

HISTORY OF THE
FIJI ISLANDS AND CANNIBALISM.
Fiji Cannibals will be exhibited throughout the United States and Europe.
PRINCIPAL. AGENTS:
W. E. LOOMIS, SAN CAL., and J. C. SMITH & CO., L EVUKA, IsLANDS.
G. T. CHAPMAN, AUKLAND, N. Z. C. C. BENNETT, HONOLU , HAWAII ISLANDS.


DESCRIPTION
OF THE
CANNIBALS
NOW ON EXHIBITION.
GENERAL RA BIAU is the son of Wiranie anti Kandaku. Kandaku was
chief of the Ti Terre Tribe, and one of the most notorious Cannibals in Fiji.
THAKGMBAIT (king of Fiji) at the instigation of some of the missionaries,
attacked the town ofßurautU, in which this tribe lived, for the purpose of compelling
them forcibly, to abandon the horrible practice of cannibalism, in which they were
adepts. _ ,
After a severe battle, in which Ra Biau distinguished himself by killing two of
Thakomban’s warriors, shooting one, and dispatching the other in a single handed
club fight, he with some others of his tribe were taken prisoners and condemned to
death; the missionaries succeeded, however, in begging him off on account ot his
)gi/.e.
The description this little man-eater gives of some of his feasts on human flesh
are disgusting in the extreme; he says they chop off the arms, legs, hands and feet
first it being quite immaterial whether the victims are alive or not; then they roast
them and serve them jip for eating; these are called the most savory bits to a Fijian
epicure’s palate; the trunk is not used except when Bakola is scarce.
KG RATU MARI MOA, son of Ra Lauan and Mara Sanna, is 18 years old, and
belongs to the Aroai Tribe. Although his people have been under missionary influ-
ence for some time, he gives some horrible details about himself and other boys
accompanying the warriors to battle, and amusing themselves by finishing the poor
wretches that were wounded on the other side.
Onlv twelve months ago he was engaged fighting for Thakonbau, and the
evident relish with which he describes beating put the disabled enemies brains,
goes far towards proving the good seed sown by the missionaries has fallen on barren
ground.
KI NA BOSE YACO. son of Jaisu and Yana, 17 years of age, belongs to Mbau,
Thakombau kingdom. Although so young, he has been in several battles, and
distinguished himself on various occasions; he bears the marks of a very recent
affray on his arm, having been beaten down at one time with a spiked club, ic m.u e
a desperate struggle and managed to spear his adversary through the stomach and
thus saved his life.
Agmix—W. B. BANCROFT, South San Diego; A. S. HOPKINS, Sacramento;
MORSE & BANCROFT, Portland, Oregon.


FIJI AND THE FIJIANS;
AND
TRAVELS AMONG THE CANNIBALS,
BY
W. C. GARDENHIRE.
J
SAN FRANCISCO:
8. P. BTEKBTT, STEAM BOOK AND JOB PRINTER, 535 OLAY STREET'.
1871.


CONTENTS.
Descriptive Geography Fage ff
Climate “ ®
History and Government “
_ u
Religion
The People “ 11
Manners and Customs..... ‘
Warfare “ - 1 ®
Commerce “
Fiji as it is in 1871 “
To my Subjects and Foreign Residents in Fiji “
Fighting in the Fijis “
The American Debt and Polynesian Company “ 21
British Power in Fiji “ 2$
Mission History.., “
Language and Literature—Table of Exports for past 6 years Method of Cotton
Planting “
The Labor Question “ 25
Departure of W. C. Gardenhire from Fiji •••• “ 29»
Leave of the Subject “


FIJI AND THE FIJIANS,
AND
TRAVELS AMONG THE CANNIBALS.
DESCRIPTIVE GEOGRAPHY.
The study of savage life has always proved an interesting pursuit to both
young and old. Who has not revelled in Mayne Reid’s description of Red
Indian life ; who has not followed with increasing interest the footsteps of
Mungo Park, Du Chaillu and Dr. Livingstone's travels among the savages
of Central Africa. I now purpose to arouse all your sympathies on behalf
of the Fijians, and my present object is to place before you a short account
of the people, and their manners and customs, country, climate, religion
and government, in as pleasant and interesting a form as possible. This is
the more necessary as the Fijians have been very much misunderstood ;
accounts of them having been principally given us by missionaries, who,
having very Utopian views of humanity in general, have judged these
natives by too high a standard. As we all know, our faults are easily seen
and soon exposed, -whilst our virtues or good actions are scarcely noticed,
and our praises as little sung ; and I think when you have heard more of
this interesting people, you will agree that they contrast very favorably
with other uncivilized nations. I have had the very best opportunity of
judging of them, having traveled some considerable time amongst the
various tribes with solely this object in view, and I obtained my informa-
tion from the best native authorities of the various islands. I was some
time a guest of the present king of Fiji, who is only too glad to show hos-
pitality to any man who will look upon a Fijian as a human being, with


human impulses and human frailties, and not as a brute devoid of good
feelings or good emotions.
Having started with these few preliminary observations, I shall now pro-
ceed to clearly place before your minds the geographical position and des-
cription of this group of islands called Fiji. They are comprised between
latitudes 15° 30' and 20° 30' South, and longitudes 177° East and 175°
West, consisting of 220 islands or islets. Their distance from here is 4,900
miles, and 1,730 from Sydney, in New South Wales, extending over 40,000
square miles of the South Pacific. There are fifteen different ways of
spelling the name Fiji; but the best authenticated are Fiji and Viti. Fiji
being used in the windward islands, and Yiti in the leeward. This differ-
ence in spelling is caused by the number of small tribes which inhabit these
islands speaking different dialects.
Nearly 250 years have elapsed since the discovery of these islands by
Tasman, the Dutch navigator, in 1643. About the year 1806 Fiji began
to be visited by traders for the purpose of procuring sandal-wood to burn
before Chinese idols, or beche-de-mer to gratify the palates of Chinese
epicures. It was only from the men engaged in this traffic, that anything
was heard about the islands or their inhabitants, and beyond the scanty
information supplied by Captain Cook, nothing deserved much confidence.
Recent visits by British ships-of-war, added to the elaborate survey of the
group by the United States exploring expedition, have resulted in more
correct information. I will pass on to a short description of the principal
islands.
NA-YITI-LEYU or Great Fiji is the largest and most important, being
ninety miles in length from east to west, and fifty from north to south. To
the southeast, there is tolerably level ground, or large undulating flat, ex-
tending for thirty-six miles inland ; edged in places by sandstone cliffs 500 feet
in altitude ; in the background are grand and impressive mountains, form-
ing some of the most magnificent scenery of the island. To the southwest
are low barren shores, the gloominess of which is relieved by hills covered
with the most luxuriant verdure, behind these again, but lost in clouds,
are the peaks of the highest in the gronp reaching an altitude of from
4,000 to 5,000 feet. On the north side grow multitudes of tropical plants,
the rich colors of which harmonizing with a background of green hills, form
a spectacle a lover of natural beauty would never tire of gazing at. Great
Fiji has a continuous shore reef, with a broken sea reef, extending from
west to north. It is also supposed to contain a population of 50,000 in-
habitants.
VANUA-LEVU or Great Land is over 100 miles long, and 25 broad.


Its western extremity is noticeable as being the only part of Fiji in which
sandal-wood can be produced. The eastern point of the island is indented
by a deep bay, forty miles long, generally known as the “ dead sea.” It’s
population is estimated at 30,000.
MBAU is a small island, about a mile long, joined to the Great Fiji by
a long flat of coral which, at low-water is nearly dry, and at high-water
fordable. The town bearing the same name covers with straggling resi-
dences nearly the whole island ; the numerous canoe sheds and temples
giving it a curious and picturesque appearance. Here is concentrated the
chief political power of Fiji.
TAVUINI or Somo-Somo from its town of that name,having been the:
residence of the ruling chiefs, is too line an island to be overlooked. It is
25 miles long with a coast of (50 miles, and consists of one vast mountain
gradually rising to a central ridge of over 2,100 feet. Fleecy clouds gen-
erally hide its summit, where stretches a considerable lake, pouring
through an outlet to the west a stream, \vhich after dashing and foaming
along its narrow bed glides quietly through the principal town, furnishing
it with a good supply of fresh water. The bed of this lake is supposed to
be the crater of an extinct volcano. The island is covered with a luxur-
iance and beauty beyond the conception of the most glowing imagination,
and contains the chief characteristics of Fijian scenery ; whilst all the
tropical vegetables are produced here in perfection.
A good idea of the general appearance of these islands is obtained by
regarding them as the elevated portions of a submerged continent. The
interior is, in many instances, a single hill or mountain and in many others
a range, the slopes of which with the plains found at their feet, constitute
the island. But the popular belief is, and by far the most pleasing to the
imagination, that these islands are formed by a small shell-fish or polyps,
generally known as the coral insect ; the theory being that these minute
polyps congregate together forming the most beautiful coral plants, and
gradually accumulating to the surface, where they collect the wash-debris
floating on the top of the ocean, forming a rich soil ; the wind and birds
planting the tropical trees ; and finally an all-wise Providence sends an
Adam to this modern garden of Eden. I shall pass on now, having merely
glancad at the two opposite theories, leaving it to your judgments or
imaginations to chose either one or the other.
As to scenery ! with a clear sky, variegated foreground, and bold back-
ground, unrivalled sunrises and sunsets, what lover of the beautiful and
grand could wish for a more perfect picture. They resemble at a short


distance more a cluster of magnificent gems than any other simile I can
place before you ; reminding me of a couple of lines of one of Bishop
Heber’s hypius :
“ Where every prospect pleasing is,
And only man is vile.”
CLIMATE.
Considering the nearness of these islands to the Equator, their climate is
neither so hot nor sickly as might be expected ; the fierceness of the sun’s
rays being tempered by the cool breezes from the wide surface of the ocean
around. The swamps are too limited to produce miasma, and fever in its
many forms is scarcely known. Other diseases are neither so maligant
nor so numerous as in other climes, especially, such as lay between the
tropics. l>The air is generally clear, and in the spring and autumn months
the climate is delightful. In December, January and Frebruary the heat
is oppresive, exertion is followed by profuse perspiration, begetting a fear
that Hamlet’s wish should be realized : “That solid flesh would melt, thaw,
and resolve itself into a dew.” The temperature is nearly uniform, the
greatest extremes of heat and cold being experienced inland. During
February and March, called the hurricane season, high winds prevail. A
great deal has been said about these hurricanes, which in consequence are
much dreaded by the new arrivals and travelers to those parts. The real
fact being, that seamen have earned home most wonderful stories of their
violence. I myself heard an old salt tell a gaping crowd of simpletons
that, whilst sailing down the east coast of Australia,“a mat was blown on
the ship’s deck and recognized by the captain, as being one that the Fiji
natives had stolen from him, three years previously, whilst trading to these
islands. I have been informed by old residents, that it blows no harder in
the Fijis than it does in New Zealand ; but that native houses being so frail
are easily blown down, and that a good weather-board house will stand the
toughest storm that ever blew there. Of course, like all tropical climates,
when it rains it comes down in torrents ; but a few minutes’ warning is
given by a peculiar beating of the leaves. Temperance and industry are
the main promoters of good health and the enjoyment of this life, and if
the white man would not give way too freely to the great thirst usually felt
in warm climates, his life will be as long and his health as good as in any
clime his vacarious career may take him.


HISTORY AND GOVERNMENT.
The origin of the inhabitants of Fiji is buried in obscurity ; they have no
reliable historical tradition of more than 100 years old. The native songs
are silent on the matter, and the popular belief is that they never inhabited
any other land. The people have had no other intercourse with the other
nations, except as visited by them. Differences of color, physical conform-
ation and language, combine to form a separate line between the eastern
and western Polynesians, except in the Fiji; where they seem to blend and
form a confluence of the two races, and there is little doubt that the Fijians
are connected with the darker races of Asia. The only distinctive race in
the Fijis, apart from the natives, are the Tongans or friendly islanders.
It is hard to say whether the Tongans were the first discoverers of this
group. Tongan intercourse with the Fijis dates far back, and originated
undoubtedly in their canoes being driven among the windward islands by
strong easterly winds. More than a hundred years ago the recollection of
the first of such voyages was lost; which seems to put back its occurrence
even beyond Tasman’s visit in 1643, Until the last 100 years, the people
of Fiji were probably patriarchal, and consisted of many independent states
having little knowledge, and many of them no political intercourse with
each other. The great variety of dialects spoken, and the comparative
ignorance about each other, countenance the above supposition. Wars
between the small powers, and internals broils, principally make up the
past history of the Fijis,
About the year 1804, a number of convicts escaped from New South
Wales, and settled among the islands ; the greater part living at Rewa and
and Mbau, the chiefs of which, dreading their fire-arms, allowed them all
their just and unjust demands. Their crimes there were so atrocious that
they were even considered monsters by these cannibal savages. Had a
desire for consolidating a power thus won been entertained by them, the
whole group lay in their grasp ; but they only sought to gratify their evil
passions. Of the twenty-seven who landed in 1804, in 1840 only one was left,
an Irishman, named Paddy Connor ; the rest having fallen in the native wars
and in deadly quarrels among themselves. At the death of NA-ULIVOU,
king of Rewa, Connor’s patron, Paddy, thoroughly Fijianized, endeavored
to take up his residence among the whites, who had since settled there ; but
they drove him away, fearing the presence of such an inhuman monster in
their midst. Rewa and Mbau owe their present superiority to these men,
the former having long been the most powerful state in Fiji. On the matter
of supremacy nothing is known farther back than the year 1800, at which
time it is certain Verata took the lead. NA-ULIYOU, or “the Root of War,”
aided by these white men above referred to, made war on Yerata, took pos-
session of his dependencies, and left its chief little more to rule over than
his own town. He died in 1829, and was succeeded by his brother
“ Tanoa ” whose reign was very troublesome, and whose kingdom was rent


with a civil war ; he died after a reign of twenty-three years a heathen and
a cannibal. He was cruel and implacable. One of his cousins, who offended
him, was condemned to die, and the story goes that, after having kissed his
relative, he cut oft' his right arm at the elbow, and drank of the blood that
flowed from the severed veins ; the arm still quivering with life he threw
upon a fire, and when sufficiently cooked, ate it in the presence of its
proper owner, who was then dismembered, whilst the savage chief gloated
over the dying agonies of his victim.
The will of the king is, on most points, law, and hence the nature of the
government varies according to his personal character. He has a sort of
privy council at which no one may speak except when commanded, and any
unsound argument would be at once ridiculed. The head of each government
is the TUI, or TURAGA LEYU, a king of absolute power, who is, however,
not unfrequently surrounded by those who exert an actual influence higher
than his own, and whom consequently he is most careful not to offend.
When rule is strictly followed, the successor of a deceased king is his
brother, failing whom his eldest son, or the eldest son of his eldest brother
fills his place ; but the rank of mothers and other circumstances often cause
a deviation from the rule. The chiefs profess to hold their influence from
the gods, and their influence is also greatly increased by that peculiar insti-
tution called “TABU,” of which more anon, found generally among the
Polynesian tribes.
Where might is right there can be very little justice, and offences are pun-
ished in a very summary manner ; the crimes of the powerful lightly, and
those of the poor severely. But, I think that, this fault in justice is not
confined alone to the uncivilized Fijian. Sometimes, if the person is an
important or useful individual, his nearest relation is sacrificed instead. A
good story is told of a Fijian of influence, who, for a grievous offence was
condemned to be hanged by the captain of the U. S. ship Falmouth. He
cooly advised the captain to hang his father instead.
The king governs the country by agents in each district, called Mata-ni-
vanuas, or “Eyes of the Land,” and their induction into office is attended
with great ceremonies. Fijian society is divided into six classes : (1) kings
and queen ; (2) chiefs of large islands and districts ; (3) chiefs of towns,
priests and mata-na-vanuas, or agents ; (4) distinguished warriors of low
birth, chiefs of the carpenters’ and chiefs of the fishers’ fraternity ; (6) com-
mon people ; (6) slaves of war.
But the ruling power in Fiji is the Vasil or nephew, who seems possessed
with extraordinary power. He has a right over his uncle and mother’s rela-
tions, and can demand any property from them, except the wives or lands
of a chief. However, powerful a chief may be, his nephew or vasu is his
master. How would uncles among us like the the arrangement ? and how
would nephews ? one illustration will suffice : An industrious uncle builds a
canoe, in which he has not made half a dozen voyages, when an idle nephew
mounts the deck, sounds his shell trumpet, and announces to all within
hearing that the canoe has, at that instant, changed masters.
Taxes are unknown in the Fiji; the people instead hold a great holiday,
and pay in their tribute in the shape of produce, with songs and dances..
Surely ! this is a lesson to our ministers.
Chiefs of power exact largely, and give liberally; only a small portion


of what they receive remains in their own hands ; which fact will help to
explain the following speech of a mata on the occasion of one of these
presentations of property: “We have a wish for eternal friendship. See
“ this in our labors to procure cloth for you. We are wearied. We have
“ left ourselves without any clothing, that you may have it all. We have a
“ chief who loves peace. We also love it. War is an evil ; let us not fight
“ but labor. Do not let difficulties or jealousies arise out of sharing this
‘ * property. Our minds regard you equally ; you are all our friends. Any
“ difference in the quantity shared to each tribe is to be referred to the
“ proportion of service rendered by the tribe. There has been no par-
“ iality” Is this not a lesson from the savage to the civilized man V Are
these not sentiments worthy of acceptance and adoption.
Of the present king, THAKOMBAU, I shall not speak at present; but
pass on to their religion.
RELIGION.
The mythology of the Fijian religion is vague and perplexing. Each
island has its own god, each locality its own superstition ; yet, amidst all
this confusion may be traced a general belief appearing again and again,
in their legends, of the existence of a supreme being, or Great Spirit,
influencing earthly things. Idolary in the strict sense of the word he has
never known, for he makes no attempt to fashion material representations
of his gods, or to pay actual worship to the heavenly bodies, the elements
or any natural objects. The native word expressive of divinity is KALOU,
which is used both to express the natives’ idea of the supreme god, and as
a qualification of anything great and marvellous. It is remarkable that
the gods of eastern Polynesia seem to be unknown to the Fijians. The god
most known in Fiji is NDENGEI, who seems to be an impersonation of an
eternal being, only suffering from hunger. The serpent is his adopted
shrine, and he resembles very much in character the Cronos of Grecian
mythology. The other gods are proud, envious, covetous, revengeful, in
fact, they seem to have classified the passions into deities. The lower order
of gods are men of a superior class, and are to be compared to the lares,
limines and genii of the Romans. Nearly every chief has a god in whom
he puts his trust. Although, the Fijians are unacquainted with idols
properly so called, yet they worship stones as the shrines of gods and regard
some clubs with superstitious awe, like the Scythians, who made a scimater
the symbol of their god of war. Other gods again, live in certain fish, or
birds, or reptiles and any person worshipping such a god must not pai*take
of the food he inhabits.


Their temples are called BURES, and great pains are taken in their erection
and finish. The quantity of sennet or cocoa-nut fibre used in the decoration of
these is immense, for every part is covered with it in various patterns of black
and red. Reeds wrapped with the same material are used for lining doors and
windows; spears are often used as lathes for thatching temples, and also tor
ridge-poles, on the projecting ends of which, white cowries are fixed, and hang
in long strings to the ground. A few spears and clubs constitute the interior
decorations'. It is the council chamber and town hall, and is often used as a
sleeping place by the chief of the village. There are priestesses in Fiji, but few
of sufficient importance to have a temple. Nothing like regular worship is
found, and fear alone impels the natives to religious observances. The priest-
hood is generally hereditary; but any man who can shake well and speculate
shrewdly , may turn his abilities to account by becoming a priest, and his rank
-will be in accordance with that of his God. The sacred insignia are : a comb
with long teeth, and a long oval frontlet of scarlet feathers. Gods are supposed
to enter some men when they sleep, and it is known by a peculiar snore. Seeis
and dreamers are also recognized in these Islands ; Cannibalism forms also a part
of their religion, the Gods being described as delighting in it.
The women are excluded from the temples. The principle of the TABU
(which means Forbidden, or Sacred ) seems to be exactly the same in every part
of the South Seas, the only variety being in its application. The institution, as it
exists in Fiji, is the secret of power and of despotic rule. It affects things, both
great and small: here, it is seen tending a brood of chickens, and there it di-
rects the energies of a kingdom. Everything animate and inanimate, even the
Gods, come under the influence of the Tabu. It is put into operation by reli-
gious, political, or selfish motives, and its violation is punished by confiscation of
property and, sometimes, by death. According to general belief, the future
world is to be much the same as this. The Fijian MBULU is the abode of de-
parted spirits, where the good and bad meet, and the road to which is long and
difficult. Native traditions on this subject are thus stated: —On the road to
NAI-THOMBO-THOMBO, and about five miles from it, is a solitary hill of hard
reddish clay, spotted with black boulders, having on its right beautiful groves
and on its left barren and cheerless hills. When near this spot, the disembod-
ied spirit throws the sacred whale’s tooth, which was placed in the hand of the
corpse at burial, at a spiritual Pandanus ; having succeeded in hitting this, he as-
cends the hill and there waits to be joined by the spirits of the wife or wives
strangled to accompany him. Of all spirits, that of a bachelor is most bardly
used, and it is said that no unwedded spirit ever reached the Elysium of liji.
We now return to the married man who is joined by his wives. He advances
club in hand, they bearing his train, and boards the canoe destined to carry him
over to Nai-Thombo-Thombo, the City of Spirits. Notice of their appearance is
given by a parroquet, who utters a cry for every spirit, and thus warns the inhab-
itants to open their doors to them, that they may pass through, to where SAML -
YALO, the slayer of souls gives him combat. If wounded, he is condemned to
wander amongst the cheerless hills for ever. Should he fall, Samuyalo and his
brethren feast on him; but if victorious, he passes on to the highest peak of the
Kaurandra mountains : here is a precipice the base of which is said to be washed
by a deep lake. Over this cliff projects a long steer-oar, which is in charge of
NDENGEI, who accosts the coming spirit thus : '‘What brought you here ?


How did you behave?” Should his answer not please the God, he is directed
to sit on the blade of the oar, and refresh himself in the cool breeze; "when the
oar is tilted up and he is precipitated to Muri Muria, the inferior heaven, where
he lives very much as he did on this earth, only having greater size and strength.
Should the God be pleased with the reply of the warrior, he is sent back to this
world to be deified.
The history of their creation is also interesting:—A hawk, having built its
nest in a rock, laid t\vo eggs, NDENGEI, the God, was much pleased with their
appearance, and determined to hatch them himself, the result of which incuba-
tion was a boy and a girl. He then placed them on one of the Islands, where
they multiplied, he having previously planted the yam and banana for their exist-
ence. His grandson, having rebelled against him and defied him, he caused it to
rain and flood the whole of the land; but some were saved in a canoe sent by
the God and landed at the summit of Mount Bengans—hence the Benganites
claim to be first in Fijian rank. By this flood, they say, two tribes were extin-
guished : one composed all of women, the other distinguished by an appendage
like that of a dog. They also have a legend very similar to ours of the Tower
of Babel:—Some of the sons of this Fijian Noah wishing to ascertain if the
moon was inhabited, built a high tower, which at last toppled over, scattering the
workmen all over the group; but there are some tribes who deny this deluge be-
ing universal.
Other minor details I shall include in my account of their manners and cus-
toms.
THE PEOPLE.
The population of the Fiji, has been variously estimated at from 125,000, to
200,000. Some familiarity is needed to picture a Fijian justly; for strangers
cannot look on him without prejudice. They know that cannibalism has made
the history of his race a scandal to humanity, and their first contact with him is
certainly startling. Fresh from highly civilized society, and accustomed to the
well clad companions of his voyage, the visitor experiences a strange and not
easily described feeling when first he sees a dark, stout, athletic and almost
naked cannibal; the weird influence of whose penetrating glance, many have
acknowledged. To a sensitive mind, the Fijian is an object of disgust; but, as
this feeling arises solely from the knowledge of his abominable practices, per-
sonal intercourse with him seldom fails to produce at last a more favorable im-
pression. The natives are generally above the middle height, well made, and of
great variety of figure. They exceed the white race in average stature, but are


below the Tongans. Corpulent persons are not common ; but large, powerful,
muscular men, abound. Their mould is decidedly European. Their head is often
covered by a mass of black hair, long, frizzled and bushy, sometimes encroach-
ing on the forehead and joined by whiskers to a thick round or pointed beard, to
which, moustaches are often added. The complexion varies; but the pure Fi-
jians seem to stand between the black and copper-colored race. It is a strange
fact that Albinoes are found more among these people than any others. The
Fijian in his mental character, is far above what his general appearance would
justify. Dullness or stupidity form no part of his character. His feelings are
acute but not lasting, his emotions easily roused. He can hate deeply and love
truly. He can sympathize with sincerity, and feign also with consummate skill.
His fidelity and loyalty are strong and enduring, while his revenge never dies.
Tact has been called Ready Cash, and of this the Fijian has plenty. In social
diplomacy, he is cautious and clever, displaying great command over his feel-
ings. It is a trite observation, that the character of a people is shown in their
proverbs. Theirs are plentiful and to the point, mostiy springing from personal
eccentricities, or having a local sense; they lose therefore by translation. One
on greediness is put thus;
“Your evil eye esteems your share too small, and prompts you quick to aim at all.”
Another to shame a cruel husband :
“ Oh! what a valiant man you are, who beat your wife, but dare not go to war.”
more than ordinary conversational powers. In sarcasm, mimicry,
jests and “ chaff” they greatly excel, and will keep each other on the broad
grin for hours together. That innate depravity which he shares in common with
other men, has been fostered in his case, into peculiar brutality, by the charac-
ter of his religion and all his early training and associations, for he has been
brought up amidst bloodshed and cannibalism. Old men, though, speak of the
atrocities of recent times, as altogether new, and far surpassing the deeds of sev-
enty years ago. They are very touchy on reflections cast upon their country; it
will therefore not excite surprise that a traveled Fijian commands little respect
from his countrymen. A Rewa man, who had once visited the United States,
was ordered by his chiefs to say whether the country of the white man was bet-
ter than Fiji, and in what respect. He had not proceeded far, when one cried
out: “ He is a prating fellow another, “he is impudent ,” and a third, “ kill
km,.'' “It is natural for a foreigner to talk thus, but unpardonable in a Fijian .”
Finding his opinions so little relished, he beat a hasty retreat, leaving his betters to
cool down, which you may be sure was much accelerated by his absence. Their
pride is easily wounded, and crying is the mode of expressing the injury, and
the more public the place their complaint is made, the better. Suicide in cases
of deep insult is also common, a Fijian preferring death to dishonor. Where there
is habitual boasting, there must be occasional lying. As “ shocking accident mak-
ers," these people would greatly excel; they could supply every variety withotit
limitation, and the most tragic and mournful without compunction. But on
most points the Fijian is truthful, and under certain circumstances it is considered
sinful. A white man, noted for his falsehoods, once offended a powerful chief.


and obtained the intercedence of one of the missionaries; the answer from the
chief was: “Tell him, no one hates a foreigner; but every one hates a liar.”
Generally speaking, reserve and mistrust disturb the domestic relationships, and
a happy and united household is most rare. One of the missionaries in describ-
ing domestic affection observes : “I have been astonished to see the broad breast
of a ferocious savage heave and swell with strong emotion at bidding his aged
father farewell. Yet, he helped to bury this old father alive." Again, “I have
listened with interest to a man of milder mould, as he told me about his eldest
son, his head, his face, his mien, doatiug on each feature. - Yet! he helped to
strangle him.
MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.
The habits, manners and customs of a savage nation, must always prove in-
teresting and instructive, and, in this instance, there is much of the charm of
novelty, revealing much which might shed a new light on that difficult study,
“man.” A free flow of affection between members of the same family, is pre-
vented, to a great extent, by the strict observance of national or religious cus-
toms. Brothers and sisters, first-cousins, fathers and sons-in-law, mothers and
daughters-in-law, and brothers and sisters-in-law, are thus severally forbidden to
speak to each other, or to eat from the same dish. The latter embargo is extended
to husband and wife, an arrangement which does not conduce to domestic hap-
piness.
A Fijian house principally consists of one room, and is built much after the
manner of one of their temples, only of smaller dimensions and pretention.
Its furniture and contents are few and simple, a few mats spread on dead grass,
and a bamboo or wooden pillow, form the bed by night, and the divan by day.
Over this, stretching across the house, falls a mosquito-curtain, giving a light and
pleasing aspect to the interior. & A Yaqona bowl —(or native grog bowl) with
strainer and cup, chequered baskets, gourds, and bottles for scented oil, a cab-
bage palm sunshade, fans, various wooden dishes, with bone knives and wooden
forks, principally constitute their domestic comforts. Their facilities for baking,
boiling, and frying food and for making hot drinks, form one of the advantages
almost peculiar to the Fijians, as contrasted with other Islanders.
The natives usually eat twice a day* the principal meal being in the afternoon
or evening. Their general food is light and plain, —fish being highly esteemed.
Their bill of fare comprises many different vegetables. The Fijian is temperate,
and his usual drink is water, or the milk of the cocoa-nut, in drinking which,
without a cup, the head is thrown back, and the vessel held several inches above


the mouth, and a stream allowed to run down his throat, a process whereby
a novice is more likely to be choked than refreshed. Drinking from the long
bamboo, also requires practice, as it is from eight to ten feet long, and holds
about two gallons ; to drink from one end, whilst a native elevates the other, is
very apt to give you a cold bath. The Yaqona, which is the national tipple, is
made from the root of the kava, by a process of chewing, and the brewing of
which is attended by much ceremony and clapping of hands.
It is regarded as a great offence, for even a chief to help himself from the
common stock, without first being requested to do so. That there is sufficient
caution required in ceremonious observances, the following anecdote will show:
“An inferior chief being on a visit to his superior, not being offered a piece of a
certain cocoa-nut, which he deemed a luxury, felt insulted, and joined the
enemies of his master, who, being victorious soon after, gave him his opportunity
for revenge. The chief pleaded hard for his life from his old servant ; but the
answer was: ‘ Remember the nut' ‘For that you must die !’ and then he clubbed
him.’’
Their usual morning salutation is, “Sa Vadra /”—“ Awake /” and in the even-
ing, “ Sa Moce!” or, “ Sleep
On the arrival, or departure of a guest, their signs of affection are great and
their ceremonies numerous.
The kiss of the Fijian is peculiar, one smelling the other with a strong sniff:
equals the faces, inferiors the hands, and the lowest order the feet. In their dress,
scanty as it is, the Fijian displays great care and pride. They are naked but in
comparison with other nations. It must be borne in mind that both their climate
and their skin render much dress unnecessary. Vanity adds ornaments, which,
decorated or defaces according to the prevailing fashions. The dress of the man is
a figured MASI, or sash, varying from three to one hundred yards, six to ten
being the usual length; and that of the women the LIBU, or fringe-band, tied
on the right side with bass, and which on gala days is long enough to form a
train: a turbaned head completes their dress. It is on the hair, however, the Fijian;
prides himself; this is the crowning finish of his toilette. The barber, or perru-
quier, is a person of some consequence, and, whilst engaged on the hair of a chief,
his hands are TABU from touching anything else; they also dye it either jet
black, blue black, or different shades of red. Painting the body and tattooing
exist, the latter only among the women.
Most Fijians are fond of music; but their instruments are few and very rude.
The conch-shell, the nose flute and small drum seem to produce the best music.
The dance is undoubtedly the most popular pastime in Fiji; but the song, which
generally accompanies it, is often very dull and their movements slow and heavy.
There is always a conductor, and in many instances a buffoon is introduced, who
rarely fails to excite laughter.
The w< men in Fiji, though not exactly an article of trade, are fearfully de-
graded, and in many parts, used as beasts of burden. Very rarely are they
allowed to choose a husband for themselves; but, if so, the enamored swain, as a
matter of form, tenders a present to the girl’s parents; should they accept, the
girl is transferred to the house of the lover’s parents with presents also. Here,
weeping takes place, and the intended bride is consoled by presents from the
young man’s friends. This is called the drying up of tears. At the end of four
days, accompanied by married women, she goes and catches fish; and having


prepared a feast, invites the bridegroom, and, by the presentation of yam to the
bride, he completes the wedding. Plain speaking, or “popping the question,” is not
uncommon. SIMIONI, wishing to bring the object of his affection to a decision,
addressed these homely remarks to her in the hearing of several persons:—“l do
not wish to have you because you are a good-looking-woman; that you are not.
Hut a woman is like a necklace of flowers, —pleasant to the eye, and grateful to
the smell: but such a necklace does not long continue attractive; beautiful as
it is one day, the next it fades and loses its scent; yet, a pretty necklace tempts
one to ask for it, but, if refused no one will often repeat his request. If you love
me, I love you; but if not, neither do I love you—only let it be a settled thing.
The naming of a child generally takes place two or three days after birth;
longer delay endangers the child’s life, leading the mother to believe it is ne-
glected. Among these heathen tribes the parents generally address their young
ones as Rats; but Christians are more advanced in this respect, for they include
brats, pups, and kids in their nomenclature.
Polygamy is looked upon as the principal source of a man’s power and wealth:
but this short story will illustrate the life they lead better than any remark I
could make: —One day a missionary’s wife asked a woman who was minus a
nose, “How is it so many of you women are without a nose?” The native’s wife
replied,—“lt is caused by a plurality of wives. Jealousy causes hatred, and the
stronger tries to cut or bite off the nose of the one she hates.” To the aged and
infirm they think the greatest kindness you can show them is to send them into
the next world by stangulation or clubbing before they get older or worse, be-
lieving that, whatever condition they die in, so will they live in the next world.
Death is a solemn thing to deal with at most times, but in Fiji is thought so
lightly of, that their ideas are rather remarkable and worth noticing. Death in
life is a condition of the soul known solely to these Islanders; for a man is often,
laid otit as dead, whilst yet alive, eating and drinking as usual; the Fijians
believing that these- are involuntary actions of the body, and that the spirit has
really fled. In laying out, his clothes are removed, afresh scarf or masi is put on;
he is newly turbaned and the upper part of his body painted black, to give him
the appearance of a warrior. When really dead, a club is put by his side, and
whales’ teeth in his hand. This resembles very much the Greek custom of
putting an obulus on the lips of the corpse to propitiate Cerberus. The custom,
dying out though, through the intervention of the whites, is to slaughter the
wife or wives of the dead man to accompany his spirit.
Real sorrow is generally manifested in fasting and other denials in dress, etc.
The following tradition accounts for the usual spread of Death : —When the first
man died, his children buried him; the god NDENGEI, passing the grave, told
them to unbury him, for like a banana is buried to ripen it, so would man be,
and that he was alive. They declined for certain olfactory reasons, and, the god,
becoming angry, decided that man through their perverseness should die and
rot. And the common expression now is,—“Oh! that those children had dug
up that body! ”
Until recently there were many who refused to believe that the horrible prac-
tice of cannibalism exists in these days ; but such incredulity has been forced to
yield to indisputable facts, it is one of their institutions, it is interwoven in the
elements of their society, it forms one of their pursuits and is regarded, by the
mass, as a refinement. Whether it originated through famine, or a savage feeling


of hate and revenge, is hard to say. Human bodies are eaten in connection with
the building of a temple or canoe, or for the feasting of such as take tribute to a
chief town. Captives are sometimes reserved for special occasions, and, according
to a popular rhyme, it is only the brave who are thus chosen.
Where is the courageous? Gone into the town to be cooked' Ovens used for
cooking human bodies are tabu for any other purpose. They do not confine them-
selves to age or sex, all being liable alike to be fed upon; but women are not
allowed to eat it, nor are certain priests.
In the foregoing details all coloring has been avoided, and many facts, which
I could advance, have been withheld, being to horrible to relate
WARFARE.
It is said of Fijians, as of most savage nations, that they are warlike, and they
hav> been pictured as bloodthirsty, fierce and eager for battle, but this is totally
incorrect. When on his feet the native is invariably armed, and, when employed
at work, his weapons are always handy. Ihis is caused more by fear than bo
ness, for he is ever suspicious of treachery. Nevertheless, F iji has rarely been free
from war and its evils, caused, principally, by a desire for aggrandisement on the
part of the chiefs. , . , -
When war is decided on, notice is sent to the neighbor to prepare his defences,
councils held, and plans formed. They then make offerings to the gods, rebuild
the fallen temples, and put up prayers for the total destruction of the enemy.
The military do not form a distinct class, but are raised by a TAKA or grand
review. This is the most interesting part of the war, and, to the parties them-
selves, the most satisfactory. They defy an enemy far away, and boast of deeds
to come. The warriors blacken the upper part of their bodies, which gives a
very ferocious gleam to the eyes and teeth, and really, gives them a formidable
appearance. An army generally numbers about a thousand and, it would requite
great power and influence to raise three or four thousand. When everything is
ready, they are led against the fastnesses, in which the enemy have entrenched
themselves, and which well deserve the name, the natives being good judges and
skilful engineers. As these places are generally badly supplied with water, a
protracted siege is the usual mode and suits the bravery of the assailants best.
Should they muster pluck, however, for an assault, a sortie will generally, drive
them back. They have a proverb very similar to ours: “He that fights and
runs away, lives to fight another day.” They say: “It is certain death to
brave it out, and but a jest to join the rout.” In fact, wars in Fiji are some-
times bloodless and result only in the destruction of propel tj.


The return of a victorious party is celebrated with wild joy; the women as among
the HebreAvs going out, dancing and singing, to welcome the returning warriors.
The modes of treating for peace vary. In some instances, a woman of rank,
dressed in the highest Fijian style, is presented to the hostile chief, with whales’
teeth in her hand; in others, an ordinary ambassador is deputed, who offers a
whale’s tooth or some other soro in the name of the people. It is customary to
give honorary names to such warriors who have clubbed a person, of any age or
sex, during war, and, if chiefs, receiving very proud and boastful names.
lake it from any point of view, there is nothing to excite admiration in Fijian
warfare, and the deeds of which they boast a truly brave man would scorn.
They make pretensions to bravery and speak of strife and battle with the tongue
ol heroes; yet, with of course a tew exceptions, meet the hardships and dangers
of battle with effeminate timidity.
COMMERCE.
It is pleasing to turn from horrible scenes of barbarous war to the gentler and
more profitable occupations of peace, of which, the tillage of the soil seems al-
ways the attractive type, and for which, the Fijian seems eminently qualified.
Here is observable one of the strange contradictions in their chararaer: Side
by .side with the wildest savagism, we find an attention to agriculture and arts
of peace, not to be found among the natives of any other of the numerous islands
in the Western Pacific. The increase of cultivated plants is regular from the
Hawaiian group up to Fiji.
Ihe natives raise large quanities of Taro, Yams, Kawai, Bananas, Kumera,
Sugar Cane, Maize, small quanities of Tobacco, and the Papua Apple.
Of Yams there are the usual varieties, and, in some parts, two crops are raised
a year; they grow like large potatoes and have been known to reach one hundred
and twenty-five pounds in weight.
The Kumera is the sweet Potato, which, I think, you all know.
Caro is the Fijian staff of life, and surpasses all their other food in nutritious
value.
Three root is used to sweeten made dishes.
The bark of the Masi supplies the natives with clothing.
Fiji implements are few and simple.
The digging stick, or plough, is shaped something like a quill tooth-pick, and
abcMt four feet long, is used with the flattened side downward.
An annual or triennial change of planting ground, with occasional Draining
or Irrigating, forms their entire system of farming.
2


In respect to its manufactures, Fiji also claims a superiority over other islands.
The women mostly attend to this department, assisted, in a few instances, by
the mechanical aid of the men.
The number of mats used is something considerable and the varieties numerous.
Closely connected with the above is basket-making which are made strong,
handsome, and useful.
Their nets are made of a creeper called the YATEA.
Sennet or cocoa-nut fibre is also one of their most useful exports.
The Fijians are also distinguished from other South Sea islanders for their pottery,
which is produced in various kinds of red and brown ware; the drinking vessels
especially being very prettily designed.
Many of the natives find employment in canoe building, which if only thirty or
forty feet long, are made out of a single tree; but if a first-class canoe is required,
the case is different, and its successful completion is the cause of great triumph.
By examining a model in Mr. Gardenhire’s possession, you will be better enabled
to judge of their build than by a description, which would occupy too much of
your time.
I may say that the Fijians are the only people, coming under the name of
savages, who manifest a taste for fine arts. Beche-de-mer is picked up and ex-
ported annually to the value of $40,000.
Many valuable commodities, cotton and sugar being the principal, greatly in
demand here, are already found wild and uncared for in the Fijis, and might be
cultivated with certain success.
There is good reason to hope that the enlightened enterprise of intelligent
settlers will, ere long, develop the resources of these fertile islands; the terrors
and dangers of a residence on them having disappeared through the influence of
Christianity.
“For here great spring greens all the year,
And fruits and blossoms blush in social sweetness,
On the self same bough.”
FIJI AS IT IS IN 1871.
And now I shall conclude with a short account of Fiji as it is, which reduces
itself into the question of labor and land.
Most of the labor is done by natives obtained from the other islands in this
way: A small craft is chartered and sent to the other islands, and a demand
is made for men. The chief assembles his people and either picks out the num-
ber required, or else they volunteer; but the purchaser of this labor is bound to


return them at the end of one year in Fiji, and from three to five years, in any of
the other islands, paying them fifteen dollars per annum. Others again buy them
from speculators, paying, in addition, their passage money, which is usually fifty
dollars a head; this is considered cheapest and best in the long run, but has led
to the belief that a species of slave trade isbeing carried on. In every instance
they are except when preferring to remain. Every ship load of these
natives is boarded by the American or British Consul with an interpreter, and
each examined as to whether a free or forced servant. Their names, and native
place are registered, and thus the authorities are enabled to tell when each ought
to be returned; besides, it is the interest of the planter to’do so, as, should any go
back and give a bad account of their treatment or the detention of others, that
planter would find it very difficult to obtain fresh laborers.
The land question, which has been a complicated one, is now being settled by
a Land Court, instituted by the present king. In some instances chiefs have sold
the land twice over, or else, it did not belong to them—or land of a conquered
force has been sold and reclaimed by them when victorious. In other instances
the whites have tried to cheat the natives by placing wrong boundaries in the
agreements. To buy from the whites land already purchased, with an undispu-
ted title is, perhaps, a little dearer, but less likely to give trouble hereafter. The
value of land varies from ten cents to two dollars and a-half an acre.
To give protection to the whites and their property, King Thakombau, on June
the sth, 1871, issued a proclamation to his subjects stating his reasons for form-
ing a new government under the principles of the Hawaiian, and for that purpose
selected a ministry consisting of influential whites and Fijians. His proclama-
tion I will here insert from the Fiji Government Gazette.
TO MY SUBJECTS AND FOREIGN RESIDENTS IN FIJI.
The daily increasing foreign population in my dominions introducing the cus-
toms, habits, and commerce of highiy civilized nations has caused me serious
consideration.
Many foreigners have acquired by purchase and lease considerable areas of land,
upon which they are expending much capital and exercising great skill and labor.
It is therefore clearly evident that to preserve that perfect harmony which
should exist between the two races, to facilitate the increasing European com-
merce, to establish foreign relations, a properly Constituted Government has be-
come an absolute necessity.
I have therefore accepted the services of the gentlemen named in my pro-
clamation to form an Executive to administer the Government in accordance with


the Constitution adopted in 1867 at the earnest desire of the foreign residents,,
and accepted by my Chiefs who have since been ruled by those laws alone.
This Constitution is similar in principle to that of the Hawaiian Government,
which has been in successful operation (upon a very moderate expenditure) nearly
forty years ; it provides for a House of Representatives, Civil and Religious Lib-
erty, simple and inexpensive Courts of Justice, and equal rights.
The Labor Question, both foreign and domestic, is one that will demand the
most serious consideration of my advisers.
My relations with the Chiefs throughout my dominions are of the most friendly
nature, and such as to insure their united support to this measure.
The attention of my Government will be at once directed—
-Ist, To measures for the adjustment of Titles and claims to Lands;
2d. To the survey and management of Public Lands;
3d, The protection of European residents and property;
4th, The appointment of Magistrates ;
sth, An adequate Postal System ;
6th, A Bank of deposit and issue guaranteed by the Crown and secured on
Public Lands and Revenues ;
7th, The Federalization of the various Chiefdoms and the gradual blending
of their interests with those of my Government; and,
.Bth, The recognition of my Government by the Foreign powers with whom
I have hitherto not had any intercourse.
To yoxi I now confidently commend my Government conscious of its deep im-
yourselves, and under Divine Providence the great future which its
careful and just administration will open for Fiji.
(Signed) CAKOBAU.
The,enterprising American Consul in Sydney (Mr. Hall,) has started, as you
are aware, a line of steamers from Sydney to this port, calling regularly at Fiji
and Honolulu, both ways, which has given a great impetus to Fijian trade, and
a strong tide of emigration has in consequence set in from the adjacent Austra-
lian colonics.
The favorite enterprise of the settlers is the South Sea Island cotton planting;
which in the last few years has made very rapid strides. The quantity of cotton
raised in 1865, was 200,000 pounds, valued at $46,500; and in 1869, 1,000,-
000 pounds, valued at $225,000, increasing five-fold in four years, and the cot-
ton having, through greater care in the choice of seed and variety, increased
over a fifth per pound in value, Mr. Ryder, who owns the largest plantation on
the islands, averaged a higher price for his cotton in Manchester than any of the
American fetched —reaching as high as one dollar and ten cents per pound. A
good manufacturing trade is placed within the reach of this town. You have
the best pf material to work on handy, and a small rate of carriage from Fiji
could be obtained, the steamers mostly returning empty from Sydney and Fiji.
The planters, at present paying a heavy rate of carriage, having to send their
produce to Sydney and, from thence, it is re-shipped to England, could afford to
sell, through the cheap labor obtained, at a much lower rate than it could be
purchased anywhere else.


The unsettled land question, has until the present deterred capitalists from em-
barking their money in sugar plantations, which require a large amount of capi-
tal to start; but, with the security, promised by the present government, already
several are taking up land for that purpose. A few coffee and tobacco planta-
tions already exist and are paying well. The Chinese grass-plant, or Ramie, has
just been introduced, and promises to rival even the cotton trade.
I may say in conclusion, that land suitable for the growth of any tropical crop,
whether cotton, ramie, sugar, rice, tobacco or coffee, can be procured at a very
low figure, and, with the cheap labor obtained in those parts, it offers a wide and
lucrative field for either large or small capitalists.
FIGHTING IN THE FIJIS.
On Thursday evening, the 15th instant, the “Jenny Duncan” arrived in Le-
vuka from Bau, with 600 warriors, destined to attack the rebellious Lovonis, a
tribe inhabiting the interior of Ovalau, and for some time in open rebellion
against Cakobau, The attack took place on Friday, 16th, and the firing and
shouting could be easily heard from Levuka. On Saturday morning at 8 o’clock,
just as the habitues of Manton’s Hotel were about sitting to breakfast, the hoarse
war-cry of the King’s soldiers was heard, evidently returning from a victory over
the Lovonis. They appeared in a state of frantic excitement, gesticulating in a
most extravagant manner, and brandishing a human arm and hand tied at the
point of a bayonet. They then reported themselves at the native village as hav-
ing killed ten men and women. The arm was subsequently presented to Mr. W.
C. Gardenhire, as an addition to his extensive collection of Fijian curiosities.
THE AMERICAN DEBT AND POLYNESIAN COMPANY.
In 1849 Mr. Williams, the American Consul, accidentally burnt down his
house with wadding from cannons fired on the 4th of July, and the natives


rescued some articles from the flames and stole them. Mr. Williams, therefore,
made a demand on King Thakombau’s government for $5,000 38 cents for
the destruction and spoliation of his property at NTJKULAU on this occasion;
and on the arrival, in 1855, of Commander Boutwell, of the John Adams, he
placed his demands before him. Commander Boutwell thereupon wrote to
Thakombau, saying he had been sent to inquire into and redress wrongs done in
Fiji against Americans, and he (Thakombau) must repay wrongs with interest,
and ask pardon; concluding with —“I must urge the authorities of Mbau, to act
speedily, and not compel me to go after the so-called Tui-viti, or approach near
Mbau,as my powder is quick and my balls are round.” After a short delay,
Thakombau agreed to pay the sum of $45,000 to the American government in
the space of two years, as reparation for damages done to American property
and as a fine, failing in the payment of which, he would resign his government
and deliver himself up to the American government, and submit to any punish-
ment the Commander might deem proper to inflict. This agreement placed
Thakombau in an awkward predicament, and, at last, harassed and anxious for
relief, he yielded to advice and offered to cede all_Fiji to England—on condition
that England should pay the American claim, and receive 200,000 acres of land,
retaining the title of King of Fiji. The deed of cession was prepared, and taken
to England.
Great interest was felt in the Colonies in the proposed cession, and some
exertions were made to induce the British government to entertain the proposi-
tion favorably, as good proof had just been obtained of the capabilities of Fiji
as a cottoh growing country. Some months later, Colonel Symthe, R. A., was
appointed to proceed as a commissioner to the Islands, to inquire into the state
of affairs, and report as to the advisibility of accepting the proposed cession,
which through the difficulties the British then had with the Maories (natives of
New Zealand) was declined, not caring to add another troublesome colony to
their possessions.
The American debt, therefore, still hung over Thakombau for several years,
causing him the greatest uneasiness and alarm, until at length it was taken up by
the Polynesia Company, whose operations I will now detail. This Company was
projected in Melbourne, in 1868, to pay the American debt of $45,000, on
condition that it received 200.000, acres, with a pre-emptive right over any land
Thakomnau, hereafter, might wish to sell, the exclusive right of banking and
issuing notes in Fiji, entire exemption from imposts of any kind, the sole right
of levying harbor and wharfage dues, full powers to make laws for the govern-
ment of their settlements, the Company undertaking to assist the King in up-
holding his kingdom, and the King pledging himself, to protect settlers on the
Company’s land from native aggression.
The acting British Consul, however, protested against the Company’s assuming
any political power, and the terms of the cession were subsequently very much
modified, and it was finally agreed that they should pay $45,000 to Thakombau,
and allow him SI,OOO a year for the right of selecting 200,000 acres within cer-
tain blocks then specified, the Company to have the exclusive right of banking for
twenty-one years and perpetual freedom from taxation. A charter to that effect
was sgined in July, 1868, by Thakombau and six Mbau chiefs. As regards the
banking monopoly, there is nothing to prevent any man’s establishing such an in


stitution, provided the public will take his paper ; and at this moment the notes
of three merchants at Levuka are very largely circulated.
An arrangement was entered into with the United States’ Consul to pay the
debt in instalments, the agreement to be null and void in the event of Thakom-
bau’s failing to comply with the terms of the Charter. It was also agreed that
the American Consul should render such material support to the Company as he
could for securing the faithful execution of the Charter. All the instalments of
the debt have been paid, and their land is daily increasing in value.
The original scheme was a grand one, and was as ambitious as that of the East
India Company, and had only a portion of it been carried out, incalculable
benefit might have been conferred upon Fiji. Companies for the colonization of
new countries, however, are rarely successful, and the present instance is no ex-
ception to the rule. The responsible officers never seemed to work together;
there were always cabals in the directory, and finally sufficient capital was never
raised to float the Company properly.
BRITISH POWER IN FIJI.
There is a great difference in the power vested in the English and American
Consul, mainly arising from the fact, that the English Consul has no judicial
authority; the English Government having no treaty with Thakombau, only con-
sidering him a chief in Mbau. Then again, the dilatory and unsuccessful way
in which the British Government has redressed the outrages and wrongs of its
subjects, has lowered its prestige very much in the eyes of the natives.
In 1867, Mr. Baker, a Wesleyan Missionary, was murdered and eaten at Na-
vosa, and no notice was taken of it by the British Government, even after Tha-
kombau had endeavored to punish the murderers and failed signally. Therefore
they still remain unpunished.
Again, Mr. Pfluger, having ordered some natives to remove their townships
from land purchased by him, and they having refused, complained to Commo-
dore Rowley Lambert, of the Challenger, who sent an expedition in the ship’s
boats, which was ignominiously beaten back, and no more notice taken of the
affair.
Then, the murder of the Rev. Mr. Volkner in New Zealand, who was killed
and eaten by the Maories without being avenged; also the murder of Mr. Todd,
a government surveyor, sent up to survey Maori land which had been confiscated,
first having been ordered off and not doing so—being of course confident of the
support of the New Zealand Government —was murdered by the natives in the
beginning of the present year. The murderers being personally known, were re


quested to be given up by the King’s party ; but they refused, and after a great
deal of bragging and bounce on the part of the government, the question was
let drop, lowering still more the prestige of British power in New Zealand.
Far different was the conduct of Commodore Wilkes. In 1840, when survey-
ing the Islands two of his men were killed by the natives, he immediately burnt
down and destroyed the offending native settlement, and dispersed the natives
into the mountains. Also the vigorous way in which Capt. Boutwell settled the
American difficulty as regarded the American debt, has placed American power
in good repute. The lack of power of the British Consul is no doubt owing to
the mistaken leniency of the British Government to those savages ; and it has
been proved, over and over again, that half-measures with them produce more in-
jurious effects than prompt, well executed punishment. The consequence is, that
the idea of British control is treated by these tribes with contempt, whereas the
American flag commands their respect and admiration.
This has been all brought about by what is known in the Colonies as the Exe-
ter Hall party with John Bright at its head, influencing those in power as re-
gards the treatment of Aboriginals in all their settlements. Instead of punishing
where punishment is due, they strictly adhere to the sugar and flour policy, and
encourage savages to think that they do a meritorious action in killing a white
man. There is no doubt that the blood of many thousands of good and brave
men rests on the heads of these Exeter Hall people. Had the Imperial Govern-
ment taken a lesson from their Trans-Atlantic brethren in dealing with these
savages, greater security would be guaranteed to the pioneers of their new set-
tlements.
MISSION HISTORY.
There arc two Missionary bodies in Fiji —the Wesleyan, which has been
settled in Fiji for the last thirty-five years, and the history of which is the his-
tory of the islands from their earliest settlement—and the Roman Catholic
dating from twenty-six years. No other religion was represented in the country
until the arrival of Mr. Floyd, a Church of England missionary, who went
to the group at the beginning of this year. The Fijians in their own concise
way distinguish the two faiths, calling the Wesleyan Na-lotu-wai-wai (the oily
religion), and the Roman Catholic Na-lotu-Popey (the Pope’s religion). The
Wesleyan Mission. —In 1835, through Tongan influence, Christianity was first
introduced in Fiji; and in 1838, the “Centenary Fund” assisted by John
Irving, of Bristol, fitted out the brigantine Triton , which sailed with the first
missionary, (Mr. Williams,) for Fij. He was followed in 1840 by Mr. Water-
house, who died in 1842, and was succeeded as superintendent by Mr. Lawry.


In 1851, the Triton was replaced by the John Wesley, and the headquarters of
the mission shifted from London to Sydney. In 1845, Yerani, king of Rewa,
through the intercession of his wife, professed Christianity, and gave the mission
a settled footing in that kingdom. But, at Mbau it had but a chequered progress,
that State being constantly at war, until king Thakombau being prostrated with
sickness, and having suffered great reverses, being pressed by King George, of
Tonga, was baptized in 1857, bringing over to Christianity a great many of his
chiefs and subjects. Previous to this he had given land to the church, and the
Great Strangers’ House was built in 1854. The present returns of the Wesleyan
church are: chapels, 617; other preaching places, 361; missionaries, 10;
English schoolmasters, 1 ; native ministers, 48 ; catechists, 905 ; day school
teachers, 2,028 ; sabbath school teachers, 2,309 ; local preachers, 728 ; class
leaders, 2,663 ; fully [accredited members 23,223 ; members on trial, 4,797 ;
sabbath schools, 1,066; sabbath scholars, 50,690; day schools, 1,549; day
scholars, 48,721 ; catechumens, 8,105 ; deaths of members, 694; attendants on
public worship, 106,777. Showing over two-thirds of the whole population to
be under the influence of the Wesleyan denomination. The Roman Catholic
mission consists of ten French priests, their principal stations being Levuka,
Rewa, Wairiki and Solevu. The Roman Catholic mission church of the Sacred
Heart is a very handsome weather-board building, sixty feet by twenty-four feet,
with a belfry thirteen feet square, containing four bells, weighing respectively
2 cwt., 4 cwt. and 7 cwt., and surmounted by a cross which reaches an elevation
of eighty feet. This edifice was built by Father Louyot himself, with the
assistance of Fijian natives. I have no information as to the number of their
proselytes, but they are few compared to the Wesleyans, whose annual expenses
are $25,000, exclusive of the working of the John Wesley, allowances to
returned or invalid missionaries, and sundry minor expenses. If they have not
succeeded in making more than nominal Christians of the great bulk of their
converts, they have only failed where ministers of religion in civilized countries
fail; and still a great deal remains undone, and the Fiji offers a noble field of
enterprise to those who delight in God’s good works.
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE.
The Fijian is not an isolated tongue like the old Etruscan, or the modern
Chinese or Basque. It is a member of that wide-spread family of languages
known as the Oceanic, or Malayo-Polyncsian type of human speech from
Formosa and Hawaii in the North Pacific as far south as New Zealand, and
from Easter Islands below the Tropic of Capricorn in longitude 109° West,
across the South Pacific and Indian Oceans to Madagascar in 45° East longi-
tude, languages are found to obtain, which less or more nearly resemble one
another in their elementary sounds, their laws of syllabication, their vocab


ularies, and all their leading grammatical principles and processes. The lan-
guage of the Malays and the Sumatrans is structurally that of the Malagasses
and the Maori of the New Zealander, is to some extent intelligible between
3,000 and 4,000 miles away among the Sandwich Islanders. The principal
features of the Malayo-Polynesian tongues may be exhibited in a few words.
Their alphabets exclude, for the most part, guttural or hissing sounds, and show
a strong partiality for vowels, nasals and liquids. Their syllables commonly con-
sist of a vowel alone, or of a single consonant followed by a vowel. The last
syllable but one in a word is that upon which the accent is usually made to fall.
A dual as well as a plural number is recognized. Nouns rarely undergo any
change to express the ideas of gender, number and case, and verbs have no
inflections properly so called. As in the Hottentot tongue the first personal
possessive pronouns, when not in the singular assumes different forms, according
as the “ we” or “ our” is to be taken in what is called an inclusive or exclusive
sense. The English expression, “Let us go,” addressed by one individual to
another, in the presence of a third party, is equivocal. It may mean, “let you
and me go,” shutting out the third person, or, “let us all three go.” No such
ambiguity can attach to the words in the mouth of a Polynesian. In the former
case, a Tongan, for example, would say, “ Ke-ta-o,” in the latter, “Ke-tau-o”;
and other languages of the Oceanic class make a similar distinction. In regard
to their syntax, the Malayo-Polynesian speech -has little of the width, the
elaborateness or symmetry of the group of languages to. which the English,
language belongs. At the same time they are equally removed from- the chaotic,
cramped and ill-proportioned style of the Tartar-Chinese and other leading
tongues oi Central and Eastern Asia. The expression of thought in Malayc-
Polynesian is simple, inartificial, flowing and vigorous, and as a B vehicle of
Christian truth, whether by word of mouth or writing, the languages of this
family will admit of comparison with the capabilities of much more polished
tongues. The characters which have now been enumerated as belonging to the
Malayo-Polynesian speech at large, are all shared by the Fijian, of which a more
minute account, excepting to students, would be without interest. Fijian
literature is in its cradle, but its infancy gives great promise of a vigorous and
energetic manhood. The New Testament and other parts of Scripture are
printed in the language, and the missionaries have published some useful books
besides. These last, as the case of the people affectingly required, have been
as yet taken up with religious and moral subjects. As soon as possible, elemen-
tary works on various branches of knowledge will be supplied for the use of the
mission schools. With a language such as has been described, and with the
blessings of God upon the continued labors of Christian missionaries among a
people so strong-minded, so enterprising, and so versatile as are the subjects of
this volume, there is no reason why Fijian literature should not by and by take
rank with the noblest cultures to which the Gospel is at present shaping the
genius of so many of the heathen population of our globe.
The following comparative table shows the annual exports for the past six
years:


1865.
1866.
1867.
1868,
1869.
1870.
Articles.
Amount.
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Cotton, tbs ...
... 268,800
#46,500
685,560
#99,000
849,632
#170,020
817,600
#154,875
1,176,000
#225.000
2,252,000
#450,000
Cocoa-nut oil, Tons 500
55,000
450
45,000
150
16,300
250
25,000
260
27,500
390
41,250
Beche-de-mer,
tbs 70,000
6,000
42,000
3,000
121,200
8,000
23,520
1,500
5,600
375
20
190
Wool, tbs ....
2,000
8,396
1,600
496
660
4,800
1,000
2,000
400
1,500
280
Tortoise-shell,
750
1,875
2,000
5,000
1,700-
4,060
17,500
40,000
2,300
6,250
2,000
5,000
Coir, Tons ...
50
2,500
20
1,000
25
1,075
Sundries
2,500
1,250
745
2,500
10.000
15,000
Totals.
#116,375
#154,850
#199,785
#225,875
#270,600
#511,720
In addition to these articles of export, there are cash re-
mittances, the amount of which cannot be estimated.
These returns prepared in the British Consulate are if any-
thing under the mark. A very large increase in the item
of cptton may have been looked for in the present year, had
it not been for a severe hurricane that visited the island in
March, 1871. The difficulty of getting good seed there,
Sea Island being often mixed with the Kidney and Egyptian
formerly grown on the islands, while they have also had
to sell their cotton in the seed to the storekeepers for want
of machinery to clean it at a very low rate. Their progress
has also been retarded by inexperience and loss of time, oc-
casioned, in many instances, by having to root up the old plan-
tations of the coarser variety to make way for the Sea Island,
which may now be said to be the only kind grown by
white men, in the group. In 1867, the greater part of the
cotton grown was of the commoner kinds, which were sold
at 20 cents per pound, while now a large proportion of the
Sea Island produced brings from 25 cents to $1 per pound-
The substitution of the knife roller gins for the old saw
gin, which spoils the Sea Island, though it is adapted for the
shorter staples, is also making a very appreciable difference
in the returns, and with the large importation of agricul-
tural implements and ginning appliances which have been
recently introduced, we may look for large exports of cotton
in the future. The trade of the group has hitherto been
exclusively with Sydney and New Zealand, but so wide a
field for commercial enterprise cannot long escape the atten-
tion of San Francisco and New York merchants. The ex-
pense of shipping cotton to the Colonies is a great draw-
back to the planter; direct communication with the United
States and England is very much needed. With the
present charge the planter, who has to sell his cotton in
the seed, loses something like 16 per cent, of the value of
the crop. The freight upon cotton to Sydney is from one
to two cents per pound, and the charge for conveyance
thence to England is about the same, Ihe cost of ginning,
packing, freight and brokerage consigned to England via
Sydney, amounts from seven to eight cents per pound. The
Kidney and Egyptian varieties of cotton, which used to bring
an average of 15 cents per pound in Levuka, have now been
entirely superseded by Sea Island. Advices from England
place the value of Fiji cotton, according to variety, at from
25 cents to $1 20 per pound. The secretary of the Man-
chester Cotton Association, in a recent communication, said,
that the Fijian Sea Island cotton was superior to that grown
in Georgia, as regarded length of staple, silkiness of texture
and purity of color, but that it was scarcely so strong in the
staple, and he believed this was owing to the method ot


growing it; he suggested that the cotton should be better cultivated, and
that if the plants were ploughed and hoed they would produce a stronger
staple. The natives grow Kidney and Egyptian cotton in limited quantities.
They sell the cotton in the seed. It is generally very dirty, but it fetches
more in the English market than the New Orleans middling. The usual
system of growing cotton is very rude : They dig a hole in the ground with a
stick or a hoe, the seed planted, and in three or four days it is up. It requires
five or six months to ripen; then picking commences, and they generally
get three crops per annum. The plant is perennial and that saves planting
so often as in the United States. I have heard various opinions on planting,
some say to prune, and others to renew your planting every third year;
but the planters are all inexperienced, most of them being sea-faring men. It
is only recently that the plough and hoe have been introduced, and only one-
fourth of the planters use them even now, the remaining three-fourths use a
large knife, fifteen or sixteen inches long, which serves also for cutting down the
-weeds. The natives know nothing of either plough or horses, the islands being
entirely destitute of animals, but have innumerable insects, snakes and birds.
The vampire or flying fox is indigenous to them.
THE LABOR QUESTION.
At a public meeting held at Vuna, the following letter addressed to Mr.
Ernest Rogan and the surrounding planters in the district of Taviuni, was
read:—“British Consulate, Fiji and Tonga, Ovalau, May Ist, 1871. Sir: —
On the arrival here of one of Her Majesty’s ships of war, I intend proceeding
to examine the imported laborers on your plantation as to the treatment they
receive, their hours of labor, the quality and quantity of their food ; and above
all, as to whether any of them have been retained beyond the periods for which
they were engaged, so as to satisfy myself that your duties and responsibilities
as an employer have been fully performed. I need scarcely remind you that the
relations between yourself and these untutored people must be those which exist
and are practiced in civilized countries, and that no plea of the custom of the
country will be allowed to excuse harsh treatment or unjustifiable severity
towards them. You will please consider these remarks as general, and not as
applied to you in particular. It is desirable that these natives should be per-
mitted to have access to any teacher of Christianity in your district, and
encouraged to attend church, taking care that when they do so they be decently
clad. This will improve their condition, and go far towards removing the dis-
favor with which the importation of labor is regarded elsewhere.
EDWARD MARCH, H. B. M. Consul.”


A deputation of six gentlemen were appointed to wait on H. B. M. Consul,
and the captain of Her Majesty’s ship Blanche on her arrival at Yuna,to express
their willingness to aid and assist to the utmost of their power in carrying out
the investigations referred to in the Consul’s circuhtr.
DEPARTURE OF W. O. GARDENHIRE FROM FIJI.
On the 18th June, I took my passage in the schooner Merlin, Captain Yates,
for Auckland, with my Fiji troupe and several cotton planters and travelers. At
10 o’clock of the same bright sunny morning we sailed out of Levuka harbor,
in a few hours had seen the last of the spray curling on the many circling reefs,
and scented the last of the mingled odor of sea-weed wreaths and fresh wet
sand from the coral shores of the surrounding islets. The white houses on the
Levuka beach and the hills behind had long passed out of view, when the
quickly fading outlines of Augau and Koro were absorbed in night, and there
was nothing left to me of Fiji, but many pleasant recollections of a beautiful
country and hospitable settlers. At the close of the same day we were
privileged to see one of those gorgeous sunsets peculiar to the tropics, which
are wholly indescribable ; the sun sets in a glory of crimson and gold, while
his mild departing splendors still tinge the waves as they dance brightly
around us with reflected tints of rose and amber from the clouds. When night
fell, the moon silvered the sea as smooth as the Mississippi. On the following
day, a pleasant breeze from E.N.E. sprang up which continued for three days,
in latitude 25° 25' South, longitude 177° 54' East; then experienced a heavy
sea from S.E., the wind being from N.N.E., causing the vessel to roll in a
terrific manner, all sail had to be lowered for safety of masts and rigging. On
Friday, the 23d, in latitude 26° 14' South, the wind shifted to N.W. and
increased to a gale with a high angry sea, which compelled the schooner to be
hove to for sixteen hours, during which time all on board had almost despaired
of ever seeing land again, on Saturday, 24th ; then veering to S.W. moderated
to a calm on Monday, the 25th ; then had strong westerly gales until arrival
in Auckland harbor, New Zealand.
The following address was presented to Captain Yates :
To Captain M. Yates.
Sir : —We, the undersigned, passengers by the Merlin, desire emphatically
to express our thanks for, and our approbation of your conduct as master of
the ship, as well as of your personal care for, and kindness to us, on the very
stormy passage from Levuka to Auckland, just ended, and to express our best
wishes for your future success.
[Here follow signatures.]


REPLY.
Schooner Merlin, Auckland, June 29th.
To the Passengers per Merlin.
Gentlemen : —I have to express my heart-felt pleasure at receiving this token
of your good feeling towards me, and 1 trust I may always find it as easy, as it
shall ever be my aim, to be of service to my passengers. I am, etc.
M. YATES, Master Sschooner Merlin.
On the 13th July, I left Auckland by the P. S. Nevada for San Francisco
via Honolulu, (Hawaiian Islands) at which place we arrived on the morning of
the 29th instant, experienced fine weather with moderate winds from N.E. I
proceeded at once to issue hand-bills, and gave a grand exhibition on the same
evening, and also one on the following day at Buffum’s Hall. The house was
crowded to overflowing, the Kanakas or natives being anxious to see their
brother man-eaters, as they have long given up cannibalism themselves.
Honolulu is a picturesque little town containing 2,500 inhabitants, 2,100 miles
southwest of San Francisco, latitude 21°, longitude—and having a lovely
climate. On the Ist of August I reshipped in the steamship Ajax for this port,
arriving in the harbor on the 12th instant, having had fine weather but heavy
head-winds from the N.E. all the way.
LEAVE OF THE SUBJECT.
In finally taking leave of the subject, it only remains to be added that I have
endeavored to give an impartial account of the condition and prospects of Fiji
as they appeared to me from personal observation, and the facts gathered during
a long tour through the islands. Those facts which have been recorded I now
leave to speak for themselves. Whatever difficulties intervene, there is no doubt
of the ultimate prosperity of Fiji. There is a wide field for enterprise in this
fertile but yet uncultivated domain, which only requires labor and capital to
utilize its undeveloped resources. They who go forth with brave hearts and
■willing hands to replenish the earth and subdue it, have before them the prospects
of those high rewards which have already been reaped by the first hardy settlers
of \irginia. Theirs is a glorious work to redeem to peace and usefulness a
generous soil, to make the rich flats teem with sugar-cane, the vacant valleys
laugh with plenty, and the tropic -wilderness to blossom like a garden.
With the labor question once placed on a satisfactory basis, and a regular and
abundant supply of field hands, there is nothing to prevent the Fiji Islands—with
their great natural advantages of soil, climate and geographical position, which
opens the markets to them, of Australasia on one side, and those of the American
Continent on the other—rapidly becoming the Mauritius of the Pacific. There is


something grand in the contemplation of the progress of the Anglo-Saxon race in
the United States and Australasia. The gradual advance of the frontier of civil-
ization throughout that great island world of the Pacific known as Central Poly-
nesia, which embraces the Fijian, Tongan, Samoan, and Tahitian archipelagoes,
the Paumotus, the Marquesas, the Hervey Islands, and the smaller groups and
islets scattered in the vicinity of these clusters, the greater portion of which
seem to be destined to be settled by the same all-absorbing people, impelled
towards the young nations of the south by the restless spirit of democracy.
The future island homes of the Anglo-Saxon or Germanic race in these seas,
afford a most interesting subject for speculation. The Aborigines of North
America, Australia, and New Zealand, obedient to a mysterious law, have
perished on first contact with that race to whom is confided the great colonizing
mission ; but there has as yet been no instance of Northern Europeans per-
manently supplanting the Asiatic or negro in their own clime. The English in
India, the French in Algeria, the Dutch in Java, and the Russians in Asia,
though ruling conquered nations have never been able to take their places, or
maintain their numbars, except by continuous emigration. In the salubrious
climate of Fiji European children thrive well, and the native population is
doomed to the melancholy fate of the aboriginal inhabitants of those countries
where the sons of Japhet have settled, without having to encounter the heat of
the tropics, or the ancient races of the old world.
The Australasian Colonies claim the Fiji Islands as naturally belonging to them.
Whatever may be the future of these embryo States, whether they unite in one
confederation, whether they become independent nationalities, or continue their
allegiance to the mother country, is now causing serious consideration. My
humble opinion is, having been some time among them, that the day is not far
distant when they will sever from their connection with England, and take a
proud position among the nations of the world as a republic second only to the
United States—which is now acknowledged to be the model of nations—with her
long railroads, big steamships and broad prairies.
We cannot appreciate our own prosperity and greatness until we have been
abroad, and see the poverty and oppression of foreign lands; and I felt through-
out all my travels the truth of the words of the old song, there is “No place
like home.”


THE
Fiji Cannibal Exhibition
WILL VISIT ALL THE
Principal Cities on the Pacific Slope
0!ll f'l B fc:Thl
Then Proceeding East, via Virginia City and Sain .ke.
Two Celebrated Fijian Chiefs
KO RATU MASI MOA, KI NA BOSE-YACO, and
Dwarf-
Thirty-five years of age, and only 3 feet 4 inches high, all regular Man
Eaters. They will perform National War Dances, Sham Fights and
m Native War Costumes, with Fijian Weapons, consisting of Spears
Clubs, &e. on
Also, a great variety of
FIJIAN AND NEW ZEALAND CURIOSITIES,
CONSISTING OF •
Canniba! Knives and Forks, used for eating human flesh ; 50 kinds of
Wood, including the celebrated Sandal wood, used for burning before
Chinese Idols ; 50 different sorts of Clubs, Spears, Bows and Arrows and
other Implements of War.
Malay War Mask and Creese, Fiji Shark’s-teeth Swords, Model of War
Canoe, Fishhooks made of human bone ; Tapa, or native Cloth, made from
the bark of tree ; Head Dresses and Mats ; Native Ladies’ Powder Boxes
Necklaces of whales’ teeth, Fans, Bracelets, Combs ; Spirit Houses where
they suppose the spirits go after death, Idols, Crockeiy, Baskets Kava
Bowls, used for making the grog from kava root.
Vampire or Flying Fox all the tropical species of Fish, Snakes, Lizards,
Tortoise-shell Turtle, one half eel and half snake (Babirrussa), and a'large
collection of Lava Formations from the Hawaiian Islands, and 200 different
varieties of Ferns.
ALSO THE
MATO OF THE LATE LOVONI REBEL KING,
KiHed m battle with Thakombau, present King of Fiji, and presented to
W. C. Crardenhire on the day before sailing, June 17th 1871.
Some superior specimens of Fiji "Sea Island Cotton (the best” grown in
the world) and Tobacco. 5
v-
u
p
fn
Photographs of Kings and Chiefs, &c., on Sale at the Exhibition.


/oNTERHATIONAL HOTEL,
t-
S w
oc
ve. r
U 1
% g
o
m
t *4
H
dj <£
rs fe=^
S.AN FRANCISCO,
•This faVorite House is located a few doors west from Montgomery* on the same street
With the Post Office, Custom House, United States Court and Land Office.
Places of amusement are all convenient to the House.
THE INTERNATIONAL HOTEL
Offers the greatest inducements for families—and can accommodate Three
Hundred Persons. The House in conducted on
TEMPERANCE PRINCIPLES.
The Furniture is quite new, and in perfect order.
The Prices of Board and Room will vary, according to kind of Room:
from $L -50 to $2 00 per day.
THE TABLE will always be supplied with the best in the market. Two good
Barber Shops, a Bath Room and Laundry are attached to the House.
Tlio International Coach
Will be at each Car Depot and Steamboat, plainly marked INTERNATIONAL HOTEL
to convey passengers to the House, Free, and to any part of the city at the cheapest rate,
according to the distance ; from the House to either of the Steamers, 50 cents.
WEYGAAT & PATRIBGE, Proprietors.
lON*]:
cn=?
CD
t=D


LINFORTH, KELLOGG & 00.
Successors to L. B. BENCHLEY & CO.
IMPORTERS
JOBBERS OF
■
AHD
ARE
.s’-
H
jog* l *-' - - /*,■
FOREIGN
AND
HARDWARE,
&os. 3 and 5 FRONT STREET,
Near Market,
San Francisco.
ANVILS, VISES, CHAINS, FRY PANS, PLANTERS’ HOES, NAILS,
ROPE, SHOVELS, AXES, HATCHETS, AGRICULTURAL
IMPLEMENTS, BUILDERS’ HARDWARE, MINERS’
and MECHANICS’ TOOLS, FORCE and LIFT
PUMPS, RUBBER HOSE, IRON PIPE,
BRASS GOODS, &c. Ac &c.
Sole Agents for the Pacilie Coast, fur the
“WORLD” MOWER AND REAPER, “TORNADO” THRESHER,
GERRISH SUBMERGED FORCE P£MP, ALLEN’S BABBIT
METAL, ENTERPRISE CO.’S TAP BORERS and SELF-
MEASURING MOLASSES GATES. WOOL WORTH
HANDLE WORKS, &c. &c. <fee. &c.
LINFORTH, KELLOGG «£ GO.
