





FIJI
THE SUVA LAND
(BY ONE OF
From, “ The Argus ” of
AGENT-GENERAL for COMMUNE BE FLAOtiUS
Twenty gentlemen, mostly from Melbourne,
availed themselves of the opportunity afforded
them by the firm of James M‘Ewan and Co.,
who had specially chartered the A.S.N. Com-
pany’s ship Wentworth for a trip to the Fiji
Islands, to arrive in time for the land sales at
Suva on the 22nd of November. Some were
bent on pleasure solely ; others on pleasure
and business combined. Mr. W. K. Thomson,
of the abovenamed firm, was cordially, and,
as a matter of course, regarded as the leader
of our party. Had the choice been entirely
our own we might well have been proud of
our sagacity, for a better leader for such
a party it is beyond my power to imagine.
Sydney was our port of departure. From
its splendid harbour we steamed to sea early
on November 9. Though it was the Prince
of Wales’ birthday it was not “ Queen’s
weather.” A thick drizzle draped the beauty
of Port Jackson, there were signs of rough
weather outside the Heads; therefore, we
were not on this occasion enthusiastic in our
admiration of the picturesque scenery we
knew to lie on either side under the misty rain.
Our surmises as to sea and wind outs de the
Heads were too well founded. Fancies about
sunny seas, with fair winds wafting us over
the unruffled bosom of a truly Pacific ocean
were rudely dispelled. The captain of the
ship and the captain of our party, with one or
two more, had the table all to themselves the
first few days. The mol de mer was bad
enough, but my cabin being right aft, the
remorseless thud-ud-ud-duds of the pro-
peller, now in the water and now more
furious out of the water, inflicted positive
suffering. I dwell no longer on this humili-
ating commencement of our pleasure trip.
With a timid courage we began one by one to
take our places alongside the fiddled tables,
with encouraging smiles and nods from those
superior beings who had never missed a
meal, but had been enjoying each elaborate
bill of fare from soup to olives just as if there
were no groans of distress reaching them
from right and left—they in paradise, we in
purgatory.
AGENT-GENERAL FOR
/ r ov* i
t
QUEST.
THE PARTY.)
Saturday, December 25, 1880.
Our ship had gained a name in the “ Went-
worth hurricane” of last year for being a
good sea boat, not, however, as to speed. She
is sure, but slow. On our tenth day out land
was sighted. Cape Washington, on the south-
west of Kandavu, with a mountain 3,800 ft.
high, was passed on our starboard before
dawn on November 19. With Vatu Lele and
Benga islets on our port we had now fairly
entered the Fijian Archipelago. The largest
of the group, Viti Levu, soon showed itself,
giving at a distance the impression of sterile
ruggedness from the precipitous and broken
shape of the range running along its coast. It
was a surprise to learn, on a nearer view
that the thickest tropical vegetation clothed
them in verdure from shore to moun-
tain top. “ Big Fiji” is about 100 miles long
by 60 broad. It is drained by one great river,
the Rewa, and several smaller. It is on its
south-east corner that the bay of Suva lies.
There we dropped anchor at 10 a.m. on the
17th November. Dr. Corney soon
with a crew of black men manning his boat.
After the due medical inquisition as to health
on board, or possible epidemic at our port of
departure, we were permitted to land at Suva,
instead of being sent to the quarantine sta-
tion on the opposite side of the harbour.
That great care and conscientiousness are
needed in such matters is painfully impressed
on every humane mind when we call to_
memory the frightful fact that an epidemic
of measles a few years ago cut off forty
thousand Fijian natives. This fearful
slaughter having in the first instance been
occasioned through ignorance or carelessness
on the part of some white people who should
have known better, more deaths are thus
chargeable on unconscientious heedlessness
in matters of quarantine than an indefinite
number of “ Carl ” atrocities could equal.
Suva lies at the south-east corner of Vitu
L e vu—the great Fiji, as the words mean. Its
harbour is capacious, and deep enough to
give anchorage to the largest fleet. It is
land-locked on three sides, while its entrance
on the south opens on what might be termed
COMMUNE


the inland sea of the archipelago, from the with its little fleet of, at this time, three
agitations of which it is admirably protected steamers, the Wentworth, Suva, and Moyne;
by two coral reefs, the one extending beyond
the other at such an angle as to afford com-
plete shelter, as well as a deep and wide chan-
nel of entrance and exit, than which no Sir
John Coode would be able to devise a better,
the coral insects thus accomplishing what
human engineers would have required a
million sterling to effect—not equally well.
The town, as surveyed and planted, lies on the
starboard side of ships entering the bay, and
about half-way from the entrance to the head
of the harbour. There is a level frontage to
the sea, from which the ground rises in
gentle hilly ridges behind. There is ample
room for a future city of any extent required.
A stone pier is well advanced, leading out
into deep water. Coolie labour is busy at the
work —the men with pick and shovel, the
women with baskets to carry the material on
their heads to the trucks, which run on a,
tramway to the water’s edge. The children of
these laborious sable mothers are playing
about with some native children till the
daily task is done at 4 p.m., when they hie
them home to the barrack quarters built for
them just outside the town. At present the
nucleus in esse of the town in posse is made
up of the large stores of James M'Ewan and
Co., where everything “ from a needle to an
anchor,” and even to a 20-ton crane, can be
procured ; then of a commodious hotel, with
40 bedrooms, large billiard-room, bathrooms,
and every requirement of comfort and
luxury ; then of two or three workshops,
about 20 cottages scattered about, and on
a conspicuous knoll, a little church for Pro-
testant worship, irrespective of denomina-
ti >n. The dwelling of Mr. Paul Joske
occupies a beautiful site on a moderate
elevation, commanding a fine view of the
harbour, sea-wards. The charm of Mr.
Joske’s establishment lies in the sensible
blending of things Fijian with things Euro-
pean. The premises are native mainly, with
some improvements. Each building (for
there are several) has a massive frame of
round timber filled up with the reed panel-
ling in which the natives are skilled;
and covered by a thick thatch, water-
proof and heat-resisting. The servants
are all native “boys,” as they are called,
though they are really grown men. Our
party, having the favour of introductions,
found in this hospitable dwelling a charm-
ing refinement and culture, most gracefully
grafted on Fijian conditions, giving to such
of us as had the honour of being received as
guests a unique pleasure while we were
there, to be prolonged in grateful memories
now that we are gone. The cottage of Mr.
C. VV. Empson, manager for the firm of James
M'Ewan and Co., occupies another fine site
just above the church ; but it is entirely
of the tyjje of wooden and iron-roofed
cottage with which we are familiar
in the colony. The view it commands
is extensive and very picturesque; the bay
a large store hulk ; and a number of yachts,
boats, and canoes lay in the immediate front
below. Beyond, the verdant hills of a range
encompassing the island with scarce a break ;
to the left the coral reefs with a glistening
fringe of broken sea. Suva is about, as I will
afterwards show, to be the scene of a rapid
development and growth. I have sug-
gested the desirability of having a photo-
graph taken of it now as it is, and every
six months after, so as to form a pic-
torial history of its progress. How interest-
ing in after years would such a record be.
The sun itself would be the annalist, and
hand on to a future generation what was
seen in “the light of other days.”
About a mile from Suva lies a town of the
black people. It is only that part of them
engaged in domestic service by the whites
who live with the latter. All the others
dwell in native villages. The days of can-
nibal horrors have passed away for ever from
Fiji. The natives are now almost wholly
Christian.
To the Wesleyan missionaries belongs the
great achievement of Christianising these
numerous and once formidable cannibal
tribes. A well-known Victorian clergyman,
being one of our party, acted as its chaplain
both on board ship and on shore. Our first
Sunday was amid stormy seas. All had to
keep sitting and holding on during Divine
service. Our second Sunday was at Suva,
with services on shore. Some of us visited
the native village, and were much in-
terested in the*simple and decorous way in
which the native teachers conducted their
worship. All sat on mats on the floor.
The teacher put on a special gar-
ment, coming down to his sulu. They
were gratified when one of us read
the lesson from the New Testament in
their own language (with some help as to pro-
nunciation from the teacher). They sang
the hymns in good time and tune, their
dialect suiting the music well. Their churches
are made of reeds and leaves on a wooden
framework. No pews encumber their matted
floors. There is no creaking of boots, or
rustling of silks, or slamming of doors. All
is softness and simplicity itself.
It was gratifying to learn that there were
evidences of good moral results from religion
as they understand it. Very proper arrange-
ments are made in their villages with respect
to the dwellings of married people, young
men, and girls. The boys of a certain age,
and the unmarried young men, have separate
sleeping places at a proper distance from the
families with whom they consort through the
day. Suva was on Sunday deserted by the
black men, who on other days frequented
the places where there was any stir. They
kept to their own quarters, and engaged in no
work or sport on that day. The black people
do not know anything of Christian denomi-
nations, except Wesleyans and Roman Ca-


tholics. Our chaplain had to be introduced Groups of black men were in the verandah,
as Wesleyan missionary to the Melbourne looking at the feast through the open door*
Papalagis (the name for white people), even
although he belongs to another section of the
Christian church.
Monday, the 22nd of November, was a great
day in Suva. The hotel was crowded to
excess. In addition to the Wentworth
party, there were between 30 and 40 persons
from Levuka. There was the hon. the Ad-
ministrator (J, B. Thurston) and staff ; the
surveyor-general, Mr. . John Berry ; the
superintendent of police, Mr. W. Seed, and
others. Mr. James M'Culloch was auc-
tioneer, and read the conditions of sale
and other preliminaries.
Suva, by order in Council, had been fixed as
the capital of Fiji. A town had been sur-
veyed and planned on the site already de-
scribed. Every alternate block, by legal com-
pact with the firm of James M‘Ewan and
Co., was to be Government land; the rest
was to remain the property of the firm. £3OO
per acre was the upset price for front allot-
ments ; £2OO for those behind. Levuka, it
is not to be wondered at, did not want the
change of capital, and it was confidently as-
serted that there would be no sales effected,for
there would be no bidders. Prophecy was at
fault this time,for the land sold brisklyand well,
through the active competition of Levuka
men themselves. All the front allotments
were sold—those of the firm as well—at
prices ranging from £5OO to £l,OOO per acre.
Several of the back ones were also disposed
of. It was a curious and historic scene this
sale. The table and chairs of the auctioneer
and clerks were placed under the shade of a
line umbrageous ivi tree (pronounced eevee)
in front of the hotel. The bidders were
under the verandah. Black men, Fijians,
Solomon Islanders, and Coolies were
all about, wondering and gabbling. That
ivi-tree is to be fenced in and carefully
preserved. Our leader was congratulated
warmly. We shared the pleasure of his suc-
cess. Several of us were investors in Suvan
sites. One of us parted with his at £lOO
advance ; others were offered even more than
this on their bargain, but preferred holding
on. The Levukan purchasers, whatever they
may have to say to those who believed their
predictions, and stayed at home, were over-
heard blessing their own good luck. Such is
this wicked world.
The dinner at the hotel that evening was
an ovation. Mr. W. K. Thomson presided.
“ Prosperity to Suva ” was drunk in bumpers
of sparkling champagne, after a speech from
the chair of an eloquence no less sparkling
and exhilarating. But when “ Success to the
firm of James M'Ewan and C 0.,” coupled
with the name of our leader, was proposed,
no Pickwickian occasion ever equalled ours
in vociferous acclamation. It was felt that a
fresh impetus had been that day given to
British colonisation and industrial enter-
prise in the Fiji islands, and the impulsive
power came from Melbourne and from him.
and windows. But they were not left to feast
their eyes alone ; liberal donations of, to
them unwonted, dainties were handed out
and divided. No intoxicating drink, how-
ever, was given them, though cigars and
tobacco are gladly received. It is their turn
now for merry-making. Some scores of them
are assembled, and prepare to hold a meke
meke, or native dance. A piece of iron spout-
ing is made to do duty for the native drum,
which does not happen to be at hand.
Around the drummer a monotonous chant is
sung. Meantime an outer ring of men
and boys perform a dance, in which
it is the arms and the body rather than the
feet that do the movements. With bends
and twists they keep time to the chant, all
the while moving sideways round the main
body of the chanters, every now and then
finishing off with a peculiar thump of one
open hand on the hollow palm of the other—
all at once, in strict time. Then they go at
it again—the same chant, the same contor-
tuous meke gyrations—ending in the same
simultaneous clap. A display of rockets and
other fireworks from the pier raised shrieks
of admiration among the blacks.
Next morning, after an early breakfast, we
embarked in a little steamer bearing the ill-
omened name of the Royal Charter, for an
excursion up the Rewa River Our boat,
trusting too much to her light draught,
went on a reef. After getting into deep
water the engine struck work. So there
we were, only floating as idly “as a
painted ship upon a painted ocean.” With
that forethought which, providing for all
emergencies, marks the genius of a true
leader, the Moyne, paddle steamer, had
been detailed to act as tender to the
Charter till we sailed over the dozen
miles or so between Suva and the
mouth of the Rewa, in case the Charter did
not answer. The Moyne, 20 tons, belonging
to the firm already mentioned, had not long
since been navigated by Captain Gilfillan and
a crew of four men from Melbourne to Suva,
calling at Lord Howe and Norfolk Islands.
It was a risky thing for a flat-bottomed paddle
craft, encumbered with a captain’s cabin-
house built on her deck, to dare 2,000 miles
of ocean. She did it well, encountering
some rough weather too, deftly handled by
her plucky crew. We steam-whistled and
signalled for the Moyne. She was soon
alongside, our stores and persons tran-
shipped, and our voyage resumed. The
reason for not taking the Moyne in the
first instance was a statement by some
Suvan wiseacres that the Charter was better
adapted for the river. The phenomenal thing
about the Rewa is the magnitude of the
stream compared with the smallness of the
island. It is like the river of a great conti-
nent. For many miles we sailed up a body of
flowing fresh water 10 or 12 chains wide, and,
with some dredging at certain places,


deep enough for large vessels. We pro- landing-pier; next, on its getting too
ceeded about 30 miles up this river dark for diving, there was a men and
in the Moyne, and could have gone with
boats many miles more. There are numerous
plantations all the way up, some of which
we visited, and were received with the
utmost hospitality. The vegetation on the
banks of the river is of the densest luxuriance.
About 10 miles up we proceeded, on the invi-
tation of Mr. T. M. Shave, to visit the sugar
plantation which has developed so well
under his able management. We walked for
two miles through rich land planted with
rows of canes, with proper arrangements for
drainage and irrigation. It came on to rain
heavily, for which we were ill provided.
When we reached Mr. Shave’s house, we had
to sit down to an excellent dejeuner, all soaked
through from hat to boots. In these circum-
stances we used despatch, and drinking the
health of our kind entertainer and his family,
we got back to the Moyne before getting
time to cool in our dripping clothes.
The sugar plantations on the Rewa have,
doubtless, a great future before them. The
sugar and rum exports from Fiji amount to
upwards of £20,000. We continued our
ascent till 10 p.m., when we reached a point
near what is called the Terminus Hotel.
Twenty Melbourne visitors coming unex-
pectedly on this far-off hotel put its
resources to the stretch. By 6 a.m,
next morning we were again on board,
going still further up the river. The
banks of the river were now steep and
lofty, covered to the top with one tangled
mass of trees, shrubs, creepers in festoons,
and flowers in great variety. Mr. Graham, a
Rewa planter, joined us a few miles further
up, and gave us much interesting informa-
tion. After visiting the plantation, of which
Mr. Stork is manager, from whose place there
is a very fine view of the country, we began
our descent. There was a considerable fresh,
owing to recent rain. It was flowing down
about five miles an hour, and this being
about the rate our boat could steam, it
rendered steering difficult. Once we got
aground, but a number of natives being at
hand got into the river, and, like a band of
Tritons, pushed us off. We visited a sugar-
mill with all the most modern machinery
and appliances. The cane goes in at one end,
has all its saccharine juice forced out (the
dry fibrous mass remaining feeding the
furnace), the crude liquor is then dealt with
ingeniously in a series of vats, a long
tortuous heating channel, ending in the
vacuum vessel—a light-grey crystallised
sugar being the result. Treacle and rum are
subsidiary products, nothing being lost, and
everything turned to account.
It being too late when we got to the lower
reach of the river to thread our way among the
reefs to Suva, we cast anchor and spent the
night at Smith’s Hotel. There was consider-
able amusement here afforded by the natives
in various ways—first by diving for silver
pieces thrown into the river from the
boys’ scramble for coins on the ground, the
native women and girls being afforded a
separate scramble of their own. Lastly, we
had two mekes —one by the males, another by
the females. The latter was carried on with
such goodwill and perseverance that we were
obliged, as it was getting late, to say Sa
vinake, Set mothe (very good, good-bye), and
send them home to their own town in
the vicinity. The hotel was crowded—beds
were made on sofas, chairs, tables, or on
the softest boards. Mosquitoes in myriads
did their best to keep us lively by making us
box our own ears and slap our own faces, just
as each of them, with its sweet little tune,
would indicate the right place, and then,
getting out of the way, would renew the
sport. To cap all, a noisy drunken half-caste,
and the person in charge of the bar, were yarn-
ing away loudly and coarsely till 2 a.m., in
full hearing of us all, the house being so
constructed as to afford customers such
benefits. Our chaplain rose to the occa-
sion habited in his nocturnal surplice,
he visited the two delinquents at the
bar, and giving them a solemn look, ad-
monition and benediction (?), dismissed them.
The half-caste in the morning was found in a
shake-down under a table, from which, it
seems, he had impudently ejected one of our
men, who, rather than make a row at that
unearthly hour, wandered down to the river
to try and board the Moyne. Early and
eagerly did we all follow his example. By
5 a.m. we were steaming down the river.
Returning to Suva, after some hours of
rest and refreshment, we embarked once
more in the Wentworth, and steered for
Levuka, on the island of Ovalau, about 50
miles from Suva. It was dark when we got
to our anchorage, between the reef and the
town. A concave line of lights was all of the
town we could see, except when occasional
flashes of lightning revealed a precipitous
hill behind. We much enjoyed a quiet, good
nightin our cabins on this occasion. No screw,
no engine, no winds, no waves to disturb us ;
no mosquitoes, nor boosy, boisterous half-
caste as on the night before. In the morning
we had a full view of the town. It occupies
a thin crescent of shore at the base of a very
steep hill, rising about 700 ft. behind it. On
this narrow selvedge of beach the business
premises are erected. The dwelling-houses
clamber up the lower part of the steep
acclivity behind. Except by reclaiming from
the sea some narrow slips of foreshore, there
can be no possible extension of the town. The
Club is built on piles, with the sea washing
under it. The Mechanics’ Institute stands on
an oblong jetty of earth and stone invading
the foreshore. All credit and honour to the
people of Levuka for what they have done in
making the most of the means at their dis-
posal ; but the most has been made, and if
there is to be a capital capable of extension,
according to the growing requirements of a


prospering colony, it must be on another site, was of the lightest kind ; white linen trou-
After mature consideration, Suva has been sers, shirt, and shoes, with broad pith or
XxLhcr UldlUrc LUllHlUCidiulvllj OUVa UCCiI
chosen as that site. Naturally there is much
feelingon the subject in Levuka, butin the end
they will come to see that it is better to change.
There are about 800 or 1,000 whites in
Levuka, inclusive of women and children.
The names in the directory number 450.
There is one school maintained by Govern-
ment ; this as yet being the whole of their
state school system. There are some half-
caste children among the whites, but all look
healthy and well cared for. The black
people here, as in Suva, have quarters of
their own. Many of the cottages have a
picturesque appearance and romantic situa-
tion ; though in this climate it must be
arduous and exhausting work to reach them.
There are stores and shops of various descrip-
tions, two bi-weekly newspaper establish-
ments, an hospital, where, however, the
patients or their friends have to pay ;
a Mechanics’ Institute with a well-appointed
library and readingroom, and a hall
which answers for all public purposes,
as well as for popular lectures, concerts,
and amusements. It contains an excellent
grand piano. '1 here are Anglican, Wesleyan,
and Roman Catholic churches, with several
hotels—Sturt s, where we dined, being very
well managed, and having every conduce-
ment to comfort. In the billiardroom there
is a collection of native curios. There was
one delicacy on the table at lunch—the
balolo, which is forthcoming always on the
same day of the year (the 25th November),
and for which, therefore, we were just in
time. It is a vermicular organism found on
the reefs. Purposing to return to Levuka,
we again took ship for an island cruise.
About 120 miles from Ovalau, away to the
east and south, a mere speck in the map
indicates the position of the islet of Mango.
This we reached early on Saturday morning,
November 27. We had come most of the
way at half speed. The navigation among
these reefs and islands was new to our cap-
tain, and he was very cautious. Besides,
nothing was to be gained by an earlier arri-
val. We had breakfast at half-past 7, and
went immediately on shore. Mr. Ryder,
one of the proprietors of the island,
gave us a courteous reception. His house on
the shore was approached through an avenue
of beautiful trees, shrubs, and flowers indi-
genous to the island. A double panelling of
reed work, set in a strong framework of wood,
made up the walls. A thick thatched roof
covered the house and a deep verandah all
round. There was a mat floor, and a raised
dais covering one-half of it, and also matted,
formed the dormitory. After regaling our-
selves with pine apple, we set out exploring
the estate. The Hon. the Attorney-Gene-
ral of Fiji, the Hon. E. Langton, and
Master J. Thomson were to await
our return at Mr. Ryder’s house. We
knew we would have many miles to walk
under a tropical sun, therefore our costume
straw hats, and one or two umbrellas. Our
path lay up a steep hill of cocoanut planta-
tion. About two miles from the shore vve
reached another house of the Ryder brothers,
and were again cordially received and re-
freshed. The view from the front verandah
was very charming. We were gazing on a
concave landscape that formed, it is
believed, the spacious crater of an ex-
tinct volcano. It was all under elabo-
rate cultivation, suited for the soil and
climate. Thinking it a pity that any
of us should lose such a beautiful sight, we
availed ourselves of telephonic communica-
tion, which, to our surprise, we found estab-
lished between the houses of the brothers
(two miles apart), and calling attention by
electric bell, we spoke to our friends at the
other end. We informed them that black
“ boys,” with chairs lashed on bamboo poles,
would be sent to carry them shoulder-high if
they would come. They gladly assented.
Then there were interchanges of songs and
friendly chat along the wire. In due time they
arrived and performed the remainder of our
explorations by this mode of locomotion. The
Attorney-General being a man of 18 stone,
made the load to the native bearers as
onerous as it was honourable. Once, coming
down a steep hill, the equilibrium was lost,
gravity prevailed with him, and mirthful
levity with us.
Copra, the dried kernel of the cocoanut,
from which oil and oil-cake are got, also the
fibre for matting and other purposes, forms the
chief export from Fiji, in which Mango is
largely represented. This tree abounds in the
island in plantations, with thetreesSOft. apart.
When the trees are grown the ground can be
used for grazing. Cotton attracted our espe-
cial interest. It is a beautiful flowering
shrub, and covers much ground in Mango.
Coffee plantations are also on this favoured
isle, but we did not visit them, as they were
some miles further off. Altogether 1,200
acres out of a total area of 9,000 acres
are under cultivation. We saw every form
and every product of tropical vegetation—
the breadfruit tree, some of which we had
boiled for lunch, and liked it well; the india-
rubber tree, which we tapped to see the flow
of juice ; the grenadilla, a delicious fruit; the
tamarind; the date palm; the mumi plant,
whose leaves are said to have a strong
digestive power, making the toughest meat
tender if laid upon it; the shaddock, the yam,
the sweet potato, the tapioca plant, the mango,
thearrowroot plant, thecandlenut tree, the um-
brella tree, the cinnamon tree, the nutmeg
tree, and the most excellent limes, lemons, and
oranges, in wasteful profusion, lying in cart-
loads on the ground. The soil is of great
fertility, and many yards in depth.
The island, now held under Crown grant in
a British colony, forms one of the most snug
and compact estates imaginable. One of its
most striking -features is its abundant supply


of fresh water, a fine creek running almost I and passed off with much Mat, the usual
through the island. It has been in Messrs, j loyal toasts being followed by others born
Ryder s possession for the last 16 years, and j of the occasion, chiefly “Prosperity to the
during that period has been producing the
famous sea island cotton, of such long staple
and beautiful silk-like texture, which some
years ago realised as high as fifty-two pence
per pound in Liverpool, being got up for that
market in the most perfect manner, owing to
the extensive and complete machinery em-
ployed on the estate. This cotton also took
the highest award and medal at Philadelphia,
and the gold medal at the late Paris Exhibi-
tion against all competitors; also at the
Sydney Exhibition, where was also obtained
the first award for coffee grown on Mango,
of which there is a considerable acreage.
Samples of most of these products are on
exhibition in the Fijian Court. The land
planted with cocoa-nut trees is estimated at
900 acres. There are also depasturing for the
island’s use a fair number of sheep and cattle.
Dr. Johnson’s fancy picture of the Happy
Valley in Rasselas is nothing to the reality of
Mango, How a Ruskin, a Humboldt, a
Hugh Miller, or a Charles Kingsley would
revel in pen pictures of this Fijian paradise—•
an Eden with no serpent—for it is a grand
thing that there are no venomous snakes or
dangerous reptiles in the group. We saw for
ourselves all the things enumerated,and more.
We visited a singular basin of water, with a
narrow opening to the sea, and steep hills all
around. We were told it was of great depth.
It also seems to have been a crater. We re-
turned to the pier after walking about 10 or
12 miles under a fierce sun, but we did not
grudge our toil with such an ample reward.
With three hearty cheers for the Ryder
brer hers we pulled off in our boats for our
ship, where a capital dinner was waiting us.
I forgot to mention that there are about 300
labourers on Mango, natives of New Hebrides
and Solomon Island. They appeared to be
in good physical condition, docile, and intelli-
gent.
We arrived at Taviuni on Sunday morning.
The 180th meridian traverses this island—
the third largest in the group It would
thus be Saturday in the west longitude part j
while it was Sunday in the east lon- !
gitude part, or Monday in the latter i
when it was Sunday in the former. ,
We cast anchor on the Sunday side, and
observed the day by services both on ship and !
shore. There are large coffee plantations on
this island, but too distant for us to visit.
For many parts of Taviuni the description of
Mango, as to its capabilities and products,
will answer. There is room here for in-
dustrious enterprise, which would, if quali-
fied by good sense, be well rewarded.
We returned to Levuka for cargo, and cele-
brated our visit and farewell with festivities.
Mr. Thomson gave a champagne lunch to
their Honours the Administrator, the Chief
Justice, and the Attorney-General, with
the principal men of Levuka. This took
place in the saloon of the Wentworth,
of the occasion, chiefly “ Prosperity to the
\ Crown Colony of Fiji.”
In the evening, by invitation of “ the
j merchants of Levuka,” our party were in-
I vited to dinner in the Mechanics’ Institute.
Chief Justice Gorrie presided. The guests and
hosts of the evening were mostly the host and
j guests of the morning, “ Our Visitors, coupled
with the name of Mr. Thomson,” being the
leading toast after the loyal ones. Consider-
ing the agitation of conflicting interests and
opinions on the vexed question of the change
of capital, this courteous entertainment of a
gentleman so much identified with Suvan
interests was no less creditable to the mag-
nanimity of the “merchants of Levuka”
than it must have been gratifying to the head
of the firm of James M'Ewan and Co. The
singing of “ Auld Lang Syne” and of the
National Anthem brought this festivity and
our visit to Levuka to a most agreeable close.
Returning to Suva for the third time we made
it our port of departure on our voyage home-
ward. We paid a pour prendre congt visit to
“ Lady Ambrose,” the wife of a Fijian chief,
residing in a fine large native house in the
village near Suva, formerly mentioned. The
chief was absent at an annual gathering of
his brother magnates in a distant island.
Such assemblages are presided over by a re-
presentative of the Government, and the pro-
ceedings are recorded. The chieftainess re-
ceived us with quiet reserve and dignity—
her only robe her sulu. She sat on
the mat-covered floor, her guests squat-
ting down iq two rows in front «
of her to right and left. From loose tobacco
leaf she kept making cigars orselukas, which i
she lighted at a firestick held by a male at-
tendant, smoked one for a little herself, and k
then handed it to each guest, and so on till
all were supplied. Next came the kava, or •
native grog. The root, torn into fibre, was §
chewed by her maiden attendants, and then
ejected from each pair of charming lips,
saliva and all, into the large wooden basin,
called the kava cup. A man with his black
arms up to the elbows mixed the mass, with
water added, till the juice was well extracted
from the fibrous mass, which was then
strained out. A cup of cocoanutshell was
used for a glass. This was ceremoniously
handed to our leader, who, to his credit,
quaffed it off unquailingly, throwing the
empty cup on the ground, as is the right
thing to do ; and the native man, who is cup-
bearer, giving two claps of the hands. Each
of us in succession drank the kava, not with-
out some pressure in a few cases, one only of
all our number making “a slip between cup
and lip,” and managing to let it trickle over
his beard to the ground without drinking it.
Some of the party observed this and objur-
gated accordingly. Princess Charlotte, a
niece of King .Thakotnban’s, was present
with Lady Ambrose. She is shortly to be mar-
ried, and sulus were ordered from Melbourne.


On the 2nd of December we heaved anchor, for the work of christianising and civilising
and bade adieu to Suva and the Fijis, not the fierce tribes, of whose dangerous charac-
without regret on both sides. One black boy ter we have had such lamentable evidences of
who had been installed as attendant for the
visit was fairly in tears at parting, even
though his hand was filled with half-crowns,
and he had been rigged put with jacket, hat,
and trousers. Poor Cockieroachie, as we
called him ! I have no doubt his sorrow was
disinterested and genuine. We anchored at
Kingston, Norfolk Island, early on Monday,
December 6. The Southern Cross mis-
sionary ship was there, before us. She
had just brought 47 passengers from
New Zealand to be present at the con-
secration of a memorial church to the mar
tyred Bishop Patteson and Commodore
Goodenough, at the head-quarters of the
Melanesian Mission on this island. The
Gunga had called with mails on the previous
evening. The first question asked by our
young gentlemen was about “ Hanlan and
Trickett”—who won ? We Victorians learned
with deep regret that Judge Barry and Mr.
Ecroyd had departed this life. The latter
gentleman had just been on the point of
coming with us, but something intervened
at the eleventh hour to prevent him.
From the circumstances which led to his
death, we think, humanly speaking, he might
still have been alive had he come. Such is
the mystery of our human lot! For a quarter
of a century Norfolk Island has ceased to be
a penal establishment. The barracks, store-
houses, prisons are still standing, but in a
dismantled and ruinous condition. Terrible
mementos of dreadful times and scenes ! The
descendants of the mutineers of the Bounty,
having outgrown their native nest on Pitcairn
Island, have been transferred to this one,
where they now live in quiet comfort to the
number of 400, about 60 of them having gone
back again to their old quarters. The old store-
house was given to them for a church. They
are ruled by their own laws, subject to the
Governor of New South Wales.
late in the Sandfly and other outrages.
Bishop Selwyn conveyed us in his own boat
to the Wentworth, which he steered and
commanded in true seaman style. He left
for his own ship, the Southern Cross, our
people heartily cheering the devoted and gal-
lant bishop. For nine months in the year, he
told us, his head-quarters are in his ship.
As we had stores, mails, and presents for the
lonely dwellers on Lord Howe Island, we
anchored there on the night of December 8.
Twelve families, comprising 50 individuals,
live here, under the direct rule, as in the case
of Norfolk Island, of the Governor of New
South Wales. Captain Armstrong, R.N., re-
sides among them as their magistrate. This
islet is about six miles long, and has no-
where a breadth exceeding two miles. It
contains two mountains, 2,500 ft. and
2,840 fr. high. The land is fertile; a very
superior pickling onion is largely grown.
It abounds in pigs, both tame and wild.
Some whaling is also done occasionally.
While lying at anchor that moonlight night,
our party began fishing for sharks. The
bait hardly reached the water when it was
swallowed. In two hours four-and-twenty
sharks, from 3ft. to 6ft. long, were drawn on
deck. It was a lively and curious scene
that shark battue. They flopped about
dangerously till deprived of their tails. Our
cook took pieces for shark cutlets, and
the rest of the carcases were thrown
into the sea to feed the others, who
after this took their leave of us. Next
morning early we were boarded by Cap-
tain Armstrong and a few of his men.
Glad and thankful they were of the call, and
for the seasonable good things we brought
them. We meant to have spent some time
on the island, but a falling glass and a
hazardous nearness to reefs warned us away.
Regretfully we bade the lonely and gallant
man adieu. Three days more of brisk
breezes and not unpleasant seas brought us
to Sydney, which we had left 32 days before.
In a few days more, some going overland and
some by sea, we found our way back to Mel-
bourne. We cannot speak too favourably of
the good qualities and obligingness of Captain
Banks, of the Wentworth, and of his officers,
while the providore and chief steward sup-
plied our table in a style equal to any first-
class hotel. Before we parted from the
Wentworth our appreciation of our leader’s
forethought, kind ness, and admirable manage-
ment was gratefully and cordially acknow-
ledged. Not a single accident (excepting a
slip into the s*-a at Suva of one young gentle-
man, who was merely immersed and out in
a moment), not a misunderstanding or un-
pleasantness, will qualify our sunny memo-
ries of our excursion to Fiji.
The island has a bold and lofty coast line,
with ridge-like eminences covered with the
beautiful well-known pine, which derives its
name from this its natural habitat. Some of
us on horseback, but most on foot, set out to
visit the Melanesian Mission settlement,
about two miles off. It was a long beautiful
avenue of Norf oik pines that we traversed. The
news of our arrival had preceded us. Bishop
Selwyn and Bishop Stuart, with a large num-
ber of the clergy of the mission, received us
with gratifying consideration. The memorial
church is a very substantial Gothic structure,
built of the stone of the island. It shows
faultless taste in every detail. The floor,
altar, and font are of beautiful Portland
marble, polished, the gift of friends in Eng-
land. There are numerous buildings around,
forming quite a town. A large number of
Solomon Islanders are here under training
STILLWELL AND CO.,
PRINTERS.
I, COLLINS STREET EAST.
AGENT-GENERAL for
*-V
COMMUNE
0E FRANCS7ILIE


muo
fV&AI
M (jz.j




