

FIJI.
REMARKS ON THE ADDRESS DELIVERED
SIR ARTHUR H. GORDON, G.C.M.G.,
AT THE COLONIAL INSTITUTE, MARCH 18,
Y COLONIST.
T WENTIETH THOUSAND.
LEVUKA JUNE, 187 9




FIJI.
REMARKS ON THE ADDRESS DELIVERED BY
SIR ARTHUR 11. GORDON, G.C.M.G.,
AT THE COLONIAL INSTITUTE, MARCH 18, 1879.
Y COLONIST.
TWENTIETH THOUSAND.
LEVIJK A JUNE, 1879.




FIJI.
Remarks on the Addeess delivered by Sir Arthur H
Gordon, G.C.M.G., at the Colonial Institute,
March 18, 1879.
A COLONIST.
Being so far removed from the scene of his experiment,
and knowing that no discussion would be allowed at the
Colonial Institute, or any of his statements contraverted, Sir
Arthur Gordon did not hesitate, in his address before that
Society on the 18th of last March, not only to grievously
misrepresent the colony, and the manner in which it is being
governed under his rule, but he also made aspersions against
the characters of the settlers which those unacquainted with
them would be inclined to believe, and which, if anyone will
take the trouble to peruse the following pages, they will see
will be entirely disproved. Diplomacy may sometimes re-
quire a slight perversion of the truth, but diplomatic misre-
presentation has a limit.
Sir Arthur commenced his address with a mis-statement.
He said he had been requested to read a paper containing an
account of the system of taxation which “ with the consent
and approval of Her Majesty’s Government has been estab-
lished among the native population of Fiji.” The system
was established months before Her Majesty’s Government
knew anything about the matter. On the 16th February,
1876 (Blue Book C 1624, p. 69), Sir Arthur wrote to Lord
Carnarvon, and told him that be had adopted the “ Native
Taxation Scheme,” and asked him to concur in allowing it
to have a fair trial. On the 31st May, 1876—more than
three months afterwards—Lord Carnarvon acknowledged the
receipt of Sir Arthur’s letter, and said, “ Although I should
have been glad if it had been possible for you to have com-
municated to us your views on such an important matter
before you had so far committed yourself to the scheme, I
cannot doubt that a measure which you have so carefully and
laboriously considered has a full claim to he allowed the fair


trial which you have requested it should receive. I am,
therefore, prepared to sanction' this experiment, though in
sanctioning it, I must call upon you to watch its operation
most narrowly, and to be especially careful that no hardship
or oppression is caused to any class among the native popu-
lation in the incidence and collection of the tax.” This is
now’three and a half years ago, and, so far from Sir Arthur
acting up to Lord Carnarvon’s instructions, he still keeps the
system in force, notwithstanding that dozens of natives have
committed suicide in order to escape the exactions put upon
them by their chiefs under it; and it will, perhaps, elucidate
matters to diverge here for an instant, and explain the reason
for these suicides.
In olden days there was a cannibal custom called “ lala,”
by which a chief might avail himself of the property or time
of his serf at his caprice, but he had to make him a return of
some equivalent, and any chief unjustly exercising this power
was immediately clubbed to death. Under the native regu-
lations “ lala ” has now been legalised, and a chief may
“ lala ” to any extent he pleases, and he is not now compelled
to make any return to his serfs. The chiefs, therefore, are
no doubt in favour of this “ scheme,” as, in addition to the
salary which they draw from the Government, they can obtain
anything from their serfs which they may lust after. If the
Government did not put this power into the hands of the
chiefs they could not collect more than a tithe of. the taxes
which they collect at present, and as nearly every native in
the group —man, woman, and child—is compelled by the
chiefs, with Governmental sanction, to work the whole year
round for the Government, on Government plantations, and
receive neither food, nor money, nor clothes, nor tobacco for
so doing, is it to be wondered at that such a state of things
has driven numbers of them to commit suicide.
It is next to impossible for planters to employ natives,
although nearly every native is anxious to work for them;
and the returns issued early in the year showed but 1,200
who were engaged with white men last year, for periods of
from one month to twelve months. For these 1,200 the
planter pays to the Government at the rate of £1 per head
per annum; he gives them as much food as they can eat,
also clothes and tobacco; they have good houses, mosquito
nets and mats, and, in fact, have not a want ungratified, and
at the end of the year they receive £3 wages in cash. Where
in any European settlement are daily labourers better off?


for, although the wages are small, it is all clear profit, and,
moreover, the wages are quite large enough for the work that
is done. In a new country cheap wages are the essence of
the enterprise, and when your men sham sickness for more
than half their time, and you have to provide a hospital, sick
nurse, and medicines, it brings the wages up to £7 or £8 per
head, and with food and passage money to about £ls, per
head per annum. How many servants in England get no
more than £8 per year, and out of that have to provide their
own clothes ? and considerably less than twenty years ago,
young strong Irish labourers could be hired for £3 a year and
rations, which consisted of potatoes and milk. But these
remarks only apply to the Fijians, not to the Polynesian
labourers, who are recruited from the New Hebrides, Solomon
Islands, and other adjacent groups.
No one will dispute with Sir Arthur Gordon that the
natives of the Fiji group of islands are a fine and intelligent
race of men, and sufficiently intelligent to hoodwink an
European ; but there are many who will deny that his mode
of treating them tends to raise them in the scale of civiliza-
tion. It is apparent to the most casual observer that natives
who have lived for twelve months with a planter, and
thereby learnt habits of cleanliness, obedience, and punc-
tuality, are far superior to the native who has never left his
home. Under Sir Arthur’s scheme the natives have to work !
and work ! ! and work !!! They are not taught to produce
anything. So long as the produce comes in—no matter from
what source —it may be, and often is made from cocoa-nuts
stolen from white settlers ; but so far from the magis-
trates punishing them for the theft, they actually encourage
the men to steal the more by saying that the settler has not
got his Crown grant, and therefore they cannot help him;
and to the native mind this often appears as an encourage-
ment to them to forthwith dispute the claim to the land,
notwithstanding the settler may have bought it, and paid
for it, and lived upon it and cultivated it for upwards of a
dozen years ; but so long as produce comes in, that is all the
Government cares about. Some brought in native-prepared
arrowroot in payment of their taxes, but as it was badly
made, they were not taught how properly to prepare it, but
simply told to pay their taxes in something else ; and thus a
product which grows wild in many parts of the group, and
could have been made a valuable export, is entirely thrown
away.


The late lamented Ciiief Justice, Sir William Hackett,
spoke of the “ scheme ” before it was put into execution, as
“ unvarnished slavery,” and the Attorney-General, Mr. I)e
Kicci (Blue Book, c. 1624, p. Ill), said also when asked for
his official opinion upon it, that it “ nearly approached
slavery.” The following instances fully bear out their
views:—l. In order to collect produce for the Government
taxes the population of whole villages are sent out into the
woods, twelve or fourteen miles from home, to gather candle-
nuts. While there they have to live upon the wild food
which nature supplies, and in such temporary habitations as
they can erect, but exposed for the most part to the sun and
the rain. The result of two months of this labour does not
yield to the Exchequer more than one shilling to two shillings
per head; but yet the Government professes to believe that
this is a proper mode of teaching the natives habits of
industry. 2. The natives on the Ea coast were sent on to
the reef to fish beche-de-mer for their taxes, contrary to their
wish, as there was a high wind blowing, but they were com-
pelled to go. As they could not light a fire to cook food or
smoke, and could not get back to land that night, one of
them named Na Biau, died on the reef from exhaustion. 3.
The Great Council meeting, which Sir Arthur Gordon said
he had instituted, is productive of an immense amount of
misery to the native population without any corresponding
advantages. Meetings on so large a scale were unknown in
Fiji before annexation, and there cannot be less than 5,000
or 6,000 followers attending the chiefs to these meetings.
In order to provide food to feed so large a concourse of
people, whole districts are “ tabued” from eating a yam or a
taro—the national vegetable as much as a potatoe is in
Ireland ; and nearly every native in the district has to supply
one or more of the following—turtle, yams, poultry, pigs, taro,
sinnet, mats, tappa, ygona (grog), &c. When it is consi-
dered that this is in addition to the work they do for the
Government —in addition to the offerings made to the
Wesleyan missionaries, which are very considerable, —in addi-
tion to the exactions made upon them by their chiefs, will
anyone deny that the Fijian is a slave? It should also be
mentioned that the “ tabu ” is put on the cocoa-nut all the
year round in order that the taxes may be as large as possible;
and this in a country where the cocoa-nut always has
been one of the chief articles not only of diet, but of use-.
These great meetings have also degenerated, in the short


space of four years, to scenes of the most unbridled licen-
tiousness and debauchery. Tons upon tons of food are
cooked, hundreds of pigs, &c., are killed, and because they
cannot he eaten before they become tainted, they have to be
thrown away; and this after all the heart-burnings which
their collection has caused, and when many thousands are
although not actually starving, still much in need of a
substantial repast. The morals instilled by the missionaries
into these people are also fast ebbing away, and their teachings
of the last thirty years are surely becoming nullified. Some
old chiefs expressed their surprise at the cruelties which
were inflicted on the dumb animals at the meeting in
December last, and said that in the old cannibal days they
had never seen such an exhibition enacted before. Men
danced “ mekes ” with live pigs, dogs, poultry, &c., in their
hands, swinging them over their heads, and dashing them to
the ground. Although their legs were broken by this treat-
ment, some of them were not killed, and after the dance was
over they were merely thrown on one side and left until they
were wanted to be eaten, although perhaps with two brokenlegs.
The Lieutenant-Governor may not have actually witnessed
these dances, but he was present at the meeting at which
they were done; and all Europeans, except the Native Com-
missioner and his clerk, were ordered away from the place
where the meeting was held, and which extended over a
month in duration. The only use that is made of the
thousands of yards of mats, tappa, &c., is, that the chief in
whose district the meeting takes place, makes presents of
them to his guests.
What is spoken of in Fiji as the “Ea coast rape,” is
too atrocious to commit the details to print, suffice it, that
what in the Australian colonies is a capital offence, was in
this instance dealt with by the stipendiary magistrate in his
summary jurisdiction, under the advice and personal interfer-
ence of Sir Arthur Gordon. It arose in the first instance
out of some minor chiefs petitioning the Governor to remove
their Eoko, who was oppressing them and exercising his
power of “ lala ” to an enormous extent; but instead of
attending to their request, the Governor deported the mal-
contents. The Eoko not being satisfied with merely deport-
ing the men, said he wished for the good old times again
when he could have punished them by killing and eating
them. One of his retainers hearing of this, said there would
have been two sides to this question in the olden days, and


that he (the Roko) would have been killed and eaten long
ago for the manner in which he was treating them. This so
angered the Roko that he sent some sixty of his constabulary
to arrest this blasphemer, and they then committed the crime
with which they were charged, and which was done with the
knowledge and by the sanction of the Roko. An account of
the whole proceedings was published in the “ Colonies and
India ” about a year ago, and they were therein likened to
the actions of the Bulgarians and Bashi-bazouks which about
that time were creating such excitement in Europe. But
what confidence can be felt in a Governor who has not hesi-
tated to set aside the law, to ignore the Supreme Court, and
to treat it as if it had no existence, as he did in this case ?
Returning to the speech of Sir Arthur Gordon : —He is
very severe on the settlers for the reports they circulated
respecting the epidemic of measles which carried off upwards
of one-fourth of the population of Fiji; but, unfortunately for
him, at the very time he was uttering those remarks, his first
shipload of coolies in the Leonidas was approaching Fiji,
with small-pox, cholera, and dysentery on board. How well
now the settlers could retaliate and say that he purposely
introduced these diseases in order to kill the native popula-
tion, and if anyone took the trouble to circulate such
reports amongst the natives he would be implicitly believed
by them. Fortunately for Sir Arthur Gordon the settlers are
gentlemen who would scorn to do so mean an action, although,
perhaps, only strictly in accordance with his preaching, where
he has called them all adventurers and scoundrels. There
cannot be the slightest doubt that the measles were intro-
duced purely by accident, any more than that Sir Arthur
Gordon purposely introduced the fatal diseases of small-pox,
cholera, and dysentery. When the two most powerful chiefs
in Fiji, living in different parts of the group, heard of the
arrival of the Leonidas, they both made a similar remark :
“ What is the use,” said they, “ of importing these rats (a
term of reproach), when we have so many strong men in the
country capable of doing all the work?” How badly must
Sir Arthur Gordon’s officials have learnt their lesson when
even they condemn him ! Let this opportunity be taken to
say a few words respecting the character of the colonists who
have been so often unjustly and wrongly vilified. When
Colonel Smythe was sent to Fiji in 1860, he said, in his
report, that there were in the whole of the group upwards of
two hundred white men, who were chiefly deserters from


whalers and escaped convicts, and who were living with the
natives, and by their immoral and vicious lives doing much
to corrupt them. This is now nearly twenty years ago, and
not more than five or six of those ■ men are now living, and
they are old men and quite incapable of influencing the
natives for good or evil. About ten years ago attention was
called to Fiji as a place for growing sea island cotton, and a
great number of some of the most respectable colonists in the
Australias and New Zealand came down to embark in the
industry. Of course it will not be denied that some men
escaping from their creditors, as well as one or two who had
committed criminal offences, also took refuge in Fiji; but
when the defaulting bank clerk from Hull was arrested here
by a detective from England, and when people saw that they
were no safer from arrest in Fiji than in any other colony, the
advent of such men ceased. The settlers now in Fiji who
came here without a clean bill of health can be numbered on
the fingers of both hands, and it is matter for comment,
amongst ships of war and other visitors, that there is so large a
proportion of gentlemen in so small a community. The exodus
of the black sheep began soon after annexation took place, and
those now remaining, out of a total population of 2,000 men,
women, and children^—the latter forming a very large pro-
portion—comprise a very large number of gentlemen’s
sons, retired army and naval men, public school and Univer-
sity men, Ceylon planters, &c., —and a club started upwards
of a year ago in Levuka now numbers 120 members. That it
may suit Sir Arthur Gordon’s policy to represent us as an
utterly lawless lot of beings is only too clear to us ; but we
nevertheless feel the injustice and iniquity of having a
Governor who prefers a black subject, and legislates for him,
before one of his own colour, —who says he does not want white
settlers to come to Fiji, but he wants Fiji for the Fijians,
and who has more than once publicly stated that he desires
to get rid of all settlers who were here before annexation—the
pioneers of the country —honest, hard-working men, who
would be a credit to any colony—and we ask was it for these
men or was it for the Fijians that England annexed the
group ?
Sir Arthur did not in his address refer to his coolie
scheme, and it is believed he is already ashamed of it. There
are, and will be for many years to come, thousands of
labourers to be obtained from the adjacent islands of Poly-
nesia at a total cost per head to the planter of about £3O for


three years, or £lO a year. The cost of the coolie will be
more than .£lOO per head for five years, or £2O a year, just
double the price, of the Polynesian, and the latter’s physique
is far finer than the coolie, and he is accustomed to the
climate and to the food grown here.- The Polynesian is also
far more intelligent and obedient than the coolie, and it
would astonish many to see a boy of twelve or thirteen years
of age driving the engine of a sugar mill just as well as a
white man. After they are once shown how to do anything,
they will do it in precisely the same manner without an
overseer having to look after them. You can rely upon them
not wasting their time. The food the coolies require has to
be imported at a great cost, and when they are attacked with
dysentery they succumb at once, because the coats of their
stomachs are eaten through with their hot curry stuffs, &c.,and
they cannot throw off the disease. If a Polynesian is attacked
with dysentery, one dose of laudanum, essence of peppermint,
and castor oil cure him in about twelve hours. If a coolie
dies before he has been in the colony a month, the planter
has still to pay to the Government £l5 for his passage money,
and very few of the first shipload have been applied for for
this reason. This experiment will cost the colony upwards of
£lO,OOO, and in her present condition she is quite unable to
pay so large a sum—a sum which has been so thoughtlessly
expended, and quite unnecessarily. It is difficult to divine
Sir Arthur Gordon’s reasons for going to this expense, as he
said himself, when he first came to Fiji, that £5,000 a year
was far too much to pay her Governor, and that he should
return £2,000 of it to the exchequer; but as this arrange-
ment only lasted for a few months, it is assumed now that he
does not give that consideration to the welfare of the colony
which he did on his first arrival.
The statement that “ the main cause of the disturb-
ance in the high lands of Yiti Levu was the Europeans tell-
ing the natives that the measles were imported purposely to
destroy them,” must be received cum grano salis. The
“ main cause ” was the action of Sir Arthur Gordon’s Com-
missioner in making the mountaineers distrustful of him,
otherwise, how can be explained the fact of their drinking
“ kava,” and having dances in the camp of the officer who
preceded him every evening. Where, when such a state
of things was happening, was there any necessity to execute
any of the mountaineers—to compel some 700 savages with
flint muskets and but little ammunition, to fight 2,000 well


disciplined soldiers with breech-loading rifles ? But as Sir
Arthur Gordon declared martial law within two miles of the
coast, and put prisoners who were brought from inland on
hoard the steamer Fitzroy for security, and then had
them taken hack again next day into the proclaimed dis-
trict and executed; let him explain why these men who,
when on the Fitzroy were within the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, were not told of their rights, so that they
might claim the protection of the Supreme Court! That
pattern for all Colonial Governors of mixed races—Governor
Eyre—whose name will live for ages to come in the hearts
of millions of his countrymen —was persecuted for acting in
a similar manner, but under circumstances far more trying,
and with much less bloodshed. Why is Sir Arthur Gordon
to be allowed to act in this manner, and nothing to be said ?
As Sir Arthur says these disturbances were put down
at a trifling cost, it may be as well to state them : —ln 1875,
£2,437 ;in 1876, £1,991 6s. 7d.; in miscellaneous expendi-
ture, £1,705 9s.9d.,and £674 in gratuities to his aide-de-camp,
private secretary, and the doctor. These amounts are rather
more than the £32 10s., which Sir Arthur Gordon wrote and
told Mr. Shaw Lefevre in 1876 was the whole expense of
“his little war,” and which letter Mr. Shaw Lefevre pub-
lished in the London Times in August, 1876.
One of the most amusing paragraphs in Sir Arthur
Gordon’s speech is that in which he takes credit for the
increased exports and imports of the colony. By referring
to the trade returns it will be observed that the principal
article exported is copra which had no value in 1875, and
which is the dried kernel of the cocoa-nut, and the trees from
which these are gathered take about seven years to mature.
It will, therefore, be seen that the trees were planted three
or four years before annexation was thought of, and, there-
fore, it is to the pioneers industry alone that this result is
attributable. So far from Sir Arthur encouraging the
export trade, he has done his best to discourage it by not
issuing Crown Grants ; and since his advent to Fiji, the trade
returns will bear out the statement that no article of export
is due to his administration. As to the imports they were
about £9,000 less in 1878 than they were in 1877 ; for
although, really £136,000 in 1878, against £132,000 in 1877,
ten per cent duty was added, since the last named year.
The “receipts from customs, under practically the same
tariff ,” is a statement which requires a little explanation.


The duty on every single article has been increased, there is
no trade or calling for which heavy licenses have not to be
taken out, and the taxation to which the white colonists are
subjected is at the rate of more than £2O per head for every
white man, woman, and child in the colony.
Sir Arthur says, that more than 800 titles to land
have been settled , This may be correct, but only 235 (or
thereabouts) have been issued, and until they are issued
they cannot be made use of by the settlers to raise money to
cultivate their land. He will have been absent from the
Colony upwards of fifteen months, during which time the
Lieutenant Governor has refused to issue the grants on the
plea that he could do nothing until Sir Arthur Gordon returned,
that his hands had in fact been tied by Sir Arthur Gordon,
and that, although, he was very anxious to assist in develop-
ing the country as much as lay in his power, he was quite
unable to assist the settlers by issuing their Crown Grants.
The country is, therefore, not only at a standstill, but is
retrograding, and until she obtains a governor with far more
liberal views than Sir Arthur Gordon she will continue to
retrograde. The Colonists have sent home two petitions to
the Queen. The first from the Agricultural Society, praying
for relief in the matter of their Crown Grants, the second from
the Chamber of Commerce, protesting against the “ Native
Taxation Scheme.” This latter was drawn up in the most
deliberate manner. A circular was sent round to every settler
in the group, and his answer was requested to certain ques-
tions. These, when received were handed to a number of
committees to report upon, and their reports were handed to
a professional gentleman to prepare the petition. It will be
seen, therefore, that this petition represents the voice of every
colonist in the group. But, notwithstanding these petitions,
Sir Arthur Gordon is sent out again to the colony, and,
according to telegrams in the colonial papers, with extended
powers ., It appears, therefore, to be useless to attempt to
better our present position. Sir Arthur who has failed in
every governorship that he has had—New Brunswick, where
the colonists to this day attribute the ruin of that country
to him —Trinidad, where he was most cordially disliked—■
Mauritius, where he was most fervently hated, and from
which place he departed in a not very ceremonious manner—
and Fiji, where, beyond being the hardest working man in
the colony, and for which every one will give him credit—-
he is even more unpopular than in any of the preceding


places. No doubt he is a dead weight ,on the hands of the
Colonial Office; and as Fiji is so far away, they probably think
he may finish his term of service until he becomes entitled
to his pension, and that if no attention is paid to our cries
we shall in time get tired and cease. Should such an idea
have passed through the minds of those at the head of affairs
it may be wise of them not to cherish it, as the colonists of
Fiji have as much influence at home as have other Crown
colonists, and they will never cease until they get their com-
plaint taken up by some members of the House of Com-
mons.
As the planters may not employ the natives, and as the
natives are not allowed to trade with settlers, we cease to feel
much interest in their welfare; but as it is said “Britons never
shall be slaves,” and as the Fijians have now become British sub-
jects, we are anxious to see them freemen, and not the slaves
which they now most undoubtedly are; and this reason
alone has made Sir Arthur Gordon’s “ scheme” have many
opponents. But the unworthy manner in which, as pointed
out by the European Mail, discussion on his paper was
burked, and which was apparently only read by Sir Arthur
Gordon in order to vindicate his policy in the presence of a
number of noblemen and gentlemen whom he had called
together as witnesses to character, will surely bring its own
condemnation. The Pall Mall Budget regrets that discussion
“ was forbidden ; for there were not a few present prepared
to challenge his statements. * * * It is a pity, therefore,
that he did not abstain from attacks to which no reply was
allowed to be made.” And this seems to be the general opinion of
the English and colonial press. Let us call to the recollection
of Sir Arthur Gordon the French proverb—“ qui s’excuse
s'accuse.”
The statement that “ women are exempt from agricul-
tural labour” must have been made either wilfully or through
ignorance; one has but to walk through the country to
observe that they do more agricultural work than the men.
It is no uncommon occurrence to come across fifty or sixty
women, without a man amongst them, weeding their gardens
and burning their rubbish. Women do also as much of the
ordinary work as the men ; and girls not more than 16 or 18
years of age look as though they were at least ten years
older from having to carry such heavy burdens. When Sir
Arthur Gordon said “ their chief possesses accounts at the
bank” he was trading on the credulity of his hearers; for


although the salary of Cakohau (£1,500 a year) may he paid
into the bank, he has no idea of the meaning of a cheque.
Likening them to the Hovas of Madagascar was but a poor
compliment, as the Hovas are some of the greatest rascals in
the world.
As Sir Arthur Gordon attempted all through his discourse
to convey a very exalted idea of the business-like habits and
morals of theßokos,he ought to have also told the meeting that
one-third of the twelve Rokos were now in trouble. That
one has been sentenced to two year’s imprisonment; another
to one year; a third sold some timber which the Govern-
ment claimed ; a fourth got tipsy in Levuka, and was sent
home in disgrace. A fifth died a few months ago, and no
successor has yet been appointed. The Government rules the
natives through their chiefs ; and when a chief is degraded
in their eyes, as he is by being put in prison, they lose all
respect for him. At the present rate the chiefs will, in a few
years, lose all control over their serfs, and when that time
arrives then may the Government expect to have trouble
with them. Although the natives would not be able to
organise any well conceived plan of rebellion, especially as
all their arms have been taken away from them, still they
might, and most probably will, murder some settler living
in an isolated district. This is a very generally received
idea by those who are best acquainted with native character.
One of the chief reasons for an outrage of this description
will be that Sir Arthur Gordon will not now sell an acre of
Government land notwithstanding that the chiefs ceded the
whole of the land to Great Britain by the deed of cession.
Although the land was advertised in the Gazette, in June,
1876, for sale at an upset price of £1 an acre, and although
a Ceylon planter communicated with the Colonial Secretary
on the subject, and was told by him that any quantity of
land could be bought at that price, yet when he came down
to Fiji for the purpose of buying land and planting it, he
was told there was no land for sale. Some other planters in
Ceylon sold out, and were waiting to hear from this gentleman
before they started for Fiji, but when they heard from him
that he could not get land, they went to Borneo, and invested
their money in coffee planting there. Thus is capital driven
from the country. If any native land is now sold to a white
settler after acknowledging the native’s right to it, it is
pretty certain that the matter will end in bloodshed.
The insults levelled by Sir Arthur Gordon at the members
of Cakobau’s Government were quite uncalled for, and one of


the ministers of that government is Sir Arthur Gordon’s
right hand man; the slurs also upon the characters of the
magistrates are equally out of place, as two-thirds of them
are now employed by Sir Arthur Gordon in a similar capacity;
but the strictures which he passes upon the poll-tax system
cannot be in any way deserved, as that system had not been
long in existence, and any errors committed under it could
have been easily remedied by time. It is the only system
that will satisfy the native ; for now the native is unable to
earn anything for himself, and he may not go to work for a
planter. The Government, no doubt, likes to keep the whole
of the natives in involuntary servitude to the crown; but if it
were known abroad, especially in America, that a British
Colonial Government raises its revenue by means of the
enforced and unpaid labour of Her Majesty’s subjects, it
would surely bring about a better state of things. The
native ought to be allowed to pay his tax, in money or
produce, at his option; but the Government, under the guise
of protecting him from the “ rapacious settler ,” a protection
of which he does not stand in need, professes that as he is
unable to protect himself, therefore that, nolens volens, they
will protect him. This is a very subtle argument, but not
quite subtle enough. A native is a better hand at driving a
bargain than is a white man himself, and should a trader
attempt to cheat a native he would be cutting his own throat,
as there are so many petty traders in Fiji that the Fijian will
naturally sell to the one who offers him the best price. But
this argument about cheating the natives comes particularly
badly from Sir Arthur Gordon when one of his own tax
collectors was recently discovered in wrongly weighing in their
copra. The natives knew that he was cheating them, and spoke
privately to a white man about it, but they dare not
complain against the Government. That there is a “ native
price ” in Fiji as well as an “ European price” will be readily
admitted, but it is in favour of the natives. For instance,
Turkey Red in Levuka is Is. 6d. a fathom—up country it
is Is. The statement about “ men being torn from their
homes and consigned to servitude, and whole districts well
nigh depopulated,” &c., are mere clap-trap, and were used
to further his own objects. The following extract from a
letter written by one of the magistrates under Cakobau’s
Government, will bear out the above remarks: —“ Defaulting
tax payers were sentenced to imprisonment according to the
amount of tax unpaid, but in no case did the sentence


exceed six months. They were usually allowed a week or
two to collect the money, and planters would attend the
court and offer to engage the defaulters at £3 a year if they
consented to their paying the tax and deducting it from
their wages. In the event of their agreeing to this, a
proper legal agreement was thereupon drawn up and signed
between them, in the presence of the magistrate. This seems
to me a better system than the present one, where a man has
to work 50 per cent, of his time for 'the Government, or 26
weeks in the year; and instead of this being concurrent, so
as to leave half of his time to himself, he has to work
three days in every week, and in certain seasons every other
day, so that he is virtually a prisoner in his town for
the whole year. ‘ Imprisonment on a plantation ’ I first
heard of in Sir Arthur Gordon’s Speech at the Colonial
Institute, as also the ‘gratuitous services for a year or
eighteen months imposed by an unscrupulous magistracy.’ ”
Payment of taxes in money is not only by far the easiest
and cheapest mode of collecting them, but one which every
native would be only too glad to see adopted.
Sir Arthur Gordon’s speech is much too long to enable a
critic to do justice to it in the length of a pamphlet without
becoming tedious, therefore there are many incorrect state-
ments and wrong conclusions drawn from false premises
which will not be here noticed on that account; but because
they are not noticed, it is hoped that readers will hot think
they cannot be answered.
That the “Native Taxes Ordinance of 1876 ” was passed
by the Legislative Council every colonist knows, and they
also know that Sir Arthur Gordon would have pushed it
through by his official votes whether the other members
had consented or not
But what was done in 1876 was done as an experiment,
and all members of the Legislative Council join now in con-
demning the scheme. It may not be out of place here to
state that the members of the Legislative Council are nomi-
nees of the Governor, and until quite recently none of
them had the confidence of the planters. Two popular men
have now been appointed, but a third is so unpopular that
he cannot get anyone to propose him for a member of the
Club, and the fourth is harmless.
If the figures quoted by Sir Arthur Gordon, as showing
cost of collection at some £1,300, be taken as a specimen of
his accuracy, how can the working and insurance of two


boats of some 35 to 40 tons each, four tax collectors at
salaries of £l5O each, besides many hundred pounds spent
in charter of other vessels to bring the taxes to Levuka, and
without charging any portion, of the subsidy of the Govern-
ment steamer to the account —be paid ? If the taxes cost
anything, they cost at the very least from £4,000 to £5,000
per annum to collect; and it will be conceded by all business
men that any tax which for collecting costs 25 per cent,
must be a bad one. The tax collectors make their returns to
the Colonial Secretary privately, and the whole of the
management of the scheme is in his hands. He is also his
own auditor, and any overplus of taxes paid by any district
may be accounted for or not to that district according to his
discretion ; and when the expenses of collection are largely in
excess of the amount estimated they are charged to various
accounts.
Sir Arthur says “ the natives have now begun to grow
coffee largely.” The other day some 500 or 600 men were
summoned from the surrounding district in order to plant
some 600 coffee trees, and were altogether nearly a fortnight
away from their homes. Reckoning these men’s time at the
current rate of wages—2s. a week, with rations, but they had
to provide their own food —the cost of planting these 600
trees may be put down at about £l2O. They would cover
about half an acre, and if,properly attended to, weeded, and
pruned, in two years they would bear about two cwts., and in
three years four cwts., of coffee, which, at 905., would amount
to £9 and £lB respectively; but as natives will not know
how to prune or weed the trees, and as coffee requires an
experienced man to cultivate it, Sir Arthur’s boast about
“the natives growing coffee largely,” will, when looked at
in a proper light, be very considerably discounted.
“ The cultivation of articles of export has been largely
promoted.” As a matter of fact this is entirely untrue. The
natives are merely collectors, and they will remain collectors
till the end of time. They produce nothing, are not only not
taught to produce anything, but even their own rude ideas of
production, as mentioned above in the case of the arrowroot,
are discouraged in order that they may collect copra, beche-
de-mer, candlenuts, &c., articles which are indigenous to the
country.
The statement that “ the Government obtains for the
natives a price for the surplus produce raised by them equal
to that which it receives itself from the coutractor,” is one


also that requires a little explanation. Last year, just previous
to Sir Arthur leaving the colony, he sent down to one district
some £250 in silver—old silver, consisting of smooth-faced
and defaced shillings and half-crowns —which the natives sold
again for half their value —in order, it is assumed, that Sir
Arthur might say, when he got to England, that the natives
had had money refunded to them on account of their taxes.
This year a certain sum was sent to another district, but
most of it found its way, or was actually paid, into the hands
of the chiefs, but it was considerably less than the £2,000
which Sir Arthur mentions. And why was this amount
refunded when the taxes did not come up to the amount of
assessment ?
The statement that the natives do not receive money
from the traders for their produce is not true. A native will
not sell except for cash, which he must have in his hands for
some time before he can make up his mind to spend it. He
likes as many pieces of silver as possible, and is quite child-
like in this respect. He does not care for half-crowns,
especially smooth ones, and would much prefer forty six-
pences to a sovereign. It is unnecessary to repeat again that
the libels on the white traders are entirely undeserved, and
that if one trader will not give a native his price another
will. There is nothing more self-evident than that a native
is a barterer by birth, and Sooner thail haggle over the price
Europeans often pay them 100 per cent, more than the value
of their goods; for instance, a native in Levuka will bring
you a basket of oranges, and ask sixpence for them, tip
country they invariably ask a shilling for a basket of less
size. There was no necessity for the special pleading to
endeavour to prove that the Javanese system is not slavery,
for those who know anything about the matter know
the contrary; but when Sir Arthur says, “ The essential
principle of the Fiji scheme is that the produce raised
remains the property of the individual who raised it, that
out of it he pays his portion of the tax, and disposes of the
remainder exactly as he pleases, and with the power of
obtaining a fair price for it,” it is scarcely possible to con-
tinue in a temperate frame of mind. Anything more untrue
or more wicked could not have been uttered. After the tax
is collected the native never sees or knows what becomes of
the produce or of the purchase money for it, and if this
statement is denied let a list of those natives who have
disposed of their produce “ exactly as they please,” be
furnished for the verification of Sir Arthur’s words.


But Sir Arthur is not consistent: in one part of his address
he says, —“ While for the surplus raised by them of those
articles in which the tax is paid, beyond what is required
to meet it, the Government practically obtains for them a
price equal to that which it receives itself from the con-
tractor for the tax produce;” in another, “The essential
principle of the Fiji scheme is that the produce raised
remains the property of the individual or family who raised
it; that out of it he pays his portion of the tax assessed on
his property or town, and that he then disposes of the
remainder exactly as he pleases, and with power of obtaining
a fair price for it.” In the one he says the Government sell
the produce, in the other the native. Which statement are
we to believe ? The Javanese is far better off than the
Fijian, for he gets a third of the value of his labour, but the
Fijian gets absolutely nothing; and not only does he get
nothing from the Government for his year’s work, hut by the
unscrupulous use of the atrocious power of “ lala ” by
every chief, petty or otherwise, even to ordinary constables,
all their property is gradually drifting away, and they are
reduced in some districts to wear banana leaves for clothes.
Formerly a native had a knife, an axe, a pig, poultry, a yam
patch, and some good clothes and mats; now he has absolutely
nothing, and he cannot only not work for a planter and earn
money, but the work he is compelled to do on the Govern-
ment plantations almost prevent his cultivating food for
himself.
Sir Arthur admits that the system is disliked by the
petty traders; but at the time he delivered his address the
petition from the Chamber of Commerce, the unanimous
opinion of every settler in the country, had not reached
Home. That it is also disliked by the natives is proved by
the fact that in every district where a planter goes to recruit
labour, hundreds of Fijians beg of him to take them away
from their homes, and which he would only be too glad to
do but for the Buli, who Says they cannot go until the
government taxes are paid.
Sir Arthur says he is certain the natives do not dislike
the system. He should have said the chiefs! of course, for
the reasons stated above, the chiefs would rather the system
was continued. But let all the natives be asked which they
would prefer—and many of the chiefs are also against it —and
there can but be one answer. Why a money tax would
impose double labour is not made very clear, for Sir Arthur


Gordon still assumes that the trader would cheat the native;
whereas it is well known in Levuka that a native obtains
exactly the same price as an European.
Sir Arthur admits that there may be cases where the tax
has pressed heavily on a village or on individuals —that unfair
assessments have been made —that a Roko Tui or Buli may
have enforced the payment with undue harshness ; but he
says these are mere matter of detail and shall be remedied.
Why are they not remedied now? Why has a Roko for
years past been allowed to oppress his subjects in a most
unjust and tyrannous manner ? Why is no complaint listened
to of the way in which he orders refractory natives to be tied
up and given two dozen with a cat for the most trifling
offence ? Why is his own brother allowed to be his
stipendiary magistrate and to help him in his crimes ?—a
man who some years ago was himself a criminal ? Why,
when a white settler complained to the Native Commissioner
of the conduct of this Roko, did he say that he wished they
had some more Rokos like him? And echo only answers
why ? But the reason this Roko was not long ago
clubbed to death is the fear the natives have of offending the
Government. Slaves they are —slaves they will remain, and
slaves of the most abject type. Sir Arthur speaks of the
sullen looks they displayed at the time of his arrival in the
colony. He would not have far to go to observe sullen looks
now—looks which mean that if their chiefs did not support the
Government they would soon throw off the yoke.
Sir Arthur says it is an advantage that the Secretary of
State has so readily apprehended the object of the scheme.
This was an unlucky remark,as Sir Michael Hicks-Beach stated
in his speech that he attended the lecture as a learner. Of the
other noblemen and gentlemen who spoke at the meeting
Lord Granville called it “a remarkable paper Lord Selborne
hoped “ that we had at last found out the way and Mr F.
Young spoke of it as “ a defence !/” A defence of what no
one had accused him ? Or did he mean that Sir Arthur
Gordon had been special pleading on behalf of his own policy ?
However, time does not permit of further remarks ; but
if it is said that no other scheme could be adopted, let a
money tax be imposed on every native—man and woman
alike —let them pay at the Government assessment—either
produce or cash —or in default let them do a certain amount
of work for the Government; let the planters take husbands,
wives, and families to work on their plantations, and let them


be responsible for their taxes, and planters would rather have a
man and his wife—as the woman works equally as well as
•the man, and the man much better when his wife is with
him—than a man alone. There would thus be no separation
of families, and a Fijian thinks very little about changing
his place of abode. Does it not seem disgraceful that a
country with 120,000 inhabitants, and more than 20,000
agricultural labourers, and with their wives 40,000, could only
supply last year 1,200 for periods of from one month to twelve
months? And this year' the number will be even less than
1,200.
Should revenue be the principal object aimed at in
taxing the natives, and the natives allowed to work for
planters, to sell their own produce, and to pay their taxes in
cash or produce, there would be at least £lOO,OOO per annum
more spent amongst the natives, and re-spent by them in the
purchase of goods, than is done at present. The customs
revenue on this £lOO,OOO would be from £12,000 to £15,000,
and although it might be deemed necessary to inflict a poll-
tax for a year or two, the increased consumption by the natives
of dutiable articles would very soon do away with the necessity
for taxing them specially at all. From the date of annexa-
tion to the date of Sir Arthur Gordon putting his scheme in
force, the natives were treated like free men, and a glance
at the table of imports will show the impetus given to com-
merce in that short period. They commenced to buy articles
of furniture—cupboards, looking-glasses, lamps, cups and
saucers, knives, forks, and spoons; to eat tinned meats
and bread, and to adopt European habits more generally;
but now they are thrown back into their early state of igno-
rance, only with ten times more cruelty than before. But,
looking at the matter from an entirely new light—viz., that of
political economy—the present labour force of the country is
almost entirely frittered away.
Imagine the labour of 120,000 people only contributing
revenue, as stated by Sir Arthur Gordon, of the value of
£17,000! Less than 3s. per head!! What will be said of
the statesmanship which this displays ? We in our pre-
judiced blindness are quite unable to appreciate the
advantages which it was intended to bestow upon us by
appointing a Governor of Sir Arthur Gordon’s ability ; but
we are compelled to think that the accident of birth and
friends at home, will make round pegs try to fit square holes.
The only argument which Sir Arthur Gordon and his followers


can use against the replies here set forth, is that this pam-
phlet embodies his strongest footing—viz., the self interest
of the planters and merchants. But when, as before stated,
the petition of the Chamber of Commerce to the Queen, which
contains the protest of every settler in the colony against
the scheme, is thrown in their teeth, following as it did the
petition of the Fiji Agricultural Society, we as British sub-
jects cannot but feel that we have the best of the argument,
knowing as we do that might is not right.
But the settlers of Fiji do not set themselves up to be
immaculate, all they ask is, that a properly constituted Com-
mission of Enquiry may he sent out to investigate and
report upon the circumstances as they find them in the
colony. Their request, in this respect, is very easy of
fulfilment, and is the merest justice, which every English-
man is by his birthright entitled to demand! Should so
simple an act of grace he denied to them, they will feel
indeed that there is no truth in the saying that the British
flag waves not over slaves; and they will themselves regret
the day that they sought this new country in which to expend
their energy and their enterprise, and be sorry that they
had the misfortune to be born British subjects.
