









PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL.
To be regarded as though in Manuscript.
FIJI




FIJI
RECORDS
OF
PRIVATE AND OF PUBLIC LIFE
1875-1880
VOL. I
EDINBURGH
PRINTED BY R. AND R. CLARK, Limited
1897




INTRODUCTION
The Government of Fiji was certainly the most interesting
of all my colonial experiences. I had very nearly a clear
field to work in. There was no established routine of
administration from which it was hard to break, —no one
to say in monitory tones that it had “ always been usual
to do so-and-so. There were no doubt abuses to contend
with, but none that were of long standing, or firmly
rooted, and there were few vested interests to consider.
And, on the whole, the Colonial Office gave me a fairly free
hand, and allowed me to do much that must have vexed
the souls of those who worship red tape and precedent.
I made mistakes; but when I look back on the work
done whilst I was in Fiji, I am not wholly dissatisfied with
it. That is to say, lam in the main content with what
ivas done; but lam very far from being so when I think of
the many things left undone, which I wished to do, and
which, with more activity, greater perseverance, and more
constant labour, I might perhaps, at least in part, have
effected.
Whether the system of administration I set up will last,
who can tell ? The odds are against it, and the writer who
has best understood it, and taken the most sympathetic view
of it, —Baron von Hlibner, —though he desires its perma-
nence, evidently doubts whether unfriendly forces will not
prevail against it. At all events, however, it has for more
than twenty years prevented the effacement of native influ


ence and native polity, and has retarded, if it has not pre-
vented, the political and social effacement of the native race ;
an effacement which would inevitably be followed by the
disappearance of the race itself.
I had hoped that the letters and diaries here printed
would have conveyed to the reader a bright and lively
picture of our life in Fiji. To my great disappointment, I
find that this is not so. On the contrary, the impression
which their perusal seems calculated to produce is that of
a somewhat dull, monotonous, and colourless existence.
Now, whatever else our life in Fiji may have been, it
certainly was not dull; for every day was full of novel
impressions, and of incidents, often picturesque, and some-
times exciting. But, of course, this was chiefly the case
with me and my staff: we had the constant absorbing
interest of administrative and constructive work; we had
much free healthy active life in the open air; we had a
fair share of travel and adventure; and we were brought
into close contact and familiarity with native life. To the
ladies of our party, who had no share in government work,
and less interest than ourselves in administrative problems
and the development of the Colony, it was of course a
less attractive life. It was full of novelty, it is true, and
of much that was curious and interesting; but the difficulty
of locomotion, the absence of all society, the want of definite
occupation and objects, together with the trying nature of
the climate during the hot months of the year, combined
to render a residence at Levuka wearisome and trying to a
lady. And as the descriptions of life there are chiefly taken
from Lady Gordon’s letters, it is only natural that prominence
should be given to these drawbacks, and that they should
occupy a larger proportion of the canvas than they are
perhaps strictly entitled to fill. S,
January 1897,


CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
PAGE
In England ........ 1
CHAPTER II
From London to Levuka ...... 67
CHAPTER 111
Arrival in Fiji—Preliminary Measures —Proclamation of
the Charter . . . . • • .122
CHAPTER IV
Installation at Bau —Murder of Commodore Goodenough—
Arrival of Lady Gordon ..... 194
CHAPTER V
Lady Gordon at Sydney ...... 226
CHAPTER VI
Progress of Affairs—Visits to Lau and Suva . . . 268


CHAPTER YII
Domestic Life at Nasova, January to April 1876 . . 402
CHAPTER VIII
Legislation—Miscellaneous Correspondence . . 451


ERRATA
Page 8, line 4, for Lie. read Licensing.
„ 17, „ 8, „of „ for.
„ 34, „ 7, „ Reunards read Rennards.
„ 37, „ 35, „ay „ aye.
„ 43, „ 12, „ personnel „ 'personnel.
„ 45, „ 19 from bottom, for Savanna read Savanne.
„ 65, „ 23, for Saraisa read Saravia.
„ 89, „ 21, „ latter „ inner one.
„ 90, „ 2, after divided insert them.
„ 151, „ 25, for wag a read wago.
„ 153, „ 9 from bottom, for Sirgatoka read Singatoka.
~ 166, „ 14 „ „ after individuals insert comma.
„ 174, „ 14, for bath read bathe.
„ „ „ 2 from bottom, for assented, to read assented to.
„ 175, „ 2, for Residental read Provisional,
„ „ „ 7 from bottom, for accused read accrued.
~ 1/ 8, ~ 6 „ ~ ~ ay ~ aye.
~ 186, „ 1, for Naratu read Navatu.
~ „ „ 27, „ Naubutantau read Nabutautau.
„ „ „ 6 from bottom, for Saguru read Sagunu.
„ 197, bottom line, for while read whilst.
~ 251, line 6 from bottom, for have read had.
„ 260, „ 11 „ „ „ according read accordingly.
~ 268, „ 12, for illustrated read Illustrated.
„ 279, „ 23, „ Sigatoko „ Sigatoka.
„ 301, „ 12 from bottom, for of read in.
„ 310, „ 25, for function read functions.
„ 325, „ 17, for Roku read Roko.
~ ~ „ 21, ~ a ~ an.
~ 333, „ 16, far Kau Vaudra read Kauvandra.
„ 339, „ 19, „ Yeitavaloa „ Yeivatuloa.
„ 364, „ 17, „ approbation „ probation.
~ 376, „ 26, ~ Veezsey „ Veczsey.
~ ~ » 29, „ ~ ~ ~
„ 377, „ 23, „ Mafi „ Maafu.
„ 388, „ 10, „ Noe Roso .. Nuya Koro.
~ 389, „ 24, „ of „ on.
„ 427, ~ 32, „ Bamboogau „ “ Bamboo gun ” (i.e. Dakaibitu).
~ 428, „ 14 from bottom, for Nasan read Nasau.
~ 456, „ 6, „ publicly first circulated read first publicly circulated.
.. 462, „ 10, „ that he believes „ which he believes.
„ 466, „ 14, after than insert that.
„ 478, „ 17, for recommendation read recommendations.
„ 479, „ 10, „ Cakabau „ Cakobau.
„ 492, ~ 23, „ impractable „ impracticable.
„ 493, „ 8, after assessors omit comma.
„ 504, „ 26, for H. C. read High Commissioner.




FIJI
1874-1880
CHAPTER I
IN ENGLAND
For a month after my return from Mauritius I kept no
journal. Nor were the events of that month specially worthy
of record. I found Rachael and her children settled at Ascot
Wood Cottage, a small red-brick house, many-gabled and red-
tiled, belonging to Sir John Lefevre, and close to his own larger
one. Let no one say that so long as the inside of a house is
comfortable the exterior does not signify. Beauty of exterior
as well as of interior exercises a subtle and half-unconscious
charm, and promotes rest of spirit and cheerfulness. I never
approached the cottage through the pines and heather without
pleasure. It has now been much added to, and has lost in
beauty what it has gained in size and comfort. I thoroughly
enjoyed the pleasures of domestic life with my wife and babies,
and revelled in the beauty of a fine English autumn. The oak
trees in Swinley and in Windsor Forest were patched and tinged
with yellow, the beeches were turning brown, and the fern was
taking on its russet hue. Nothing is more lovely than a wood-
land district in England in a fine autumn. In many places the
heather still lingered in blossom. I have seldom —I think never
—since enjoyed an equal period of quiet and tranquil rest.
Our first visit after my return was to Lavington. It was a
trial to visit Reginald there as its master, but Mrs. Reginald, who
is pretty, pleasing, and kind-hearted, made it as little painful as
possible.—How pretty that steep wooded down is, to be sure,
with its natural thickets of box and yew ! —Almost immediately
afterwards, we went to Highclere. That too looked lovely in
its autumn dress. Dr. Acland was there, and we had much
discussion as to the length of time such lovely expanses of
park and wood, and such houses as Highclere, will be allowed
B


to last. I hardly give them to the end of the century. The
growing discontent and desire to have great properties broken
up, the growing burdens upon land, combined with the diminu-
tion of landholders’ wealth and power, must, unless arrested,
end in a social revolution : to my thinking a pernicious one. I
think the Sir Joshua at Highclere is one of the very finest of his
pictures, and indeed, I think, gives me more pleasure than any
other of them that I know. The composition is perfect, the two
young archers, one dark the other fair, are admirably grouped and
drawn, and the colouring, which is of exquisite beauty, is in perfect
preservation. Then we had a visit from my successor Sir Arthur
Phayre, whom I like, and whose accounts of Burmah immensely
interested me. While he was with us, the Ascot Wood party
made an expedition, in which we joined, to Sutton Place, where the
Lefevres used to live before they migrated to Ascot:—a glorious
old Henry VII. house, with window-mouldings and parapets of
terra-cotta. The end of the great gallery is used as a Roman
Catholic chapel. It is the sort of house I should greatly like to
inhabit, but it would require a large fortune to keep it in good
repair or even weather-tight. We also had a visit from Des Yoeux,
who is, as usual, in trouble—this time over a central Sugar
Factory he has started. He is essentially right, but ingeniously
puts himself in the wrong. I did him good service by standing
up for him and fighting his battles at the Colonial Office, which
would willingly throw him over. I found on my arrival a whole
mass of letters waiting for me of all sorts. Among them was the
following letter from Selborne :
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, September 6, 1874.—My dear Gordon —I hope
this may not be long before your arrival. In your letter from the Seychelles,
you mentioned the middle of this month : so I write in good time to greet
you with a most hearty welcome. Whatever happens as to Fiji, I suppose
Sir Hercules Robinson’s Report must necessarily be received and considered,
before any further step is taken: so I conclude we shall have you, for at least
some months, in this country ; and I hope you will find an opportunity, before
leaving it again, of visiting Blackmoor. This, however, cannot be, till after
we ourselves return from the North, whither we are bound at the end of this
month ; intending to spend the whole of October in a series of visits in Scot-
land, of which the first will probably be to Haddo ; as we have accepted an
invitation from your nephew and his good mother, to go there about the third
or fifth. I wonder whether there will be any chance of our meeting you there ?
This, you know, was to be a political letter about things in general. I
must first say, that I agree with you in thinking, that Gladstone cannot help
exerting such an influence, and interfering in politics so much, as to make
any other lead of the Liberal party for the time impossible, unless he retires
altogether, either from Parliament or from the House of Commons. And yet


I think he is so thoroughly determined not to lead, or return to office, (on any
terms which the party can or will make practicable,) as to offer extremely
little chance of his giving up his wish for retirement, which is certainly
genuine. So that, unless they entirely spoil their own game, the present
people have really a much better chance than the world in general supposes,
of remaining in power for more than this one Parliament. I cannot say that
they have as yet done much to gain the confidence of those who did not place
confidence in them before : but they have this advantage, (Disraeli being, in j
this respect, the very opposite of Gladstone), that their leader studies politics!
as an art, and is not carried away by zeal or enthusiasm for or against any i
person, or any thing; and it appears to m e that Disraeli, quite as much as I
Gladstone, (of whom also this was true,) is himself the Government, anpl not*
onTy’TtjT Head. The only one of his colleagues who seems to me to have
strength enough and judgment enough, to make him a real power in the
Cabinet, is Cairns ; Lord Derby is au fond, weak and irresolute ; Salisbury is
too critical and contradictory, and between him and Disraeli there is a mutual
repulsion—all the rest are pawns. Lord Carnarvon I, of course, like, especi-
ally as a chief for you to serve under: in his department, I have no doubt,
he will be popular and conscientious ; but it is impossible to suppose that he
will have any serious weight in the Cabinet. Hardy’s abilities and influence
are not of a kind to signify so much in office as in opposition, especially in
such an office as the Secretaryship for War, to which he is entirely new. But
this very want of strength in the subordinate parts is favourable to the
Cabinet holding together, unless Disraeli and Salisbury quarrel again outright,
(a thing which is always possible): and, if it is not favourable to their doing
much, I am far from sure that the country in its present conservative temper
wants much to be done. One of the principal reasons for the late change was
that it was tired of heroic measures, and frightened at the prospect of what
might be thought heroic measures in the future. To turn to the other side.
I cannot say that my opinion of Gladstone, as a statesman, has risen, with!
the opportunities I have had, since 1871, of observing him more closely |
though my opinion of him, as a man, has certainly suffered nothing. For the
arts of political management, he trusts too implicitly, I think, to J whippers-
in, and other men inferior in political earnestness and insight to himself;
and with respect to the business of legislation and government, his mindl
seems to me to be too one-sided and vehement, and to want accuracy, equa-£
bility, the sense of proportion, and breadth. He can hardly be brought to
interest himself at all in any matters, (even when they are really great
matters,) in which he is not carried away by some too strong attraction ; and
when he is so carried away he does not sympathise, or take counsel with
those whose point of view is at all different from his own. This makes it
hardly possible for him to be Minister, except when it is the time for some
“heroic” measures, for which he can excite public enthusiasm; at other
times his mind is not a centre, round which other minds can revolve, or
which so associates itself with the thoughts and interests of other men, as to
harmonise and regulate their action, in the manner necessary for ordinary good
government.
This character of his mind makes too many people afraid of his taking,
whenever it is possible, a radical and revolutionary turn ; and I confess it
makes me myself doubtful, whether such measures as “ Disestablishment,” in


England and in Scotland, may not, as events tend to give tliem more im-
portance in the constitution and action of our political parties, attract him to
their side. His line during last Session, when Ecclesiastical matters, both
English and Scotch, came under discussion in Parliament, was by no means
unlike that which he used to take on questions relating to the Irish Church
before its Disestablishment became a practical measure. It sounded very
much like, “You must choose between the status quo, without any attempt
to alter it, either by lightening the strains on its weak and sore points, or
otherwise, —and—Disestablishment. ”
This is a line with which I cannot agree. An Institution which is so
thoroughly out of gear that you cannot touch it without bringing it to the
ground, is manifestly one which cannot be maintained : and its demolition,
with those who take that view of it, can be nothing but a question of time. I
do not think that Gladstone shares the visionary ideas of some Churchmen
as to the freer course which Church principles would have in this country, if
the Church were delivered (in the language of the “Liberation” Society)
“ from State control ” : but I suspect he has much sympathy with the Non-
conformist idea, that the State should be absolutely neutral in matters of re-
ligion, when the nation is not sufficiently united in religion to make the
realisation of his own abstract ideas (those of his hooks, to which I believe
he still adheres) about the Church, as a “ national organ ” of a common re-
ligion, possible : and I have good reason to know that he has a just jealousy
of any tendency to compromise, for the sake of State-Religion, in the direction
of Eclecticism, or of an abstract instead of definite and dogmatic Christianity :
in which latter point I myself most heartily agree with him. But, upon the
question of Establishment, my own conviction is, that the terms of it, as at
present settled, are not too onerous to the consciences of those who believe in
the Christian Church as a Divine and not a Secular Polity, and not too re-
strictive of the energy and freedom which are necessary for life and power in
a Church, to be acquiesced in still as they have been hitherto, and maintained
and justified as sound in principle ; and that the freedom of the Church, for
good, would not really be increased by its overthrow ; —that the terms of
Disestablishment, if effected in England, would be far more destructive than
in Ireland, involving the loss of our Cathedral and parish Churches, as a rule,
(subject to exceptions, in favour of recent private benefactions), and exclud-
ing the power of commuting life-interests on favourable terms, with a view to
any permanent Church Fund ; —that the moral effect of such a change would
certainly be for a long time adverse to the influence of religion, (the religion
of the Church, at all events), among the people ; and that its political con-
sequences would be revolutionary, as to all our ancient and distinctive
political Institutions. I think, too, that the strength of the Church of
England, whether viewed on the religious or on the political side, is so great
as to make its destruction not only not inevitable, but hardly possible, but
for the effect of internal dissensions : as to which, while I admit that, if the
most powerful religious influences in the Church cannot reconcile themselves
to the actual terms of the existing settlement, and to their bond fide ob-
servance and enforcement, the Institution cannot stand. I am myself more
hopeful than some others, that they may be kept within the limits necessary
for self-preservation. On the whole, my own determination is, to have nothing 1
to do with Disestablishment: and if (as seems not improbable) this should I


hereafter become a sine qud non of the co-operation of the extreme section of the
(so-called) Liberal party, and if, (which I trust is not probable,) the Whigs,
never “friendly, as a party, to the Church, but at the same time preferring the
policy of even excessive State control to that of a “free Church in a free
State,” should be found willing to surrender the Church for the sake of that
co-operation, I could act with the party no longer.
Before, however, things come to this point, it is probable that circum-
stances, (such as may follow the removal of Disraeli, whenever it happens,
from the political scene,) will lead to a fusion of the moderates, of both
parties. Most of the members of the late Cabinet, and especially the stronger
men among them, are really moderate : e.g. Lowe, Cardwell, Forster, Goschen.
Of these, however, the two last have strong views in particular directions,
which cause them to be regarded as less moderate than they are : and the
two first, while they have no such views, are probably, (as are Lord Granville
and Lord Hartington also,) thoroughly Whig in their ideas as to the Church.
None of them seems at present to have any prospect of coming to the lead,
except Hartington : and if he were to do so, (dividing the lead with Granville
in the Upper House,) it could only be as a matter of temporary convenience,
and could not last long.
From Mr. Newton
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Mauritius, September 17, 1874.—My
dear Sir —Notwithstanding that you wrote to me that if you did not turn up
here by the 10th of September, I might conclude you had gone straight
home, I have hesitated to be sworn-in as Officer Administering the Govern-
ment. The weather we have had has been so boisterous that if you did
carry out your intention of visiting in the Thetis some of the islands, you
may have been delayed longer than you expected, and it is more than pos-
sible that you are on your way here. I have, however, thought right not
to let the mail go without sending forward to the Secretary of State the
ordinary routine returns, and a few more important matters, and I have
therefore ventured to address our despatches to Lord Carnarvon. There is a
memorial from Mr, Trouchet complaining of the low salary he receives in
comparison with other magistrates, and another from Mr. Dangerfield (which
he sent direct to the C.O. and which has been returned here) complaining
that he was not appointed “special examiner” at the Audit Office, because he
had discovered irregularities in the proceedings and accounts of the store-
keeper. I have, I think, effectually answered both these complaints, and I
hope they will satisfy Lord Carnarvon.
I forward you all the correspondence about the Piddington case, as well as
Daly’s report on the memorial, and also the CemAeris commentary on the
case. I cannot think of anything else which could be of service to you in
answering the allegations. Daly intends to send a copy of his report to Mr.
Knatchbull-Hugessen, but I suggested to him that he had better not do so
without your consent. I have not yet got Mr. Beyts to tackle the Board of
Health expenditure, so the question of the salaries of the guardians is still
hung up. I did not think it necessary to add to the Commission to inquire
into the accounts of the liberated Africans. The selection of Beyts and Elliott
is undoubtedly the best which could be made here, but it is unfortunate


that their social position should not have been higher—and of this Ward may
naturally complain. The crop is turning out badly: I do not think the
original estimate of the loss caused by the hurricane was excessive ; I find it
will be fully twenty-five per cent. I have only seen the portion of Julyan’s
report which refers to the Railway and the Surveyor-General’s Department.
His suggestions as to the former are nearly all impracticable, especially the one
that Port Louis should be a through station, and that the same carriages and
engines should run from Mahebourg to Grand River, S.E. The Admiral left us
ten days ago, and I was not sorry when all the racketing the presence of the
ship caused was over. The Shearwater is here. Wharton, the Captain,
tells me he met you in Trinidad ; he is a particularly nice fellow, I think. *
The new bishop for Madagascar, accompanied by five clergymen, arrived I
yesterday. It is rather difficult to put them all up, and I \%as coolly asked I
to place Reduit at their disposal! I hope they will go on to Tamatave in the *
ship which brought tffienToulT Lord Lindsay has not yet arrived, but his
astronomer has settled himself, and is building his observatory at M. de
Chazal’s at Mapou. Lord L. is to be here towards the end of the month. The
English naturalists I have at last pushed off to Rodriguez ; I do not think
they made many important discoveries during their six weeks here. A Dr.
Mdbips of Kiel, particularly recommended to you by Lord Carnarvon, arrived by
last mail. He is a very intelligent and agreeable naturalist, and has taken up
his abode on He Fouquet at Mahebourg, where I have got for him some tents,
but we are building him a hut as fast as we can. His particular line is marine
zoology, and he is charmed with the treasures of the reef.
From Mr. Seed
Abercrombie, September 17, 1874.—My dear Sir—Your letter to Blunt of
the 24th ultimo raised the hope that we might see you for a short time in
Mauritius. With regard to the “Patent” circular, I can at present get no
information, as I never see any Police Officers but Shellam and Spencer, whom
I could not ask. I never get out of my sub-district except on duty, and on
my feeling my way towards getting a pass for a day to go to Rose Hill, I was
asked who was going to do my duty in my absence ? My sub-district is bounded
on one side by Plaine Yerte Gardens, and on the other by Abercrombie Station,
so that I have no opportunity of seeing any one. Nothing as yet has been
done with reference to the salaries of Sanitary Guardians. I sincerely wish
Council would vote them at once, as I have not an easy time of it by any
means. It seems to get hotter and hotter as the days go by. Blunt has
taken up his estate work again, and is stopping for the present at Curepipe.
He is writing himself, and will be able to give you more news than I can. I
hear Mr. P. Julyan’s reports on the Railway and Surveyor-General’s Department
have not given satisfaction to the respective heads of Departments. The
Police is sadly disorganised at present, every respectable man is leaving, and
the trio in town seem to play into each other’s hands in the most wonderful
way. The two “ Ss.” make the Chief do anything they like. The men had
an idea Blunt was coming to take over and are very disappointed. O’Connor
is much in the same boat as I am myself, and is unfortunately more sensitive
to snubs than I am. Hoping it may not be long before I may again have the
chance of serving under Your Excellency.


From Mr. Beyts
Mauritius, September 17. —My dear Sir—l did not reply to your letter
of the 10th August by last mail, because I thought it unlikely that my answer
would find you at Seychelles. As the Thetis has not yet arrived, it seems
very probable now that you made up your mind to go on to Aden in the
Godavery, instead of carrying out your original intention of favouring us with
another visit. If this be the case, your friends will assuredly regret their
being deprived of the pleasure of seeing you once more before your final
departure for England. Permit me to say that I would'participate in that
regret, as sincerely as I grieve to hear of your resignation. lam sorry that
you do not remain to carry out the various reforms you had in view, especially
as the period of administration you have gone through has, by the force of
circumstances, been rather a period of investigation and inquiry than of
action, and the time for action seemed to have just begun. To leave your
task thus unfinished you no doubt have good reasons. Ido not inquire what
they are ; but as one who would have wished to see your administration
crowned with ultimate success—with the success deserved by the earnestness
of your endeavours—l do regret that you have retired so soon. Had you
remained and pursued your task to its end I should not have despaired to see
even your antagonists brought round to the conviction that your ultimate aim
was to promote the best interests of the Colony—not the interest of one class
to the prejudice of others, but the interests of all classes alike.
In speaking of your antagonists I feel that I am treading on burning ground
—one that I have all along purposely avoided entering upon in my communi-
cations with you ; but allow me to throw off a little of the reserve I have
hitherto imposed upon myself, and to speak of the affairs of this Colony with
a little more freedom. It is useless for me to disguise the fact that you have
had antagonists, it is one that you are well aware of yourself, but what you
may possibly not know as well as I do, is that since your return from England
the tide of public feeling had decidedly begun turning in your favour ; and
that many of those who had been inimical to you were evidently undergoing
a change. Some were wholly converted, others partially so, and a year or two
more would probably have sufficed to bring round most, if not all, of the uncon-
vinced to a fairer appreciation of your motives. To those who knew what they
really were, there could be no doubt whatever as to their thorough uprightness.
I have received the papers concerning the Seychelles accounts and have
with Mr. Elliott begun examining them. By the mail which will leave this
next month our report will probably be ready to be forwarded to the Secretary
of State. The Ordinance amalgamating the Sanitary Revenue with the general
revenues of the Colony has been passed, but has not yet been brought into
effect. The General Board of Health and the Local Board of Port Louis have
both presented estimates of their probable expenditure up to the end of this
year. They apply for £32,000 more than the Sanitary rates would have
yielded. The surplus revenue of the year, if there be any, will be very
small, so the amount applied for in excess of the Sanitary rates, if granted,
can only be taken out of the accumulated balances of past years, or borrowed.
I am inclined to think that it would be improvident to take so large an
amount out of the accumulated balances, and should rather recommend that
a loan should be resorted to for a portion of it. —The whole matter will have


to be discussed, with a view to the adoption of the course to be taken. I
have been called upon for a report on the subject. I shall be ready with it
in a day or two. The Ordinance you allowed me to propose for the amend-
ment of the Lie. laws has undergone two readings. I expect that it will
render the collection of license duties safer, easier, and cheaper. It will
probably allow me to propose another important reduction of my staff, which,
as you know, has been greatly reduced already. There will be room for still
further reforms in the Rec.-Gen.’s Department ; but, as my tenure of office
is uncertain, and as Mr, Julyan’s report is probably ready now, I do not
intend to propose any more changes Until I see his recommendations.
We have not yet heard who your successor is to be. Mr. Cairns is spoken
of as likely to be the successful candidate ; but I don’t know on what author-
ity he is stated to be so. When you call on the S. of S., as you doubtlessly
will, you would oblige me greatly by recommending my being confirmed in
my present post, or removed to an equivalent office in one of the other Crown
Colonies. I should not at all dislike a transfer to another Colony, if my
confirmation in my present situation could not be sanctioned. Mr. Barclay’s
friends here still affirm that he is coming back ; some say that he expects he
will be allowed to resume his functions. If so, I shall of course have to look
forward for something else. I shall rely on your kindly using your influence
not to permit my being cast adrift, in the event of his returning to his post,
or the appointment being conferred on a stranger.—May I ask you to be good
enough to favour me with a few lines, informing me of the result of your
conference with the S. of S. about the matter.
Mr. Coles, the Agent for Hooper’s Telegraph Company, has arrived, and
although the contract stipulating the manner in which our submarine cable is
to be laid seems to have been signed, and the contract sets forth that the
cable is to be laid between this and Aden, he is striving hard to be allowed to
carry the line to Galle. To the Company this would be a clear gain, but to
us I think it would just be as clear a disadvantage. If taken to Galle it would
pass far from the Seychelles, whereas the Aden line might very well touch at
Mahe. I leave off here for fear my letter may have run to too great a length
already.
From Captain Havelock, Acting Chief Civil Commissioner
Seychelles, September 20, 1874. —My dear Sir —The month since you left
has passed in perfect peace. Disagreeable subjects have been allowed to rest,
and I hope they may be allowed to die a natural death. Knollys has taken
me out once shell-fishing at Isle Moyenne. We pulled across the harbour with
a dead head-wdnd and the bait in the bows of the boat. I caught one fine
olive, and then botanised with Snip on the Island. Knollys, Horne, and I
have made one voyage en mer. We started in the Wave for Frigate
Island with a strong head-wind and sea. After much suffering on my part
(I was miserably sick for the first time for some years), and some on the part
of Knollys and Snip, though I regret to say Horne only lost his appetite, we
i-eached Frigate Island, after nearly four-and-twenty trying hours. We found
the surf running so high that we gave up all hope of being able to land.
However, inspired as we afterwards found by the expected honour of receiving
you, Mr. Savy sent off a magnificent pirogue, manned by a crew who took us


ashore in a way that was really admirable, giving us several times the excite-
ment of the anticipation of immediate drowning and of the subsequent
salvation therefrom. I think Mr. Savy did his best to be civil when he had
recovered the disappointment of finding that you were not of the party ; but
we did not take to Frigate Island, curious as it undoubtedly is. We bathed
under great difficulties, having to make the best of a muddy puddle after
having driven away some African ladies who were washing clothes therein.
We had to wait two hours for food, and then had no salt and no stimulant to
assist our digestions. I had a good deal of conversation with Mr. Savy, in the
course of which he mentioned with some sarcasm the shortcomings of the
Government in the matter of minor Africans’ wages, without, however, any
special reference to Mr. Ward, for he enlarged on his amiable qualities, and
showed me two hideous sofas he had given him as a memento. Horne walked
round the island, but found nothing new in his line. After we had got all we
could, we re-embarked, being taken through the surf in the same “ heart-in -
the-mouth ” manner. We intended to have landed at Isle Marianne, but the
surf would not let us do so, so we went on to La Digue, where I was glad to
rest my aching head. The people there were very kind and hospitable : I
made a rash promise to give them a pass through their reef: Horne found a
few new weeds, and Knollys sea-fished. We had a fair wind and fair passage
home, and I am sure we were all glad to get back to cleanliness and shade.
I went to the Cascades yesterday, so as to be able to give you a late report
about the work there; it is getting on fairly well. With the help of the
scaffolding for the bridge, I was able to walk across the whole way. The pier
is not forgotten, but we are rather working in the dark there until Mann
comes. That idle fellow Moulinie has not done any more photographs for you.
I have engaged to take him to the chaussee on the Barbaron road next week.
That most amusing person Mr. Henry Percy, the “Delegate of the Yice-
Admiralty Court,” as he calls himself, has not yet gone to Cosmoledo. He
came to me the other day to borrow money. On my remarking that I
thought his allowance of eight shillings per diem was ample for a man in his
position, he informed me that he belonged to one of the best families in
England, that he loathed fish as an article of food, and that it cost him
sixpence a day to get shaved, —consequently that he could not pay his land-
lady. I shall be sorry to lose him ; he is about the most amusing person
here. lam sorry to say he has made friends with Muratorio and Co. : perhaps
he has learnt to understand the times of Sir Robert Walpole, “when every man
had his price,” in a different sense from what he did when he arrived here. Mr.
Yaudin protested against Pere Ignace for having perfunctorily and sacri-
legiously baptized newly-arrived Africans at the Hospital. On investigation
I found that Pere Ignace had administered the sacrament to two or three
dying children, and that Mr. Yaudin himself had not visited the Hospital
for nearly a week, though there were over twenty patients, some in a most
critical condition. Consequently, in my reply, I was able to give him the
whip. I am a good deal exercised by the question of an Institution for
African children. I worry the Bishop by every post, but I fear he has not
the means if he has the will, to do much. I have been working against the
Civil Status Act and the Civil Status Officer to get people married. I have
triumphed at last in the case of Mrs. Bunker, but I have one client whose
case I despair of. It is known that he was born here, though his ode de


naissance cannot be found ; consequently the loophole of the affidavit,
allowed by the Act in the case of persons born out of the Colony, cannot be
made use of by him. Unless a special ordinance is passed to meet his
case, he can never be married. If I remain here, I shall preach a crusade
against the Civil Status Act. There has been great difficulty on account of
the high winds we have had, in moving Captain Mortemard’s buoy into its
supposed right place. I have had a temporary one laid down, so that he will
be able to tell us whether we have hit on the exact spot. I found that I
could not get rid of Mr. Cauvin, the tide-waiter, after all. I think of em-
ploying Woodruff as Inspector of Mr. Cauvin’s rum distillery, at seven pounds
a month.
September 22. —The mail has arrived bringing me your note from Aden.
I own to feeling a little depressed at the opinion you express of my chance.
I already owe so much to your very great kindness, and to the good opinion
that you have been led to form of me, that I ought to be content, but I am
not. I hear Sir Arthur Phayre is the new governor. He is an old Indian,
and I believe worthy. The Dupleix and Godavery are both in the harbour,
neither of them very close, however. My wife joins me in kindest regards to
you and Lady Gordon, Rachel is well, and I think she is really improving.
From Mr. Barrow
Seychelles, September 21, 1874. — Sir—There are few events to chronicle
since your departure, and those of the least possible public interest. The
latest news from Mauritius tell of stagnation in trade and light crops, neither
of which has a tendency to exhilarate the spirits of the community. Of
politics there is literally nothing to tell. I send by the Godavery the speech
and the address of the Board of C. C. and have introduced the proceedings of
the meeting, and described the conclusion in a few words of my own. The
queries for the Gazette I have written and consigned to a safe hand, and have
provided that if the Gazette does not print them they shall appear in the
Sentinel as a rejected letter. The idea of Seychelles without Sir Arthur
Gordon, either present or at Mauritius, is somewhat difficult to realise. It
seems to me, and I have no doubt also to others, as if the head had been re-
moved from a large family, and that the heir, although in possession, had not
yet learned to stand alone : so much have we been accustomed to look beyond
the C.C.C. to the real mover and director of everything around us. I only
hope that the new Governor will not be acted upon, or at least suffer himself
to be influenced by evil counsels, and leave Seychelles out in the cold. The
Board of Health has met, and got through a little business. It has been re-
solved to assess for the present year at sixpence in the pound, and by rating
property at its real value I hope to see as much money collected as formerly
under a ninepenny rate. The Board of Civil Commissioners has done
nothing. The recently passed regulations have been published. The
Political Resident at Zanzibar has asked for information regarding the mode
of treatment of liberated Africans at Seychelles, and the C.C.C. has sent
him copies of all Regulations bearing on the subject, with an explanatory letter.
I have also sent a paper to the Cornhill Magazine by this mail, which is far
from being the worst I have written. If they print it there will be no harm
done ; on the contrary, good may result from it. Captain Havelock has read


it and highly approves. It is headed “The Slave Trade since the Treaty of
Zanzibar.” I heard a report to-day that Dr. Brooks is a candidate for the
vacant Chief-Commissionership. This lam not surprised at; but I was
astonished to learn that he stands some chance of success. Personally, I
should regard his appointment as one of the greatest misfortunes that could
befall me, whilst on public grounds I should consider it a great calamity to
the dependency. I really do not believe that he can stand any chance by the
side of those who, with real claims backed by political influence, must be
candidates for such an appointment. Of course, if he succeeds I shall do my
very best to avoid any unpleasantness, though I fear it will be the old story
of the “wolf and the lamb over again.” As for the traders and the leading
inhabitants, they would be furious, and petition against him ; as nothing
would convince them that he had retired from trade, and did not abuse his
position. Lord Carnarvon might possibly find an abler and more experienced
man than Captain Havelock, but he could not select one who would be more
acceptable to the Seychellois. They are unanimous on that, if on no other
point. The Revenue keeps up. I shall be glad, however, if the five hundred
and fifty pounds for furniture is not spent this year, as Savy’s bond is yet un-
certain. Would it be necessary to take another vote for the furniture in the
event of the money not having been spent in 1874 ? The mail from Aden has
not arrived yet—now Tuesday, eleven o’clock a.m. We are all in hopes
that something will be decided about Mr. Franklyn’s successor. They are
pushing on with the Cascade causeway, but the pier is not advancing, and
there is nothing done about the water-pipes. If this work is delayed another
month nothing can be done at the Rochon until after the rainy season. The
Church Building Committee, of which I am not a member, has quarrelled ;
the Chairman has resigned, and the remaining members have referred to the
Bishop for instructions, so that we are not likely to have the use of the
Church for an indefinite period. Nothing can be done with the lighter ; even
as a gift it would be looked on as a white elephant.
From the Rev. Canon Kingsley
Little Cloisters, Westminster, October 5, 1875.—Dear Sir Arthur—l
heard with delight on Friday of your safe return. Thank God that you are, at
last, I trust, freed from that evil place. I too have been wandering far, and
nearly left my dreary mortal existence behind in the great western desert. I
have many things to speak to you of. Is it possible that we may have the
pleasure of seeing you at Westminster, even for an hour ? lam still too weak,
I fear, to make an expedition to Ascot. With most hearty regards and
congratulations to Lady Gordon. —Believe me, ever your attached,
C. Kingsley.
Saturday , October 24, 1874. —Irving went at 12. We had
some more talk before he left, walking up and down the lawn in
the cold sunshine. On the whole, I rather like him. I think he
will hold his own and act justly and well in Trinidad. Read
Palmerston’s Life. It is odd that Evelyn Ashley, who edits
it, does not see what admissions he makes as to the Spanish


marriages. Drafted a letter to Jarnac, and wrote part of a
report on Piddington’s petition. Read aloud to my Nevil.
Sunday , October 25. —A wet, warm day. We did not
go to church. I received this morning a letter from Lord
Carnarvon, stating what he thought I might consider three
objections or probable objections to my going to Fiji—that
he should require whoever went to stay there his full time—
that he meant to put strong men in the inferior posts, and that
the salary could not be a very high one. After some thought
I replied in the sense that these reasons alone would not deter
me if he really wished me to go, and that strong men in inferior
posts are just what I want. It is an anxious matter any way.
I do not wish to be eager, but to be content in whatever case
falls out. I walked a little on the approach to the house with
George—backwards and forwards. He is vexed at not having
been made a P.C. It is rather absurd, but he spoke to Gladstone
to urge him to give that rank to Sir John, and Sir John wrote
to Gladstone to urge him to give it to George! Neither knew,
or knows, what the other did. Read Bishop Patteson’s Life.
Monday , October 26.—Another wet day. Caroline and Loo
went at 11. I wrote to Jarnac. I wonder how he will take
the letter ! At 12.20 we went off ourselves for Sarsden. 1 First
to Reading; whilst waiting there went with Rachael to an
upholsterer’s and ordered a cupboard for Ascot. Our next
waiting—at Oxford —we utilised by going to luncheon with the
Aclands. It is very funny going back to a house in which one
was once a familiar guest, but which one has not entered for
fifteen years. Oxford too looked so odd—One knew it all so
very well, and yet it was so strange ! Much new building, and
quite a new town near the station. Acland only popped in and
out. Conybeare was there, and Mrs. Irving of Drum. Some new
drawings of Acland’s. His new octagonal library is a great
addition to the house. Then on by 4.10 train to Chipping
Norton Junction, where we found carriages, into one of which we
got with Lady Portsmouth and daughter. Sarsden is an ugly
house in an ugly country. Sinclairs, Charles Lyttelton, one or
two more there. Sat between Lady Ducie and Lord Moreton.
Lady Ducie wants repose, and is not quite so clever as she
thinks herself. Read Punch Greville’s Diary. 2 Amusing, but
weak and very partial and unjust. Especially so in its mention of
His Lordship, whose name, however, seldom occurs. Unfair too
to the Duke and most of the Tory leaders.
1 One of Lord Ducie’s houses.
2 i.e. the first two volumes.


Tuesday , October 27.—Du11, close day. Spent the morning in
reading various books, and in writing. In the afternoon walked
with young Sinclair to Catesby’s house, to Daylesford and to
Lord Leigh’s. Bather bored on the whole. Catesby’s house is
wonderfully well preserved, but is an eery sort of place and took
hold of my imagination powerfully. Not a stone seems to have
been touched for two hundred and seventy years, and the offices,
gardens, garden walls, and green terraces seem to be now just as
they were then. But it is a place to grow mad in. The church J
is close to the house. Daylesford church is one of Street’s best
efforts. Warren Hastings’ tomb a mere urn —tasteless and mean.
I looked on the tomb of that great governor with a sympathetic
interest. The roads vilely muddy, with a white, greasy, slimy,
soapy mud. Country very ugly, but there are noble elms in the
different parks. Talked to Lady D. at dinner and to Lord D.
and Lady Portsmouth after it. Lady Portsmouth I like. She is
a lady every inch, and energetic.
Wednesday , October 28.—Another gloomy day. Left Sarsden
after breakfast. Beceived a mysterious telegram from Carnarvon:
“ Have received news which makes me think it better to defer
conversation till after the 9th November, will write to-morrow to
explain.” Put Bachael into train for Beading, and myself took
that for the North. Wm. Lyttelton in train —also another
parson, Mr. Turner, and wife—Worcester Musical Festival.
Long, slow, stupid journey to Chester. Beached Hawarden
about nine. Mrs. Malcolm and Ambrose De Lisle there.
Thursday , October 29. —Gladstone’s whole soul and mind is |
fully occupied with ecclesiastical matters, almost to the exclusion f
even of tree-cutting, though there was some excitement as to the |
cutting off of a limb of a great lime tree in front of the house.
He has written a new pamphlet, The Vatican Decrees considered i
in their bearing on Civil Allegiance. He argues that obedience to I
the Vatican Decrees is incompatible with civil allegiance —J
that had they existed in 1829 the Belief Bill would not have
passed, and that Catholics who are good citizens are bound to
declare their want of participation in their conclusions or apparent
conclusions. In conclusion he says that in any case he should
oppose any restriction of those liberties, but I should not be
greatly surprised if the publication were to lead to a wild clamour
for the repeal of the Emancipation Act. He invited me to make
criticisms, and I made many, but, in limine, I question the wisdom
of the publication. We had a walk to St. John’s. Talked of
Bishop of Winchester. He has not been asked for letters and
will not give them if he is. He questioned me kindly of my


own prospects. Does not oppose my going to Fiji. Wants me
to write three lives—ecclesiastical of course, —Stephen Gardiner,
—De Dominis, —and Archbishop Laud. His estimate of Laud
very high. Says it is absurd but true that the outcome of the
rubrical agitation is simply a strict enforcement of Laudian usages.
Looks forward to a very bad time coming. Says the House of
Commons has lost and is losing ground—that speeches are no
longer reported —that money is the sole power worshipped. I
repeated to him Manning’s speech to me. He said there was an
odd half-truth in it. Only the first sentence of the paragraph
was in the first draft: the rest was inserted at Munich and under
the influence of what he saw there, but without Dbllinger’s
knowledge. His story of rubbing down Dollinger—De Lisle’s
story of Padre Fortunate—“Ministro Protestante, Ministro del
Diavolo! ” Discussed again on pamphlet. He put a critical
question to poor De Lisle, but before he could answer it, to us
enter Lord Acton. I had not seen him for many years. He is
wonderfully full of information. We sat up late. Conversation
almost wholly ecclesiastical. In fact Gladstone will not speak
or think of aught else.
Friday , October 29. —After breakfast, De Lisle went away.!
Gladstone taxed me (not unjustly) with having made him more un-j
favourable to publication, and then he and I and Lord Acton fell ter
work discussing the pamphlet. I reminded him of his own speech'
to Lord John in 1851, and said how grieved I should be if some
one else addressed similar language to him five-and-twenty years
later. Lord Acton went to finish the reading, and Gladstone and
I continued our conversation. He said he feared some would
think it a “ red herring.” I ventured to tell him nine out of
ten would never read it, but only the summary of it in some
daily paper. I had a little private converse with Acton, and
after luncheon we three went out together. Acton was rather
hesitating in his remarks, and hardly touched the main question.
After coming in, I had a long and very interesting and very
intimate conversation with Gladstone. I wished him to consults
some of his colleagues. He was not complimentary to them.!
“Cardwell—Would you have me consult Cardwell?” and he
mimicked Cardwell’s manner when walking with him in 1853
before the Budget. Reminded me too, in a parenthesis, of my 1
father refusing to let him modify that scheme. —Said he would
have consulted Granville had he been in England. As it was,
Goschen and John Bright were the two he most inclined to. Mrs. i
Gladstone, I see, agrees with me in fearing results. Lord Acton
came into my room whilst I was dressing, to hear what had passed.


Told him. Catina Petri. Pleasant dinner. Talk of novels.
May Lyttelton very charming, though so fatal, both those she
was engaged to having died. Mary, too, is more attractive than
I thought, and plays to absolute perfection. Lord Blackford’s
name suggested as a referee. Sate up late with Lord Acton.
Harry came.
Saturday , October 31. —Left at eight, after a caution to Willie,
who has read only the first few pages and finds them “very
interesting.” Got home at 5.15. Roza and Arthur. Answer
from Jarnac.
Tuesday , November 3.—Had an odd conversation with A. G.
last night. This was a lovely bright day. Heard from Manning,!
who says : “If Gladstone should be carried away by his impulses]
to controversy, his end is come. He will cancel a long life of 1
public service by bringing down a public disaster. But it will!
give us an opportunity which I shall not fail to use.” I had'
heard yesterday from Lord Acton, and gathered from his letter
that there was little or no hope of persuading Gladstone to silence;
he says:—
We had six hours of talk to-day alone, and I am to see him again before
the thing appears, but his last words at the door were, “You will think me
very obstinate.” We travelled over nearly the whole ground—danger to the
party—disgust of colleagues, bone to Tories, judgment of Lord Aberdeen,
probable imputation of motives, imperfect explanation of reasons for the
sudden determination, etc. He was armed k at all points but one. I said
more than once that I pleaded not for bishops or for peers, but for poor people,
whom it would be made more difficult to help with chaplains, schools, etc. To
this he never gave a reply until I said plectuntur Achivi , when he showed (very
copiously) that Horace did not understand Homer. lam ashamed to say that
he was not at all shaken by my saying that I should answer him. It struck
him, I thought, unpleasantly at first, as he knows that I dislike Ultramon-
tanism, and he did not quite see what I meant when I said that there was no
distinction of Jew and Gentile in respect of the help we are called upon to
give to our helpless co-religionists in their little troubles and squabbles under
the bigotry of men. But he quite saw my meaning when I said that “I am
one of those challenged though not one of those attacked.” Still my intention
to reply must show him that the division of the Roman Catholics will be pre-
vented, that the shock will come on a taut rope. I have not said what my
answer will be, but I told him that no answer of mine can meet or appease
popidar violence. An incautious paper in the Month, a Jesuit publication, t
visibly inspired by Manning and violently attacking him, came this morning j
and supplied the otherwise missing provocation and opportunity. I don’t
know whether he will make use of it in the manner he might well do, but
it would fully justify him from the reproach of having picked the quarrel
himself.
Walked round the race-course and towards Swinley, also


to C. Ryan’s site. Wrote part of my letter to Gladstone and
finished despatch upon the Daly case. C. Ryan dined with us
and Sir John came back. Sir Denis le Marchant is dead. It
was only to be expected.
Wednesday , November 4.—Lovely day. Walked about most
of the morning, to C. Ryan’s and went with him to the station
—to see Sir John—and walked with Roza to the Mabel
Cottage. In the afternoon wrote the beginning of my letter
to Gladstone. The Ryan children came to luncheon. Got
copy of decree from Edinburgh. Both George and Roza decreed
to have been British subjects.
Thursday , November s.—Another tolerably fine day. Got up
early and, in Nennie’s language, was “ ’iting ” all day. My letter
to Gladstone was itself very long, and took a terrible time to
copy out in my slow handwriting. On the whole I approve of
it and don’t think it will offend him; but I should have liked to
have polished and considered it for a few days longer. Played
with the children for a few minutes before they went to bed, but
except for this break, and those for meals, spent nearly the
whole day over my letters.
Friday , November 6. —Showed my letter to Gladstone to Sir
John, and then posted it. Went up with Rachael, Roza and
Arthur by 11 train. Took Roza to Manning. The Bishop of
Salford was with him and we saw both. They had not very
much to say to Roza, but were kind and encouraging. Talked
afterwards to Manning about the pamphlet, which is, alas, adver-
tised. He told me what Knowles of the Contemporary Revieio
said. Went to luncheon with the Alex’s. He had seen the
Duke of Cambridge, who was as encouraging as might be
after a .stormy interview. Drive with Caroline. Saw H.
Lindsay and her husband. Colonial Office —Herbert —Photos
of Fiji. To Athenaeum, where saw Lacaita and learnt from him
that Gladstone was in town. We went over to Carlton Terrace
together, and I deferred going down till the 5.40 train. Lacaita
agrees, of course, more than I do with Gladstone, but, like me,
he deprecates publication.
Saturday , November 7. —This morning I received “from the
author ” the pamphlet! With his usual impetuosity, he has gone
before the advertisement, which was for Monday. Sent it over
to Sir John. I went to Kew to see Hooker and meet Waterfield.
Took Hooker my luminous fungus —the abnormal Coco de mer
and the toy boat. Lovely day. Went back by 4.45—C05m0
Gordon in train.


To Mr. Gladstone
November 4. —I saved my train on Saturday by the fraction
of a second.
I find that I took away with me the notes which 1 had made
upon your projected pamphlet, and which you wished me to leave
with you. In now returning them, or rather in now sending you
a more legible copy of them, I am not sorry to have a natural
opportunity of once more placing before you the considerations
which appear to me to render the expediency of the publication
of that pamphlet questionable, and which I am anxious to see
well weighed by you before you finally determine on that course.
If I am not mistaken, the objects you desire to accomplish
by this publication are three in number. You wish :
1. To justify the accuracy of the assertions contained in one
of the paragraphs of your recent article on Ritualism.
2. To induce some portion at least of the Roman Catholic
community in England to disavow the extravagant pretensions
put forward during the last few years by the Roman Curia, and
to dissociate themselves from those who advance or admit such
pretensions.
3. To point out to the people of England the incompatibility
of acquiescence in such claims with the obligations of civil
allegiance.
Of these objects, the first, being purely personal, is one
which, if it stood alone, would certainly not be considered by
you worth attaining, however easily attainable, if, on public
grounds, it seemed inexpedient. It may therefore, I think, be
left out of consideration for the present.
The second object is no doubt one which it would be very
desirable to accomplish, if its accomplishment be feasible. But of
this it must, I think, be manifest that there is not the slightest
hope. When a man like Lord Acton, whose hostility to Ultra-
montanism is well known, tells you that he will take up the
glove you throw down, —that so far as he can prevent it, there
shall be no divergence of sound in the utterances of the English
Roman Catholics, and that all internal difference among them
will be suspended in presence of external assault, —the most
sanguine must, I think, feel that the idea of effecting a division
in the camp is vain. You will in fact, I apprehend, do much to
check that which you wish to foster; —the growth, namely, of a
healthy feeling of dissatisfaction within the Roman Catholic body,
which may ultimately arouse an independent resistance to extrava-
gant claims, and you will to a great degree arrest the growing
disunion between Vaticanists and Anti-Yaticanists, by throwing
c


the latter into the arms of the former, under the pressure of a
common danger. I do not think I mentioned the fact to you
when I was at Hawarden, but I have good reason to know that
the strongest of the Infallibilists rather desire to be assailed, in
order to weld indissolubly with them the whole of the Roman
Catholic body. The instinct of cohesion among those attacked
(if I may use so inaccurate a metaphor) is strong. In 1851
public feeling was aroused by an arrogant act of the Papal Court,
but although that act was a purely executive one, involving no
doctrine, and undoubtedly disapproved of by large numbers of
influential Roman Catholics, it was found quite impossible to
extract (except from one or two purely nominal Roman Catholics,
like Lord Camoys and Lord Beaumont) any response whatever
to the invitations freely given to repudiate the Pope’s act as an
aggression on the prerogatives of the Civil Power.
The third object is one your attainment of which seems to be
certain, —indeed only too certain; —for such a warning from such
a source may, and not improbably will, bring forth a response
far exceeding your expectations or your wishes. Your main
proposition —roughly stated, and as I imagine it will appear to
the majority of men—is, if I do not misapprehend it, that the
civil privileges which Roman Catholics enjoy were granted to
them in the belief, and on the assurance, that they did not hold
doctrines which the Vatican Council now asserts to be binding on
them, and that unless they now repudiate those doctrines, (which
not only in your opinion, but also in that of those who passed
Catholic Emancipation, are incompatible with Civil Allegiance),
they must be held to occupy a position, which, had the truth been
known, would never have been accorded to them. It is true that
you go on to say that you would not deprive them of that
equality of civil rights which they have already obtained, but it
must be remembered that, of those who read your pamphlet, the
majority will do so hastily, and that hundreds more will never
read it at all, but only glance at what a newspaper summary may
choose to represent as being its contents. Over these, your facts
(powerfully stated) will exercise far more influence than your
conclusions. They will accept your statement of the danger.
They will probably form their own notions as to its remedy.
This being so, I confess it does not appear to me an illogical or
unnatural conclusion for the public to draw, that if Roman
Catholics will not comply with the conditions under which
those rights were obtained, they should forfeit rights, which,
except on those conditions, would not have been granted
to them, and which they cannot be trusted to exercise in a
proper manner. Ido not say that this feeling will go all lengths,


or that it will lead to the repeal of the Act of 1829, —a course
which would be well-nigh impracticable as regards the parlia-
mentary representation of Ireland, and almost an idle form so far
as it affects that of England or Scotland. But such a feeling
would almost necessarily lead to the undoing of much that has
been done to diminish the influence of religious differences in
civil affairs—to destroy that recognition of equal civil rights of
which the Act of 1829 is the expression, and that spirit of
harmony and goodwill which it was intended to promote. It is
against the supporters of the new dogma that your attack is
directed, but it is not they alone who will suffer from its success.
The English public, when once the Protestant spirit has been
raised, will make no nice distinction between Vaticanists and
anti-Yaticanists —between Ultramontanes and anti-infallibilists.
If stirred as I anticipate, it will brand as bad citizens and dan-
gerous men all alike whom it terms “ Papists.” It is not those
in high places—not those really responsible for the grievous
burdens they have laid upon men’s shoulders —who will have
most to endure from such a state of things. There are thousands
of poor and humble men and women, Roman Catholics by con-
viction, but strangers to the subtleties of Councils, who will find
doors which are now open to them, shut against them on account
of their religion,—who will be regarded among those with whom
they live, with a suspicion not now felt, —whose children will go
about untaught—and whose sick, in public institutions, will die
without the consolations of religion, should the same spirit of
bigotry once more prevail in England, as, (whatever exceptions
there may have been among the higher classes, or however kindly
the refugee clergy of 1791 may have been received,) it certainly
prevailed as a popular sentiment, a century ago.
You may consider these apprehensions as exaggerated, and
very possibly they are so, but you cannot treat them as wholly
chimerical. We have ourselves seen how easily such a storm is
raised, and that, even when its exciting cause was one uncon-
nected with doctrine, its fury was not directed solely against
Papal encroachments upon the rights of the Civil Power, but
against Roman Catholic doctrine as such, and against all which
was supposed to symbolise with it in the Church of England.
Whatever then be our relative opinions as to the extent to which
public feeling is likely to be agitated, you will not contest my
belief* that, if the pamphlet has any effect at all, it is likely to
produce a certain degree of prejudice in the public mind against
Roman Catholics as such, and you will, I am sure, at once admit
that risks, even if they be but slight, of disturbing the social peace
of England, are not to be incurred without adequate motive.


What then, as I understand them, are your motives for
desiring to publish the pamphlet you have lately written ?
1. The wish to prove that the allegations made by you are
both well founded and material, and the desire to meet the
challenge which you conceive yourself to have received from
Lord Ripon, Lord Emly, and others.
2. The misapprehensions which exist, especially on the
Continent, with respect to your own position and feeling towards
the Romanising party in England.
3. The fear that the pretensions of the Vatican are not put
forward as mere doctrinal propositions, but in contemplation of a
future attempt to restore by arms the temporal power of the
Pope.
4. A conviction that your long advocacy of the just claims
of Roman Catholics to civil equality renders it peculiarly incum-
bent on you to warn England against dangers arising from the
extension of Ultramontane principles.
I cannot think the first of these motives in itself of sufficient
weight to justify any risk, however small, of bringing about such
results as I have foreshadowed. You can well allow your state-
ments to rest on the weight of your own authority. Even were
no evil consequences to be apprehended from publication, I think
there would be some want of dignity in an apparent eagerness to
justify your assertions from the criticisms of a few obscure
periodicals. Nor do I think the challenge of Lord Ripon and
Lord Emly, if indeed it be one, (for I do not believe it to have
been intended as such by them,) is of a nature to render it
necessary for you to return a public answer. To do so is to take
a step of no small importance, and (whatever may have happened
in your case to loosen the restraints of party leadership), you still
must be said in some degree to belong to your party, and are
bound, out of consideration for it, frequently to keep silence
when as a private individual you might wish to speak. But in a
much higher sense you belong to England, which you have so long
served, which you have governed, and which you may again
govern. You owe it to her not to imperil her social peace in
order to place your critics in the wrong, or to prove to captious
correspondents that they have really no cause of complaint
against you. Similar reflections are suggested by the second of
the motives I have enumerated. It must often be your duty to
suffer in silence misconceptions of which the correction would be
easy, (and were you alone concerned not improper), when such
correction might be attended with mischievous public con-
sequences.
The third motive is one to which it is perhaps difficult to


assign its proper weight. It is uncertain whether the attempt
to restore the Papal power by force will be made at all. Dr.
Dollinger, —no mean authority,—you told us, thinks that it will
not. But I confess I am myself disposed to think with you and
Lord Acton that it is contemplated, and that it may be made.
We all agree, however, that it cannot be made successfully.
Whether for the sake of calling attention to the fact that an
attempt, (which will undoubtedly be unsuccessful), may possibly,
though by no means certainly, be made to unsettle the existing
state of things in the dominions of a foreign sovereign, it is worth
while to excite a social agitation in England, may, I venture
to think, be well open to question. I myself am one of those
who are not disposed to underrate our own intimate interest
and concern in all great social and intellectual movements on
the Continent of Europe, and should perhaps not unfrequently
be disposed to consider a reference to them sufficient to influence
domestic action. But lam very certain that it would not be so
regarded by the mass of the people of this country, or by the
most prominent members of either House of Parliament.
The really powerful motive is that which I have named
last. It is one the force of which I cannot pretend to combat,
and the urgency of which must be judged by yourself alone. If,
however, it be deliberately resolved by you that it is your duty
to sound this note of warning, I should certainly desire that it
might be divested of all that bore relation to more trivial and
temporary interests. lamby no means sure that it is not from
your place in Parliament that such a declaration would be made
with most propriety and effect; but at all events it ought not to
appear to have been elicited by a few ill-natured criticisms and a
few querulous letters. If it be put forth in answer to them,
there will be some plausibility in the assertion that, had they not
appeared, neither would your rejoinder have seen the light; and
yet, a solemn warning to the English people from their first
living statesman is too grave a matter to be allowed to be
dependent for its utterance upon a mere accident, or to be
elicited by a passing provocation.
My conclusion therefore is, that most of the motives which
I (perhaps inaccurately), gathered from your conversation to be
those impelling you, appear to me inadequate to justify the peril
in which you may possibly place the social and domestic peace
of the British Empire, by the step you contemplate, and that if
an overpowering sense of duty compels you to speak, it should
be in a different manner and at a different time, —not under the
pressure of a temporary inducement. In short, to adopt language
with which we were a short time since familiar, while I assent


to the truth of the doctrine you set forth, I question the
opportuneness of its declaration.
My father often told me that your greatest fault as a
politician was that you were wont unduly to exaggerate the
exigencies of the moment, to give undue relative importance to
anything that deeply interested you, and to he vehemently
impatient of even moderate delay, in any matter with respect to
which your feelings were excited. How far this may have been
true twenty years ago, it is not for me to say. In what degree,
even if true then, it may now, after long years of labour and
responsibility, be still applicable, Ido not pretend to guess; but
the danger is one against which it can in no case be wrong to
guard. You once wrote to my father (it was in February 1855)
that “you had never gone, with your vulnerable temper and
impetuous moods, into his presence without feeling the strong
influence of his calm and settled spirit.” With him you can no
longer take counsel, but I would ask you to imagine him with
you now at Ha warden, and to carry on in fancy the conversation
which would ensue.* I cannot of course convey to your mind
the conviction which fills my own—a conviction founded on
innumerable recollections, —but I have not a shadow of doubt
that had he now been living he would have recommended caution
and delay.
There are, I think, numerous minor dangers involved in
publication, which are not in themselves to be disregarded,
although not to be compared for a moment with the enormous
one which has so filled me with apprehension.
It is, I think, impossible to deny that such a declaration as
that which you contemplate, is a political step of no common
magnitude, and considering the position which you have held,
and that which you virtually now hold, in relation of the Liberal
party, it will, I fear, seem to many almost a want of courtesy,
and certainly a want of prudence, to take such a step without
any communication with a single one of your former colleagues.
I, and a few others, may know that, as a fact, they have not been
consulted, but the world at large will never suppose that
such a pamphlet has been published without some previous
concert. It will be looked on not merely as an expression of
individual opinion, but as the manifesto of a party. This is, I
imagine, inevitable, and though I do not think you are by any
means bound to follow their opinion, it seems to me, I must own,
but fair to the other chiefs of your party, that they should at
least know what is in contemplation. Ido not think anything
of the postponement this would occasion. If the probable
ultimate necessity for such a publication has been in your mind


for years, and you have deferred it from time to time lest it
should interfere with the adoption of measures of justice to
Roman Catholics which you considered to be their due, (an
admission, by the way, that you are not unconscious of the
tendency and probable effect of the pamphlet,) there can be no
overflowing need for violent hurry now with regard to its final
production. To allow its appearance to be hastened, (if other
considerations point to some delay), by such publications and
criticisms as those which have moved you, is to attribute to them
an importance, and allow them an influence, which they by no
means merit.
I think it not inconceivable that the existing Government
may imagine the pamphlet to be a bid for power on your part,
through the medium of a Protestant cry. They are capable of
believing that others may not disdain the tactics they themselves
successfully played eight years ago, and they may be tempted to
out-bid you by mischievous appeals to Protestant fanaticism and
intolerance. Such a course will not be without several attractions
for Disraeli. To play with and appeal to unreasoning prejudices
which he does not share is to him an intellectual gratification.
He would be enabled to rid himself of Salisbury and others
whom he does not love, who would not be accessory to such
mischief, and he would have the satisfaction, if he succeeded, of
seeing you (as he would imagine) “ hoist with your own petard.
That his success would prejudice the party with which you have
been so long connected, must be a matter of concern to you. To
me it is one, I will not say of positive indifference, but certainly
of comparative indifference, for I have lived too long out of party
struggles to be very keenly interested in them; but it is any-
thing but a matter of unconcern to me to contemplate the
probable effect of such an agitation on the country at large-
the discord, the ill-will, the bitterness it will everywhere excite
—the rending asunder of the bands which have been already
slowly woven during the last half-century.
You yourself alluded to the chance, (which had also struck
me), of your publication being regarded as a red herring intended
to draw attention from matters connected with the Church of
England. But it is quite as conceivable —perhaps more so-
that it might have a totally opposite effect, and to this possibility
I should wish to call your special attention. The popular feeling
once raised against “ Popery,” might become directed against all
that was in the popular mind, (however erroneously), supposed to
savour thereof, and against all those who were supposed to have
any sympathy with its doctrines, or affection for its practices.
The experience of 1851 points in this direction. The popular


demonstrations of that year were aimed- not only against the
Pope and Cardinal Wiseman, but almost equally against the
principles and persons then occupying a position in the Church
of England corresponding in many respects with that filled by
Ritualism and the Ritualists in 1874.
If you consider it absolutely necessary for the discharge of
your own conscience to call attention to the Papal claims and
their incompatibility with civil allegiance, I can say no more.
I could not wish to see you shrink from the performance of what
you deem an imperative duty. I would then only urge that the
statement of these momentous propositions should not be mixed
up with adventitious matter of inferior importance and temporary
interest, and that it should be deferred until it can be dissoci-
ated from all connection with the strictures on your late article.
I must add that it is due to your former colleagues to make,
at all events some of them, aware of your intentions; and that
the step which you have been long pondering should not at last be
taken in haste, and, as I must frankly say, it will appear to most
men, with heat, and under the irritation created by circumstances
of the moment. But if it be not absolute necessity that you
should speak,—a necessity so grave that to keep silence would
be to fail in what you owe to God and man, —I would entreat
you to pause yet awhile before you give your paper to the world.
In so entreating you, I have in mind, in some degree, the
party whose leaders you would, I think, slight, and whose
interests you may in some measure compromise; but far, —very
far, before the interests of the party, have I at heart your own
dignity and lasting fame. The former would, I think, suffer
from your apparently responding to provocation, and the author-
ship of a new Durham letter, though it might gain you some
temporary popularity, would not permanently augment the
latter. Above all, I urge delay in the interest of our Roman
Catholic fellow-subjects, who are likely to suffer, not indeed in
life and limb, but in public estimation, through the consequences
of your publication.
I have written with much freedom —with more freedom
perhaps than is altogether warrantable when the difference in
our respective ages and positions is taken into account; but my
doing so will at least show you that my counsel is not that of a
friend who is afraid to speak out when he thinks speech a duty.
There are, I believe, few now left who regard you with more
loyal and unselfish personal affection than myself, and I prefer
even the risk of giving you offence to allowing you without
remonstrance to take a step which, I think, you may afterwards
have reason to regret.


It would indeed be a source of sorrow to me to know that you
had been the man to stir into a blaze the quiet embers of intoler-
ance ; that you had unwittingly been the means of bringing down
on the Church of England a yoke intolerable to be borne; that
your name had become a byword, not to the hangers-on of the
Papal Court alone, —not only to fanatics whose “love once
passed ” has “ soured to hate,” —but to the whole Irish people,
who whatever their ingratitude, yet, I believe, still feel some
respect for their benefactor. But it would give me yet more
pain to know that you were regarded as the cause of their
misfortunes, and as their personal enemy, by every poor old
woman in a workhouse to whom the consolations of religion
had been made less accessible, by every obscure family whose
daughters were unable to find places in domestic service because
they were Roman Catholics, by every artizan whose creed
proved to be a bar to his advancement, and by all the hundreds
who may find their days made darker, and their path in life
rougher, through the consequences of your act.
It would be with keen regret that I should hear your own
words retorted on you in the House of Commons, —(for no doubt
they are remembered by others as well as by myself),—and the
terms in which you addressed Lord John Russell addressed in
turn to you. But much as I should regret to hear this language
addressed to you in Parliament, I may myself, in all affection,
use it, and ask you in your own words—“ What are you going to
do ? ” —“ Are you going to repeat Penelope’s process but without
Penelope’s purpose ?—Are you going to spend the latter half of
the nineteenth century in undoing the great work which with so
much pain and difficulty your greatest men have been achieving
during the former?” With you I answer, “Surely not.” I say
emphatically, God forbid that it should be your hand that
should furbish up anew in this country the exesa scabie rubigine
pila of politico-religious strife! —l remain, ever yours very
affectionately.
Thursday , November 12.—Gladstone’s pamphlet has provoked
replies from Archbishop Manning and Lord Acton, and rather
sarcastic articles in the Times. So far, I think, my fea,r is
likely to be realised, viz.: that instead of being a “ red herring
it will turn attention to what the Times ominously calls the real
danger, the “ sacerdotal pretensions ”of our own Church. Glad-
stone’s answer to me from Aldenham was this ; “ Pray under-
stand that your letter of the 4 th, which was sent to Ha warden when
I was in London, has only reached me this day. I have read it
with care ex post facto. You have obliged me by speaking so


clearly and fully. Still I have not been shaken. All the opinions
received in London were (except one neutral) strongly aye. They
included an important one of those whom you suppose to have
been excluded, given, not on a perusal, hut on a full account of
the gist. Again thanks.”
From Bishop Scairisbeick
Port Louis, October 3, 1874.—My dear Sir Arthur—The* last mail
cleared away all the doubts that were hanging over the question of your return
to the Colony. I am very sorry not to have had an opportunity of shaking
hands with you and thanking you for all the kindnesses you have shown to
me and to my charge since I landed in the Mauritius. I have read with the
greatest pleasure your admirable address to the Seychellois. It will, lam
sure, make many cowardly heads bend. Mr. Newton did not lose an hour in
taking possession of the reins of government. The mail anchored at 3.30 p.m.
His letters might be in his hands at 4. At 4.10 we were summoned to Govern-
ment House to assist at the ceremony of swearing in at 4.30. The extract,
you kindly sent me does not astonish me, I knew how deep is his hatred of
the abominations of Popery, and many of his “drawing-room” observations
have reached me—one being that he wondered how any sensible and intelli-
gent man could be a Catholic ! He has done absolutely nothing for us sincej
your departure. We have not yet received the £3OOO loan to the Cathedral,
nor have we yet been paid the £6OO for our churches, although these matters
have been brought under his notice continually. It would indeed be sad if a.
man like Mr. Newton were named Governor over a Catholic population. I
need not add that of course the school question has not advanced a step since J
you left. lam very anxious to know what we have to expect from Sir Arthur
Phayre. The first half of his name sounds hopeful. Being a military man, I
fancy the Creoles know what his mission is, on the Coolie question. —Now
I must answer your very kind though somewhat scolding letter of August 10.
I am very sorry that my letter to the Secretary of State on the Yallee des
Pretres question should be interpreted as a want of confidence in you, I
assure you it is the very reverse. I really thought that I was doing what
you yourself would have recommended, and what you have so often urged me
to do under other circumstances, I knew all along that the difficulty about
the settlement of that question did not come from you, and I could not help
noticing the antagonistic attitude of Mr. Newton when I met him in Govern-
ment House, when he made that celebrated answer to my question—“ You
don’t see the other side of the question?” Bp. “Would you mind telling
me what is the other side?” Mr. N. “Oh ! there is another side” (Curtain
drops). I knew that he would raise obstacles, and I felt sure that you would]
understand my reason for requesting the Home Government to reconsider the
whole question. Now as to my request that you would forward the document
without unfavourable comment, which you consider as an effort of coercion
and a wish to hamper your official action where there is question of duty. It
was farthest from my thoughts, but you have so accustomed me to regard you
as the friend and supporter of the Catholic interests of Mauritius that I
thought I might venture to use an expression which in official intercourse


would be unpardonable, but which I do not consider misplaced in a private
and friendly communication, I hope you will overlook this disrespectful
style of correspondence, but as I said before, your great kindness to me on
all occasions is in great measure the guilty cause. You find fault with my
assertion that Mauritius is as Catholic a country as Bourbon, which you
condemn as extravagant, and full of exaggeration. I quite agree with you that
a public servant ought never to exaggerate, and that it weakens a good cause
as much as moderation strengthens it. I always try to keep within the limits
of the strict truth ; I still think that Mauritius is as Catholic as Bourbon, and
all whom I have spoken to on the subject as knowing both countries (Henri
Adam amongst others) bear me out, and even say that Mauritius is far more
Catholic than Bourbon. In Bourbon, Catholicity is the state religion, here
it is not; there it is the interest of all to be Catholics, here, from a human
point of view, it is the very reverse ; —and yet all the population remains faith-
fully loyal to their creed, and are more practical than at Bourbon {this,
however, does not imply much). I say all, because the exceptions are the English
employees of Government who are here per accidens, and when the place
has served their purpose they go. This, I consider, does not affect the country
itself which is not made up of a floating population. Then there are a few
Blacks who have been taught to say they are Protestants. We and perhaps
you know something about this, and I wish them joy of their new accessions,
they certainly are not likely to be a credit to any church, and in point of fact,
now that Mr. De Joux is no more, they are all coming back to their church.
The Protestant section —the many Protestant churches and ministers, etc.
to which you allude, are here, as everybody must see, not because they are
needed, but because they want to be needed ; but it is useless, the Creoles are
French, and of a Frenchman you may easily make an infidel, you cannot
transform him into a genuine Protestant. So I still think that lam not far
off the mark in saying that Mauritius is as Catholic as Bourbon. But after
all it is only a matter of opinion and of calculation. lam writing this early
because to-morrow I leave fof Rodriguez on a pastoral visit of five weeks, and
I must do Mr. Newton the justice to ssy that in this he has been exceedingly
gracious and kind. He has given me a passage on board a man-of-war he
has placed the Government barge at my disposal, and he has expressed his
intention of being at the Post-office wharf to see me off. My most respectful
compliments to Lady Gordon.—Ever yours most gratefully and sincerely.
P.S. —I enclose the statistics you asked. They are furnished from the
Eveche, with strict injunctions to underrate rather than overrate. He assures
me that these figures do not represent all, beaucoup s’enfaut.
From Captain Knollys
Port Louis, October 13,1874. The roof of the Council Room has been
discovered to be on the point of coming down, and they have consequently
had to vote £IOOO to put a new one on. Connal and Mann are very anxious
to put a high-pitched roof like that in the Mariner’s Church ; the effect I
should think would be curious, but I believe they are not to be allowed to do
it. Efforts are being made to make the two Government Houses respectable.
Ido not think that they are likely to be successful. Mr. Jenner discovered


a very bad state of affairs in Aalaga—false imprisonments, floggings, etc. and
the necessaries of life sold to labourers at a most exorbitant price,—but I
suppose Newton will have told you about it.
I arrived here by last mail, that having been my first opportunity of com-
ing. There was a schooner, the one that brought the iron pipes, which left
about a fortnight before the mail expecting to get in a week before her, but
I thought it so uncertain that I would not risk it, and it is by luck that I
did not, as she has been thirty-five days out and has not yet been heard of.
From Judge Goeeie
Curepipe, October 13, 1874. —My dear Sir Arthur—l hope the news, which
as yet we have only got by telegraph, and that not official, of the appointment
of Sir Arthur Phayre is true. There has been a most ominous silence here
since. When Ward heard it, he is said to have groaned out, “ I would much
prefer Sir A. G.” The Bishop confirmed what Ward had also heard, that the
new Governor was especially strict in a line where strictness is not usually
practised here. While we were sitting in the Council Room waiting [for
Newton being sworn-in, Colin said to me with a very despairing countenance,
“This means the adoption of the report.” I said, if true, it certainly did,
and a great deal more. The papers have been ridiculously quiet—only one
article against me since August, and that just before the announcement of
the new Governor. It was so transparent an inspiration of the Police Depart-
ment that I was debating with myself whether I should not send in an
official letter and demand an enquiry into the authorship, when the mail came.
The Assizes were arranged for and nearly finished under the old regime
when your resignation was known. There were some things which I did not
fail to notice, but said nothing. First of all there were an unusual number
of gang robberies—three at least. They were all put down to the Chief Judge
or Mr. Bestel. Imagine the old gentleman trying to guide the jury to a right
conclusion where there is conflicting evidence in regard to a number of
prisoners. The result of course is that the speech of the prosecutor is practi-
cally the summing up. In one of the cases I saw from the papers that one
of the men in pleading guilty complained that they had been induced to do
what they did by a man not in custody —in all likelihood the old practice.
No enquiry of course was made into this. The case of the two ruffians I had
so much trouble with, (the case where I recommended Manemootoo for pardon,)
was set down to Shand ; again I said nothing. After a two days’ trial they
were acquitted of the two charges upon which they had been tried before me,
but condemned on a new count for possession of stolen property. I asked
Newton to carry out the recommendation in favour of Manemootoo, and
as he seemed in a funk as to what the papers would say if he did so, I took
care, in having the pardon read in Court, to explain that it was done on
my recommendation from doubts entertained, etc. etc., in order that there
might be no excuse for blaming Newton. The principal papers did not even
notice the incident. This again convinces me, that they are accustomed to
receive hints from the department of the Procureur-General. Colin brought
me the pardon himself, and this was before the mail arrived (I think).
May I ask what you have done with my notary report ? I am hot sure
whether Colin was referring to that or the Land Laws, in the slip so kindly


sent from Seychelles. There can be no doubt that Pitot—poor creature—was
trying to have a slap at me in the Council, O’Brien having probably put him
up to it, but all that will probably drop. I presume the Report will be here
by the next, or the October mail. It is a thousand pities that it has been so
long delayed, and that having come out purposely, you did not receive it
here. However, you may be able to report upon it still more effectively at
home. Shand is always going—now the time is fixed for November. The
fact is, Lady Shand is pulling the one way and he the other. She does not
want to go, and fears that if he does go he will be disinclined to come back.
My own notion is that with a son a planter, (and his own capital involved
also,) and another son a sworn broker, or with one, the sooner he is home the
better ; and I rather think he is inclined this way himself if he were free to
act. Ellis has come back much the better of his trip. I have heard very
little about Julyan’s report, and can only hope that his changes will infuse
greater unity into the administration, etc. lam delighted with the blunders
of the administration in Parliament, not that I wish them any harm, but
merely from the selfish hope of there being a general election somewhere in
1876 when I may be at home. “This is patriotism.” I trust Lady Gordon
and the children are well. Mrs. Gorrie had a narrow escape the other day
—the ponies bolted at a hill, and she and the children were capsized.
P.S. —I have not mentioned one thing—l refused to deliver the gaol at the
end of the assizes, as twenty-two prisoners remained untried. The Substitute
Procureur - General brought in the Procureur-General and they tried every
argument; but I insisted on either continuing the assizes or having a supple-
mentary one in October. It was the most important discussion in the
Criminal Court since I came. The papers scarcely noticed it. No leaders
pitching into me for presuming to make the gaol delivery real, and resisting
the desires of the Procureur-General. Altogether the aspect of affairs has
been peculiar—it may be ominous. There is to be a Supplementary Assize
this month.
From Captain Havelock, Acting Chief Civil Commissioner
Seychelles, October 18, 1874. —I continue the history of the Seychelles
during the last month. Mr. Coles, the agent of the company that has con-
tracted to lay the Mauritius and Cape Telegraph, has been here for some
weeks sounding on the Sechelles bank. His report is not favourable on the
whole ; there is nothing, he says, to render the laying of the cable actually
impossible, or even very difficult, but the nature of the bottom on the bank
and the strong and variable currents that prevail, would expose the cable to
constant risk of being broken. I took some trouble to get information for
Mr. Coles from Mr. Nageon and other old experienced local navigators and
fishermen, but, for some reason or another, he did not choose to make experi-
ments in the direction they recommended. lam afraid the Seychelles have
not much chance of being made a telegraph station unless the home Govern-
ment insist, through the Crown Agents, on the strict carrying out of the
original contract. I suspect there are other circumstances besides the diffi-
culties of the Seychelles bank, which lead the company to prefer Ceylon to
Aden as a starting-point. I have a sort of feeling that Mr. Coles was sent


here on purpose to condemn the place. I hope lam mistaken, for the tele-
graph is a matter of life and death to us. The cocoa-nut fibre manufacture
is looking well. A great part of the machinery has arrived, and the building
is nearly finished. It is intended, besides making the actual fibre itself, which
was the limit of the original plan, to extend the undertaking to the manufac-
ture of rope, matting, and the many other articles of which cocoa-nut fibre is
the raw material. An Englishman, now in Natal, a brother of an old brother-
ofiicer of mine, wishes to settle here, and has applied to me for information.
He has a small capital and wishes to invest it in land. I have told him all
the details I could find, and have said all the good I could of the country.
Money is to be made here even under existing circumstances, not quickly but
easily. lam sorry to say Mr. Newton thinks we have not much chance of
recovering the chest deficiency. He does not tell me why : the matter has
been referred by Mr. Dick to his company in England. Even if decided that
we cannot recover the amount of this loss, I am still sanguine of a small sur-
plus. The case of Mr. Savy’s Bond (£500) has been given in our favour, and
the revenue continues to come in well. At the end of September, the revenue
for nine months, exclusive of customs at Mauritius, amounted to £7508. The
same taxes were calculated to bring in for the year, £9535. Therefore, to
reach the estimate, the tail quarter will have to produce about £2OOO. This
amount will be greatly exceeded, as in addition to the ordinary items of
revenue, there are considerable arrears of last year’s Sanitary Tax, the whole of
this year’s Sanitary Tax, (to be collected on a new assessment roll at the rate
of sixpence in the pound, though under the old ordinance,) and the unfortunate
Savy’s £SOO, —to be received. In the first three quarters of last year the amount
of revenue collected locally was £5026 ; the same period of this year has pro-
duced £7508, an increase of nearly £2500 ! On the other hand, the Customs
collected at Mauritius have not come up to the estimate, and have slightly de-
creased since last year. This remark, however, only applies to the first six
months of the year, as I have no later accounts from Mauritius than 30th
June. It is quite possible that the last six months of the year may show an
improvement. Our expenditure has, of course, exceeded the estimate, but not
so as to neutralise the excess of revenue. As near as we can tell, on the 30th
September, after paying all expenses, there was an excess of revenue for the
nine months of about £7OO. The infanticide case embarks for Mauritius in
the steamer expected to-day or to-morrow. lam sorry to say Fleming leaves
at the same time. Ido not know who is to replace him, but I imagine the
chances are that Mr. Esnouf will return. One might do worse, —he is better
than some Creoles, but that is all I can say for him. The people here have great
confidence in Fleming’s judicial capacity and integrity. There has not been a
single case of appeal against his judgments, although he has had a good many
important cases to decide. We have not done much in the way of making new
regulations since you left. I cannot yet tell how the regulations affecting the
occupation of land are likely to act. I find it advisable not to insist on their
being strictly carried out, until proprietors or occupiers shall have had time to
become acquainted with the regulations themselves, and to arrange and adjust
matters between one another. I have temporarily provided for the difficulty
arising out of the excessive destruction of turtle by extending the breeding
season, and by forbidding the killing or capture of the females during that
season. These measures are within the scope of the present ordinance, and I


was assured by the most valuable testimony I could procure, that they would be
very effectual and easy of execution. Of course, the destruction of the “careb,”
the turtle which is killed for the sake of its shell, would not be practically
much influenced by these restrictions, as it would be next to impossible to tell
from the appearance of the shell whether the creature killed was a male or a
female : therefore, as it was too late in the season to introduce a fresh regula-
tion, I left the proclamation as far as that species was concerned iu statu quo.
But, in the case of the Tortue de mer, the provider of food, it is easy to
distinguish, even in the water, with a practised eye, the male from the female ;
and if brought alive to be put into the the turtle ponds at Mahe, or killed for
sale as food at the outlying islands, any infringement of the rule as regards
the killing or capture of the female would be at once detected. The breeding
season for this species of turtle is now extended to the end of May instead of
the end of April, beginning on Ist January. I send you by this mail a volume
containing the regulations passed in 1872 and 1873. The binding was done
here by Mr. Davidson, and is, I think, very creditable. The chaussee and the
bridge at the Cascades are at last finished, and there are about 300 yards of
good road on the further side. They are now working at the broken bit be-
tween the Cascades and the end of that portion of the road formerly finished.
The pier is not making much visible progress, but the filling up is now neces-
sarily slow work as they have got beyond the edge of the reef. Captain
Mortemard’s buoy has been put in the right place at last. lam sorry to say
Mr. Moulinie has not been either industrious or successful in taking photos.
He has taken one view at the river Rochon, very badly, I consider. I enclose
a proof of it. He also photographed this house, but so badly that I won’t send
a proof. I will do my best to stir him up to a little more energy, and send
you something better by the next mail. The Brooks and Barrow difficulty has
been allowed to rest. I told the former that the accusation of building his
house with Government materials, brought against the latter, had broken down.
With the exception of one short conversation in which bad language was used
and very bad taste shoAvn, I have not been troubled any further on the subject.
Mr. Barrow does not like drudgery. He has an evil habit of getting other
people to do the work he does not like, and invariably tries to throw the blame
of anything that goes wrong on some one else’s shoulders. How'ever, I think
he and I are getting more clearly to understand one another. I have been
on the verge of a disagreeable misunderstanding with Dr. Brooks, and I am
not quite sure that the storm has blown over yet. I had observed for some
time that post-mortem examinations and other medical rites and ceremonies
had been becoming very common, very much to the profit of Brooks, but to
the disadvantage of our poor little revenue. At last a bill was sent to me for
approval, for attendance on a man who had got his head broken. I could not
understand it or find any ghost of authority for such a charge, so I sent it back
with a request for explanation. This act brought down upon me a perfect
torrent of impertinent and illogical memoranda, concluding with a letter
(official), which Fleming, to whom I showed it, described as that of a maniac.
This production I sent back to Brooks, with a private note, written in as gentle
terms as possible, requesting him to withdraw it. Several days have passed
and I have heard nothing more about it, so I trust wise and moderate counsels
have prevailed. Meanwhile I have always spoken to him whenever I have
met him as if nothing had happened, and, moreover, I have been able to help


him in a coaling difficulty he has had with the Admiral. Brooks is certainly
the most wrong-headed man I ever met, in matters in which his own interests
are concerned. He is also given to be most insolent and insubordinate, as
the records in this office as well as my own experience abundantly testify. It
is commonly reported here that he is to be made Chief Commissioner. The
fact of his having bought Mr. Franklyn’s boat is, I think, the principal founda-
tion for this rumour. My little African girls at the Convent are getting on
well, picking up French and civilisation very quickly. The bishop was furious
with Mr. Yaudin for not taking the responsibility of taking charge of them,
and has ordered him to make preparations for the next cargo. Towards me
he is sarcastic, he says : —“ My one comfort in the matter is that the Roman
Catholic Convent school authorities, in accepting aid under the new school
regulations, and being thus bound to abstain from religious instruction (in
the case of scholars whose guardians object to it), will of course have been
distinctly informed by Her Majesty’s Chief Civil Commissioner—their only
and lawful guardian—that these children are to be considered as Government
wards, and as such to receive all their religious teaching from the English
chaplain. Else indeed, we shall have good reason to complain of the ‘ Irish
reciprocity ’ of the Regulation in question, and that in a most important
instance.” Pardon this long quotation ;itis so thoroughly characteristic, I
could not resist making it. Imagine Mr. Yaudin going to the Convent to
give religious instruction ! The Bishop has received no answer as yet to his
petition against our education regulation. I believe they have an ordinance
in course of manufacture, intended to give the Bishop a legal status as Bishop
of the Church of England in Mauritius. I fear he may be allowed to have his
own way with Sir Arthur Phayre. Most old Indians are rigidly Protestant.
I have done very little in the way of excursionising during the last month.
One very hot day I walked over to Foret Noire and back. The views and
vegetation were lovely, but I think I managed to get a slight sunstroke. I
came home with a fearful headache, and have not been quite well since. Mr.
Houareau, the owner of Port Glau, came to call on me one day, but he was
not quite as cordial as he might have been in inviting me to come and see him.
However, I fully intend to go before we leave the Seychelles. I have had a
little time for continuing Motley. It is a pleasant relief to read of the
Duchess of Parma’s moustache, after a large dose of Brooks’ coal contract
and medical fees.
October 20. —The mail arriving yesterday brought me your letter of Sep-
tember 24. Of course I need not tell you that lam delighted to hear that
there is still a prospect of my being confirmed. This news revives my interest
in the place, which I must confess was beginning to flag a little. We will be
fully prepared to meet Sir Arthur Phayre, if he comes by the next steamer,
with an eloquent address from the Board of C.Cs. The gigantic tortoise is
still alive, and the others are not to be compared to it. If I succeed in buying
him I shall be rather puzzled how to get him home. I should think it would
be bad for him to travel in winter. I shall be very sorry to lose MacGregor.
I wish he were here now, on private as well as public grounds. I have not
a male soul to speak to except Brooks, and his limits of conversation are so
very narrow. I will enquire about the bird with the red head to be found
at Marianne. I suppose he is the Tourterelle rouge. He is included in the
proclamation, and it will be therefore illegal to take him, but I daresay that


obstacle can be overcome. Our daughter is very well, and is getting very
active on her legs, and sharp and observant enough, and at the same time
rather self-willed.
I have certainly obeyed your injunction to write “ long and prosily.”
October 21, 1874. —I hope you will pardon the addition of a supplement to
my long chapter on Seychelles. I have a long letter from Mr. Newton in
which he tells me that he does not intend to put the Yanilla Ordinance in
force ;he says it is a great mistake and quite contrary to his wish. Mr. Fer-
guson of the Oriental Bank has written to me for statistics of the Seychelles.
If he thinks the plan of having a branch bank here at all hopeful, he will
send a man to reconnoitre. If it should be in your power to say a on
the subject to the Directors of the Oriental Bank in London, I think our
chances would be greatly improved. I look upon a bank here as the next
best thing to the telegraph. Mr. Cheyron does not seem inclined to move in
the matter. I see Lord Peter’s 1 Ordinance has passed its first reading.
The Dicks are on their way home, Mr. D. having been ordered by the
doctor to leave Mauritius. Miss Dick is spending the day on shore with us.
It is a pleasure to my wife to see a lady once more. Captain Mortemard is
satisfied with the position of the buoy. lam going to show him our lamps
for his opinion as to their suitableness for harbour lights.—Believe me, yours
very sincerely.
From Mr. Barrow
Seychelles, October 20, 1874. —Sir—The C.C.C. will transmit a State-
ment of Revenue and Expenditure to the end of September. To render the
information more complete I have included the receipts during 1872-3 for the
corresponding period, and I shall now offer a few explanatory remarks, as you
are not near to ask questions.
Customs will, I think, reach the estimate, but I hope for nothing beyond.
At this date the receipts of October are £l2O.
Quay Dues are in excess, owing to importations of Coal, which I had fore-
seen ; but as Brooks and Cheyron have between them 2000 tons there will be
a falling off of nearly £IOO in 1875.
Warehouse Rent counts for nothing, and now that Dr. Brooks has a private
Bonding Store, it will in future be only nominal.
Land Revenue will not increase much, if anything. The Islands are now
let at a rack rent, and there is only M. de la Barriere’s rent to add.
Licenses in 1873 increased £157 :17 :8 over the corresponding period in
the previous year, to fall £216 : 6s. Ido not understand this : and as there
is not an Inspector of Licenses it is impossible to say whether the deficiency
is, or is not, owing to contraventions of the law.
Rum Permits show a steady increase in the consumption of Seychelles
Rum ; but there is a decrease, though not to the same extent, in importations
from Mauritius. During the first three quarters of 1872 the duties on Mauri-
tius Rum amounted to £408:125. and for the same period in 1873 to
£4lO :17 :0. I have not the returns for the present year, but the importa-
tions of rum have been trifling, which in some measure accounts for the
1 Bishop Royston.
D


decrease in the Mauritius Customs. The following figures will explain my
meanings :
Mauritius. Seychelles. Total.
1872. £408:12:0 + £1054 :13 :1J = £1463:5:1|
1873. 410:17:0 + 1437: 6:0 = 1848:3:0
1874. 1723: 6:li
Stamps are looking better. Eeunards told me the other day that he might
often take contraventions of the Stamp Ordinance. I asked why he did not
do so ? His reply was characteristic of the Creole, “ "Why should I ? I should
not participate in the fine ; and the extra commission on stamps would not
compensate for the amount of ill-will I should earn.”
Local Rate was collected previous to your departure. The excess, and
Savy’s £SOO, which is to be paid, will cover the deficiency of £BOO calculated
as the produce of the Ward Rate.
Postages produce less and less. The transmission of naval correspondence
via Zanzibar doubtless has something to do with it, but that route was not
opened early enough to cause the difference between the receipts of 1872 and
1873. And of the sums actually received this year more than three-fourths
are due to, and will be claimed by, the G. P. 0., London.
Fines, Fees, etc. are increased this year by the fines and forfeitures in the
case of the seizure of rum at Frigate Island. If Mr. Fleming remained long,
however, the amount receivable from that source would sink below zero. The
fines he inflicts appear to be ridiculously small, and the prisons are nearly
empty. If crime showed a corresponding decrease all would be well; but,
unfortunately, such is not the case.
\ The Receipts, which do not include the Mauritius Customs, are £133 in
excess of the expenditure, whilst the latter is charged with upwards of £490
extraordinary expenditure, viz. £IOO allowance to C.C. C., £l5O to Mrs.
Franklyn, and £240 :s:B| to the Board of Health. Of course there is some-
thing undrawn by both Dr. MacGregor and the C.C.C., but that will be more
than covered by the Sanitary Rate, yet to be collected. On the whole, there-
fore, I think we shall come out right at the end of the year. The effects of
the late C.C. have been sold. Mr. Brown, in whose hands Mrs. Franklyn
left everything, turned over his responsibility to the Deputy Curator. The
estate, exclusive of the “House,” produced about £350. The Galley was
bought by Dr. Brooks for £44. If fortune smiles, I suppose he intends that
she shall carry his flag as Her Majesty’s representative ; if not, he may send
her to Mauritius and make money on the transaction. I suspect that the act-
ing C.C. and the G.M.O. have had a “tilt” together. There is not much
harm done, as yet; but it will need all the tact Captain Havelock is possessed
of to avoid future hostilities in that quarter. Of course it is hardly necessary
for me to say that the C.C. is in the right, and acted as became a man of
his high breeding. The Church is still untouched. The Committee has been
thrown into dismay by the resignation of Dr, Brooks, who, as usual, wished
to ride roughshod over the other members —a proceeding they disapproved of
—and hence the resignation, coupled with an attempt to fasten a quarrel upon
poor Mr. Yaudin. lam happy to say that lam out of that business. The
arrival, by last mail, of a gentleman sent by the Messageries Maritimes Co.
to inquire into certain charges which had been brought against M. Cheyrou,


in his capacity of agent, has brought to light another of Dr. Brooks’ bad
actions. You know his capacity for letter-writing, especially when he has an
object to gain or a grievance to complain of, and will not be surprised to
learn that twenty pages of foolscap were filled with the most frivolous and
nonsensical charges, and an elaborate recommendation, flimsily disguised, of
himself as a suitable successor to Mr. Cheyron. The agent from Marseilles
came, saw, and speedily made up his mind that Dr. Brooks is a very dangerous
and evil-disposed person ; and he has made no secret of the conclusions he has
arrived at. It is believed that Cheyron has good grounds for an action for
damages if he chooses to press a charge against Dr. Brooks. Another piece of
gossip I may mention, chiefly because it affects one of the honourable members
of the Board of C.C. Mr, Lemarchand having been sued for debt, pleaded,
as a reason why he ought not to be condemned to pay, that he held no pro-
perty. At Baie Luzare he was merely the servant of his wife ; that he re-
ceived no wages ; he worked for his food and clothing ; and that if he wanted
a new coat he was obliged to ask his wife for it. Counsel for the other side
remarked that his qualifications (property) as a member of the local legisla-
ture were of a rather questionable character. And I am afraid that other
people, besides the learned counsel, are of the same opinion, and not with re-
gard to his property qualification only. I hear a rumour, but do not vouch for
the correctness of the statement, that Miss Lemarchand is to be married to
Mr. Cheyron. The witnesses in the case of infanticide went to Mauritius
yesterday. Mr. Fleming also returned to his duties. At the present moment
we have no magistrate, unless some arrangement has been made that I don’t
know of. I have just seen Captain Havelock. He tells me that nothing
definite has yet been decided with regard to Seychelles. Ido not know what
may be ultimately decided, but I think it is quite contrary to the traditions
of the Colonial Office to place a man at the head of the Government who has
been for sixteen or seventeen years a resident in the place. • I have no personal
objection to the promotion of Dr. Brooks, provided that it is not done at
Seychelles. For my part, I look upon Captain Havelock as already con-
firmed.
Saturday , November 14. —Rachael and A. J. L. G. went to
Reading for some skating at the Monck’s. I went with them
as far as Wokingham—thence walked to Wellington College,
where I found Mr. Wickham and Agnes at lunch on bad cold
beef. Had a long chat with Agnes, chiefly on family matters.
She had a glorious photograph of the Seggiola, full size, and a
chalk drawing of Herbert’s of the Adoration of the Magi, done
last Christmas Eve, very good. She told me all about Sir
Stephen’s death, which was very sudden. He was seized with
faintness, went into a shop, sat down, and there died in a very
short time. When asked his name he gave it only as “ Glynne,
without further explanation, so much time was lost in sending
to Lord Wolverton’s, as the shop people fancied he must be a
relation of his. Phillimore went to “ break ” the news to Mrs.
Gladstone, and did so so clumsily as to give her a prolonged and


terrible fright about Mr. G-., which has almost produced a cool-
ness between them. Walked home by Swinley. Dined at the
house. The Crutchleys and Mr. Brodrick there. Talk on division
of property.
Monday , November 16.—Went up to town to see Manning
and Charles Cordon. First to the Archbishop. He said he
would have the Memorial translated by his secretary and left
with him so that it might be signed in town, and forwarded to
him in Rome, where he goes to-morrow. Gave but a weak reply
when I pressed him on the point of moral discipline. Urges my
going to Rome before the 10th December. He says Lord Acton
has written to assure him that he wrote to the Times to disavow
the schismatical interpretation of his letter, but that it was
not inserted. Next, to Charles Gordon, who, to my surprise,
was readily accessible to reason, and consented to delay taking
any such steps as he had proposed. Saw Herbert at C.O.
Saturday Review and Spectator strong against the pamphlet.
Went down with A. L. G. Found Rose Kingsley at the cottage
with the two children on her knee and very uproarious. I like
Rose Kingsley; was very sorry to hear from her of Mrs. Hooker’s
sudden death. I saw her at Kew not ten days ago. Madeleine
dined with us.
To Lord Selborne
Ascot Wood, November 17, 1874. —My dear Selborne—l found your long
and interesting letter awaiting my arrival here. I did not answer it at first
because I hoped to meet you at Haddo, and subsequently because I thought
that having already too long delayed thanking you for it, I would, as its
contents required no immediate answer, continue to defer doing so until I
had seen Gladstone and had formed my own impressions as to his views and
probable course. I have now been at Hawarden ; but before I give any
account of my visit there, I will make my comments, which are not numerous,
on the contents of your letter.
Much of what you say I receive as information, and on your authority ;
but as regards those points on which I can form any opinion of my own, I
should say that substantially I altogether agree with you : the only shades of
difference between us being three, viz.: —
1. I think you underrate Gladstone’s indisposition towards disestablish-
ment.
2. I think you overrate the improbability ot disestablishment (enormous
as its difficulties would be), when you speak of it as “hardly possible.”
3. Whilst I entirely agree with you that the effects of disestablishment
would be wholly mischievous, and that it ought therefore to be earnestly
deprecated, I rather suspect that I might be brought to admit its necessity
at an earlier stage than yourself; although happily we are as yet very far
from having arrived at that stage. But on the whole I agree to what you say
as to the tendencies of Gladstone’s mind,—the possibilities of party exigencies


leading to a surrender of the Church, —and the impossibility, unless in totally
changed and improbable circumstances, of acquiescing in such a surrender.
And now for my visit to Hawarden.
I found Gladstone in the midst of his pamphlet. With his usual con-
fidence and kindness, he showed to me what he had already written, the morning
after I arrived, and called for criticisms. I made a good many small sugges-
tions, the greater part of which he adopted ; but earnestly begged him to
refrain altogether from the publication, or at all events to take more deliberate
counsel before he took a step the serious consequences of which he did not
appear at all to perceive. No one had up to this time seen the MS., except
Ambrose De Lisle, who, though a most amiable and excellent man, can hardly
say “Bo” to a goose, and certainly cannot say “No” to Mr. Gladstone. So Lord
Acton was telegraphed for, and he came the next evening. His advice, like my
own. was strongly against publication. But it was clear that G. ’s mind was made
up, and it was easy to see that the two moving causes were his recent visit to
Munich, and his annoyance at the manner in which, on the Continent, Ripon’s
secession had been spoken of in connection with himself, —I ought rather to
say that these were the immediate moving causes, for I believe the views
expressed have been long felt by him.
After I had left Hawarden, I wasted some time in writing him a letter, of
which I enclose a copy. It is rather more rhetorical than is perhaps necessary,
but this was intentional; for though, of course, to attempt to argue with him
is only to suggest answers to that subtle brain, I have often known him
influenced by feeling ; and Lord Acton wrote to me after I left Hawarden
that he “was armed at all points but one, I said more than once that I
pleaded not for bishops or for peers, but for poor people, whom it would be made
more difficult to help with chaplains, schools, etc. To this he never gave a
reply until I said ‘. . . plectuntur Achivi,’ when he showed (very copiously)
that Horace did not understand Homer.” I accordingly dwelt a good deal
on this view of the matter. Please return this copy. lam almost ashamed to
ask you to read anything so lengthy, but it conveys fully my own views about
this publication, and I should very much like to know yours. Gladstone
answered me very kindly ; but of course he is not shaken in his convictions.
He told me, however, that when in London, immediately before the pub-
lication, he had consulted one member of his Cabinet, who said “ay
heartily. That one is Cardwell.
I do not at all like, but this is, if you please, most strictly between our-
selves, the influence which Knowles, the Editor of the Contemporary Review ,
seems to be acquiring with him. It is odd, but true, that any clever and not
very scrupulous man who knows how to play upon his weaknesses and does
not hesitate to do so, may, for a short time at all events, gain immense
ascendency over him, and lead him into scrapes from which he may not always
find it easy to extricate himself.
It is curious how little in many ways age and responsibility have altered
him. The impetuous publication of this pamphlet, without counsel and in
spite of entreaty, is in almost every detail the history of the publication of
the Neapolitan letters over again ; and yet the consequences which attended
his impatience of delay in that case might have made most men pause.
I found him quite unable to talk or think of anything except religious or
ecclesiastical questions. A curious little indication of this, and of the odd


way in which one thing at a time fills his vision to the exclusion of all others, was
afforded by his urging me to take advantage of leisure time to write some lives
which he wants written, two of them being those of Stephen Gardiner and
De Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatro and Dean of Windsor, whom he regards
as a sort of “Old Catholic” of the 17th century. 1 I pleaded that the first
literary duty incumbent on me was the completion of the arrangement of my
father’s papers ; a work which could hardly be fully done by any one else.
He replied, rather impatiently, that all that might surely wait—that their
lives were much more important than that of Lord Aberdeen : which may
be true, but which, besides not being altogether kind to say, was beside the
mark, as I have a special obligation in the one case, and have none whatever
that I know of towards the memory of Stephen Gardiner or Antonio de
Dominis. It is odd—kind, affectionate, and at times most considerate as
he is—how he will also at times disregard other people’s feelings altogether, if
they stand in the way of what he desires, and his own do not happen to be
touched. When they are, I know no man who is more impressionable.
I do not think he is quite so determined not to take office again as he was.
He consented to contemplate the possibility of his being once more Prime
Minister. He spoke very strongly as to last year’s ecclesiastical legislation.
Till then he had, he said, regarded disestablishment as a “ disordered dream.”
It had, he thought, been rendered “less nebulous ”by last year’s action. The
thing I most disliked, and remarked with most apprehension in relation to
this subject, was that he had been contemplating the difficulties (the “almost
insuperable difficulties ” he called them) of such a measure in a 'practical
light: saying, e.g ., that the compensation to private patrons could be hardly
less than £13,000,000. When, too, I told him that disestablishment could
never become a practical question in our day unless brought forward by him,
I observed that he did not affect to deny it, nor did he say, ‘‘Then it will
never come in our day.”
I have been at Highclere, and I need hardly say that I am much pleased
with my new chief. He treats one as a gentleman, which his predecessor did
not. I think it probable I shall be asked to undertake the settlement of Fiji,
and if asked I shall probably accept it. There were also some hints of the
Governor-Generalship of the West Indies, which I should prefer. My wife
desires her love to Lady Selborne. I very nearly met Lady Waldegrave the
other day at Wellington College.
Wednesday , November 18.—Went to town with A. J. L. by
early train. Went to see Macmillan. Talked to him and Mr.
G-. Grove about articles for magazine, and book on Seychelles. To
South Europe meeting. Met Alfred Hervey and Rate there.
Got £IOO dividend, but don’t think we shall get much more out
of it. Returned to Ascot by 2.5 train. Read Patterson and
Fronde.
Thursday , November 19.—Dark day. Does the sun never
shine in England ? Wrote letters for Mauritius to Sir A. Phayre
and others. Unpacked books and stowed them away on new
1 The third (to which I had more inclination) was that of Archbishop
Laud.—S.


shelves. A. J. L. heard from Ella—nasty letter. Sat up writ-
ing till late.
Friday , November 20.—Bright, beautiful day. A. J. L. brought
his sketch of Jason and Medea early. I finished letters to Maurice
and went up to town by 12.10 train. To luncheon at Alex.’s, and
then went with him and Caroline to Boehm’s to see the monu-
ment, 1 which I think excellent. Posted my letters for Seychelles
and left those for Maurice at the C.O. Then went down by
4.45 train. Met A. J. L. Examination put off till to-morrow.
On Saturday Charles Ryan came. I called with him at the
Michaels’, where we saw some rather nice things —inter alia , a
leather lotah from North Afghanistan and a blue jug from Madeira
of excellent shape and colour.
I was in town on Monday the 23rd, and at the Athenaeum
met Lord Cardwell, with whom I had a long talk. He approved!
of the pamphlet—was the one ex-colleague referred to, but drove*
me wild by lauding it almost exclusively in a party sense. It|
would consolidate the party —it would atone for Gladstone’s Public
Worship Bill speeches —it would be a pledge that he wouldn’t
do it again, etc. etc. He also said that it was not to be borne
that there should be sixty members of Parliament at the bidding
of the Pope. I observed that the logical deduction from such a
conclusion was, that what could not be borne should be abated,
and the repeal of the Act of 1829 was the only remedy. He only
rejoined that Parliaments were not logical, which is true; but
they are practical, and here is a practical grievance, if there is any
grievance at all. I have recently been reading Froude, and I con-
fess I think these premises would in principle go far to justify
the founding of a system of penal legislation—of branding and
castration—such as he describes with manifest approval; and
which certainly effected its object. Cardwell said a little egg
had been dropped unperceived amid the ritual debates from
which a novus ordo would arise, and, I thought, seemed to con-
template doctrinal revision and consequent schism and disestab-
lishment with pleasure. I went down to Huntercombe. Very
cold, moonlight, frosty night. Slip carriage to Taplow. House
very pretty —in perfect taste and full of pretty things. Hamilton
and Charles Boyle. I rather like Hamilton. He told me a lot
about Ashantee. Nothing very new, however.
On Tuesday I returned home after a long talk with Ella,
who has got into no small mess by making assertions she cannot
prove. Train at Ta,plow an hour late. Letter from Gladstone
about the G. Gordon affair.
1 Of my father.


Friday , November 27.—We went to Milton Court and stayed
there till Monday 30th. Rate ill with a very bad cold. My
old friend, Herbert Waddington. The children rather nice,
Margaret and Francie well-mannered and sensible, Lauchlan a
fine, rather spoiled boy—lda the least attractive, and Enid, the
baby, a mere lump of fat. Got Rachael to walk up the hill to
Ranmore. She drove down again without sufficient wraps and
naturally got a very bad cold.
On our way home on Monday we stopped for luncheon with
Agnes Wickham at Wellington College. On our arrival at Ascot
Rachael went to bed, and had so much headache and fever during
the night as to make me quite uneasy. I have seldom seen
a worse cold than she had for the next few days. On Wednesday
I had to dine in town with Lord Lyttelton, Phillimores, Mrs.
Ford, etc. Mrs. Gladstone came in after dinner and Harry came
to be said goodbye to. He is off for India. I slept at the Alex.’s.
On Thursday I attended a meeting of the Wilberforce House
Committee and then went by order to Lord Carnarvon, who
made me the offer of Fiji. Saw Dr. Johnson and took down the
Memorial to the Pope for signature.
Friday and Saturday. —l stayed at Ascot. On Saturday morn-
ing the announcement appeared in the Times: complimentary. On
Sunday we had the Mission Service at Church. Arthur and I
stayed for Holy Communion. I called on Delane, who is busy
with a new name for Fiji. Ottiwell came over, and so did Louisa
Hamilton, whom we want to persuade to go with us. She walked
from Virginia Water, bag in hand.
From the Rev. C. Kingsley
Eversley Rectory, Sunday. —l say GO and God go with you. I can
write no more. Mrs. Kingsley is very ill.—Your affec,, C. K.
Monday , December 7. —A most lovely day. Louisa Hamilton
and I walked over to Windsor. Ido not think she will go. I
am sorry, for she is just the right sort of person, though a few
years hence I should not care to have her, for she is very far
advanced in her opinions, and it would be somewhat unsafe for
the children. She spoke of a “ service ” which she attended at
which extracts of Confucius, the Vedas, etc. are read. I said
I hoped they did not altogether exclude the Bible, and she told
me pieces of it were also read sometimes! I went up to town
—C.O.—Colnaghi—Athenaeum, etc., and on my return home found


found an invitation waiting for Windsor Castle on Thursday,
which puts off the Blackmoor visit again. Dined at the house.
Pearse dined there.
Thursday , December 10. —Went up to town with Rachael, Lady
Emily Gore, and her niece, by 11.6 train. Saw Capt. Urquhart;
he is rather like Abbey—no great shakes. Chesson and his
aborigines. Dr. Featherstone and Charles Dalrymple and his
boy Willie—a nice lad. To Caroline and thence to Windsor.
Met Lord Carnarvon at the station and went down with him.
We talked a little Fiji; the instructions are already prepared
without my seeing them, which is contrary to promise and rather
displeases me. lam also not quite easy about the personnel.
A carriage was waiting for us at the station and took us up to
the Castle. My rooms were in the tower looking out on the
Round Tower. As dinner was not even nominally till 8.30, I
had plenty of time to write letters. The ways of the Court
have changed, and for the worse. Punctuality has gone, and so
has decorous splendour. We met before dinner in one of the
compartments of the corridor —dined in the Oak room at a round
table , and formed the circle also in the corridor after dinner.
The other guests besides Carnarvon were Count Munster and
his daughter, and Genl. Ponsonby. The Lady was the Duchess
of Atholl, next whom I sat, the Lord, Lord Torrington, and
the Groom in Waiting, Sir E. Commerell, whom I like. The
Queen began by saying it was a long time since she had seen
me —talked a little of Fiji —said I was to call the chief place
Patteson—talked of various relations, and thought John
“ weakly ” —spoke of the article on the Pacific in the Quarterly ,
which she did not know to have been Gladstone’s. When she
retired we went into the Drawing-Room, which she now never
enters. Maids of Honour there and Cowell, Lady Caroline
Barrington, and one or two more. I did not sleep much. It is
many years since I was last here as a guest, and it is impossible
not to feel a certain emotion at revisiting scenes once familiar
now grown strange, and such scenes. Was at early prayers on
Friday and then breakfast in the Oak Room, which was
pleasant. The Queen sent to me to write my name in her book
under the date of my birthday, and an additional message that I
should add “ First Governor of Fiji.” After breakfast, I went
to see the Dean. He has grown very old and shaky. He readily
undertook to speak to the Queen about Mrs. Gordon. I went
to church at St. George’s Chapel. The Queen has grown old,
redder, and her voice, though still sometimes full of its old clear
tone, is often gruff and masculine, and she certainly has more


German accent, which is odd, as I should have thought she j
would have had less.
I noticed that there was a new carpet in the Oak Room, but
which, (though new since my days), has itself had time to get quite
old and shabby. Forgot to say that Princess Beatrice dined with!
us, and that the dinner was simple; boiled chicken, roast beef.!
Went up to town and down to Blackmoor. Lord Selborne met 1
us at the station. We stayed there till Monday. No other
visitors staying there except Miss Walter. Selborne is, I
very apprehensive about disestablishment, and I fear he is right.
His church is handsome, his new clergyman second-rate. We
had a great deal of very interesting conversation, but none worth
chronicling. We engaged to support a Fiji missionary together,!
The house very cold, and not very comfortable, though near
being so. The Queen sent to ask for Rachael’s photograph!
and mine. Col. Grey’s sad death, and dangerous illness of]
Sir George Grey. •
From the Marquess of Salisbury
India Office, December 19, 1874.—My dear Gordon Thank you
sincerely for your very kind letter. lam very anxious to have a talk with
you about the Coolie Question. Will you let me know how long after Christ-
mas you will be disposable for a conference at the India Office ? I must get
from Bouverie a representative of the planters, and then with you and Camp-
bell and perhaps a man from the Colonial Office, we shall he able to clear the
way for presenting to the Indian and still more to the Colonial authorities
definite issues for their decision. Meanwhile we shall, I hope, meet in Arling-
ton Street, or at Hatfield.—Yours sincerely.
From Captain Blunt
Curepipe, November 9, 1874.—My dear Sir—l forward you a couple of
copies of my report about the laws, etc. regarding immigration at Reunion, and
trust that you will approve of it; if you think it worth the trouble, would you
send Mr. Frere one of the copies, as I think he would like to see it ?I am
afraid it is finished in rather a hurry, but I have not had a moment to myself
since I have been here : it will at any rate give the India Office and Govern-
ment some idea of the laws there, and that govern Indian subjects ; the more
we think of it the odder it appears, our having no Consul at either Martin-
ique or Guadeloupe, for in both these places there are as many, if not more,
immigrants from India than in Reunion, and immigration at present is much
more active to them, as they have a regular fund to help towards the expenses.
I add a few remarks that I should have added to the report; if you think
them worthy of notice, please make use of them as you may think best.
I am in hopes this mail will bring me something settled about Seychelles. I
only trust I may, anyhow, be moved out of my present appointment, as lam
sure I shall not be able to last very long in it. I have no news of any sort from
here ; all are in a state of expectation, waiting to see what the new Governor


is like, and what line he takes ; many think it will be as with the man when
the unclean spirit left him. I heard Ward and some others have already
begun to wish you back again. Poor Seed and his wife have both been very
unwell out at Abercrombie; he bears the worrying and bullying from
O’Brien very patiently, but he is getting worn by it, I am afraid. Fleming
returned by the last mail. I have not seen him yet. We have moved over to
the hotel up here, as Mrs. Daly arrived by the mail—it is not very com-
fortable. You have never told me what you wish me to do with Madagascar
cloth, etc. I should be glad if you would do so when you have time to drop
me a line.— \%th —l applied to be allowed pay at Reunion, for the month I
was obliged to remain after Perry arrived—yesterday I got the reply : “ Sorry
they could not give it me, no funds, had better apply to Colonial Office.”
It is rather hard lines to have been done out of a month’s pay at both ends,
and nine months’ Office Allowances. I received Lord Derby’s thanks for the
manner in which I had conducted the Consulate and my annual Report on
Immigration, but I wish he would be a little more liberal in his payments.
I think the India Office might give me something for this Report on the
Laws, etc. ;it was the Marquis of Salisbury who ordered it to be done. I
forgot to say that I sent six copies to the F. 0., six to Calcutta, and six to
Madras. The Commercial Gazette thinks that Lord Carnarvon might have
treated the Port Louis Local Board of Health less cavalierly when abolishing
it, and might have thanked them for what they had done. I, for my part,
think it would have been difficult to have found out what they did do, unless
under Ducray’s Mayorship.
From Inspector O’Connor
Maheburg, November 11, 1874. —Sir —Since your departure from the
Colony, the position of several of the offices in the Police Department has
become almost unbearable, and nothing has been left undone to cause annoy-
ance and trouble. The appointment of Acting Sanitary Guardian for Savanna
excited the jealousy or envy of the head of the department, and daily since
have I been visited with memorandums. Many of the Civil Servants enter-
tained hopes that you would have returned from Seychelles, previous to your
departure from the Colony, but like things which are earnestly desired, they
were doomed to be disappointed. Mr. Seed informs me that he requires leave
to go to the “ Chaussee ” ; however, he is more fortunate than what I am,
for my applications (two) were refused, and I have not attempted a third.
There is only one course open, and that is to be confirmed as Sanitary
Guardian, or be transferred to another department of the Civil Service, for I
fear, if not successful, something may occur to my detriment. My life has
become almost insupportable, and I am informed that I am not to exercise
control over the Police as Sanitary Guardian. I have not done so, but one s
acts are misconstrued. You would confer a deep favour by having my acting
appointment confirmed. Mrs. Daly was obliged to come down from Curepipe
and pay me a visit on her return from England, as I could not possibly
leave Maheburg ; and all this because I will not be a party to what I enter-
tain a strong objection. Wishing you, Lady Gordon, and family every happi-
ness and blessing this world can afford.


From Mr. Fleming
Moka, Mauritius, November 12, 1874.—My dear Sir—l promised to
write to you on my return to Mauritius, and I accordingly do so, though I
fear there is not very much news to send you. I returned by the last mail
and we had a most disagreeable journey hack. In the first place the ship
was very much crowded, what with astronomers from Aden and witnesses
from Seychelles ; and in the second place, as ill luck would have it, we were
caught in a cyclone and had one most uncomfortable night at sea. Captain
Monge was in a great state ; when he saw a cyclone was really approaching he
turned the ship round, but notwithstanding we had very bad weather from
7 p.m. on the Wednesday evening until 1 a.m. the next day. During all
that time the glass continued to fall, and Captain Monge said so long as it did
so he could not tell what we were in for. About 1 a.m. the glass became
steady and the wind changed a little, showing the storm was bending south of
us ; we then stopped steaming and tossed about until 10 o’clock in the morn-
ing, when we again made for our destination. Cyclones at this time of the
year are very rare. I have been told there was one in 1862, which seems to
be the only one known. When we got to Bourbon we were in hopes of having
a day on shore, but it was announced measles existed there, so we were at
once put in quarantine and had the satisfaction of rolling about at anchor for
about twelve hours. We got here on a Tuesday instead of Sunday. Mauritius
seems much the same as ever. Mr. Colin told me he had received the letter
I and Esnouf wrote to you about the working of the Court at Seychelles, I
fear, however, that Esnouf has not taken much interest in the matter. I took
a certain amount of trouble in composing the letter, consulted him about it,
and even gave him a copy of it that he might talk it over on his arrival here.
Mr. Colin now tells me that he appeared to know nothing about it, and said
that though he had signed it he had scarcely read it through. I have, how-
ever, talked the matter over with Mr. Colin, and he promises he will consider
some of suggestions made. I also mentioned to him what a bad condition
the Civil Status books are in at Mahe, and he says he will also inquire into
that matter. I am not sorry to be back, as I found Seychelles very hot and
dull, but the work there I liked, and I shall always take an interest in a
place which I think is well deserving of it. I hope, for the good of Seychelles,
that Havelock will be confirmed; he is, I think, just the man for the post.
Before I left he and Brooks had a somewhat disagreeable correspondence
about a very small matter. I did my best to calm the troubled waters, and
hope I succeeded. I tried to explain to Brooks that whatever our private
opinions may be, the inferior official must always give in to the superior. He
was rather reluctant to look upon the matter in that light, but I trust made
up his mind to do so. Havelock seemed to me to have carried on the corre-
spondence with much tact and civility. Mr. Ellis returned here by the
September mail. The Chief Judge has, however, changed his mind about
going away and does not leave for some months. I saw Dr. Reid a few days
ago ; he tells me nothing has as yet been done about the Hospital Inquiry. I
fancy the best thing now is to let matters remain quiet. lam still at Moka,
but how long I shall remain I do not know. Mr. Colin hinted to me the
other day that Mr. Rouillard would be back before long, and would of course
resume his place in town, when Mr. Didier would come back here. I shall be


sorry to leave for any other district, but I suppose such cannot be helped.
Mrs. Daly came back by the mail; I was very glad to find some one I knew
as a fellow-passenger from Mahe.
From Mr. Daly
Maheburg, November 12, 1874.—My dear Sir—We are living in a period
of great expectations and small events, so that I hardly know how I can
convey to you any news of interest. I can’t feel sure whether you will
prefer to forget or to be reminded of all the little affairs of this island. I am
hoping by next mail to have a reply to my letter which conveyed the reply
to Mr. Piddington’s Petition, and also to hear how Lord Carnarvon has
disposed of the matter. For the past two months I have been let alone, and I
have made it my study to give no dne a just reason for finding fault with me
in any way. Blunt and Mrs. Blunt shared my house in the gardens for some
weeks, and now, since the 27th ult., I am happy to say, Mrs. Daly and my
little girl have also been with me, and I feel far happier and better than I have
been for a long time. In public matters Mr. Colin is the only person who is
doing anything, and he seems to have a mania for tinkering legislation. Every-
thing is in suspense. Julyan’s report, the Commissioners’ Report, and Sir A.
Phayre, all said to be immediately coming, are the excuses for every delay.
During the past month I presented at a meeting in this Court-house the
rewards of the Board of Trade and the medals of the Royal Humane Society
to Nadul and his companions. The whole affair gave great satisfaction, and
it was fully recognised as being due to you. Our memorial is being erected
opposite to the railway station. It will be neither elegant nor grand, but,
like our judges, may possibly be “remarkable.” Although Mr. Ward threat-
ened to deprive me of my free railway ticket, and to have rent, for Mr.
Horne’s house deducted from my pay, nothing has been done. The Auditor-
General, they say, stays at home on perpetual leave. Sir C. Shand has put
off his departure until March. He is so used to postponements that it is
quite natural ; besides, he does not think that he should be absent when the
Governor arrives. Miss Colin was married to Dr. Rogers on the 28th ult.,
and three hundred people were invited. Dr. Bolton’s case was before the
Executive last week ; the Secretary of State not only confirmed the sentence,
but directed further inquiry as to the former derelictions of duty which I
pointed out. I and Mr. Ooms have given our evidence, and his falsification
of the prison register is fully proved, I think. Lord Bury, and the Duke of
Ediubro’s Equerry, Haig, have received kind replies from Lord Carnarvon
in answer to their applications in my favour. I was tempted at one time
to write to Lord C. urging, on the evidence of that Piddington Petition,
that it was impossible to withstand the sinister influence of the whole of a
dominant class in a community like this, in such a position as mine, when
once an outcry was raised, and pointing out that, for simply trying to do
my duty with independence, I had been and would be treated only with
persecution and vengeance. But I felt that I might safely leave it to you
and my friends, and the effect of “The Report,” to let it be clearly seen
how unfair it is to leave subordinate officers to the mercy of such people
as we have here. I do long and pray so for a change, and yet lam so
frightened that I may be offered something which I cannot accept for want


of means to remove and inability to transfer my liability to another quarter.
I have already paid £4OO to the Oriental Bank, and I hope to be able to
continue to do so at the same rate ; but I may lose my appointment as Poor
Law Commissioner and be charged with rent and travelling expenses next
year, so that my progress will be slower. If anything should offer in another
colony, do you think I could arrange in England to set aside part of my pay
to be applied through the Crown Agents to pay what I owe here ? If I could
not make such an arrangement a transfer to even a better place elsewhere
would be beyond my reach. You know how anxious lam to leave here, and
what good reasons I have to wish it, and I am sure Lord C., if disposed to be
kind, will feel the justice of my request. lam surrounded by a host of
enemies, and if it were in their power they would injure and make me
miserable to such an extent as to drive me out of the Colony. Why should
they at the Colonial Office regard me only as a candidate for a law appoint-
ment ? My unfortunate want of qualification as an English Barrister, and
the very limited number of those appointments, make my chances in that
direction so much less. However, I feel sure that you will not overlook any
opportunity of giving me a helping hand. lam very happy to say that Mrs.
Daly has returned in much better health. Her return was managed only by
the aid of kind relatives in Canada. My little girl is very strong and well.
We all like Curepipe air and climate very much, and if we can but remain
here Ido not fear so much for the summer. Our chief friends here are the
Blunts and Gorries. We have not had any other visitors excepting Knollys.
Mrs. Daly is able to take a good long walk with me now every day on the
arrival of the train, and altogether our life is very quiet and happy.
My district is very peaceable, and I have now no difficulty in getting all
work done without delays and postponements. I hear that Mr. Messiter is
not coming back until May, so I suppose I will have the same office at least
for that period. Colonel O’Brien is still as petty and spiteful and foolish as
before to all his officers whom he thought you had treated with any favour.
Seed and O’Connor he never lets alone. Mr. Delamare he is less hard upon ;
this last gentleman has just announced his intention to marry a Miss Cowen
of Mapou.
From Dr. MacGregor
Civil Hospital, Mauritius, November 13, 1874. —My dear Sir —I had
your note by last mail. With regard to the question contained therein,
permit me, in the first place, to offer you my sincere thanks for your remem-
brance of me. I shall be most happy to accept your conditions, and pledge
myself to accompany you, to I know not where, nor what to do. I should be
ready to leave this at any time on a month’s warning, and if I return to
Seychelles I could leave in less if necessary. The long projected trial from
Seychelles will be finished to-day, the fourth day of the case, so that I should
return to Seychelles to-day, but I am summoned to remain in Mauritius on
account of two other cases to be tried before the assizes ; but as I have not
been appointed -to the Asylum, I shall return to Seychelles next mail, if not
appointed before that time. Mr. Newton and Dr. Reid are very anxious
that I should be appointed Superintendent of the Civil Hospital, and I
believe have written to Sir Penrose Julyan on the subject, but that shall


not interfere with my engagement to accompany you, should I be called upon
to do so.
The Lord Bishop is in great tribulation that I am not returning immediately
to Seychelles, as he wishes to have his schools examined immediately. He
now confesses that his schools in Seychelles are in a most deplorable condition,
and most mighty things are to be done now. His Lordship is good enough
to say that I, and I alone, am qualified to examine the schools, and that he
has no confidence in any other person in Seychelles, not even in Mr. Barrow,
with whom he used to dine familiarly. His Lordship gave me the cold
shoulder ever after we met at Reduit until the arrival of last mail, but soon
after that came His Lordship himself to call, and immediately after an
invitation to dinner, which unfortunately my hospital duties compelled me
to decline. He is to propose Mr. Barrow as inspector merely as the best of a
bad lot. lam very glad to hear that you did not forget my recommendations
about the African diets, and about the La Digue pass. Unfortunately nothing
was done for a cemetery for Pere Louis, but I am in hopes that Captain Have-
lock may manage that. We have all got rid of the fever now.
From Captain Havelock
Seychelles, November 16, 1874.—My dear Sir —The Godavery, with the
new Governor on board, arrived yesterday. Sir Arthur Phayre and his party
spent some hours on shore and dined with us. As he was anxious to arrive
at Mauritius on Saturday, if possible, Captain Mortemard started the same
night. I like the Governor. He is an excellent specimen of the good old-
fashioned Indian, rather of the Colonel Newcome type. He did not seem to
think it at all a bore to be crowded into a boat with Mrs. Grattan, her babies
and her nurses. He appears inclined to be pleased with everything and every-
body. I am afraid the people at Mauritius will, until he finds them out, be
impertinent and take liberties, and so spoil him. The Board of C. C. s presented
him with an address ; a deputation of the inhabitants waited upon him and
made him a speech ; Mr. Cheyron harangued him at great length about the
mortgage office ; I talked to him of our want of a Bank, of the abominations
of the Civil Status Ordinance, and about the Conscience Clause, and Educa-
tion in general. In short, we bored him as much as the limited time and
our limited appliances would admit of. He showed a tendency to agree with
most things that were said, but carefully avoided committing himself to any
decided opinions. By his frequent reference to “ 'private enterprise ” and
“public spirit,” it is plain that he does not know that the Creoles of these
parts look to the Government to do everything for them, and never can or
will do anything for themselves. I did not take much to the Aide-de-Camp
or the Aide-de-Campess. The latter is a lady from the city of Dublin, where
society divides itself into three degrees of excellence, distinguished as cream ,
milk , and butter-milk. I tried her in the two first degrees, but without
success, so I did not pursue the experiment further. But she is very good-
natured and jolly. If she is humble, and allows herself to be patronised,
I think she will get on very well at Mauritius. Major speaks
French. The Governor does not, which is a great pity ; moreover, he under-
stands it but little.
I thank you very much for your letter of the 22nd October. I cannot
E


deny that I am disappointed by Lord Carnarvon’s decision not to confirm me,
though I quite see the force of his reasons. I suppose I ought to feel very
grateful to him for having allowed me to hold the acting appointment for so
long. I have already been in occupation nearly eight months, and I suppose
I can hardly look for my successor’s arrival before January. I have gained
a great deal of most useful knowledge and experience since I have been here,
I have derived much pleasure and interest from my work, and I have acquired
your good opinion and your approbation, and, believe me, my dear Sir Arthur
Gordon, I do value most highly your good opinion and your approbation, on
grounds quite apart from those of possible advantage to myself. My wife
and I have been pondering over a hope you express that you may have us
both with you somewhere some of these days. Such an arrangement would
most completely console us for the loss of Seychelles. During the last month
I have been busy making the Estimates for next year ; they are now before
the Board. If I can, I will send you a copy of them, and of my Minute.
There is nothing very imaginative in them ; the increase of the police force
and the employment of one of the Corporals as a Forest Ranger are the two
most salient points. I regret that the narrow margin that was left after
satisfying all the unelastic demands precludes a larger vote for Roads and
Bridges. My idea is to ask leave to appropriate a portion of the accumulated
surpluses of past years, which will, when the present year’s accounts are
closed, amount to more than two thousand pounds, for public works. I
would propose to establish a Harbour-light at St. Anne’s, to put up an
inexpensive beacon at Flat Island, and to supplement the vote for Roads and
Bridges. lam not yet able to give you a report of the working of the Regula-
tion for the Registry of Leases and Servants. I have not yet received the
printed copies, but I hope I may do so by the mail due to-morrow. I shall
then immediately put them (the Regulations) into active operation. lam
preparing an explanatory Memo for the benefit of the Wardens. lam really
very sanguine of the result of these Regulations. The Board have fixed the
fee to be paid in the case of land, etc. being let for other consideration than
that of money, at £1 for the first acre, and ss. extra for every additional half
acre or portion of half an acre. There was quite a warm discussion on this
matter when it was brought before the Board. One non-official member
strongly opposed such a high rate of fee, the other two were bent on fixing it
so high as to make it practically prohibitive,—which it is of course meant to
be. The Regulation gives the C.C.C. power to remit the fee. I should be
very glad to see the Board take more real interest in their work. I think
they are improving ; Fleming showed them a good example. In unimportant
points I have more than once let the non-official members have their own
way, when that way was not quite my own, in order that they may be
dissuaded from believing that they are mere dummies, and that their
opinions and votes are of no value. It is hoped that the Savings Bank
may be started next year. lam trying to compass some gentle means of
pressing Africans to put their wages, or rather a portion of them, into the
Savings Bank. The only other Regulations I have in mind are—revision of
the Boundaries of the Wards, Dog Tax, Postage on ship letters, and Protection
of the Caret (Tortoise-shell producing Turtle). The Chaussee at the
Cascades has been lately tried by very heavy rains, and has, stood well. They
are still at work on the bit of road between the cascades and the end of the


road out of the town. Pointe la Rue will not be reached for a long time to
come. I have started a perambulating gang for cleaning and mending the
roads ; they find ample occupation, now that the heavy rains have set in.
The Cemetery is beginning to look less savage, and is to be opened to the
public on New Year’s Day. The outline of the cross-head of the pier can now
be traced, —lumps of rock and coral have begun to show above the water
along its projected line. Mr. Mann has not yet been allowed to come, so the
water-works are in abeyance. They are working at the pass in the reef at
La Digue ; Mr. Cauvin has promised that it shall be finished at the end of
this month, so I am in hopes it may be not later than January. I think I
told you in my last letter that there was a prospect of a storm between Brooks
and myself. lam glad to say it has quite blown over. I think Brooks
saw the foolish and wrong position he had got into, for he pocketed without
remark the snub I administered by returning him his objectionable letter.
I am sorry to say a complaint has been made against him, through Cheyron’s
agency, to the Secretary of State, for carrying on mercantile business and
monopolising the coal trade, to the prejudice of regular merchants. Lord
Carnarvon does not approve, and has ordered investigations and reports to be
made. This will give me some rather disagreeable work. Mr. Barrow is
going on well; he has adopted apparently a more suitable line of conduct,
and I think he does his proper and legitimate work much better than formerly.
Sir Arthur Phayre informed me that he was to be judged on the merits of his
performances since he has been here, and directed me to support him in the
event of any attempt being made to injure him by the use of a knowledge of
his antecedents. I have never acknowledged to him that I know his history,
but of course he knows that I know it. I have let him feel that he is quite
safe. I saw Mr. Dick on board of the steamer on his way home. He told
me he thought his Insurance Company would make good the chest deficiency
rather than stand a law-suit about it. I have had the chest furnished with
two extra locks, and have handed it and its contents to a Treasure Committee.
I have thus relieved myself of a good deal of disagreeable responsibility, and
shall be saved the trouble of counting the money into the hands of my
successor.
I have not made any distant excursions during the last month. As soon
as we have a fair chance of two or three fine days, I am determined to go to
Port Glau. There are “Tourterelles rouges” to be found at Isle Marianne :
they are fairly numerous. Mr. Calais has at last relented about his big
tortoise {(he gigantic one I mean) and will sell it for £ [sic]. Several others,
very large, though smaller than that one, can be bought for from £4 to £B.
I will make inquiries about full-grown hinged tortoises. Your good fortune
with the pigeons and parrots encourages one to send some specimens of the
Pie chanteuse, but at this time of the year I fear they would stand a poor
chance. lam writing to the Secretary of the Zoological Society about the
gigantic tortoise. Ido not feel sure that he is the right person to address,
but if he is not, I daresay he will kindly send my letter to the proper function-
ary. I send you at last some photographs. lam afraid you will be dis-
appointed with them, for they certainly do not do justice to the places they
are meant to represent. There are several you have not asked for, but still
I think you might like to have them. I am sorry to say I have not yet got
Mr. Mouliuie over the Barbaron. He is a very difficult person to get up a
51
I
FIJI


hill, but with the assistance of the mules, I have no doubt I shall be able to
manage it in time. I think I can safely promise you the views of the town
and Trois Freres from Barrow’s Verandah. Some of the people here are so
good as to say that they like me. A proposal made by Cheyron and Lemar-
chand would, I think, amuse you. It was to address a petition to the Secretary
of State praying him to appoint me to be C.C.C., and at the same time to offer,
either by subscription or by voluntary payment of an additional tax, to augment
my salary, if any further inducement to accept the office should be required
by me. The most amusing part of it was, that this proposition was gravely
communicated to me , and I think their feelings were rather hurt by my not
warm reception of it. I have been reading for the second time Mr. Keate’s
correspondence during the time he was C.C. here. He must have been a
decidedly clever man, and he worked hard, but all his talents and all his hard
work did not produce the slightest result. His pathetic dabit Deus his
quoque finem , at the end of his second year’s correspondence speaks volumes.
I have just had time to glance at Gladstone’s article on ‘ ‘ Ritualism.” It is easy
to criticise it, as the Times has found out, much to its delight. In the anti-
Roman passage assertions are made, which I certainly should not believe
except on such high authority as that of Gladstone. How has Rome in the
19th century “substituted for the proud boast of semper eadem a policy of
violence and change of faith ” ? Has the repudiation of modern thought and
ancient history appeared for the first time or even in an increased degree during
the present century ? We are living just now in a delicious smell, the Sang-
dragon tree being in blossom. The grass is really looking well; the lawn-
mower and the heavy rain between them have quite restored it. My little
daughter has greatly improved since you Saw her ; her hair has grown a good
deal, and she has made great strides in intelligence. To my wife she is an
inexhaustible source of interest and amusement. I have not seen Mrs. Wales.
She has returned to Mauritius, but I did not know of her being on board the
steamer at the time she passed. Nothing has been done about the tomb. I
must plead guilty to having forgotten your precise wishes on the subject. If
you would kindly repeat them I will do all I can to get them carried out.
Strange to say we have not heard a word from the Frankly ns since they
left. I cannot help feeling a little anxious about them, for they promised to
write from Pointe de Galle and from Hong-Kong, and there has been time to
have heard from the latter place. My wife sends her kind regards to Lady
Gordon, and will answer her kind letter by the next mail.
I have forgotten to give you one little bit of gossip ; Mr. Vaudin is likely
to be removed to Mauritius. The Bishop is trying to get some one from Eng-
land to succeed him ! ! !
Another piece of news : the Consul at Zanzibar is so perfectly satisfied
with the arrangements made here for the protection and proper treatment of
Africans, as reported to him by me, that he has given instructions to all of
H.M.’s cruisers in Madagascar waters to bring to Mahe any slaves they may
rescue. Archdeacon Hobbs is coming here by the mail, armed with full
powers by the Bishop to start a school for little Africans. I forgot to mention
that I could not get much enthusiasm out of Sir Arthur Phayre relative to the
beauty of the Seychelles. The A.D.C. remarked that it was like the Cape!!
Just about as much alike as the Alhambra and the Escurial. I feel conscious
of having written you a very stupid letter, and a most wearisomely long


one. You will perceive that I was preparing to close it two or three pages
back.
P.S. —I have not sent my letter to the Secretary of the Zoological Society,
as it occurred to me that he might think I was chaffing him, or perhaps trying
to do a profitable stroke of business. I shall be very glad to act on any wishes
that either you or he may express with regard to the gigantic tortoise.
P.P.S. —I forgot to mention that we had heard from the Franklyns: they
had reached Pointe de Galle all right, but unfortunately too late to catch the
steamer for Hong-Kong. I think they rather enjoyed their detention, though,
of course, they deplored the expense. The rest of their journey will be both
pleasanter and easier. Mr. Antelme did not turn up by this last mail. I
have further proof that Mr. Coles, the man who came to survey the Seychelles
Bank for the Telegraph, was predetermined to report against this poor place.
Before he left Bourbon on his way here, he announced publicly that it was
settled that the line was to start from Pointe de Galle instead of Aden. I
wish something could be done to upset him !
We returned on Monday to Ascot. The Rates came to us
on Saturday.
On Tuesday and Wednesday the 22nd and 23rd I had inter-
views with Herbert and Carnarvon, which settled my Fiji busi-
ness, and on the Wednesday we went to Huntercombe for one
night. On our return on Christmas Eve we found Sir John very
seriously ill—congestion of lungs and general failure. On Christ-
mas day, just before Church, Pearse helped me to get a nurse
for him. During the following week he improved slowly.
Charles and Jane came on Saturday. I walked over to Windsor
on Sunday to get some turtle soup for Sir John —a dreadful cold
slippery walk, much of it in the dark. Weather of almost un-
exampled severity.
Sir John went on improving. Jane and Charles went on
Saturday 2nd. On Sunday 3rd the weather changed. That
night I fell ill and spent the next week in bed; at first with
violent fever, then slight congestion of the lungs. As I got
better Jack fell ill with what turned out to be scarlatina. On?
the last day of the year Alphonso XII. became King of Spain, a
matter in which I took much interest.
On Friday 15th I was well enough to go up again to town.
I saw Manning for the first time since his return from Rome :
had a conversation with Herbert, and wrote to Gladstone on his
retirement from the leadership. He replied, “ Your letter grati-
fied me much, and I wished to answer it at once ; but my work
has been utterly beyond me in hand and time. Speaking
generally, all friends not official or political approve my recent
proceedings. The others commonly, but not universally, lean the


other way. My polemical affair is quite an exception to the
general course of my life and thoughts, and it was far from my
desires. At the same time lam perfectly convinced that it is
impossible to defend Christianity from the standing ground of
Vaticanism, on account of the political elements involved in it,
and its deadly hostility to the inward, even more than the out-
ward, freedom of man. Without Luther, I know not what woulJ
have become of the Church of Alexander 'VI. and Leo X., and
the protesting German professors are now the best friends of the
Church of Pius IX., who warn it of its sins, and strive to dispel
its slumbers. But the work I had marked out for myself was
the positive work to which you refer. This controversy will very
soon be over. The Gordon case is indeed extraordinary. I
never thought I should live to see a memorial of four Anglicans to
the Pope, imploring him to exercise matrimonial jurisdiction in
Great Britain. I should have supposed that references such as
that already made in Macmillan for December would be the very
best means of promoting Mrs. Gordon’s case at Rome, and far more
efficacious, though much cheaper than the memorial. I should
like this point to be considered with reference to the intention I
announced to you. At the same time her interests in the matter
and those of her children are, as you say, so very grave, that I
should be loath to constitute myself the judge of them. I keep
the memorial, as you permit me, and return all the other papers,
but I have kept a copy of part of the extract. The great object!
of all papalism seems to be to avoid establishing clearly any
principle, either strict or lax, and under the name of regard to
special circumstances to keep absolute power in its own hands.”
On Monday 25th I went to town again for a meeting at thd
India Office on Immigration. Sir G. Campbell, Malet, Mr.
Lubbock, Hill, and Lord Salisbury himself. We were fairly
harmonious. I stayed at Alex.’s—Caroline seemed in low spirits.
She showed me Lord Pembroke’s strange letters —clever—but
rather shallow —and very sad. “ Roots ” quotha. Sprouts I call
them.
Jamieson came down one Sunday, saw Cosmo and settled
with him. The Gordon case went on slowly. On Monday I got
a postcard from Gladstone with this warning:—
Un seul mot. J’ai aujourd’hui de sures nouvelles que le Macmillan de
Fevrier va paraitre la semaine prochaine (on m’a dit Lundi), et que s’y trou-
vera un opuscule ou lettre sur la matiere la plus pressee de nos dernieres
lettres.
and a few words about Sir John. I rushed off to Macmillan,
and after a stormy battle with Grove, and a reference and visit


to the Dean of Westminster, got the passage modified. Mac-
millan behaved capitally throughout.
Lady Carnarvon died on Monday 25th —a sad event. Sadder
to me, however, was the death of Kingsley, who expired on
Saturday 23rd. We had heard frequently from Rose and the
curate, and had somehow hoped on to the last, even against
hope.
Thursday , January 28.—Kingsley’s funeral. I went by the
12.13 train and got into a carriage with the Dean [Stanley],
Drove, Macmillan, and Henry Kingsley and his wife. From
Wokingham we drove in an open fly. Day dull, calm, and chilly.
The funeral was very nice and very Christian—perfectly simple.
The two girls and the boy followed the coffin. The Dean and
the Bishop of Winchester read the service. The churchyard was
full of the parishioners, much affected, and not only parishioners
were there, but a band of gipsies. The grave was under a bough
of one of the great fir-trees. Mrs. Kingsley’s calm and com-
posure are wonderful. She sent me by Mrs. Max Muller a book
in which she had herself written that it was in memory of the
day, and sent me also—which I think touched me more—his
Trinidad cutlass. Such strange thoughtfulness at such a time •
I saw him before' the coffin was closed, and am glad I did so,
for the face was noble. All the earthliness had passed away;
calm and colourless, its grand features bore no stain, and so I
doubt not it is with his spirit. 1 Rose too bears up wonderfully.
Seeing me she walked across the hall and shook hands with me,
sending her love to Rachael. I came back with Mr. Rothery,
and as we were much too soon at Wokingham, we went to
1 “Never shall I forget the moment when for the last time I gazed upon
the manly features of Charles Kingsley —features which Death had rendered
calm, grand, sublime. The constant struggle that in life seemed to allow no
rest to his expression, the spirit, like a caged lion shaking the bars of his
prison, the mind striving for utterance, the soul wearying for loving response,
—all that was over. There remained only the satisfied expression of triumph
and peace, as of a soldier who had fought a good fight, and who, while sink-
ing into the stillness of the slumber of death, listens to the distant sounds of
music, and to the shouts of victory. One saw the ideal man as Nature had
meant him to be, and one felt that there is no greater sculptor than Death.”
—Max Muller, in Preface to The Roman and the Teuton .


look at Walter’s church, and as it chanced arrived just in time
for service, which over, we went down to the train and came
back as far as Ascot with the Dean.
Lord Russell has written a book of Recollections, in which
there are sentences about my father, which induced me to write
him a long letter. 1 Of this Gladstone says :
Your letter to Lord Russell is, I must say, a masterly statement and a
terrible exposure. I rather infer from your expressions that you mean me to
keep this copy. I shall gladly do so, but shall return it if you have occasion
for it. # I think that in the closing passage you do a little more than justice
to Lord Russell’s comparative reputation. It is true that much more time
was employed in building it up ; but then what pains he has taken to pull it
down, and this in how many ways and for how many years ! But the
time of the Aberdeen Government is the saddest blot upon the reputation
of one who is, after all, a great patriot, an eminent statesman, and a good
man.
From Lieutenant Knollys, 32nd Regiment
Maheburg, December 10. —I received the ring you so kindly sent me by
last mail. In thanking you for it I need hardly say how pleased lam to have
it, or how much I shall always value it as something more than a memento
from you. I shall always hope to be with you again some day, as you are so
kind as to say that you will try for me if you go elsewhere.
Sir Arthur Phayre arrived by the last mail. We had everything ready to
give him an official landing, but he refused it. However, he afterwards said
that he would have the Guard of Honour as it was there, and it consequently
became a public landing. He was sworn in about an hour afterwards and then
went to Reduit, where we had things ready for him. He held, a Levee three
days afterwards, which was very crowded, but a good many people were
away who ought to have been there. I stayed at Reduit for four or five days
to put the A.D.C. in the way of different matters, or rather, I should say, Sir
Arthur Phayre, for he wanted to know the most of the two. It does not yet
appear how Mrs. will get on with the people here. She seems
determined to have society of some sort (I fancy she is more particular about
the quantity than the quality), and I expect she will eventually fall into the
hands of Mrs. Ferguson and Co. I like the A.D.C., but he seems rather slow
to perform double duties. He is to have £4OO a year, so the saving to the
Government is not very great. They are already talking about balls, but they
can hardly venture on them in the hot season. The whole of the gardeners
1 Printed as an appendix in Kinglake’s History of the Crimean War.


at Reduit and other items for the maintenance of the grounds, etc., are to be
cut off, and the place kept up by the Governor. I expect that this, as well as
most of the rest of Sir P. Julyan’s report, will be very unpopular. It has only
as yet been seen by two or three people, and the papers are still uncertain
whether it has arrived. Sir Arthur Phayre seems determined to know every-
thing down to the smallest items, and does not appear likely to require a Prime
Minister, or to listen to everything that is told him. I send the second bill
of exchange, the bank are sending the first, for the money you left here.
There is no prospect of the rate getting lower till next crop, i.e. about nine
months hence, and I can discover no other means of sending it. The rate
has been at 9 and is now at 8 per cent at ninety days. Had I not thought
that the rate would go down I should have sent it immediately on my arrival
here. I also send an account of the money I have spent for you here ; the only
thing left is the wine, which has been at the auctioneers for nearly two months,
but has not yet been sold ; I will send the result as soon as I get it. I have
not been to Flacq yet, but I will have the photographs done. There is a new
man, whom they say is very good. lam very sorry that Havelock’s chances
of confirmation are so bad ; he will be a great loss to Seychelles. I cannot say
that I like Mauritius any better; three days perpetual rain in a leaky house
are not pleasant. I have ordered Adolphe to send you a Commercial by each
mail, as I am unable to see about it myself. The papers since my return have
been pretty quiet; their great point is that you could not have the Thetis
to bring you down here, which is all the more absurd that she has come here
after all to dock. My paper is so wet that I can hardly write.
From Captain Havelock
Seychelles, December 16, 1874. —My dear Sir —The Dupleix , arriving
yesterday afternoon, two days behind time, brought me your kind letter
of November 19 and 20. I cannot sufficiently thank you for your kind
efforts in my behalf. While fully acknowledging the justice of Lord Carnar-
von’s arguments as to previous services, I cannot help thinking that in this
particular case, for obvious reasons, your recommendation should be allowed
to carry immense weight with it. If you do go to Fiji, and if you think I can
be of any use to you there, there is nothing that I should like better. We
have at last paid our visit to Port Glau, and were very fortunate in the
weather. It was most unusually clear ; Silhouette, without a cloud on it,
looked like a great mass of lapis lazuli. The coast views are lovely, but it
was Silhouette as seen from Cape Ternay that pleased us most. It is unlike
anything else here. Mr. Houareau received us most kindly; we slept in
golden beds and were fed on the fat of the land. We were allowed the un-
usual privilege of seeing some of the ladies of the family, among them two
Miss Houareaus, sisters of our host, the most strangely silent people I have
ever met. I liked Mr. Houareau ;he did not catechise me as to whether we
were going to leave or stay, or express regret at our approaching departure, or
tell me how and where I ought to make roads, the line generally pursued by
most of our friends here, lam sorry to say I have no fresh photographs to
send by this post. Perhaps you will not regret it much after having seen the
specimens of Moulinie’s art I sent last time. You shall have all those you
have asked for, and the new fibre factory also. This is rather a hideous


building, so perhaps Moulinie may succeed in making it look handsome. The
machinery for manufacturing fibre was put in motion for the first time
yesterday. Mr. Pallu de la Barriere is anxious to extend his original plan of
operations, and has asked for more land on which to construct buildings. I
should be very glad if I could see the road over Pointe la Rue finished before I
leave, but the work goes on so very slowly on account of the great quantity of
blasting that is necessary, that I almost despair of it. The Barbaron road has
been a good deal damaged by the heavy rains we have had lately, lam obliged
to send a special gang to repair it, the perambulating gang not being strong
enough. The Land Regulations are gradually coming into operation, and are
almost universally approved of, even by the very landowners whom they most
affect. An unfortunate oversight in the framing of the Registration of Leases
Regulation has necessitated a suspension of its full action. It is worded in
the future tense, and therefore does not legally apply to arrangements or agree-
ments made before the date on which it came into force, there being no clause
to give it retrospective action. The Board are remedying this defect, and the
amended Regulation will, I hope, be approved and published early in February.
The delay thus caused has really become necessary for other reasons. The
effect of the clause exacting the payment of a fee by the proprietor in the
case of land let out for other consideration than that of money has been far
greater, I imagine, than was ever anticipated, showing how great is the evil
it was meant to check. The police having put on the screw rather sharply
about a fortnight ago in the case of two or three notorious proprietors, the
result was curious. Mr. Rosemond Gouthier from North West Bay, with a
following of about forty Africans, male and female, old and young, some
robust and active, others diseased, lame, or blind, presented himself at my
office. He informed me that these were a few of the Africans living on his
estate on the moitU-moitU system (that there were a hundred and fifty
altogether), that he would not pay the fee for a single one of them, and
that consequently if the law was rigidly insisted on, he should turn them
off his land at once. Further, that he would not at all regret doing so, as
they stole from him, from one another, and from the neighbours ; that he
considered the moitU-moitU system a very bad one, but that it had been in
existence ever since the emancipation, that he had found it on his land when
he bought it, but that he had never been able to get rid of it, etc; he, how-
ever, represented in his tenants’ favour, that they had planted certain crops
which he considered they ought to be allowed to reap before being turned
adrift. I then gave audience to the forty Africans themselves, who simulta-
neously implored me to allow them to remain till they could reap their stand-
ing crops. The scene was curious, and reminded me a little of one of Lever’s
descriptions of interviews between agents and tenants in the west of Ireland.
Hearing that this Gouthier deputation was only one of many, and having just
discovered the flaw in the Regulation, I thought it prudent to let it be under-
stood that prosecutions would be suspended until a little time had been given
for reaping crops and making other plans and arrangements. Meanwhile all
other conditions of the Regulation are in full force. They will be of incalcul-
able benefit, I am certain, but a good deal of care and discrimination will be
required to avoid great hardship in many cases. In time, things doubtless
will find their own level, but it is of course impossible to substitute at once a
new order of things for a system that is so old and apparently so widespread


as the moitU-moitU arrangement. I fear there will be very few, at any rate
at first, who will hire land for a money consideration ; at present there are
hardly any that do. Our Regulations are in future to be printed. There has
been great delay in printing the recent ones for 1874. I will send you copies
as soon as I receive them. During the last month the Board have passed the
estimates for next year in the form in which I transmitted it to you by the last
mail. They have also been considering the change of the boundaries of the
Wards. On this subject Mr. Lemarchand made me very cross, by inveighing
against the Ward system—a system that he helped to introduce less than two
years ago, and which has hardly had any trial at all yet. Of course he was
snubbed. The Council at Mauritius have flatly declined to sanction our Water-
work Loan from the Savings Bank funds. Our credit balance at the end of
this year will amount to more than £3OOO. I have written to ask leave to pay
for the Water-supply works from this balance, and to give up the loan. I
enclose a minute read by me to the Board on the subject. On the subject of
the schools I must give you one amusing extract from a letter of the Bishop’s.
He says: —“I am anxious at once to state, at the request of the S.P.G.
Committee here, that now that Earl Carnarvon has not seen his way clear to
grant their request in respect of modifying the new school regulation, they
are driven to try its working. They ask me to request you to arrange for the
examination of their schools as soon as possible, so that they may at least not
forfeit the current year’s grants.” The way in which the matter is put is
delightful. Lord Carnarvon “ cannot see his way clear” ; and S.P.G. Com-
mittee, not the Bishop, “are driven to try” the working of the new Regulation.
Then again the modesty of the implied request that their schools, examined
in December, should have a whole year’s share of grants !
I have examined the schools myself; a more disgraceful exhibition I have
never seen—out of nearly one hundred children, only three could do the
simplest form of multiplication sum. I cannot suggest that the Board should
recommend more than a six weeks’ proportion of grant, and as I have been
obliged to put the teachers in the lowest class, and the proficiency money is
next to nil, the amount will not be large.
The Convent school is getting on capitally ; the scholars have increased by
fifty since I came here ; they are arranging for a new dormitory, in addition
to the one at the opening of which you assisted. I have been using all the
inducement and persuasion I could think of to get the school at Anse Royale
opened before I leave. They cannot spare any of the regular sisters, but they
have promised me that it shall be opened in January under the temporary
charge of a secular teacher, pending the arrival of two sisters about the month
of April. The sisters for the hospital have never turned up ; they are now
promised for the month of April. MacGregor does not seem charmed by the
prospect of taking charge of the Lunatic Asylum. He asked me if, in the
event of his return to Seychelles, he would receive the £2OO per annum laid
down in the Order in Council as salary for the Justice of the Peace, in addition
to all his other emoluments. I told him that I should certainly not re-
commend it. I think he will accept the Lunatic Asylum, in which case Seed
would make an excellent Inspector of Africans, etc. If they thought he wanted
to get away from Mauritius, perhaps they would not let him come ! You ask
me why I did not get rid of Cauvin, the tide-waiter. You told me when you
left that he was to be suspended and dismissed, but his case had not then


been heard throughout. In his defence he flatly denied a part of the charge
brought against him by Mr. Davidson ; the result of the inquiry made on this
point was in favour of Cauvin, and therefore, though the main feature of
the charge against him remained proved, his suspension would have rendered
necessary the accusation against Mr. Davidson of falsehood being brought
forward. • Though the weight of evidence was strongly against Mr. Davidson,
lam still of opinion that Cauvin was the liar. However, Davidson would
have shown very badly, and I think Cauvin would eventually have got off,
so 1 thought it better to settle the difficulty by severely reprimanding
Cauvin and cautioning Davidson. Woodruff is the Acting Inspector of the
distillery. He is doing well in that post, where I believe not a little sharp-
ness and watchfulness are needed. I have had a great deal of trouble and
writing lately about a delinquency of Mr. Fitch’s. It has been proved
that he has misappropriated certain sums received by him in account of rum
duty. I have been obliged to suspend him. His offence would have been
discovered long ago, and perhaps prevented altogether, had Mr. Davidson not
screened him. By the aid of the books he has to keep as Superintendent of
Distilleries, he found out the shortcoming at once, but not only neglected to
report having done so, but on two occasions rendered a return made out so as
to screen Mr. Fitch’s delinquency. He was not a sharer, however, in Fitch’s
peculation, and, I believe, thought for some time that the discrepancy was
caused by Fitch’s having given credit to the purchasers for the sum. When
he found out that the money had been really misappropriated, he reported
the matter at once. However, his offence is a very serious one, and I have
reported him to the Governor. The hugest tortoise and the next hugest may
be taken away from He aux Cerfs at the cost of £4O. lam awaiting the
instructions of the Secretary of the Zoological Society, or whoever the interested
party may be. I will not by any means forget the birds. If by any chance
I come home myself, I will bring a large assortment with me, in hopes of
being made a life member of the zoological, and for the sake of having my
name mentioned in the report. I will with the greatest pleasure get you
specimens of the best woods in the islands. How am Ito get the nuts, fruits,
and berries, indigenous to the Seychelles, to Kew —dead or alive ? There is
a Swiss naturalist here collecting for the museum at Brussels, and for a rich
Englishman. I will consult him on the subject. I forgot to mention,
while mentioning schools, that Archdeacon Hobbs has been down here to
organise a mission school for little Africans. He has caught six or seven
little boys and girls, whose masters and mistresses were anxious to get rid of
them, and has boarded and lodged them at rather a high price with Mr. and
Mrs. Fitch, and has hired a young German to teach them. He assures me
that this is only a temporary measure. I fervently hope so ; otherwise, in
the event of further arrivals of little Africans, I think I should have to appeal
again to the Lady Superior and Pere Ignace. I see the papers are full of
Gladstone’s pamphlet. I have sent for it. It is one of the grievances I have
against the Seychelles, that there is not a soul who ever sees or cares about
seeing anything of that kind. Mr. Mann has not yet come to lay the pipes.
It is very late in the season for building the masonry required to form the
reservoir. It would be almost better now to wait till May. My time has
been taken up so much with writing lately, that I have been driven to the
last moment to attend to my private correspondence. This must serve as an


excuse for a more than usually slipshod letter. My wife is writing to Lady
Gordon, and will, I am sure, give her the fullest details about our daughter.
I am afraid she is growing into rather a spoilt little person.
From Mr. Barrow
Seychelles, December 16, 1874.—Sir—The outward mail reached Seychelles
late yesterday afternoon. Those who expected the arrival of the new Chief
Commissioner, (and there were such), are now obliged to content themselves
until the expiration of another month. The regret that Captain Havelock is
not to be confirmed is very general. I, for one, have learned to like him very
much indeed, and 1 think that he, on his part, has discovered that during the
first two or three months of his stay here, he sometimes did me injustice,
owing to the misrepresentations of a certain friend of mine, Mr. Savy has
paid his £SOO, and we shall be able to show a surplus of revenue over ex-
penditure of about £BOO. The Council of Government at Mauritius has
refused to sanction the loan of £2OOO, under the impression, perhaps, that we
shall be embarrassed thereby. I am not sorry for this. Captain Havelock,
acting upon the suggestion I made during your stay here, has written to
Mauritius to ask the Governor’s sanction to the payment by Seychelles of
the entire sum, —a proceeding which will, I think, rather astonish those who
are not posted up in financial affairs at Seychelles. The Sanitary rate for
1874 is coming in rapidly. Upwards of £BO was paid on the 14th and 15th.
By the end of the year the entire sum will have been collected. The two
Regulations—for the Registration of Leases and Agreements and of Servants —
have come into active operation. They will, when more generally understood,
become popular ; they have now, in fact, many warm supporters amongst those
whom I did not expect to support them. The cocoa-nut fibre manufactory com-
menced operations yesterday morning. The firm commence the erection next
week of a second building the same size as the one already completed. They
have asked for the entire frontage between Royal and Bazaar Streets, upon
which, if conceded, they intend to erect four factories in all, the third and fourth
to be devoted to the manufacture by machinery of cocoa-nut oil. I think I
mentioned in my last that they had purchased the frame of lighter for
£IOO :itisto be made into a steamer. A clerk has been sent from the Audit
Office to examine the books of the various offices. For my part I am not
sorry that it is so—for many reasons. I regret to say, however, that his
arrival has been indirectly the cause of Mr. Fitch’s suspension from office.
In the month of September last he failed to account to me for the amount of
duties payable on three casks of rum, and in October for the amount payable
on one cask. It is Mr. Davidson’s duty as Superintendent of Distilleries, in
charge of the rum store, to check the sums received for duties on rum he has
delivered, and when, at the end of September he made out the monthly
returns for the audit and compared them with the cash book, he discovered
the absence of the three entries in question ; instead of reporting the case to
me, he consented, at the request of Mr. Fitch, to falsify his return and
conceal the defalcation. He repeated the same thing at the end of October,
believing, as he says, that Mr. Fitch would replace the money. He, however,
took fright at the arrival of the auditor, and spoke to me about it. I caused
him to furnish me with the particulars, and immediately adopted the only


course open to me, viz., reported the matter to Captain Havelock. On his
demanding an explanation, Mr. Fitch acknowledged that he had misappropri-
ated the money, when he was suspended until the Governor’s pleasure can he
known. The amount of the defalcation is £37 ; not a large sum, yet quite
sufficient to ruin his future prospects. lam really very sorry for him ;he is
a frank, and, I believe, at heart a very honest fellow ; but he has become in-
volved in some private speculation or other, and hence we have a most pain-
ful repetition of the old, old story. I consider Mr. Davidson quite as bad as
Mr. Fitch. Ido not for a moment suppose that he participated in the fraud,
beyond a guilty knowledge of it; but his books are the check, and the only
check, upon the receipts of several of our most important items of revenue,
and if he fails in his duty, whether from mistaken notions of kindness or
otherwise, there is no knowing where it will end. So far as lam personally
concerned, I am very glad indeed the auditor has come to Seychelles. Arch-
deacon Hobbs has paid a short visit to Mahe. His two chief objects were to
endeavour to get the church repaired, and to start a school for the training of
young African children. With regard to the school, I fear he has not done
much, nor that wisely. Not to enter into particulars, I should say that, to
judge from the commencement, the Church Mission School for the reception
and training of young liberated African slaves will be on a par, relatively, to
the Church Schools in aid of which the Bishop once refused , and has now
requested , a grant of public money. The Rev. Mr. Yaudin is to be transferred
to Mauritius as soon as a suitable successor can be found to take his place at
Seychelles. Dr. Brooks has come to grief. Cheyron’s people have managed l v
to get the ear of the Secretary of State, who has directed an inquiry to be 1
made. Dr. Brooks’s report is a most extraordinary piece of composition,
covering upwards of forty pages of foolscap. Unfortunately for him he lost \
his temper, and, as a natural consequence, the two or three arguments he I
advances in his favour, (and they are not without weight), are completely
buried under the quantity of mud he has thrown at his adversaries. We
have got rid of the whole of our Pension List, with the exception of the
allowance to Mr. Forbes, and four-fifths of that granted to Mr. Ross. This
question was, I believe, decided by you before leaving Mauritius ; still it is
comforting tq have had them acknowledge it. This sum, and the amount set
apart for interest and the sinking fund, relieves the budget of £4OO per annum,
aby no means inconsiderable sum to Seychelles. I see, by the Melbourne ’
papers received by this mail, that the Fiji group has been unconditionally I
ceded to Great Britain, and that it is to become a Crown Colony. You will »
hear in England, perhaps, by this mail how Lord Lindsay fared at Mauritius
on the 9th instant. The day was beautifully clear at Seychelles, and in every
respect favourable for observation. I had a fine view of Venus in transit,
through an instrument belonging to H.M.S. Nassau. The planet appeared
quite as large as a five-shilling piece. The child murder case has been tried ;
one of the implicated parties was released, another was sentenced to imprison-
ment for six months, and a third was condemned to death. The witnesses
arrived by return mail, and were put into quarantine owing to the prevalence
of measles at Reunion. That unquiet spirit, Mr. Thomas Martin, has left
Mahe to reside on the island of which he is the manager. His business
in town is being wound up. Ido not know the individual upon whose
shoulders Elijah’s mantle has descended, unless his name be Charles Jonanis,


a man who possesses all Mr. Martin’s revolutionary tendencies without his
brains.
„ The mail is just signalled, and I must close this letter.
Was in town at C.O. on Tuesday, 2nd February. They have
appointed an Attorney-General, one de Ricci. The only thing I
know against him is that he seems to be a friend of Sir Seymour
Fitzgerald. Sir John recovers slowly, and I have doubts as
to his perfect restoration to his former state. Went down on
Thursday 11th to see the Eyres near Bridgwater. They are a
nice family in tone and manner, and there is a little boy, Sydney,
who is adored among them much as Jack is with us. On Tuesday,
February 16th, we went to town, having be(jn over on Monday
—our one fine day—to Wellington, to say good-bye to Agnes
Wickham. I dined with the Colonial Institute and attended
a meeting afterwards, at which Mr. Chesson read a paper on Fiji,
and I made a speech.
Wednesday, February 17. —Saw young Mr. Le Hunte, whom
I like, and Charles Mitchell, who looks brown and well. Called
on Mr. Gladstone and walked with him up to Portland Place,
where he is sitting for his picture. To the F.O. and C. 0., where
a great piece of work was made about my Consulate. Perhaps
after all I shan’t go. Dined at Alex.’s. Thursday —Lane-Fox.
Had breakfast with Gladstone on Saturday —Lyttelton, McColl,
and Newman Hall there. Talk almost all Vaticanism. My
letters, however, have had the effect of making him qualify this
part of his new pamphlet as to Tametsi. He quite approves of
my uniting consular and gubernatorial powers. Dined at Rate’s/
Monday, February 22. —Went to Ascot and saw my babies
—Rachael had too bad a cold to go with me. Very civil letter
from Lord Granville.
From Earl Granville
My dear Gordon—l showed your letter [to Lord Russell] to Cardwell and
Hartington, who were struck equally with myself by the singular power and
good taste which mark it. I should have thanked you for it earlier, if
Gladstone, to whom I sent it, had not forgot to return it to me till this
morning. I have since seen him, and he tells me that he has expressed his
admiration of it to you, and he informed me of your having obtained Lord
Russell’s agreement to its publication. My strong regard and gratitude to
your father make me rejoice that this will take place.
Friday, February 26. —I saw Gladstone and had a long talk
with him in re Lord Russell’s letters, and George Gordon’s affair.
Dined with the Rates.


On returning to town I found a sad catastrophe as to .
I will say no more till it is finally settled. Russell correspond-
ence published in the Times.
March 6.—This business is indeed a sad history. He
has bolted —with some woman whose acquaintance he made on
the voyage from New Zealand. I found a letter from him
resigning his appointment, and a heart-broken letter from. his
father to say that he had disappeared. For the rest of the
week, Arthur and his brother were busy tracing him, but in vain.
We put advertisements in the papers, some of which he must
have seen, for on Saturday I received another letter from him
declaring his determination to abide by his intention. lam
very sorry for him, poor boy, and very much sorrier for his
poor, proud, fond parents ! Had another long and very interest-
ing talk with Gladstone. Sir John has resigned his office; —not
too soon. Called at Argyll Lodge and had a pleasant talk with
the Duke and Duchess. We dined with the Alfred Herveys.
Party at Granville’s. Talked to Mrs. Bob Lowe and admired:
Lady Dudley’s ropes of pearls and diamonds. Rate’s baby got*
scarlatina, and much consequent anxiety. Mary Aberdeen came
to town to see us off. Official matters still very unsettled. X
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, February 10, 1875. —My dear Arthur I
return both the letters you enclosed to me. Gladstone’s is a very nice one,
and I agree in every word of it. As to the passage about your father’s com-
parative reputation, it seemed to me that the form, “may be,” etc. made a
great difference ; and that any one might understand from it, rather a high-
minded acquiescence in a popular judgment, founded on imperfect knowledge
of the one man, and the more demonstrative activity of the other, than an
(even implied) acknowledgment of the justice of such a judgment. We do not
return to London (except off and on, for necessary business) till after Easter.
I am sorry for what you tell me about Sir John ; but reluctance to sever
the tie between a long life of activity and the rest of one’s time on earth is
natural to all men, and not least to the best and most useful men. I admit
that it is an infirmity, and that it must be painful to those who see the
necessity before it is seen by him whom they love and honour ; but it is an
infirmity so connected with the highest qualities as to be entitled to great
allowance. Whatever else may be said of Gladstone’s retirement from the
first place in politics, at least it saves him from ever being placed in that kind of
difficulty.
But the sequel only can show, (however thoroughly sincere it may be, as
beyond all question it is, at the present time,) whether that is a real and final
retirement. For my own part, I think his decision has been right and wise,
looking to the circumstances of the time, and the state of his mind upon some
initial questions, even so far as that is known to one who, like myself, cannot
boast of being in his intimate confidence ; and, for the same reasons, I can


thoroughly understand that “a mountain has been taken off his shoulders.” 1
Whatever other mountains he may choose to put upon them again, it will be
more easy for him to move freely, and with a safe conscience, under these
self-imposed burdens, than if he were still tied down to the earth, like Gulliver,
by a thousand bonds of party Lilliputians, at every muscle and nerve ; not to
say, exposed to the temptation (which would be a real one to less virtuous men,
though perhaps not so to him) of accepting the homage, and doing the work,
of powerful combinations of men, whose objects are not the same as his own.
I shall never cease to regret that the occupations of my profession prevented
me, while it might still have been possible, from ever attaining to that degree
of intimacy with him, which any persons (sympathising with him au fond)
who could go often to his Thursday breakfasts, etc., had the opportunity of
cultivating. Few greater men, and none better, have ever governed this
country.—Ever yours affectionately.
From Bishop Selwyn
The Palace, Lichfield, March 19, 1875. —I would have come to London
with the greatest pleasure to assist in sending you and your staff forth with
our prayers and blessings to a field upon which the life and death of Bishop
Patteson has shed a holy influence. Of your centre of operations, the Fiji
islands, I personally know little, as they have been in the hands of the
Wesleyan missionaries, and we found more than enough to do in Melanesia,
where the field was clear. Your Excellency will find in Norfolk Island the'
Rev. R. H. Codrington, J. R. Selwyn (my son), J. Still, M. Bice, G. Saraisa
(native), wdio will be able to give you much information and some assistance
in threading the maze of the hundred islands and the broken dialects of
Melanesia. I shall be rejoiced to hear that they have been united with you
in a reciprocity of help. lam engaged on Monday for two confirmations
which it is now too late to put off. If your farewell meeting had been on the
23rd I should certainly have endeavoured to be present.—Commending Your
Excellency and your party to the guidance and protection of God by sea and
land, I remain yours most truly, G. A. Lichfield.
March 22, 1875, Monday in Holy Week. —My last day in
England for long;—perhaps for ever. At eleven there was a
farewell service for us and those travelling with us —for our]
friends and their friends. It was celebrated at King’s College j
Chapel, and consisted of the Mission Litany, and Holy Communion.
Barry read the Litany, and celebrated, assisted by my brother]
Douglas. Pearse read the Epistle and gave a short address of'
farewell in very good taste and very well chosen words. There
were about fifty people present, but the chapel was dark, and I
did not recognise them all. I liked the mixture of ranks and
opinions—the Duchess of Argyll and Marques the nursemaid,
Gladstone and the Dean of Westminster. Selborne was there,
and also Lady Salisbury. I have made on the other side as
1 Mr. Gladstone’s description to me of the relief he felt.
F


complete a list as I could. The offertory was for the Melanesian
Mission. After the service we shook hands with and bade adieu
to most of our friends at the head of the stairs, whilst a few of
them came into the library for a more deliberate adieu. Learnt
with much sorrow from Gladstone that May Lyttelton, who had
been for some days ill of typhoid, was dead. He looked old, ill,
and worn, and was muffled up to the ears in a coat with a great
fur collar. Goodbye at 18 Spring Gardens—a sad one; for it is
unlikely we shall ever see either Sir John or Lady Lefevre again.
Goodbye at 47 Charles Street, less sad and calmer. Jane and
Charles dined with us; then goodbye at 9 South Audley Street,
where I saw Mrs. Kate in bed, and received a whispered adieu
from her. Then final packing and letter-writing. To bed
about two.
The two months before my start for Fiji were months of
much worry and vexation. I was determined not to go without!
being allowed a fairly free hand, and at the Colonial Office,
although almost everything I asked was orally assented to,
there was much reluctance to translate that assent into official
action. Then the Foreign Office, that is, the subordinate officials!
there, raised difficulties as to my being Consul-General as well
as High Commissioner for the Pacific, and the High Commission
itself hung fire. I had intended not to leave England without
it, but was at last persuaded by Herbert to start in March, on,
the distinct promise in writing that it should be sent after me
immediately, and that I should probably find it awaiting me at
Sydney on my arrival there. I did not find it at Sydney, and
having once left without it, I did not get it for more than two
years , a delay which has caused much misery, loss of life, and
general evil; for had I been High Commissioner in 1876 I could
have prevented the inauguration of that chaos in Samoa which
has prevailed ever since, and still prevails [1895]. Nor probably
would there have been any German New Guinea. I got Have-j
lock appointed Treasurer, MacGregor Chief Medical Officer, andj
several others placed on my staff, disposable as I might think fit.;
But they saddled me with an Attorney-General whose antecedents
in India, as I speedily learned from Sir George Campbell, ought
to have wholly disqualified him for the post. Still, as I had had
my own way in so many particulars, I thought it well to try and
make the best of him. Was daily persecuted by office-seekers,
fad-mongers, old hands from Fiji, speculators, and philanthropists,
and was at last very glad to be off, and at peace.


CHAPTER II
FROM LONDON TO LEVUKA
March 23, Tuesday. —Katie went with us to Charing Cross,
where we were met by Alex., Johnny, Maria, and Constance.
Aberdeen went with us as far as Folkestone. Reached Paris
about 6.30 —Hotel, St. James. My start was terribly saddened
by the unexpected news of poor Jarnac’s death, which I only
learnt on opening my Times after the train had started. In him
another and a very strong link with the past is gone. He was
one of those who best understood my father, and who most
loyally loved him. His first public speech as Ambassador
referred to him, and he never lost an occasion of showing how
he appreciated that intercourse. We were to have dined with
him last Saturday, and received a note from Mde. de Jarnac on
Thursday saying he was ill and must put off the dinner, but
Gladstone, whom I met that night at dinner at Beresford Hope’s,
gave an account which led one not to anticipate any danger. I
told Johnny he ought to go to his funeral.
March 24, Wednesday. —Waterfield came. Called on the
De Witts, who were in much affliction at Jarnac’s death. Dined
with the Tourgenieffs. Rather a stupid party, except for
Madame Mohl, and a Russian anthropological traveller, one
Khanikoff, who has been eighteen times in Persia, and to whom
I promised contributions for the Paris Anthropological Society.
Thursday , March 25.—Wrote a good deal. Saw Mde. de
Witt. Took Miss Gordon Gumming to the Louvre. Left by
night train for Arles, where I met Waterfield. The French!
plan of having only one class in express trains is inexpressibly
nasty. I had among my companions two private soldiers and
two bourgeois, who spat the carpet into a puddle and stunk
objectionably. A. J. L. joined us about noon, and in the after-
noon we drove to Les Baux, stopping at Montmajeur on the
way. The day, though rather keen, was bright, and though
the country is bare, and not pretty, our drive was pleasant. The,


spring is not advanced as much as one might have expected, but
a few willows are golden, some thorn hedges green, and the white
blossoms of the sloe and pink ones of the almond not infrequent.
Few other flowers —here and there a yellow spurge, a good deal
of rosemary, and one or two others. Les Baux is a very curious
place indeed. Much more so than I had expected. The town
is to my mind the most interesting relic —more so than the
castle. Great stone houses line the narrow streets. Almost all
are roofless and deserted, but imposing mansions of well-cut stone,
not of very early date and almost all partially cut out of the
rock itself, a fine yellowish limestone. The town is perched on
one side of a narrow ravine on the acclivity of a rock, the other
side of which dominates the plain, visible to a great extent.
The opposite side of the ravine, which ends abruptly in a cut de
sac , is honeycombed with caves, and the plateau above it is one
huge mass of bare tumbled boulders. It was not unlike the
Gebel Mokattam. Above the town is green sward and the
shattered ruins of the castle. In the town, at a corner, is a little
church and nunnery, and the sound of girls’ shrill voices singing
the Ave Maria came strangely on the still air of the deserted
town and quiet valley. On one fifteenth-century house was the
inscription, Post tenebris Lux. Les Baux looks as if it would
have some time to wait for fresh days of light. Montmajeur I
had seen before with Moody and Crowder fifteen years ago. It
is interesting, especially the little unaltered Carlovingian church
in perfect preservation, which has many curious classical features.
It consists of a tower with four gables and four apses, to one of
which a porch with pediment has been added. The cornices are
all of debased classical work. The masonry very good. The
great Abbey is a fine ruin, the position striking, and the cloister
picturesque. There is a singular Buddhism in the rock-cut wihara
below it, said to have been Archbishop St. Trophimus s abode.
To-day was Good Friday, and I was struck both in Arles
Cathedral and in the little church at Les Baux, by the Crucifix
left alone in the church upon its cushion on the altar steps,
approached and kissed by solitary worshippers in silence, and
without any fuss of priestly attendance.
Saturday , March 27. —Easter Eve. Ban over Arles hastily.
The intersecting views in the Arenes are fine, but the picture
left in my mind is that of the ruins of the theatre as seen
from a corner, with the morning sun shining on the two grey-
veined marble columns, and on the romanesque tower of the
Cathedral beyond them. Joined Bachael, Eka, and the children
at the station, and went on with them to Marseilles. Train
dddoubU consequently the luggage delayed. Drove about


town and up to Notre Dame de la Garde. All our party met
and dined together. Afterwards I walked with 0. C. W. and
talked. Wrote some final letters.
A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon of Ellon
When I arrived Jack took it quite as a matter of course to see me standing
in the courtyard of the hotel and called out at the top of his voice, “Mr.
Arthur! ! come up here,” from the nursery window, much to the diversion
of my fellow-passengers. Mr. Abbey, E, the farther he gets from England!
the more he cocks his hat on one side. He has been parading Marseilles thus, j
and brimful of the fact that he is once again “ 'ls Hexellency's ’ouse steward,” I
and must therefore dress as is becoming so elevated a personage. One of the'"
results of this self-importance is, however, sometimes rather embarrassing to
one of so nervous a temperament as myself, for, if called in the gentlest tone,
the emphasis with which he roars SIR ! ! is, to say the least of it, startling,
while it has a tendency to lead everyone to the natural conclusion that one’s
servant is a maniac.
Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
Marseilles, Easter Eve. —We had a very good journey
here, but I am so sleepy and tired to-night that I really must go
to bed very soon and write from Naples. We all met here and
dined at the table-d’hdte, nine of us, including Mr, Waterfield, who
has come to see us off. Mr. Le Hunte, Mitchell, Charles Eyre,
and Dr. Mayo arrived this afternoon. Arthur J. L. also.
Would you kindly call at 4 Mount Street and ask Mrs. Hutch
for a carriage rug left on Arthur’s bed by mistake—black and
red, a very nice one—and keep it for us and use it. We have
plenty without it.
Lady Gordon to Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre
Marseilles, Easter Eve. —We have had a capital journey
and arrived here about twelve, having picked up Arthur at Arles.
The children slept well, only they were constantly disturbed by
the door being opened and banged to at every station. I also slept
part of the night. We only once got some basins of cafd au lait,
which we had hardly time to drink, so we were most thankful for
our luncheon basket and the excellent chicken and ham. The first
thing in the morning, Jack remembered his doll’s luggage-box, and
he and Nevil were surprised and delighted when they opened them
to find them full of “ seeties.” Jackie seems quite himself to-day,
so I hope his little attack has passed off. He is very jolly and
does nothing but suggest fresh punishments for Emil: “ She
shall be put into boiling water.” They both seemed to enjoy


their journey very much indeed. Miss G-ordon Gumming was
very good natured and helpful. She is such a practised traveller,
every imaginable thing comes out of her big travelling-bag during
the night. We got so horridly dirty with the dust, but we con-
trived to wash our hands in half a tumbler of water each, and
fortunately there was some soap handy. Miss Gordon Gumming
has just been into the salon to ask exactly how to spell Tour-
genieff—perhaps she is writing an account of the dinner for
Good Words. She made a note of it in her notebook. I meant
to write you a long letter, but I feel so dreadfully tired and sleepy
to-night that I really must go to bed. We have to be on board
before ten to-morrow. That last*’parting was horrid. It was
just the last link. I miss you so much—it almost makes me
dislike Eka, for I wish so much it was you.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
M.M. Steamer Anadyr , Easter Monday. —l am afraid I can’t
write much of a letter after all. Every one almost is sick. I
hear horrible sounds in other cabins all round. Nurse and both
children woke up very sick, and I am writing in my berth—
hardly able to get up. I tried to write last night in the saloon
but it nearly finished me off*—however, I am quite well as long
as I lie down. Poor Jack is crying in Nurse’s arms, and Nevil
very sick in Marques’s ! I don’t see how I can get up. We have
a splendid large cabin, and everything most comfortable—Nurse
and the children with me. Arthur in the next, a very large one
too —room for any amount of boxes. Eka a large one to herself.
It is not very rough, but the motion is unpleasant. I hope they
will soon get well.
Monday, 2 o'clock. —We are all up now and recovered. Jack
suddenly announced that he felt “ quite ’ell,” and he is now as
jolly as possible up on deck—with his carriage bag and all his
little possessions. It is very cold and dull, and not at all pleasant
on deck—soon it will be hot enough. I wish we were safe
through the Red Sea. There are not a great many other
passengers —no one of interest as yet, but many of them have
not yet shown. I like Eka much better now, and think we shall
get on, now we understand one another better. We shall get to
Naples in the night, and stay there six hours, and if we get up
very early we may have a chance of seeing it. Arthur has
got a very bad cold and is quite seedy with it. I feel stupid
and headachy, as one always does the first two or three days. It
is not pleasant certainly. They think we have a chance of


seeing Naples to-morrow. We have got through our first day-
pretty well and are all settling down. It is quite calm to-night
and the children have gone comfortably to bed.
Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
M.M.S. Anadyr , near Naples, Easter Monday. —. . . I wrote
you rather a short letter from Marseilles, but don’t think I can
do much better now, for I always feel stupid and headachy the
first few days at sea. We embarked at ten yesterday morning
and had a beautiful start. Sunny and pleasant weather and very
smooth sea. But in the night the wind got up a little, and there
was a nasty cross sea, and both children and nurse woke up very
sea-sick. I think most people are sick and it is a cold dull day,
very unpleasant on deck. However by 12 o’clock the children
were all right again, and both look as jolly and rosy as possible
now. We have splendid cabins and are very comfortable. W e
sit four of us on each side of the purser, Eka on one side of him
and Arthur on the other. The captain is at the other table.
About eighty or a hundred at dinner —no other lady that I could
discern. There is one rather nice looking party consisting of a
Mr. Rice (Lady Winchilsea’s brother), a planter in Australia, and
three young men, viz., a young Finch-Hatton, son of Lord
Winchilsea, a son of Lady Caroline Tumour, and a Mr. Knight.
These three are apparently going to settle in Australia with Mr.
Rice. There is no one else in the least interesting. The food
is very good—French of course—but the dinners are much too
long. It is far cleaner and nicer than an English steamer. . . .
I am getting on with Eka and like her better than I did just at
first. Happy thought! I had her put next the purser at dinner
instead of myself, and she talks French to him and thinks him
charming. He is really a horrid little snob. She is very cosmo-
politan. She rattles away with all of the staff and just equally
ready to talk to any one —Nurse, Abbey, or Arthur, and not at
all fastidious. She is most good-natured and is, I think, beginning
to understand us now. 1
1 A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon of Ellon
We left Marseilles very punctually this morning, weighing anchor soon
after ten o’clock, and we are now all comfortably settled in our several cabins.
Lady G. and Sir A. have two large cabins between them. Miss G. C. has one
to herself. Dr. Mayo and Eyre are doubled up, and so am I with Mitchell.
Le Hunte is the only one of us who is billeted with a stranger. The cabin
occupied by Mitchell and myself is a four-berth one; we therefore have plenty
of room for our portmanteaus. The ship is fortunately not crowded as yet,
but we may take in other passengers at the different places at which we stop.


Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Thursday , April I.—Our voyage so far has not been remark-
able. We spent a few hours at Naples, but the day was thick,
grey, cold, and lowering; the scenery of the bay to a great extent
invisible. We visited the Cathedral, San Severe, and the Jesuit
Church—passed the Royal Palace and walked about a few streets,
but the effect was naturally one of disappointment on such a day.
The smoke of Vesuvius was, except for a moment, hidden by cloud.
I have had and still have a cold and sore throat, which have
made me rather miserable, and kept me one day in bed. Some
pleasant fellow-passengers—Rice of Queensland, Finch-Hattons,
his fellow squatters—one Rawlins recommended to me by Herbert.
Objectionable purser-commissaire. Eka rather too continually on
the clack, but I think good and useful. Children well pleased
and well. (They were very good on the journey.) Captain
stupid.
Friday , April 2. Cold much the same. Fiji class after
luncheon. A good deal of rolling in the afternoon.
To Sir John Shaw-Lefevre
Anadyr , at Sea, Aprils. 1875. —My dear Sir John — We expect to reach
Port Said to-morrow morning, and I will therefore endeavour to give you some
account of the most remarkable incidents (which are, in truth, few enough) of
Till now, 9.35 P.M., it has been perfectly calm, but a vase of flowers has just
tumbled over, and I hear the cabin ports being shut, so we shall probably
have a little sea on to-night. The only one of us as yet affected by the ship’s
motion is young Eyre, and I trust he will soon get over it. I feel most un-
utterably stupid to-night and as if ideas would not come. Miss G. C. is writing
out of the same ink-bottle and every moment makes some remark, which is
not conducive to the collecting of my scattered faculties.
29 th. —Soon after I left off writing last night a sharp squall came down
upon us, and during the night we had a nasty chopping sea and a good deal
of rolling. I, however, slept very well. Jack and Nevil were very sick this
morning—also Nurse, but during the day they all got over it and have been
on deck and the children as lively as possible again. The weather has been
cold and disagreeable to-day, but we got into smooth water again about dinner
time, which was fortunate for the sufferers. Everyone is taking advantage of
the smooth water and our approach to Naples to send off letters, and as it is
just tea time tea-cups and ink-pots alternate down the table. We are not all
writing, however, for I see Le Hunte playing chess with a fellow passenger,
and Miss Gordon Gumming has just dropped to sleep over Bishop Patteson’s
Life ! My reading for the day has been of a drier kind, viz., Blue-books, of
which I shall have a good deal during the voyage; not that I shall deny myself
the luxury of occasionally perusing literature of a lighter character.


our progress thus far, although I have no doubt Rachael will have kept you
fully informed as to everything likely to be of interest to any of you.
Of our doings at Paris I need say nothing. In the first place there is not
much to say, and in the next, Madeleine and Emily will already have said it.
Madame Mohl, whom I had not met before, amused me, but on the whole I was
rather bored by the Tourgenieff dinner. There was nothing either sufficiently
in common, or sufficiently in contrast, between the guests there and oneself
to make it interesting.
I joined my friend Waterfield at Arles, on Good Friday morning, and in
the afternoon we drove out to a very curious place, not much visited, about
ten miles from Arles, called Les Baux: an almost deserted, and for the most
part ruined, mediaeval town of very singular character. It is situated on the
upper part of the slope and crest of an abrupt hill of limestone which forms
one side of a narrow valley, ending a little further in a cul de sac. Its
singularity consists in this, that there is hardly any house in the ruined
town which is not partly excavated out of the solid rock. The narrow steep
streets are composed of houses the walls of which are perfect, and are formed
of most beautifully cut stone, but which almost in all cases want their roofs.
They are not very old—from the beginning of the fifteenth century to the
middle of the sixteenth, but their position, preservation, and desolation make
a remarkable ensemble. A few houses are still inhabited, and there is a small
convent close to the little church, from which the shrill thin sound of children s
voices singing rose into the quiet stillness. At the top of the hill are the
ruins of the castle, of rather older date, and a more wonderful mixture of
masonry and rock excavation than the town itself. Both town and castle
were destroyed by Richelieu on account of their having been the rendezvous
of one of the revolts of Louis XIII.’s reign. The view from the top of the hill
over the great plain of Provence is fine and very extensive, —hardly pretty.
The opposite side of the ravine is honeycombed with caves, which no doubt
first prompted the sort of constructions used at Les Baux. In fact I have seen
no place in Europe so much reminding one of Petra —architectural fa9ades to
rock-hewn chambers.
The spring had not made as much way as one might have expected. Heie
and there a willow was yellow or a thorn hedge green, the almond trees were
covered with exquisite pink bloom and the wild plums with white ; but on the
whole there was little appearance of vegetation, and though the sky was bright
the air was keenly cold. A yellow spurge, rosemary, and on the castle rocks
a few wild geraniums, were all the flowers I saw, though a few weeks later
these great open heaths will be all brilliant with colour from the masses of
cyclamens, jonquils, anemones, etc.
Arles itself is a very interesting place on account of the number and
perfect state of its Roman remains. The amphitheatre is absolutely without
injury, and the different combinations of its rows of arcaded passages intensely
picturesque. But you will not thank me for a supplement to Murray s
Handbook.
I have said that it was Good Friday, and both at Arles and at Les Baux
I saw a sort of service going on which struck me much fiom its entiiely
popular character, without any share or interference of priests or clergy, and
which was in itself impressive. After the morning mass, the crucifix is laid
on a cushion placed sloping on the steps of the altar, and left alone theie.


The doors of the church remain open, and all day long, as their fancy prompts
them, singly, or by twos and threes, people come in, and go up to kiss it.
Sometimes the church is left entirely empty. No one is left to watch or
guard the crucifix, which is thus left to the people’s devotion.
On Saturday morning I rejoined Rachael, Miss Gumming, and the children,
as they passed in the train, and an hour or two after we reached Marseilles,
where, in the course of the day, our whole party joined us. The children, by
the way, proved remarkably good travellers, and were patient and cheerful
throughout, though Jack was rather overset by the first day’s journey to Paris.
On Sunday morning, at ten exactly, we started on our voyage, in a magnificent
steamer most comfortably appointed, and have thus far had a very prosperous
but very cold voyage. We paused a few hours at Naples, but all was cold,
grey, and misty, therefore the beauties of the bay are still to me a matter
rather of faith than of sight.
Our fellow-'passengers are not particularly interesting, or at least have
not yet shown themselves to be so, and the Captain is rather dull and holds
himself somewhat aloof from company. Both Rachael and I have colds, and
I shall not be sorry to change the keen air and cloudy sky and dark angry
'sea of the Mediterranean for the warmth of the Canal and the blue waters
and bright sunshine of the Red Sea. There is a great Australian squatter
who has got the best cabins on deck, who seems nice, and is a gentleman ;
but, except a couple of nuns, I have not yet seen any ladies to my fancy. In
fact there is an absence of the softer sex altogether as regards number, and
happily there are not many children, except our own, who delight in their
maritime life. After luncheon every day, my staff and I form a Fiji class, and
get up as extensive a vocabulary as we possibly can. If we all persevere, we
ought to have a rough knowledge of the language by the time of our arrival.
Lady Gordon to Lady Shaw-Lefevre
Anadyr, April 3. I intended to have sent you a long
letter from Port Said, but the ship is rolling about so much to-
night that I find it very difficult to write at all. The children
have fortunately got thoroughly accustomed to it and don’t mind
it at all. They are perfectly happy running about on deck all
day, and very good. They have made great friends with Mr.
Eyre, who is very kind to them. They call him “ Friendie.” I
heard Jack saying when he saw him “ I must rush to my friend.”
It is a beautiful ship and as comfortable as possible in every
way, but a voyage is always very tedious, and I have felt head-
achy and seedy and tired ever since I came on board, but I
daresay I shall soon get right. Arthur got cold again and has
been very unwell with sore throat and cough, but he is better
and will get well as soon as we get into warmer weather, which
must be in a day or two now. It has been very chilly up to
this time, and not at all pleasant for sitting on deck. Most
people have got colds, and the saloon is very draughty. We


shall feel a great change in two or three days. To-morrow we
shall be at Port Said, and two days more will bring us to the
Red Sea. We stopped a few hours at Naples, and we all went
on shore; Miss Gordon Gumming and I had a little carriage and
drove about the town —the rest walked. We went to the
Cathedral and two other churches, and then drove about the
town and round the Bay till it was time to meet the rest of the
party on the wharf. It was unfortunately a dull, sunless day,
very chilly and very dirty, as there had been a good deal of rain.
So we did not see Naples to advantage. None of us had ever
been there before, so we did not know exactly what we ought to
do. Our fellow passengers are uninteresting. There is only one
other English lady, a young bride going out with her husband to
Shanghai. The other ladies are Dutch and French. We eight
sit together, I between Arthur and A. J. L. G. The food is quite
different to what I have met with in other ships —a great number
of indifferent dishes, and here and there something very good,
all quite French. There is always only one SAveet dish, and that
excellent —plenty of fruit. At Naples we took in quantities of
large mandarin oranges —delicious. The children, who all dine
together, including “Teddy and Tother,” have exactly the same
dinner that we have—olives, mushrooms, sardines, rich sauces,
and all the rest of it, which of course ours are not allowed to
touch, but which are greedily devoured by the French children.
M.M. Steamer Anadyr, April 2.—You don’t know how
difficult it is to write letters on board ship. The seats in the
saloon are so hard and uncomfortable. One gets so tired
by the evening, and then there is a racket all the evening.
Almost directly after dinner, (which is at five), is cleared
away, begins tea and lemonade, and brandy and water, all down
the two long tables, which lasts till bed-time. We have had
chilly weather as yet, all along, not pleasant for sitting on deck,
and Avith two children and Nurse in my cabin, I don’t get much
quiet there. Poor Arthur has had a very bad cold and sore
throat; he was in bed nearly all day yesterday with it, but he is
better to-day, and I hope we shall noAV soon get into genial
weather. The children are quite well. A more uninteresting set
of fellow-passengers could not exist. I have scarcely identified
any of them; except the Winchilsea party —four gentlemen, viz.
Mr. Rice (Lady Winchilsea’s brother), Hon. H. Finch-Hatton (her
son), Mr. Tumour (her nephew), and Mr. Knight (their cousin)
who all seem nice, there is no one to speak to. Our party of
eight all sit together.
Yesterday morning very early we arrived at Naples. We eight


all landed as soon as we could, and had nearly two hours on
shore. Unfortunately the Mus6e was not open so early, but we
went to the Duomo, two other churches, and drove about the
town in a small carriage, and round the bay; that is to say, Eka
and I did; the rest walked about. It was a dull, sunless, misty
day, and as there had been a good deal of rain, the streets were
filthy , and I was disappointed in it; but the streets, etc., are most
picturesque. None of the party had ever been there before. I
wished we could have had a few days there. I have felt rather
seedy since I came on board, headachy and tired; but I hope I
shall get right soon; nearly everybody has had colds. The ship
is very draughty : in hot weather it will be all the better for
being so. We shall be at Port Said to-morrow night, and there
I shall post my letters—l only wish there were any to get! I
really can’t write any more to-night.
Saturday. —There is a great deal of swell on to-day, but happily
we don’t mind it. It is still chilly. Arthur is better. They
(our people) have a Fiji class on deck every day. I fancy it is
very difficult—l have not begun it yet, and don’t feel as if I
would. To-morrow we shall probably all go on shore at Port
Said, and it will be very hot. We expect to get there in the
morning—then twenty-four to thirty-six hours on the Canal —
a few hours at Suez—and then the dreaded Red Sea, which takes
five days —a few hours at Aden, and a week to Ceylon. The
children get made a great deal of; they are an amusement
to people who have nothing to do. (Eka doesn’t care a straw
about children.) They are very good, and supremely happy.
As usual we have a great many more of some things than we
want, and are short of others. I hope to get a little washing
done in Ceylon, but we only stop at Pointe de Galle twelve hours.
Best love to all. 1
1 A. J. L. Goedon to Mes. Goedon of Ellon
March 31.—1 posted a letter to you yesterday at Naples, where we happily
had plenty of time to go on shore. The day, however, was cloudy and the sea
looked dull and grey, while heavy clouds of smoke hung over Vesuvius ;
altogether, it was not all what one’s idea of Naples would have led one to
expect. All our party except the nurses and children landed at 8 A.m. and
drove somewhat wildly about the town, visiting churches, etc.
This morning when I came on deck we had left Messina far behind us.
The morning was lovely, the sea blue and sparkling, and in the distance,
looking back towards the Straits, one could see above the misty loom of the
land white sunlit snow on the mountain tops. Sir Arthur’s cold is very bad,
and to-day he remained in bed all the morning ; he did it no good going ashore
yesterday. Dr, Mayo'has seen him to-day, and this evening I think he is
decidedly better. I have been grinding at Fiji grammar with Mayo ;he has


Lady Gordon to Miss Emily Shaw-Lefevre
M.M. Anadyr, Suez Canal, Monday. —. . . Arthur wrote to
Mama last night because we thought the letters would have to
go before I should have time to write this morning, but I find
there is just time for one letter. I have been unwell ever since
we left Port Said with a feverish cold and dreadful headache.
I spent one day in my berth, and have not been able to do any-
thing. It has been going through us all. Arthur began first.
He is quite well again now and enjoying the warmth. Both
children have got colds, and also Nurse and Marques. It is a
mistake to suppose one is proof against colds at sea. I think mine
had been coming on some time, as I had not felt well since I
came on board. lam much better this morning. We are just
coming to Suez, we shall stay there a few hours only and then
the Red Sea. The Captain has just been telling me that it will
not be hot at all there now. We are just at the right time.
The weather is perfect now, clear and sunny but not hot. I have
not left off my thick serge, and the children are still wearing all
their warm things. We are most comfortable and even luxurious
in this ship. Arthur has come for my letters.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Anadyr , at Sea, Red Sea, Apil 7, B.—To-morrow will be
our fifth and last day in the Red Sea, and we hope to arrive
at Aden in the evening. It has not been so very hot after all,
not anything like what I endured in the Tamar , crossing the line,
for about ten days. I think we have had a splendid passage.
Of course it is hot, especially in the middle of the day, but the
the advantage of me, however, by knowing a little Malay. At Naples the
Captain presented Lady Gordon with a magnificent bunch of camellias and
violets. The weather gradually gets warmer, but the wind is still somewhat
chilly.
April I.—Hard at work at Fijian all day. We have established a class,
Mayo doing professor on the strength of his Malay knowledge. There are
some nice people on board going out to Queensland, where they have an estate
—a Mr. Rice, and a relation of his, Finch-Hatton ; to their party also belongs
a retired naval lieutenant, Turner by name. They are all good fellows, and
we are fortunate to have them with us.
April 2.—We are rattling along at a good pace this evening, with the wind
right aft and a pretty heavy sea, which makes us roll a good deal, Mitchell
and I got a sea in at our cabin port this afternoon, but luckily it did no damage.
We had our Fiji class after luncheon as usual. It creates some amusement
among our fellow-passengers and, as far as we are concerned, helps to pass the
time, besides its being both interesting and useful.


evenings are cool and pleasant, and there is usually some breeze
then—the nights are very hot. We have all got on our thinnest
dresses, and Jackie is in his white sailor clothes with his neck
open, looking particularly nice and cool, and is made a great pet
of by everyone. I think he feels the heat more than Nevil does.
Arthur is revelling in it. I cannot say /like it, but I unfortunately
got a bad chill before we got to Port Said, which seems to have
upset me altogether, and I have not felt very well since we came
on board. I am better to-day, but have no appetite and don’t
feel quite the thing. Usually I feel so well at sea. lam just
now writing on deck sitting in my own deck chair : it is much too
hot to sit in one’s cabin or the saloon. The six gentlemen are hav-
ing their Fiji class, which occupies them every day for two hours
after luncheon. Jack and Nevil are playing near, and talking to
a nice kind nun of the order of Filles de Marie , whom they
are very fond of. There is scarcely any motion now, except the
shaking of the screw, which makes it difficult to write. The
days pass away very quickly ; we shall soon have been a fortnight
at sea. I only wish we could go all the way in this comfortable,
luxurious ship. I rather dread the week at Singapore, for it is
very hot there, and as there is no Governor there just now, I don’t
know what kind of accommodation we may get, and when we
change ships there, it probably won’t be the same thing at all.
When we leave Aden we shall be twenty-two in number, and the
Finch-Hatton party, who are also going to Australia, number six,
so that there will be twenty-eight including servants and children,
which is a large number for a small steamer, even if there are no
others. Our fellow-passengers here don’t interest us much. The
only two other ladies are an English and a German bride, both
rather pretty and well-dressed. I forgot a large family going to
Batavia, of whom the mother seems nice and pretty, but I have
scarcely spoken to her. There are various other females, more
or less objectionable. We fraternise chiefly with Mr. Eice and
Mr. Finch-Hatton, both very nice, and a pleasant addition to our
own party. lam sitting at the saloon table now with the punkahs
waving over our heads and making a most pleasant breeze, though
in other respects I dislike them extremely —they make me feel
quite giddy —but I don’t think we could exist without them.
There is a piano at the end of the saloon, usually being played
upon by somebody. The English bride, Mrs. Vickars, sings very
nicely indeed. Besides the nun I mentioned, who is a lay sister,
there are two “ Mothers ” of the same order, both ladies of good
families, one English, the other French. They look so nice in
their light blue and white dresses and silver badges. They are
very shy, poor things, for it is a cloistered convent, and they never


come out except to travel. One of them said she had not been
outside the walls for eight years since she entered the convent.
They are both young looking. They are going to join a convent
of their order at Madras. The children are both very well and
have good appetites, but they look tired and pale with the heat.
It is rather difficult to keep them amused when it is very hot.
They sleep quietly through all the racket, which one hears more,
I think, inside the cabin than out here. lam so oppressed with
sleepiness, that I can’t write any more and must go to bed,
Friday evening. —We are out of the Red Sea now and shall be
at Aden before daybreak to-morrow. We mean to get up early and
go on shore in the cool. I feel much better to-day and for the
first time had an appetite at dinner. Poor Jackie is looking very
pale to-day, and is rather cross! What a long time it will be
still, three weeks at least, before we get any letters.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Sunday , April 4.—Left Port Said early. Weather still cold.
Read prayers with nuns. Anchored for night in Bitter Lakes. 1
Monday , April s.—At Suez eleven. Off again at five.
Conjuring in the evening. Our voyage down the Red Sea was
in no way remarkable. We had a smooth sea—a pleasant breeze
and fine cool weather the whole time. We reached Aden at day-
light on the morning of Saturday, April 10th.
1 A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon of Ellon
April 4. —Port Said. I was ashore a good deal during the day, but except
dirty Arabs and filthy Egyptians there is little to see here. The high wind
that has been blowing also made it very disagreeable, although, of course, it
prevented one feeling the heat. Sir Arthur is all right again, but poor Lady
Gordon has now got a bad cold, and has been in bed all day to-day. I shall
be glad to be off again, for while we are standing still the baths don’t function,
and it is a nuisance to be without one’s tub of a morning. If this wind lasts
I should not wonder if we stuck in the Canal, and the prospect of a sandstorm
in the desert is unpleasant and, I fear, not improbable, I must say the quiet
of this evening is a pleasant change after the knocking about of last night.
The punkahs have been rigged in the saloon in preparation for the Red Sea.
Certainly we have not wanted them as yet, and even to-day people have been
complaining of the cold.
April 7. — I went ashore at Suez with Dr. Mayo and Le Hunte. We each
got donkeys and rode about the town and through the bazaars. Suez is far
more interesting than Port Said, and although people are in the habit of
saying that there is nothing to see there, I, for my own part, differ from
that opinion. I have always found, and never more so than this time, much
worth looking at; but then, of course, as passengers passing through Suez
spend their time chiefly in sitting in the courtyard of the hotel, it is no wonder


Few men probably have derived so much pleasure from Aden
as A. J. L. and I have extracted from our various visits there.
He has been at Aden seven times, and I five times, during the last
four years, but we always see it with renewed delight, nor does
it now seem to me one whit less picturesque than it did on my
first visit. I took Rachael on shore early, with the nuns, and
we drove up—two carriages full—to the tanks, returning by the
tunnel. As we were going ashore we met Knollys coming off.
He was so changed that we hardly recognised him, having
shaved off his whiskers and got his arm in a sling, having
shot himself through the hand, nearly destroying two fingers,
but luckily not seriously injuring either. The tanks we found
empty, all save a few drops in the upper one, but flowering
trees were out, and for the first time I saw the peculiar Aden
plant in flower. It is a very pretty crimson flower—five
petals streaked red and yellow. Went through the bazaar, as
picturesque as ever—and went with Rachael, Miss G. C., Arthur,
and Le Hunte to breakfast at the Residency, where we were hospi-
tably received by the Schneiders. They sent for the children to
come on shore, who played very contentedly all day with a toy boat
and some shells in a corner of the verandah. I particularly like
the Residency. Its long treble verandah is quite, I think, unique.
Sent a telegram to R. Mitchell, and strolled a little through the
Steamer Point town—Somaulis and Arabs, Hindoos, Jews, and
Negroes, all in picturesque confusion as usual. The Vulture here
—Captain Brooke called on me—Hamilton is promoted. Tele-
graphic despatch from Lord Carnarvon. Went on board again at
5.30 in Vulture's boats. Glorious sunset and afterwards faint
summer lightning. Dry, hot, confined, Aden may be; but how
any man with eyes in his head can call it ugly, I find it hard to
conceive. Perhaps what is chiefly striking is that it has no un-
that they see nothing to admire. In the little back streets of the Oriental
part of the town one comes across pictures worthy of Cairo before it was
Europeanised. I should like to have stopped there a few days and done
some drawings for the Graphic, but we had to get off to the ship by 5 o clock.
We left Suez the day before yesterday, and have had lovely weather ever since,
with a cool northerly wind sending us along at a great pace. Punkahs were
set agoing at dinner to-day for the first time, but no one has as yet complained
of the heat except young Eyre, who says it prevented his sleeping last night.
Sir A. and Lady G. are both quite well again, and the children I think enjoy
the voyage, though poor little Jack is occasionally sick of a morning.
April 9.—lt is hot enough at last, and I am at this moment sitting in a
temperature of 99—t00 hot to write much—fortunately on deck there is a
breeze, and I have rigged a wind-sail out of my cabin port, so do not suffer at
night. Lady G. and the children don’t mind it much, so that is all right,
and we are all quite well.


picturesque features—nothing as yet to mar the effect of its succes-
sion of pictures. They are going, however, to build an ugly new
Residency at Steamer Point.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Anadyr at Sea, Thursday , April 15. — 1 have come down
to my cabin after breakfast to see if I can manage to begin a
letter to you, having tried in vain to write in the saloon every
night for a week. It is so hot and shaky there, and I always
feel so dreadfully tired after eight o’clock, when I come down, that
I can do nothing. I can’t stay on deck later than that, as I in-
variably catch cold in the night air if I do. I have had nothing
but a succession of colds since we left Marseilles, and can’t get
rid of them. Both Jackie and I feel the heat very much. Nevil
does not mind it at all, she is as jolly as possible, and sleeps so
well, and looks particularly well. She is a great pet with every
one. Poor Jackie is constantly sea-sick. If there is the least
motion he succumbs directly, but he is more brave about it, and
doesn’t mind so much. He said this morning, “ I don’t think I
feel kite ’ell.” I found several of the ladies were sick, though
the rolling is scarcely perceptible. He also suffers a good deal
from prickly heat, and is very much oppressed with heat. The
meals here are very long and numerous. There is chocolate from
6 till 8.30; at 9.30, a regular French breakfast with numerous
courses. At 12.30, luncheon —bouillon, bread and cheese, claret,
and fruit. At 5, dinner, with more courses; at 8, tea. Lemonade,
brandy and water, go on all the evening till 11. Arthur
and I now cut the second breakfast, and make rather more of
luncheon—it answers much better—and we always cut the tea.
Miss G. C. never misses a meal, and rarely a dish. She is won-
derfully strong and well, and enjoys the heat.
Friday. —Very hot still, but perfectly smooth. Jack is quite
well to-day, but very cross. I suppose it is from the heat, poor
little fellow. We expect to get to Point de Galle on Sunday after-
noon and to stop there Monday and Tuesday, which will enable
us to get some things washed. We shall probably go on shore
and sleep at a hotel if we can find good rooms, it will be cooler.
If it were not for the heat, I should rather like the voyage, but
that makes me feel so tired and languid always, and takes away
all one’s pleasure in life. Ido hope it won’t be so hot in Fiji.
We shall be five or six days getting from Ceylon to Singapore,
where we stop ten days. We are due at Sydney about the 25th
May. Mr. Knollys joined us at Aden. lam very glad to have
him back. The.MacGregors had gone on a fortnight before in the
G


P. and 0. Arthur and his staff are getting on very well with
the language, and spend nearly all day at it. I can’t attempt it
now. Perhaps in two or three weeks I may get a letter. What
a time it seems ! We have been about three weeks at sea. I
hardly realised before what a long journey it is.
Lady Gordon to Miss Maria Shaw-Lefeyre
Anadyr at Sea, April 8. —We have just left the Red Sea,
and to-morrow morning at daybreak we shall be at Aden. We
have had a splendid passage through the Red Sea. It has not
been at any time unbearably hot, and there has generally been a
breeze at some time in the day. The nights are very hot, and
both children look pale and tired, but they sleep well, and are
very well on the whole. Jack has come out in his new white
sailor clothes with his neck all open, and he is very much admired
and made a great pet of in the ship. To day he had an Anadyr
ribbon given him for his hat. Nevil is called la petite
Marquise by the French people, on account of her reserved
courtly little manner. Just after we left Suez, the ship
rolled a good deal and Jack was very sick again, as I dare-
say he always will be when it is at all rough, but he soon got
over it. Nevil does not mind it at all. Nothing can be more
delightfully comfortable and luxurious than this ship. I fear
we shall feel the difference when we change into a smaller one at
Singapore. We shall arrive at Pointe de Galle in about a week
or ten days, and shall have two days there, then about another
week to Singapore, where we have to stop ten days for the
Australian steamer. ... I never had such difficulty in writing
letters in any ship before, and now the punkahs waving just
above one’s head make writing almost impossible. I hope I shall
do better next time. I get very sleepy about nine o clock. I
can hardly keep awake any longer.
Lady Gordon to Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefeyre
Anadyr , April 17. —Early last Saturday morning we arrived
at Aden, and as soon as we could get a boat —about 6.30 —we
set off to go on shore. As we got near the town we perceived
Mr. Knollys coming to the ship in another boat, so we stopped
and took him on board ours. He had been waiting for us for
three weeks, expecting us by every steamer. The MacGregors had
gone on a fortnight ago in the P. and 0. steamer. We landed
and hired three little carriages, in which we drove out to the
Tanks, about six miles, I should say. It is certainly the most
picturesque place I ever was at, and I could not help wishing, as


I often do, that you had been with us. The people are so won-
derfully picturesque. There are endless subjects for drawing,
especially in the life—many strings of camels, etc. The place
itself is absolutely bare, there is scarcely a patch of vegetation,
but for all that it is most attractive. As we drove through the
Arab streets I saw all sorts of picturesque jars, baskets, etc., which,
had I been coming home , I could not have resisted getting posses-
sion of. We found that the same Resident whom Arthur had
stayed with before, General Schneider, was still there, and that
we were expected to breakfast, so we all went there after our
drive and thoroughly enjoyed a good rest on shore and real tea
and iced milk. After breakfast, Mrs. Schneider let me send
Arthur J. for the children, who were delighted to come, and we all
stayed and dined there. Captain Brooke, of the Vulture , whom
Arthur had seen much of in Seychelles, took us back to the
Anadyr in two of his boats. Jack was delighted when he saw the
English man-of-war’s men, for he had not at all liked being rowed
ashore by black men. It was excessively hot at the Residency,
which is a small kernel of bungalow with three rows of wide
verandahs separated by thick stumpy pillars round it, forming
the sitting-rooms, and apparently built for coolness. The ther-
mometer 87°. We started again as soon as we got back to
the ship, and since that no.incident has occurred to break the
voyage. I think it has been hotter since we left the Red Sea
than while we were in it. Every evening I have tried to write,
but found it impossible from the heat, punkahs, and general feel-
ing of sleepiness. Poor little Jack feels it a good deal. Nevil
does not seem to mind it much, she is particularly well, sleeps
well, and has an excellent appetite. Whenever there is the
slightest motion, Jack is sick and very miserable. lam afraid he
will never be a good sailor. . . . Eka never seems to feel hot,
and is still in her thick navy serge.
Oriental Hotel, Points de Galle, Ceylon, April 19.
We arrived here yesterday morning at daybreak, and Arthur,
A. J. L., and Mr. Knollys got off as soon as they could, secured
rooms for us here, and Mr. Knollys came back and took us on
shore as soon as we could pack up. We found they had made a
flag for the Governor on board, and hoisted it on the mainmast
when we came into port. We have got very comfortable rooms,
and are most glad to be on shore for a few days, but it is, oh !
so hot. I feel in a continued state of trickling down, just as
when we were first at St. Thomas’s. In some ways the hotel
here reminds me of that, —bare floors, scanty furniture, hard beds,
and the great verandah round the large dining-room, with little


marble tables, and people sitting or standing about smoking
or drinking beer, and the quantities of bananas, pine-apples,
and oranges and mangoes, and gorgeous bouquets of flowers, —but
it is a much better hotel than at St. Thomas’s. All day there have
been innumerable boys and men clamouring for one to buy, quite
tormenting, round the verandah, and I must say if I were only
coming home I should buy a lot of things, —charming nests of
baskets, things* of ivory, ebony, tortoiseshell; boxes of different
woods, sapphire and pearl rings,—great rubbish most of it, but
now and then something very tempting ; however, I have resisted
all but a few trifles. Yesterday (Sunday) we all went to church at
six. Such a nice church, but stiflingly hot. I had on my new
Paris holland and very soon found it was covered with dark lines
of heat. For that reason, holland does not answer in hot climates.
I hardly know what is best to wear. I shall lay in a stock of
thin China silks at Singapore, where I hear they are very cheap.
We dined at the table d’hote at seven —our party at a small
separate table —not a bad dinner. The best dish was prawn
curry, which is excellent. They hand round all sorts of little
extras with it, such as chutney, grated cocoa-nut, salt fish, peppers,
etc., and we have it at every meal. This morning, much to our
disgust, it was pouring with rain, which continued nearly all day,
heavy, stifling rain, and we sat in the verandah and bargained
with the native traders. Arthur and Dr. Mayo set off, in spite
of it, in a carriage with a cover, to see a Buddhist temple. When
the rain cleared off in the afternoon it was tolerably cool, and the
children and nurse and I and Mr. Knollys took a drive. The
country is very pretty, so wonderfully green and tropical, and all
the tropical wild flowers one knows so well in profusion. But
as we drove through the lovely green rice plantations, which are
swamps, I thought that Mamma never could have stood this
climate. Ido not think it is healthy—here, at least —and we hear
that cholera and dysentery are about. Eka’s friends are nearly
all at Nuwera Eliya, as this is the hot season, but the banker s
lady came to call and asked her to dinner, and she had a carriage
lent her by some one else. She asked me to take a drive with
her, “ You won’t mind waiting for about an hour while I make a
sketch ? ” But I found I should have about half a mile of walk-
ing up a hill to the place of the same sketch, so I declined, and
she went alone. She has already sketched nearly everything in
Ceylon, so she is not very keen about it, as she never cares to do
a thing twice. ... It is so amusing to see Jack fanning himself,
with a benign smile on his face. I had no peace till I bought
him a fan for his very own, which he wears suspended to his
waist. He has left off jerseys, and looks so jolly with only his


short, and very wide, open neck. He didn’t think it quite proper
at first. I heard Nevil say to him, “Jack, what are you going to
do with the fan Mr. Rice is going to give you?” I said Mr. Rice
had never promised to give him one. “ No. But I mean to ask
him to give Jack one, and I know he will.” Mr. Rice is Nevil’s
great friend just now. He is a very tall, big man, and she is
generally sitting in his arms with her head on his shoulder. Last
week she quarrelled with him, no one knew why, and she said to
me, “ Mr. Rice is no longer my friend, Mr. Finch-’Atton is my
friend now.” However, after ignoring his existence for two days
she suddenly restored him into favour. I was rather surprised to
see her back in her old place on his knee. Mr. Rice and Mr. Finch-
Hatton now form part of our party, and I rarely speak to any one
else. There are some most objectionable Dutch people going to
Java, several Spaniards, one Russian, a German newly-married
couple, and various French persons. A good many English tea
people going to China, and some Australians. Nearly all are on
shore at this hotel. lam tired of their faces. . . . It is a month
to-day since we left London, and we are not yet half through our
voyage. However, the Anadyr is really the perfection of a
steamer. It is more like a good hotel, so beautifully clean and
sweet, and everything done most liberally. When not too hot
it is most comfortable, and she has such a beautiful long deck.
There are not many passengers for her enormous size. Arthur
has just brought me in from the bazaar such a beautiful large
brass dish. lam delighted with it.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Our voyage from Aden to Galle was an agreeable one, not
too hot—no rain—a pleasant air, and a calm sea. Our mode of
life was on this wise. I got up early and went on deck. At 8
R. and I breakfasted on chocolate, eschewing the regular break-
fast at 9.30. The morning was devoted to preparing Fiji lessons,
and at about one we met in class till three. After dinner there
was generally an attempt made to get up singing glees, but it
was not usually of a very successful description. We used to
cluster on the stern gratings for the purpose. The only acquaint-
ances we made were a Mr. and Mrs. Vicars, who joined in the
singing. We all liked both Rice and Finch-Hatton.
We reached Galle on Sunday 18th early, and Knollys,
A. J. L., and I at once went ashore in outrigger canoes —very
funny machines. The fort looked very very picturesque from
the water, and it looked equally so when we landed. We passed
through an old Dutch gate in the walls, with the date 1664 on


it, but with our royal arms of later date above, and a fringe of
green wall-plants to both. Walked up a little hill under a shady
avenue and so to the Oriental Hotel. Having secured rooms
they went off again to fetch Eachael and the children ashore.
To church in the evening, at the most sensibly—for the
climate—built church that I have yet seen in the tropics.
We stayed at Galle till Wednesday. A great part of my
time there, and certainly that most interesting to me, was spent
in discussions with Buddhist priests, hearing their own account
of their doctrine. Mayo and Arthur always went with me—Le
Hunte, Mitchell, and Knollys once. We visited two temples and
conversed with five priests. The first temple we visited, the Para-
mahanda Yihare of Minuwangoda, is about a mile and a quarter
from the Fort; the other about a mile farther on. Both are on
hills —the former entirely shut in by wood, the latter commanding
a fine view. The Attepattu Mudaliar of Galle, who speaks English
admirably, accompanied us as interpreter. The buildings of the
first temple were of a very rough character. There was a large
dagoba, and a colossal figure of Buddha in a modern shrine. In
a side shrine was a moderate-sized figure (rather over life size)
of Buddha seated, of brass and of great antiquity. There was a
shed for reading Bana, and opposite to it the priest’s house and
chapel—a one-story verandahed house. A new building was in
course of construction opposite the entrance. The high priest,
a very intelligent old man 1 in the picturesque yellow robe or
toga of priesthood, took his seat in a long-armed chair (Yankee)
in his verandah, and we began to talk; he having previously
called round him a crowd of people about the temple. The
conversation lasted three hours. Of course I can give but the
pith of the questions and answers. I began by asking what was
the origin of matter? Was it created, or self-existent, and if
created, by whom ?
A. Matter is self-existent and eternal. No superior power
created it, nor can now control its inherent laws.
Q. Is the world in which we live coeval with matter, or was it
created out of unorganised matter ? If so, when, and by whom ?
A. The elements out of which the world is composed are
eternal, but in obedience to the working of natural laws, the
world as we see it, decays and dissolves from time to time, forms
itself anew by the operation of the same laws, and is gradually
re-formed. Thus there have been, and will again be, times at
which it might be said with truth, “ The world [as we see it]
is not,” but there never was a time at which it could be truly said,
1 This was Bnlutgama Unanse, with whom I was destined later to become
much better acquainted.


“ The world has not been.” There was no creator. The successive
formations of the world are accomplished by the working of
immutable laws inherent in nature and without the conscious
agency of any intelligent being.
Q. Besides the five precepts and the eight precepts, are there
any sacred writings accepted by all Buddhists equally ?
A. The “ preaching of Buddha ” is accepted without the
slightest variation of line, word, or letter, in Ceylon, Burmah, and
Siam. In China and Thibet there is not the same resemblance.
There are many commentaries, but they are of very various
degrees of excellence and authority. They help one to under-
stand the preaching, but that is all, and the views of any of them
may be freely questioned.
Q. What is the present position of Buddhists in various
countries towards one another? Might a Chinese or Burman
enter a Singhalese monastery, or vice versa ?
A. There is perfect inter-communion between the Buddhists
of Siam, Burmah, and Ceylon —not with those of China and
Thibet, who are on some points mistaken, and are, moreover,
ignorant and superstitious.
[These heresies were chiefly as to living Buddha, etc., and
their not so clearly recognising the idea of the entire absence of
supernaturalism.]
Q. What is the origin of virtue, or rather wherein does it
consist? Are acts virtuous because they are in accordance with
the teaching of Buddha, or has virtue an independent and
essential existence?
A. The five precepts are eternal. Buddha could but declare
them. He did not make and could not change them. They are
inherent in existence. The ecclesiastical precepts and the teach-
ing rest on Buddha, and may be changed with each Kalpa by each
succeeding Buddha. So long as they exist, the actions enjoined
by them are virtuous and obligatory because enjoined by Buddha.
But they stand on quite another footing from the five precepts.
Q. What is the nature of the respect paid to the images
of Buddha? Have they any essential sanctity, or are they
simply memorials ?
A. There is nothing said in the preaching of Buddha with
regard to images. Buddha enjoins us to respect his memory,
and objects by which he may be recollected, and the most
esteemed commentators, and also the practice of the earliest ages
of Buddhism, have interpreted this as an injunction to make
images of him, to keep alive men’s remembrance of the Teac er.
They are simply symbolical and have no sanctity whatever o t eir
own. A certain respect is paid them because of whom they repre


sent. This is right. It would be thought wrong and shocking to
insult a statue of the Queen or of the Governor. In a still
higher degree is the statue of Buddha entitled to respect.
Q. But do not the common people reverence them as possess-
ing mysterious powers ?
A. A few—a very few—extremely ignorant persons may;
but all who possess even the most moderate degree of instruction
know that the image is no idol, and is mere metal or plaster, and
nothing. We do not pray to Buddha, he is dead, we simply
praise his memory for his excellent doctrine and the benefits we
have derived from it.
[lt is worthy of note that these answers were given unhesi-
tatingly before a considerable audience, of persons of the lower
classes, who did not express the slightest dissent or surprise.]
It should be added here, however, that at the second temple
visited, one of the priests, though he unhesitatingly agreed that
the images had no virtue, expressed a different opinion as to the
relics of Buddha. These relics, which he divided into two classes,
Ist, those of his person,—teeth, hair, bones, etc.; and 2nd,
things which had belonged to him—bowls, spoons, mats, etc.:
or at all events those of the former class, had, he held, the
power of curing or relieving certain diseases, provided these
diseases did not result from the sins of the patient in this or a
previous life. This virtue, he took care to explain, was not in
any way supernatural, but the result of natural laws governing the
properties of matter which, when sublimated in such an existence
as the body of a Buddha, acquired many wonderful new qualities.
I had been much struck by the resemblance of the practices,
(styled Kasina), to produce abstraction, as described in Spence
Hardy’s book, to what used to be called electro-biology, and
wished to learn more about it.
Q. Of the different sorts of Kasina, what is the best and
most used ?
A. There are many kinds of Kasina. The most usual, that
of the lamp. The method is to put a light inside a jug set on
its side, so that a circle of light is thrown on the wall, and then
steadfastly to regard that circle.
Q. One Kasina is practised with a lump of earth with a
painted spot of colour in its centre. What size is this lump ?
Is it taken in the hand ?
A. It is not taken in the hand. The hand would shake and
spoil its effect. The lump of clay must be stuck against a wall.
The size is about that of a dollar. The instrument is nothing.
It is but a help. When abstraction is reached, the instrument
may be taken away. Its use is over. A flower or a stick would
CHAP.


do as well as anything else, if looked at carefully. Kasina can
only be attained when sitting in a posture which is comfortable,
but not too comfortable.
[The Mudaliar explained that Kasina was rarely if ever now
practised in Ceylon.]
Dr. Mayo then asked some questions and gave some informa-
tion about Borobuddur, and asked about the resemblances in the
life of our Lord and of Buddha, about which the priest did not
know much.
In the afternoon we drove to the other temple, the path up
to which was pretty and bordered by wild flowers, ixoras, lantana,
frangipani, and the beautiful iron-wood blossom (new to me).
There were also cashews and Jack trees, but not specially
fine. In the court of the temple were two fine trees of Poin-
ciana regia in full flower, and the place was ablaze with their
masses of scarlet and white flowers. The establishment was
more straggling than the other; there was no dagoba, but
a sacred “bo ” tree enclosed by stone terraces. Leaves
might not be plucked from this, but we might pick up those
that had fallen. The temple was divided longitudinally. In
the outer chamber was an upright Buddha. In the latter a
gigantic recumbent one. In these chambers, as in the other
temple, the walls were covered with long rows of disciples holding
flowers, very like paintings in the catacombs. There were also
scenes from the life of Buddha. All the figures were painted on
a scarlet or rather Indian red ground. In the verandah were
seated a number of devotees clothed in white, who had taken the
eight vows. A good many other persons of all ages had come
up to make the five vows. It was very like a litany. The priest
and people repeated three times each vow. The five precepts
are :—Thou shalt not kill —Thou shalt not steal—Thou shalt
not commit adultery—Thou shalt not lie —Thou shalt not get
drunk. But the vows (which are taken for twenty-four hours, but
usually renewed every week) intensify these into not taking the
life of anything—not coveting—not having intercourse with any
woman, and abstaining wholly from spirituous drink and un-
necessary conversation. After seeing these vows taken, we
adjourned to the dwelling-court of the temple and began to talk.
Three priests sat together on a sofa at the end of the verandah,
and a most picturesque group they made; each in his yellow
toga with russet endings. We asked the same sort of questions
and received substantially the same answers. One priest, how-
ever, was disposed to attribute virtue to the relics of Buddha,
though he unhesitatingly agreed that the images were naught.
Belies, however, he said, not by any supernatural virtue, but by


their inherent properties, would heal diseases which were not the
result of a man’s own sins in this or a former life. He divided into
relics of the person of Buddha—articles which had been employed
by him, and images, which he ranked last. Evil deeds would be
followed inevitably by their result, which, according to circum-
stances, might be the man’s re-birth as an animal or as a devil of
a lighter or darker dye, a pratu or assura. No divine being could
interfere to avert the consequences of sin, nor a fortiori could
Buddha. The fruit inevitably ripened. The conversation,
though equally long, was more desultory and less interesting than
that of the morning. The following day we went back to the
first temple to see a specially learned priest, a pupil of the best
Pali scholar in the island. He was a man of about thirty, of
fine pleasing face, somewhat ascetic, but covered by a frequent
smile. The old priest also took a leading part in the discussion.
Q. In the Christian religion it is held that the punishment
of sin may be escaped through the merits of a mediator, both
divine and human. According to the Jewish, the Hindoo, and
most other religions, atonement for sin may be made by sacri-
fices. What is there analogous to this in Buddhism ?
A. Nothing. Good and bad actions inevitably bring their
consequences, as the flower produces the fruit and the fruit the
seed. No divine being exists who could avert the consequences
of sin, and a fortiori Buddha, who is not divine, could not do so.
Q. We have been told that actions inevitably bring about
their own results. This is true in the physical world in the
strictest sense, whether the acts are performed with or without
full knowledge of their nature. The man who falls from a
height will be equally injured whether he threw himself down
knowingly or thought he was treading on safe ground. Is this
true also in the moral world ? Will a man who has killed
another incur the same punishment whether he did it inten-
tionally or accidentally 1
A. Certainly not. An unconscious action is, morally speak-
ing, no action at all. Intention and other circumstances all give
an act its special character and consequently its special results.
Q. Of what avail is repentance ?
A. Repentance for sin will not enable a man to escape chas-
tisement for it, but, as if sincere it will be accompanied by good
actions, it will shorten the period of punishment and cause him a
better re-birth.
[This answer, however, was not given without some discussion
among themselves, and, as I thought, some difference of opinion.]
Q. You speak of “punishment.” Does not punishment
imply the existence of a power that can punish ?


A. The punishment or rather the suffering that a man
undergoes for wrongdoing is not imposed by the will of another;
it is the evil fruit of the evil seed he has sown.
Q. What is the nature of the punishments which evil deeds
entail ?
A. Some sins produce their fruit in this life, such as diseases,
disgrace, poverty. Those that are not punished in this life in
which the sin is committed are punished hereafter when the
elements of being recombine into life, by misfortunes in the
life to which the sinner is next born; by birth in an inferior
condition of life, or as an animal; or by birth in one of the
various hells as a demon of darker or lighter colour —a jpratu or
assura. But these hells are material, and when their punishment
in them is over, these demons themselves may be reborn as
lower animals and ultimately again as men. Similarly there is
an angelic world in heavens which are material, and the in-
habitants of which are not free from “ ignorance ” and “ desire ”
(the two great hindrances to the attainment of Nirwana), and
who, though they may attain it, may also be reborn as men as a
punishment for demerit.
Q. Is it an act of merit to convert others to Buddhism.
A. Yes, it is an act of merit to place the truths of Buddhism
before others, only, as it is contrary to the precepts of Buddha
to inflict pain of body or pain of mind on another, not only must
no persecution be used, but Buddhism must not be so pertina-
ciously pressed on others as to distress them mentally by im-
portunity.
Q. As a matter of fact, are conversions made ?
A. Yes, not unfrequently, though not very often.
Q. Others besides Buddhists teach the five precepts. Are
they to be regarded as friends or enemies ?
A. [Given unhesitatingly.] As friends of Buddha’s doctrine ;
not of the Buddha’s person or teaching.
Q. Does Buddhism reappear in each Kalpa 1
A. Yes. But there are intervals before the appearance and
teaching of a Buddha in each Kalpa. At such times the five
precepts only remain.
Q. Is Buddhism always the same, or may it receive a different
handling in each Kalpa ?
A. The five precepts are eternal—other teaching may be
varied according to the peculiar circumstances of the Kalpa, and
is only binding for that Kalpa.
Q. Have there been false Buddhas ?
A. Yes, several. There is a mad monk now at Kandy who
fancies he is Buddha.


We had then long talks on Nirwana, and on the origin of
the human race in each re-creation of the world. What it is
I think they hardly understand themselves; and we only got half
through a definition of “ignorance,” for at each step of the
explanation an illustration was given, which led to minor
illustrations of the illustration, till one got hopelessly lost and
generally muddled. There is a dialogue in one of Sir William
Jones’s works of exactly this description, of which I was at once
strongly reminded. Our talks were too broken and discursive
to be reduced to a question and answer, but on the whole I take
the Cingalese opinion to be that Nirwana is practically annihila-
tion ; but they admitted that another view might be taken, and
said that Nirwana could not be said not to have individuality,
though they admitted that there was another view which might
be held, and with some inconsistency declared, in answer to
my question whether Nirwana was individual , that it could
not be said to be so, neither could it be said not to be so. In
short, I fancy the true view to be that Gotama meant by
Nirwana the annihilation of all that was human, including
personality, but not the non-existence of felicity, incompre-
hensible and indescribable except by the negation of all human
attributes, bodily, mental, or spiritual. The negation of all
human attributes of body, soul, or spirit, according to our con-
ceptions = nothing , but I do not know that that is a necessary
conclusion.
The Attepattu Mudaliar in answer to a question from
me as to what European work gave the best account of
Buddhism, answered that none were tolerable. “It was as though
the hand had been put into a pond and a handful of water
scooped out.” The priests were acquainted with Max Muller’s
name.
Of the origin of man they gave the following legend: —
Q. How does man first appear on earth in each Kalpa ?Is
he naturally developed from earth, or is he at least created ?
A. The heavens are material and subject to changes like the
earth, but the higher heavens do not dissolve with each Kalpa as
the earth and lower heavens do. When the materials of the
earth have first come together again for the formation of a new
world, this is visible to the glorified men in the Brahmaloka
heaven. These men have not yet wholly overcome ignorance or
desire (for had they done so they would have attained Nirwana),
and in some of them these passions are so strong that they wish
to revisit the earth; they descend first into the lower heavens,
which have been renewed with the earth, and there some of
them remain, but others descend on to earth itself. All these


beings are self-luminous, but those on the earth itself, and who
derive support from its jelly-like pulp, gradually lose their
brightness and acquire animal functions. They can still, how-
ever, see the bright ones they have left in the lower heavens,
and having lost their own splendour and forgotten its existence,
they come to regard these shadowy ones as gods. Hence the
origin of all human mythologies. After a time grass springs up,
men eat it, and lose all their brightness, then grain comes,
and with the eating of it comes difference of sex and an entire
loss of all perception into the heavenly world till then visible.
Of the origin of animals they said nothing.
The younger priest quoted the Buddhist scriptures freely
and fluently.
Mayo plied them again with questions as to the resemblances
between Christianity and Buddhism. They consulted together,
and replied that such resemblances were purely accidental and
were not so great as those which might be traced between the
birth of Christ and the birth of Vishnu. The old priest then
put some questions to us as to whether it was true that some
of the learned pundits in Germany had come to disbelieve
Christianity, etc. 1
The weather was very bad during our stay at Galle, and I
only got one good drive through the bazaar and the cocoa-nut
groves. Country very pretty, but, I should think, very unhealthy.
The chief novelties were to me the Cingalese costume, (which
is ugly), the tortoise-shell combs worn by the men and a few
new flowers. We left again on Wednesday morning in a deluge
of rain, the children carried on board in waterproofs, etc., the hotel
leaking like a sieve. We had nasty wet weather all the way to the
Straits of Malacca —then fine weather —then a tremendous down-
pour on the morning of our reaching Singapore, which, however,
cleared off before our landing. The approach to Singapore
exceedingly picturesque. Mr, Rice very unwell with fever all
the voyage. We were warped up close alongside the wharf, and
in the operation completely capsized a boat which chanced at
the moment to be crossing the warp. It was regularly lifted up
into the air, balanced a moment on the rope, and then turned
over, upsetting its contents —men, cabbages, cooking-pots, and
paddles,—in a shower into the water. A Mr. Harman, Post-
master, met us, and under his guidance we got into gharries and
drove to the Hotel de I’Europe —a very uncomfortable hostelry.
The A.D.C., who had been too late to find us on board, joined us
at the hotel. He had only taken four rooms for the ten of us.
Hotel is a big barrack full of queer trap-doors and ladders lead-
ing down to bathrooms on the ground floor —cockatoo loggia


billiard-room. Cathedral of indifferent Gothic, but cool and
spacious. The place has altogether a generally well-kept and
prosperous appearance. Dinner at Government House. Hand-
some house, especially drawing-room. High steep stairs.
April %'lth, Tuesday. —Made arrangements for hiring a house.
Knollys, Arthur, and I went out to bathe in the harbour. We
had a pleasant row through a picturesque fleet of junks. Our
bathe was not very satisfactory, but it was pleasant to have a
swim again of any sort. Much rain. Dined again at Govern-
ment House. Mangosteens. Very pretty fruit. Pigs of snow
in a case of marone velvet.
To Sir John Lefevre
Mount Echo, Singapore, April 27, 1875.—0ur passage
down the Eed Sea was uneventful and unusually cool. At
Aden we stayed a day, and I saw no reason to modify my
often expressed opinion that it is perhaps the most pictur-
esque place that I have ever seen, taking it altogether. There is
finer scenery elsewhere, and more striking buildings, and possibly
an equally picturesque population, but such a combination I know
nowhere else. Moreover, —and this is perhaps that which forms
the most essential part of the charm, —there is absolutely nothing
that is not picturesque,—an entire absence of those features which
usually mingle with and spoil such scenes. . . .
My time at Galle was for the most part spent in a very
interesting manner, viz. in long conversations with learned
Buddhist priests in their monasteries, and in hearing from
them what the doctrines of Buddhism really are. It is by no
means an unphilosophical system, though rather a dreary one,
being practically atheistic. They regard matter as eternal, and
governed by eternal and unchanging laws, over which no power,
divine or human, has any control. Idolaters they certainly are
not, but regard the statues of Buddha exactly as we do those of
the Duke of Wellington or Shakespeare. I have written down
an abstract of these conversations, and if there is time to have
it copied before we go, (which is, I think, doubtful,) I will enclose
it to you, as I have every reason to believe you would find it not
uninteresting.
Lady Gordon to Miss Emily Shaw-Lefevre
Imperial Hotel, Singapore, April 27.—Here we are at
Singapore, five days from Ceylon, a very fine and very quick


passage. We left Ceylon on Wednesday, Tuesday it rained all
day, and Wednesday morning it rained worse. We hardly knew
how to get out to the ship. The Harbour-master had two boats
ready for us, and I tucked up Jack in my big waterproof, which
I was glad enough to have. Nevil was tied up in a piece of
waterproof cloth. It was a difficult business getting them into
the ship, as the waves were very high. However, we did not get
wet, and Jack said he was very glad to get “ home ” again. The
next day he felt very sick for some hours, but he got over it and
was particularly jolly and well, and so was Nevil all the way
here. It was intensely hot for two or three days. Poor Mr.
Rice has been very unwell indeed with intermittent fever; he is
laid up here, and I hardly think he will be able to go on to
Australia. At Galle, Arthur had a letter from Robert Mitchell,
who we rather expected might meet us there or here, (he is now
at Calcutta,) saying he could not come, but that he had sent
us an excellent Madras cook. Abbey went on board the steamer
just arrived from Calcutta, found him there, and brought him on
board the Anadyr in a canoe, a little fellow in a white jacket and a
big white turban. Nothing of interest happened on our voyage here.
It was much too hot to write, so I put off all my letters till we
arrived here. We steamed into the harbour about three o’clock,
a long narrow opening like a river. We lay alongside the wharf,
so we had not the disagreeable landing in small boats. A little
man whom I took for the Governor’s A.D.C., but who turned out
to be the Postmaster, came on board and was very civil. He
said that we were expected, but that as there was no room for
us at Government House, rooms had been engaged at the Imperial
Hotel, and he put us into three small carriages drawn by
Lombok ponies and brought us to the Post Office, where he said
there were letters waiting for us —(the town is three miles from
the wharf), then he insisted on Arthur and me and Eka getting
out and having some very nasty tea in his room. In the mean-
time A. J. L. came here with the children to see after the rooms, and
when we arrived we found to our disgust that, though eight had
been ordered, only four had been kept for us, and those very nasty,
all passage rooms to the others, whilst one has only a borrowed
light. We can just manage to squeeze in by putting Marques
in Eka’s room, and the two children and Nurse together into one
gigantic bed. A. J. L. and Mr. Knollys managed to get a horrid
room at last, and the rest are gone off to other and worse hotels.
Soon after, Sir A. Clarke’s A.D.C., Mr. Brackenbury, arrived, having
been down to the wharf to meet us too late. He said that the Gov-
ernor had been away, and only heard that morning that we were
expected; that he was extremely sorry he had not room to take


us in to stay, but that seven of us must come and dine that night.
We said we would come if they would excuse our travelling
dresses, as we could not possibly unpack. He said that was of
no consequence, and that we must come, etc., and the • carriage
would be sent for us. Accordingly we went at half-past seven, —
Arthur and I and Eka and Mr. Knollys,—but the stupid A.D.C.
had never told Lady Clarke about our not dressing. We went
in our ship black grenadines. She appeared resplendent in white
satin, lace, diamond stars, aigrettes —a regular ball dress. After
dinner she apologised for it and took me quite aback, for she said,
“I am a great hand at reading faces, and I know you thought
when I came into the room, ‘ What an overdressed, second-rate
little thing,’ ” which was exactly what I had thought. She is
very good-natured. ... Sir Andrew said he had heard from
George that Arthur was going to Fiji, but as he did not mention
me he thought A. was going alone, and never expected there
would be a lady in the party. There were two or three men
at dinner, of whom I only made out Colonel Fielding, who is
staying here on his way from Australia and leaves for England
by this mail; I had not seen him for years. ... It is a beautiful
Government House, exactly suited to the climate —immense cool
sitting-rooms, fine hall, wide staircase, nicely decorated with
plants, everything very nicely done, and handsomely furnished.
Lady Clarke said they had packed up everything of their own,
as they leave next Monday. This hotel is horrid —bad food,
stuffy rooms, and attendance bad as it can be. You call a
Chinaman and give him an order, and he stares and apparently
goes to get what you want, but never comes back again. I
was quite uneasy about the children, not being able to get
proper food for them or anything at the right time. The
day we arrived I could not get any dinner for them till seven
o’clock, and they were so tired and hungry, poor little things.
Jack suffers a good deal from heat; he is still covered with prickly
heat like little blisters, particularly bad on his hands.
Mount Echo, April 28. —The Governor told us that there
was a very nice house about three miles out of the town
which he thought we could hire for a week with linen, servants,
plate, and everything we could want, and he strongly advised
us to take it, as he knew the hotel was quite unfit to stay
in. So the next day Mr. Knollys and A. J. L. went to see
it, and were so much pleased with it that we determined to
take possession at once, and we all removed bag and baggage
before breakfast this morning. We have brought our new cook
and shall be able to give him a trial. It is a charming place on


a hill, quite cool and airy,—a delightful change from the hotel.
It took three bullock-carts and two carriages to convey us and
our light baggage up from town. There are plenty of rooms, but
only six beds, two of which are eight feet square, so that Nurse
and both children will sleep all together in one of them. Mr.
Dunlop, the owner, has most kindly put the house at our disposal
without rent. There are three servants belonging to him, butler,
cook, and boy, (Chinamen). There is no room for Abbey, so he
has to stay in town, and come up every day with the “ bazaar,”
i.e. provisions for the day. We have had capital breakfast and
luncheon to-day. Mr. Dunlop has made us most comfortable, and
has left everything, such as candles, soap, etc., for us to begin upon.
We have hired two carriages among us for the week, a nice open
one with a pair, and a small gharry with a little pony. Jackie was
not at all well yesterday. I suppose the food he ate at the hotel
upset him, but Dr. Mayo thinks he will soon be all right again. I
could hardly sleep last night for fidgeting about him. Nevil is
very well. We dined again at Government House last night, five
of us. There were a Captain and Mrs. Maynard, Colonel Newdi-
gate, Rifle Brigade, besides Colonel Fielding, and various other
men. We are to dine there again to-morrow, and that, I hope, will
be the last time, for we have had about enough of it. Yesterday
it rained all the afternoon, but Miss Gordon Gumming and I hired
a gharry and drove about the town, which is most curious and
picturesque. The Chinese shops are most amusing. I longed to
stop and pick up all kinds of curiosities I saw —rude china pots and
pans, etc. This sort of ware is said to be excessively cheap. You
and Madeleine would have been charmed with it. Eka has not
much taste for the sort of things we delight in. There is one swell
shop where the Chinese and Japanese china is most fascinating,
but I did not see anything in dress worth getting. There are the
usual merchants looking in all day long with silks, fans, screens,
haberdashery, and every imaginable thing. Out here we shall be
very quiet, but I am only too thankful to escape from the beastly
hotel. The town looks and smells very unhealthy, but it is said
not to be so. The Clarkes like it very much, and are extremely
sorry to leave; but Lady Clarke thinks the climate is enervating
in the long-run. We were greatly relieved when we got in here
to find that our next ship is to be the Brisbane , one of the best on
the line. There are three good and three bad ones, and we did
not know which to expect. But lam afraid it will be very much
crowded, and we cannot expect the comfort we have had in the
Anadyr. Forty of our fellow-passengers got out here to pro-
ceed to their various destinations by other ships. We took leave
of them with no regret, with the exception of Mr. and Mrs Yicars,
H


(tea). She is decidedly a nice little thing and sang nicely. We
had a good deal of music.
Mount Echo, April 28. —We are very comfortable here and
have everything we want, just as if we were in our own house, but
it is hot certainly. We had a pleasant little family dinner to-
night. It does seem so odd to have settled down here with a
house of our own. I wish you were here. There are endless
picturesque things to draw, but Eka doesn’t condescend to little
things, and has not yet found a sketch worthy of her. A. J. L.
is always saying if only it were Madeleine, she would sketch
this and that effect or picturesque bit—Chinese junks, bullock-
carts, the Chinese themselves with their long pigtails. Jack began
to cry the first time he saw a real living pigtail. It is a wonder-
fully curious place. Oh dear, how I wish you were here. You
would enjoy poking about in the Chinese shops. One can pick
up the most charming things in common china for a few cents. I
don’t care for fine expensive things, but these common things are
most fascinating, and no one else knows of them, lam sure. One
might get a breakfast set, lovely shapes and patterns, for a few
shillings. I could find such subjects here* for drawing as you
would be delighted with. I had half a mind to send home a
big box of rubbish. Mary would go wild over these things. I
found Eka most good-natured and kind. She is going to town
at six in the morning with A. J. L. and Mr. Knollys, to be
deposited in a Chinese temple to sketch, and be called for again
in three hours. Ido not envy her, for they are stinking places.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Wednesday , April 28.- —Walked in town before breakfast and
looked into temples. Met Miss G. C. and went about with her.
We looked into one large joss-house—a granite enclosure with a
species of cloister of scarlet wooden pillars on three sides, and
a pavilion-like open temple on the fourth. Eka poked and
pried into every hole and corner, and when she had satisfied
her curiosity we went out again into the street, down which we
walked, pursued by a very evil odour, which seemed to cling
close to us, but of which we could not discover the cause. At
length, casting a glance at Eka’s head, what was my amazement
to see a small column of smoke quietly ascending in spiral coils
from the crown of her hat! In rummaging the temple she had
thrust her head up to an altar and unwittingly carried off a joss-
stick, sticking in her hat, to which it had now set fire, and which
was smouldering away with a very nasty smell. It was impos


sible not to laugh, and in the laugh I must do her the justice to
say she heartily joined. I afterwards went with her to a Chinese
cemetery, of which she made rather a nice drawing. It is a
pretty place; the tombs built into the side of the hill and faced
with a low wall in the shape of a great omega. Plenty of trees
about. Drove up to our new house, Mount Echo, before break-
fast. It is prettily placed. After breakfast, went to a great
Chinese funeral. Not very striking, except the widows, who were
muffled up in coarse white sackcloth completely covering them
from head to foot as if under an extinguisher or in a sack.
They could neither see nor be seen, and were led by the hand.
After luncheon, drove with Rachael to Botanic Gardens.
Very prettily laid out. Fine avenue of Antherstia nobilis, —baby
orang-outang, bears, etc. ; dined at home. Our house has a lower
story of baths and billiard-room, steep stairs, a large verandah,
and is in other respects the usual Creole house, on a hill, the road
up taking sweeps round it. Ixoras, gardenias, and all other
West Indian plants in abundance.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Mount Echo, Singapore, April 29. —I sent off a long
letter to Emily by the French mail to-day. I find there is an
English one leaving on, Sunday, which will reach you nearly,
if not quite as soon. I told Emily to send her letter to you, as
I could not write any more. It is certainly a very hot place.
Even up here in quite a high position, where you catch every
breath of air, it is so close to-day that one does not know how to
keep cool. It seems so odd to be established in a comfortable
country house of our own, with books, pictures, clocks, nick-nacks,
just as the owners left it. Mrs. Dunlop has just gone home to
take her only child aged five, and leave him there, and Mr.
Dunlop found it too solitary to live alone, and wants to let the
house for a few months. It is about three and a half miles from
town. It is a much better house than any in Mauritius. There
is a good large drawing-room and dining-room with half partition,
and a very wide verandah full of chairs and sofas, into which all
the rooms open with only jalousies —never closed. In fact, all
the house is only half partitioned, and it is rather like living in
one big room; as every word must be heard in every room.
There is a billiard-room and a very nice garden, and quantities
of flowers are brought in and dressed by some one every day.
The children have been much better since they came, but
Jackie feels the heat, and is very cross indeed. He gets into
such passions, which he never used to do. I believe it is nothing


but the heat which affects his temper. The prickly heat must
be very trying, he is covered all over with it. Nevil has not had
it at all ; she looks much better than when she left England,
and she is extremely good, but they are both very happy here.
Yesterday, Eka and I and Nevil went to lunch at Govern-
ment House. We also all dined there for the third time. It is
about two and a half miles from here. Lady Clarke had up a
man with shawls, silks, etc., for me to see, and I invested in a
China crape shawl to make a tunic of, and some Fussore silk, and
also a piece of fibre silk, which I never saw anywhere else; it
looks like Grenadine, but is much stronger, and is only two shill-
ings per yard. It will be a nice cool material, but I don’t know
how I shall get it made. Some things here are very cheap indeed,
especially white clothes, and our gentlemen have all been fitting
themselves out with them. Chinese tailors come and make them
in a few hours. We had rather a pleasant dinner there. It is
nice to be in such a big cool dining-room with punkahs—and I
think it is a delightful house—but it would not reconcile me to
living here. It is too hot. Children can’t stay here after five
years old. They all have to be sent home at that age, and they
look quite colourless and waxen. All the year round it is the
same, but generally pretty cool at nights, and not unhealthy.
Eka never feels hot. I never met with a stronger person, or a
more capital traveller. We met at Government House last night,
the Maharajah of Johore, a very nice enlightened Malay; his
Private Secretary; a Russian gentleman named Baron Maclay ;
the Attorney-General and his wife, (a particularly nice person,)
and Dr. Mayo and Mr. C. Mitchell as part of our party.
The servants are all Indians, and look very well in their
livery of white tunics, scarlet and gold sashes, and scarlet and
gold hats; there are an immense number of them.
I rather like Lady Clarke; she is very good-natured. They
have an immense deal of entertaining. Chance people coming
in nearly every day, from all parts of the world. It must be
amusing, but rather too much of it. Lady C. says they are never
alone. I know lam writing very stupid letters, but it is so hot.
I don’t think the place agrees with me, for I have not felt right
since I came, and cannot eat. It always takes me some time to get
acclimatised to great heat. I often wonder how you would like
it, but I fancy you would not get on in such heat. The baths
are very peculiar here, the same as in India; you stand on a
marble floor and throw the water over yourself out of a big
earthenware jar like a little bucket. I don’t like it much, and
long to get in, which one can’t do. Each bedroom has its bath-
room below, and a small staircase down to it, generally inside a


wardrobe. The place looks very thriving, and there are no end
of nice country bungalows in every direction, with nice gardens
and well-kept approaches, and the roads are capital. There
is to be a farewell ball given to the Governor and Lady Clarke
next week, which we happily escape. I have not been able to
go to any of her receptions, as I have no clothes! but I don’t
suppose one misses much, and it would be terribly hot. The
vegetation here is much the same as in Trinidad, very luxuriant,
and there are much the same fruits and flowers. We have our
early coffee in the verandah, breakfast at eleven, and dine at half-
past seven, with a small luncheon of fruit, Our cook has been
ill with fever ever since we arrived here, so that we have not
been able to try him yet. The cook belonging to this house is
a capital one.
A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon of Ellon
May 1. —We have been nearly a week here already. In the first instance
we put up at an hotel in the town, and were extremely uncomfortable there ;
but this house, which has been lent to Sir Arthur by a merchant here, is about
three miles out of town and is a delightful place. We had a good deal of rain
coming through the straits of Malacca, and therefore had but misty glimpses of
Sumatra and the other islands, but enough to give one an idea of how lovely
it must be in fine weather. Before reaching Singapore, however, the weather
cleared, and we came into harbour in sunshine, passing along in clear green
water, through narrow channels between thickly wooded islets and numerous
picturesque Chinese and Malay fishing-boats. A rather amusing incident, that
is, for the spectators, took place as we were getting alongside the wharf. A
boat with its thatched roof and two or three Malays in it was passing along
between our ship and the landing-stage, when a cable connnecting us with the
shore, which previously dipped down in the water, gradually tightened as the
boat went over it, catching the boat amidships and raising it up gently
to the height of about eight feet above the water, where it remained balanced
for a second and then quietly toppled over bottom upwards into the sea. It
was a most ridiculous sight to see all the men sitting helplessly in their boat
while it went up in the air and then shot them out with their gear like so
much rubbish.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Saturday , May I.—Knollys, Mayo, Le Hunte, and I started
for Johore after breakfast. We passed through the pretty jungle
which skirts the Botanic Garden, and then over fourteen miles of
good road to the north side of the island. The road was for the
most part flat and not very interesting, passing between low
rolling hills, some of which were covered with forest. Cultivation
of course diminished as we advanced. Passed many houses, but
no villages. At the ferry was a police station much like that at


Santa Cruz, Trinidad, —a sort of rest-house, and a few hovels
—much mud and mangroves. The strait is about a mile broad,
and on seeing us two steam launches put off from the other
side—the one for us, the other for our luggage. They could
not get near the shore for the low tide, and we had to go out to
them in a sanpan. The Maharajah’s Private Secretary came to
meet us. In one boat the seats were covered with beautiful
Chinese embroideries : squares of fine red cloth embroidered with
geometrical patterns and dragons in floss silk and gold. On the
steps of the wharf were the Maharajah, his brother, Prime
Minister, etc. We walked (under fire of a salute from the
battery) through his pretty garden, up flights of steps, and across
three terraces to the Setana , and so upstairs, where H.H, set
himself down on one sofa and deposited me on another opposite to
to him—Rather awful—The rest stood round. Conversation
naturally flagged. We smoked a cigar or two, and then H.H.
proposed that we should walk out to look at the railway.
Crossed the garden, looking into the unfinished audience hall,
which is in old Malay style and consists of four stages each within
the other and each raised a few steps above the one outside
it—the common people, the Inshis, the Uncos, and the Maharajah
himself. Then down a precipitous path to the railway, where
we saw the engine-shed, the new locomotive from India, (Lord
Northbrook’s present), etc. Walked along the rails to the first cul-
vert. Returned to the commencement of rail and found carriages
waiting. H.H. drove me in the first, horsed by two uncommonly
pretty black Delli ponies. We drove first to the great sawmills,
and went over them in minute detail with the intelligent
superintendent, Mr. Boultbee. Saw some large logs of teak and
cedar. Drove next through rising streets to the Head China-
man’s. House nearly open to street. Chairs high and straight-
backed, arranged in three sides of a hollow square and covered
with the same sort of embroidered towels as the boat had been.
Had tea, stared at the pretty things in the house, and were stared
at by a Chinese crowd outside. Then drove over a “ circular
road ” not in the very best repair. Saw an elephant come out of
the mud. Drove home—more cigars. Looked at a new lake in
course of making, lounged in the verandah, looking at the elephant
playing before us, talked to Baron Maclay, bathed, and, finally,
dressed for dinner. Dined in a fine marble-paved hall on the
lower story. Most of the Maharajah’s European officers, his
brother, his Ministers, the Head Chinaman, and the Moollah
dined with us. The dinner was good, though long. A band of
boys played during dinner, and we went to look at them after-
wards. They were all in Malay silk dresses, and played


remarkably well, considering that they had only been five months,
some only two, under instruction.
On going to my room and reflecting on what I had seen
during the day, I had to own myself greatly astonished. I had
heard of the enterprise of the Rajah of Johore, but had no notion
that he was such a man, or had done so much.
The sawmills are among the largest in the world, only
exceeded, according to the statement of the very capable
superintendent, Mr. Boultbee, by some in California. They saw
thirty tons of wood a day all the year round, and export to all
parts of the world, including Brazil, which, considering the
amount of fine wood there, seems almost incredible. In Mauritius,
as I well remember, nearly all the wood was “ Singapore wood,”
i.e. from the Johore mills. Johore teak and cedar are the two
woods exported; a third, Maconqu, a softer wood, is used for
building, etc., at home. Four cents is given for each log to the
cutters. In the mill almost all are Chinese —on the Gambir
plantations Coolies.
The railway is surveyed about twenty miles, and roughly
laid down about fifteen, finished for two. The Engineer thinks
the teak rails will last six years, and although the cost has much
exceeded the first estimate, he thinks £IOOO a mile will cover
everything. The wages to navvies are from twenty-three to
twenty-five cents a day. Generally he prefers piece-work. On
the curves the engine has cut a little, and he is laying down a
guard rail. The speed will be about twelve miles per hour.
All culverts, bridges, etc., are in wood. The town itself is a sur-
prising creation. Seven years ago there was not a house. The
mangrove swamps have been drained and filled in, and have given
place to broad, handsome quays and good streets, with a popula-
tion of some 15,000 Chinese, and 10,000 Malays. As yet the town
is wood, or plaster and mud, but there is good stone near, and I
saw some handsome pieces of granite lying by the sawmill for
the adornment of the Head Chinaman’s house. The palace itself
is handsome and well adapted to the climate, whilst the grounds
in which it stands are really most tastefully laid out, and are
very pretty.
The land, the Maharajah told me, on each side of the
railway is taken up by Chinese as fast as opened. He sells
this land out and out, not receiving rent. To Malays he
advances seeds or money for plantation, but the Chinese oust
them everywhere. Pepper, gambir, and cocoa-nut are the chief
plantations. There are three “ circular ” roads round the town
and one a few miles along the strait, not in very good order, any
of them, so far as I could see. H.H.’s carriage, drawn by veiy
103
FIJI
II


beautiful hlack Delli ponies, an unusual colour. Table served in
wholly European manner, as to china, plates, and glass, not in
very good taste, except the coffee service of Sevres and the
native gold work. The curry was formidable —we had to mix
ingredients from thirty-six different dishes ! Servants in almost
Hindoo dresses with yellow bands and turbans, or rather caps.
Head butler speaks English. Most of the princes in European
clothes. Moollah in crimson silk looked on disapprovingly.
After dinner, Knollys and Le Hunte went, under protection from
the Head Chinaman, to see some Chinese gambling places.
They would not let me go even incog.: but gave a curious de-
scription of their experiences and brought back one of the square
boxes with which they gamble. The Head Chinaman has much
lucre and influence, but is responsible for the good order of the
whole Chinese population. If they misbehave, off goes his head.
Sunday , May 2. —We were up betimes, and after coffee started
a little before seven in the steam launch for an expedition up the
river, the Maharajah alone accompanying us. H.H. appeared
this morning in a well-made sand-coloured shooting-jacket and
knickerbockers, stockings, shooting-boots, solar topee and pug-
garee. He is the first native I have ever seen who does not look
ridiculous in European costume. He has very good calves. We
went puffing up the river about ten miles, to a point where a sanpan
was waiting to take us still higher; the original arrangement
having been that we were to stay all Sunday at Johore, and
spend the day in going up to the real fine forest and a Chinese
village. As it was, only the first part of our programme could be
carried out. The scenery of the Straits was very like that of
the lower Orinoco—low shores of mangrove, backed by larger
forest trees, a net-work of narrow channels under the trees
when in the river. The broader main channel winding con-
stantly. Here and there islands, here and there a village; in
one place a very picturesque charcoal - burning establishment.
We met one boat only coming down. Palang Palai well visible
most of the way. Along the coast of the Strait before entering
the river, which, by the way, is called the Scoodai, the ground
is cleared for a mile or so back and there are many plantations.
Some picturesque hamlets. At one, fearing rain, we requisitioned
some mats for shelter. The houses were on the usual high posts
and a few figures well grouped on the stage before the door.
At the spot where the sanpan was waiting, we came upon an
old wooden railway made some years ago, which H.H. had
engineered himself. Saw many pretty butterflies, and some
decent wood, but nothing wonderful. We much regretted being


forced to return. The sanpan, a boat built on very beautiful
lines, went down before us, and showed us a place where a path
led to some forest. There were a few fine trees, but only a
few. The jungle growth, however, was luxuriant and beautiful.
We gathered flowers and leaves, and cut sticks, and then we
went on again, pitching the mats out of the launch when opposite
the owner’s house and hallooing to him to fetch them, a rather
summary way of returning lent articles. We had breakfast:
were presented with sarongs; their pattern is a series of checks
like tartan, and curiously enough, the different checks indicate
the tribe of the wearer, as tartan does. Then returned home to
Mount Echo, which we reached about 4 P.M. To evening church
at the Cathedral. The punkahs bewildering and irritating.
There was no attempt at keeping time in pulling them ; each
went at its own rate, and as there were a great number of short
ones up the nave, end on to us, the way in which they crossed
and recrossed each other was intolerable.
On Monday morning we drove down to the wharf through
streaming rain and over sloppy roads, and embarked on board
the Brisbane. Saw Mr. Jamie and Dr. Light before leaving. 1
Saturday , May 15.—The Brisbane has her cabins amidships,
with a hurricane deck. Fore and aft, on the main deck, are
550 Chinamen. The smells from this live cargo are indescribable
1 A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon or Ellon
May 3, 7.30 a.m.— We are just off, and all our luggage has already started
for the ship in three bullock-waggons. We have been so comfortable here
that we are sorry to leave, especially as we may expect every discomfort on
board the Brisbane , as she is dreadfully crowded, and we men shall be doubled
up three in a cabin. Your little trunk that I ran away with comes in most
usefully now, as it is the only piece of luggage I possess that will go under
the berths in the Brisbane.
May 11.—What pleased me most at Singapore were the Malay villages
built out into the sea on high poles, with wide spreading roofs of a rich dark
brown colour, and I must do the Chinese justice by saying, that on the water
their junks and small boats are perfectly charming both in form and colour.
I went to two of their joss-houses or temples. They are outside extraordinary
masses of curly roofs, green dragons, and gilding ; and inside, carved pillars,
coloured lanterns, burning joss-sticks, gilt Buddhas, devils, and dirt. The
whole seen through a haze of smoke, with the altars (apparently covered with
a conjuror’s apparatus) reminding one somewhat unpleasantly of a caricature of
a Roman Catholic Church. We watched an old man and a boy saying their
prayers before one of the altars, and were much puzzled by their manoeuvres,
prostrations, mutterings, shaking of sticks in a bamboo cup till one fell out,
casting of two pieces of wood and attentively watching the position in w nc
they fell, walkings round the altar, and offerings of joss-sticks.


and detestable. Otherwise she is not a bad ship, though built
by builders not much acquainted with tropical requirements.
The Captain (Balfour) is a particularly nice fellow.
Our voyage has not as yet been very eventful (happily). On
Ascension Day we passed the point of Madura and saw Java
and Balli in the distance. Next day we were close off Lombok,
the peak of which looked very glorious in the rising sun. The
next few days we passed along by Sumbawa, Ombay, Timor,
Wetta, etc. Pretty, but not first-rate. In the Arafuara Sea we
broke down for twelve hours. In the morning, whilst waiting the
repair of the engine, the sea seemed so calm and the ship so still
that we thought we might have a swim; accordingly, the ladies
went below, the ladder was let down, and the deck was soon
strewed with heaps of clothes and the passengers were bathing in
the clear blue. We on deck saw a huge grey shark, bigger than
any I ever saw in Trinidad, appear beneath the water and dis-
appear again. The alarm was given and great was the scramble
on board again. Le Hunte was actually in the air for his
ten-feet header, when the second officer sang out, “Come
back ! ” “ Come in ! ” but there was no stopping then, so down
he went with a splash, and his heart in his mouth. I had just
undressed, and was standing behind him, waiting for him to leave
the gangway clear for my own dive. Yesterday morning we
reached Cape York, having anchored the previous night off* Booby
Island. The settlement at Cape York (Somerset) has been placed
on the strangest site. It is on one side of a narrow strait, per-
haps three-quarters of a mile wide, hardly so much, through which
the tide rushes with such extreme rapidity that it was impossible
for us to anchor without passing Somerset, going right through
the Strait, turning when at sea again, and coming up against the
current to our anchorage, a manoeuvre which we had to reverse
on sailing again. Mr. Aplin the Magistrate and Mr. Macfarlane
the Missionary came on board, and we went on shore with the
former and up to his house, prettily situated on a hill over-
looking the strait. The huge ant-hills filled me with amazement.
Saw some Prince of Wales Islanders, black, stark naked, but not
such bad-looking savages as I had expected. One was coiled up
asleep by a fire on the beach like a dog. Also saw the writing
of a man just recovered from the blacks, Narcisse Pelletier,
whom we are to take to Sydney. Saw Mr. J at the boat-
house —was not favourably impressed with him. He is the man
who is said to have Sunday shooting parties in which black men
are the game. Pleasant to be on shore again. Vegetation new
to me. Settlement to be removed to Thursday Island.


Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
S.S. Brisbane at Sea, May 17 to 20. — ...It is a fortnight
to-day since we left Singapore and we expect to be at Sydney in
about nine days. It has been a remarkably smooth voyage so
far, almost like a lake. Now that it is no longer hot, the ship is
fairly comfortable. The great drawback is the 520 Chinese
emigrants on board. They are horribly dirty people. The
smell of their food, cooked in hot rancid butter, is something
disgusting , and there is no means of escape from it, as they are
stowed partly forward and partly aft, and seem to cook every-
where. The ship was refitted at Hong-Kong to take them in, and,
as she is a small ship of under 1000 tons, the passenger accom-
modation is very much crowded in consequence and it is often
very smelly. I consider it a great do , as we should not have
come this way if we had known of the Chinamen. There is a
great rush just now of Chinese to some new gold diggings
about 140 miles from Cooktown, where we are at this moment
stopping to land about 300 of them. We were rather dis-
appointed in the Malay Archipelago: the islands are pretty
but nothing wonderful. We did not stop anywhere till we
got to Somerset, the northernmost point of Australia, The
coast of Queensland is very pretty, extremely like the west
coast of Scotland, For some days it has been so excessively
windy that one quite forgets one is still in the tropics—till
we come below. Often it has been too windy to stop on
deck at all, but to-day, Tuesday, May 18, it is quite delight-
ful. We have been stopping to-day for some hours at a place
called Townsville, one of the small gold-digging stations. Here
we landed one Chinee. I forgot to mention that yesterday
one of the Chinese ladies with her maid was landed at Cooktown.
It was excessively rough, and she had to be slung into the boat in
a chair with a rope round her waist. It was delightful to see the
graceful manner in which she alighted in the boat, fan in hand,
paper flowers in her hair, and the beautiful teapot arrangement
of her hair not ruffled. A husband came to meet her. .. . Nevil
is generally in the arms of one of her twelve friends. They go in
and out of favour. I think Mr. Finch-Hatton is the prime
favourite just now. He is very nice indeed, handsome, refined,
and certainly very attractive. lam sorry to say that three of
that party, Mr. Finch-Hatton, Tumour, and Knight, leave us
to-morrow at Lowen to proceed to their station in the bush. I
think it must be a very good concern, as they talk of coming
home for good in three or four years. Mr. Tumour, who has


lately left the Navy, was talking to me to-day of his captain, who
had married out in Jamaica, much to the wrath of the Halifax
people, who expected him to marry there. I found he meant
Edward Howard ! Mr. Rice, the head of this party, is still very
unwell with intermittent fever, which he has had for the last
three weeks. He is obliged to go on to Brisbane to be under
a doctor there till he recovers. ... We got a telegram to-day
from Mr. Cairns, Governor of Queensland, to invite us to Govern-
ment House at Brisbane. He says there are two spare rooms
and a dressing-room, so I think Arthur and I and Eka will go
there for the one night we stop. ... I have not much to write
about, as you may perceive. One day passes just like another.
The great excitement of the voyage has been the coming on board
at Somerset of a young Frenchman who is being sent to the charge
of the French Consul at Sydney. Seventeen years ago, when he
was quite a boy, he was wrecked on this coast and fell into the
hands of a tribe of savages, who never allowed! him to leave
them till he was found and carried off by an English boat’s crew
a few weeks ago. For all these years he has lived the life of a
savage, quite naked, and subsisted on fish, and lived among them
like one of themselves. He had almost forgotten his native
tongue, but it is gradually coming back to him. He even
remembers how to spell and in a way how to write. There
is an engineer officer on board, a Mr. Ottley, who talks a
great deal to him in French, and it is most interesting to see
his face brighten up as his memory returns. He is evidently
very intelligent. Arthur has been making a drawing of him.
He wants very much to be sent home to his family in France.
His father is a shoemaker. His name is Narcisse Pelletier. He
says the savages were very kind to him and admired him
extremely. He remembers the name of the ship he was
wrecked in, so they can tell* exactly how long he must have
been lost. He does not look more than 26, so he must have
been very young when he fell among them. Nevil and Jack
spend a great deal of time in drawing. They do very little else.
The carriage bags have been a great resource: they are getting
quite shabby. Both children are very good on the whole, and I
don’t think at all spoilt. The cabin in which I, the children,
Nurse and Marques sleep is very close and ill ventilated, though
of tolerable size. I have felt better in this ship than I did in
the Anadyr. The English cooking, though rather coarse, suits
me better, and it has not been so intensely hot as it was the last
fortnight in the Anadyr. We are now in the same latitude as
Fiji, and if it is not hotter there than it is here we shall have no
cause to complain, but of course one gets a good deal more air


at sea. It has been a beautiful sail to-day, all among islands and
as smooth as glass till now. This evening there is a little more
motion. Nevil says, “ Dear ! dear ! how she is pitching ! ”
When Jack talks of his bed she says, “ I suppose you mean your
berth , stupid,” and she talks much about the “ fo’castle.”
Wednesday , May 19.—The Finch-Hatton party left us to-day
at Bowen. Two or three rough-looking Australian passengers
have come on board. The ship has been much sweeter since the
Chinese left. There are now only about 150 remaining, and they
have all been put forward and the afterpart has been filled up by
an influx of white passengers, so we are still pretty full. We
find we shall hardly catch the mail at Brisbane, and that it is safer
to post the letters at Rockhampton, where we shall call to-day.
Since last night the ship has been pitching a good deal. Poor
Jackie is very sick this morning. He has now gone off to sleep,
and I hope will be better when he wakes. We may expect this
weather now all the rest of the way. Nevil is quite well, she is
a capital sailor. ... We have all left off our thin things, and
I have returned to my thick serge and the children to the
things in which you saw them start. Arthur J. has just made a
drawing of the French savage, and sketches of the place where
he was found, and is going to send them to the Graphic with a little
account of him written by Arthur. I hope it will be put in.
Mind you look out for it. No; —I find Arthur is sending his
account of Narcisse Pelletier to the Times. It will interest you
very much; it is most curious—l hope you will see it. This
pitching is most disagreeable, and makes writing more difficult
than ever. To-morrow we shall be at Brisbane, and then about
forty hours to Sydney.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Friday , May 21, Off Frazer Island. —We have been all his
time running down the coast of Queensland, which is truly a big
country. Called at Cooktown, Townsville, and Keppel Bay, but
landed nowhere: in fact, at Cooktown it was so rough as to
make landing disagreeable. We got rid of 240 Chinese there,
however, —a good riddance. The Chinese had some most singular
musical instruments, the funniest and feeblest little tinkling fiddle
any one ever saw. We did not see or hear much of the Chinese,
but the smell of their cooking and of the frying of stinking
butter was intolerable. The only way of escape was to go to
the forecastle, which was joined to the hurricane deck by a
narrow bridge, and leaning over the bow to watch the waves
tearing themselves to bits and the foam piled up against the
109
FIJI
II


cutwater as it dashed asunder the waves to either side. The
space for walking, cooped up on the hurricane deck, was small,
and we had to resort to games, for which also there was little
room, in order to give ourselves enough exercise. One favourite
amusement was playing at ball with pumelows (citrons of great
size). The Colonial Treasurer of Hong-Kong was on board—a
very important person in his own eyes, and a very precise one,
who looked with much disfavour on these juvenile sports. One
day, as a game at ball was going on, Mr. M.’s rather sour-
looking head suddenly appeared above the companion right in
the line of the pumelow, which, being soft, burst and dashed
itself to pieces, covering the honourable gentleman’s face and
clothes with pumelow pulp and juice. He was angry. The
players rapidly vanished, and next day made an apology, which
he accepted with difficulty. At Townsville, Finch-Hatton left us
with Tumour and Knight. There was during the early part of
the voyage some pretty scenery, but a good deal was very bare
and unsatisfactory. “ Whitsunday passage ”is striking—rather
Highland-like. We arrived in Moreton Bay, off the mouth of the
Brisbane river, about ten at night on Friday, and anchored between
twelve and one. Cairns’s A.D.C. came on board, but we decided
to remain on board till the morning. Early on Saturday we went
up in a little steamer, the Laura. The river is rather pretty.
Brisbane is an unfinished town, with a nice Botanic Garden and
an ugly Legislative Palace. The Government House is gloomy
and rather ugly. Walked in garden with Cairns and drove withj
him after luncheon. The country is pretty, reminding one of;
New Brunswick and England. Brisbane itself is ugly. The
President of the Legislative Council and Speaker, the Premier,
and the ex-Premier appeared at dinner; the Premier distinguish- 1
ing himself by coming out in full uniform! Moreover, he got,
drunk after dinner, or rather was drunk when he came. The'
Botanic Garden is very pretty, and both temperate and semi-
tropical plants thrive. When one sees that at any place they
grow “all the products of the temperate and tropical zones,”
it usually means that both are wretched specimens, but here the
bamboos and the geraniums seem both equally good. I rather
like Sir Maurice and Lady O’Connell. The Private Secretary,
Maudslay, is a very nice and clever fellow, handsome withal.
Trinity Sunday morning early I went to church at the pro-
cathedral and received the Holy Communion. Then, after an
early breakfast, steamed down the river again in the Kate , got on
board the Brisbane and went on our way. The Premier (stillj
drunk, but happily not still in uniform) came down the river with
us. Next day, Monday , was rough, the first really rough day!


we have had on our voyage. On Tuesday morning we reached
Sydney. The Governor’s A.D.C. and De Ricci came out to meet
us, and we went to Government House. I was on the whole
rather disappointed by Sydney Harbour, though it is undoubtedly
pretty. Its great defect is the straightness of the sky-line.
There are hills, but they are all flat-topped or rather run on in
one level ridge without peaks or breaks of any sort.
June 6, Sunday. —We have now been here for nearly a fort-
night. Ido not much like Sydney. It resembles a third-rate
English country town without the remains of antiquity such a
town would possess; the streets are mean, and the shops ex-
teriorly shabby though not bad as to contents. There are, how-
ever, some decent Gothic buildings, and the interior of the
Cathedral is really good, especially the narrow transept arches.
For the first week of our stay, the weather was intolerably bad,
and one could only get about in hansom cabs, which are the
regular public conveyances of Sydney. But on Tuesday ,
May 31, it cleared up again, and for four days we had
really fine weather. On one of these we went to Parramatta,
a really pleasant excursion, going up by boat and returning
by rail. Sir Hercules was kind and pleasant, and is sensible,
though not quite so clever a man as he thinks himself. What
a thing it is to have interest at the C. 0.! His staff* is not
a first-rate one. The A.D.C. is nearly stone-deaf; slow, gentle-
man-like, and rather good-looking. The Private Secretary is
cleverish, bad form, fast, and flirts with Mrs. . Robinson
was evidently very reluctant to part with the only little bit of
real work he had. They gave me the Council Room for a
sitting-room, and there I saw my interviewers, who were many.
My resolution never to take an Australian Colony, has been
intensified by my stay here. The town, generally speaking, is
in its business parts like the streets between Bedlam and
Deptford, and in its “genteel ” parts like Maida Hill or St. John’s
Wood. We went one day in a special train to the “Zigzag,” a
really fine piece of engineering, but a very poor rival to the
Brenner, the Semmering, or the Bhore Ghaut. The forests
monotonous, and of small trees, and the scenery, though on a
grand scale, commonplace. I was as much pleased with some
pools of still shallow water near the Nepean, reflecting sunset
lights, with dark masses of bulrush in the foreground, as with
anything else I saw. After a fortnight’s stay at Government
House we went to Pfahlert’s Hotel —not a bad change.


Lady Gordon to Miss Maria Shaw-Lefevre
Government House, Sydney, June 4, 1875.—Here we have
been for actually more than a week and I have not yet even
begun a letter home. I sent the last just before we got to Bris-
bane. ... We arrived at the mouth of the river on Friday night
about half-past twelve o’clock. The Governor sent down his
A.D.C., Captain Macarthy, with a small steamer to ask us to go
up to Govt. House. I had gone to bed and had no intention of
getting up and going off at that time, so it was settled we should
go up the next morning. There was such a racket all night that
it was quite impossible to sleep. In the morning at eight o’clock
we went off in a little Government steamer, which the Governor
had sent for us. It took about two and a half hours to steam up
the river, which was rather like New Brunswick. We found it
quite chilly, and I was glad of my warm serge and thickest jacket,
which seemed odd, for we passed bananas, sugar-canes, and orange
trees covered with fruit along the banks. We were very hos-
pitably received by Mr. Cairns and his staff, who were waiting
breakfast for us. Brisbane is a straggling unfinished North
American-looking town of considerable size. Government House
very comfortable and nice, but wants a lady very much. The
rooms have a dreary look. Of course we had only our travelling
dresses, and the black grenadines, which have been most useful.
We walked about the Botanic Gardens in the morning, and in
the afternoon we had a very nice drive along the river with Mr.
Cairns. They had a dinner-party to meet us, consisting of the
Prime Minister, Speaker and wife, ex-Prime Minister, and two
or three others. On the whole it was a pleasant change to get
ashore for a night. Early the next morning, Sunday, we returned
again in the Kate , and got on board the Brisbane by twelve, and
started off again. The ship had very much improved since we
got rid of most of our immigrants, and was really quite comfort-
able now. On Tuesday morning we arrived here and steamed
into this beautiful harbour at about eleven o’clock. It certainly
is very pretty, only one had heard rather too much about it.
When we got nearly opposite Government House the Governor’s
barge intercepted us and took us up to a small pier just outside
the house, where we landed. I forgot to say that we had letters
both from Lady Robinson and Sir Hercules asking us to stay, |
but saying that they had only two spare rooms for Arthur and
me, and that the Commodore and Mrs. Goodenough had a
room for Eka in their house close by. Sir Hercules’s A.D.C.
came for us in the barge, and Mr. Hely Hutchinson was
waiting for us at the little pier at the bottom of the garden, and


we walked up to the house, which is a sort of castellated affair,
very large and imposing in appearance. The Governor, Lady^ }
Robinson, and their three daughters were in the hall to receive •
us, dressed most gorgeously and in the vilest taste. We were
informed that rooms for Arthur and the staff had been secured
at the best hotel, but that they and Eka were expected to dine
at Government House whenever they chose. Sir H. was very
sorry that there was not a room for Arthur, but two days later
I suggested to Lady Robinson that he might as well occupy a
small servant’s room which was given to Marques, and send her
to the hotel, so he is now here, and it is much more comfortable
for him, as he has the Council Room given up to him as a sitting-
room. The children and I have got two large and most comfort-
able rooms, and are not at all sorry to get unpacked and settled in
a house after so many weeks at sea. But we are most anxious to
get into some place of our own. We have been looking out for
rooms ever since we arrived, but hitherto without success. After
we got here we had four rainy days, on one of which Lady Robin-
son had a reception, but only about six persons came on account
of the weather. They live very handsomely and well, but in
complete isolation. I do not know whether they ever do give
dinners, but, since we have been here, no outsiders except our
personal staff have dined here, not even any of our Fiji party.
The De Riccis and MacGregors had arrived three weeks before,
and were awaiting our arrival at a hotel. I have not seen much
of them as yet, as no one who calls is ever admitted except on
Lady Robinson’s reception day, except the Commodore and Mrs.
Goodenough, both of whom we like very much. They have the
entree of the house, but they have only once dined here. It is
now settled that all the Fiji party except Arthur and one of his
staff are to start next Tuesday in H.M.S. Barmcouta for Fiji.
It has been fitted up with a deck house for Arthur’s use, and is
to remain in Fiji at his disposal for some time. The Commodore’s
ship, the Pearl , is to take Arthur a few days later. Captain
Knollys and Arthur J. have been very busy getting all kinds
of things to take, viz.—kitchen utensils, furniture, supplies of
all kinds, sheep and poultry, also some flooring and doors for the
house which is to be built for us. We hear a very good account of
the climate, but in other respects there is very little to be found
out. Arthur was very anxious to leave Captain Knollys here
with us, but I persuaded him to take him, as I know he will be
of much more use there getting on with preparations for us, and
I don’t think we shall want him here at all. My great anxiety
is to go on as soon as possible. Arthur does not see why they
should not get ready for us in two or three months. I don’t at all
I


like the prospect of being left here. Sydney is a very large town
with busy streets and capital shops where you can get anything
and everything you want. Some things, such as boots, gloves,
etc. are a little dearer, but most things quite as good and as cheap
as at home. The harbour is very pretty, and there are charming-
looking villas and some large country-houses with terraced gardens
in every direction over-looking the harbour, which is full of ships
and always very lively. The climate is just now absolutely per-
fect, rather cold, but clear, fresh, and invigorating, and so very
sunny, more like the spring in New Brunswick than anything
else. I regretted at first that I had not brought my sealskin,
but now I think it might have been too hot; one feels the cold
at first after the intense heat we have had on the voyage. The
children have the Governor’s only son Hercules, a very sporting
little boy of eight, and Mrs. St. John’s little girl of four to play
with. Poor Nevil is dreadfully jealous because “Herkie” likes
Jack much better than her, and won’t play with her. Lady
Eobinson gave a ball last Wednesday, to which about three hun-
dred people came. It was not a particularly lively affair, partly
because the music was bad. I was introduced to some of the
principal people here, but none of them seemed very interesting.
Many of them were extremely well dressed. I danced the first
dance with Sir Hercules and Arthur with Lady Eobinson. I
wore my black and yellow, which did very well indeed. I got
on capitally without a maid, and do not feel the want of one at
all. Nurse can manage my head very well, and makes a capital
maid. We all go to the hotel on Monday or Tuesday, and if we
find it comfortable, I shall probably remain there all the time ; if
not, I must try and find a house. Arthur and I have just been
dining with the Goodenoughs, which was very pleasant. I like j
them both particularly. He is going to take Arthur to Fiji and 1
will be away on a five months’ cruise, so I am afraid I shall not
see much more of him. We met there Sir Alfred Stephen, who
is one of the principal people here, and his son, who was an old
college friend of Arthur’s. Mr. Hay, President of the Legislative ]
Council, is a brother of the oldest tenant of Lord Aberdeen’s
estate at Haddo (the same family have held the farm about
three hundred years) ; and his wife, a nice old Aberdeenshire body,
knows the interior of Haddo House so intimately and minutely
that Arthur thinks that she must have been a housemaid there
once ! I rather like her. She is going to send her carriage for
us to spend a day at her house, four miles from town. We spent
a day at Paramatta yesterday with some people of the name of
Billyard. They had a steam launch to take us up the river (about
two hours), and we came back by train, Arthur and I, Eka,


Arthur J., and Mr. Le Hunte. It was a very pleasant day. I
saw several of those rough Australian ponies there. All the girls
have them as a matter of course, and the boys take their ponies
to school. They are turned out and never groomed. We came
back loaded with camellias; they grow in profusion here in the
open air. I never saw such beauties. The Robinsons could not
understand our going to pay a visit to such “ common ” people,
but we rather liked them. lam trying to find some things to
send home in the course of time, but as yet I have heard of no
specialties except the Possum rugs and some very beautiful small
shells, which make lovely necklaces—quite unique. I have
ordered some of them, but they are difficult to get.
Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
Pfahlert’s Hotel, Sydney, June 13, 1865.—Arthur is not
gone yet after all. He was to have left yesterday morning, but
a telegram he expected from Lord Carnarvon did not arrive in
time, so the Commodore put off* sailing till Monday. It was
rather a pity, for everything was ready, and all the luggage sent
on board, and some things had to be brought back. Besides, it
is only prolonging the saying good-bye, and every day at this
end will make it longer before we can get out to Fiji. So now
it is quite settled that he goes on board at half-past eleven to-
morrow morning. Arthur and I have been to luncheon on board
the Pearl to-day. It is rather a small ship for a flag-ship, and
they say most unpleasantly lively, but the Commodore’s cabin
is very comfortable, and there is a very nice cabin for Arthur on
deck. The Goodenoughs were very kind and nice, and I am
sure Arthur will get on thoroughly well with him. I may get
my first letter in about a month, as H.M.S. Blanche, now at Fiji,
will leave soon after they arrive. It seems such a very long time.
Mr. Le Hunte, Mr. Mitchell, and Abbey are also going in the
Pearl. I shall feel horridly lonely after he is gone, and don’t
look forward to the next two or three months with pleasure.
We are all very well and the children most flourishing, but I
don’t quite like their living in the middle of the town. However,
I don’t see what else we can do at present. I hope that very
soon H.M.S. Nymphe will arrive here : Cosmo Gordon is the First
Lieutenant, and he will be most useful to us and will, I know,
do everything he can for us. The Nymphe will be stationed
here for some months. I saw the two ponies in very good
quarters on the Pearl, and was much pleased with their looks,
and also with some splendid cocks and hens which Abbey has
bought. Our sheep, ducks, and turkeys went in the Barracouta,


and I think I told you that they have taken out flooring and
doors for the house, and carpenter’s tools of all sorts. lam in
great hopes they may find a house that may be made to do, at
least at first, by additions, but we must have at least thirteen or
fourteen rooms for our large party. They have taken furniture
enough to begin upon, and I shall gradually look out for more.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
June 18.—Arthur has now been gone four days. On Sunday,
the day before he left, he and I lunched on board the Pearl.
She is a small ship for a flag-ship, but looked very comfortable.
The Commodore’s own cabin is very nice and cheerful, and full
of books in every available corner. Mrs. Goodenough said there
were about four hundred volumes, and Arthur was much pleased
with the look of them. There was a writing table arranged for
Arthur in one corner, and the cabin was adorned with water-
colour drawings and bits of china well secured on brackets.
The dining cabin is also very cheerful and light. It will hold
about ten at dinner. He has got a very pretty white Dresden
dessert service, each piece of which has a fixed place round the
cabin, and he says they never get broken. The Pearl has the
character of being a most unpleasant ship at sea. Arthur has a
very nice cabin on deck. I was very glad to have seen it all.
The Commodore is gone on a five months’ cruise. Poor Mrs.
Goodenough does not like being left any more than I do. She
is pretty well accustomed to it, but she says she thinks it is worse
every time. They have got two very handsome little boys of
eight and nine got up in complete sailor fashion.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Monday , June 14. —My start for Fiji. I was to embark
from the Government House pier, so went in to take leave.
They were very kind and civil, and made all sorts of offers of
kindness to Rachael, which cheered one up a bit. As I passed
down the garden, I came upon Mrs. Goodenough sitting half-way
down the slope watching the ship and waiting for our departure.
I shook hands with her as I passed, but did not speak. Was
able to send a short note to Rachael after getting on board, by
the Bank people.
To Lady Gordon
H.M.S. Pearl , Monday , June 14. —Went on board at noon,
and sailed as soon as the boxes of silver and copper, which I was


to take to Fiji, arrived from the Bank and were slung on board.
The afternoon was lovely, and it was very pleasant indeed, sailing
along with a good breeze, and all canvas set. I enjoy being on
board a man-of-war again after the nasty packets. It is so clean,
so quiet, so orderly. None of those discordant breakfast and
dinner bells; none of that abominable clattering of plates and
cackling of voices; none of those beastly stinks of ghee or bilge-
water ;no dirty Chinese fellow-passengers; and the motion so
different, calm and easy without that eternal (and to me distressing)
vibration and quiver. There was a gorgeous sunset behind the
fast vanishing land of Australia, and at half-past six we dined.
The chaplain was the only other guest —rather a nice fellow, who,
oddly enough, had been with me in the Boris in 1868, coming
from Caraccas. The world, as I have often said before, is really
a very uncommonly small place. Here, on board this ship, there
are no fewer than three officers with whom I have made cruises
before, in different parts of the world—Mr. Peyton (the chaplain)
in the Boris, Mr. Harrison in the Wolverine in 1873, from
Seychelles to Bombay, and Mr. Reid in the Forte going to
Seychelles 1871. Mitchell messes in the Ward Room, Le Hunte
with us.
Tuesday, June 15.—The ship was rolling a good deal this
morning, but I didn’t seem much to mind it, and it certainly
did not diminish my appetite for breakfast. My swinging cot
is most luxuriously comfortable. Spent an hour or two watch-
ing the men at drill and inspecting the chain cables. Ponies
and chickens seem very comfortable; not so Abbey, who cannot
bear the discipline and regularity of a man-of-war, where he
is not a swell, and cannot order about people and things as he
likes. Captain Hastings and one of the lieutenants and Mitchell
dined with us to-night. We have very good dinners, and not
over good—well cooked simple things. Very sleepy in the
evening. Rolling a nuisance, as things fly about, but did not
feel the least ill.
Wednesday, June 16. —Rolling diminished this morning, but
still had a beautiful breeze in our favour, with which we went
bowling along as fast as if we were steaming. About the middle
of the day we passed Lord Howe’s Island, and saw to the south
of it “ Ball’s pyramid.” The island is small, not above five miles
long, but has some very high ground (over two thousand feet),
and fine cliffs. The “ pyramid ”is one of the strangest sights
I ever saw. It is a rock which rises almost perpendicularly out
of the water to a height of eighteen hundred feet, from a base
not a quarter of a mile in length. Lord Howe’s Island, desolate


as it is, has several inhabitants, who rear a few cattle, and kill a
few whales. At dinner to-day we had Dr. Messer, and the
First Lieutenant, Mr. Reid. Dr. Messer is a particularly agreeable
and clever man, and I should think a good one also. He draws,
and his drawings remind me somewhat of Eka’s. He has a good
eye for colour, and considerable facility in applying it; in fact,
his landscapes are very good, but he has no knowledge of per-
spective, so that his buildings are all crooked, and to all appear-
ance he has not much eye for proportion, as all his figures have
heads or bodies too big for their legs. Still his drawings are
effective, and I should think give true pictures of what they
represent.
Thursday , June 17.—Showery day. Read an absurd book of
sham travels in New Guinea, which Messrs. Chapman and Hall
ought to have been ashamed to publish, it is so evidently false
from one end to the other. The author calls himself Captain
Lawson. Changed our dinner hour to-day to three o’clock : two
of the lieutenants and the Master (Navigating Lieutenant) dined
with us. The officers are a nice gentlemanly set. Heavy rain
at night. Had a long talk with the Commodore, whom I like
better and better, and whose abilities I rate more and more
highly as I know more of him. Steamed all day in default of
wind.
Friday , June 18. —Fine lovely day. Able to sail again. The
midshipman of the morning watch always breakfasts with us
(we breakfast at eight). This morning the said midshipman was
His Serene Highness Prince Yolbrath of Lowenstein, a very
nice boy. I am this morning in a towering state of rage,
annoyance, and vexation. You recollect Mr. M‘Leod of Glasgow
returned my manuscript of the loss of the Heron to you, and
I have hitherto kept the roll unopened. I opened it to-day,
as I had nothing to do, and thought I would correct it for
another periodical. He has not returned half : I have destroyed
the draft and have no other copy, so I have lost the record
of a very interesting recollection of what was told to me, and
a very good story is lost altogether. lam greatly annoyed.
Two of the lieutenants dined with us, Fullerton and Hill, also
Harrison the marine, and Perry the Secretary. Did I say
that we now dine in the middle of the day ? The breeze
freshened in the afternoon, and seemed so steady that the
Commodore determined to hoist up the screw altogether, and
we are now skimming away over the water with all sails set,
(some of which, however, if the wind continues to get up, we
shall soon have to take in,) at the rate of ten miles an hour.


It is very pleasant, and I thoroughly enjoy it. I ought to add
that my swinging cot is the perfection of comfort.
Saturday , June 19.—We had to take in the royals some time
in the night, (I don’t know when, but the order woke me,) and
we are going along this morning at an equal rate, but with less
sail. Ship moving a good deal, but with a pleasant easy motion.
We passed a good way to the north of Norfolk Island during
the night, so we shall not see that famous spot. As I have not
Eka’s passion for merely “ seeing ” things, I cannot say that I am
deeply grieved at the omission. Rather high sea, and heavy
rain squalls, with bright warm sunshine between whiles.
Lieutenant Carslake, the Secretary, the Paymaster, and another
officer dined with us. Ponies and poultry none the worse for
the rolling. Read Lord Nelson’s letters in the evening, and
walked on deck in the moonlight with Mitchell. The bulkhead
of my cabin has set up a terrific creaking, which is a bore.
Sunday , June 20. —Some very heavy rolls during breakfast
this morning, which sent everything flying. Le Hunte’s coffee
went up his coat sleeve, mine over the tablecloth, while my
chair glided gracefully back the extreme length of the cabin at
a railroad pace. We all seized hold of what we could, cup or
dish, and held it up out of harm’s way as far as we could.
After a few violent rolls we subsided into our normal state.
Church at ten. The chaplain did not give us a particularly good
sermon—in fact rather a stupid one, but church on board a man-
of-war is, I think, always impressive. We had a little variety
to-day, caused by two hammocks tumbling overboard. We were
going pretty fast through the water, but a boat was manned and
lowered in less than a minute, and we lay to until the hammocks
were picked up. The boat had a long hard pull back again with
the recovered goods. An albatross and two or three “ mutton
birds ” have been seen flying near the ship yesterday and to-day.
There is great fascination to me in the beautiful poise of wings
and easy sweeping flight of these great birds far out on the
lonely ocean. The voyage is getting a little monotonous, and
though not at all sea-sick I should be happier if it was calmer.
Monday , June 21.—The breeze died away at night and we
steamed again. But this morning there is another beautiful
breeze in our favour and every sail is set. Nor is it so rough
to-day. We shall very likely be in on Wednesday evening.
We dined to-day, by invitation, with the officers, in the Ward
Room, at half-past two. There is something grotesque and
ludicrous in dressing for dinner in full evening dress at that
hour. However, I suppose one must obey the mandates of that


tyrant custom. It was also rather ludicrous in another way.
The table stands across the ship, and as we were all day steadily
heeling over before the breeze it necessarily had a very steep
slope, and as a natural consequence all our chairs kept for ever
gradually sliding against our next neighbour’s, till we all found
ourselves clustered together at what was literally the bottom of
the table, leaving the president in solitary state at its head, and
had to shake ourselves up again into our places like the old
woman in Bleak House. This happened several times in the
course of the dinner. A nasty evening; wet, rough, chilly, and
disagreeable.
Tuesday , June 22. —A nasty day. We have not made so much
progress as usual, and though we are in the tropics it is cold and
raw, and dark and gloomy; drizzling showers and a heavy sky
threatening rain in earnest, of which, by the way, there was a
good deal in the night.
Wednesday , June 23. —All yesterday it went on blowing harder
and harder and the sea getting rougher and rougher. Took in
sail gradually—foretop sail split by the wind—spanker carried
away. The Pearl certainly throws herself about in a wonderful
way in a heavy sea, but it is not an abrupt or uneasy motion,
and though bored to the last degree and unable to do anything
except stand about on deck, I did not feel at all sea-sick—but
bored , oh how bored. My cot behaved well at night, except that
it now and then flew bang against the bulwarks; but the bulkhead
of the cabin was not very tight at the bottom, and this morning
its floor was an inch* or two deep in water that had come in from
the deck as we rolled. To-day it is clearing up all round, and
they say we ought this afternoon to see Kandavu.
Thursday , June 24. —We got a very distant glimpse of Kandavu.
To-day we are among the islands, but have seen very little of
them, for though quite calm it has been raining all the morning, and
is now raining as hard as ever it can rain. If this is the weather
in the dry season, what must it be in the wet? We are now
about sixteen miles from Levuka, of which, however, we see
nothing as yet. . . . About twelve, it cleared up and became
beautifully fine, revealing to us the coast of Yiti Levu, and grand
ranges of mountains far inland, about fifty or sixty miles away;
and nearer to us, on one hand the islands of Angau, Wakaya, and
Mokongai, and on the other those of Moturiki and Ovalau, which
we gradually approached, and anchored inside the reef off Levuka
about two o’clock. The island reminded me very much of
Seychelles, but is I think even prettier. It is very very lovely,


no doubt about that. Arthur and Knollys of course came off at
once. They arrived on Sunday, and seemed very jolly, but had
had a most disagreeable voyage down in the Barracouta, which
they describe as very uncomfortable and horribly wet. They
have established themselves and my headquarters at Nasova, the
building of which I showed you a photograph at the Good-
enoughs. The Blainche is here as well as the Barracouta , and her
Captain (Simpson) as well as Captain Stevens and Mr. Layard
dined with us in addition to my own party. Layard is a
gentleman who reminds me in some ways of his brother, of
whom, however, he is a very inferior edition. I did not go
ashore, but looked a good deal at the town and all that was
going on through Le Hunte’s binocular. Did not sleep much, as
you will readily imagine; the excitement of the unknown future
being considerable, and the subjects for thought afforded me by
the news given me, many and serious.
Note. —lmmediately on reaching Sydney, I learnt that the measles had
been taken down to Fiji in the ship by which the King and his family had
returned there. People were assembled to meet them from all parts of the group,
and these carried the disease back with them to their homes. Thousands of
people died : certainly over 40,000, probably very many more. Accounts of
this outbreak, and of the great mortality it was causing, had reached Sydney
in the middle of March, but, up to the time of my arrival in June, nothing
had been done in the way of medical assistance from Sydney. lat once sent
down the Barracouta, with the two medical officers, and medical stores to
the value of £147 : 19 : 7 ; but my annoyance was great to find, on my arrival
at Levuka, that, chiefly owing to absurd points of punctilio, the Adminis-
trator, Layard, had not sent either doctors or medicines to the islands where
the disease was still raging, and that they and the Barracouta were still at
Levuka. lof course sent them off at once. At Levuka, and indeed through-
out Ovalau and the adjacent islands, the disease had nearly died out, but it
still prevailed in the interior of the big islands and the groups to windward,
and I was confronted by three grave effects of the plague, Ist, universal
suspicion on the part of the natives that the disease had been purposely
introduced to destroy them ; 2nd, the death of almost all the leading chiefs,
to whom one had looked for aid in administration ; 3rd, the failure of all tax
collection, and consequent deficit. For the last I was prepared, having learnt
it at Sydney, and had borrowed £5,500 from the Sydney Bank, which I took
down to Fiji with me chiefly in silver. Lord Carnarvon s telegram to me to
borrow no money, did not reach Sydney till after I had started, but I should
have done the same had I got it, for the Government of New South Wales would
not advance anything, and cash was of course absolutely necessary. I knew
that on arrival I should be called on to pay at once for official salaries due,
passages of public officers and returned labourers, etc., to the amount of some
£3,000 more than I should find in the Treasury.
121
FIJI
II


CHAPTER III
ARRIVAL IN FIJI—PRELIMINARY MEASURES —
PROCLAMATION OF THE CHARTER
Nasova, Friday , June 25. —1 landed to-day at 11. Yards
manned, salute, etc. ; the way from the ships to the shore lined
by the boats of the squadron. I landed on the pier, which is
right in front of the house, walked on between the guard of
marines on one side and a guard of native troops on the other
to the steps in front of the main entrance, from the top of
which I said a few words to the people. They will be printed
to-morrow, so I will enclose them. Then I received people and
then, when the crowd departed, set to work. The house is
very comfortable and very nice really, but I am afraid you
would not like it, for the hills rise right behind it. In the
evening I pulled up the coast a little way with the Commodore in
his boat, and went up to the bathing place he was always talking
of, which is beautiful. It is in every way (by “it” I mean
Levuka) pleasanter than I anticipated, and the climate (at this time
of the year) delicious. I have not yet half taken in all the new
sights and sounds around me. The native soldiers under Olive
were armed with short rifles and dressed in a very full garment
of thick fringes like a kilt reaching to the knee, under the knee
a sort of garter of black water-weed. They all had great heads of
hair, for the most part dyed yellow. The house (three sides of a
square) is built on a sloping pile of loose stones, to a great
extent covered by yellow thunlergia. Its walls are reeds, its
roof deep thatch. We have had our first dinner here, and
vote our Indian cook a treasure. And now lam going to bed
—my first night here. It is a very solemn plunge, and I feel
very deeply, almost painfully, the responsibility of this just com-
menced and yet untried career. May God order it all for good.
A gratified wish so often turns out a curse that I feel half afraid,
but the very consciousness of this feeling is perhaps the best
safeguard and check that one could have, and may enable one to
be of some use here.—Good night.


Speech on Landing
Gentlemen —These two boxes contain —the one the Royal Charter of the
Colony, the other my Commission under the Great Seal as its first Governor.
But it is not my intention to proclaim that Charter or to read that commission
until the machinery required for carryingon the Government has been organised,
and therefore, although I shall at once assume the control and direction
of affairs, the administration of the Government will formally continue as at
present for some little time to come. Meanwhile, in preparing for the task
I have undertaken, I have to request the co-operation and aid of all resident
in this Colony. In communicating with me freely, whether personally or by
letter, either to inform me as to matters which I ought to know or make
suggestions which may be useful, you will do me a real service ; and although
I certainly cannot say that every, or indeed, for that matter, any suggestion
made to me will necessarily be adopted, this I can say, and do say, that every
such suggestion shall be well weighed and carefully considered.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Ovalau, Fiji, June 25, 1875. —My Lord—Your Lordship may
possibly have remarked in my despatch No. 16 of this day’s date, announcing
my landing, the omission of the usual addition to such an announcement,
that I have ‘ ‘ taken the oaths of office and assumed the administration of the
Government.”
2. Until the arrival of the Attorney-General and the Treasurer there are
not the necessary materials for the formation of the Legislative Council, but
unless the promulgation of the Charter of the Colony is immediately followed
by the passing of an Ordinance giving effect to the Acts of the existing Pro-
visional Administration, and authorising the prosecution of suits commenced
under it, all the Acts of the existing Government will be reduced to the same
absolute nullity as those of Cakobau’s Government previous to the cession.
The Courts of Law will be at once annihilated without any substitute for
them being provided; cases pending before them will all have to be com-
menced de novo before the new Courts when constituted. All appointments
will lapse, and their present temporary occupants must be formally re-
appointed until the arrival and appointment of the permanent officials, an
arrangement which it is for obvious reasons desirable to avoid.
3. I have therefore determined to await the arrival of the Attorney-General,
and, if possible, that of the Chief-Justice and Treasurer, before proclaiming
the Charter and formally assuming the Government ; meanwhile, I shall be
daily acquiring useful information, and the Administrator, Mr. Layard, will
take no steps without previous consultation with me, or without my sanction,
4. I am not sorry to have some further opportunity of observation before
I commence the detailed duties of administration ; and as, of course, I shall,
until I am sworn in, only receive half salary, I am glad, that the remainder
should be available for the remuneration of the Administrator, who has not
received, and cannot now for another month at the earliest, receive any in-
structions, either from your Lordship or from the Foreign Office, as to his
movements, and who, therefore, will not, as I understand from him, leave
Fiji for some time to come.


Saturday , June 26. —This is a very rough plan of the house.
We are shaking down into our quarters. If only I could think
that you would like them, or not hate them, I should be perfectly
happy, being in possession of greater enjoyment, both physical
and mental, than I have had since we went to Mauritius.
But it will be all spoiled if I see you unhappy, and I cannot
hide from myself that, beautiful as it all is, you will think the
position of the house confined, and that, as yet , there is but one
riding road and that not a long one. The house itself, so far as
the mere house goes, you will, I think, like. The rooms are large,
numerous, and may be made very comfortable and pretty —in
fact, so far as we gentlemen are concerned, they are very comfort-
able already, but will need a little alteration for you and the
chicks. The ponies came down all right and so did the poultry,
which, by the way, is remarkably fine.—Oh, I forgot; we saw
them when we were on board the Pearl together the day before I
sailed. Snip has produced a litter of puppies—rather nice little
beasts, but of course she snaps and bites at every one who
ventures to come near her, except us three.
I have elaborate instructions from the Colonial Office as to
the custody of treasure. It ought to be kept in a fireproof stone
vault with three different locks, each key in the keeping of a
different person. As a fact, the treasure boxes I brought down
are piled close to my bed, in a room which would burn like flax,
if once lighted, and which has no key. But on the top of the
pile is a basket containing Snip and her puppies, and I don’t
think any one attempting to steal would find it an easy business !
Sunday , June 27.—Went to church at a very nice little church
on the hill. There was a tolerably good choir in surplices and
the harmonium was very well played by a little boy of nine.
Mr. Floyd preached a good short sermon, and we all received the
Holy Communion—the best beginning we could have to the very
solemnly serious work on which we have engaged. Wrote letters
in the afternoon. By the next ship I shall be able to tell you
when you may come, but it may certainly be very soon. A few
drains and outhouses must be made, a few board partitions run
up and three or four additional rooms built, but there is nothing
that offers the least difficulty. There is a charming fellow here—
Olive, of the marines—one of our sort, good , active, and simple,
who has been most useful to us. Indeed, Ido not know what we
should have done without him, for the natives are very different
from Hindoos and are as proud and indifferent as possible if not
properly treated. I like the natives very much—they are not black
but brown —much lighter than most coolies, and many of them
are very handsome. Captain Simpson of the Blanche is going to


Sydney to-morrow. He will take this letter and will call on you.
He is a very nice, quiet, gentlemanly man. We have not had
time to send anything but letters, but next time you shall have
your first Fijian cadeau. Is it not a bore the enclosed letter from
Sir G. Grey was not sent to Sydney instead of here ? I should
certainly have accepted the invitation for you.
Nasova, Monday , June 28, — I enclose my journal letter, but
write a word to cover it, and to say at once that everything here
far exceeds my expectations—scenery, climate, work, people—
and that though I cannot yet say when this house will be fit
for you, it certainly may be made so in no long time —under
three months certainly. Were it not for the apprehension that
you will not like it as well as myself, and the apprehension
that it may not suit the children, I should be perfectly happy,
—far happier than I have ever been since we went to Mauritius.
I am thoroughly in my element.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, June 27, 1875.—My Lord—Your Lordship will, I am sure, be
anxious to learn what report I have to make with respect to the terrible
epidemic by which these islands have been lately visited.
2. I am happy to be able to inform your Lordship that the disease is said
to have disappeared from this island and most other parts of the group. In
some islands, however, it still lingers, and from some there has been no
report.
3. I enclose a memorandum from Mr. Thurston, the Acting Colonial
Secretary, for which I called immediately on my arrival. In addition to the
report of deaths appended to it, I have the honour to enclose all the other
statistical information which I have been able to obtain, and which is, as your
Lordship will see, meagre enough. In fact, Mr. Thurston’s list and mine put
together only relate to this island, to those of Gau, Nairai, Koro, Yanua-
Balavu, Lakemba, Cicia, Nayau, and one province out of the seven into
which the island of Viti Levu is divided,
4. The only magistrate’s reports which contain much information are
those of Mr. Emberson, Stipendiary Magistrate at Loma Loma, from which I
enclose some extracts. I cannot, however, I fear, possibly undertake to-day
to give your Lordship anything like a detailed digest of the mass of papers
submitted to me on the subject of the epidemic, or a clear and accurate
account of its progress and effects. This duty I hope to perform by the next
mail, and I am confident that, bearing in mind the multitude of matters
which require immediate attention on my first arrival, your Lordship will not
expect such a report from me on the day next but one after that on which I
landed.
5. Your Lordship will observe from one of Mr. Emberson’s reports that
the people of Ono are said to be starving, and to have been subsisting, so far
back as two months ago, on Yaka roots and old cocoa-nuts only, and that he


asks for immediate assistance, which it has not yet apparently been found
possible to afford.
6. I propose, therefore, the day after to-morrow, to send the Chief Medical
Officer, Dr. MacGregor, in Her Majesty’s Ship Barracouta to that island with
medicines and a supply of food kindly placed at my disposal by the Commodore.
He will also visit Lakemba and Loma Loma (Yanua Balavu) before his return,
and will leave medicines and medical comforts, as the foundation of a dis-
pensary, where he finds persons competent and willing to undertake the care
of such establishments.
7. On the same day I shall despatch Dr. Mayo to Tavinni and Yanua
Levu in the schooner Lady Palmerston , a trader plying between Mna Point in
Tavuini and this port.
8. Owing to misconceptions, on which it would be needless to dwell, the
services of these medical gentlemen had not been rendered available previously
to my. arrival, as had been intended by me when I despatched the Barracouta
before me from Sydney.
9. Many planters have shown great humanity towards the natives, and
careful attention to them. Until I make my report I cannot give anything
like a list of those who have done so ; but I may at once mention Mr. Ryder
of Mango, and Mr. Barrack of Savu Savu. Where proper care has been taken,
and medical directions have been observed, there has been very little
mortality, which suggests the painful reflection that probably much of this
terrible mortality was preventible, and might have been avoided had prompt
and judicious measures been taken at the outset of the epidemic.
10. Several of the clergy of the Wesleyan body, and of the Roman Catholic
Church, as well as Mr. Floyd, a clergyman of the Church of England, resident
here, have rendered good service, and I must not forget to notice the inde-
fatigable exertions of Lieutenant Olive, R.M., commanding the Police Force,
whose conduct in this matter has been above all praise, and who has worked
with an unselfish disregard of trouble or labour, which has injured his health
and exhausted his private pecuniary resources, but which has deeply endeared
him to the native population.
To Lady Gordon
Nasova, Wednesday, June 30. —After the Blanche left on
Monday I saw a few folks—planters and others, and then sailed
across the bay with Arthur and Le Hunte to Wai Tovu, the
beautiful bathing place of which I told you. But I will reserve
any attempt at description of that place—though, indeed, descrip-
tions of places are almost always vanity—till somewhat later, for
I am anxious to get on to Tuesday, which was one of the most
interesting days of my life. On Monday evening, MacGregor and
Mayo dined with us, and I took the sudden resolve of making
Olive an additional A.D.C. We could hardly manage the native
servants without him, and were always sending for him every five
minutes. I wish I were as certain of your liking Fiji as lam of
your liking him. Ask Mrs. Goodenough about him. He will
not be paid, and keeps his place at the head of the armed force.


But to get on to Tuesday which, as I have before said, was so
interesting a day. That which made it thus interesting was the
fact that old Thakombau at noon made me his personal feudal
submission in proper style.
I was determined that it should not be made a show of, for
the mere idle curiosity of the townspeople and sailors, so I kept
away every one not actually taking a part in the ceremony. No
boats were allowed to land at our pier till it was over, and
sentries let no Europeans pass on the Government ground, or
indeed any natives either, except those taking part in the pro-
ceeding, but then they, as you will see presently, amounted to
several hundred.
Between our house and the old king’s there is a high pro-
jecting rocky promontory, and when we saw the head of his
procession coming round the corner, I took my seat (on one of
your carpet chairs), in the verandah at the head of the steps,—
my staff in uniform standing behind me, and Mr. Thurston by my
side as my interpreter. On there came, very slowly, an appar-
ently interminable column of natives, two and two, dressed in
white kilts , singing, or rather chanting as they walked, and
carrying palm-leaf baskets filled with yams. These they
deposited in front of me, and as fast as they came up those
who came before them carried away the baskets and com-
menced piling the yams into a pyramid. As each finished his
share of the work he went and squatted down on the ground in
the place allotted to his village,—some at one side, some at the
other, and others in a group in the middle. They left, however,
a semicircular path on each side of the square, (indeed, nothing
could be prettier than the order and ease with which everything
was done,) and up this semicircular path next advanced the
strangest party —a number of men with kilts of bright-coloured
strips of black, yellow, and red, made of pandanus leaf and much
crimped , and fantastically ornamented with green leaves—a
garter of leaves round each leg below the knee, a great garland
over one shoulder and passing under the other arm, and wreaths
of leaves mixed with tapa on their heads. They were chanting
with continual repetition a low harmonious chant and dragging
slowly along in their midst, by cords wound round their bodies
and thrown over their shoulders, three large turtles, which also
were duly deposited on their backs before me. After this there
appeared Cakobau, his sons and his attendants. They walked
very slowly, and I had plenty of time to observe him well before
he reached me. He is a far more striking man than the
graphs would lead you to suppose,—very kingly in bearing ancl
with a most intelligent head. He was dressed in a long wrapper!


of dark red (almost black) tapa with a shirt of some native manu-
facture. He walked with a long gold-headed walking stick. His
sons were dressed like him, but in light brown tappa figured
with black balls and geometrical patterns. When he got near me
he raised the salutation given by an inferior to his chief, a sort of
sighing inspiration, more like the “Woh!” one says to stop a
horse than anything else. This, at his lead, was taken up by all
the rest in a great shout of Woh ! One of his sons 1 carried behind
him an immense root of kava. This he now took into his own ]
hands and laid at my feet, breaking off at the same time, rather j
nervously and hastily, one of the smaller portions of it and
placing it on my hand. This was the decisive act of vassalage.
I said, Au sa tar a oqo: ena vinaka sara ho Viti, (I accept this :
may it be well with Fiji). Then they raised the shout of
Mdna I and clapped hands. This formal act over, I shook hands}
with the Yunivalu, as he is henceforth to be called, and asked’
him and his sons into the house. He was a good deal
as was not unnatural, for, though he has signed treaties of
cession and hauled down flags, this is probably the first time
in his life that he ever performed a personal act of homage to]
another, and that too in the presence of his people. The effect'
has been electric. Wherever Igo now the natives shout Woh I j
and crouch down, as before their own great chiefs, and
admit and understand that I am their master.
If you read Eka this account, you may tell her that I was
sorry she was not present at a scene she would have so much
enjoyed. But, had she been here, I should only have allowed
her to peep through a window !
The stack of yams amounted to about two tons weight! I have
sent the greater part to the starving people in the island of Ono.
At night my guard had a mehe or dance, and we sat looking
at it for a long time. You cannot conceive anything more wild
and picturesque. Of their costume you may form some idea from
the enclosed sketch of one of our footmen presenting a glass of
curaQoa to the Commodore.
Friday, July 2.—Much of my morning taken up as usual by
interviews. You may be amused with my note of them as taken
down at the time.
1. Mrs. Blair and Captain Beatson — Case of the Volunteer.
Told ’em British Govt, not responsible for acts of Fijian Govt.
Must claim redress either from Govt, or from individuals. If
from Govt., we don’t acknowledge any claim. If from private
individuals, a court of law is the place to enforce it.—Feeble,
foolish, and knavish.
1 So I thought: really one of his Mata-ni-vanua.


2. Capt. Lyons —Lent Fijian Govt. <£Boo odds, for which
he produced Clarkson’s promise to pay him by bank draft on
Sydney. Never got a penny. Seems a hard case and an honest
good sort of man. Told him all claims would be inquired into.
3. Gag gin and Wise —Came to petition that Katonivere may
not be appointed Eoko of Macuata—are content with Timoci—
wish for one of Eitova’s sons—think Katonivere to blame for
late murders—say he began them, and showed me on the map
where he came over with a big tail and killed Eitova’s men; but
that was in September, before the cession—they plant cotton—
live opposite Mali Island.
4. Rupert Ryder —Eather favourable to Indian labour. Wants
to talk of sugar and cacao. A good sort, I think. A gentleman.
5. Brower and Drury —U.S. Consul and U.S. Vice-Consul—
gossip.
6. JosJce —Sugar planter—from Suva—flabby and feeble—
but this is only the son.
7. Chalmers —Of Coro—was secretary to Eatu Savenaca—
sensible but limited— very limited.
8. Ratu Josepha —Apologies.
9. Cakohau, Abel, Joe, and Cagi Lem —Free intercourse—what
laws applicable to natives—house should be built—Cakobau
thinks it necessary to my hold on natives that yangona should be'
drunk in a certain solemn manner. Mutual civilities.
10. Moore —Can he survey? Yes: if he likes, but I won’t tell him
to do so, nor in any way take him under Government protection.
11. Thurston —Draft Bankruptcy law. Natives to be used as
printers—chiefs’ debts to be investigated by commissioners—
distillery law.
12. Tother Moore —lnterpretation. Police should be largely
used in civilising. Query : Might not compulsory service be
useful ? a species of conscription.
13. Thurston again—New offices—report of homage.
14. MacGregor —lnstructions for his mission. Quarantine
laws to be observed—they were violated this morning.
15. Olive —Police to give warning to MacGregor as to sick-
ness and quarantine.
16. Waterhouse (Missionary)—Offers services. Asked him to
get me report on measles—also Moore’s Fiji vocabulary.
17. Young Moore —Asks for interpretership to Government.
18. Youngest Moore —Will give me Fijian lessons.
19. De Ricci —General feebleness and self-seeking. The man
is repulsive to me.
20. Wylie —Asked him about grammar, etc. —is of the “ no-
eyes ” type.
K


21. Walter and Hamilton Hunter —Taviuni men, brothers—
rather good sort. Brought an introduction from Jamieson.
22. Maughan —Back of this island—from Bureta —feeble—a
friend of Antelme’s. Proposal from Mr. Bichard for Mauritian
colonists. Heaven forbid!
23. Mitchell —Wants an office table and pigeon-holes. Of
course, but why bother me ?
24. Harding —Eeport of travels in interior. Thinks the Kai
Colos think they were poisoned. Is strong that the chiefs
possess no absolute right to sell. Will give me notes on village
organisation. A man of force, and to be used, but hard, master-
ful, and cruel. Speaks highly of Nadrau.
That’s about enough interviews for one morning, I think.
We embark in the Pearl this afternoon to go over to Yanua
Levu, “ the great land,” to have a hasty glance at the fine harbour
of Savu Savu, where I may perhaps put the capital.
To Lady Gordon
Nasova, July 5. — I find, on my return here, that the ship for
Sydney will not sail before Wednesday, so I can add some
account of our trip to Savu Savu. A. J. L. and I went on board
the Pearl at 4 p.m. on Friday, July 2. We immediately weighed
anchor and sailed for Yanua Levu. We took over Mayo and
“the Shadow,” 1 with a great lot of medicines and stores, and an
interpreter. There was also on board, as pilot, a certain Captain
Barrack, who is the manager of Mr. Campbell’s estate in Yanua
Levu, and who is also the son of a Haddo farmer, and nephew of
the old innkeeper at Ellon !
Saturday , July 3.—A truly enjoyable day, and one much en-
joyed by us. At daylight, when I went on deck, we were just
entering the magnificent bay of Savu Savu. To our right, were low
undulating grassy hills bare of wood. Before us, ranges of moun-
tains three or four deep. To the left, point after point died
away in the distance, beyond the great semicircular curve of
the bay itself, twenty miles across, broken by many minor
curves of great beauty, but not as beautiful as Trinidad. We
anchored in about nine fathoms, with a fine mud bottom, in a cove
in the north-east corner of the bay, and very near its head, where
there was room for any number of ships, and where there appeared
to be a tolerable site for a town. Opposite to us was a planter’s
house with a half-built sugar-mill behind it. Here, as soon as we
had had breakfast, the Commodore, A. J. L., and I landed, and
1 Dr. Mayo’s servant.


walked, in the first place, up to the top of the low ridge, some fifty
feet high, from which we could look round us. There is a good
deal of flat land, much more of undulating land, but, so far as I
could see, only two streams of water. A Mr. Hobbs from Ceylon
met and walked with us, and we went together to the planter’s
house, which is that of a Mr. Pillans, who had bjen a cotton planter
and has now gone in for sugar. Here we found Mrs. Pillans, a
piano, and several very nice, clean, healthy-looking children, well
cared for and well looking, and neatly though sensibly dressed.
Pillans took us to his sugar mill, not yet working, which has a
noble water-wheel just put up (he employs water power), made of
magnificent wood ( Vesi )/ and a foundation (for the boilers and
laches ) built of excellent brick made on the other side of the bay.
These can be got here for £3 per thousand, and could be sold at
Levuka for £5. Those imported are sold at Levuka for £ls per
thousand. But Pillans knows nothing of sugar, and will most
likely fail. He took us along his canal up to his mill-pond
for a bathe. It is a broad deep pool with large trees about it,
wherein numerous parrots were chattering. Saw also blue con-
volvuluses, and many black and blue butterflies. The reservoir is
about ten feet deep and is a good large pool. I need hardly say
we had a good long swim in it, after which we came down again
to the house, and were regaled with pine-apple wine (not a
bad drink) and polite conversation. Mrs. Pillans has evidently
seen better days. She is another proof how small a place the
world is, for she is the daughter of a man to whom Havelock’s
brother was assistant in India, and her sister had just been seeing
Mrs. Havelock in London when she last wrote. The number of
pine-apples in their garden was something quite enormous.
After this, we put away our coats in the boat, and set off to
walk along the coast to examine the promontory, etc. (That
is, the Commodore, Arthur, and I did so. Mayo had gone off
with the Shadow to a native town to see after the sanitary state
of the people.) We crossed a stream, and after going a little
while along the beach, we turned inland into a small wood, up a
steep path through creeping ferns and big purple ground orchids
and many a lovely bit of vegetation. We wandered about the
wood-paths and got out on to an open promontory, which I had, in
passing, noticed as a charming site for a house. Here we loitered
some time. A. J. L. made a sketch of what would be the view
from the drawing-room window. I should have no fear whatever
of your not liking this as a site. It is as open as Levuka is shut
in, and commands a most magnificent view of the kind you like, i.e.
seen from above. There is plenty of room for gardens, and they
1 Afzelia bijuga.


might be made very pretty with some of the old wood behind.
The Commodore and I strolled about. Saw a fine large hawk
and numerous butterflies. Then clambered down to the beach
among a lot of fine Barringtonias—here called “Vutu,” —and
walked along the shore to the brick-kilns, which are in another bay
of equal size to that in which we had left the Pearl , (you will under-
stand they all form part of the great bay of Savu Savu). There the
Commodore’s gig met us with luncheon, which we ate under the
shade of some cocoa-nut trees, near the water’s edge. Two New
Hebrides islanders from Mallicolo came and stared at us as we ate,
and devoured the scraps we left. They were regular savages,
much darker than Fijians, and ornamented by much scarlet paint
on their cheeks and noses. One had a bright red streak right down
the middle of his nose, which had a most comical effect. The
other had one side of his forehead and the opposite cheek painted.
The paint used was the seeds of arnotto, which I daresay you
remember in Trinidad. Both had their hair bleached with white
coral lime. You would have laughed to see how frightened one
of them was by the uncorking of a soda-water bottle.
Sailed across the bay, rounded the promontory, crossed
another bay, and landed at a police office of Captain Barrack’s,
where we were received by armed policemen. This station is in
a pretty situation, on the edge of a narrow inlet—very deep,
eight fathoms close to the shore. At this point the hot springs
run into the sea, and the water in their river is quite warm up to
the boiling springs, about half a mile off. The regular pulsation of
the fountains is very marked, as is also their intermission. Both
springs, which are not hot but boiling, were used for cooking whilst
we were there—great baskets of vegetables being placed in them,
whereof we ate some and pronounced them good. Every now and
then one of the springs stops playing, upon which another begins a
little distance off. The jets range in height from one foot to four.
Clouds of steam are thrown up with the water, and this steam is
also scalding, as one feels if the wind blows it on one. The native
magistrate pleased me in appearance, but not so the native
teacher (all the men at Nukuseva dead of measles). Walked
down to Barrack’s house, in a pretty but hot situation. Scotch-
man-like, he has cleared away a great many too many trees i
about it. Here we drank milk, played with the cats and the!
children, and tried to talk to Mrs. Barrack, a silent and depress-
ing woman with an objection to bathing, which she considersj
“weakening.” Nevertheless we had a bath in the sea, and
A. J. L. another in a pool up the river with young Barrack, who'
informed him that he bathed about once a week. Surveyed Mr.‘
Barrack’s store, full of old machinery —ginning machines, cocosJ


nut fibre teazers, oil-pressing machines—even a steam launch—
all waiting. He has ten children living. Had eleven. Said
Tui Cakau 1 killed one, a fine boy. Put on an air of sympathy,
expecting to hear a tragedy—that a lad of sixteen had been shot
by Tui Cakau, or something of that sort. Nada de eso. Tui
Cakau came by with many men, which “frightened Mrs. Barrack,
who was nursing the boy, who was three weeks old, and the milk
went from her breasts and the child died. Now I consider Tui
Cakau killed him and should hang for it! ”
Sailed home in the dark—a very pleasant sail, and had a
pleasant dinner on board the Pearl —going to sleep very soundly
afterwards. One of the boats in which some of the officers had
gone exploring was out late. Fired a gun for her recall. The effect
of the flash and echoes in the night fine. The day altogether is
one of the most enjoyable I have spent for a long time.
July 4, Sixth Sunday after Trinity. —At 6.45 the Commodore,
A. J. L., and I, after a cup of chocolate, went to bathe at Pillans’s
reservoir. Very pleasant. Parrots in abundance. Saw little Bertie
and his sister, who came out with milk for us. On board to
breakfast. After breakfast wrote, etc. Church at 10. Attended
by the settlers. Church on the upper deck, and we sat on the
poop. Not a bad sermon. Afterwards Holy Communion in
the Commodore’s cabin. None present but a few officers and
settlers. The Pillans family came off to church and had luncheon
with us afterwards. A. J. L. and I went on shore. He made a
sketch or two, and I strolled along the beach with Milne, a civil
engineer, to whom both Arthur and I took a liking, and from
whom we got a good deal of information. He told us much about
the trees and woods—his account of the death of Ratu Meli pathetic.
Saw a hermit crab out of its shell—a sinuganga tree —and some
deserted houses ; also some poorish shells. He classes Vesif- Bua,
and TaviTavi as first-class woods—as second , Dilof Nokonokof Dalcua. 5
Th eDakua Salusalu 6 he thinks little of. Few Fijians thought much
of Christianity when dying. They suspect us —will not come
near the Pearl. “ Bigger ship than Dido , —bring bigger disease.”
But they received Mayo very kindly, and seemed pleased at his
having been sent. Milne much prefers Fiji men to foreign
labour. On returning from our stroll we had a long pleasant
bath again in the mill-pond, and then went on board and up
anchor. Off Captain Barrack’s house we stopped, and there
landed Mayo—not very happy, —and the Shadow—very dis-
1 The great chief of this province.
2 Afzelia bijuga. 3 Tacamacca, Calophyllum inophyllum.
4 Filhao, Gasuarina. 5 Kauri Pine, Dammam.
6 Podocarpus Vitiensis.


consolate; and as the dusk fell and rapidly deepened, we saw
Mayo standing on the beach among his traps, with the Shadow
as usual behind him, and wild-looking Tanna savages trans-
porting his heavy stores to Mr. Barrack’s mill. Poor Mayo,
notwithstanding all his travels, is rather helpless, and don’t
like roughing it. As for “ the Shadow,” they have frightened
him thoroughly on the lower deck of the Pearl by old canni-
bal stories, and by obfuscating dates, and the difference between
past and present, so that he gravely expects to be eaten,
and was, I believe, comforted by some of the sailors on his going
ashore with the pleasant assurance that there would not be much
of him left a fortnight hence. We sailed all through the calm
night, bright with stars, and cast anchor here again early on
Monday morning. We thought Savu Savu hotter than this place,
but found on our return that there had been two very hot days
here. It must, I think, be a healthier place than Levuka, it is so
much more open and airy, and certainly the condition of the
Barrack family spoke well for it. They have ten children,
ranging from twenty to three, all in good health.
A. J. L. Gordon to Mrs. Gordon of Ellon
July s.—On first nearing the islands I was struck by their resemblance
to the Seychelles, that is, from the sea : on closer observation there are many
differences, particularly in the want there is here of sandy beaches. The
shore here is chiefly shingle, of a very angular and uncomfortable character
to walk upon, and most destructive to boots. The mountains rise up almost
directly from the shore to a height of about 2000 feet, well wooded and
most picturesque in form. We are now regularly established in the Govern-
ment buildings at Kasova, about a mile to the southward of Levuka. These
buildings were built by the former Government before the cession for the ex-
King Thakombau, and the Government offices still occupy one wing, but we
are now building new ones, so as to have the whole house to ourselves. We
shall also have to add a few rooms for Lady Gordon’s accommodation. They
will soon be done, and I see no reason why she should not join us in three or
four months’ time. The present rooms are large and very airy, the walls
being made in the native fashion, of reeds, so that the breeze passes right
through : the roof is thatch and the floor cement, and on the whole, as far
as coolness is concerned, this is the best tropical house I have seen. We are
most fortunate in having the native police close by, and we have enrolled
several of them as servants. Their Commander, a Lieutenant of Marines,
left here some months ago to take charge of Ihem, is a particularly nice fellow ;
his name is Olive. The natives are devoted to him, and he is in consequence
of the greatest use to us. The Governor has put him on his staff, and he now
lives with us and is in every respect a very pleasant addition to our party.
I send you an account of Thakombau’s visit to the Governor which took
place a few days ago. The ceremony was most interesting and picturesque,
and the “ Yunivalu ” looked dignified and king-like. Knollys and I returned
, his visit the day after in full uniform. Olive also accompanied us, and the


old man was good enough to say we were “three pretty boys,” alluding, I
presume, to our fine clothes. He came up from Bau, the chief native town,
where he generally lives, to meet the Governor, and while here lived at a
small native village close by us in anything but princely style so far as
European ideas go, that is, in a small house with thatched roof and sides, no
windows, and only one small doorway, in fact one of the usual native houses.
The floors are covered with mats four or five deep. They are very comfortable
and always kept clean. Levuka would look well but for the prevalence of
corrugated iron roofs and whitewashed wooden walls.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
July 6.— lnterviews.— Brodziak —J.P. in Kandavu—not
much to say for himself.
Thurston —Quarrel among ladies of Yunivalu’s family—widow
Saveneca, etc. I think Lady Gordon may settle it.
Ordinances for administration of justice—sale of spirits —
report of intention to attack Mr. Henry Thurston—seems to me
a “ plant.”
Missionary Collections. De Ricci’s house and his claim to
exemption from customs duties. Martin’s reports of labour
voyage unsatisfactory.
Le Jeune —A Mauritian engaged as an engineer to sugar works
at Suva, who opines that Fiji is un pays sans avenir. Brings
me an introduction from Daly.
Carew —Gives a sad account of the havoc measles have
worked among the Kai Colos. Divides the tribes into two lots.
The one to the east of the watershed, and somewhat beyond it—
the other about the Sigatoka river.
Told him of my schemes —Mem. to get him to define the
boundary of excepted district.
Baron has gone up far into the interior and got lots of curios.
Thinks gunpowder and muskets will fail the mountaineers.
Missionary organisation—its perfection. Teachers ran away
from Colo —they weren’t sent away. All the great chiefs of the
interior dead. Language of mountaineers —some peculiarities in
structure, but more in words. Sakiusa threw dynamite cartridges
down on a cave. The big heads thought them fireworks. Cutting
off the wigs often produces sunstroke.
Murray —Hawaiian Consul. Has neverbeen in Hawaii. Newsl
paper writer. Has letters from the Duke of Kent to his
out of which he wishes to make capital. Presumably a rascal.^j
Mitchell —Wants to know distinction between royal and
private lands. I don’t suppose either exist. Wants to prentice
young Fijians to labour, p) yevono.
Cakobau came to see me this afternoon. He is very anxious
that all should tama to me now that he has done so.


Wednesday, July 7.— Scott of Viro —Suggests Port Kinnaird as
capital. Offers his house at Viro. Sees no difficulty in land and
native questions. Happy man ! Thinks facilities should be given
to insolvent planters to pay their debts. Was with He Ricci
yesterday when he went to Cakobau—says the King declined to
give the point unless he knew I did not want it, when He Ricci
assured him I did not. How he found that out I don’t know!
Says the King certainly supposed it was my desire that De
Ricci should have what he asked for.
Carew —Submits list of districts to be exempted.
To Lady Gordon
Nasova, July 11, 1875.—After all, I find on returning here
last night that the Silver Cloud, which was to have sailed on
Wednesday, is not yet gone ; so I am able to write again and tell
you about our trip round this island. On Thursday morning,
July 8, Knollys and I left Nasova in the gig about seven.
A. J. L. walked to fetch Mitchell, and Olive followed. We had
breakfast at Waitovu, after a jolly bath. Bois Immortelle in
flower. Walked on to the so called, but most absurdly,
and thence by the beach to Tavia, where we slept. Our house
was a nice new one with plenty of mats on the floor. Fanned by
missionary. Visited the school. An arithmetical meke going on.
The evening —very picturesque. Mosquitoes. Bathed
before dinner in a wai levu. Family prayers by missionary.
July 9.—Bathed at bathing-place—Rain—Rainy day through-
out —Walked on—Crossed one bay in the boat. Stopped at a
Mr. Marshall’s. Working with La men almost Tokalans.
Breakfast in the boat-shed. Walked on. Gorgeous beetles—
Boyd’s plantation—saw-mills—Uncivil Yankee—Boyd’s yam
patch—milk and bird skins—Wet but pretty walk to Bureta.
Met by chief who is R.C. People on the rara. The women one
side, the men the other. In the house the magiti presented.
Saturday, July 10. — Went in the morning up the lovely valley
of Lovoni. Such tree-ferns, such clear pools, such a river and
such cliffs and rocks. Coming down again we got into the river
and swam down its course great part of our way back to Bureta,
sending our clothes on to wait for us a little way above the
village. Then we finished our tour by going round the south
end of the island and returning here. On the whole, the scenery
was rather disappointing. It was not nearly as beautiful as
Seychelles, and when cleared, will I fancy, be rather Mauritius-
like. Still there are some spots of great loveliness, and the
valley of Lovoni, if one could only get at it, would be a
FIJI
CHAP.


charming site for a house. I shall certainly make a road
there, but of course it cannot be made in a day. But though
the scenery on other parts of the coast was less beautiful
than here, the people and their ways were very picturesque
and interesting. The houses of the principal natives are really
fine houses, lofty and comfortable, with any amount of fine
soft mats piled on the floor, and mats and tapa hung on the walls
and from the beams. When I came in and sat down on the
mats a chief came and sat near, but below me, and began to fan
me with a large reed fan like what you see in Thakombau’s
photograph, during which operation the villagers trooped in
with their baskets full of husked cocoa-nuts, their fowls, pigs,
etc., and laid them down before me. They all make great use
of garlands of flowers and green leaves, which look extremely
pretty on their brown skins, which said skins, by the way, are
as soft and glossy as silk.
The food, cooked in the native ovens, was very good and very
tender, but I cannot extend my praises to the native puddings,
which are horrid masses of sweetened dough. After dinner
comes a seluka —a sort of cigar of native tobacco, rolled up in a
bit of banana leaf, and then follows evening prayers. In the
chief’s house the missionary leads the service, but in all the other
houses of the town the sound rises at the same time, with an
effect which reminded me much of similar customs in the Tyrol.
They first sing a hymn, and then a prayer is said. When one
remembers that a few years ago they were cannibals, the scene
strikes one forcibly. Both at Tavia and Mbureta there were
schools, and that at the former place seemed an efficient one,
though as unlike an European school as could well be fancied.
The Wesleyans, wise in their generation, have adapted their
lessons to the old national songs and dances, and we were
informed by a great swarm of brown boys and girls, chiefly
dressed in green leaves and flowers, that “ four times five
shillings make a pound,” with all the movement, gesticulation,
and swaying about which mark one of their regular mekes.
We stopped at a few white settlers’ houses, and found them
all complaining of their want of money, and of the hard times
they had had. It will require a new set of men to come in
before there is any real prosperity in the colony. Most of the
present holders of land will sell, and, as is usual in all new
settlements, the first-comers will be ruined and go to the wall.
We are getting on with the house. Of course you must not
expect it to be really comfortable , but we may, I think, make it
shift passably till we build a better one elsewhere. The great
fault of the existing house is its draughtiness, and we are sadly


in want of shades to the candles, things that, as you know, we
could not procure in Sydney, and, of course, still less here. It
is almost impossible to write at night, “ with a flickering, flaring
candle, that glimmers like sickly hope,” and that every second
minute nearly goes out altogether. Abbey is in despair over
the servants, and no wonder, for they are totally unlike any-
thing he has ever had to do with before, and have none of the
submissiveness of Hindoos. But for the fact that they are all
policemen, and for Olive’s influence, we should get nothing done
at all. The other day, Abbey swore at one of them, who had
aggravated him very considerably by laziness, whereon they all
struck work, and marched off in a body to complain that he
had used “ taboo ” words to them. But I think they are begin-
ning to understand that they must get up in the morning, and
must finish what they begin. The poor He Eiccis are dreadfully
miserable. She finds it worse than she expected, and I must
say the town (which I rarely enter) is in truth thoroughly odious.
I like Mrs. De Eicci’s pluck. She has a great deal more of
article than her husband has. The Commodore goes away
morrow, or on Tuesday. I shall, perhaps, go with him as far
as Nandi, and return in the Barracouta. lam sorry he is going.
He is a man of good sense and good feeling. The weather con-
tinues very cool, almost cold, and we have had little rain and
hardly any mosquitoes, but we are told that it will be very hot,
and very wet, and very mosquitozs/i soon. Abbey has started
a very nice little garden in which the vegetables are coming up
capitally. I said I would send you something by this mail, but
I really don’t know what to. send that is small enough to go
by post, unless it were a bit of fine tappa. I find on looking
over .this that I omitted any account of the yangona drinking with
which the evening in a native house concludes. It is very
picturesque. The concoction going on in a great wooden bowl
with legs, a low weird chant being kept up all the time by
those sitting round. Then, when the cup is presented to me,
dead silence till I have done drinking, when there is a clapping
of hands and a cry of ah mdtha !
From Sir A. Gordon’s Note-Book
De Eicci seems inclined to give trouble. He is a shifty,.'
intriguing sort of man, and, I should say, incapable of truth ori
straightforwardness. I fancy he knows that I know his dis-»
reputable antecedents in India, and, if so, that knowledge is sure
to act in one of two ways—either to make him docile and sub-
servient through fear, or to make him an enemy, ready to plot


and intrigue against one. The latter is the line he is taking I fear,
but there is as yet no open opposition, though a great disposition
to intrigue. He wanted to purchase the point at Nasova and
build a house on the top of it. I should not in any case like
this, as a house on the point would completely command my
house, and, indeed, be almost within hearing of what was said in
the garden. But on public grounds, as we have forbidden all
present dealing in land, I thought it most undesirable that a
public officer, a member of the Executive Council, should buy
land for himself, while, moreover, we did not know what
Cakobau’s rights over the 'point really were. I thought the
matter settled, but it seems he went to the King with Scott the
lawyer, and got Cakobau to sell him the point. Cakobau assures
me that he only did so because he was told it was my wish, and
I have therefore told him to cancel the consent given under a
misapprehension. This he has done. Of course De Ricci is
aggrieved. Again, he had, in Sydney, on the strength of the
permission given him to take private practice, accepted some
most improper retainers against the Crown, and against his
colleagues in the Executive Council. It was evident to me he
must give up his claim to private practice, and he was himself
eager to do so when he found what he would probably get from
private practice fell short of what he would get in the way of
increased salary without trouble if he gave it up. But he
wanted to make it appear that I had forced him to it, so as to
have a grievance against me, and also a claim to compensation.
I certainly pointed out the propriety of the course, but left him
perfectly free to act as he thought best. I did not deny his
unquestionable right to private practice; it was for him to con-
sider whether he would exercise it or not. We agreed on a
form of letter to the Secretary of State, but when he sent it
next day it was not what we had agreed on, and stated that I
had proposed to him to give up his practice, which I had not. I
sent back the letter, and he caved in.
To the Attorney-General
July 7, 1875.—My dear Mr. De Ricci—This letter, which I return, is not a
copy of that which you yesterday submitted to me, with only the alteration of
the paragraph which we agreed to alter, and it contains a new paragraph con-
yeying as inaccurate an impression as that to which I yesterday objected. It
implies that you assented to some proposition of mine, which, as I yesterday
fully and clearly explained to you, was not the case, as you very readily
admitted, when the course of our conversation was recalled to your memory.
Your letter of yesterday contained all that was required, with the omission I
requested, and the addition, (as to my concurrence,) which you wished to


make. I cannot forward this letter, because it does not convey what I consider
an accurate representation, and I should therefore be bound to contradict it.
Pray let me have that on which we both agreed yesterday. If it is delayed
much longer it will be too late for the mail, and I should regret any tardiness
in submitting the matter to the Secretary of State.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, July 9,1875. —My Lord—l have the honour to report the arrival
here on Friday last, the 2nd instant, of Mr. J. H. de Ricci, Attorney-General.
2. Since Mr. De Ricci’s arrival he has addressed to me a letter, of which I
have the honour to enclose a copy, and in which he expresses his intention, on
public grounds, of renouncing the right to private practice accorded to him
on his appointment,
3. Previously to my arrival here, I had, as your Lordship is aware, been
strongly of opinion that it was desirable that the Attorney-General of this
Colony should be allowed private practice. It appeared to me, as a general
principle, obvious that his legal attainments were, under such circumstances,
likely to be more sedulously cultivated than if he acted for the public only on
a fixed annual salary, whilst, of course, if possessing a right to private practice,
his public services might be remunerated by a smaller salary than would other-
wise have been possible, a consideration of no small moment in the case of
this Colony.
4. But I must at once confess that, however sound the general principle,
I was decidedly in error in supposing that it was applicable to a society so
extremely small as that of these islands : not only would the Attorney-General
have been immediately involved in bitter personal quarrels, but it would be
practically impossible to separate in the public mind the Attorney-General
from the Government, and many of those persons whom it is most desirable
to conciliate, whether from their power or their respectability, would have
been thrown into violent antagonism not only to Mr. De Ricci, but to the
administration, by his prosecution of instructions received by him from parties
by whom he had been retained on a general retainer in Sydney.
As, however, the arrangement had been made, I did not feel at liberty to
disturb it, as its abandonment must undoubtedly most seriously affect Mr. De
Ricci’s private income. I therefore merely observed that a prosecution com-
menced by him against one of his leading colleagues, against whom he had
received instructions to proceed on a matter of disputed obligation, would be
productive of great inconvenience, and that I thought that his entering into
partnership, as he proposed to do, with one of the low local solicitors of
Levuka, was open to grave objection.
To explain this proposal, it may be necessary for me to observe that the
two branches of the profession are now united, and will still under the new
Supreme Court Ordinance continue to be so, and that, therefore, any barrister
may at any time be called on to perform attorney’s work. If he has a partner
who is a solicitor, he can of course avoid the necessity of personally under-
taking it.
5. The fact that Mr. De Ricci had received general retainers from a few
large planters and merchants would certainly cause others to consider that
the Government was not dealing impartially by them, and with a strange


obliviousness to his position as legal adviser to the Government, he appears
to have not only undertaken to press private land claims as between different
white settlers, but to have accepted a fee from a party, a Mr. Levick of Sydney}
whose instructions are thus couched : “I am aware you cannot act for any one
but the Government in getting titles passed through the Lands Commission,
but feel sure you will afford advice to those who can. As I am desirous of
retaining you to act for me in reference to the above matter, and generally, I
beg to enclose a cheque for £5 :10s. as a general retainer on my behalf. The
first important point is to obtain the completion of the Dalidoni deed by R. S.
Swanston, which should have been done long ago.” '
6. I was therefore much relieved to find that Mr. De Ricci, after a few days’
residence here, became keenly alive to the great difficulties of his position, and
perceived the probable irreparable injury which the exercise of his right of
private practice might inflict on the early stages of the new Government.
He has, therefore, after full consideration, voluntarily proposed to abstain
from availing himself of that right.
7. I am, of course, aware that if Mr. De Ricci does not undertake private
practice, his salary will have to be increased, and, in the present financial
condition of the Colony, this is a fact which I cannot but deeply deplore.
Nevertheless, I feel that an immunity from the evils which such private practice
must entail will be cheaply purchased by an even considerable increase of
salary, and he is himself aware that he cannot anticipate an increase equal in
amount to the sum which he might have obtained by the exercise of his pro-
fession here. That sum is stated by Mr. Layard, Mr. Garrick the Acting Chief
Judge, and the principal solicitors here, to be at least £IOOO per annum.
8. Mr. De Ricci, in my opinion, deserves much credit for the manner in
which, when he perceived his private interests and those of the public to be
in opposition, he has waived the former, on which, had he chosen to do so,
he might have, no doubt, insisted.—l have, etc.
To Lady Gordon
Nasova, July 14, 1875. —The Silver Cloud , after having
closed her mail a dozen times, is not yet gone, which I am now
glad of, as it enables me to answer your letter of July 1, which
I received last night after I had gone to bed —the Reynard
having made a very quick passage down and beaten the James
Patterson , of which we shall probably see nothing for some days
to come. I am thankful to hear so good an account of you and
the bairns, and very glad to learn that you continue to like Mrs.
Havelock. I think she is a person to suit you admirably. You
don’t say anything abou£ Lady Hackett, but I suppose your
letter per James Patterson contains the account of her. I
hope you get on well with her, for, De Ricci being what he is, all
my chance of having any efficient legal assistance consists in my pulling
thoroughly well with the Chief-Justice. He is not bound by his
duty to give me any such assistance at all. It is dreadfully
cold here, and I have got quite a bad cold in consequence of
141
11l
FIJI


the draughts of which the house is full, but I have moved
into another bedroom to avoid them. Still, till the weather
gets rather warmer again I shall be miserable. You would enjoy,
it immensely, and all the young gentlemen say it is delightful.
I suppose it is healthy, but to my feelings it ain’t pleasant.
I think you have been cheated by that gifted Gilfillan, who
wants to get paid himself for the storage of my boxes at Sydney.
“The price of storage is enormous at Levuka,” is it? But
where does he expect me to store them except in my own house ?
Eh ! —and who am Ito pay then for storage ? Is it Mr. Abbey ?
And, as it happens, it isn’t only the cabinets that are important,
but among the books there are Trinidad, Seychelles, and Jamaica
Ordinances, which are most pressingly wanted here as models for
adoption. We began the new rooms yesterday, and I send you a
rather better plan of the house with the additions. These additions
ought to be ready in two months, but, of course, there may be
delays. Still I would take the first really good opportunity after
that date of coming, for if they are not quite ready you could
always be put up temporarily in the existing house. At the
same time, though you could be, I must warn you that, for a lady,
it would be very uncomfortable. The walls and partitions (of
reeds) are so thin that the former let through every breeze, and
the latter every sound from one end of the house to the other,
and I am afraid, if you come to it, you may, especially if the
weather is bad, take an intolerable disgust to all Fiji, whereas I
hope the new rooms will please you. Much as I like the country,
I am sure that were I a woman and came here in wind and wet
I should hate it—at least I should hate the very many small dis-
comforts of it. The Commodore went away yesterday for the
New Hebrides. I saw him just before he sailed, and he was
very well and lively, as you may tell Mrs. Goodenough. We
parted with mutual respect and liking. If the Silver Cloud does
not disappear from our horizon to-day, I shall write again to-
morrow. At present her mails are supposed to close at 10 A.M.,
which hour is now at hand.
Nasoya, July 16, 1875.—The Silver Cloud, as usual, after
“ closing her mails ” did not go, and now they are all to be
transferred to the James Patterson, which has come in, and leaves
again, it is said, to-morrow. At all events it gives me the
opportunity of answering your letters, and the charming ones
of the children, which are capital, evidently genuine, and very
characteristic. You make no comment on Alfred Hervey’s
death, of which I was both surprised and shocked to hear. He
has been, I think, of those who were with us at Somerset House,
the first to depart hence to the real world. And when will our


own turn come ? Perhaps soon. God knoweth! What an
exceedingly nice letter that is of Alex.’s. I do not think
during the whole of our forty-five years’ acquaintance I ever
had such a nice one from him before. I hope you have taken
very good care of the plaid. You see how he prizes it. So
do I. I wonder what your answer was to Mrs. Rate. Those
sort of things should never be asked; they should come spontane-
ously. At the same time it is a request not very easy to refuse.
Perhaps your best way would be to say that no married friend
of yours, not a near relation, is so addressed by you, and that it
wouldn’t feel natural, but that she may certainly call you Rachael
if she pleases to do so. But then this depends upon the accuracy
or inaccuracy of my supposition as to what is the case, and what
would be your feelings. How did the Queen’s picture come?
just sent from the photographer, or with a letter 1 In the latter
case send me the letter, as I must write a dutiful acknowledgement.
Most of the other papers, etc., of this time came here vid San
Francisco and New Zealand without going to Sidney. But the
original missing lot seem never to have turned up. Next time
don’t send on the packets unopened, but take out all or any of the
periodicals you like—l certainly shall not have time to read them.
The Fall Mall and Guardian will be quite enough for me, with an
occasional Times of any special interest. I have very little
“ literary leisure ”; I may say none. I have got a real bad cold
and am quite seedy with it. I tell you this at once because,
judging from the wonderful exaggeration and lying which prevail
here, (worse than Mauritius, —I suppose it is in proportion to small-
ness,) it is as likely as not that Mrs. or some other gossip
will write to Lady Robinson that I have measles, smallpox,
scarlatina, dysentery, or all of them together. If so, you need
not believe a word of it, for there is no truth whatever in it.
The excessively cold weather—weather you would delight in,
but which is very trying to poor me —has in this draughty house
given me a cold, which has made me stay at home for a day or
two. You need be under no apprehensions as regards milk.
There are cows all about everywhere on the island; so many
indeed that the natives complain of the damage done by them
in trampling down their taro beds and banana plantations.
Nasova, July 20, 1875. — My cold is very much better, and
this afternoon I went for a sail down the coast for some miles.
To-morrow I am going over to the big island in the Barracouta.
Since I last wrote, I have found Lady Ely’s letter. I shall not,
however, write to thank the Queen till I have seen the photo-
graph. Lady Ely’s letter is a nice one. You say nothing of the
M‘Arthurs. Have you never heard anything more of them ?


Has all their hospitality melted into hypothetical care of possible
future measles 1 The poor De Riccis are very miserable here.
I must say I think Levuka is about as disgusting a town as I
ever saw. Mrs. Hamilton is quite right in saying that Butters’
site would never do for us. You would about as much enjoy
living at the top of a lighthouse. Lord Carnarvon’s and Herbert’s
letters are very pleasant and satisfactory, and I am on the whole
very well contented with the aspect of things official. Our works
at the house progress slowly; my cold has thrown them back.
I find MacGregor a very pleasant as well as useful doctor. I wish
you would send me some botanical pressing paper. Dr. Moore
will either give you some or tell you where to get it. You
must put up with a very shabby letter to-day, for I am very
tired and the Eenard leaves early, and in sober truth I have very
little to say. My letters usually are of very decent length.
There will be another opportunity in a few days by the Emu.
Arthur has gone on an expedition to Yiti Levu with Mr. Carew,
a gentleman recommended to me by Sir George Grey, who has
a great knowledge of the language and ways of the tribes of the
interior, and whom I am sending to see what is the actual con-
dition of the country, and to set at rest the suspicions and
uneasiness to which their unhappy visitation of measles has
given rise. They will go right across the big island from side to
side, which few, if any, white men have as yet done. It is a
journey of some adventure.
July 20.
opposite Mali Island. Has 1000 acres burnt, 150 planted,
which he leases. People decimated by measles. Roads over-
grown since measles. Wants a place very badly.
Wright —From Ono near Kadavu. Very hoarse and gloomy.
Wants very bad to be a Justice of the Peace. Says there are
twenty white folks, all told, in Kadavu and Ono, and only one
English J.P. for them all! There is a native magistrate, but he
is no use because he don’t know New South Wales’ law, [which
is not in force here now,] and is afraid to administer law vaka
Viti because he knows it is illegal [ —which it isn’t]. The other
day some chiefs made illegal exactions of food, and ill-treated
a girl who would not give up her pig. The native magistrate
was afraid to interfere, and Mr. Wright didn’t like it, and “it
made him feel bilious.” He bought a piece of land at Savu
Savu, but the man he bought it from hadn’t bought it himself
from the natives, so they would not go away peaceably, and
there was no way then (six years ago) of forcing them to do so,
so he abandoned his purchase and went to Ono. Hopes he will
be “ righted ” now and get “ his ” land !


John Thcmison —Nadroga. A manly sort of fellow, but with
a bad expression of face. May, I think, be made use of. Was
secretary to Ratu Kini. Didn’t much like his notions of the
“ introduction of law and order,” but on the whole rather liked
him. Story of the plot to kill him and Henry Thurston
—won’t stand examination. Was a planter at Nadi—at Maro—
and is now a trader at Cuvu, Says Nadi Bay near Na Saso
is the place for a town. Of course every one thinks the capital
should be at his own door.
Jones —Raki Raki. Rather a nice quiet fellow. Was in the
Raki Raki war as a volunteer when Swanston called for volun-
teers. Was wounded—shot through lungs —and seven weeks
in hospital. Wants compensation for ruin of health and planta-
tion. Explained not responsible. Buli, near him, has ordered
all the measles widows and unmarried young men to marry —a
wise step I think. Says he saved the lives of a whole village in
measles with arrowroot. The chief of it his pet Fijiman.
To the Eahl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Ovalau, Fiji, July 22, 1875. — My Lord — l have the honour
to report for your Lordship’s information the particulars of a failure of
justice, which I shall not so much regret if it removes from your Lordship’s
mind any lingering vestige of hesitation or doubt which may have remained
there as to the expediency and necessity of the clauses contained in the draft
Ordinance of Justice enclosed in your Lordship’s despatch No. 2, of the 22nd
March 1875, which provides for the substitution, in certain cases, of assessors
for a jury.
2. The case is that of a trial of two Europeans, whose brutal inhumanity
and neglect led to the death, in a few weeks, of 24 out of 31 Polynesian
labourers committed to their care, and who were accordingly indicted for man-
slaughter, but who, in spite of very clear and sufficient evidence of their
culpability, have just been declared by a jury to be “ Not Guilty.”
3. The particulars of the case are as follows :
4. One Simpson, owner of a vessel called the Tui Tavuki , some time in
November 1874 applied for and obtained a licence to recruit a number of
Polynesian labourers. The Tui Tavuki sailed in the same month, and re-
turned to Levuka with 39 Polynesians on the Bth February of the present
year. On the 10th February these people were landed, inspected, and
approved by the Protector of Polynesians, and, pending their being hired out
to permanent service, were, under a special permit, entrusted to the care of one
Brodziak, acting as attorney and agent of a Mr. Simpson, then absent from
the Colony.
5. Eight of these men were at once hired out to other masters, and the
remaining 33 were, by Brodziak’s directions, taken to a Mr, Evans, who gave
a receipt for them, —an entirely illegal arrangement. They were taken to a
property of Evans called “ Evans’ slaughter yard,” and there appear to have
been turned out almost without food or clothing, and with no shelter except
L


such as could be obtained from some partly overhanging cliffs hard by. The
weather at this time was peculiarly wet, boisterous, and inclement.
6. On the Bth March following, Evans addressed a letter to Brodziak
requesting the immediate removal of the Polynesians received per Tui Tavuki ,
alleging that they would not work, and intimating that he had ordered no
more food to be supplied them.
7. Brodziak seems to have agreed to take back some of the number, and
on the 10th or 11th five sick men were returned accordingly, and were by
Brodziak’s storeman, “Joel,” placed in the back part of an empty store. In
this store they were found on the 12th, locked in, by the Protector, whose
attention had been called to the matter by persons who had witnessed the
starving wretches among the rocks, wandering about in search of food. They
were all in a state of extreme exhaustion. The Protector states in his evidence
that the men “had no blankets—there was a piece of sail-cloth on the ground ”
(which sail-cloth another witness described as dirty and wet through). They
had seen no doctor, and their only food was some biscuit and cold kumalas.
At the request of the Protector they were at once supplied with blankets and
inspected by the Government Medical Officer, Dr. Cruikshank, by whose order
they were on the following day removed to a temporary hospital improvised
for that purpose at the Police Quarters, Totoga, where one of their number
died a few hours after admission.
8. On the same day, the 12th, the Protector proceeded to the “slaughter
yard,” there he found 24 others of the Polynesians. These men also were re-
moved to Totoga. Two others of the number transferred to Evans were found
the day following under some overhanging rocks at the rear of the residence
of the American Consul, whither they had wandered in search of food, and
some sort of shelter from the rain. They presented a still more destitute
appearance than those in the “slaughter yard,” and one of them died very
shortly after his admission to Totoga.
9. From the time the Polynesians were committed to the care of Brodziak
and by him handed to Evans on the 10th February, to the time when they
were removed to the hospital on the 12th and 13th March, they were unpro-
vided with either mats, blankets, or clothing of any kind except a strip of calico
about 5 feet long by 18 inches wide, given to each on landing. No provision
was made for their being regularly supplied with food. They were sent by
Evans to the rocks at the “slaughter yard,” and although incessant rains and
boisterous winds prevailed from the early part of February to the end of
March, neither Brodziak nor Evans appear to have evinced the smallest thought
or care for the condition of the men, or to have visited, or caused any one on
their behalf to visit for them, the place where their labourers had been located.
10. Of the 39 Polynesians who arrived per Tui Tavuki 31 remained with
the defendants. Of these, 24 died at short intervals after admission to
Totoga. Of the 8 that were engaged to other employers not one has died, and
they are all at present in good health.
11. The trial took place lately, commencing on the Ist and terminating
on the sth inst.
12. The defence made was threefold : (1) That the Polynesians when com-
mitted to the care of the defendant Brodziak and by him handed to Evans,
were in an emaciated condition, mere skeletons, barely able to walk ; (2)
That on board the Tui Tavuki they had been badly fed, and had there


contracted disease of which they ultimately died ; (3) That the defendants
had provided ample food and shelter.
13. As to the first and second points, the evidence of the Protector, Mr.
Bentley, the Master, Fraser, and the Agent, Haddock, is, I think, conclusive.
It is that of persons who had the Polynesians under immediate supervision.
The Protector had no interest in passing the men, if unfit to be passed, and,
as a public officer, would have been guilty of a gross dereliction of duty had
he approved of labourers in the emaciated condition contended for by the
defence.
14. It was admitted that no shelter but such as could be obtained from
the rocks was given, and as to the allegation that a sufficiency of food was
supplied, it is enough to say that the only evidence adduced to prove it (that
of Evans’s clerk) was to the effect that two tons , or say 2000 lbs., of food was at
Evans’s shop in Levuka, half-a-mile distant, to which, it was stated, the 31
Polynesians and 6 others in the employ of Evans had access. However,
admitting, which is very doubtful, that the whole of this food was consumed
by the labourers between the 10th February and the 13th March, it would
fall far short of the statutory allowance of 7 lbs per day to each man, which
would amount for 32 days for 37 men to 9288 lbs.
15. If it had indeed been the case that the Polynesians were in the
emaciated state described when landed, it was even yet more imperative upon
the defendants than it would otherwise have been to provide ample food,
good shelter, proper covering, and medical advice for them, instead of which
the men had been left for 32 days wholly uncared for, exposed amongst bare
rocks to wind and rain, without food or clothing ; —had in short been turned
out like so many sheep to graze.
16. The jury returned a verdict of “ Not Guilty,” adding the strange rider
“that they had very grave doubts as to its propriety”! The judge, Mr.
Garrick, in discharging the prisoners, said that the case was slight as against
Brodziak, but that Evans, though acquitted of manslaughter, had been guilty
of gross inhumanity to poor “ creatures who, brought to a foreign country and
unable to speak its language, were powerless to seek relief.”
To Lady Gordon
H.M.S. Barracouta , Suva, July 23.—We have caught the
Benard here, so I can send you a. few lines more. My cold is gone
and to be numbered among the things of the past. Olive and I
and my Fijian guard embarked last night after dinner. This morn-
ing at daylight MacGregor came on board, and we sailed at 6 A.m.
Eventless voyage to Suva. Passed Benard. Stood out seven or
eight miles unnecessarily far to sea. Steamed slowly down here
and reached Suva about 4.30. Dawson of the Survey, and Mr.
Joske, planter, came off, and Olive and I went ashore with
Joske, as did also MacGregor. Imposing two-storied plank hotel,
verandah on both stories and tin roof, with a very West
Indian look. Plank bridge over creek. Dawson’s house with
a little garden. Then walked up to Joske’s, with a nice


flower-garden inside a bamboo fence, where good roses and bright
flowering plants flourish. Mrs, Joske rather nice, and almost a
lady. Flourishing children. They all seem fond of plants and
flowers. Ambrose the young chief. Dawson and Suckling
(sub-lieutenant) at dinner. The harbour is a noble one and it
'gives me much pleasure to be again on a big island, where there
is plenty of room to move about, instead of on Ovalau, where I
certainly will not have the capital, wherever else it may be placed.
Where I may fix I shall of course not determine till I have seen
all the competing sites. Mr. Dawson of the Livingstone Expedi-
tion is now here surveying. He is a capital fellow, one of the
best naval officers I have met for a long time.
Saturday , July 24.—Olive and I were up early and went to
bathe up a creek, as directed by Dawson. The creek was man-
grove-edged and very West Indian. Behind the mangroves on
the south side rose a steep bank of wood in which sago palms,
Cecropia peltata , and others were specially conspicuous. On the
other side was a more gradual slope, also richly wooded, and
backed by a cliff of brown rock. The creek forked, got too
narrow to pull in, so we had to punt and paddle, and at length
got to the foot of some steps, 180 or so in number, up a steep
bank among rich forest. The steps themselves were logs of
cocoa-nut laid against the hill-side among tree ferns, sago palms,
creeping lianas, and large-leaved underwood. Parrots —with
bright scarlet waistcoats, but not “ Kulas ” —fluttered or chattered
in the foliage or sat on the branches screaming and calling. We
could have shot dozens had we been so evil-minded. The view of
bay through a frame of forest, as one looked down the stair-like
pathway from perhaps 150 feet above the water, was truly
lovely. At the top found the house of a settler, a Mr. Cuthbert,
on a very bare elevated place. He has set up a small sugar-
crushing machine. We went down a bad slippery path to his
bathing place, where in wet weather there is a waterfall and a
good pool, but now there is only a muddy pool without the fall.
Returned late for breakfast. After breakfast saw Mr. Magistrate
Thurston, a bad edition of his brother —also Ratu loni Colata,
to whom, however, I did not speak. Went ashore. To native
village and went through the usual performances of food pre-
senting, magiti, etc. at Ambrose’s (the chief’s) house. Ambrose
is, I fear, a scamp, but a good-looking one; he has quite lately
married a rather nice girl from Bau, and she was gorgeous in a
yellow gown. There was also a school —not a good one. The
people of this bay are of a low type—prognathous jaws, low
foreheads, etc. Went through cane fields —a very needless per


formance. The sugar mill is a fine one and would not disgrace
Mauritius or the West Indies, but the canes look sickly and the
soil is thoroughly ill adapted for sugar growing. It would be a
better site for a town than a sugar plantation, but it wants water.
After luncheon, went in the steam launch with Dawson,
Stevens, Olive, and MacGregor to the inner harbour. Very pretty
indeed, but unfortunately we had heavy rain. It rather reminded
me of some of the Scotch lakes, i.e. of Loch Lomond. We went
up to the top of one island, by a slippery, scrambly, muddy, and
generally most objectionable path. Not much view to be had
as it was pouring hard, but got into a curious limestone cave full
of human bones, among which we grubbed away for some time,
and finally came away very wet and very dirty. Whether the
cave was a place of burial or a place of feasting we are not
prepared to say. Cruised a little round inner harbour and came
back to ship—MacGregor at dinner. A ship is generally more or
less uncomfortable and this ship is specially so; but, of course,
the discomfort is greatly increased by wet weather. And it is
horridly cold too as well as rainy.
Sunday , July 25. —Sailed at eight, after an interview with the
Rewa Buli—a good sort of fellow, but got up in Europe clothes
and a white waistcoat. We towed out Renard , which after leav-
ing yesterday had to put back again—got into a nasty sea, found
the thick driving rain-squalls made it impossible to see the reefs,
and consequently dangerous to go on, so we put into the newly
discovered harbour of Namuka, only a few miles beyond Suva,
under Dawson’s pilotage. Here we stayed all the afternoon.
Squalls and showers. The mainland is densely wooded and so is
a little island close to us. Landed on the island and picked up
shells. No good ones, but found one very fine dead olive of
immense size and beautiful markings. There must be more
where it came from. Wind, rain, and general discomfort.
Monday, July 26.—More rain—much rain—heavy squalls
and showers. Went in the morning to inspect a wonderful red-
foliaged tree, the existence of which had been reported to us by
Dawson, but behold, when we had pulled a mile and a half we
found that it was a bank of red earth ! After breakfast went to
village of Lasilasi. Village on a point —poor and wretched. All
the inhabitants looking ill and are ill-looking. They had, however,
good banana gardens, and there were twenty fine canoes drawn
up on the beach. Got shelter in the chief’s house during a
heavy shower. Got a few clubs and spears —had magiti and gave
it to the boat’s crew. Lost a third by measles. Poor chapel.
Same schoolmaster as at Suva. Horrid afternoon of rain and


wind, and stayed on board listening to the heavy drip of the rain
and looking out now and then at the scud and mist.
Tuesday , July 27.—1 tis breakfast time, (Wednesday,) but
nothing is ever punctual on board this ship, so I shall have time
to write somewhat to you of yesterday’s proceedings before it is
ready. Rather better day, but still rainy and squally. Spent
the morning botanising with MacGregor on the small island of
Namuka. Found many ferns, —what we took to be Vanilla—
and a tree new to us, with very bright red fruits growing from
the stem and branches like cacao or bilimbi—also a tree flower-
ing in the same manner. Small sweet-scented flowers on a tree
like a coffee bush. Crept through the bush, waded through
water, clambered over rocks, squirmed through mangroves.
Joined boat again. After luncheon went with Dawson to the
sawmills. Sawmiller Seaton rather nervous. Guess he is a de-
serter. He is building a boat. Picturesque clearing—different
kinds of mangroves—one with a pretty red flower ( Sangala ).
Native path to interior. Potato plant or at least some sort of
Sohnum. Inquired as to prices of timber, etc. Seaton don’t
seem to be doing a roaring trade, and I expect he lies as to the
amount he really does. Went on to the river Davitu and went
up it a mile or so. Birds plentiful. Chiefly parrots and pigeons
and a bird with a clear, loud, pleasant note. Also flying foxes
in numbers. Three houses at the mouth of river. Called there
as we came down. All the people as usual seemed ill and stupid.
One man had very bad elephantiasis. Pulled to another point
and gathered some grass and flowers. Then back to ship in a
tremendous pelting shower, and got on board thoroughly drenched.
Had to change again,—such a bore. One’s clothes never get
dry. I hate this ship. As we cannot go on we will go back to
Levuka to-morrow, and I won’t take a voyage again in’the
Barracouta in a hurry if I can help it. I shall be very glad
when Cosmo’s ship comes to relieve her. After dinner MacGregor
dried specimens.
Wednesday , July 28.—1 wrote great part of the above whilst
waiting for breakfast. Here we still are, and I don’t know when
we shall ever get away again, for it is still raining and blowing
furiously. Went ashore to the island with MacGregor. We
got many specimens, some very good ones, of ferns and flowers.
After lunch MacGregor and M‘Leod went ashore at the sawmill
and he had a great haul of specimens without going many yards
inland. Mr. Gain shot two pretty parrots. Olive and I went
down to Nagara Island, opposite which we landed at a native
village of some size, oddly situated among tree-stumps at the


bottom of a muddy mangrove creek. Close by, a projecting cape
of fair height stood out into the water, on which one wondered
the inhabitants had not by preference located themselves.
Opposite this some canoes were lying. The people here are only
half “ lotu ’’-ed, 1 and are seldom visited. The women and chil-
dren and a part of the men had fled to a hill in the back-ground,
where we saw them clustered and staring at us. An intelligent
teacher, and a stupid headman. Got a few poor clubs. We
pulled part of the way across to Nagara, but Avarosa told us
the white settlement was still some way off, so we had mercy on
our men and their stiff pull back against the wind, and turned.
Got back to ship about six. Rather a stupid day’s work.
Dawson seedy.
How I wish I had time to write some letters to the Times , or
to write at length to friends in England. I have written no
letter to any one at home except Lord Carnarvon, or to any one
out of the group, except yourself, since I came here, I really and
sincerely have not time. Every moment is fully occupied. It
would take time and thought and trouble to compose anything
like a “ graphic ” account of the country or people, or one’s own
adventures. It would take a good deal to paint in words even
my native orderly officer, Sakiusa, now approaching, with his
beautiful brown skin, becoming though scanty dress, bright smile,
and mop of yellow hair.
Thursday , July 29. —Sa Jcasa na waga. 2 It was a very fine
morning, and we left our place of anchorage early. Ten minutes
after, we ran on a reef, and there we now are. Dawson was
steering. I shall be very very sorry on his account if he gets into
anything of a row about it. There is every disposition to cast
blame on him. We got off the spit about one, but wasted all the
rest of the day in what Dawson called “amateur performances
with boats and anchors.” The men wouldn’t, or at least didn’t,
work, the gear was rotten and the officers inefficient. There was
near being a bad accident by the breaking of a windlass as the
anchor, which had been laid out to warp us off, was being got up.
There was an accident when it was let go again, the cable flying.
Several men escaped it by jumping over-board, but one got severely
jammed—not seriously however. Though on shore we did not
get ashore all day, and it passed heavily enough. It was so
late in the evening when we got everything clear for a start that
we anchored again immediately.
Friday , July 30. —Dawson called the getting off yesterday
“some amateur performances with boats and anchors.” We
1 Christianised. 2 The ship is aground.


started about B'3o, intending to go to Levuka, but after perform-
ing a series of what Dawson calls “ Barracouta quadrilles,” i.e.
sometimes going out to sea, and sometimes coming inshore again,
we reached Suva so late that Mr. Gain 1 said he would not answer
for arriving at Levuka before eleven or twelve at night. So I
decided to stay at Suva. Had an hour or two on the reef at
low water. Baskets of beautiful fish, and got one or two
tolerable shells. Tide rose with wonderful rapidity. Went
ashore to Joske’s and Dawson’s, and went to look at Dawson’s
site for Admiralty Reserve, and went with him up one or two
reaches of the Tanavua river. MacGregor went, unsuccessfully,
to the bone cave.
Saturday , July 31.—Really sailed and really got to Levuka
about 3.
Interviews. — Mason —Taviuni—University man but rather
objectionable.
Hill , Rambi—Conceited though cleverish.
Sunday , August I.—Went for once to the Wesleyan church.
Didn’t much like it.
Leefe —Buli marrying folks. Roko ordering people to leave
town.
Baron von Hugel —Asked him to stay.
Monday , August 2.—Maafu says that it was Ongea, not Ono,
he spoke of, which is exactly what I supposed.
Watson and Horton —Bank of Fiji—Discussed its proposed
New Charter. w
Wilkinson —Did not like him at first. He improved on/
acquaintance, and I shall make him chief interpreter.
Burt —Savu Savu murder —Very little moral doubt, but no
sufficient proof. Shute is anyway a ruffian.
The Baron is a particularly nice young fellow. He is a
brother of the Von Hugel who married Lady Mary Herbert, and
is travelling scientifically, collecting for the British Museum, I
believe. He has been in the interior and met Arthur there, and
has brought a strong recommendation from him.
Tuesday , August 3.— Jones —Son of Sheriff Jones of New
Brunswick, Gunner in New Brunswick Artillery, to whom I
gave the Prize Cup, in ’63. Wants a place in the police. Won-
derful how small the world is.
Maafu , to take leave Discussed land and native law.
Lectured him as to the iniquity of dynamite fishing and delayed
reports.
Wednesday , August 4. Woolley —Yankee. Complains the
1 Navigating Lieutenant.


trade given as payment to the labourers returning in the Daphne
is insufficient. Explained that I would not give guns, but that
other trade should be ample. Sent for Thurston and enforced
the same on him. Complaint made that no selection is allowed.
Otway —lrishman from Nandi in Yanua Levu. Wants
Senior’s place. In favour of Coolie immigration, and thinks
nothing can be done till the present race of planters is cleared J
off, himself included.
JVylie —Gave him £25 for Wesleyan Mission in Levuka.i^
De Ricci —Bosh.
Thursday , August s.— Holmes , Yanua Levu —Not a bad
fellow. Did much in measles.
Martin —Captain of Marion Rennie. lof course told him I
could not discuss with him the charge of kidnapping, on which I
had ordered his prosecution. The statement of Missen, the
Government agent on board, is most curious. The simplicity
with which this man, apparently unconscious that it was his
business to see that no breach of the law took place, records in
his letter the direct purchase of men, reluctant to leave their
own islands, their subsequent escape, and the attempts to re-
capture them, is highly instructive.
August 6,— Bentley —lndiscretion —Cameron’s boat. Hard-
ing’s case.
Swayne , Dreketi river—Wants to be a magistrate. Recom-
mended by Layard, and is, I think, eligible.
Beatson —Plan of a dock. Would be useful, but there are
many other things to think of and take in hand before Govern-
ment can undertake such a work.
Lee , Planter, Namena—Bad sort. Wants to transfer some
labour. Thinks “though New Hebrides men are dying out,
there are plenty of islands to the north not properly worked up
yet.” Wants to set up what would be virtually a Slave Trade
Company. Told me of big land claims of Winter on Dreketi
and on Ba—Swanston and others at Serua, etc.
Cowen —Planter, Nadroga. Says natives are going to give
trouble there, near mouth of Sirgatoka. Perhaps so. He clearly
wishes it, and he and others may do much to render a collision
inevitable.
On Tuesday, 10th, Arthur arrived, looking so well and brown
after his journey. He had been right through the big island
from one side to the other, and was in ecstasies with the climate
and colouring of the west side of it about Nandi. Mitchell,
who has been all round the island, also came back soon after,
so here we are again. Since then we have been living very


quietly, not to say monotonously, one day just like another,
with nothing to relate or write about. The James Patterson has
come in days before her time, and is going back again directly.
The consequence is that having delayed or neglected one’s letters
and despatches they now have all to be written in a hurry, and
many will not be written at all, or be far too short. In addition
to the things you mention pray at all events bring or send
two or three good sofas. There is nothing in the house of that
sort except a few narrow leather-seated cane-backed steamboat
deck seats. Two or three nice little tables for the drawing-
room will do no harm. It does really seem to me now most
selfish to have brought you out to a place where you can have
so little enjoyment, I fear, of life, and it makes me quite
unhappy and ashamed. Still this is certainly the right sort of
work for me. lam much obliged to Maudslay, to whom I
write a note to thank him; but, all the same, I don’t like being
obliged to an almost stranger for the care of my wife, and I
should send Knollys down to-day were it not that if you come
with the troops you will have started before he could reach
Sidney, which would be ridiculous. If you do not come with
the soldiers I shall send him at once, though no doubt his absence,
especially during the house-building, will be extremely incon-
venient. Have you learnt enough Fijian to know what malua
means 1 “By and by,” which is its translation, is the great
resource of all men, white or black, in Fiji, and the house is no
exception. It is now contracted for, but it will not be finished
till October. I quite admit the justice of your criticisms, except
that as to servants going along the front of the house, which they
don’t, but the nature of the ground rendered any other plan almost
impossible. We could not have the kitchen on the other side, but
when the public offices have vacated the rooms they now occupy,
I think we might move the dining-room to the kitchen side of
the house. lam delighted by your thorough appreciation
of Eistori ; not at all surprised, for you have perfect taste
and are a perfect lady, and it is this which makes you appreciate
her. I recollect her twenty years ago or thereabouts. Will you
kindly ask Mrs. Goodenough to have the proper direction put on
this letter to the Commodore ? It is important. Talking of sailors,
I am horrified at Cosmo’s reckless expenditure on my boat! I
have written to endeavour to cut it down, but I don’t anticipate
much success, and shall be let in for a very useless waste of
money.
I have sent you by Mr. Floyd two of the little plumes the
natives sometimes stick into one side of their hair. I don’t
know whether they will keep their brilliancy and lustre or will


turn brown. They are very pretty when fresh, and are made of
the thin membrane which lines the inside of a cocoa-nut shell.
On the night of August Ist I had a singular dream or vision.
Woke in the night with footsteps on the matting which were
apparently Arthur’s. I was, or thought I was, only half awake.
Conscious of that drowsy state one is in when suddenly waked, but
conscious at the same time of the position of one’s limbs and
members. It was dark. He bent over me to kiss me, and
though I saw nothing I felt the mosquito net on my face and
the pressure and warmth of his on mine. I said, “Oh I’m so
glad you are come back, but I’m only half awake yet,” and
put up my arm to put round him. I completely woke up and
all vanished. I suppose that the mosquito net touched my face,
and that the footsteps were the Baron’s in the next room, but I
confess to have felt somewhat anxious till Arthur returned safe
and sound on the 10th.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
Nasova, August 11, 1875. —My dear Captain Stevens —As you had a
letter from me actually in your hands before you wrote the postscript to your
official letter of this morning, I am sorry that you did not open and read it
before you despatched your own. The receipt of official communications with
respect to the letter which I privately showed you yesterday, was, I must
confess, entirely unexpected by me. When we were together on Monday
evening I asked you to look in here some morning, and when you came I ex-
plained to you that I had wished you to call because I thought it courteous to
yourself, and likely to facilitate the easy transaction of business between us that,
instead of making a public and official remonstrance against a charge to which
I objected as improper, I should privately suggest its withdrawal. In this view
you concurred, and the letter was, in accordance with your own request, sent
back to you this morning. I also showed you, but equally privately, Mr.
Emberson’s letter to Mr. Thurston, in order to prove to you the correctness of
my own impression as to the meaning of Mr. Emberson’s letter to yourself.
I did not ask you here for the purpose of showing you that letter, and I
certainly did not intend to make any official communication of it to you,
precisely because I was of your opinion as to the undesirableness of raising
any further discussion of the subject to which it related. lam now sorry
that I showed it to you at all, but I certainly thought we were sufficiently
acquainted to warrant my doing so. I deprecate, with yourself, any corre-
spondence of a controversial nature, and I still think that it would be better
not to enter upon it, and to withdraw your letters of yesterday and to-day.
Strictly speaking, you are not entitled to claim a copy of a letter from one
officer of this Government to another, confidentially shown you by me, but, as
I have already said, your request, if persisted in, shall be complied with. I
am ready to return the letters or to answer them, as you may on full consider-
ation wish, but I shall only answer them with regret, for however little our
relations maybe affected by such a correspondence, and, so far at all events
as I am concerned it will make no difference, it certainly has a'tendency


to disturb the perfect cordiality and freedom of intercourse which I should
always wish to exist between myself and the Senior Naval Officer in these
waters.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
Nasova, August 12, 1875.—My dear Captain Stevens— l have this morn-
ing received with great surprise your official reply to my private note of
yesterday. Had I not heard you say that the letter from Mr. Gain to Mr.
Thurston, to which your letter of this morning refers, should be withdrawn,
and another substituted for it, I should of course have at once directed the
Colonial Secretary to reply officially to that letter. You are quite aware why
I did not do so ; and I am therefore surprised to see it made the subject of
official comment. lam quite aware of the rules for official correspondence
to which you refer, nor have I suggested that you should depart from them.
But it seems to me that there is a mal entendu, which five minutes’ conversa-
tion between us would set to rights. I will therefore ask you to call here
any time to-day most convenient to you.
P.S. I kept no copy of my letter of yesterday—not supposing it was to be
treated as an official document. Might I ask you to bring it with you ?
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
Nasova, August 12, 1875.—My dear Sir —I regret that you should not
have complied with my invitation to call here this afternoon, but I still more
regret that you should adopt the unusual course of replying to private notes
by official despatches. Were it not altogether irrational to suppose that
my having shown you Mr. Emberson’s letter, (however much you may feel
displeased with that gentleman,) could have given you any cause for offence
with me, such a course as you have taken would appear to indicate a desire
for the cessation of the friendly personal intercourse hitherto subsisting
between us. I now send my official replies to your letters. As you have
thought it necessary to return an official answer to my note marked “private ”
of this morning, I must ask you to have the goodness to furnish me with a
copy of that note, as I have retained none.
To Commodore Goodenough
August 19, 1875.—Sir—I have the honour to enclose copies of a corre-
spondence which has lately taken place between Capt. Stevens, R.N.,
commanding H. M. S. and myself. I should not have deemed it
requisite to trouble you with its perusal had I not feared that an impression
prejudicial to Mr. Emberson might possibly be made upon your mind by
Capt. Stevens’ reports to yourself. Such an impression would, I believe, be
totally erroneous and unjust to a very zealous and meritorious magistrate.
To render this correspondence intelligible I must, however, refer to some
previous occurrences.
When the Barracouta was at Loma Lorna about six weeks since, the magis-
trate there, Mr. Emberson, asked Capt. Stevens to request his pilot and inter-
preter to ascertain for him whether reports which had reached Mr. Emberson
with respect to exactions of native chiefs in some islands were well founded
or the reverse. Capt. Stevens, as is evident from his reply, totally mistook


Mr. Emberson’s meaning, and imagined that he had himself been asked to
inquire into and adjudicate on these cases. Acting on this erroneous im-
pression he at Koro and Ono called before him the chiefs and people of the
island, summoned witnesses, conducted- a species of judicial investigation
and gave “injunctions” which, as it happens, were not in accordance with
the laws actually at present in force in this colony. On the return here of the
Barracouta, Capt. Stevens sent me a portion of his letter of proceedings to
you, and from this I learnt Avhat had taken place. I had a conversation with
Capt. Stevens and pointed out both the mistake he had, as it seemed to me,
evidently made as to Mr. Emberson’s meaning, and the inconvenience which
w'ould arise if similar proceedings were repeated, but I said that I did not
wish to enter into any official correspondence on the subject, which was then
allowed quietly to drop.
A short time ago a claim was sent in for payment by the Colonial
Government of the expenses of entertainment on board the Barracouta of
Lieut. Dawson, who was stated to have been embarked at my request. As
this was not the case, I saw Capt. Stevens and suggested to him that instead
of my replying officially in this sense the letter should be withdrawn and
another substituted. He acquiesced, and the letter was accordingly returned
to him. A letter from Mr. Emberson had just been received by the Colonial
Secretary and was on my table when Capt. Stevens was with me, and to show
that I had been right in supposing that gentleman’s views to have been mis-
understood, I allowed Capt. Stevens to see this letter. Capt. Stevens then
expressed great dissatisfaction with Mr. Emberson, and complained of his
want of courtesy to him in not calling on him immediately on the arrival of
the Barracouta at Loma Loma. The correspondence I enclose then followed.
I enclose Mr. Emberson’s explanation of his not having called on Capt.
Stevens for more than twenty-four hours after his arrival at Loma Loma.
That explanation is to me perfectly satisfactory, as I hope it will be to yourself.
Mr. Emberson’s request to Capt. Stevens was possibly injudicious, but I
cannot agree with that officer in thinking it beneath the dignity of any naval
officer of whatever rank to make an inquiry to further the ends of justice and
assist a magistrate in the performance of his duty. In this case, however,
Capt. Stevens was not asked to make any such inquiry. He was only asked
to desire his interpreter to do so. The only other point that I think it neces-
sary to notice is the impression under which, from his letter No. 7 of the 12th
August, Capt. Stevens seems to labour as to my having asked him to cor-
respond with the Colonial Secretary. A reference to my letter will show that
I never made any such suggestion. I simply stated, with respect to his refer-
ence to what he calls “ Mr. Emberson’s despatch to yourself,” that the letter
in question from Mr. Emberson was addressed not to me but to the Colonial
Secretary, and I suggested, with a view to avoiding an official correspond-
ence with myself touching the matter, that Mr. Emberson should voluntarily
send Capt. Stevens, with a reference to his previous letter, a copy of the letter
which he had written to Government. Capt. Stevens had already received
and answered one letter from Mr. Emberson, and there could, I apprehend, be
no objection to his at any rate receiving another from him on the same subject.
I regret that Capt. Stevens should, without any intimation of his inten-
tion, have treated my private notes as public documents ; but of course it was
entirely within his discretion so to do.


Mr. Gordon to the Attorney-General
Nasova, August 18, 1875.—My dear De Ricci—l am directed by the
Governor to return you the enclosed letter marked “confidential.” If (as
from the style of its commencement and conclusion, and from the fact that
it is written on foolscap paper, and marked on the envelope as “On Her
Majesty’s Service,” he is inclined to suppose) this letter is meant to be an
official one, H. E. requests that it may, in accordance with a rule of service,
which he has never yet known to be departed from, be addressed to the
Colonial Secretary, “the organ of communication between all departments and
the head of the Government,” as explained by Sir Hercules Robinson, vide
notice in Fiji Govt. Gazette of October 13, 1874. If, on the other hand, not-
withstanding its (in that case) unusual form, this letter is intended as a
private one, H. E. would much prefer its being couched, (as was your note of
the 13th inst. on the same subject,) in a less apparently official shape.
The Attorney-General to Mr. Gordon
Leyuka, August 18, 1875.—My dear Gordon—ln reply to your letter of
to-day’s date just received, I beg that you will point out to His Excellency
the very great difficulties which under existing circumstances obviously will
attach in the discharge of my duties of Legal Adviser to H.M. Government
in this Colony, should the Governor refuse to receive directly from me official
communications marked “ confidential. ” I would submit for His Excellency’s
consideration that the exceptional condition in which matters now are is a
sufficient (and I believe a necessary) reason for departing from the ordinary
routine in this respect. I therefore return my official letter in hopes that it
will be received without being passed through any other channel. Should it
be considered that this course is unadvisable, I shall address my letter to the
Colonial Secretary as H. E. desires.
Mr. Gordon to the Attorney-General
Nasova, August 18, 1875.—My dear De Ricci—The Governor desires me
to say that any private and confidential communication you may at any time
wish to make to him will at all times command his attention, but H. E.
distinctly declines to receive official communications otherwise than through
the proper official channel; nor is he at all aware of the nature of the difficulties
which must in your opinion “obviously attach to the discharge of your duties ”
from such adherence to the rule existing in other colonies, and already
established here.
From Sir A. Gordon’s Note-Book
After one has been a short time in any place one gets so
accustomed to one’s surroundings and environment, however
strange they may essentially be, that one ceases to notice even
salient peculiarities, and takes as matters of course features which
at first rivetted attention. I must try to make some notes of
the places, people, and things round me whilst I still see their


strangeness. If Ido not I shall before long cease to be able to
do so. —I will begin with my dwelling-place.
Nasova
The house, which is large, forms three sides of a square. It
is built on sloping ground, which has not been in the slightest
degree levelled; consequently, the back of the transverse building
is on the ground whilst its front is raised on an embankment of
piled stones. The two sides of the square are on a slightly lower
level, and here again one end is on the ground, while the other end
is supported on piles some distance above it. The walls of the
house consist of a double screen of reeds beautifully tied together,
and they are sheltered by a thick roof of deep overhanging thatch
which forms verandahs on each side of the building all round.
One of the side buildings was the place of meeting of the Fijian
Parliament. It is now my office, and I mean when I get into
another to turn it into the dining-room. It is a large and might
be a handsome room, with a good roof. Meanwhile, we dine in a
small square room exactly in the centre of the house. The
other side building was and still is devoted to the public offices.
Here I intend to have my own office—those of my staff, and also
the Abbeys’ quarters. The long back building contains bed-
rooms, store-rooms, kitchen, and the dining-room aforesaid. Near
the house on the Parliament House side runs a little stream,
beyond which are some fine ivi trees and a long thatched house
for the native soldiers. Beyond is some rough open ground
extending to the base of the hills, and on which are several
cottages belonging to high chiefs, which used to be occupied by
them during the session. All these and the barrack (which is
inconveniently near the house) I shall clear away. The barrack
I shall rebuild on the opposite side of the green, which I shall in
some degree level. I shall also level away to some distance at
the back of the house, making a steep sloping bank up to what
will then be a garden. The rooms for the ladies and children will
be built on still higher ground at right angles to the back of the
house, but en dchelon to it, so as to have a good view of the sea from
the verandah of the drawing-room; and the new public offices
will be at right angles to the present ones, but a little in advance
of them so as not to interfere with the free circulation of air.
It will then be a very large, very irregular, mass of building.
The centre I mean to convert into a garden and have steps only
at the ends of the verandahs. The public road so called—it is
only grass—runs between the front of the house and the rough
stony beach, and right in the centre is a strong wooden pier
running some little distance out. On each side of the sort of


dry bay in which the house stands, comparatively low rocky points
run out; that to the south covered with forest trees interspersed
with cocoa-nuts, that to the north only by jungle and bushes. On
the latter, on a slight elevation, is Mr. Thurston’s pretty little
house. Between these points the hills sweep back in a semicircle,
gradually rising into densely wooded mountains to a height of
2000 or 3000 feet. Over the rocks climb hoyas with their sweet
waxy flowers, and a beautiful caper with large white blossoms,
and yellow allamandas—the last imported, but now grown wild.
Looking seaward, the eye passes over the calm shallow water
within the reef, is arrested by the white surf ever thundering on
that barrier, and dwells on the blue deep sea beyond, or on the
islands of Wakaya and Mokongai, some ten or twelve miles off—
high mountainous islands of good outline, full of bare precipices
and wooded slopes. In the distance on the horizon are remoter
islands, and sometimes the distant mountains of Vanua Levu,
“ the great land,” are dimly seen.
There is plenty of life and animation about the place.
Groups of villagers constantly pass the house on the way to or
from the town. On the beach, and in the shallow water near
the beach, are bands of girls fishing with most ineffective nets.
On the rough green —called the Kara —the native soldiers saunter
in twos and threes, holding one another by the hand, or assemble
for dances, or games in which shaddocks do duty as a ball. And
constantly there emerges from behind the point of rock to the
south, as from behind a side-scene on the stage, one or more
native canoes, which are among the most picturesque objects that
can be imagined —a huge reddish or yellowish brown sail of
mat, a great outrigger, and a general rough picturesqueness of
the most charming character. It is hard to say whether their
form or their colouring is most effective. The colouring generally
is very pleasing to the eye. Within the reef the water is of a
clear bright green. Then comes a broad line of snowy white,
where the breakers for ever thunder on the reef. Then the
sapphire blue of the deep sea. In the late evening the sunset
lights on Wakaya and Mokongai are beautiful beyond descrip-
tion, and are succeeded by exquisite amethyst tints against a sky
in which the western sunset, (which we cannot see,) is partially
reflected.
Our Daily Life
The glorious flood of golden light, which fills the eastern sky
and is reflected on the stretch of sea between us and Wakaya,
before the sun rises behind that island, wakes us early.
We get up soon after daylight and half dress. The others


generally go out, and I sometimes go with them, but more often I
have to use these morning hours for writing. I work on till they
return,when we all adjourn to the end of the pier, from the steps
of which we bathe. We are having a platform put up on the
other side of the pierhead to give us a clear dive, for which the
steps are rather awkward. We generally swim about for some
time, dawdle on the pier steps in that pleasantest of all garments
in these latitudes, one’s own skin only—dive again into the
clear warm salt water, which we are loathe to quit,—and at last
go in and regularly dress for the day. Thin silk and wool shirt,
white trousers, long red cummerbund, (sash,) socks and white
canvas shoes. No coat, and often no necktie or collar.
Breakfast at 8.30, after which we go to our various work. The
Colonial Secretary comes to me first with a wicker basket full of
papers, received in his office that morning, and forming the
current business of the day, which we discuss and on which I
minute. Then we probably talk over larger subjects, and
the different legislative and administrative measures which I
am preparing to take whenever I formally assume the Govern-
ment. Then come in all sorts of people who want interviews.
Interviewing takes a great deal of time, but is very useful, and
I purposely make myself as accessible as possible. In the
intervals of seeing people I write what I can. Luckily lam
not much affected by distractions ! The notes I take give but a
very imperfect idea of the number of these visits, for I often omit
to record them, and never or hardly ever note the visits of
ministers, who are perpetually popping in and out from their
buildings round the corner, about business of their own depart-
ments. At two, we have luncheon, often prefaced by another
short plunge from the end of the pier. After luncheon, Igo on
seeing folks or writing for an hour or two, and then get out
either for a walk or a sail. I am having a boat built here —a
sort of whale-boat on capital lines—by a boat-builder named
Palmer, at a village called Yangandathe at the other side of the
town. Sometimes we go to the bathing place at Waitovu, of which
more hereafter; if we have not been there, we generally tumble
into the water again from the pier before dressing for dinner, for
though we don’t wear coats we do dress for dinner. Our evening
dress is white shirt, black trousers, handsome gold or crimson
sash, turn-down collars, and black necktie. At some time, either
before dinner, or early in the morning, I get an hour’s lesson in
Fijian from young Thomas, my private interpreter. After dinner
we usually adjourn to Olive’s quarters, or to the ram , (the open
piece of rough grass between us and the northern point,) and go
through the yangona ceremony, which is always picturesque
M


and in its way solemn. The chewed yangona is placed in the
bowl, made of a huge piece of fine hardwood, usually vesi, the
long sinnet cord by which it is hung up when unused is thrown
on the ground in the direction of the person of highest rank
present, and the strainer then takes his seat cross-legged behind
it. Nothing can exceed the grace of his movements while engaged
in straining the bowl. Every one of the motions of his arms, the
position of his hands, etc., is regulated by strict tradition and
never varies. Whilst he is at work, the circle sing or rather
chant some old meke , which they probably at best only half
understand. It is not thought good form to talk or smoke
while this is going on. When the bowl is perfectly strained the
strainer indicates that he has done by a muffled clap of the hands
on the hibiscus which has served as strainer. Immediately there
is a dead silence, whilst a youth of rank seated cross-legged before
the bowl presents a cup of thin cocoa-nut shell, which is filled
by squeezing the sponge-like mass of hibiscus fibre into it.
He then in silence brings it across the room, and, kneeling,
pours its contents into my own small drinking bowl which
with both hands I hold out to him. As I raise it to my
lips a measured clapping of hands in most exquisitely ac-
curate time is set up by all the circle and continued so long
as I am drinking. When I throw down the cup this stops,
and the Mata ni Yanua (a sort of A.D.C.) exclaims Ah mdtha/f
(It’s dry), which is echoed by the rest. The drink is then’ 1
taken to every one in order according to rank, and con-
versation and smoking are now unrestricted. I rather like the
stuff. It is undeniable that it has a taste of rhubarb, and
to some degree of soapsuds also, but it has a pungent aromatic
smooth flavour which is comforting and agreeable. Sometimes
the soldiers dance by moonlight or torchlight. The figures are
often not at all unlike the Greek dances I have seen in Corfu and
Albania. Then the rest turn in, and so do I if I can, but I
often have to steal yet an hour or two from the night for more
writing and more getting up of questions coming before me.
Men and Measures
Of all the white men that I have seen in Fiji one stands far 1
above others in ability and resource. He is, in fact, on quite
another plane from them, and, perhaps for that very reason quite,
as much as any other, he is hated and feared by those who do not.
in the least understand him. That man is Mr. Thurston. Whether
he is as honest as he is able is another question. On the whole 7
my disposition is to think favourably of him. There can be no


question of the utterly unscrupulous animosity of those who
denounce him to me, and although he is charged with breach of
every one of the ten commandments, I have been quite unable
to elicit even in confidential conversation any definite charge of
misconduct. Now it is quite certain that if any positive stories
to his discredit could be told, they would be repeated to me, and
lam therefore inclined to think they do not exist. This is all
the more probable when I remember with what bitterness and
recklessness stories to his supposed discredit are told me, but which
are really to his honour, showing that he steadily opposed the
wishes of the majority of the whites to exploiter the natives for
their own selfish benefit. The general feeling seems to have
been that the independent kingdom of Fiji was to be managed
exclusively by and for a handful of white settlers, who
alone were to have votes for and seats in the legislature, that
the king and the great local chiefs were to be practically altogether
superseded in the work of government, and that the one object
of administration was to be the transfer of the soil from native
to white hands and the compulsion of the natives to work on
white men’s estates instead of on their own village plantations.
Mr. Thurston had sufficient political sagacity and breadth of view
to perceive that such a result, let alone its injustice, was wholly
impracticable. Though iniquitous, it might have been practicable
to attain if backed by the force of an exterior power; but when
the physical force, on which in the last resort the kingdom had
to depend, was wholly native, it was impossible to disregard
native rights or safely to alienate the chiefs by ignoring their
authority. Through them it might be possible to govern; against
them it was impossible. Moreover, I sincerely believe that, not
only as a question of policy but of right, Mr. Thurston objected to
be the tool of such a system. Certainly his repression of outrages
on the part of white men, his determination that the constitution
once adopted should be respected, and that the native authorities
should, ostensibly at least, continue to discharge their functions,
are the points with respect to which he is most assailed, and on
all these lam entirely with him. On the whole, his record since
he came here is a good one, though he may in some cases have
thought himself obliged to comply with the exigencies of his very
inferior colleagues. It must be remembered that Mr. Woods, not
Mr. Thurston, was the Prime Minister of Cakobau. But though
I shall certainly make Mr. Thurston my chief adviser in the
Executive Council, I do not think it would be expedient at present
to continue him in the office of Colonial Secretary. Every letter
sent out is signed by the Colonial Secretary, every communication
to the Governor is made through him, and he would be thus brought


into daily communication with those most opposed to him. They
would be irritated by this, and above all by everything addressed to
me passing through him, and this irritation had better be avoided.
In a year or two most of these men will have drunk themselves
to death, or become utterly ruined and have left the colony, and
new men will have settled here, free from the passions and
traditions of the past. Then he may resume the post. Mean-
while Havelock, whose settled post is that of Treasurer and
Receiver-General, may act as Colonial Secretary. Thurston is
in some ways the most remarkable self-made man I know. He
has educated himself well, but in this he is not singular. He is
remarkably quick in observation and in adapting what he has ob-
served. So too are others. But every other man I have ever seen,
who has risen like him, has been either offensively self-assertive
or as offensively obsequious. He is neither. His manner is per-
fectly natural and easy, quiet, and rarely betrays self-consciousness.
After Thurston, it is clear to me that the most important
man in Fiji is the head of the Wesleyan mission, Mr. Langham.-
I have not yet seen him, as he is absent in Australia, but I see
everywhere evidences of his force and power, and that he occupies j
very much the position of one of the political bishops of the!
Middle Ages. How we shall get on depends very much on what
manner of man he is. Goodenough likes him and says he is a/
manly straight man and very much on the side of the natives.
But he quite sees with me that the position is a difficult onej
for Langham has been accustomed to rule very autocratically
in much outside the spiritual sphere, and will not surrender his
secular influence without a struggle. His locum tenens at Bau,
Mr. Webb, is a man of much more refinement than one usually;
finds in Wesleyan missionaries—of gentle spirit, and in another
environment would be a gentleman. The missionary here, Mr.
Wylie, is of a bad, ordinary type —professional—and showed
himself a coward and helpless in the measles. Mr. Waterhouse,
the head of the training college at Navuloa, has impressed me
favourably. He and Langham appear to be the heads of two
bitterly opposed factions among the Wesleyan ministers. Their;
chief subject of quarrel is the position of the native ordained*
clergy, but the difference is really one of principles, that of
working for the natives, and that of working through them. I
need not say I side with the latter.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
JSTasova, August 19, 1875. —My Lord—l have the honour to enclose copies
of a correspondence which has taken place between a certain Mr. Blair and
myself.


2. Mr. Blair complains of harsh and unjust treatment at the hands of the
late Fijian Government, and demands compensation from that of the Colony.
3. I have caused Mr. Blair to be informed that Her Majesty and the Colonial
Government are not responsible for the acts or misdeeds of the former so-
called Government of King Thakombau, and that if he has sustained wrong
from any of the individuals comprising that Government he can obtain legal
redress for such injury.
4. Mr. Blair is very much dissatisfied with this decision, and intimates an
intention to bring his claim before the Canadian Parliament, and I believe
also the English House of Commons.
5. That Mr. Blair was harshly treated by the Fijian Government is very
possible, though by no means clear; but claims for compensation on this account
are of a totally different nature from those for payment of accounts for supplies
or money furnished to the Government for public purposes, and it would, in
my opinion, be most unwise were the Colony for a moment to admit that it
may equitably be called oil to make good damages sustained through the
mistakes or maladministration of King Thakombau’s Ministers. *lf one such
claim were admitted, hundreds more would be put forward, which it would he
very difficult to reject, if harsh or illegal action on the part of Thakombau’s
advisers is to be a sufficient cause for their recognition.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, August 20, 1875.—My Lord—l have had the honour to receive
your Lordship’s despatch No. 30 of the sth May, 1875, to Sir Hercules
Robinson, requesting information as to the causes of the suspension of Mr.
Swanston.
2. I have accordingly the honour to enclose a copy of the charges which
were, in the first instance, brought against that gentleman, and the accuracy
of which, as to matters of fact, was substantially admitted by him.
3. The line of defence adopted by Mr. Swanston was, however, one which
renders a discussion of these detailed charges unnecessary, for it amounted to
an assertion of his almost unlimited right to independent action. With
respect to the instructions to Mr. Mason, mentioned in the sixth charge, of
which the administrator had disapproved, he observes that “ they are of such
a nature that, in the discharge of my duties as Secretary of Native Affairs, I
am constrained, in spite of his Honour’s opinion, unreservedly to confirm the
same.” He lays down the position that, “as a member of the’Executive Council
of Fiji, and the independent head of a department, Psit in council on an equality
with my colleagues, to advise in matters generally connected with the welfare
of the Colony, and I sit independently of the Executive, in reference to the
duties of my Department, and the conduct of the same ; and in this I am not
accountable to the Executive of Fiji. If, in the direction and management,
aught appear objectionable to his Honour the Administrator and the other
members of the Executive Council, they may record their protest.” And he
states his determination “to maintain his position as Secretary of Native
Affairs and Registrar-General, not subject to the will of the Executive Council
of Fiji.”
4. I do not see, after so open a defiance of his authority, how the Admin-
istrator could have done otherwise than suspend Mr. Swanston. Any weak


ness with respect to insubordination would have produced a very mischievous
effect; and I must say that I heartily concur with Sir Hercules Robinson in
approving of the step taken by Mr. Layard.
5. Mr. Swanston is a vain man, of intemperate habits, full of crude
theories and inexact information. The use made of him by the Commissioners
as a foil to Mr. Thurston, I think, induced them to take far too favourable a
view of both his abilities and character. Nor do I consider the loss of his
services to be a very serious one to the public. But he has, undoubtedly, a
very fair knowledge of the Fijian language, and I shall not be sorry to give
him some employment in connection with the Lands Commission or inter-
pretation. I have seen and conversed with him. He is now aware of his
error, is quite sensible that he cannot look for restoration to his former post,
and will willingly accept an inferior position.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasoya, August 21, 1875. —My Lord—ln my despatch No. 34 of the
22nd ultimo, I had the honour of expressing my opinion that Levuka was not
a proper site for the capital of this Colony, but owing to indisposition I was
unable to state at length my reasons for arriving at that conclusion.
2. Since that date, I have called upon the Chief Medical Officer, Dr.
MacGregor, and the medical officer for Yanua Levu and the windward islands,
Dr. Mayo, to report on the eligibility of Levuka as a site for a considerable
town. I requested them to report separately and without previous com-
munication with each other.
Copies of these reports I have now the honour to transmit to your Lord-
ship, and your Lordship will perceive that they concur in considering Levuka
to be entirely unsuited for the purpose in question.
3. The sanitary aspect of the question is fully dealt with by these gentle-
men, who have pointed out the evils likely to arise from the confined site, low
level, and imperfect water supply, and from the impossibility of, under these
circumstances, establishing an efficient system of drainage.
It is therefore unnecessary for me to dwell on this branch of the subject.
4. The want of facilities for extension is to my mind absolutely fatal, and
renders a consideration of other objections almost needless. I will, however,
advert to some of a more general political nature,
5. The greater part of the land on which Levuka stands is claimed by the
Wesleyan missionaries and two or three private individuals and their claims,
will, I anticipate, be found indisputable by the Lands Commission. But
both the Wesleyan body and the individuals in question absolutely refuse to
sell an acre of this land, and will only grant leases of it for short periods.
Ground might no doubt be obtained for public purposes by legislative
enactment, but even in this case the compensation which must necessarily be
awarded would amount to a sum which the Colony could ill afford, while
private parties desirous of obtaining sites for building would remain absolutely
in the power of the proprietors. Experience has amply shown that good and
substantial houses will not be built on land not owned by the builders, and
in which they have but a temporary and brief interest.
6. The temperature is higher and the weather wetter at Levuka than in
most other parts of the group, and the dampness of the atmosphere is such that
cargoes of maize, which, if sent direct from the drier localities in the western
CHAP.


part of Yiti Levu, arrive in Sydney uninjured, are not unfrequently spoiled
and rendered comparatively valueless by even the short detention here to
which they are subjected on exportation from the Colony.
7. The harbour of Levuka, though fairly good, is not by any means a
first-rate one, and the “ central ” position, which is urged as its recommenda-
tion, is, in point of fact, a continual source of embarrassment and inconveni-
ence. If, therefore, other sites more suitable in a sanitary point of view
and equally convenient for commercial purposes can b 6 found, I see no
political reason whatever for the retention of the seat of Government at this
place.
8. Those who desire Levuka to remain the capital themselves admit that
it can only be extended by reclaiming land from the sea, and terracing the
rocky mountain spurs by which it is backed. But such operations would
involve a cost which, even if the Colony could meet it, would render the
commencement of other public works, urgently needed, absolutely impossible,
and would cripple every effort of the Administration for the general improve-
ment of these islands.
9. The friends of Levuka point indeed to Hong-Kong, but —not to dwell
on the total difference of the two Colonies in a financial point of view—they
forget .that at Hong-Kong the selection of the site of the city of Victoria was
a matter not of choice but necessity, and that, had Great Britain possessed
in the immediate vicinity of Hong-Kong a large island equally well placed
commercially, and abounding in level and open sites for a town, labour and
money would certainly not have been uselessly expended in converting
slopes of granite rock into building ground,
10. Before I leave this part of the subject, I desire to call attention to
the truth of two remarks made by Mr, Layard, and to express my entire
concurrence in them. He is quite right in saying that the choice (if it can
be so called) of Levuka as the site of a white settlement was not the result
of a deliberate preference due to advantages which the place might be sup-
posed to possess, but was due to pure accident. It was the nearest place to
Bau (then the centre of affairs) at which a white settlement could be formed,
and had white men been permitted to live at Bau itself, I have little doubt
that that place (utterly unfit as it is for such a purpose) would now be the
capital of Fiji.
11. It is also the case that there are no really permanent buildings here,
and that little would be lost by removal. Landowers in Ovalau would
certainly suffer a depreciation in the value of their property, but I do not
think that their interests should be allowed to outweigh those of the com-
munity at large.
12. The island of Yiti Levu is much more important than that of Vanua
Levu, and its affairs will probably require for the next few years much more
care and attention than those of the rest of the group. It is on its large rivers,
the Rewa, theNavua,the Singatoka, and the Ba, that the chief settlements of
planters will be formed. It is the only island on which the native popula-
tion still gives trouble and cause for anxiety, and it is therefore on it that,
I believe, the Government of the Colony should be located. If this be so,
it is probable that the final choice will lie between Suva and Nandi; and,
notwithstanding its fine harbour, Savu Savu will, from its being situated in
Vanua Levu, be deemed unsuitable. But this is a question which must await


the examination by the Royal Engineers of the different sites proposed,
and the report of the Admiralty Surveyor on the different harbours. That
officer, I may remark, reports far more favourably of Suva than was sup-
posed by Mr. Layard, in fact he writes and speaks of it in the highest
terms of commendation,
13. Should either of these sites appear to these authorities as well as to
myself and my Council unexceptionable, I would request your Lordship to
authorise my at once taking the necessary steps for the removal of the seat
of Government, without a further reference home, which would involve a fresh
delay of probably not much less than six months, if not longer. I have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, August 21, 1875. —My Lord—ln the month of March last I had
the honour to receive from your Lordship a despatch containing your
Lordship’s instructions with respect to most of the points raised by Sir H.
Robinson in his despatch of the 20th October, 1874.
2. That despatch contains very clear and definite instructions as to the
mode in which claims to land should be dealt with, and I never entertained
a moment’s doubt as to their meaning. Before leaving Sydney I caused the
advertisement, of which I inclose a copy, to he published there, at Melbourne,
and at Auckland ; and since my arrival here, the claims which have in answer
been sent in, have been arranged, filed, and examined, in readiness for the
Titles Commission, when its appointment is rendered practicable by the
arrival of the officer commanding the Royal Engineers’ force to be stationed
here. As I have already observed, your Lordship’s views appeared to me
to be very distinctly expressed in the 6th and subsequent paragraphs of the
despatch in question, and I therefore never thought it necessary to avail my-
self of the permission given in the 14th paragraph, to refer to your Lordship
for “ further directions on any point on which I did not feel assured that I
fully understood the intentions of Her Majesty’s Government. ” Nevertheless,
as questions are apparently likely to be raised with respect to the purport
and force of your Lordship’s instructions, I now think it as well to take ad-
vantage of that permission to seek from your Lordship an authoritative in-
terpretation of their true import.
3. Your Lordship’s despatch appears to me to lay down the principle that
all the land in the Colony, “whether in the occupation of, or reputed or
claimed to have been, prior to the cession of the Islands, the property of
either Europeans or natives, as well as all waste and unclaimed land, has,
by virtue of the instrument which ceded to Her Majesty the ‘possession of
and full sovereignty and dominion over the whole of the Islands,’ become
absolutely and unreservedly transferred to the Crown, and that the Queen
has the full power of disposing of the whole of the land in such manner as
to Her Majesty may seem fit, having due regard to such interests as she may
deem to deserve recognition under Article 4 of that instrument.” But,
although the assertion of this abstract right clears away many difficulties,
it is not intended to inaugurate a policy of confiscation ; on the contrary, it
is fully recognised that it is desirable that hona fide transactions should not
be disturbed ; and, with a view to their settlement, all claims to land are to
be sent before a Commission, the duties of which are to be to investigate and


report to the Governor, and Crown grants are to issue to those persons
“ who appear to have acquired land fairly and at a fair price.” These views
and intentions of Her Majesty’s Government I am instructed to “declare.”
4. Now, although your Lordship’s directions appear to me very clear and
precise, I understand that the lawyers here question whether your Lordship
can have intended to give such instructions, and whether, as a matter of
fact, your Lordship has the power to do so ; the Deed of Cession, according
to these gentlemen, recognising the existence of private rights to landed
property already acquired previous to the cession, which rights, it is main-
tained, can only be determined by a court of law, and not by the decision
of the Crown.
5. Unless some such course as that prescribed by your Lordship he adopted,
an amount of fraud upon the unfortunate natives will be sanctioned under
the colour of law to which I should be most reluctant to be a party, and of
which I should hesitate to be even a passive witness ; for the association of
the enforcement of these claims with the establishment of British rule would
preclude all hope of conciliating or benefiting the native race.
6. If it is thought absolutely necessary to legislate on this subject (the
Chief-Justice and Attorney-General are doubtful as to the effect of the
cession, and whether such a declaration as that apparently contemplated by
your Lordship would be sufficient), it is my intention to introduce and pass
a declaratory Ordinance, couched as nearly as may be in the terms of your
Lordship’s despatch, and asserting the Queen’s rights as therein stated.
7. There is another subject connected with land claims on which I should
be glad to be honoured by your Lordship’s instructions. At the commence-
ment of King Thakombau’s “Constitutional” Government in 1870, he was
engaged in a contest with a tribe occupying the Lovoni valley —the finest and
most fertile part of the Island of Ovalau. The tribe ultimately submitted.
The whole of its members —men, women, and children —were sold into
slavery in other islands, and their lands mortgaged, on behalf of Thakombau,
to Europeans, who advanced money to the “Cabinet” of the day. Since
the cession, these prisoners of war (for such in fact they were) have been
released from slavery, but have not been restored to their homes or allowed
to quit the islands to which they were removed.
8. Since 1870 “wars” have been undertaken with the almost avowed
object of aiding the Exchequer by obtaining lands to sell and prisoners to
dispose of.
9. With regard to these latter cases, I apprehend little difficulty, but I
confess that I am in some degree of doubt as to the principles w T hich should
govern the consideration of the Lovoni case. The war was begun before the
inauguration of Constitutional Government. Are we to regard it as an episode
of savage warfare, or to have been the act of a civilised and Christianised
administration ? If the former, as Thakombau would have had vaka viti
[Fiji fashion] —the undoubted right of killing all he conquered —he may be
presumed to have had the right of removing them. If, on the contrary, it is
to be regarded as an act of his “ Government,” I should be disposed to take
a different view. Operations against an independent tribe, with a view to
its subjugation, were, of course, strictly legitimate ; but to remove hundreds
of people from their country, after they had submitted, is so contrary to all
received notions of equity in civilised states that, if it was done by the


direction and in the interest of Europeans, it appears to me that it should
not be recognised, nor the transactions which have resulted from it allowed
to stand good. I have, etc.
Tuesday , August 24.—Went to Moturiki in the whale-boat.
Baron, Knollys, A. J. L., Le Hunte, and MacGregor went with
me —rather a tight fit. Had a particularly pleasant sail down ;
passing along the coast of Ovalau and then past the two little
islands, Yanutha Levu and Lailai, both of which are rather
pretty. Landed at the village of Niu Sara, where they brought
us cocoa-nuts as mangiti —(you will have to get used to our Fijian
shop, and uncouth technical words). Walked across the island
with Baron, A. J. L., and MacGregor. A very pretty walk it was.
The island, which is nowhere very high, is prettily, though not
thickly wooded, and much broken into little hills and ravines.
We passed over the top of a hill where are the ruins of an old
fortification of considerable strength,—three concentric walls of
stone with deep ditches between, now overgrown by bush and
young trees. Then down into a thick wood, full of parrots and
pigeons, and then down into an open valley, where clumps of
trees were dotted about on the grass just as in an English park.
This ended in a grove of cocoa-nuts, passing through which, we
reached Niu Basaga, where Cakobau has a sort of country house,
or rather several country houses, on the white sandy shore, look-
ing over towards the mainland of Viti. Here the Baron shot a
“ belo ” and two pretty swallow-like birds very much attached.
He left them on the shore, and they were eaten by pigs, or na
gone tagane , beka. 1 Sat a long while in a house whilst they got
us cocoa-nuts and pudding. The pudding is great nastiness, as
sticky and thick as glue, and as insipid as gruel. The village is
rather a nice one, with a good broad street and ornamental
flowering plants collected round the town well. Returned
by another way, over a ridge, and got some very pretty views,
especially those of Ovalau and the lake-like channel between the
two islands. MacGregor went down the coast to visit a sick chief.
I followed down the coast after him with Le Hunte. Very pretty
walk along a coast path winding round points and passing here
and there through bits of thick wood, really fine timber. Here I
saw for the first time the nettle tree, “salato.” It is a real tree
forty or fifty feet high, very handsome and attractive, with large
nettle-shaped leaves of very dark green, as dark as holly, but not
glossy. It is a true urticaceous plant with a sting just like that
of a nettle, though of course much stronger. Passed three villages.
At the first was a Roman Catholic Church, the projecting ends
1 “ The boys, perhaps. ”


of the ridge pole of which were covered with white cowrie shells
which also hung down in festoons from them. Watched the
operations of a new Polistes mason-bee, with steel-blue metallic
wings and red fur on shoulders, hard at work. It is the first I
have seen here, and is smaller than the Trinidad one. His nest
is a nearly perfect globe, with a beautifully turned lip at the
entrance. He puts green caterpillars into his nest, where the
Trinidad one used to put green spiders. Bought some pottery
of large size and picturesque shapes. Went back to village and
dined very well on roast pig and yams. Then went across to
the rock of Lando, —a very picturesque pyramid of white rock in
the centre of the narrow channel between Moturiki and Ovalau.
Here there were herons in plenty, white and blue, flying about.
The Baron and Arthur climbed up and shot one of each, which the
Baron now proves to be the same bird in different stages of
plumage. We also got their eggs, bright blue ones. It was near
sunset, and the lights on rock and island, water and sandbank,
were lovely. Shell reef with no shells. Then we sailed home
in the dark, bumping and striking on many reefs. Saw soldiers
on Yanutha grouped round a most picturesque fire under a cliff,
roasting bats for supper. Twenty years ago they would have
been roasting men, and even ten years ago it would have been
hardly safe to be alone in such places after dark. Got home
about ten.
Moturiki abounds in particularly fine crotons, chiefly of the
narrow-leafed yellow and green sort. Some of the shrubs were
fourteen or fifteen feet high. We also saw the sinugaga tree, a
sort of Pacific Islands manchineel, of the poisonous properties of
which many very marvellous stories were told us. I have not
yet seen the kau karo , said to be even worse, and which is, I fancy,
of the strychnine species.
From the Chief-Justice
August 25, 1875.—My dear Sir Arthur Gordon —Since our meeting on
Monday I have carefully considered the question of the Ordinance which was
then agreed to, and I think it is impossible to pass an Ordinance declaring that
the Deed of Cession means what, on the face of it, it clearly does not mean. If
there could be any doubt on that point, it would be removed by the 15th par.
of Sir H. Robinson’s despatch of 3rd October, in which he states that the 4th
cl. of the Deed of Cession was drawn in that shape advisedly, and that “it
would have been impossible to have gone farther than this without injustice,
and without giving rise at the outset of British rule to serious disaffection
and difficulties.”
In another place he says, “ If any clause had been inserted transferring to
Her Majesty all lands irrespective of private ownership and the requirements
of tribes, such a provision would never have been assented to peacefully.” I


think it is clear from this that it was the intention of the parties to the Deed
of Cession that the proprietorship of not “ the whole of the land within the
limits of Fiji,” but only that of certain specified portions of that land, should
be transferred to the Crown, and I do not see how you can declare the inten-
tion of the parties to be something totally different from that which they
themselves state it to be. If the Crown will not accept the gift on those
terms, but insists on an absolute and unconditional transfer of the ownership
of the whole of the lands in these islands, whether in the occupation of
Europeans or natives, this, I think, is an act of State, and, as such, is beyond
the •powers of the local Legislature. It is now, I think, clear, that the proper
time for making such a declaration was at the time of the cession, and the
framers of the deed appear to have removed the difficulties of the situation
from themselves with the result of bequeathing them, perhaps with increased
intensity, to those who came after them. Upon the whole, if it be necessary
to follow the directions of par. 13 of Lord Carnarvon’s despatch, literally, by
making the declaration there mentioned, I am disposed to think that it
should be done by Proclamation and not by Ordinance, at the same time that
I cannot see how the transfer can be said to have been made by the Deed of
Cession, in the face of such a construction being expressly repudiated by Sir
H. Robinson himself.
TO THE CHIEF-JtrSTIGE
Nasova, August 26, 1875. —My dear Sir William—Your preamble seems
to me to meet the wants of the case and to steer clear of the reefs with which
it is as thickly surrounded as one of these islands. But, as I think I men-
tioned to you the other day, the legislative part of my work has always had
a special attraction for me, and received my special attention ; and I must
confess that I have a certain dread of long recitals which are not part of the
enacting clauses of a law, but which may raise questions that might other-
wise sleep. My inclination at all times therefore, on seeing a long preamble,
is to omit all that can properly be left out, and then to ask how much of what
remains is indispensably necessary. Now, applying this mode of treatment
to the present case, I would ask, merely by way of suggestion, and subject to
your own decision, whether it might not suffice, and indeed might not be
better, to limit the preamble to a recital of the fact, which must be admitted
without dispute by all, that the Queen has been pleased to direct the in-
vestigation in question, leaving out all reference to previous transactions ?
As to the Queen’s order to appoint a Commission there can be no dispute, but
there might be questions raised as to some of the earlier statements. Was
the cession made by the chiefs ? Could they cede ? The charter says
“Chiefs and people.” It is true the cession was accepted as “uncon-
ditional,” but was it really so? Was it at the time, or is it now, held to
have been so by those who were immediate parties to the deed ? All these
are questions which it might be necessary to touch, if the mention of them
were essential to the enacting clauses. But is it so ? and, if not, is it desirable
in the preamble to a law to raise des questions briUantes ? I should like, if
you see no objection, to limit the preamble in substance to what I enclose,
the words of which will need some correction. Th q period should not, I think,
be the Cession , but the erection of the Fiji Islands into a Colony by Her


Majesty’s letters patent under the Great Seal, up to which the Commission
is to inquire ; otherwise last year's transactions will not come under the
review of the Commission. I see I have not expressed my thanks to you
for the trouble you have taken. I hope, however, it is hardly necessary for
me to say how much obliged I am for such valuable aid as yours in dealing
with so very delicate and grave a question.
From the Chief-Justice
August 26, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur —I think the preamble as amended
by you will do very well. The part relating to the cession was inserted
advisedly to meet the instructions contained in par. 13 of the Secretary of
State’s despatch, but if you think it better to avoid any reference to it, which
perhaps is the wisest course, the preamble may, I think, stand as it is in
your copy, with the addition of the part which recites the expediency of
preventing litigation. As to the apparent harshness of the phrase, • “ prevent-
ing investigation in the ordinary courts of the Colony,” of course you may use
language which would sound more euphemistical, but the end and scope of
the Ordinance is to prohibit litigation. Although I am, strictly speaking,
not the proper medium of communication between the Governor and the
Attorney-General, as Mr. De Ricci happened to come in I handed him the
drafts and acquainted him with your wish that an Ordinance in accordance
with the preamble should be drafted. Ido not think the paper signed by
Thakombau on the 30th was intended to be the formal instrument of cession.
The understanding upon which the cession was made was embodied in the
deed of the 10th October, and the construction of the 4th clause of that deed,
according to Sir H. Robinson’s own despatch, is inconsistent with the idea
that the absolute ownership of all the lands of Fiji was intended to be
conveyed to the Queen. Ido not wish to be understood as speaking
positively, but there seems some reason for inferring that the onus probandi
rested on the claimant, and that the Crown had a prinna facie right of
possession. But one cannot help wishing that the Deed of Cession had been
more explicit. Many thanks for your memorandum, which, I think, states
the case fairly.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
August 26. —Wrote on land question and considered appoint-
ments. MacGregor—his Chinese beasts and Mayo’s medicines.
Letter from Carew. Fitzgerald said to have burnt himself out.
Eoko Tui Ba lawakaing in mountains. Walked up Totoga Gorge
with Le Hunte. A pretty walk, but not easy walking. Gathered
butterflies and flowers—pretty red flowering tree. Good lesson
in Fijian with Thomas. Household dinner.
August 27.— Macintosh —Planter, Ba. Brother of man who
was murdered. Half ruined—thinks of sugar. Lands easily
irrigated. Says Fitzgerald burnt the house himself. Specimens


of his lies—the guards for Macintosh’s protection—the amount
of arms and ammunition in his possession.
Bell —Candidate for police. Nothing very definite or posi-
tive. De Eicci wrote an absurd letter to Thurston which he
answered well, and I sent him queries he will find it hard to
answer. Went to bathe at Waitovu with Baron and Le Hunte.
August 28.—Executive Council. De Eicci generally sat upon.
Capt. Berrell —Tearful.
Milne —Cakobau’s Secretary. When is Vunivalu to come ?
M l Connell —Planter, Taviuni. Yuna Point as a port.
Wilkinson —Scheme of Commissioners. Layard and two
sailors at dinner. The remaining three days of August were
taken up with meetings of the Executive Council, seeing endless
planters, and getting out in the afternoon for a bath at Waitovu.
The weather beautiful.
From the Chief-Justice
August 30, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur —I have been to the Court House
again, and like it even less than on my first inspection. The Judge’s room
is simply uninhabitable. In warm weather it is an oven, and in wet weather
a shower bath. The bench is likewise liable to be deluged with water in
rainy weather, as well as many other parts of the building. The accommo-
dation for the Registrar is equally, if not more, insufficient. He has no safe,
and no secure place in which to keep the Archives of the Court. In fact it
is simply impossible to conduct the business of the Court in the building in
its present state. I find that the so-called Judge’s clerk is really the
interpreter to all the Courts, and not a Judge’s clerk at all. I presume the
name was given to him as an ornament. He told me himself that he did
not well understand why he was called so.
Wednesday , September I.—To-day I read the Charter and
was proclaimed Governor. The “ordinary vehicles of public
information ” will give you all particulars. The square of
Government House was dressed with flags from the Barra-
couta, which looked bright and gay and, I suppose, did not shock
the taste of the Levukans. To my eye it looked very like a circus
at a fair. The day was fine and the concourse large. We
converted the front steps in the centre into a sort of stage,
and covered it with matting and one of the Servian carpets,
and there I read the Charter and took the oath and made a
little speech. On the whole a success.
Immediately after these performances I held the first meet-
ing of the Legislative Council, and at once passed through all
their stages, and assented, to four Ordinances, the passing of
which at once was essential. They were : “An Ordinance to con


firm certain Laws, Ordinances, Proclamations, and Regulations
enacted, issued, or made by the Residental Government of the
Fiji Islands prior to the Proclamation of the Royal Charter
under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom making such Islands
into a British Colony, and for indemnifying all persons who may
have acted under any of the said Laws, Ordinances, Proclama-
tions, Regulations, or any part thereof.” “An Ordinance to
continue temporarily certain Laws, Ordinances, Proclamations,
and Regulations adopted, enacted, or made prior to the Pro-
clamation of the Royal Charter, etc.” “An Ordinance to
prohibit the maintenance of suits in respect to present existing
claims to land in the Law Courts of the Colony.” “An Ordin-
ance to provide the adjudication of certain claims between divers
Europeans and natives in the Colony of Fiji.”
The first of these gave validity to the acts of the provisional
Government, which, strictly speaking, had no authority at all.
The second continued in force, till we have time to repeal or
amend them, certain New South Wales laws, which have been
temporarily adopted, and various local regulations already made.
The third is a very short Ordinance in lieu of the declaratory
one contemplated, and to which both Chief-Justice and Attorney-
General object. The preamble recites, what no one can deny,
viz. that the Queen has directed the investigation of all land
claims by a Commission, and that, pending its investigations,
litigation relating to such claims is undesirable. The enacting
part is substantially contained in the first words of the first
clause, “ It shall not be lawful to commence or maintain any suit,
action, or proceeding whatsoever involving any present existing
claim to land in any Court of Law in this Colony.” There are
then provisions to allow proceedings with regard to trespass on
actual occupation, tenancy, mortgage, etc., and a second clause
enacts that where a Crown Grant of any land has been issued
the ordinary action of the tribunals with respect to it is restored.
The fourth Ordinance, which is only enacted for twelve months,
provides that it shall not be lawful to institute or commence
any action, suit, or proceeding in any Law Court of the Colony
in respect of any claim or cause of action between Europeans
and natives accused prior to the passing of this Ordinance, and
that all such claims shall be arbitrated upon by a Commission.
Extract from the Fiji Argus of September 10, 1875
The second chapter in the history of Fiji as a British dependency may be
dated from Wednesday last, on which day Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon read
the Royal Charter constituting these Islands into a separate Colony, and
was sworn in as first Governor under it.


The morning was most auspicious, and the ceremonies at Nasova were
attended by the principal residents of Levuka, and many visitors from all
parts of the group. The dignified and unostentatious bearing of His Excel-
lency made a marked and most favourable impression—the impress of a good
understanding between the Governor and the governed. Long before 12
o’clock throngs of ladies and gentlemen wended their way to the Vice-regal
habitation, the flag-staff of which was gaily adorned with bunting. A guard
of honour, composed of bluejackets and marines from Her Majesty’s ship
Barracouta, under Lieutenant Maxwell, and a troop of native soldiers, under
Lieutenant Olive, occupied the front and both sides of the building. His
Excellency, dressed in the Windsor uniform, and wearing the decoration of
St. Michael and St. George, appeared in the centre of the verandah exactly
at 12 o’clock, and was attended by Mr. E. L. Layard, late Administrator of
the Government; Sir W. Hackett, Chief-Justice; Captain Stevens, Her
Majesty’s ship Barracouta; Captain Havelock, Receiver-General; Mr. De
Ricci, Attorney-General; Mr. Thurston, Auditor-General; and a number of
other celebrities, as well as his Private Secretaries and Aides-de-Camp.
Sir Arthur then directed all to uncover, and, producing from its casket
the Royal Charter, in a clear, sonorous, and distinct voice read it. Three
cheers were then given for Her Most Gracious Majesty, and a Royal Salute
of twenty-one guns was fired from two field-guns landed from the Barracouta.
Captain Havelock, the newly appointed Colonial Secretary, then read His
Excellency’s Commission, at the conclusion of which three hearty cheers
were repeated, and a governor’s salute of seventeen guns fired. His
Excellency then made the following exceedingly well-timed remarks :
“Gentlemen, —I have now assumed the administration of the Govern-
ment, and my first act on its assumption is to appeal to all inhabitants of
the Colony, settlers and natives alike, to co-operate with me in the en-
deavour to raise Fiji to that position of prosperity and importance which we
trust it may one day attain.
“Her Majesty’s injunction, which has just been read, that you should
be ‘ aiding, assisting, and obedient ’ to him who represents her here, has, I
am sure, not fallen on inattentive and unwilling ears. For myself, I will
only say that it is in no light spirit that I have undertaken the task confided
to me. No light cause would now induce me to abandon it.
“That I shall make mistakes in my administration is probable ; that I
cannot give satisfaction to all is certain ; but, with the blessing of God and
your support, I do not despair of being useful to the new Colony. Its
history as a Colony begins to-day. May the record of its yet unwritten
pages be one of prosperity and peace, of harmony and justice.”
This was received with great applause, and the interesting proceedings
were brought to a close.
Thursday, September 2.—To-day I had my settlers’ meeting—a
very great success, you will be glad to hear. I have no time for
particulars. I forget whether I told you in my last letter to bring
some sofas. The only things resembling them now here are some
narrow wooden seats like those on the deck of a steamer. The
new house is getting up nicely. I have been incessantly occupied
during the last few days.


Speech.
I do not mean to make any formal set speech, or to indulge either in
oratorical figures or safe official utterances. I wish to say a few plain words
to you very plainly, to ask some questions, and to give some information.
Formal addresses and replies are all very well in their proper place and at
their proper time, but their place is not here and their time is not now. At
the outset of a new colony the utmost freedom of intercourse between
Governor and governed is, in my opinion, essential. Very large powers
have, as you are aware, been entrusted to me, and these powers I shall not
hesitate, if necessary, to use ; but it will always be my desire to act in ac-
cordance with your wishes. Sometimes it may be impossible for me to do
so consistently with what I deem my duty, but experience has taught me
that in nine cases out of ten where the wishes of a community are disregarded
by its rulers, it is not the result of deliberate intention, but of ignorance of
what those wishes really are. It is, therefore, essential that the freest and
frankest intercourse should exist between us. Those of you who have
already been so good as to call upon me have not, I hope, spread such
a report of their reception as to deter others from following their example ;
but I cannot expect every one to come and hunt me up, and it is fully
my intention to go about the group as much as possible to visit you
at your own homes. Circumstanced as this Colony is, I have no belief
whatever in sitting at a table behind a big inkstand, with a bundle of quills
on one side of me, and a bundle of red tape on the other. And now, gentle-
men, I must thank you very heartily for having, in such large numbers,
responded to my invitation, to do which has, I know, caused many of you
trouble, expense, and inconvenience. You may, however, feel some dis-
appointment at my not being prepared to announce to you a policy. You
may think it a very little thing to hear a few questions asked and a few state-
ments made, which you may say you would have seen just as well in the
newspapers. But I ask you not to think so, for in truth it is not a little
thing that a system of free and unreserved communication between us should
be inaugurated, which I hope will be of long duration, and which, cordially
carried out, cannot fail, I think, to be attended with much benefit to the
Colony. Some of you, as I have observed, may be disappointed at my not
being ready to give a complete programme, cut and dried, of what I intend
to do, or wish to do, and may say, “Why, he has been here two months
already or more. Hasn’t he made up his mind what he is going to do ? ”
Well, gentlemen, two months may seem for some purposes a long time, but
for others it is a very short time. There are some folks who come out
crammed full of fine theories and preconceived notions, and attempt, more
or less unconsciously, to force facts to suit them. You will recollect the
story of the Frenchman who, on being told that the facts did not bear out
his theories, answered, “So much the worse for the facts.” Such a course
is ridiculous on the part of any man ; it is worse than ridiculous—it is mis-
chievous—on the part of one who has to govern. No, gentlemen, lam not
disposed to ignore facts, but I am slow to satisfy myself respecting them,
and am not prepared always to accept anything as a fact, simply because it
is told me as one. I have no preconceived plans to carry out, regardless of
circumstances, and time must elapse before I come to any fixed opinion on many
N


most important points. Meanwhile, I must thank those who have been good
enough to furnish me with suggestions. Many have done so, and I wish that
more had done the same. They have all been carefully read, and carefully
thought over, and many of them contain hints of extreme value. But I think
the fact most prominently forced upon my notice by these communications has
been how great a diversity of opinion can exist in a small community. Hardly
two of you think alike. One gentleman says, “If you want to assure the
prosperity of the Colony, do so and so. ” Another says, of the very same thing,
‘ ‘ Whatever you do, take care not to do that; if you do, the Colony is ruined
beyond redemption,” and so on. In short, reading these communications
reminds me of the old Athenian fable, which I fancy we were all acquainted
with in our youth : the man and the boy who drove their donkey to market,
and listened to everything said by passers-by as they went along. At first, the
fact of the father riding, and the son walking, was looked upon as harsh
treatment of the boy ; when their position was reversed, the son was censured
as undutifully selfish ; then they both got on, and were accused of cruelty
to animals. At last the end of it was that they carried the donkey instead
of being carried by it. Well, gentlemen, I cannot yet say which of the
various suggestions made to me I shall follow, or that I shall not change my
course if I see reason to do so. lam not too proud to ow r n myself mistaken,
or be unthankful for suggestions which may prove me to he so ; but there is
one thing I will not do, and I may as well tell you so at once, —I don’t mean
to carry the donkey. But though too soon to proclaim a policy on all points,
there are some things so plainly wanted that I cannot hesitate at once to
declare them. We want capital invested in the Colony ;we want a cheap,
abundant, and certain supply of labour; we want means of communication; we
want justice to be readily and speedily administered ; we want some facilities
for education; and lastly (though, perhaps, that interests me more nearly
and specially than you), we want revenue. Now, as to capital, it is clear
that will not be invested in the Colony until there is good security for its
investment, that is to say, until the land titles are settled, and a steady
supply of labour provided for. What we are going to do as to the land
question I will tell you presently. I now pass on to that of labour. An
ample and steady supply of labour is absolutely essential to the Colony.
From whence, and under what management shall we obtain it most certainly,
most cheaply, and with the least probability of abuse ?
The first question is whether the management of the introduction of im-
migrants should be undertaken by the Government exclusively, or, as at
present, by private parties. lam of opinion that it should be undertaken by
the Government. The immigration would be more systematically carried on,
its initial expenses would be borne by the Colony, and the planter, instead
of being called on, as now, to pay a large sum down at once, would have the
amount distributed over a period of years. There would, moreover, be an
almost absolute guarantee against abuses. But the question is one on which
I should wish to have your opinion, and I will ask you to write ay or no
before you leave the room to the following question, which you will find
written on a sheet of paper near the door : —“ls it in your opinion desirable
that the Government should undertake the conduct and management of the
immigration of labour ?” Now as to the source from which labour is to be
obtained. Shall we attempt, not to supplant, but to supplement Polynesian


labour by that of Indian coolies ? I think that we shall do well to do so,
I have nothing to urge against Polynesian labour, but I think we must
admit that the supply of it is decreasing, and the cost of it increasing. All
the evidence I have been able to obtain tends to show that this state of things
will continue. If Queensland persists in giving higher wages than are given
here, wages here must rise, or our supply must cease. The Imperial
Government also is likely to insist on measures which will render increased
expenditure necessary. The supply of labour to be obtained from India is
practically boundless. The amount of wages ordinarily given to Indian
coolies is well known. I hold in my hand some statistics as to the probable
expense of their introduction here. My calculations are £3:lßs. for
recruiting ; 10s. a head per man for the agent; passage money £l2 ; cost of
returning same, £3 ;in all, £l9 : Bs. Deducting from this the amount of
one-third, as paid by the Government, we arrive at the fact that, for
£l2 : we obtain a coolie servant for five years, with his wages of sd.
per day additional, with rations. The West Indian system of immigration,
which works well, is this : Before a certain day in the year, each planter
sends in a requisition to the immigration agent, stating the number of
coolies he requires for the coming year. These are added up together, and
the total they amount to is sent for from India. The men when they arrive
are assigned by lot to the applicants, so that there may be no complaints of
unfair play. If a number less than that asked for is sent, a proportional dim-
inution in the number allotted is made all round. An indenture fee, in some
colonies £l, in others £2, is paid by the planter on each man allotted to him,
and a like amount in each succeeding year of the five for which the coolie
is indentured to him. The remainder of the expenses, so far as the planter’s
share of it is concerned (for the Government bears one-third) is defrayed
by means of an export duty on produce, which varies every year, according as
the number of immigrants sent for is great or small. It must be remembered,
when speaking on this subject, that the Indian labourer enters upon his
service for a much longer period than the Polynesian. He is engaged to
work upon the estate for one certain five years, together with an additional
five of labour in the Colony, though not necessarily on the same estate, before
he is entitled to receive a return passage to the place whence he came. Thus
it will be seen a Polynesian would have to be returned and re-engaged three
times for every time an Indian labourer would be. The expenses of this may
easily be calculated, and the saving soon arrived at. I must, however,
candidly point out that, in one respect, the contract of Indian labourers
contrasts unfavourably with those of Polynesia—that of wages ; sd. per diem,
with rations, was the least amount they could be maintained at, and without
rations they would cost lOd. per diem. If we had both systems of immigration
at work, the Government would send for such a number of Polynesians and
such a number of Indians as the planters might respectively ask for. It
would depend on themselves which they would have, and no doubt they
would ask for that which on the whole they found most advantageous for them.
The immediate question then is, “ Is it in your opinion desirable that efforts
should be made to effect the introduction of immigrant labour from India ? ”
and to this also I would ask you to return an answer.
I now come to the administration of justice. A petition has been for-
warded to the late Administrator of the Government, Mr. Layard, with


reference to the restrictions that had been placed upon the facilities for
obtaining justice in respect to the claims of large creditors upon those who
had been indebted to them more than £3OO, as well as other complications
which rendered the Law Courts of the Colony not so comprehensive as they
ought to be. I agree with the remarks of the petitioners, and admit the evils
they had to complain of. By an Ordinance passed yesterday by the Legis-
lative Council, the action of the late Central Court was confirmed and
ratified, and whilst continuing its jurisdiction, it was extended, and now has
all the powers of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. It offers every
facility to those who require, to whatever extent, the interposition of justice,
to make good their grievances. I believe in this respect the administration
of justice wdll be proceeded with in an exemplary, dignified, and efficient
manner ; and Ido not think it is necessary for me to dw r ell further on this
topic.
Now I come to the question of inter - insular communication, and you
must have seen by public advertisement that this has been amongst the
first of the matters I have endeavoured to provide for. I have called for
tenders to supply two steamers to meet the wants of all the planters, and
these I will certainly see are placed at your disposal. The subject of
roads is also to me one of the greatest importance. The roadmaker I
look upon as-the greatest civiliser, even more important from an initiatory
point of view than the schoolmaster. Not that I would undervalue those
who instruct youth in the first lessons of reading and writing, and so
far as I can do it I will help all who labour to instruct the children of
Fiji. But the roadmaker is the first civiliser. His work enables the
people to look around them, and benefit by civilisation, and my best assist-
ance will be given to the inauguration of new roads.
With regard to education, however, I will give every encouragement to
those who open schools of instruction. Still I cannot see how I can subsidise
them. For although a subsidy might be given to a good schoolmaster, a
superior one might make this the scene of his labours, and might well com-
plain if he could not have assistance at a greater rati<? than he who had
preceded him.
The next point for discussion will perhaps touch you more nearly than
any that had gone before. I allude to that of revenue. lam not going
to ask you if you would like to be taxed (laughter), but would like to
have your expressed opinion as to its easiest application. No doubt there
are many diverse opinions as to whether there should be a general system
of taxation, or whether it should be more local. That it should come in
some shape or form is inevitable, but it is with me, indeed, a matter of
earnest consideration how it can he so imposed as to be least disagreeable
to those who have to pay it. I cannot see the clock, which is over my head,
but I certainly would be glad to hear, however late in the day it may be, any
remarks you may wish to make on the incidence of local taxation. I cannot
yet conclude, for there are other matters of grave importance to be decided,
and none less so than that as to the formation of a Legislative Council. I have
read to you the Royal Charter of the Colony, and that makes provision for such
a Council with only two members, but I am desirous of extending its numbers,
as I have the power to do. Whilst, of course, it is within my authority to
construct the Council of such elements as I consider most desirable, it is


indeed my wish that all the people of Fiji should be represented, and that
my Council should consist of persons that would he acceptable to them. I
cannot allow an election to take place, for that would be opposed to the
policy of a Crown Colony, and to my instructions ; and indeed, I think, as
the Colony is situated, perhaps the gentlemen to constitute a Legislative
Council would be better chosen by nomination than by the counting of noses.
Still, I would ask you to give me your assistance in providing a Legislative
Council, and would take it as a favour if you would each write the names
of four persons upon a slip of paper to be given in before you leave the room,
I will not say that those who in this way appear to be most in favour will
be appointed to the Legislative Council. But I will say that great weight
will be attached by me to the names you submit.
With regard to the question that has lately agitated the public mind
as to where the capital is to be situated, I would also gladly receive your
opinion. Of course I am aware that if I applied individually to the
inhabitants of the Colony to resolve this question, I should hear from each
person a decided opinion that any spot within five miles of their own home was
the place where the capital should be. (Laughter.) I know the opinion of
persons residing on Ovalau, and would not on this occasion ask for them to give
expression to it. But of those now present I will ask : Is Levuka, in your
opinion, a convenient site for the seat of Government ? Does Levuka, in
your opinion, possess the facilities for extension required for a capital ? Is
Levuka, in your opinion, a satisfactory site, in a sanitary point of view, for
a large city ? But I have some things to tell as well as to ask. I suppose
that if I were to submit to a catechism, the first question put to me would
be, “How about titles to land?” Well, gentlemen, lam not one of those
who consider that statesmanship consists in mystery, and I will read you
verbatim the instructions I have received from the Imperial Government on
this point. Lord Carnarvon says : “It should be declared that the whole of
the land within the limits of Fiji, whether in the occupation of, or reputed
or claimed to have been, prior to the cession of the Islands, the property of
either Europeans or natives, as well as all waste and unclaimed land, has by
virtue of the instrument which ceded to her Majesty the ‘ possession of, and
full sovereignty and dominion over, the whole of the Islands,’ become absol-
utely and unreservedly transferred to the Crown, and that the Queen has
the full power of disposing of the whole of the land in such manner as to
Her Majesty may seem fit, having due regard to such interests as she may
deem to deserve recognition under Article 4of that Instrument. With
the view of disturbing as little as possible existing tenures and occupations,
and of maintaining (as far as practicable, and with such modifications only
as justice and good policy may in any case appear to demand) all contracts
honestly entered into before the cession, the Colonial Government, to which
the rights of the Crown are delegated in that behalf, should forthwith require
all Europeans claiming to have acquired land by purchase to give satisfactory
evidence of the transactions with the natives on which they rely as estab-
lishing their title ; and if the land appears to have been acquired fairly, and
at a fair price, should issue to the persons accepted, after due inquiry, as
owners, a Crown grant in fee simple of the land to which they may appear
entitled, subject to any conditions as to further payments and charges, or
otherwise, as may appear just. Henceforth all dealings in land between


Europeans and natives shall not only be invalid and not recognisable by
any court of law, but shall be expressly forbidden by enactment. When-
ever any European desires to purchase any native lands, his application
must be addressed to the Colonial Government, which, if it think fit to
sanction such purchase, shall itself acquire the land, and fix the price at
which it shall be granted by the Crown to the applicant, and that, as
between Europeans, no land shall he transferable except under the provisions
of the Ordinance for land transfer, through the Registration Office, which it
will be your duty at once to cause to be enacted on the model of the Acts on
this subject now in force in Australia.” The object of these instructions is
to settle these claims in the speediest, cheapest, and most equitable manner.
Advantage has therefore been taken of the technicality that the land has,
strictly speaking, all passed to the Queen, in order to obviate the necessity
for tedious lawsuits and technical legal decisions, not always in accord with
substantial justice. This could best be done, not by recourse to law courts,
or by pressing them through a labyrinth of legal forms, but by submitting
them to a well-chosen Commission, which could deal with every case fairly
and promptly. I can tell you, although grumblers might construe into
tyranny and injustice the course Her Majesty’s Government has determined
to pursue with reference to the lands, that the course to be adopted is,
nevertheless, not so. The onus probandi, as it is called, that is, the necessity
of showing that they had a good claim, is thrown on the claimants ; but if
the claim is a bona fide one, they have nothing whatever to fear. The
Commission to be appointed will undertake their investigation so soon as the
Royal Engineers expected here arrive, the Officer commanding them being a
member of the Board of Commissioners. Before the Crown grants can be
issued, however, surveys must be made. But in order to prevent delay to
persons in operating with their properties, certificates of title will be
granted as soon as decisions are arrived at, which will be as good a patent
for dealing with land as the Crown grant itself.
I suppose the next question I should be asked would be as to the debts
and liabilities of the former Government. Well, on that point, too, I will
read you my instructions : “You will cause it to be very clearly understood
that Her Majesty’s Government and the Colonial Government absolutely and
entirely decline to admit that they are necessarily under any obligation to take
up the liabilities incurred by those who have purported to administer the
affairs of the Islands. No claim of the kind preferred by way of a demand
or as a right can for a moment be entertained. But although I think it
necessary to define, in the strongest manner, the refusal of Her Majesty’s
Government to accept, or allow the Colonial Government to accept, any direct
liability or obligation connected with the acts of persons for whom it has
been in no way responsible, I am nevertheless of opinion that it will be for
the credit of the newly constituted Government that voluntarily, and as an
act of grace, it should offer to undertake the payment of so much of the debts
incurred before the cession as, after proper inquiry, it may appear just and
fair for it to assume. As Sir Hercules Robinson has pointed out, it will be
necessary for this purpose, to examine carefully all claims put forward ; and,
as at present advised, I am of opinion that the four classes of the creditors
of the so-called Fijian Government may be dealt with on the general principles
laid down in paragraph 9of his despatch of 20th October. But with regard


to the time and manner in which any such payments are to be made, the
Government of Fiji must reserve to itself the fullest discretion. lam disposed
to think that the best course will be for you to notify publicly, as soon as
convenient after your assumption of the government, that while the Govern-
ment of Fiji declines to be responsible for any debts or liabilities incurred by,
or in the name of, Cakobau, or any other persons purporting to represent any
Government of Fiji prior to the cession, it is, nevertheless, willing to consider
any proofs that may be brought forward of money or supplies having been
actually provided for public purposes ; but the persons so applying to be
reimbursed must be made clearly to understand that it will rest entirely with
the Colonial Government to decide in each case, whether the sum claimed,
or a part of it, should be paid, and, if so, at what time, and in what manner,
the payment shall be made.” I will only add that it is the wish of Her
Majesty’s Government, and my own intention, that these instructions should
be construed in a generous and liberal spirit. If any gentleman wishes to
put other questions to me, I shall, as far as possible, answer them on the
spot.
And now, before I close, you will, I hope, forgive me if I venture on
one or two bits of very plain advice. It may be that progress will not be
quite so rapid as has been hoped for —indeed I fancy grumblers have been
already inquiring as to wffiat advantages have accrued from the new state of
things. I would advise them not to be in too great a hurry. Six months
is not sufficient to produce great changes. Time is required, and no doubt
in time prosperity will eventuate. There is one remark I would make, in
all sincerity, and in all kindness. I myself can perceive that there pervades
this little community, as in all small communities, a strong party spirit, a
strong personal feeling. I beg that it may be a thing of the past. I myself shall
ever discourage personal animosity and tittle-tattle, and whatever unpleasant
remarks are made, they will never have the slightest effect upon me.
My other bit of advice is, that you should make the best of me, whatever my
deficiencies. The Colony will get on better if we pull together than if there
is discord between us. I have been in other small communities, and, perhaps,
know what they are as well as most men ; I ask you to have confidence in me.
If at any time my action does not seem satisfactory, let it be pointed out, but
do not think I am to be given up as useless because I am sometimes wrong.
Perhaps as a new-comer I have one advantage—l can form a more impartial
opinion. I repeat my desire to obtain your confidence. I fancy there may be
grumblers who might say, “Well, it’s all very well for him ; he comes here
with a great salary ; what does he know about it ? ” This might be indeed
said. It is not very dignified to notice it; but I am determined to throw
dignity to the winds, and will state why I came. It was because I believed
I might be useful; but I will tell you plainly, once for all, that to come
here has cost me many and great sacrifices. I trust you will not be hurt by
my saying so. It perhaps will appear to you that my salary is dispropor-
tionately large—it is certainly a large one. But it was accepted by me in
order to secure the claim to a pension my former services entitled me to,
and which I should forfeit by accepting a salary nominally less ; it is my
intention to return to the Colonial Treasury nearly half my salary, and they
will be much mistaken who think the other half will go into my own pocket.
Then again, there are others who might say, “ Oh, we have heard of you


before. You are a philanthropist—a friend of the blacks, etc.” It may
be so. I confess I do not like to see a man put upon on account of his
colour; but this is certain—l have no sympathy with those whose
philanthropy demands that they should think little of their own race and
colour. My sympathy for the coloured races is strong; but my sympathy
for my own race is stronger. Those who have, under no ordinary amount of
hardship, privation, and toil, laid the foundations of civilisation here, are
entitled to the warmest sympathy, and they certainly have mine.
And now, one word more. It is one I have purposely avoided saying
before, lest you should think I was trying to gain your ear by flattery. You
are pretty well aware that the fame of Fiji has not always been of the best;
nor has it always borne a good name with the world. I wish to say publicly
that I think these charges unjust. My own short experience proves to me
that much that has been said against the country is undeserved. Society
here is certainly not angelic. There is, no doubt, a certain amount of
rascality there is more drunkenness and dawdling than I like to see, but
not more, I think, than are to be found in other young countries similarly
circumstanced; while there are in the community men of education,
probity, kindness, and enterprise who would do credit to any state. With
this expression of opinion I will bring my address to a close.'
From Me. Thurston
Nasova, Monday Morning. —Your Excellency—Having last night pro-
cured a Fiji Times for the purpose of correcting the mixture of third and first
persons in the report of Your Excellency’s speech, I became aware of the
following paragraph in the leading article.
“Sir Arthur, by his own admission, is a man of indomitable will and
perseverance, and not likely to be deterred in his line of conduct by being
subjected to inconvenience. We discern this more especially in the retention
of Mr. J. B. Thurston in a subordinate position in the Government, for how-
ever useful he may be as a sort of peripatetic encyclopaedia of the past of
Fiji, socially he must be an incubus to a man of good lineage like Sir Arthur
Gordon ; still we presume there are means of using a man officially without
being taxed with his personal acquaintance, and as such, we assume, he will
be treated, socially, as an inferior ; officially, as a useful servant, when care-
fully watched.”
I am not altogether unused to this sort of thing, and I have # happily ex-
perienced, sir, that slander and abuse do not, however well and frequently
hurled, always bring down the intended victim.
Still, it is not pleasant, either as a private person, or a public officer, to be
constantly held up by this journal to public ridicule, hatred, and contempt.
The editor of the Times says that Your Excellency is “not likely to be
deterred in your line of conduct by being subjected to inconvenience.” Still,
the object of the Times all along has been to cause my exclusion from any office
under the Crown as a matter of expediency, less than of reason, or necessity,
not that I am utterly useless, unfit, or imbecile, but, first, because my official
conduct in this country has been of a corrupt and dishonourable character,
and, secondly, because I am, according to the standard of the Times and its
admirers, not a gentleman.


The first part of my official life in Fiji (and which in some sort causes me
to be the “encyclopaedia” referred to in the foregoing extract) was in Her
Majesty’s service, and at its termination I was commended in high terms by
the late Lord Clarendon. lam not sensible that my more recent official life
has made me either corrupt or dishonourable. An unequal contest, constant
work, and doing two men’s duty has fagged me a little, and, by causing me to
neglect my personal affairs, made me poorer, but I am not sensible of any
other marked effects. The second reason given, coming in the country, and
from the quarter that it does, is not intended for, but clearly is, a joke. I
do not pretend to be a gentleman in the sense in which the word was used
before it was appropriated by drapers, clerks, and bagmen. As a free-lance,
fighting my way in the world—and fighting fairly —I am content to be what
I am, rather than appear to be what lam not. In being admitted to Your
Excellency’s councils and friendship, I am quite aware that les extremes se
touchent, and if the fact affords a standing text for the Times, that journal is
very welcome to it. It is, however, ‘‘ an inconvenience ”to have the character
of a public officer, holding the position Your Excellency has honoured me with,
proclaimed all the world over, by a malicious journalist, as a moral and social
pariah, and I hardly see my way how to stop him. Personal action would
perhaps afford the fullest satisfaction—but is out of the question. Legal
action is the other alternative (excepting silent contempt) presenting
itself; but as the men—both editor and proprietor —have not a shilling in
the world, a verdict in damages would end in nothing. Whether the
publisher could be prosecuted criminally is a question upon which I am not
certain, but I do feel that the time has now arrived when the torrent of
abuse against me should be stopped. My chief object in addressing Your
Excellency this morning upon what is in its greater part a personal affair of
mine, is because I find that reports of an injurious nature are being circulated
as to myself among the chiefs at Draiba. The same half-caste who carried
the petition to the chiefs for signature informed them yesterday that I had
been removed from my late position as Colonial Secretary, and, using the words
of the Times, was now only in an obscure or “ subordinate ” position under the
Treasurer, etc. Foolish as the chiefs are, I have no wish to lose the esteem
in which I believe they hold me, and which has been the growth of years,
but there is just enough distorted truth as to my change of office to puzzle
them, and make them think perhaps that my loss of seniority is owing to the
false reasons conveyed to them. I shall therefore take it as a great kindness
if Your Excellency will, at such a time as you may deem convenient or
opportune, say to the chiefs whatever you may think proper or requisite in
the matter of my change of office. —I am, Your Excellency, very faithfully
yours, John B. Thurston.
From Mr. Carew
Leyuka, Ovalau, September 3, 1875. —Your Excellency —Having been
commissioned by Your Excellency to visit the various districts on the Na
Viti Levu for the purpose of inquiring into the existing state of affairs, and
with reference to reports of impending disturbances in the Ba and Nadroga
provinces, I have the honour to inform Your Excellency that I left Levuka for
the above purposes on the 18th of August ultimo, visiting Bukadra (Koro


tubu), Navula (Nadroga), Nadranu (Ra), Naratu (Ra), Nakasi (Tavua),
Sagunu (Ba), Budnka (Nadi), Cuvu (Nadroga), Korolevu (Serua), Serna’
Suva, Navuso (Naitasiri), and Ban, thence on to Ovalau, where I arrived
on the Ist inst., after an absence of fourteen days. I also called on many
of the settlers on different parts of the coast, who, with the sole exception
of Mr. Bucknell, at Korolevu (Serua), expressed themselves as feeling secure,
and had no fear of any attack from the natives.
Mr. Bucknell of Korolevu (Serua) is in a peculiar position, as the coast
village adjoining his residence is inhabited by people belonging to the
interior, and their relatives and friends are constantly in the habit of coming
down to the coast in considerable numbers, armed, and cause much annoyance
and alarm to Mr. Bucknell and the members of his family.
I arrived on the second day of my journey at the village of Nakasi
(Tavua), but, owing to the darkness of the night, took the wrong arm of the
delta, and did not thus have an opportunity of visiting Mr. D’Este, the
Justice of the Peace of the district.
The people of Tavua district (Yatusila tribe) are closely related to the
Nabutautau men (Yatusila), against whom warrants have lately been
issued for murder and cannibalism at Tavua (inland). I found them most
uncommunicative, professing to know nothing, and to have heard of nothing,
and declared themselves to be ignorant of the name of the Buli of their
district. The teacher, Sefanaia, refused plainly to give me any information,
declaring that, if they did so, the neighbours in the interior might feel
annoyed.
The people of this district are in the habit of supplying information, and,
when they possess it, ammunition, and are suspected of treasonable tendencies
in conjunction with the Nabutantau and other turbulent remnants of tribes
in the interior. I cautioned them most plainly, and explained clearly to
them the fact that accessories were also liable to punishment, and that they
were lying under a most dangerous belief when they supposed that actual
perpetrators of offences alone were liable to punishment. The teacher I
threatened to report to the head of the district.
They told me some stories about murders and other matters, which, they
stated, had been perpetrated by Nagaga people, with whom their friends in
the interior are on bad terms, and which I knew to be false at the time.
I afterwards explained to the people here, as at every place I landed at,
the motives of the Lands Commissioner in visiting the districts ; also many
other matters calculated to set their minds at rest on many important
subjects. •
I then left for the Ba river, visiting several of the planters, and made
inquiries into the probable cause of the burning of Fitzgerald’s place, Na
Korowabuta, and also visited Na Vunisamaloa, the place the Fitzgeralds
lived at both before and after the occurrence. I found the general impression
to be that Fitzgerald himself had burnt his house for ulterior purposes.
On returning to Saguru, the chief town of Ba province, I examined
Pita, one of the cook boys working for Fitzgerald at the time. This boy
Pita confessed, in the clearest possible way, that he had seen Fitzgerald
set fire to the houses, and also that he was promised £5, which was to be
paid by Government. I took this lad’s statement down, and handed it over
to Mr. Eastgate, the Stipendiary Magistrate, who arrived during the night.
CHAP.


The planters whom I had the opportunity of seeing express themselves
in most indignant terms at the supposition that their part of the country
was unsafe : they consider the report as calculated seriously to affect their
interests by interfering with the introduction of capital into their part of the
country.
I next proceeded to Na Buduka at Nadi. Here I found the chief and
leading men had left for Ovalau ; the natives declared the interior to be
quiet; the people here appear to be in a depressed condition, and at present
are living chiefly on cooked unripe bananas, half-grown ; they were not
possessed of decent clothing, and declared themselves to be unable to pay
taxes, as the planters were determined not to give them work unless they
would engage for a whole year. I had no opportunity of verifying the truth
of this report.
At the next place I called, Navula, the people were also without money,
the so-called Turaga ni lewa begging me, in the most abject manner, to
buy a shilling’s worth of salt, in order that he might not be found entirely
without money when the taxes were demanded. This state of affairs I
ascribe almost entirely to the total absence of energy on the part of the
people, who might make canoes, and thus procure without much labour
quantities of pearl shell and “beche de mer,” for which this neighbourhood
is so famous. I also notiped many empty houses, the owners having died
during the late epidemic.
I then followed up the coast, landing above Tadola, the plantation of Mr.
Thomson Smith, sending the boat on to Cuvu, the chief town of Nadroga,
and walked along the shore, calling at the residences of various settlers.
Mr. Thomson Smith informed me that an excitement had lately been
caused by a Mr. Rennie, who had lately written requesting assistance of the
settlers to repel a threatened attack by the natives from inland. The
planters, having no faith in the report, did not, I believe, respond to the
invitation of Mr. Rennie. I then proceeded on foot to Cuvu, and found,
with difficulty, a local officer, the son of late Roko Tui; Ratu Luki and
leading men having left for Ovalau. I requested this officer to send for
Ratu Mosese, the cousin of Luki, and any other chiefs whose attendance
might be procurable ; they arrived on the following morning, when I in-
formed the meeting of the object of my mission.
After some consultation they told me that the report originated in a mis-
understanding on the part of Mr. George Rennie, residing in the village,
who being intoxicated, and having but a slight knowledge of Fijian, had
misunderstood a rumour brought by a native ; they further stated that Mr.
Rennie had, upon hearing this false report, ordered his Tana servants to
bring out the muskets belonging to the tribe and deposited in a tobacco
store, and had had them loaded to the number of fifty, and left them in
his own house ready for the supposed attack ; they further assured me that,
although the hill tribes were in a most turbulent state, they themselves did
not fear any attack.
I learnt that a number of teachers who had recently gone to a Chief of
Naikabocobo near Koro samiti and Quali mari, had recently had a most narrow
escape of being murdered, the people ascribing the late epidemic to the anger
of their heathen gods at their recent conversion to Christianity. I requested
the native ordained minister of the district to leave the people to themselves


for awhile, and not to attempt to push Christianity upon them against their
wish. I also told thejmeeting that the Government expressly forbade any
attempts of the kind ; that religion must be left to the individual will of
every person, but that the law must be obeyed ; that the Queen had accepted
the sovereignty of the Colony by the express wish of the people ; that Her
Majesty had sent Your Excellency to rule the country in her name, and that
it was a most unusual thing for a Chief of Your Excellency’s standing to be
sent to rule such a very small country as Fiji, the whole number of inhabi-
tants of which, if added together, would only equal the population of a small
town in Great Britain ; that Her Majesty wished the people to be ruled with
justice and humanity, but that be ruled it must and would ; and that it
would be easier for them to attempt to stay the heavy breakers on the beach
than to attempt by their insignificant scheming to thwart the benevolent
intentions of the Government on behalf of the people. Finding the people
had no proper idea of the late visit of the Lands Commissioner, I then ex-
plained it, and told them that they would not be placed on reserves, and that
they were to pay no attention to idle reports. I then gave them a slight
sketch of Your Excellency’s proposed plan of governing the interior, placing
it in a problematical point of view, and asked them if they thought that
such a plan would succeed if attempted ; the native minister, a Togan, and
a most intelligent man, replied promptly that he believed they would like
the plan very much.
I then proceeded on to Mr. Bucknell’s place at Korolevu (Serua). The
people here appeared to be insolent in character, and Mr. Bucknell assured
me he did not feel secure from attack, and that they kept loaded weapons
always at hand. Mr. Bucknell is a most hard-working man, doing even
common field-work himself, in which the three ladies of his family assist; he
rises by candle-light to work every morning. It is quite impossible that a
man of Mr. Bucknell’s energy of character should be able to agree with natives
who saunter about his place armed in large numbers ; quarrels must arise ; the
natives will feel themselves most unpardonably insulted at times by Mr.
Bucknell’s apparently harsh conduct towards them ; and, altogether, I much
fear the most dangerous elements have here been thrown into contact, a tribe
of arrogant, warlike, hitherto unsubdued savages, with a settler of unbending
and harsh character, and altogether devoid of tact or knowledge of native
language, character, or mode of thought.
I here learnt that the Chief of Navola, a village in the vicinity, whose
name is “Manu i vudi,” and now in Ovalau, has great command over the
people of the interior, and that his influence extends far inland. As he also was
absent on his way to Ovalau, I proceeded on to Serua, thence to Suva, thence
to Naitasiri, thence to Bau, and on to Ovalau, arriving on the Ist instant.
In conclusion, I have the honour to state to Your Excellency my firm
conviction that great trouble will shortly arise in the section of the Colony
represented by the hill tribes of Serua and Nadroga, unless action be at once
taken in the matter; and also that, although the settlers at Ba and
Nadroga express their opinion that no danger exists of an attack on them,
yet I am morally convinced that this expression arises less from a real
belief in a state of security than from a feeling that great loss might accrue
individually if an opinion should gain ground outside the Colony that
might jeopardise the introduction of capital; and I further take upon myself


the liberty of suggesting to Your Excellency the advisability of calling a
meeting of the hill tribes of Nadroga and Serua as soon as convenient after the
return of the Chiefs now assembled at Ovalau ; it will be most advisable also
that Your Excellency preside at this meeting and have a thorough and most
complete understanding as to their future relations with Your Excellency’s
Government. —I have, etc., Walter S. Carew,
Special Commissioner for Ban and Nadroga.
From Sir A. Gordon’s Note-Book
With the Proclamation of the Charter and my speech to the
settlers, a new act in the drama has begun. After a couple of
months, during which I have in all respects acted as Governor
(except in the signature of Proclamations!) and have closely
watched what was going on, I now assume full responsibility
and control. The interval has been most useful to me, especially
in the opportunity it has given for sifting out the bad and the
good among the officials of the old Government, and letting one
see distinctly whom one ought and whom one ought not to
employ. It has also enabled me to judge much more accurately
than I could otherwise have done, what legislative and executive
action I ought to take immediately the new regime came in
force. Most of the great Chiefs have come over to attend the
installation at Ban.
LevuJca
I am afraid I have already become too familiar with Levuka
to describe it from a stranger’s point of view, but I will try to
hold it, so to speak, at arm’s length, and look at it, as it were,
from a distance. From Nasova the town is invisible, being
hidden by the projecting point on which the Havelocks’ house
is built. This point is reached by a narrow up and down pebbly
path, soon to be replaced by a good broad level road, at which
the Royal Engineers are even now working. We pass several
“desirable villa residences,” and on turning the point Levuka
lies before one. What one sees is this : a number of wooden
white-washed houses, mostly only one story high, running along
the beach; more houses of the same character scattered about
inland, and the ambitious wooden steeples of the Roman Catholic
and Wesleyan churches. The Church of England church has no
steeple, and stands back modestly at some distance from the
shore, by the side of a little stream, the Totogo river.
After rounding the point, the first objects one finds are, on
one’s left, Mr. Henning’s cotton stores, and on one’s right, the
big substantial wooden pier, now being built by the Engineers.
From this point the hills recede in a semicircle, and what


was once a bay of about fifty acres in extent is now a flat plain
of deposit from the Totogo stream. On this the greater part
of Levuka is built. Near the stream are the ditch and rampart
of an old native town, which are kept up because the oval site
they enclose is now used for a gaol and police office. On a height
above the stream, on the left, is the public hospital, and some-
what farther on, the English church, which within presents a
really fairly churchlike appearance. Along the beach one finds
Sturt’s hotel, a long low-verandahed building; divers boarding-
houses—one two stories high; various stores, and on a hill
jutting out into the sea, once, I suppose, an island, stands the
Court-house, rather an imposing building for Levuka, but far"
from satisfactory to Sir William Hackett, who at first said he
would not act until he had better and more dignified accommoda-.
tion. He however soon saw (though I uttered no threat) that
if he refused to do his duty, I should appoint an acting Chief- 4
Justice, and accordingly thought better of it, only hedging his
retreat by a demand that the Royal Arms should be painted upl
over his chair. In this I was very willing to indulge him, and
got Captain Beatson to do the work. He copied the lions and'
the harp in the arms fairly enough, but the supporters are.
most amusing works of art. The lion rampant has exactly the i
face and appearance of a Tokalau labourer, and the unicorn wears,
a woebegone look of drunken dissipation that is irresistibly comic.
However, Sir William was satisfied, and sits daily under the
performance without a smile. Nearly opposite the Court-house
is the private house of Mr. 0. Cudlip. He is a New Bruns-
wicker, whose relations I knew very well when in that
A little farther on is the Consulate, a strange one-story building,
right over the sea, built on piles, with its own little pier, etc.
The situation has certain advantages, but in stormy weather it
must be a somewhat perilous one, and a hurricane (and they are
not infrequent) would, I should think, leave no vestige of the
house or of those dwelling in it. Passing on along the beach,
one reaches another stream, the Levuka river, over which the
Engineers are about to build a substantial wooden bridge, on the
farther side of which stand a few dirty old native houses, which
are all that remains of the former town of Levuka. Here “ the
capital ” terminates; for a cliff of black rock here comes down
to the sea, and on passing it one finds oneself in another very
pretty semicircular bay not yet choked up, owing to the absence
of streams such as the Totogo and Levuka. This bay is decidedly
pretty. At its head is the building-shed of the boat-builder
Palmer, a capital workman. There are a few houses up a rocky
ravine, and in one of these the Chief-Justice has located himself.


He is always complaining that there is no road to his house. It
is perfectly true, nor is there likely to be one for some time to
come, all the energies of the Royal Engineers being devoted to
the construction of the road through the town and its bridges,
and to building their own barracks, which are situated on a
slope of the hill at Vagadace, on the site formerly occupied by
the so-called Immigrants’ On this structure the Engineers
are spending <£looo of the Colony’s money, which we can ill
spare. I greatly fear they are going to be more of a white
elephant to us than anything else.
High up one of the hill spurs is the house of Mr. Butters,
Mayor of Melbourne, which the Commodore wanted me to take
for Government House. How he can ever have thought of so
impossible a position I cannot conceive. One never could have
gone out or come in again without ascending or descending a
mountain. Rachael would never have got out at all, and I
should have been quite inaccessible to people wanting to see me
without a great expenditure of time and trouble. At Nasova
one is in touch with everyone except the Chief-Justice, who
chooses to live at Vagadace. On another hill arc the lanterns
which form a guide to the entrance of Levuka harbour at night.
It is a most unsuitable position for a large town. The area
of flat land is very limited, and the hardness of the conglomerate
rock prohibits terracing for building, except at an enormous
expense. The flat cannot be drained, and is already wholly in
the hands of private proprietors, who will not sell except at
extortionate prices. The Wesleyan Mission, which is the largest
single owner, will not sell at all, and only grants leases for a term
of years, which is fatal to real improvement. I have pretty well
made up my mind not to have the capital here, wherever I may
ultimately locate it—probably at Suva or Savu Savu, possibly at
Nandi. But, looked at from Havelock’s house on the hill, it is
highly picturesque and pretty. One’s eye ranges over the little
flat plain dotted with little hills, (once, I suppose, islets,) groves,
and houses, and intersected by streams, the waterfalls of one of
which are seen in the narrow gorge in which the valley terminates,
and which leads at a rapid incline to the summit of the mountains
and thence to the Lovoni valley. The mountains themselves,
receding here, advancing there, form in general a bold semicircle
and rise to a great height, say 2000 feet, in every variety of
peak and jag, thickly clothed with wood, except where bare
faces of rock assert themselves. On the opposite side of the
semicircle, from out a dark ravine, the mouth of which is
just seen behind a nearly perpendicular bluff of bare black rock,
emerges the Levuka river; and in the water at one’s feet,


safely moored between the reef and the town, are numerous
coasting vessels, many native canoes, a few larger vessels, and a
single man-of-war steamer. If I were not so busy, I could spend
many a morning in mere pleased contemplation of so fair a scene,
which is all the fairer for being framed by some beautiful bread-
fruit trees of large size.
Waitovu
I wish I could at all adequately describe that pearl of all
bathing places, Waitovu, but that is impossible. Nevertheless,
I must try. On passing the point at Yagadace, a very short
walk along the narrow strip of cocoa-nut grove between the shore
and the rocks brings one to Waitovu. More commonly we go
there by boat, and land on the beach of its little bay. The
native village is situated on the flat near the shore at the mouth
of a steep valley, and is sheltered by very fine 1 ivi and breadfruit
trees, and of course the ever present cocoa-nut, bending in every
direction, so that the stems cross and recross in the most be-
wildering confusion. The little town contains some of the best
native houses I have yet seen. Of the houses on the coast there
are two different styles. The mountain houses in the interior
are, I believe, built quite differently, but I have not yet seen any
of them. The framework of the two kinds of coast houses is
the same, but their exterior presents a very different appearance.
In the one kind, the neat reed walling of the house and its com-
plicated sinnet fastenings, forming elaborate patterns over its
surface, are distinctly visible; above the wall plate is a heavy
projecting cornice, edged by ropes of sinnet elaborately twisted
into a graceful pattern, and above this - a heavy thatch of grass or
pandanus leaves. The other kind of house has no cornice, and
its walls and roof are covered alike, without a break, by a sort
of upper thatch of brown leaves closely packed together. One
of these houses, at a little distance, looks more like a gigantic
haystack than anything else. In Waitovu there are some of the
best specimens of the former kind of house, with elaborate cable
cornices—really very picturesque, and not only that, but very
snug inside also.
We pass through the village, noticing some giant bamboos
the Commodore, who is very fond of the place, has planted, and
pass along a narrow path, which after a short diagonal ascent
leads one to a passage on stepping stones across the stream under
a magnificent dawa. 2 When across the stream, the ascent becomes
much steeper, and we go through pepper bushes, wild lemons, and
candle-nut bushes, etc., and tangled bush and jungle, with here and
1 Inocarpus edulis. 2 Nephelium pinnatum.


there a palm tree and here and there a patch of cultivated
ground beautifully terraced and irrigated, where the glossy green
leaves of the Arum esculentum peep above the water. At length,
after forcing one’s way through thickets of pepper and other
bushes, one comes out on a narrow ledge of rock with a wall of
cliff on one side and a steep slope of smooth rock down to the
tree-tops on the other. The sailors of the Pearl have tried to
improve the path across this glacis by cutting some steps, but
without any very marked success. When one has crossed it
and looks about, this is what one sees. One is standing on the
brink of a gray bare cliff, over the top of which water pours
downwards towards the tree-tops below us, among which the
farther course of the stream is hidden. Right in front of one—
the horizon at a great height owing to the height to which one
has mounted—is the sea, and the island of Wakaya just filling up
the space between the trees on either side. The island is glow-
ing in the light of the declining sun, which we cannot see, for it
is hidden from us by the mountains behind us. Turning round,
one sees that the cliff on which one stands has at some distant
time fallen forward and separated itself from the main cliff,
which is much higher, and between which and where we stand
is a deep and, roughly speaking, wedge-shaped cavity, in which
the water of the stream accumulates, till, full to the very brim,
it escapes over the cascade. Towards the upper end of this
pool, where the stream enters it, the water has worn away the
rocks, which rise high on either side and form a smaller second
pool terminated by a cascade, which pours into it. These two
pools form our bathing place, and a more exquisite one in every
way it would be difficult to imagine. The water is for the most
part very deep, and the natives are fond of taking “footers”
into it from a pinnacle of rock which juts out into it, at least
twenty-five feet high.
Here, in the afternoon, whenever a man-of-war is in harbour,
one may find lieutenants and middies basking on the warm rocks
or swimming in the pools, and attendant natives jumping from
heights into the water, the naked figures, white or brown, adding
to the completeness of the picture. But partly on account of its
distance from Levuka, partly on account of the climb involved in
reaching it, and partly from an indifference to the picturesque, the
European community of Levuka for the most part let the place
alone, whereat I and my staff rejoice. The only fault I have to
complain of is that the rocks below water abound with a little shell
like a small snail-shell, but armed with three sharp spikes, one or
more of which, if one treads on them, is apt to break off in one’s
foot, and it is sometimes a troublesome job to get them out again.
o


CHAPTER IV ¹
INSTALLATION AT BAU-MURDER OF COMMODORE GOODENOUGH
-ARRIVAL OF LADY GORDON
I DO not propose to enter into the past history of the Fiji
Islands, or to recount the steps which led to their annexation. The
Government of Cakobau, as it existed in 1872, could not but fail.
It committed some faults, and fell into grave errors, but it is due
to it to say that it was a much better government than might have
been anticipated, or than is generally supposed. But it depended
on the good will of the white settlers for its existence, and that
good will depended on an acquiescence in conditions which would
have rendered continued submission on the part of the natives
improbable. However this may be, its hand was forced, and
an offer of unconditional cession obtained by Consul Layard
and Commodore Goodenough. That offer was accepted, and the
government of the new dependency was, from the 10th October
1874 until my arrival, conducted by an administrator, acting
under the direction of Sir Hercules Robinson, the Governor of
New South Wales,
The state of things which disclosed itself to me on landing
in Fiji was not encouraging. Pestilence, heedlessly admitted,
had swept away one-third of the entire native population.
The same cause had carried off many of the imported labourers
of the planters, who, from a variety of causes, were themselves,
for the most part, reduced to the greatest straits. The revenue
had fallen short of even the modest estimate of Sir H. Robinson,
while the expenditure had largely exceeded his anticipations.
The introduction of labour from other parts of the Pacific had
almost ceased. The season had been unfavourable for agriculture,
wet and unhealthy, and gloom and discontent pervaded all classes.
The white settlers had apparently imagined that the mere
assumption of sovereignty by Great Britain was to raise them at
once from indigence to prosperity, that their claims to land
1 From this point, Fijian spelling is used for Fijian words, names of
people, places, etc. In Fijian, 6 = mb, c=th, d = nd, g=ng, <? = nng.


would be at once allowed, that an abundant supply of labour
would be at once found for them, and that their claim to
supremacy over the natives, which the Government of Cakobau
—whatever its faults—had steadily refused to recognise, would
be at once acknowledged. They were, therefore, bitterly dis-
appointed to find their hopes not realised.
The natives were cowed and disheartened by the pestilence,
which they believed to have been introduced purposely to destroy
them, —a belief encouraged, lam ashamed to say, by some of our
own countrymen, and which was probably the main cause of the
disturbances in the highlands of Viti Levu in the following year.
They were perplexed by reiterated assurances from the whites
living among them that by the mere fact of annexation to Great
Britain their own laws and customs had been abolished; that
their rules of succession and laws for the transmission of property
had no longer any existence, that many of their cherished habits
were illegal, that their lands had become the property of the
Crown, and that they would themselves be expected, if not
required, to labour on white men’s plantations. They were
told, moreover, that all distinctions of rank among them were
at an end, —a notification which in its suddenness was more
perplexing than pleasing to the people generally, and which
naturally caused irritation and distrust among the higher Chiefs.
A third element in the population, the immigrant labourers
from other parts of Polynesia, whose contracts of service had
long expired, but whose employers had no means to send them
back to their homes, and who had remained in some cases for
many years in by no means voluntary servitude, were exasperated
by the bad faith they had experienced, and on not a few
plantations, where the owners had no means to pay, feed, or
clothe them, were in a state of extreme misery. I had all these
elements of disquiet at once to face.
For two months I refrained from formally taking over the
Government, partly because the absence of the Chief-Justice
and Attorney-General made the formation of the Executive and
Legislative Councils impossible; partly because I did not wish
Layard, the Consul, who had acted as administrator, to be set
free from the obligations, or deprived of the emoluments, of
office; but chiefly because I wished to look about me, and so
be able, when I did take office, to act decidedly, and at once
determine whom among the officials of the old regime I would
re-employ under the new one. But, of course, though official
notices were issued in Layard’s name, I really acted as Governor
all the time, and was so regarded and called. My very first step f
on the day of my arrival was to send off Dr. MacGregor in the|


Barracouta to the islands where measles still prevailed, with ample
supplies of medicine and medical stores, and to despatch Dr. Mayo
on a similar errand in a different direction. On their return they
reported the disease to be nearly extinct, but gave a terrible
picture of its ravages. My next measure was to take effective
steps to pay off and repatriate the time-expired labourers whose
detention in Fiji had done so much mischief; and I then turned
my attention to quieting the uneasiness and dispelling the sus-
picions of the natives in the interior. I sent Mr. Carew to
restore their confidence, and Arthur with him as a representative
of my own person. Their journey—an adventurous one—was
productive of excellent results. I made up my mind very quickly
that Levuka was not a good site for a permanent capital, but
waited to decide where it should be placed.
Modest as were Sir Hercules Eobinson’s expectations as to
the revenue to be raised in Fiji during the first year after the
cession, they were completely overthrown by the effects of the
measles ; and in the almost entire absence of revenue —(the
receipts of 1875 were only £16,000) —I had to devise means of
raising money from new sources. On my voyage out I had
roughly outlined to myself a plan founded on the culture system
of Java, as described in Money’s interesting volumes, How to
Govern a Colony , but differing from that system in many essential
particulars, more especially in this: that in Java any surplus
produce became the property of the Government, whereas in my
opinion all but a fixed amount ought to remain the property of
the cultivator, and in my scheme accordingly did remain so. With
this was connected my whole scheme of native policy, with respect
to which it is necessary to say a few words.
The mode in which subject races have been dealt with b y
alien rulers has varied in every age and place, but nearly all
these varieties of treatment are in fact governed by one or other
of three principles of action.
The doctrine that a superior race may rightfully oppress and
utilise for its own benefit the existence of a subject one, has
been, in former times, very general, and it is at this day not
only very far more widely spread than it ought to be, but far
more so than is perhaps commonly suspected. But this is not.
a principle of policy which any civilised government of the
present day would avow, or, I trust, on which it would, without
avowing it, act.
A somewhat better sentiment has been that which combines
an acknowledgment, (though perhaps a grudging acknowledge
ment,) that strict justice is required from the dominant race to
the inferior, with a jealousy ever on the watch not to extend
196
FIJI
CHAP.


that justice one hair’s breadth beyond the narrowest limits
within which it can be restrained, and to take every opportunity,
which can without manifest bad faith be taken, of improving the
position of the conqueror at the expense of the conquered.
A third and higher principle of action is that which recognises
the interests of all classes of the population as equal objects of
solicitude. But in this case the really benevolent intentions o£
rulers are often frustrated. The most enlightened views and the
most liberal legislation can be neutralised by the social aversion
between discordant races which may accompany a full concession
of political rights, and which renders their practical exercise
impossible. Even where no such conscious repulsion exists, there
is not unfrequently a want of imagination on the part of the
dominant race which prevents any conception by them of matters
from a native point of view, and produces a lack of tolerance for
laws or usages not in accordance with European modes of thought,
which is often not only as injurious as real injustice, but
frequently leads up to it. Indeed it is probable that as much
real wrong has been inflicted by the conscientious but narrow-
minded desire to act in accordance with maxims in themselves
generally sound, but not of universal application, as by violence
and consequent tyranny.
Where the governing power itself has not shaken off such
prejudices, it is probable that the harm done by it will be in
almost exact proportion to the degree of activity with which it
strives to effect good. Under the influence of a desire to effect
improvement, a pressure is put upon the native to adopt European
habits, perhaps unsuitable, and almost certainly distasteful. He
subjected to laws which are strange to him, and which in some
respects conflict with his own idea of justice, whilst he is aware
that, although on a footing of nominal equality before them with
his white fellow-subjects, the advantage in any contest under such
laws is all on the side of those who have long been familiar with
their operation. He is urged to simulate ideas which are unin-
telligible to him. Impatience at the ignorance and levity too
frequently displayed by natives in authority, to say nothing of
acts of real misconduct, leads to their services being set aside, and
all native agency is replaced by that of white officials and magis-
trates. Something—perhaps much, perhaps little—is done for the
native; nothing is left to be done by him, or in his own way.
Such a mode of treatment I hold not only to be rash and un-
wise, but, where a native population greatly outnumbers the
whites, to be also attended with no inconsiderable danger. Even
where the settlers are too strong to be resisted with success,
such a policy may lead to collisions; while at best the natives,


bewildered and depressed, deprived of all interest and object in
life, sink into indolence, apathy, and vice, and, exposed almost
without any safeguard to snares and temptations innumerable,
they lose position, property, self-respect, and health, and perish
from off the face of the earth.
It is manifest that the more the native polity is retained,
native agency employed, and changes avoided, until naturally and
spontaneously called for, the less likely are these results to follow.
But it is not enough to abstain from seeking hastily to replace
native institutions by unreal imitations of European models.
The moral sense of a semicivilised race is often very unlike
our own, but is not on that account the less real; and it would
be a great mistake to suppose that it does not exercise a most
powerful influence upon thought and action. A native may
suffer very patiently what we should deem a grievous wrong,
because to him it would not present the same intolerable appear-
ance ; but if rights really cherished by him be touched, if his
moral sense be shocked, or his honour seriously wounded, it may
be doubted whether he will ever again entertain any belief in
the justice of those who have, as he conceives, wronged him,
respect those who have shown, what seems to him, moral weak-
ness, or forgive the insult he has received. Severity he can
pardon, and perhaps admire; some things which an European
coilld not forgive, (blows, for instance, or an imputation of false-
hood,) he may take with indifference and easily condone; but
there are offences the effects of which are indelible, and wherever
white and native races meet, such offences are sure to be com-
mitted, partly in careless indifference, and as frequently through
well-meant blundering. It is therefore of the utmost importance
to seize, if possible, the spirit in which native institutions have
been framed, and endeavour so to work them as to develop to the
utmost possible extent the latent capacities of the people for the
management of their own affairs, without exciting their suspicion
or destroying their self-respect.
Of course the application of these principles must vary
greatly according to the capacities and condition of the people
with whom we are called on to deal. No one would dream of
placing on one level the acute and cultivated Hindoo or Cingalese
and the wandering and naked savage of the Australian bush.
The Fijian resembles neither; but he has more affinity with the
former than the latter. He has not, indeed, the literature, the
art, the culture, and luxury of eastern civilisation, but he has in
many ways advanced beyond the ruder stages of savage life, and
possesses those receptive powers which fit him for far higher
social and intellectual advancement.


The people are not nomadic ; they live a settled life in towns
of good and comfortable houses; they respect and follow agri-
culture ; their social and political organisation is complex ; they
amass property, and have laws for its descent; their land tenures
are elaborate; they read, they write and cypher. Women are
respected, hold a high social position, and are exempt from agri-
cultural labour. There is a school in almost every village.
Their Chiefs possess accounts at the bank, conduct correspond-
ence, and generally exhibit capacities for a higher grade of
civilisation. On the whole I should class them in their present
condition with the Hovas of Madagascar, whom in many respects
they much resemble. Like them, the Fijians all profess an at
least nominal allegiance to Christianity, and that it has largely
influenced the life and character of great masses of the population
not the most incredulous can, I think, deny. Like the Hovas,
too, they have shown a gradual progress, which is, in my estima-
tion, of far more hopeful augury than a rapid imitativeness of
unfamiliar habits.
I came therefore to the conclusion that the wisest course to j
pursue would be to preserve as far as possible the existing native
organisation of village communities, to uphold the authority of the'
Chiefs and local councils, and generally to maintain existing native
laws and customs, modifying them where necessary, but working, 1
them mainly through native agency.
The search for those who shared these principles and would
work in their spirit was, however, a thankless one. Few under-
stood at all what was meant, and of those who did, fewer still
sympathised with me. To a large number of settlers the natives
were simply encumbrances to be cleared off* the face of the land
as rapidly as possible, and by any means which could be decently
adopted. Even officials of high rank, fresh from home, were
inclined to object to restrictions on the liquor traffic, which, if
unchecked, would serve the double purpose of raising the revenue
and rapidly diminishing the native population. Among those
who took a more generous view and realty wished well to the
natives, what was aimed at was usually to “ raise ” them by a
forced and unreal affectation of European ways and habits, and
the replacement of all native law and custom by those of Europe.
The lawyers were special sinners in this latter respect, and my
policy of keeping up native institutions, native law, and native
authority had no stronger opponents than the Chief-Justice and
the Attorney-General. The former was in some degree held in
check by the positive instructions I had procured from the
Colonial Office as to the adoption of some of the measures he
thought most objectionable. The latter was restrained by no


such considerations. He told people that the Attorney-General
at the Straits had gained promotion and credit by systematic
opposition to the Governor, and that he contemplated advancing
himself by similar means.
The next question to consider was the principle by which I
was to be guided in dealing with the subject of native taxation.
Forming, as they do, ninety-nine hundredths of the in-
habitants of the colony; causing, as they do, a large part of
its expenditure on police, administration of justice, etc., it is
only right that the native population should contribute, and
that in no inconsiderable measure, to defray expenses incurred
for their protection and on their behalf. The mode in which
such contribution may best be made is, however, by no means
easy of determination. To the ordinary sources of revenue the
natives pay comparatively little. With the exception of cloth and
cutlery, of which large quantities are bought by them, they use
few articles on which customs duties are levied. They do not
consume spirits, they do not take out licences, and they have no
need of stamps. Any impost upon them must, therefore, to be
productive, be one of a special character.
The tax imposed on natives by Cakobau’s Government was
an uniform poll-tax of £1 per man and 4s. per woman,
throughout the group. I, however, find it difficult, and indeed
impossible, to suppose that revenue was the object contemplated
in the imposition of this tax, or that its payment was ever
seriously looked for. If any such expectations existed, they
were doomed to disappointment. The largest sum ever obtained
in any one year from a population of, at that time, certainly not
less than 150,000, was £6OOO, and of this sum a large part
was not, in fact, received from natives as payment of their
tax, or indeed from the natives at all, but from white men as
payment to the Government for the services of natives assigned
to them as labourers by way of punishment.
I believe that the main design of the native poll-tax, when
first imposed, and as it existed on the arrival of the British
Commissioners in Fiji in 1874, was that of furnishing through
its instrumentality a large supply of labour to the plantations of
the white settlers. And in this respect it no doubt worked
successfully. The unknown consequences of disobedience to the
order of the “ Matanitu ” (the equivalent of the Indian “ Sircar ”)
exercised a mysterious terror over the minds of the natives,
which induced them in many cases, in consideration of the
advance of their taxes on the part of a planter, to contract
with him for a year or more of gratuitous service. These,
however, were of course the exceptions. In the majority
CHAP.


of cases, the tax was simply not paid, and could not be
paid. When this happened the legal penalty for default was
six months’ imprisonment, which was spent in labour on the
plantation of any settler who would pay to the Government the
amount of the defaulter’s tax. But, though six months was the
limit allowed by law for such assignment, the magistrates of
that day were not very scrupulous in their reading of the Act,
and sentences of a year, and even eighteen months, seem to have
been pronounced; while by the imposition of heavy costs, and
the assumption that the default of their payment might be
similarly punished by “ imprisonment on a plantation,” even
these periods were almost indefinitely extended.
A faint glimpse, and but a faint glimpse, of the working of
this system is given by some of the enclosures to Sir H.
Robinson’s despatch of the 16th of October, 1874, printed at
page 6of the Blue Book laid before Parliament in 1875. The
more search I made into the records of that time, and the
better I became acquainted with their contents, the darker did
that period appear to me. lin vain endeavoured to obtain
accurate statistics of the numbers torn from their homes and
consigned to servitude under the operation of this law, but its
effects were sufficiently visible. Whole districts had been well-
nigh depopulated, and the reckless deportation of the male
inhabitants had left two formerly fine provinces almost deprived
of cultivators. The memory of these times is terrible to the native
population, and any step which might seem to be in the direction
of renewing them is to be profoundly deprecated.
I should add, that the amount paid by planters to Govern-
ment for these assignments of labour appeared under the head of
native taxes, as did also, of course, those to which I have
previously referred, where the payment was made by the native,
though advanced to him by the planter.
With these deductions, the amount of tax actually paid by
natives themselves becomes very small; but even of this small
amount a large portion was in fact actually paid in kind, the
articles taken being estimated at a low valuation, or, as I was
particularly informed by the late Commodore Goodenough,
invariably at a third or fourth of their proper value.
Sir H. Robinson felt strongly the impossibility of maintain-
ing such a system, which he rightly described as one by which
the services of the entire male population of whole districts had
been in effect sold to European planters in other and distant
islands. He at once abolished it, and substituted an arrange-
ment by which all but adult males were excused from taxation,
and the tax of these men fixed at twenty days’ labour in the


year, redeemable by money payments of various amounts, accord-
ing to the supposed wealth, or poverty, of the district in which
they lived.
Sir H. Robinson, I fancy, imagined that redemption in
money of the obligation to labour would be generally resorted
to, and at first, while the population remained under the im-
pression that a money poll-tax still continued to be exacted by
the Government, this was to some degree the case; but, as a
better knowledge of their liabilities spread, and especially after
it was found that the redemption payment could not, as hereto-
fore, be made in kind, there arose a disposition to claim the
right of discharging the obligation by three weeks’ labour.
This, therefore, was the problem which I had presented to
me : —Should I continue the labour-tax of 1874; should I re-
enact and attempt to enforce the direct tax in money of the old
Fijian Government; or should I endeavour to provide some
substitute for the existing system which should bring larger
returns to the treasury, and yet be neither oppressive, nor
opposed to the traditionary habits and feelings of the people ?
The labour-tax in its existing form was clearly unsustainable.
It was impossible to transport the whole population for twenty
days to those places where public works were being carried on.
Such places were few, and in most districts of the colony there
were really no public works on which the inhabitants could be
employed. In such cases, either works have to be invented which
are not needed, and which lead to an employment—(or rather a
waste) —of labour in no way beneficial to the colony, as well as
an expense of supervision wholly thrown away, or the tax must
be quietly permitted to fall into disuse.
The practical alternative, therefore, was the renewal of the
poll-tax of the old Fijian Government, or the substitution of
some as yet untried system.
I have already mentioned some of the reasons which rendered
a return to the poll-tax of former times impolitic and objection-
able ; but even if it were not associated in the minds of the
natives with ideas of tyranny and misrule, and were as efficient,
as it proved, in fact, an inefficient agent in the production of
revenue, I should still think it open to objections which would
be in my mind fatal to it. They are: —
1. Its literal equality, but substantial inequality of incidence,
the greatest Chief and the poorest servant, the strongest youth
and the feeblest elder, all paying alike.
2. The facilities it affords for corruption. The native col-
lectors were necessarily, for the most part, natives of inferior
rank—constables, or less; and the instances of favouritism on
CHAP.


the one hand, and oppression on the other, of which they were
guilty, were, I have every reason to believe, countless.
3. Its individuality; which I think one of its greatest faults
as a system of native taxation. Among natives, the individual
invariably acts as part of a family or village, and the traditional
feeling of centuries will only slowly change under the influence
of altered times and manners. As yet, no alteration has taken
place in this respect, and it is necessary to accept the fact, deal
with it as we may.
4. The abuses to which it was liable as an engine for
forcing men into involuntary servitude, to which some allusion
has been already made.
5. The impossibility of practically enforcing it. There are
limits to the power of a government to inflict punishment, and
if, as would often have happened, whole districts had failed to
pay, it would have been impossible to commit the inhabitants
en masse to prison.
But, if the idea of re-enacting a poll-tax be abandoned, no
other direct money tax could be imposed. In fact, there is a
species of absurdity in the imposition of pecuniary taxation on
a population, nine-tenths of which possess no money. I know
it has been said that if they do not possess money, they, at least,
might all become possessed of it by engaging to work for planters.
I confess lam unable to see the force of this assumption. The
ordinary wages given by a planter to an able-bodied man, were,
in 1875, Is. a week, or £2 12s. per annum. This is a small
sum from which to pay a tax ranging from <£l downwards, even
if the wages be paid in money, and not, as was invariably the
case, in “ trade,” of often questionable value. Whether it is to
the native’s advantage to leave his taro patch and yam planta-
tions, his own village, his generally comfortable home and his
family, to work on some distant estate for 525. a year, may be
questioned, nor do I think he can reasonably be expected to do
so, except under strong compulsion.
But if a money-tax be not enforced, all that remains is the
alternative of contributions in produce, or the performance of
gratuitous services. Either of these aids to Government would
have been in accordance with the habits and usages of the people,
but there are obvious reasons why the Tatter should, if possible,
be avoided.
The payment of taxes in money is of course generally pre-
ferable to their payment in kind; but payment in money being
in Fiji impracticable, the real question in this case was between
payment in kind and payment in labour, if any payment were to
be made at all. Payment in labour was a course open to so


many objections, that the idea of it was at once and altogether
set aside by me.
Although taxation in money is generally preferable, and
taxation in kind unusual, the latter is by no means unknown or
unprecedented in a British possession. The late Earl Grey,
no mean authority (and one who, by the way, was perfectly
aware that, in semi-civilised communities, “ taxation may be
more easily and justly levied in the shape of tribute from the
tribe, than in that of taxes due from individuals ”), once wrote
as follows to Sir Harry Smith; “ The most convenient form of
imposing a land tax in a rude state of society, I believe to be
that of requiring from all who cultivate the soil, a tithe, or some
fixed proportion of the produce, as their contribution towards
the public expenditure. This is a mode of raising a revenue for
public purposes, which seems to have been the first adopted by
mankind in the earliest stages of civilisation, and to have pre-
vailed generally among all nations in the remotest periods of
which we know anything from history, while in Asia it continues
to the present day to be almost universal. It is also a mode of
taxation which, in any early stage of civilisation, when money is
scarce, and when little capital has been invested in land, seems
to be the least burdensome that can be had recourse to, though,
in a more advanced state of society, it is the reverse.”
In the soundness of the principle of these remarks I entirely
concur.
After much consideration, I came to the following con-
clusions :
1. That the taxation of natives, to be effective, must be of
the nature of a land tax, or corn rent, levied on the district or
village, rather than on individuals.
2. That while such a tax could not at present be obtained
in money without the exercise of gross oppression, a tax of pro-
duce could be easily raised, with the best possible pecuniary
results, and with the yet greater advantage of stimulating
native industry, and largely increasing the native trade in
the group.
3. That it would be undesirable that the Government should
take part in any complicated trading operations or commercial
dealings.
A third question was that of native indebtedness. It has
been the practice of some traders to allow natives to remain
habitually and largely in debt to them, on account of the indirect
advantages they were able to exact through the control they thus
exercised.
The results of this were most pernicious, both politically and
204
FIJI
CHAP.


socially. Politically, it was mischievous, inasmuch as it tended
to render the great chiefs, holding office under the Government,
far less servants of the Crown than servants of the trader to
whom they were in debt. The Crown could but dismiss them.
The trader could both ruin and imprison them; and they natur-
ally feared and obeyed him most who had the greatest power to
injure them. The threat of being “ brought to Court,” if the
trader’s wishes or caprices were not complied with, has, I have
no doubt, led not only to great neglect of orders from the
Government, but to much active oppression.
Socially, the indebtedness of the common people, throwing
them completely under the control of the trader, has produced,
as it must produce, great evils; reducing them sometimes to a
condition which really does bear some analogy to slavery. In
one village, the whole population under the burden of old debts
to a trader, was compelled to work for him gratuitously when-
ever and as he chose, with an entire disregard of their own
interests or convenience; and in this case the villagers, to avoid
legal proceedings being taken against them, were ready to take
any steps and make any compliance directed by the creditor.
No doubt other similar cases existed.
On this point I had no doubt, and passed an Ordinance at the
first meeting of the Legislative Council, which referred all past
debts to a Commission, whilst I took time to consider the measure
which should be prepared with regard to future ones.
I will now return to the entries in my diary.
Monday , September 6.— lnterviews. — Mr. W. Scott —Wants to
be paid advocate of natives in the Supreme Court. Is strong
for Levuka as capital—naturally.
Mr. 11. S. Thompson and Mr. G. R. Humphrey , partners, from
Navua—Live on the river above Deuba Island. Not wholly
prepossessing. Say the people about them are a troublesome
lot. Perhaps they themselves also are troublesome.
Mr. H. Surplice —P.P.C.
Mr. P. S. Friend —Thanks, etc., for magistracy.
Hamilton Hunter —Much the same.
G. F. Pickering —Wants to be stenographer or law reporter.
Mr. G. Holmes , North Tavuini—Complains of Tui Cakau’s
men, and wants a white policeman.
Mr. Ernest Logan , South Tavuini—Says ditto, ditto. Also
asks about Fijian labour.
Mr. A. Taylor —l like the man and have made him magistrate
accordingly.
Mr. Peat, Udu Point —Wants licence to get line labour.


Complains much of the troublesomeness of the natives who, he
says, steal his cocoa-nuts and spear his landlord’s, Mr. Tempest’s,
cattle. Would revive tiempo pasado. “Supposed,” with an
evident hope of being reassured and contradicted, that he
“ mustn’t shoot niggers now, if they came along trespassing ? ”
I said, “ Certainly not, unless he had a desire to be hanged.”
Mr. Hill , of Rambi—Free trade.
Mr. Miller , Navua—Retired officer. A gentleman, but a
drunkard.
Brodziak , Kadavu.
Payne —Gave me information about forged land deeds, etc.
Postmaster incompetent.
Parsons , Vanua Levu—Rather like him.
Tuesday , September 7. —Have just had Maafu and Tui Bua to
dinner. The only other guests were Wilkinson and Thomas.
It was a very interesting and amusing affair. Both of the Chiefs
behaved perfectly, with ease and good breeding, and conversed
freely enough. Balolo, —sandal wood, —horses, —volcanoes, —
earthquakes,—sequence of trees on burnt lands, —tambuas, 1 —
were the chief topics of talk. When forest is burnt one of the
soft woods comes up. If (?) it is good land. If nokonoko it is
bad. In old days, if an earthquake came on whilst a Solevu
was in preparation, the food was all considered appropriated
by Degei and carried to his temple. Earthquakes frequent in
Bua—almost weekly, certainly monthly. Maafu planted some
sandal wood in sandy soil at Loma Loma. It is growing well.
iTabuas worn by elders in Tonga and by mata-ni-vanuas here—
tabua first brought Maafu when a lad to Fiji. Tui Bua is
however the more interesting of the two men. Dressed in a
square cap and rochet he would look just like a Spanish
Inquisitor. I praised his son Tui Kubulau to him and this led
to a curious family history. One of his sons was sentenced
to imprisonment. His father declined to remit his punish-
ment and the boy committed suicide. Tui Kubulau obeys
his father’s precepts strictly, and not only never drinks spirits,
but never even touches the native yaqona, though he is often
engaged in mixing it for us.
Wednesday , September B.—Had a meeting of the Legislative
Council and passed the Deportation Ordinance. This Ordinance
empowers the Governor to prohibit any one from being in any
particular district, to remove him thence by force if necessary,
and imprison him. Afterwards spent a good deal of time in
seeing Chiefs assembled here en route to Bau for the approaching
1 Whales’ teeth.


ceremony. Ilaitia, Tevita, Ului Lakeba—Manumanu ni Yudi
—Malaki of Moala—and Maafi of Loma Loma were among
those who made most impression on me.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, September 10, 1875.—My Lord— l have the honour to
transmit for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation an Ordinance
‘ ‘ To provide for the adjudication of certain claims between divers Europeans
and Natives in the Colony of Fiji.”
2. My attention and that of the Executive Council was called to the
subject of the liabilities of the native chiefs by a memorandum of Mr.
Thurston, of which I have the honour to enclose a copy.
3. In this memorandum the fact is pointed out that, under the ordinary
operation of the law now brought into force, amounts will be recoverable
without trouble or difficulty which would not have been so recoverable under
the condition of things in which the liabilities were incurred, that this risk
was at least fully taken into account in the original transaction, and that a
large part of the claims which may thus be enforced are altogether inequitable,
that in others the amounts are very different from what they would have been
had not the uncertainty as to the time of payment been taken into account,
and that if those even which are just are harshly and immediately pressed,
the majority of the greater chiefs will be wholly ruined, or become dependants
on one or two money-lenders. In either case they would be thus rendered
useless as assistants in settling or ruling the country.
4. It was unanimously resolved by the Executive Council that it was both
just and politic that the arbitrary enforcement of these claims should be
restrained by their reference to the consideration of a Commission, by which
such claims, when unjust, should be disallowed, when excessive, reduced to a
reasonable amount; and by which, when the claims themselves were admitted
to be just, arrangements should be made for their being met in such a manner
and at such times as should not altogether cripple the native debtor. In this
decision the Chief-Justice, who attended the meeting of the Council, fully
concurred.
5. The present Ordinance providing for the appointment of a Commission
to arbitrate with respect to such claims, and restraining for one year all
actions at law with respect to them, was accordingly passed by the Legislative
Council without a dissentient voice, and I have now the honour to recommend
its confirmation.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, September 10, 1875. —My Lord—A short time ago a report
reached Levuka to the effect that the mountaineers of the interior had
descended on the property of a Mr. Fitzgerald (whose name has already been,
not very favourably, brought before your Lordship) 1 and that his house had
been burnt by them.
2. Mr. Fitzgerald’s story is enclosed.
1 Lord Carnarvon had written to me to make inquiries into an alleged
case of manslaughter of a half-caste girl by Major and Mrs. Fitzgerald, and I
had replied that inquiry was, for several reasons which I gave, useless.


3. There was of course an immediate question of the organisation of an
expedition to revenge the supposed raid, but fortunately the Ba settlers waited
for the Government to act instead of taking up arms themselves, as they would
undoubtedly have done a few years ago. The Roko Tui Ba, the native
governor of the district, made an investigation immediately after the fire, and
reported that, although the day had been wet, no traces of footmarks in the
mud, or of the passage of men through the bushes could be found.
4. Finally, on an investigation being held by the Stipendiary Magistrate,
it was made pretty clear that Mr. Fitzgerald, after removing the bulk of his
property to another house owned by him lower down the river, had himself
set fire to the buildings. I enclose.extracts from these proceedings.
5. Your Lordship will no doubt see the full atrocity of this action, which
was well calculated to throw the whole country into confusion. Mr. Fitz-
gerald’s object, of course, was twofold: first, to obtain compensation from
Government for property supposed to be destroyed, as he would have alleged,
through their failure to afford him sufficient protection ; secondly, to involve
the settlers and the mountain tribes in hostilities, from which he hoped to
profit both as settler and soldier, —as a settler because it would lead to the
confiscation of land, and the clearing away of all doubts as to his ownership of
that of which he is now in occupation, whilst as an old soldier he looked for
employment and emolument in a “ mountain war.”
6. A slight inclination to “punish the natives” manifested itself ; but it
is to the credit of the Ba settlers that after the first movement of surprise
they showed themselves very incredulous of Mr. Fitzgerald’s romance.
7. A charge of arson which the Stipendiary Magistrate directed to be
brought against Mr. Fitzgerald could not of course be sustained, the property
being his own and uninsured. He has now been indicted for perjury, but Ido
not anticipate his conviction.
Thursday , September 9.—Went to Ban in my new boat with
the Baron and Knollys, the rest of the staff going ahead to be
ready to receive us. It was a pleasant voyage —the sea studded
with boats and canoes taking down the Chiefs from Driemba and
other native spectators of the impending ceremony. Adi Kuila
passed us at a little distance in a large double canoe going at a
great pace, drums beating, and attendants sitting on deck before
her, showing how high a position ladies occupy. We stopped
at Leluvia, Jack Castle’s island. He is a splendid figure of a
man, hard as iron, and his blue eye and complexion clear as light.
Glorious view of the Tailevu and interior mountains. Bau
picturesque. Much of the island is faced by large stone slabs
set upright like tombstones, which form a sort of retaining wall or
quay. The Yunivalu took my hand and led me by it through the
broad tree-bordered streets of Bau, between ranks of crouching
and silent people dressed in their best. Mats had been laid down
for me to walk on. On reaching Cakobau’s big house we found
Adi Lytia, a large stately woman, awaiting us. The VunivahiT
lectured on religion and sobriety, and denounced Tui CakauJ


Roko Tui Dreketi, and the Vunivalu of Rewa as backsliders.
Went to Webb’s house on the hill to sleep. Cakobau and Adi
Lytia dined with us. He joked the Baron on his escape from
being eaten. The new boat answers perfectly.
Friday , September 10.—Bau, as seen from the hill on which
Webb’s house stands, is very picturesque and striking. The
small island consists of a central hill, with at its foot a circle of
perfectly flat land round it. On this flat ring of land the town
is built. On the hill there are no houses except the mission
house. I sent for the Vunivalu. My messengers found him j
lecturing the assembled Chiefs, who were seated in a ring
before him—the proud Tui Cakau hanging down his headj
like a whipped schoolboy. When he received my summons 1
he told Tui Bua to take up the thread of his discourse till his
return, and came to impress on me the same things about the
Chiefs.
All the morning the folks were busy putting up mat awnings
in the rara and arranging thick layers of fine mats for the Chiefs
to sit on. From our hill we had a complete view of all that
was going on below, and indeed a bird’s-eye view of the whole
town. It was most fascinating to watch the proceedings of the
assembled crowd and the workmen. As the day drew on, the
working garments of the morning more and more gave place to
brilliant white sulus and clean white shirts, and before 3 P.M.
the rara was filled with an immense crowd, the men mostly in
this attire, the women in bright coloured pinafoas, red, blue, or
yellow, and covered with garlands of strong-scented flowers.
On a little eminence, on which the Ulu i vuaka, the great recep-
tion-house, over 100 feet long, formerly stood, (it was burned
down six weeks ago), Adi Lytia, with her ladies, servants, and
attendants, had established herself to see the show. At half-
past three the meeting took place. It was not very picturesque,
but it was very impressive and real. What struck me most was
the buzz of excited whispers after I had finished drinking and
the salutation has subsided. Carew read my speech. The Chiefs”!
then took the oath and received their staves of office—very long*
stout poles of vesi headed and ornamented with whale’s-tooth ivory. F
Each took the oath with his hands in mine, seated in the attitude!
of respect before me, and then, while still holding their hands J
I delivered to each a short but grave admonition.
Later I walked about Bau with the Baron. One specially
picturesque house on a pile of old stones under big trees. Small
though the island is, the town has curiously the air of a capital.
It looks now less picturesque than usual, having been all tidied
up lately in my honour, to the great detriment of creepers,
P


moss, wild flowers, and all the adjuncts which soften newness,
rawness, and ugliness. Ratu Abel’s double canoe a fine bit of
naval architecture.
The Governor’s Address to the Chiefs at the Installation
Meeting at Bah
Chiefs now assembled —
At Levuka last week I read my commission, that is to say, the letter of
the Queen of Great Britain appointing me as Governor of Fiji.
You are now present; you have acknowledged me after the customs of
Fiji to-day as ruler of the country ; you have promised to obey me in all
matters.
I have called you to this meeting in order that we might consult about
the country, and that it might be clear what customs shall be lawful and
what forbidden.
In former times nothing was stable, but the foundation of the building
we are now about to erect shall be firm and strong.
The reason why I have not spoken before at Ovalau, was because I intend
that we shall work steadily and quietly, as one would in travelling over a
rough road. I have called you in order that you should tell me your true
minds ; do not be deaf to my requests ; tell me this day the whole of your
ideas with reference to the work of the country ; my eyes shall always be
upon you.
The laws of the country may be compared to a net of very fine meshes,
nothing can escape ; it will cover over all alike.
Obey the laws, every one of you. You the Chiefs, you are the Chiefs of
the people ; but I again am the ruler of you the Chiefs. Let there be no
vain excuses ; let scheming practices be for ever abandoned.
I now wish to make some statements. Chiefs, like me, never tell false-
hoods ;itis a most un-chief-like practice ; all that I tell you shall be perfectly
true. The ownership of your own lands is with you, it shall not be taken
from you ; but if you wish to give away or to sell land, it shall be decided
by me whether or not it be sold. I remember the words of the Yunivalu af
the time Fiji was offered to Great Britain. He said, “We are being eaten nJ'
daily ” ; now I have come to prevent this.
Some time ago Fiji was offered to Great Britain on account of its being
burthened with debt, also it was in great difficulties in many ways in those
days ; but Great Britain refused to accept it.
Afterwards Fiji was again offered to Great Britain, who then accepted it,
but the Queen did not really wish to annex Fiji; at that time it was accepted
unwillingly, but the Queen believed it would be right to do so, remembering
the words of the Yunivalu, “Lest the stalkers about on the coasts of the
country eat us up.”
The Queen, in her all-loving heart, did not wish that the words of the
Yunivalu should prove true; she also disliked much her subjects living
without law and order, and each doing what seemed good to him.
On account of these reasons the offer of annexation was accepted, and in
order that you should be cared for and led into the proper path. When we
compare Fiji with many other countries, it is but a small place after all ;
nevertheless, a Chief of rank in Great Britain has been appointed to govern


Fiji; but if a Chief of less rank, and but little known, had been appointed,
it would still have been your duty to respect and to obey him.
Now, Chiefs, you must know that the great Queen has sent me to govern
Fiji; but in governing Fiji I shall not act with oppression, or in an unbe-
coming manner. I shall make all necessary laws for you the natives, and
also laws relating solely to the whites ; the laws shall be printed soon. Do
you have a little patience.
Any useful native customs shall be retained, but improper customs let
them be given up : nevertheless I do not intend to make sudden changes,
I shall govern the country in a spirit of justice and mercy, for you must
know that laws are necessary ; a country without laws would be in a pitiable
condition.
The great Queen has taken you to befriend you, and to protect you, for,
Chiefs, you know that you could not of yourselves have prevented covetously-
disposed persons from taking your land.
Now listen to this. The very first law I have made is one forbidding
you from selling or leasing land, and forbidding white men to buy it of you,
without my permission ; it may only be sold or leased after my permission
has been first obtained. If any person shall disobey this law he cannot obtain
the land ; his agreement with the owner of the land shall be of no avail.
Now, then, let there be an end of murder and cannibalism : compelling
women to marry against their will is a very great evil; it leads to adultery
and to many other great crimes.
Chiefs, I now ask you, I ask all men, do you give me your assistance in
this great, this useful labour ; as Chiefs, let playing at cross purposes cease.
Also, I do not intend to detract from the respect due to the Chiefs by the
lower orders. I believe it to be a most proper thing that we should all of us
pay due respect to those above us ; let the people continue to pay respect to
their Chiefs.
But, Chiefs, on the other hand, do you be just to the people ; do not op-
press them ; if you act harshly to them will you gain the respect of others ?
I will now say a few words about lala. Do you consult together, and
come to some agreement amongst yourselves and let me know this day your
minds on this subject; tell me what lala you wish to retain, and what
you are willing to abandon.
Levy food for yourselves, and for travellers, also house-building, and the
planting of the Chief s food, but upon no account make levies out of your
own individual districts ; if any one shall act in an oppressive manner, or
take property merely for the gratification of the moment, he shall be
punished ; improper and unfair lala , idling about and begging for property
merely to gratify idle longings, are all things tambu sara (most strictly
prohibited).
If any person shall resent unjust and improper lala, he may not be
punished for so doing, neither shall anything be done to the man who objects
to submit to it.
I again beg of you all to assist me to the utmost of your power in the
work of governing the country.
It is now proper that I should speak of some matters referring more
especially to yourselves.
I mean the jealousy and rivalry existing between you Fijian Chiefs.


They exist to a very great extent in Fiji, and are the origin of many and
great evils. Now, my good friends, let there be an end of these improper
practices. If a number of people are paddling together in the same canoe,
and some paddle forwards, and some paddle backwards, what will become of
the canoe and its people ?
Also I now wish to say something referring to the Magistrates I have
recently appointed. I have confidence in them ; if otherwise, I should not
have appointed them to their positions in the Courts of the country. I
believe them to be upright men, and of good conduct.
Now Chiefs, be wise, and give them every assistance, support them in
carrying out their work, and help them to the full extent of your ability. If
you should be perplexed or anxious of mind about matters of difficulty, ask
them to assist you and they will do so.
Also there are some whites in Fiji with whom it is quite impossible that
I could associate, or that I could agree with in the smallest matter. Now,
be good enough not to associate with them yourselves ; decide now whether
you will lean on me, or lean on them ; decide at once. Many people in Fiji
are saying : “ How is this ? There is no office of native affairs.” I now tell
you once for all, I have taken native affairs upon myself as my own task ;it
is my own individual task alone.
In the law all are equal, whether Chiefs or common people; and no matter
what appointment a man may hold under the Government, you must always
remember this, every one of you, that if any man is oppressed, or wronged
in any way, and it appears to him that he cannot obtain justice in the
Courts of his district, let that person come straight to me, or write to me at
Nasova. I will not treat his petition with indifference, and this I now most
faithfully grant and promise to all people,
I again ask you to give your assistance to the Magistrates, whether they
be whites or Fijians ; they will then respect you and assist you in a very
great many ways.
I now wish to tell you my intentions in the matter of governing the
country. Do you, the Roko Tuis, and you, the Bulis, never tire of travel-
ling about your districts ; as for you, the Bulis, if any sudden evil should
arise in your districts, write about it at once ; let a true register of births
and deaths be kept, and do not allow one to be unregistered ; also write and
report on all matters to the Roko Tuis. Now, as for you, the Roko Tuis, do
you write to me every month, but, if necessary, write to me at all seasons
and at all times.
Now, with reference to taxes, you must follow the old plan for a while
longer, but before long it shall be on an entirely different system ;in after
times it shall be as follows :—A piece of land shall be set apart in each district
and shall be called the “district plantation,” and I alone shall then decide
what shall be planted, and what shall be suitable to the district; and when
the produce is gathered it shall be all taken in to the Government for sale
by the owners, and I alone shall fix upon the price to be paid ; but if more
than sufficient be taken to the Government, it shall then be permitted to the
owners to sell the remainder at their pleasure ; also, there is something else
you must do, that is, the clearing and formation of roads ; any person dis-
liking road clearing, may pay money to the Government in lieu of his work.
I now tell you there are two things of paramount importance, that is,


activity and industry ; the Yunivalu has said “If the people do not work
they will die out,” and I am decidedly of the same opinion myself.
Now, with reference to the inland districts. It will be the task of the
Chiefs of tribes there, individually to govern their people, and some one shall
be appointed to live inland, to preside over the ruling of the interior, to
assist the Chiefs in carrying out the law, and to be their preceptor and
adviser in all matters. I intend to divide the interior from the coast
districts. I shall make the Government work of easy comprehension to the
people of the interior, and I shall give greater powers to the Commissioner I
intend to appoint than those possessed by the Magistrates on the sea coasts.
Now Chiefs, he whom I have appointed to the interior is known to you ;
it is not as though he had but just arrived in Fiji.
I now beg of you all, and most particularly those of you who have come
from Serua, and from Nadroga, do you give him every assistance in your
power ; I have confidence in him, and I now ask you to pay attention to his
counsels.
Now, one word to those of you who may be in difficulties through debt.
I have made a law preventing your being taken to Court for debt, and I in-
tend to appoint some gentleman to inquire into your affairs, and to look into
the justice of the claims against you, that you may rest in peace.
With reference to incompatible marriages and adultery, laws relating
thereto shall be made as soon as possible ; do you have patience for a little
while longer.
Now, in the matter of religion and schools, I shall not say much ; you
have your teachers who will set forth to you their advantages ; for my part
I think religion is of the greatest importance to us all, but you must not
thrust it on people against their wish.
Religion is a subject on which each must decide for himself; we shall
all be held individually responsible hereafter at the judgment seat of God.
In schools do not allow your children to absent themselves under any
pretext, and do you all respect and assist the teachers.
It is now right that I should now tell my mind with respect to the
Vunivalu ; in former days he was respected only in Fiji; in these days, he
is respected in all countries. He gave Fiji in order that his people might
rest in peace and plenty ; he did not consider his own interests.
For myself, I have the greatest respect for him ; it is my wish that he and
I should be of one mind, as one person in all things ; do you also respect him,
and go to him for assistance and advice.
I have now done ; do you take my words home to your minds, and may
the blessing of Heaven rest with you.
I have now concluded my address to you, the Chiefs.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasoya, Fiji, September 20,1875. — My Lord—shortly after my arrival here,
Cakobau (who has, on every occasion since the Cession, consistently shown tliel
utmost anxiety to confirm and strengthen the authority over the natives of the*
Government by which his own has been superseded) suggested that, after the!
public reading of my Commission, I should go through a ceremony which, he!
said, rarely took place, but which had been performed at his own inauguration ad


Vunivalu, and which, he assured me, would pledge all the Chiefs and people
to me as their feudal superior. This ceremony, I found, consisted in drink-
ing a bowl of yaqona in the presence of the Chiefs, whilst they saluted me
with their hands in the manner in which an inferior among the Fijians
salutes his chief when drinking.
2. After consulting those best acquainted with the natives, and having
been assured by them that the performance of the ceremony would undoubt-
edly afford me a great hold over both Chiefs and people, I consented to
Cakobau’s proposal, and, on the 11th instant, the ceremony took place at
Bau, a locality selected by me for its performance on account of its being the
ancient capital, the traditional headquarters in former times of cannibalism
and heathen superstitions, and a place still of so much importance that its
common people are regarded as Chiefs in other parts of the group.
3. Bau is a small island some twenty miles from Levuka, very near the
mainland of Yiti Levu and entirely covered with houses, which cluster
round a low hill in its midst. Its aspect, always picturesque, was rendered
doubly so on the occasion of my arrival, by the crowds assembled to witness
my landing. As I stepped from the boat in which I had sailed down from!
Levuka, Cakobau, after saluting me with the “tama,” or cry of respect, took!
me by the hand and led me, still holding it, through the streets of the towrul
We walked thus along a broad road, shaded in some places by trees, past the
sites of heathen temples, now destroyed, past the upright stones which mark
the ancient places of sacrifice, and at length reached the entrance of his own
residence. The way was lined by men and women in clean bright dresses, and
seated on the ground in perfect silence in the crouching attitude of Fijian respect.
4. On entering the house, I was conducted to the dais, Cakobau taking!
his own seat below me on the floor. An interesting conversation ensued, in I
which the Vunivalu very emphatically repeated many times, and I have no I
doubt with perfect sincerity, his satisfaction at the assumption of sovereigntyj
by Her Majesty, a satisfaction which he thought that the majority of the
Chiefs shared with himself, although they did not see so clearly the ad-
vantages of the change. He denounced by name, and more than once, two!
or three of the great Chiefs who led drunken and irregular lives, and
on the necessity of religion, morality, and sobriety in any one placed in
command, in a style which, his past history considered, was sufficiently sur-
prising, but was, I believe, thoroughly true and real.
5. Before I left, he asked permission to send the criers through the town,
announcing the ceremony of the next day, and they were so engaged until
far into the night.
6. The following morning the Vunivalu assembled all the high Chiefs,
and lectured them in their duties under the new state of things, their
ignorance, shortcomings, and foolish anticipations, after a fashion which
those who heard it describe as in the highest degree striking and effective.
7. In the afternoon the great Chiefs, to the number of about 200, took
their seats in a double row in a circle on mats placed on the ground, under
the shelter of a great awning of mat-sails, erected in the rara or public square
of Bau. Outside the awning were the townspeople and my native guard,
and at a little distance, on a small rise of ground, Cakobau’s wife, Adi Lytia,
with her family, ladies, and servants.
8. The yaqona having been made to the accompaniment of the usual


chaunting, was brought in a small bowl to Cakobau by a young Chief of high
rank, and by Cakobau handed to me, amid the profoundest silence. As I
began to drink, at Cakobau’s signal and himself leading, the assembly
the hand-clapping and shouts which imply acknowledgement of superior rank
and position, and on their cessation, as I ceased to drink, I was much struck
by the sudden momentary buzz of suppressed but excited conversation, which
contrasted strongly with the silence observed both before and subsequently.
9. The address, of which I inclose a copy and translation, was then read
in Fijian by Mr. Carew.
10. After this, I proceeded to administer the oath of allegiance to the
Queen to each of the ten Rokos, reappointing each, with one exception, to his
former Government by the delivery of a staff, accompanied by a few words of
admonition, with their hands placed within my own.
11. It was curious and interesting to watch them as each successively sat
before me, with the Bulis, or district Chiefs, of their respective provinces
seated behind them. There, somewhat ill at ease, in a place where, though
treated with much outward politeness, he is regarded with much bitterness
and ill-will, was Maafu the Tongan, the bold and ambitious foreigner who has
secured a master’s hold upon the half of Fiji, and there were others with
whose names I will not weary your lordship, but among whom ‘ ‘ the King of
the Reefs ” (Tui Thakau), with great awe of the oath upon his handsome
Assyrian face ; the wise and good Tui Bua, the most reflective man and best
governor I have met in Fiji, in countenance resembling a Spanish ecclesiastic
of the sixteenth century; and Na Cagi Levu, the energetic and large-limbed
Chief of Kandavu—were, perhaps, the most remarkable.
12. The ceremony concluded with the formal donation on my part of a
large present of cloth to the principal Chiefs, to be distributed subsequently,
and the presentation to me of an address from the native clergy of the district,
which, according to a promise made by me to them, I enclose to Your Lord-
ship in original, that Your Lordship may see how clear and good a hand-
writing that of a native Fijian may sometimes be.
13. Cakobau seemed much relieved and in much better spirits when the
whole affair was over. He had urged it with much persistence on some of
those present, from whom he had wrung but an unwilling acquiescence in its
performance, and who would fain have avoided any overt admission that they
had accepted a stranger for their master.
The fact of this reluctance justified Cakobau in having insisted on the
importance of the acknowledgment. None were at last absent whose presence
was of the slightest consequence, and the significance in the eyes of the native
population of the public act of homage rendered, not only, as on my first
arrival by Cakobau himself, on behalf of others, but by all the assembled
Chiefs, can hardly be overrated.
14. Cakobau declined to wear at this ceremony the vast train of tappa in |
which it was formerly his custom to appear on state occasions, saying that
“ the time for such things was past,” and appeared, as did nearly all the |
other Chiefs, in a long “Sulu,” of many folds of chiefs tappa a (light brown
with black spots,) reaching nearly to the feet, almost the only exceptions to
this costume being that of the native magistrates, and some of the Chiefs
from the Lau Islands, who wore black tappa, and the native Ministers, who
were for the most part dressed entirely in white.—l have, etc.


Saturday r, September 11. —Meeting at the Yunivalu’s. Admin-
istered justice to Ambrose—to Johnny Colata—to the sons of
Kitova—to Gagabokola—to Ratu Mundu Yabia—to Rio Tivitivi
—ordered the restoration of the people of Saheto to their town
and lands—and asked questions for subsequent answer.
After breakfast, a school meke was performed under the big
trees. Very pretty—Cakobau and Lytia sitting looking on from
the very spot where human sacrifices had been performed. Ratu
Abel’s little sons beautifully dressed, chiefly in deeply fringed
white tappa, with a great hunch behind, chest and arms bare,
with necklace and pendant ornament of red shells on the breast.
Some other very good costumes. The meke over, we crossed
to the mainland and so to Navuso by a fair road, distance about
twelve miles. On mounting a hill covered with short grass we
came, just at a place where the road entered a small wood, upon
thirty bare circular patches of earth, each about eighteen inches
in diameter, kept carefully weeded and shaped. These are
called the Tokatoka men’s heads, and are the places where the
baskets holding the heads of men killed by the Namata people
—not so very long ago—were set down to rest on the way
to Ban. Took shelter from the rain in a house at Koro
Damudamu, and again in the church at Verata, a little town
which has three deep concentric fighting ditches. At the former
village I saw a man with a sort of crown of bright blue and red
parrot’s feathers. The views in some places very pretty—wood,
water, sago-palms—and the roads tolerable. Many parrots
and pigeons in the woods we passed through. The former caw
like crows, and the latter bark like dogs. The river truly fine —
nearly as broad as the Rhine at Coblentz. Ferried over shortly
before sunset in a beautiful quiet evening light; banks on
each side some height above the water, then flat land swelling
gradually into hills; mountains in the western background.
Adi Kuila received us graciously. Fine house, beautifully clean,
about 100 feet long, on a raised platform some six feet from
the ground. She is very pleasant and clever. Evening prayers.
Sunday , September 12. —At Navuso. A short distance below
Adi Kuila’s house the little river Waimanu runs into the Rewa,
and at the confluence of the two the little town of Navuso is
built. Though now the land on both sides of the river is some
twenty feet or more above the level of the water, it is often
flooded in the rainy season. The only house that is never
reached is Adi Kuila’s, which is raised on a high platform of
rough stone. Went to church. Prostrating oneself on the tip
of one’s nose seems an odd way of praying. The order of service


was Hymn —Prayer —Lord’s Prayer—Hymn—Creed—Sermon,
and finally a very fluent and energetic prayer by Adi Kuila
herself. After church watched the people coming out, and then
went a short way up the river in my boat with my staff for a
crew. River very fine, and at some points very pretty. It
consists chiefly of long straight reaches and very sharp abrupt
turns. We returned to dinner at Adi Kuila’s. The house is an
extremely fine one —very lofty, beautifully matted, the mats
increasing in fineness from the great end door to the dais. Behind
the screen which crosses the house at the head of the dais is her
own room, thickly carpeted with the finest white mats and hung
with dainty muslin mosquito-nets. Had a long chat in the
evening. She is as to eyes and expression rather like Mrs.
Moody, and she reminds me a little of Lady Herbert. It was
pretty to see her teaching her little boy, “ the Great Shark ”
(Qio Levu), to say his prayers. A great air of repose and dignity
about the room altogether.
Monday , September 13.—During the minority of her son Ratu
Peni, Adi Kuila virtually rules the province of Naitasiri. She
was seated in the gate this morning lecturing the village elders
and some district Chiefs and giving orders, which these old
gentlemen seemed to receive with the greatest respect. Went
over to call on the Witherows, who seem to have a taste for
gardening. Have brought plants out of the forest, and stuck
them all about their house and grounds.
Down the river for some miles, calling on the way at a little
inn at a bend above an island. When we came near Rewa we
turned off into a narrower stream to the west, one of the in-
numerable branches which form the delta. We passed some
large villages and then came to a still narrower stream, opening
out of our second river, and forming a short cut into another
larger stream, another of the branches. The narrow connecting
cut is, I believe, an artificial canal, cut by the natives within the
last century. We landed at a settler’s (Morel’s) at this junction
for a short time, and then went rapidly down to Navuloa, the
great missionary college, where we were to spend the night. We
got there about six, and found all the students in white shirts
and sulus drawn up in two lines at the landing to receive us.
As all our party save me were shoeless and stockingless, as well
as coatless, (which we all were), we were hardly show figures.
We spent a dull evening with the Waterhouses, who received us
hospitably and kindly. The Baron’s pet bat.
Tuesday , September 14. —Went over the college with Water-
house, The buildings are well situated, and whoever selected


the site had good taste. The Principal’s house stands on a ridge
overlooking the river and perhaps 100 feet above it. To the
north, one looks over the sea towards Ovalau—a fine view; to the
west, one looks up the river and over the sea of forest intersected
by the numerous arms of the delta; to the east, one looks along
the ridge the house stands on, towards Kamba Point. To the
south, the land falls and rises again, and on a ridge a quarter of
a mile off, or rather more, stands a large and conspicuous church,
with long strings of white cowrie shells dependent from the.ends
of its ridge top, and a sort of big examination hall.
Near these are the houses and gardens of the students. I
should have thought this an arrangement which would have
involved difficulties as to discipline, but I suppose they know
their own business. Examined the school and spoke a few
words to the students. This, and Eichmond in Kadavu, are
the two great Wesleyan colleges in Fiji, and at one or other of
them, not only are the clerical students trained, but most of the
Chief’s sons are educated. After breakfast started for Ovalau,
We went round the north end of Moturiki, and reached Nasova
about eight, having only stopped an hour or two at Castle’s
en route for rest.
From the Attorney-General
Levuka, September 11,1875. —My dear Sir —I would feel obliged by your
informing me whether you wish me to sign a receipt for part of my pay or
for the whole.
Capt. Havelock objects to the accompanying altered form of acknow-
ledgment, and I object to signing the original form unless Your Excellency
requires me, as it- appears to me that by so doing I limit my full pay to £SOO
instead of £750, the amount you have informed me it now is.
To the Attorney-General
Nasova, September 15, 1875. —My dear Sir —I only received your note of
the 11th on my return here last night. You do not appear to understand
your present position as regards salary. It may, I think, be clearly explained
in a very few words. I received very precise and positive instructions from
the Secretary of State for the Colonies as to the amount of certain salaries in
Fiji. These instructions I have no power to alter, and by them the salary
of the Attorney-General is fixed at £SOO a year. That amount is therefore,
strictly and technically speaking, the full amount of your salary. But
when that salary was fixed, it was intended that you should take private
practice, and when you came to the conclusion that such practice was, in
the present situation of the Colony, incompatible with your position, it was
obvious to me that your salary must be raised. In transmitting to the
Secretary of State your letter pointing out the impossibility of your combining
private practice with that independence of position which it is essential that


the Attorney-General should maintain, I assumed the increase of your salary
as a matter of course, and suggested that £IOOO a year would not be too
much in the altered circumstances. The course ordinarily followed when an
increase of salary is recommended by a Governor is this : The holder of the
office continues to receive his old authorised salary until instructions are
received from home for its augmentation. These instructions fix (if the
augmentation suggested be approved of) whether the increase of salary shall
date from the receipt of the despatch, or from any earlier period. In the
latter case, the amount of augmentation due for the back period is paid in a
lump sum. In your case, I felt so sure that an augmentation would be
granted, and thought it so hard that you should at the outset of your career
here be deprived, without any compensation, of what had been regarded as a
part of your remuneration, that I told you that I would at once increase
your salary to the rate of £750 per annum at my own risk. This I have
done, by paying you out of my own pocket £2O :16 : 8 per mensem , in addi-
tion to your authorised salary. If your augmented salary is authorised as
from the date of your arrival here, I shall retain what I have advanced out
of its amount. If, on the contrary, it is only authorised for the future, I
shall only look to repayment when it may suit your own convenience. I
hope this explanation is sufficiently clear, but, as I understand that Captain
Havelock has already made you a similar explanation, I am not without
apprehension that I may fail to convey my meaning intelligibly. Put in
two lines, it amounts to this :
£SOO per annum is undoubtedly your present full official salary.
£250 per annum extra is advanced to you by me out of my own pocket
in anticipation of authority to increase that salary.
From Chief-Justice Sir W. Hackett
September 13, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur —Mr. Harman, Interpreter and
Judge’s Clerk in the Central Court, called on me on Saturday and asked me
what his position was, he having received »o intimation of any change in
his situation, except from the notification in the Gazette that Mr. Moore had
been appointed interpreter to the Supreme Court. I told him I was sorry I
could give him no information on the subject, and that I knew nothing
about Mr. Moore’s appointment until I saw it notified in the Gazette. It
was certainly awkward for a Judge to be obliged to confess that he knew
nothing about the appointments in his own Court, but it could not be helped.
I am not aware what reasons existed for appointing Mr. Moore Interpreter in
place of Mr. Harman, but, if I had been consulted in the matter, I should
not have thought it desirable to remove Mr. Harman except for good and
substantial reasons, more particularly as he has had considerable experience,
and was, I am informed, in the habit of acting as clerk in the absence of the
Registrar, Mr. Moore has had, I believe, no experience of the sort, and
would therefore be inefficient in that respect. I may mention that in my
experience as a Judge I have found it to be the general rule that no appoint-
ments should be made in the Court, except with the consent of the presid-
ing Judge. In most of the Charters of Justice, which it was formerly the
practice to grant, this was expressly provided, and in the Straits Supreme
Court Ordinance which was passed in 1873, it was provided that the number


of the Staff of the Court should be fixed by the presiding Judge, with the
concurrence of the Governor, and that the appointments should be made by
the Governor, subject to the approval of the Judge. These clauses were (for
the Ordinance received the Royal Assent) not inconsistent with the constitu-
tion of a Crown Colony, and at the same time they gave the Judges that
control over the staff and the appointments to the offices in the Court which
is necessary for the proper conduct of business. As far as I can judge at
present, I think that the staff of the Court should be composed somewhat
as follows : —A Registrar to discharge the duties performed by the superior
officers of the Courts of Common Law and Equity, an Interpreter who is also
to act as Clerk to the Registrar, a Sheriff to execute the process of the Court
and have the custody of prisoners, who might be renumerated either by fees
or by salary, the fees in the latter case to be paid into the Treasury, and
lastly a Judge’s Clerk, or Associate. For the latter office, if the salary
should not be too small for his acceptance, I should be glad to secure the
services of Mr. Hobday, of whom I wrote to you.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, September 15, 1875. —My dear Sir William —If, instead of living
at the extremest opposite ends of Levuka, we were in any greater degree of
propinquity, or if the to-be-wished-for sedan-chairs had as yet been intro-
duced, you would certainly not have any reason to complain of any indisposi-
tion on my part to consult you not only as to matters concerning your own
department, but almost all others also. In fact there are very few things
here with respect to which I should not wish to have the advantage of talk-
ing them over with you. At present, however, communication is so difficult
that, sine gravd causa, I am reluctant to drag you here in the daytime, and
to ask you to walk twice over the Levuka beach at night in order to dine
here would be no kindness. As regards the special case of Mr. Harman, I
have doubts as to the strict correctness of his denial that he had received
any intimation of his appointment except from the Gazette. I suppose he
means no official notification. The Central Court has been abolished, so has
the joint interpretership of the Central and Police Courts, and the junction
of the offices of Interpreter and Judge’s Clerk. There was no question that
Mr. Harman should be Judge’s Clerk, and the only question before me was
whether Mr. Harman should be appointed clerk to the Supreme Court or
to the Police Court. I thought it desirable that you should have the best
possible interpreter. Mr, Moore is a perfept master of the language, of which
Mr. Harman has only a comparatively inaccurate knowledge, and I had no
hesitation as to which was the fittest for the post. I do not think the
clerical assistance that Mr. Harman might at times render is for a moment
to be weighed against the advantage of having a really good and gram-
matical interpreter instead of a merely colloquial one. Moreover, as the
Registrar will have a Clerk, there is no need for the employment of the in-
terpreter in that capacity. I should like to speak to you before you finally
select Mr. Hobday, but I can do so to-morrow. Meanwhile I will not longer
detain Le Hunte. We have had a very pleasant and very successful trip
to Bau.


Thursday , September 16.—You will readily understand how
dreadfully shocked I was to receive yesterday evening the news
of the Commodore’s murder. Poor Mrs. Goodenough! It
makes me almost cry to think of her. So proud of her husband,
and looking so confidently for his return. How little I thought,—
or she either , —when I passed her in Government House garden on
my way to embark on board the Pearl , that she would never see
her husband alive again! And she can have had no sort of
preparation ; for, on the first sudden and unexpected appearance
of the ship, it must have been at once seen that her broad pennant
was half-mast high.
I had taken Havelock to bathe with me at Waitovu, and
was coming back from thence a little before sunset, when
we saw a steamer nearing the harbour. At first we hoped it
might be the Star of the South , now more than a fortnight over-
due, and which we greatly feared had gone to the bottom. We
soon, however, saw that it was the Emu from Auckland. Have-
lock, who had been with me in the boat, went home, saying some-
thing about sending me down some papers of which we had been
talking, and when, half an hour afterwards, I saw him returning
here, I thought lie was bringing them himself, and went towards
him across the rara saying how sorry I was that he should have
taken the trouble to come down again so late, for it was just
growing dusk. He then told me that the Emu had brought
dreadful news, and that the Commodore had been murdered!
At the first moment it was almost a relief, for I did not know
what the “ dreadful news” might be, but my sorrow is profound.
We were thoroughly like-minded on all matters connected with
these Colonies, and had become confidentially intimate as to
things and persons. It is not to be expected that he should
have a successor like him. But the loss is really a national
one.
A sitting of the Legislative Council had been fixed for to-
day, and I seized the opportunity to send down a message
expressing my feelings, and calling on the Members of Council
to express theirs. This subject of course mainly filled one’s
thoughts, but painfully preoccupied though we were, we managed
to do some useful business, and passed (which was what the
meeting had been called for) a very short but very important
Ordinance to the effect that “all conveyances, transfers, leases,
and all transactions whatsoever in land, or relating to any
interest therein, between natives and any persons not being
natives, are hereby expressly prohibited and declared to be
invalid, and it shall not be lawful to institute any proceedings
whatever in any court of law in respect thereof.”


Message to the Legislative Council
Arthur Gordon. —The Governor is confident that every Member of the
Legislative Council shares the deep sorrow with which His Excellency has
received intelligence of the death on the 20th ultimo of the late Commodore
James Goodenough, C. 8., C.M.G., Commanding Her Majesty’s Ships on the
Australian station.
Gifted with great natural ability, possessing an amount of general culture
rare among the members of a profession the arduous duties of which leave little
time for acquirements not directly connected with their discharge,—and com-
bining, in an unusual degree, largeness of view and gentleness of disposition
with restless energy and force of will, Commodore Goodenough was no ordinary
man, and a career of eminent distinction seemed clearly to lie before him.
Although not confounding the labour traffic with the abuses by which it
has been sometimes disgraced, Commodore Goodenough had a keen sense of
the evils inflicted under colour of it, to which he had himself been a witness,
and both felt and expresssed the strongest sympathy with the natives of
Polynesia.
Like Bishop Patteson, he has fallen by the hands of those whom he desired
to befriend : and like Bishop Patteson has but too probably been a victim of
the sins of other men who have as yet escaped all human punishment.
His public services, his intimate connection with the events which led to
the assumption of British Sovereignty over these islands, and the deep interest
he took in the welfare and development of the new colony, are known to all;
and the Board, His Excellency has no doubt, will desire to record its sense of
the loss which has been sustained by the Colony, —by the service, of which he
was a distinguished ornament, —by the British Nation, —and by the Queen.
Those only, however, can fully appreciate the magnitude of that loss, who,
like His Excellency, have had the advantage of Commodore Goodenough’s
close personal acquaintance, and know by how high a sense of duty, both to
God and man, every act of his public and private life was regulated,—By
Command, A. E. Havelock, Colonial Secretary.
To Mrs. Goodenough
Madam— l have been requested by the Legislative Council of this Colony
to forward to you copies of two Resolutions unanimously agreed to by that Body
on Thursday the 16th inst.
It is with a melancholy satisfaction that I acquit myself of a duty which
affords me the occasion of expressing my own sense of the loss which the nation
has sustained in the death of Commodore Goodenough, and which permits me
without impertinent intrusion to assure you, Madam, of my own deep and
respectful sympathy.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, September 20, 1875. —My dear Sir William —It has not been the
custom in any of the colonies over which I have presided that the Governor
should address any Civil Servant of the Crown otherwise than through the
Colonial Secretary, but I am quite willing to address you in any manner
most agreeable to yourself. Strictly speaking, if rigid official etiquette were


adhered to, your minute as to the officers of the Court should have been
replied to in the same form, i.e. that of a further annotation on the letter
forwarded. I am not clear in my own mind whether the power to depute
any one to administer oaths may not, in the case of official oaths, be limited
by some N.S.W. law in force here; but if you are satisfied on that point,
I will depute Captain Havelock to administer the oath. The- Commission
will be made out, but you are aware that the “seal of the Colony” is at
present only my own private seal. My thanks for your congratulations on
the arrival of my family. lam much puzzled to know where to stow them
away till the new rooms are finished. You will be glad to hear that the
Ordinances I was waiting for, and also instructions to appoint you to the
Legislative Council, have come by this mail. I have also received an
amended set of Royal instructions which require yet further amendment!
From Consul Layard
British Consulate, September 15, 1875.—Dear Sir Arthur—l have been
much pained to observe that Mr. Fraser, whom I selected to fill an important
post with the unanimous consent of the Council—should be entirely passed
over in the recent appointments, while the man who behaved so treacherously
to us, broke his oath of office, and was a notorious drunkard, should be em-
ployed. Other men also, of whom no one knows anything, are likewise
employed, and people’s tongues wag freely and their remarks come round to
my ears. I either did right or wrong in suspending Swanston. I either did
right or wrong in appointing Fraser, —and the selection by you of the one
and the rejection of the other, induces people to suppose that I was wrong.
The bandying about of petitions and memorials in favour of Swanston—how-
got up the vox populi plainly shows—also is made by a certain party to imply
a slur on me. To show you the value of these memorials, a J.P. and promi-
nent man signed it in my presence, with the following apology: “I don’t
mean to offend you—l know he behaved infamously ; but I hate Thurston
and he hates Thurston, and if he gets in, he will oppose him with all his
might! ” Of course I don’t mean in any way to fetter your course of
action, but I should be glad to learn at least that there was nothing against
him, and more than all that he had a chance of being employed. He is a
hard-working honest man, with two families depending on him. His taking
office under me completed his private ruin, if I may so express it, as he did
nothing to build and plant after the devastation of the hurricane. He is a
good scholar, speaks Fijian well, and I am sure would be a first-rate Govern-
ment servant. He has the good opinion of all that I know. He knows
nothing of this letter, which I hope you will consider strictly confidential,
and believe me again when I say I don’t wish to embarrass you by writing
it.
To Consul Layard
Nasova, September 20, 1875. —My dear Layard —I should have answered
your note sooner, but the dreadful news of Wednesday evening deprived me
of all heart to write letters the next day, since when I have been constantly
occupied.
1. I think you did right in suspending Mr. Swanston, and that indeed


you could not have done otherwise. I think that I have done equally right
in re-employing him, and in so doing, I have followed the advice of Sir H.
Robinson, the Commodore, and Mr, Thurston.
2. I cannot admit that Mr. Fraser’s appointment, described by yourself
as a purely temporary measure, pending the re-organisation, gave him any
right to hold the post permanently, nor has he any right to consider its
abolition as a “dismissal.” In the despatch in which you reported Mr,
Fraser’s temporary employment, you made what I consider the very wise
suggestion that the Native Affairs Department should, as a separate depart-
ment, be done away with. On that recommendation I have acted.
3. As respects Mr. Fraser’s future employment, I fear I can give you no
other answer than that which I have already given to Mr. Fraser himself, viz.
that his wishes will be borne in mind, but that no slur such as would be im-
plied by dismissal is implied by non-reappointment to an office, and, if possible
still less by the abolition of an office avowedly of a temporary character ;
that I cannot admit him to have any claim or grievance, and will make no
promise, and come under no engagement, respecting his future employment.
4. It is quite true that Captain Havelock, Mr. Mitchell, and some others
recently appointed, are unknown to the half-dozen quidnuncs who constitute
the “public” of Levuka. It is sufficient that they are known to me, and
that I, who am responsible for their appointment, know them to be fitted
for the duties they have been appointed to perform.
5. No petition or memorial in favour of Swanston has ever reached me.
6. That people’s tongues “wag freely ” is to me a matter of course—and
of supreme indifference. A small society always has some members who
delight in slander, and whose malicious and lying tongues do harm generally
in inverse proportion to the degree in which the gossips who own them are
known. I don’t suppose Levuka is an exception in this respect, or that it
lacks the usual proportion of mischievous busybodies.
7. You have not in the least degree “embarrassed” me, or “fettered my
course of action ” by your letter.
Now that my new boat is finished, I hope Mrs. Layard will accept the
loan of it sometimes “ for a drive.” Have you heard anything by this mail
as to your future ?
The Attorney-General to the Superintendent of Police
Attorney-General’s Office, September 17, 1875. —My dear Olive—l
have just witnessed a scene within a few yards of ray office, which I think you
should be informed of without delay. It was an English sailor being hustled
along on the shoulders of some native policemen. The man was evidently in
liquor, and was struggling violently. Altogether it was a very degrading
sight, and I cannot but help thinking it would have been better if it could
by any means have been avoided. It has made a very strong impression
upon me, and I am more than ever convinced that Europeans should not be
arrested unless by the orders and in the presence of a European constable, or
officer. As a matter of political expediency, indeed, I believe it to be most
unwise that natives should be permitted to imagine for a moment that they
are capable of exercising any control over the ruling race.
Trusting that you will see your way to making some reform in existing
regulations on this score, I am, etc.


Captain Olive to the Attorney-General l
Nasova, September 18,1875. —My dear De Ricci —I have received from the
constable in charge at Totoga a report of the case to which your note refers,
and this report I enclose.
I quite think with you that arrests of whites should, when possible, be
made by white constables; but to render this an invariable rule would, I fear,
be in many cases practically to give to any white man immunity for the
commission of any offence not committed in the presence of another white
man. I am, of course, most desirous to be guided by your advice and
opinion, and I should be glad to learn from you what you think the police,
when no white constable is within reach, ought to do in the following cases,
some of which have actually occurred, and all of which may occur. What
should be done:—lf an European is drunk, disorderly, and quarrelsome in
the public street, endangering the public peace and making use of language
disgusting to the occupants of houses in the neighbourhood ? If he assaults
an European woman in the street and she calls for assistance ? If he assaults
a Fijian woman in the same manner ? If, in the presence of the police, he
tries forcibly to enter a house, European or Fijian, contrary to the will of the
inmates ? If, in the presence of the police, he causes an obstruction of the
public thoroughfare, and refuses to move on when called on to do so ? If he
attempts to force a passage through, or entry into, some place to which access
is forbidden, and which is guarded by police ? If, in the presence of the
police, he commences or continues the destruction of private property ? If,
being unknown to the police, and to the person robbed, he, in the presence
of the police, steals anything from the person of another man and attempts
to make off with the property ? If, in the presence of the police, he assaults
another man, European or Fijian, and continues his assault, so as to endanger
life or limb ? If he is pointed out to the police as a fugitive from justice, for
whose apprehension a reward has been offered ? Finally, if he commits, or
attempts to commit, a murder in presence of the police ? Would you advise
that in all, or any, of these cases the police should allow the offence to be
persisted in until the arrival of an European constable, —or, where there are
no white constables, until the offender chooses to desist ? Considerations of
political expediency are not within my province, which is simply to carry
out the orders I receive, but I may as well observe that the police force ever
since its institution has had full power to enforce the law against all
offenders without regard to colour. To introduce distinctions of race now,
my knowledge of the natives renders me certain, would be greatly misunder-
stood, and would, I fear, be considered contrary to the assurances as to
equality of rights and position so emphatically given at the time of cession.
Monday, September 20th. —Rachael and party arrived in a
tremendous downpour of thick blinding rain. Their first
impressions must necessarily be all that I most desired them
not to be.
1 Written for Captain Olive by A. H. G.
Q


CHAPTER V
LADY GORDON AT SYDNEY
TO MISS MADELEINE SHAW-LEFEVRE
June 14. —I think I may as well send a supplement to my
letter gone in the bag this morning, to tell you that Arthur is off.
Nevil and Jack walked down with him to the wharf, where the
Commodore’s boat was to be ready at 11.30 to take him off to the
Pearl , which was lying a little way off. Eka kindly took herself
off, with her luncheon, to sketch somewhere, directly after break-
fast, which was very considerate. We had scarcely had any com-
munications with the Eobinsons for the week we had been here,
and I had only seen her once, when I went to her reception on
Friday. But, just as Arthur was starting the A.D.C., Capt. St.
John, appeared with a very kind note from the Governor, saying
he would do all he could to make my stay here less lonely, and
also a note from her to me with a quantity of camellias, and
saying she hoped, now I was left alone, that Miss G. C. and I
would come to Government House whenever we pleased and dine
there whenever we were not otherwise engaged, “ the oftener, the
better pleased we shall be.” This was unexpected, and was a
consolation to Arthur as he went off. The A.D.C. also said I
might consider him as my A.D.C. and make any use of him I
liked. He is rather a nice little man, but as he is almost stone
deaf I had never during my stay there attempted any conversa-
tion with him. ... It is such lovely weather now. I have
just got a line from Arthur on board the Pearl. He must be
well out of the harbour now. We have no view from our
windows. I wish I could see the lovely view of the harbour. .. .
To Sir A. Gordon
Sydney, Tuesday , June 15, 9.30 a.m. — l was so pleased to get
your note from the Pearl. I was told that one of the gentlemen


from the Bank had something important to deliver to me with
his own hand, and this was your letter. After you were gone
I felt very miserable of course, and had luncheon alone, and
then I and the children went out for a drive in the waggonette
provided by Abbey, which turned out a complete failure. First,
it could not hold two people and two children inside without a
great squeeze; second, it was exceedingly difficult to get in and
out of; third, the driver did not know his way anywhere, as
he at once informed me; fourth, it was excessively shaky and
altogether disrespectable in appearance; and lastly, the horse did
not seem at all quiet, and at last gave a tremendous shy and very
nearly upset the machine, upon which we all got out as fast as
possible and sent it home, and we walked some distance till we
found a hansom in which we drove to the gardens, and then I
sent the children home, and the hansom came back for me and
Eka, whom I found drawing very near the gate. When we got
home she went off alone to tea at Government House, and I,
in the meantime, had a nice long visit from Mrs. Goodenough
all to myself, which I liked very much. In the evening, quite
late, the telegram came for you from Lord Carnarvon. I sent
it up to Sir H. this morning and asked him to have it forwarded
to you; but for fear of any mistake I took a copy, which I
now enclose; I also kept a copy of it for the benefit of Captain
Havelock. I was much surprised and quite pleased at the
parting cordiality of the Robinsons, and am very glad you knew
of it before you left. His letter, which you sent me, was really
a very nice one, and I send you hers to me. I wrote a very
civil answer, and told her we would often come and dine, and I
think we shall probably do so about once a week. Eka said
she was very nice and kind to her—much better than she had
ever been before, and really seemed to wish to see us there, so
I shall make the best of her. lam sorry to say that the quiet
family we had in the next rooms are gone and a party of
Jews have succeeded them, with a number of children who
play on the piano from morning till night, in a most detest-
able way. It is really a great annoyance, as they might just
as well be in our room. lam going to make a complaint
to-morrow. Otherwise we are very comfortable still.
I was very tired when I went to bed, and slept well. After
breakfast this morning, I went to call on the De Riccis, whom I
found on the point of coming to see me. She seemed horridly
disgusted with the Meteor , which she had been to look at. I
felt quite sorry for her, poor thing. At 12 o’clock, Mr. Hay’s
carriage came for us, and we all went out to luncheon there.
The children were delighted; they raced about the garden and


played at “ ’ide and seek,” and to their great delight a pony
was saddled for them, and they were led about the field in
turn upon it. Jack was quite bold, and would not be held
on, and says now he knows how to ride quite well. There
were four other ladies to meet us, none of whom I knew, and I
found it rather heavy work talking to them, while Eka went
off for a scramble in the woods with one of them after the
luncheon. We did not get home till five, and I feel tired
again to-night. I have not seen anyone yet from Government
House. On Thursday we are to lunch there, and go out in the
steam launch, and to-morrow we are all going to Manly Beach
with Mr Brand, who is going to leave Sydney the next day.
So you see for the next few days our time is filled up.
Eka has, as I quite expected, subsided into a very quiet
state, and makes quite a pleasant companion. So you see we
are getting on very comfortably so far, and you must not make
yourself uneasy about us. The children are both very well
and good. Jack asked, the first thing this morning, “Where’s
father ? ” knowing perfectly well. I really do think Nevil was
very sorry, she has been so affectionate to me ever since.
Mr. De Ricci said he should call for my letter the first thing in
the morning, so probably I shall not have time to add anything
to it, and in fact there will be nothing more to say. It is not
now thirty-six hours since you went away.
I shall be satisfied now with the steady carriage and pair
from Hawke, and not try any more experiments, so don’t fancy
we are going to run any risks in that way. The Torres Straits
Mail is telegraphed, and will be here on Saturday, five days
before it is due. Shall I get any letters I wonder ?
Pfahlert’s Hotel, Sydney, Monday, June 21, to June 24.
so you will get this a very few days later than my letter of last
Wednesday. Mr. De Ricci will have told you that he saw us on
board a small steamer going to Manly Beach, We had a
pleasant expedition there, and such a lovely day. The children
were intensely happy. Mr. Brand provided them with spades
and buckets, and they built castles and picked up shells all day.
Eka and Mr. Brand went off for a scrambling walk, and I stayed
with the children. I found it rather hot on the beach, for there
was no shelter whatever, and having had some distance to walk,
I could not climb up to a place called “The Fairy Bower,”
where there were trees and a cool breeze. I think it did the
children a great deal of good, they have both looked so well
ever since, and Nevil has got quite a colour in her cheeks.


Lady Robinson was surprised at the improvement in her. We
stayed there all day, having taken our luncheon with us. On
Thursday we went (by invitation) to luncheon at Government
House, and immediately afterwards we were taken out in the
steam launch by Lady R and all the party. We went up
a cove in the harbour where Eka and the rest were landed to
look for ferns, and Lady R and I sailed or rather steamed
about for about one and a half hours, and then picked them up
again. Lady R was very gracious and good-natured in a
way of her own. She asked us to dine at Government House
the next day, which we accepted; (I shall never dine there
without a special invitation). She seemed rather surprised that
the children had never been to see her, so I sent them there on
Friday, and nurse said she seemed very much pleased to see
them again. Eka and I went out for a drive and took the
children, and made various calls, but found no one at home.
Mrs. Goodenough, Mr. Stanley, and Mr. Suckling were dining
at Government House, the latter commands the schooner Reynard ,
which is going to take the mails to Fiji. He has offered to take
anything for you, so I think I shall send some of the boxes from
King’s. Three boxes were sent by Meteor. It is rather amusing
to watch the little play-acting at Government House. Mrs.
Y has now got up a flirtation with Mr. X , and has
nothing to say to Mr. Z , who, after scowling at Mr. X
and contradicting everything he said, at last got up and left
the room, not having spoken a word to anyone else. ... I had
no opportunity of talking to Mrs. Goodenough,—l never have
at Government House. Sir Hercules was civil, but did not
talk much. On Saturday Lady R called for me in her
carriage, and we were taken to see a camellia garden, and after-
wards to the racing stables, where the eight horses were all
“ stripped ” for us to see, and we had to listen to a good deal
of racing slang between Lady R and the trainer. I was a
good deal tired with standing about so much, but Eka was quite
bent on going to see Grace Egerton in the evening—so I gave
in to her. It was a most vulgar performance—the only amuse-
ment of which was the extreme rapidity with which an ugly
old woman could change from a ball-dress into man’s attire and
then into a scullery maid and Sairey Gamp, etc. etc., singing
vulgar songs in a very loud cracked voice. She has been at it
many years, poor old thing, and it might have been worth see-
ing when she was young and attractive. Yesterday, Sunday ,
we went to St. Philip’s church in the morning, and all the after-
noon I stayed in and read and talked to the children, who were
so good—while Eka walked off to the cathedral. When I came


in from church, I found Jack and Nevil in the sitting-room,
playing at Church ,” they said. “Now Jack stand up,” (they
always stand to sing), and Jack jumped up, and Nevil began to
sing a hymn in a very loud voice, he pretending to play an
organ. This was the result of their having been to church with
nurse the Sunday before ! I always miss you more on Sundays
than other days.
Wednesday , 23 rd June. —The steamer is put off till Friday
after all. On Monday afternoon Eka and I went to luncheon
at Government House, and we all went directly afterwards to
the opening of the French Exhibition at the Exhibition Building,
all very smart, two carriages, three mounted orderlies, etc. Sir
Hercules took me in first—“ God save the Queen,” etc. etc., but
such a collection of rubbish as the exhibition contained I never
saw. We stayed about two hours walking about and talking to
uninteresting persons. I was amused at watching the ups and
downs of Mrs. flirtations. Mr. X very attentive to
her at first and Mr. Z in despair. At last Mr. X
walked off with a very pretty girl, and left Mr. Zin
possession and triumphant. Mr. Stanley intends to remain
here a month longer ; he is still staying at Government House.
Lady B told me that Sir Hercules was very anxious that
Mrs. Goodenough should come and live with them altogether
and lend her house to us, but he did not like to propose it, and
Mr. Stanley was quite sure she would not like it. I think for
her own sake she had much better keep her own house—and I
don’t feel sure that it would answer for me. I should have great
difficulty in managing her servants, and we are more independent
here. Please don’t mention it to the Commodore, The English
mail T.S. came in yesterday morning, and again neither letters
nor papers for us, and nothing for you. What can have
happened ? lam dreadfully disappointed.
The children are very well. I have had a little table made
for them, which adds greatly to their happiness. I wish Eka
liked children. She takes no interest in them, and is often
bored; she can’t help it, of course. She continues very quiet
and contented, and I am sure she is anxious to do everything
she can for me. Yesterday we went to luncheon with Mrs.
Goodenough to meet Mrs. Hamilton. I like Mrs. Goodenough
particularly. Mrs. Hamilton talked to me a good deal about
Fiji—but was not very encouraging. She said the Butters’
house would never do; she had stayed there herself and did
not like it at all. That I should never be able to climb up to
it, and if I did I should never go out! She had suffered a good


deal from the sores, as most new-comers do; but the children
were very well as long as she could get milk ; when that failed
they got ill.
Wednesday evening. —Eka and I have again been to luncheon
at Government House, and for a drive with Lady Robinson.
She was very gracious and civil. Nothing has been said about
our dining there again. I have discovered an old widow lady
here whom I rather like—Mrs. O’Brien. She is a sister of
Captain Moody’s father —I am very sorry you did not see her.
She seems to be very rich, and has got a delightful place in the
country, where Mrs. Goodenough stayed for a month last year.
She has only lately come to town to her house in Macquarrie
Street. She knew everything about you, and was very friendly
to me —I have only seen her once, but she has twice called on
me.
Thursday. —Jack had a little cold yesterday, but it is almost
well. He says he wishes Nennie would have a cold, because
then she would stay in bed and he could take her things.
Pfahlert’s Hotel, Sydney, Saturday , June 26. .. .
After doing up my letter and taking it to Government House
on Thursday, I found that the James Patterson had again put off
starting till Monday, so I have time for a supplementary letter.
On Thursday, Eka having gone off for the day, I walked down
to Mrs. Goodenough’s and paid her a long visit—and then went
on to Government House and gave my letter to Sir Hercules
and sat a little time with them —I get on much better with
them all than I did when we were staying there, and Lady R.
really seems anxious to be civil to us. The next day the AA.
Mail, which was not due till two or three days, came in, much
to our surprise. There was at last a large budget of letters
from home for me—a double set, but scarcely anything for you
—I enclose the few there are, and no newspapers. My letters
are not very cheerful. My father seems low and depressed,
and misses his work very much. I was afraid it would be so;
and very soon after we left Mamma became very unwell
indeed—a kind of feverish attack, which they thought had been
coming on for some time, and which they partly attributed to
all the anxiety she had gone through in the winter. However,
she was much better when they wrote last , and had gone to the
Cottage for change. George and Constance had just left and
set up in their own house. I have a very nice letter from
Constance. The only particular news is, that the Duke of
Buckingham is not going to be married to Miss F , as was


given out. Neither is Lady Antrim going to marry Lord R ,
with whom she is not even acquainted, but Lord Antrim is to
marry Miss Victoria Grey; and, what will interest Arthur, all
the three eldest Ladies Boyle are going to be married to Lord
Foley, Mr. Plunkett, and Mr. Kirkman Hodgson respectively,
the last marries Lady Grace Boyle. But the only marriage that
will interest you is—only think—Helen Richardson to Sir
Edward Blackett! He is seventy and has been married twice
already. He has, besides sons, five daughters, four of whom
are married, the other is Helen’s greatest friend. I feel rather
sorry—but she will make a charming mistress of Matfen Castle
—and all the Blacketts just adore her.
You see I have no papers to send you, and I don’t know
what you may get. You may hear that the Duke of Bucking-
ham is to be Governor of Madras, and I see in the Telegraphic
Obituary the death of Lord Alfred Hervey, which I know you
will be very sorry for. The Rates will feel it very much. I
send you her letter to me. He could not have been ill then, or
she would have mentioned it I am sure. I wish you would
write to her. I wonder what could have caused it—he seemed
quite well and strong only the other day when we dined there.
I am very sorry indeed.
We went yesterday to the reception at Government House,
and there we learnt that the P. and 0. Mail (now due for a
week) had been telegraphed from Adelaide, and that the Have-
locks and Sir W. and Lady Hackett had arrived. I had just
written to Captain Havelock and sent it to Melbourne, but it
would be too late, so I have telegraphed to tell him to come
here, and have engaged rooms for them, and I shall send a
letter on board by the pilot.
To-day, Eka and I went to luncheon with the Wentworths.
They sent their carriage for us (six miles), and sent us back
with another pair of horses. I shall take good care not to get
let in for another luncheon. The drive there is extremely
pretty, and it is a lovely little place—but the luncheon, which
was really a very grand dinner and lasted nearly two hours, was
most oppressive. The Hays, Hills, old Wentworths, and many
others, were asked to meet us, and we had to do company for
an hour before and an hour after it, till I was quite tired
out. After I had accepted, Lady Robinson warned me what
we were in for, but I could not get out of it. I found Jack
and Nennie in the highest spirits on my return. The great
excitement now is Nevil’s coming birthday, and the innumerable
presents Jack means to buy her, which he always tells her for a
great secret. He is learning to print his letters quite nicely,


but he cannot learn which is which. Nevil has been very good
at her lessons; she had a letter from Frances Rate, to her
great delight. She cried out, “ I know who it’s from, —Father,
because I writed to him.” Jack has had his hair cut—really
too short —he told the man he was to cut it very short like
father’s. They are both very well. Nevil did have a little
cold, but it was so slight that Jack had not the pleasure of
waiting on her in bed. They are going to Manly Beach on
Monday. I think a day of sea air will do them good. I had
a nice kind letter from Mrs. Macarthur; she says the measles
is all around them, but they have not yet got it themselves, and
if lam not afraid, she hopes I will come any day I like. How-
ever, I am afraid, and shall not go near them till they have
quite got rid of it in their surroundings.
Sunday , June 28. —I received the enclosed from Sir Hercules
this morning. It was kind of him to write to me. lam very
much pleased to hear about the Mail. If it can be arranged
that the steamers stop at Levuka, it will make all the difference
to us, and we shall not feel so very much out of the world—
and cut off from all communication as we are now —and the con-
venience of the monthly steamer from here for supplies will be
very great.
It has been raining in torrents and blowing hard all day.
I feel so glad to think that you are (as I hope) safe at Fiji.
Eka waded to church in her waterproof, but I stayed at home
with the children; they are both so good and look particularly
well. Jack says he shall write to father by the next Mail.
How Ido wish you were here. lam getting very impatient
for news of you.
Sydney, Monday , June 28. — Again the James Patterson has
put off sailing for a day, and I have time for a few more lines.
The children have both improved so much in looks since they
came. Nevil goes singing about the house in a loud and rather
discordant voice, and she is wild with spirits. It shows that the
place agrees with her, and they are both getting quite rosy.
Tuesday , 12 o'clock. —The Havelocks are just arrived—great
excitement among the children about “ Havelock Rachael,” who
seems a nice little thing—Captain H, will write to you himself.
I shall not have time to talk to him much before the Mail
closes. An irregular lot of papers have arrived; I have sent
you them all.
The Hacketts are come also. The Havelocks say they are
rather nice—l shall call on them later—they are also in the


hotel. lam afraid there will be no way of their getting on for
three weeks at least. It is a great pity the James Patterson
could not wait for them.
Tuesday evening.—James Patterson put off (as usual) till to-
morrow positively. If it had only been for two days longer
Captain Havelock would have gone with her.
I proposed that the first night we should all dine together,
which we did, in your room downstairs. The Judge is a tall
gaunt creature. Captain Havelock says he improves on ac-
quaintance. This afternoon, as Eka was going off to see some of
her friends, I called for Mrs. Good enough and took her a long
drive. We went to Kudgee Bay, which is very pretty. It was a
nice cool fresh day, and the glow that comes over everything at
about four o’clock is beautiful; we both enjoyed the drive very
much. Now Ido like her very much indeed, and I see as much
as I can of her when lam alone. I can see that Eka and she
do not like one another at all.
There is no news of the Nymphe yet; I hope she will soon
come in.
Wednesday. —The James Patterson is really going to-day, so I
must finish up and say goodbye for the third time. Nevil is
going to take the letters and deliver them to Mr. Hutchinson
herself. She is very proud of it. She has nothing more to say
but dear, dear father. It will be a long time before I have
another chance of writing except it is by the Pieynard , which
may leave in a day or two,
Pfahlert’s Hotel, Sydney, July 1. —The James Patterson
only left yesterday* so I have not much more to tell you.
However, you will not be sorry to get news of even one day old.
I am counting the days now to the arrival of the Blanche. In
a week we may begin to look for her. Ido so long for news
of you. The weather has become much colder; there was actually
snow at Sir H.’s racing stables yesterday. Eka and I and Mrs.
Havelock drove with Lady B. to call on Mrs. Barker (Bishop)
to-day. They have such a pretty place, overlooking Kudgee
Bay—but a very bad road to get to it. We, the Havelocks,
and the Hacketts, have received cards of invitation to dinner at
Government House on Wednesday next. The Havelocks have
got your, sitting-room, and we dine there together and sit up
here in the evenings. I have not asked the Hacketts to join, as
it makes it company, and would be a great bore every night. I
have not seen them again. To-morrow I must call on her. I had


a walk with Mrs. Goodenough this morning, while Eka went off
to the hospital, where she means to spend some of her spare
time. lam rather glad she has found some occupation, for she
has nothing whatever to do indoors, and has not found anything
yet worthy of sketching.
Sir Hercules had a long talk with Capt. Havelock, and seems
to have tried to impress upon him that the Home Government
had made a great mistake in not letting Fiji be governed at a
distance by himself , and that it was not likely that anything much
could be made of it. Both Capt. H. and the Chief-Justice have
done all they can to get off by the James Patterson , but there was
absolutely no room, even if he could have waited a few days.
The children are both quite well, and look very rosy and jolly.
Jack asked me to-day to “let him have a holiday by doing no
lessons! ” It is very nice indeed having the Havelocks here.
I like her so much; we are all very comfortable. But Ido want
to know about you, how you are getting on, and what you are
doing . . . and what the chances are of our coming to you.
Nothing can be more civil and attentive than the hotel people
are, and we have everything we want. Nevil does her lessons
very regularly now, and is getting on nicely, and she is very
good and affectionate. I like Sydney much better than I did,
and as long as the weather continues cold, I don’t think we can
do better than remain here. Ido hope you take care of your-
self. Don’t run any risks ; I sometimes get uneasy about
measles for you. Dr. Forbes does not give at all a nice account
of Levuka, but it may have changed very much since he was
there. Did I tell you that I saw in some paper that Major
Pratt is coming out with the Engineers, and that they are to
come in the JVhampoa round the Cape, not a troopship. I must
send this letter now, as Mr. Suckling sails at day-break, so good
night.
To Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre.
June 25.—At last a mail has come in which has brought
letters for me . . . Please be particular as to dates in future.
“Friday” conveys no idea to me —nothing . . . There are
telegrams two or three days before the letters come from


Brisbane and Adelaide, giving the heads of the news and an
obituary, which is rather startling and I look at it with dread.
I see this time Arthur’s great friend, Lord Alfred Hervey.
I know he will be so sorry. Last time I saw “ Lady Gordon,”
and was very uneasy for a short time, till I saw in another paper
that it was Lady Duff Gordon. I think I last wrote after
Arthur went away. I can’t quite remember. Of course I felt
his going very much, and was very lonely at first, but I have
got more used to it now, and the time gets on somehow. Every
day something or other turns up for us to do which just pre-
vents the time hanging heavy. . . . Sydney is a very rich place.
There are any number of families with £20,000 a year. There
are innumerable large country houses surrounding the bay, with
beautiful terraced gardens and parks. The harbour is really
lovely and so very large. One day we went seven miles up the
inner harbour in a steam launch and were not near the end.
It is always full of shipping and so lively, quantities of little
steamers plying about all day. On Sundays several steamers
crowded with people, like Thames boats, go to Manly Beach
and return late in the evening. The view of the harbour from
Government House is quite lovely; here we can see nothing.
The town is very stirring and cheerful, full of good shops and
fine public buildings, and numbers of smart well-appointed car-
riages dashing about. The Australians drive in a most reckless
fashion. I often feel quite nervous in driving about the streets.
Yesterday, Eka and I made an expedition to the Chinese shops,
which are in a low part of the town, near the wharf. At Govern-
ment House they told us it was not proper to go there, so we
did not say anything about it. It was very amusing, and diffi-
cult to resist buying all kinds of Chinese curiosities, but the
things are much dearer than in Singapore, and Chinamen never
bargain. I invested in a few boxes and trays, and Eka bought a
lot of things as commissions. She did not care for my purchases,
nor I for hers. ... We have come back from an oppressive
luncheon or rather grand dinner of many courses and champagne,


which lasted one hour and a half, besides doing company an hour
before and after. I am so tired and shall take care lam not
let in for another. A very grand carriage came for us, and a
different pair of horses brought us back, and a great many people
were there to meet us. Everything was of the most expensive
kind, such an exquisite Copeland dessert service and elaborately
engraved glass all fresh out from home. The place is charming,
with lawns sloping down to white sands by the sea, but of course
one couldn’t go and poke about and enjoy it in smart clothes !
Eka in her old linsey had the advantage in that respect, but of
course I must be rather swell. I should have been so glad if I
had had the children, but they were not asked. I asked Nevil
to-day if she remembered Constance. She said, “Oh yes, I re-
member her, I think about her, but I love Maddle best of all.”
She has rather taken to dolls lately, and is very funny with them.
Jack also is extremely fond of “ his nieces ”as he calls them. I
have had a little table made for them, and the little chairs brought
from home have been unpacked, and they are quite happy.
Jack looks so fat and jolly. I try to teach him a little now, but
he cannot succeed in learning the name of a single letter, though
he can print a good many.
Sunday , June 27.—A pouring wet day; Eka has gone to
church. lam staying with the children. lam glad to have a
little quiet time with them sometimes. I have just got a letter
from the Governor, with which lam very much pleased. You
know that for some time there has been no mail at all to Fiji,
and they have trusted to chance steamers or sailing vessels.
There has now been a contract made with the San Francisco line,
by which it has been arranged that the large San Francisco
steamers of 3000 tons are to go direct to Fiji, and branch
steamers to Sydney and Auckland are to meet them. You can’t
think how glad lamit is decided in our favour. As it is now
it is very difficult to get to Fiji. Arthur has to depend for his
mails on a man-of-war sent from here. There is a schooner
going up this week with the mails, H.M.S. Reynard. She only
sails and will be a long time getting there. The De Riccis and
MacGregors and Mrs. Abbey had to go in a wretched little sail-
ing vessel, the Meteor , which may be three or four weeks getting
there, for there was no other means, and I can’t think how the
Chief-Justice and Treasurer and their wives are to go. The
new mail service will not begin till November. Now it will not
be so difficult for you to come if you ever can make up your
mind to it. Since I begun this the P. and 0. has come in. . . .
By this mail also the Havelocks and Hacketts are come; they are


all in our hotel. The Havelocks and we have agreed to dine
together. I am very glad to have them for many reasons. I
like them so much. Here they will have to stay for six weeks,
as there is no chance of a steamer going or even a sailing vessel
before that. By this time, Arthur, I hope, is in Fiji. He was
to arrive yesterday. In a fortnight I hope I may get news of
him and hear his first impressions by H.M.S. Blanche. I don’t
much like what I hear about it, but people here are prejudiced
against Fiji, and won’t say a good word for it. They don’t like
it being made a separate Government, as they intended it to be
under New South Wales, and so did Sir Hercules. So it is the
fashion for every one here, especially Government House, to
cry it down and depreciate the whole business. I always hear
the same thing. “ You won’t like it, Lady Gordon ” —“ I pity
you,” etc., which is rather disheartening for me. As soon as I
hear from Arthur I must begin to prepare and buy all sorts of
things, for they have only taken just enough furniture to begin
with. The shops here are really very good. There is a very
huge affair, something like the Bon Marche, where you can get
everything, beautiful silks and materials, and all the very same
little neckties, fichus, collars, etc. which I saw there, and bonnets
in the latest French fashion. Their chief milliner is a little
woman from Elise, to whom I brought a letter from Mrs. Rate.
She came out in an emigrant ship a few months ago, and now
gets <£loo a year and leave to work for herself out of hours.
It has got so cold the last few days that I wish I had my seal-
skin. The shops are full of muffs and furs.
To Sir A. Gordon
Sidney, July sto 16.—1 tis three weeks to-day since you
left, and I begin to think about the arrival of the Blanche.
I am getting so very anxious for news of you that it makes
me feel quite restless —and then I don’t know when I can
get a second letter and when I shall be able to send this
to you. It is horrid to be so cut off from all communica-
tion with one another. I don’t think I half realised it
before you went. Oh dear, how I wish we could be together
again! It has become much colder here these last few days|;
we have taken to fires. It came on suddenly, and both the
children have got cold, and have not been out for four days. I
daresay I am unnecessarily fidgety about them when you are
not here. I wrote last by the Beynard on Thursday night. On
Friday we and the Havelocks had one of the Government steam


launches, and steamed about in the harbour, but it was too cold
to be very pleasant. On Sunday I went to St. Philip’s church
in the morning and the rest to the cathedral, and in the after-
noon Mrs. Havelock and I stayed at home with our respective
children. Little Rachael is rather too young to play with ours,
—Nevil takes no notice whatever of her—Jack is very attentive
to her, and tries in vain to make her answer him. I saw him
stooping over her and saying over and over again, “ Do tell me,
Baby, which would you really like me to build best, a little house
or a large one,” and the only answer he could get was, “ Pleasum.”
He can’t think why she won’t answer him. After a time we
went together and called on Lady Hackett, and brought her up
to see the children. She is a nice, bright little woman—l like
her much better than at first. She is decidedly rather pretty
and well dressed, and seems very plucky; she married very
young and is not more than thirty, but looks much more. Eka
and I discovered a few days ago two youths, midshipmen in
the ship Dunbar Castle , one a relation of hers named Lee, and
the other the third son of Mr. Kortright, so we asked them both
to dinner on Sunday. Young Kortright is a remarkably hand-
some boy, of seventeen, I should think. He seems a very nice
fellow, and was so very much pleased at my asking him. The
ship has been here six weeks, and is going away immediately.
I am so sorry I did not know of him before, but he did not call
till he heard from his mother by the last mail. They both
seemed to like their ship and to be very happy in the merchant
service. They are going to Ceylon, and Eka gave them some
letters of introduction there. I drove out to Coogie Bay again
to-day, and took the Havelocks.—lt was rather chilly. We
always drive with them now, and get on extremely well
together.
Thursday evening. —The children did not seem quite well
to-day. They have both lost their appetites and look pale, so
I thought I had better let Dr. Cox see them. I don’t think
there is much the matter, but I don’t know what to give them.
He said they were both “ liverish ” from a chill, and he will
soon set them right. Ido get so fidgety about them when you
are away! We asked the Hacketts to dine with us to-night.
They are rather pleasant. I don’t think she has much in her,
but she looks nice. She was very nicely dressed. They are
going to leave the hotel to-morrow, and move into lodgings.
I have nearly finished the new book about Fiji (Two Years in
Fiji) which Sir W. Hackett lent me. It is interesting, certainly,
and I think, on the whole better than any of the others; but it


is discouraging—Dr. Forbes is very anti-missionary. I think
he is rather unfair upon the Wesleyans.
Friday evening , 9 tin. —l have not written for two days. On
Wednesday we all dined at Government House. The first real
dinner-party there has been since we came to Sydney. There
were twenty-four. Besides ourselves, Havelocks, and Hacketts,
there were the Dicks, Mrs. Macintyre, Captain Digby (of the
Sajppho), Mr. Stanley, who is still staying there, and two Ceylon
men, whose names I don’t know, and Mrs. Goodenough. Mrs.
Macintyre was, you see, the only Australian of the party, and
she is really a Scotch lady by birth. It was not an unpleasant
party. Very good dinner—beautiful table—scarlet liveries—
all in the best style. Lady Eobinson’s dress was yellow silk
trimmed with crimson! Huge bunches of cherries on the
sleeves and in her hair—a low body very decolleU. Lady
Hackett and Mrs. Havelock were both very well dressed and in
good taste. I did not dislike the dinner, for of course I sat next
Sir Hercules, whom I like particularly. ... I must say lam
very glad to have Captain Havelock here, and feel it is a great
support, and they are both so very nice. The Hacketts dis-
liked their rooms so much in this hotel that they have moved
into the boarding-house in Gladstone Terrace which we rejected.
They were very sorry afterwards, as they might have had good
rooms here if they had waited two or three days. lam sorry
they are gone. They have been very much fUed by the Bar
here, and think Sydney delightful. Yesterday I stayed in-doors
writing letters for the P. and 0. mail, and seeing after the
children. Nevil seems much better and has begun to sing again,
which is a good sign with her —Jackie is still rather seedy. Dr.
Cox thinks it may be the change of climate and living which
has upset them, and that they may both be better for it after-
wards. He is very nice and careful and does not dose them.
The Havelocks have moved into the rooms next ours, which
are very nice and much more convenient. We dine in their
room and sit here after dinner. Captain H. very much dis-
likes his enforced stay here with nothing to do. He is longing
to get to Fiji and begin his work, and he feels how much you
must want him there. We all wish ourselves in Fiji now; lam
longing for the time to come —but, unless you can send the
Barracouta for us, I don’t see how on earth we are to get there.
The first mail steamer is to begin to run in November. It would
be horrid to have to wait for that. If we do , I shall certainly
not stay here, but shall go off somewhere as soon as the warmer
weather sets in. If only we could all go together they would


send a steamer for us. . . However, it’s no use writing about
it, for I shan’t get an answer for months ! Last night we went
to the Opera — La Fille de Madame Angot, done in English by a
new company just come from Melbourne; it is light and amus-
ing, and really very well given, and amused us very much.
Saturday evening , 10th. —We and the Havelocks all went for
an expedition with the Hays to the Fortifications. We crossed
the water, and several carriages were provided by the Hays on
the north shore, and we had a beautiful drive of about six miles
and then a picnic. The view from that point and most of the
way there was beautiful, and it was such a lovely day. I really
quite enjoyed it. There were a few other quiet sort of people,
and it was all well managed, and not at all oppressive. Ido
like the good old Hays very much—they are so kind. The
only drawback was that the children were asked, and I was
afraid of taking them, and I wished so much I could have had
them there, but it would have been rather too long a day for
them. Nevil is, I think, quite right again, and will soon pick
up now. Poor little Jackie is still rather seedy, and off his
feed. I was straining my eyes the whole time, hoping to see
the Blanche come in, but in vain.
Tuesday, 13 th, Nevil’s birthday.—She was so happy over
her presents and “ divisioning ” some of them with Jack—
when the page came in with a big envelope—it was your letter.
I had not heard of the arrival of the Blanche, so I was quite
taken by surprise. Nevil thought her letter was a birthday
present. I always told her that perhaps Father’s first letter
would come on her birthday. I was exceedingly pleased to get
it, and to Tiear such a good account of you. lam so very glad
you like it all so much. It was quite unexpected, for I fully
thought that I should hear you were disappointed, and that it
would be months before you would let us come out, and now
three months more does not seem so very long, even if it is as long
as that. I really think I shall like it from all you say —that is,
if it suits the children and I feel well there myself, and it is not
too hot. At any rate I have made up my mind to like it, so
you must not be uneasy. It is not so much that I have disliked
the idea of it all along, but that I feel I am unsuited to the kind
of life it will be, and that I shall not be able to be of any use,
and I am afraid you will always be dissatisfied. . . .
I am glad you like the Commodore so much. Mrs. Good-
enough told me how much he liked having you with him. You
don’t say anything about the King. Your letter is very nice
and long, but of course I always wish for more as soon as I


have finished it—there are so many things I want to know,
especially what furniture I am to bring out, as I might be
getting it now I have time. I hoped I might have heard from
Mr. Knollys or Arthur—l wonder how they like it. I take
great pride in telling everybody I see how pleased you are with
your first impressions. I have not seen Sir H. since I heard
from you.
Wednesday , July 15. —Jack is at last, I think, almost well
again. It is just a fortnight since he got the chill, and he has
been very seedy, poor little fellow. To-day he has been quite
like himself and jolly again. Nevil got over hers much more
quickly and is as well as possible. I have sent them both to
Coogie Bay in a hansom these last two days, and let them stay
there for an hour to get a little sea air. It has done them a
great deal of good.
Eka is gone away for about a fortnight for two visits, first
to the Campbells and then to the Wentworths. They will take
her about and show her a little of the country. Now I have
the Havelocks I do not mind being left. . . .
The weather has become very warm again, quite oppressive
and unseasonable. If it lasts I shall go to Parramatta very soon,
and take up my quarters, at least for a time, at the hotel there.
Lord Normanby’s letter is not very encouraging, but I hope it
will not be necessary to go to New Zealand, and still more I
hope there will not be time for it. I wonder how we shall get
to Fiji? The new steamers won’t begin before November, if
then, and I am afraid the James Patterson and steamers of that
class must be very nasty. The Barracouta doesn’t sound pleasant
either.
Nevil was very happy on her birthday. I gave her a set of
dominoes, which are a great success. She quite understands how
to play with them, but Jack doesn’t at all. However, he gets very
excited over them, and shouts out “ I’ve wonned, I’ve wonned.”
She was very much gratified at Herkie sending her a book (she
doesn’t know that he told his mother he would much rather send
one to Jack). She said, “I think he loves me, tho’ he won’t
kiss me. Lady Eobinson says that some day he’ll want to kiss
me, and then I won’t kiss him ! ” Eka gave her some Chinese
dishes, which she “drvisioned” with Jack. I have them almost


always with me, as their nursery is small. They breakfast and
have their tea here, and often their dinner too. This, and having
only one sitting room and one table for everything, makes it
impossible for me to begin to draw here. I really can't , so you
must not expect anything.
Friday, July 16. —Jack is quite well and very jolly to-day. I
shall give him some iron till his throat gets strong again. He
is very grumpy this morning, and Nevil in the highest spirits.
I have sent them off in a hansom to spend the day with Mrs.
Hay, which is a great treat. Dr. Cox came and thought him all
right again. So now I shall put off going to Parramatta till
the weather gets warmer. It is cool again to day. I shall send
them to Manly Beach for the day next week, and try and keep
them in the air as much as possible.
I like the plan of your house. The hill behind is an objection
certainly, but it is perhaps better than living on an inaccessible
hill and not being able to go out.
Little Eachel Havelock has improved wonderfully since she
came here, and is the picture of health now. She looked delicate
when she arrived, so that I think it must be a healthy place, and
I hope you won’t get fidgety about us.
From Jack
Dear Papa —I saw the pigs, and I saw the cow, and I saw
the white pony, which didn’t belong there, and, dear Papa, a kiss
and a love—and I saw Mrs. ’Ay, and I ’ad some fruit in the
dining-room and brought some ’ome in my pocket. I did go
out in the garden and run about all in it, and round it and in the
wood close by, and found things with little stalks and big large
things at the end of them [toadstools], and I saw the two water
fountains playing, and played a game of ’ide and seek, and,
runned about and runned about and threw the big ball, and
whoever caught it shall have it. A kiss and another kiss, and a
kiss for Arthur, and a kiss for Captain Knollys, and—what else 1
Oh, you must send Mr. Abbey a kiss. Tell him we went to the
seaside with Mr. Brand. I have been pretending to cut
Nennie’s head off; and that shall be the end of the letter, except
a kiss for all of them. From Father’s dear little boy, Jack. I can
nearly read now. I know A and B.
To Sir A. Gordon
Payten’s Hotel, Parramatta, Saturday, July 24 to Saturday,
August 7. —It is a week since I sent off my last letter to you by


the Western Star. The very next day —Sunday the 18th—we
heard a rumour of measles being in the hotel, which put me in
a great fidget ; before night we found out that a lady in the
next room to the children had actually got it—so I sent Capt.
Havelock to Dr. Cox for advice as to what we had better do.
He said we must leave the hotel instantly—that night, if
possible, and that he would himself take the children in—as he
did not wish Jack to have it just now. However, by that time
the children had gone to bed, and I could not move them, so I
had sulphur burnt outside their door, and by the first train
on Monday I took them to Parramatta, leaving nurse to pack
up. I fortunately found rooms for us all and the Havelocks,
and we are now settled here for the present, and as they have
not shown any sign of measles, and this is the seventh day, I
think they may be considered safe for the present. They are
both particularly well and jolly, and the change has done Jack
a great deal of good, and quite set him up again. I cannot say
I like it much—it is a rough country inn, not very clean, and
the rooms are small and dark and gloomy, on the shady side of
the house. Parramatta is a “ deadly lively ” place, dull to the
last degree, and I know nobody but the Billyards ; but it has
one advantage, that we can go to Sydney every day if we like!
I have already been there five times! In fact it is much less
expensive than taking a drive here, for I have the free pass
ticket, and Capt. Havelock has contrived to get one too. The
packing-up was a very great trouble and worry to me, for we
had made ourselves quite comfortable at Pfahlert’s Hotel, and I
had to pack everything, and have the boxes put in the hotel
storeroom, only bringing here what is absolutely necessary. It
took me two whole days to do it, before I could give up the
rooms. I had a kind letter from Lady Robinson after I got
here, saying that she was very sorry for us, and proposing that
after our quarantine was over we should return to Government
House, and occupy our two rooms there as before till the 20th
August. She did not mention Eka, so I wrote and thanked her
very much, but said I could not of course desert Miss G. C., but
that I would leave it open for the present. Eka has been away
for some time now, staying with the Campbells and Wentworths.
She says she is enjoying herself extremely—out the livelong
day, gipsying and picnicing to her heart’s content. I have had
two very gushing letters from her, but she says I must not let
her stand in the way of going to Government House, as there
are heaps of things she wants to see, and she can easily dispose
of herself with other friends. I have advised her not to come
here if she has anything to do she would like better, for as


long as I have the Havelocks I don’t want her, and she would
never be able to stand this place. There is nothing to do out
of doors, and the sitting-rooms are miserably dark and dull. I
really don’t know now what to do. Perhaps while the Havelocks
are here I had better put up with this place, and stay on for
the present, and perhaps when they go I may go to Government
House for a week or so, before returning to Pfahlert’s or settling
somewhere else. The MacArthurs are still surrounded by measles,
and do not advise us to go there. The Havelocks and I get on
perfectly well together, and suit admirably. The people here
are rather surprised at my liking for her. Little Rachel has
improved wonderfully since she came —she has grown so fat and
rosy. Jack’s appetite has come back again, and he is also much
fatter. The other day, when I called him to come and sit on my
lap, he said he had eaten so much dinner that he was afraid he
was “ rather much heavier.” The two advantages of being here
are, that the country is very good for the children; and that it is
very, cheap. I pay only £7 : 7s. per week, instead of <£ls : 15s.
still, I don’t think I shall be able to endure it after the
Havelocks leave.
July 26. —I have been in to town again as usual. It does
seem so strange that here at the antipodes everything is so
exactly the same as in England, everything one uses or wears —
furniture, carpets, glass, china, books, dress — all come out from
home. The shops seem the very same things. The railway
stations, bookstalls, all the English shilling novels and illustrated
papers. Igo up and down to town in the very same clothes,
my old serge, and felt hat, with my carriage bag and umbrella,
just as I did at Ascot, and almost fancy I am on the way there.
How I wish I were!
To Mrs. Ryan
Parramatta, July 28, 1875. —This hotel is so wretchedly dull and gloomy
that it is impossible to stay indoors. The children are much better off, for
there is a long masonic hall into which all our bedrooms, (which are mere
cabins,) open, and there they all play together and have their meals. It has
been excessively cold here these last few days, and we hardly know how to keep
warm in this draughty house. The food is not at all bad, though rough —
excellent bread, butter, eggs, and poultry —and so cheap that, without Eka, we
only pay £5 : ss. for board and lodgings per week, including everything but
wine. . . . Mrs. Goodenough has just sent her second boy, aged 8, to a school
some distance off, so she feels very lonely. He took his pony with him, as
his brother did, and walked down to the station carrying his saddle. Nearly
every boy in the school has a pony. They are turned out in a field, and the
boys have to catch and saddle them themselves and look after them.


Saturday , July 31. —Since I began this I have written two
short letters to you and sent them via New Zealand, one by the
Hero , and the other by the A. &A. Mail —I though it just worth
while trying.
We are still at Parramatta, and have now been here nearly a
fortnight, so all fear of measles having been caught at Pfahlert’s
is over. Jack is so well and fat and rosy now, that I don’t think
it would hurt him if he did have it. No doubt coming here
has done them no end of good. It has been very cold all the
time —we sit over a large fire, and are glad of three blankets
at night. The children are very well off, for all our little
bedrooms open into a long Masonic hall, which they have taken
possession of as a playroom, and they have their meals there.
It is on the sunny side of the house, and they race up and
down all day, and are very happy. Our sitting-rooms are on
the dull side, and very small and dark. The house is full of
draughts, and very dirty, but the living is not at all bad. All
this time I have not seen the Robinsons at all, for I heard that
Lady R. was horridly afraid of measles. I believe I might
safely go back to Pfahlert’s now, but I shall not do so while
the Havelocks are here. Eka has been away for three weeks,
staying with one friend after another —she seems extremely
happy, for she is seeing a great deal, and leading the kind of
out-of-door life which suits her exactly. Mrs. Havelock just
suits me, and we are very happy and comfortable together.
Sunday evening , August 1. —The James Paterson came in
yesterday, and I got your nice large packet —actually five
letters. It was very good of you to write so much and so
fully. But lam rather concerned to hear of you having such
a bad cold. I hope it was really getting better at the end.
Mind you take care of yourself, and don’t run any unnecessary
risks —and don't go where there is any measles still. I often
feel very uneasy when I think about it. Your account of King
Thakombau giving his submission is most interesting, and must
have been a very striking sight; I wish I had been there to see
it. I read it to Captain Havelock, who thought it most interest-
ing, and also the next letter about your expedition to Savu-
Savu and the hot springs, which must be most curious. I
wonder whether I shall be able to go and see them, and whether
you would have let me be present at the ceremonial with
Thakombau. I mean to copy a part of that letter to send to
my father. lam sure I shall like Mr. Olive. I had heard a
very good account of him from someone here, I can’t remember
who, but I am afraid our party living together will be almost


too large, and that Abbey will never be able to manage for such
a large number, especially when Mr. Maudslay joins you, as I
expect he will do soon. Your plan of the house is very imposing,
but one can’t judge at all without knowing the size of the rooms.
It is too late to criticise, but I should say the kitchen ought to
have been made on the dining-room side, as it is such an immense
way to carry the dinner, and the servants must pass all along
the front. Also I hope you will make a bedroom for yourself
near me, as I should not like to be out there all alone and you
so far off; and are not my rooms a very long way from the
main building 1 lam longing to come to you now. I don’t think
we should be much more uncomfortable than we are here in
this dirty draughty old inn—l can’t endure it. The life at
Sydney is detestable to me, and I am thankful to think I shall
never see the place again. I shall now begin preparations in
earnest —but neither you nor Captain Knollys have told me
anything about furniture, or what things it is necessary I should
bring out besides candle-shades. The Havelocks and Hacketts
have brought the whole of the furniture of their houses, while
we have nothing, except the few things which went with you —
and I don’t know what to do about it.
The troops, sappers and miners, are coming on in the
TVhampoa, and I believe they are going to charter a ship here to
take them on to Fiji. Cosmo is going to find out about it for
me, and if I find it possible I shall get a passage in this ship,
which will be about the end of the first week in August. That
would bring us to Fiji about the end of August —rather sooner
than you say, but you must manage to take us in somehow.
If we don’t come then it may be weeks before there is another
chance, and I think it is very important that we should try and
get there before the hot weather sets in.
Sunday is a very dull day here. I hate the church here,
which is within walking distance, and on Sunday one can’t get
a carriage to go to the other in, which I believe is better. We
went to church, and after our early dinner Captain and Mrs.
H. took a long walk together, and I, feeling very tired from
having walked too far yesterday, stayed at home and tried to
read in our nasty, dark, cold, little sitting-room. The children
went out for a walk in the Domain. They have both got slight
colds. By a rule of the house we were obliged to have our tea
at six, long before we wanted it.
Monday evening , August 2.—We (I and the Havelocks) have
been up to town for a cruise up the middle harbour in a new
little steamer, which they want the Fiji Government to buy.


It certainly is a most charming little steamer, very steady and
quiet and nicely fitted, and it would be delightful to have it
there. Captain Havelock will tell you about it. The party were
Mr. Manning (the owner), his wife, Mr. Sahl, Mr. Stanley, and
Lady Manning, who, by the way, is, I think, nicer than anyone here.
She is so quiet and ladylike. They gave us a very good luncheon
and champagne in the saloon, which is extraordinarily roomy and
comfortable for the size of the steamer. But the price of the
steamer, £6OOO, seems enormous. I forgot to mention Sir W.
Hackett, who was of the party. He seems rather disgusted at
the idea of going to Fiji in the James Patterson , which certainly
does not look inviting. I have offered to take charge of his
wife, if he likes to leave her here to come with me. . . . They sent
their things round the Cape, and have had to pay £9O for the
freight only, as far as Sydney, which is a good deal out of six
months’ pay !
I have had a very civil, quite kind letter from Lady R.
She will tell me the moment Mr. Trollope goes, and “ quite
looks forward to having us back,” etc. She doesn’t, how-
ever, mention Eka. She (Eka) had the misfortune to offend
her about a month ago, and I was very much afraid we might
have a quarrel, but I think she thought better of it. I have
carefully kept out of it, though I felt rather shabby, as I ought
to have backed up Eka, but if I had the consequences might
have been serious (if I must have quarrelled too)! Captain
Havelock knows the story. It is not worth while writing it.
The children have both got colds, which is tiresome, but they
are very jolly. Nevil was rather naughty, and had a crying
fit two days running. She was very sorry afterwards, and
came to me of herself and said, “Don’t tell Father I have been
a naughty girl.” I have begun a book of marks, which had such
a good effect at Ascot. She was very anxious to put down
“ Good ” to-day before-hand, as she said she intended to be good
all day, and she has kept her intentions. Jack is such a dear,
good little boy, and so loving. When he comes in the morning,
lam generally woke by—“ Mammie, I love you. You love your
boy best, don’t you, Mammie?” Nevil just looks in and says,
“ I can’t stop —I’ve got a great deal to do, I mustn’t waste my
time, I’ve got those children (dolls) to see after,” while Jack
stays as long as he can, and has a great deal to tell me. He
is very attentive to little Rachel, and so gentle and kind, but
sometimes he knocks her down with his kisses. Nevil generally
ignores her existence. There never were two children so different
jn character as ours.


To Mrs. Ryan
Woolpack Inn, Parramatta, August 5,1875. —I must tell you about Mr.
Maudslay. He was Private Secretary to Mr. Cairns when we were at
Brisbane. Arthur took a great fancy to him and asked him to come and pay
us a visit in Fiji some day, and said that he would find something for him to
do there, as he was most anxious to come. So, a short time ago, he resigned
his appointment with Mr. Cairns, and here he is in Sydney, having taken his
passage in the James Patterson, which leaves on Saturday. I like him par-
ticularly, and it occurred to me that I might get him to stay here with me,
and go with us instead. So I proposed it to him on Tuesday evening. He
agreed at once, and seemed pleased to be of use. lam so glad, for when the
Havelocks are gone I shall feel the want of a man to help us and do all kinds
of things for us, and assist us in getting off. He is exactly the right sort of
person—kind, helpful, and considerate, and having been some time on Mr.
Cairns’s staff, with an immense deal to do in domestic matters and house-
keeping, he thoroughly understands all the duties of an A.D.C. Besides which
he is clever and pleasant, and very well off. I don’t exactly know in what
capacity he will be in Fiji, but I expect Arthur will attach him to his staff
somehow for a time. He is a good photographer, and is taking out a large
camera. I shall now tell Arthur that he need not send Capt. Knollys back
for us, as he intended to do.
To Sir A. Gordon.
Pfahlert’s Hotel, Friday , August 6.— Here are we back in
our comfortable rooms. I have been writing for the English
mails the last two days, I copied a good deal of your last
letter, and sent it to my father, for I know he will like to hear
all about you. I don’t think I told you about the great event
here, viz. the arrival of Madame Ristori with a troupe of about
thirty persons. She has been here a fortnight, and acts about
three times a week. I wonder whether you have ever seen her ?
I had a great longing to go to her “Representation,” so the
Havelocks and I went up from Parramatta on Tuesday, and
had a dinner at the hotel, to which I invited Mrs. Goodenough,
Cosmo, and Mr. Maudslay, and we all went to the theatre
immediately afterwards to see Ristori in Queen Elizabeth. I
was quite delighted with it —she is certainly a wonderful actress.
It is the most satisfying acting I have ever seen —she is such a
perfect lady, easy and graceful in all her movements, and with-
out any rant. We came back at night by the 12 train,
with an intense longing to see her again. On Wednesday, Mr.
Maudslay came down to Parramatta to lunch with me, and it
occurred to me that I might ask him instead of going to Fiji
to-morrow (he had taken his passage in the James Patterson ), to


wait a month and go with me, and make himself generally use-
ful in the meantime. He agreed at once, and seemed quite
pleased to be of use to us, so now you may be quite satisfied
that we are well looked after, and unless there is any other
reason for sending Captain Knollys back, you need not do so
on our account. Captain Havelock has been so helpful and
kind that I shall miss him very much, and feel it the greatest
comfort to have Mr. Maudslay instead. He will stay at this
hotel, and dine with us whenever he has nothing else to do.
He at once took the position of an A.D.C., and is so very kind
and nice. I like him particularly.
Thursday. —Captain and Mrs. Havelock went up to town,
and I stayed down to write my letters. In the afternoon Mrs.
Hamilton called and said how very much she wished to hear
Ristori that day, but could get no one to go with her. So I
proposed to go up with her, and we decided that we would go
and dine with Mrs. Goodenough. Mrs. Hamilton was to go
there first and prepare her to receive us, while I dressed at
Pfahlert’s—and that, as we all settled to leave Parramatta the
next day, I should sleep in town and leave nurse to come up
with the children and Havelocks. So we came up together. I
stopped on the way at the camellia garden and got a large bunch
of camellias for Mrs. Goodenough—for her luncheon party the
next day. It was nearly 7 by the time I reached Pfahlert’s.
As I went in I met Mr. Maudslay, who said he was going
too, and that he would get the tickets and meet us at the
theatre at 8.10. I dressed very quickly, and went to Mrs.
Goodenough’s, who received us with open arms, only too delighted
at my appreciation of Madame Ristori. This time it was Mary
Stuart, which is her favourite part. Of course it is in Italian,
which I do not know well enough to follow, and I had not had
time to get it up beforehand; but the acting is so perfect that
the words are hardly necessary. I was more delighted with
her than ever. Unfortunately she is much too good for Sydney,
and she never has a full house. I was quite grieved to see how
empty it was —and the Robinsons do not patronise her. They
have actually not been once. I really feel quite ashamed of
them. Lady R says, “ Really you and Mrs. Goodenough
are quite silly about Ristori! ” She supposes she shall have
to go once, but she knows it will bore her, and it’s so
expensive !
Ristori has with her her husband, the Marchese I for-
get the name just now, a young Marchese, and a very pretty
daughter. Mrs. Goodenough asked me to come and meet them


all at luncheon to-day. There was no one else but Mr. Stanley,
and I enjoyed it very much. She is quite charming in private
life, and still so handsome. She reminds me a little of Lady
Herbert. She can’t speak a word of English, but talks very
good French. She talked about her breakfast with “Lord
Gladstone ” two years ago, where she had met the Prince and
Princess of Wales. She did not know the least who I was, but
mentioned having met Lord Aberdeen (your father) at dinner
in London once, years ago. Afterwards we met again at Lady
Robinson’s reception, and became quite friends. Mr. Stanley
said I monopolised her! which was not the case; for no one
else but we three —he, I, and Mrs. G. —cared to speak to her.
Lady R can’t speak French. The whole party have been
to luncheon at Government House, but that is all. I mean to
call on her to-morrow —Lady Robinson said that she should
have room for us next week, and hoped that I and the children
would go there for a week on Wednesday. I said that I would
come, but that I must be allowed to go to see Ristori whenever
I felt inclined, and that on Thursday I was to dine with Mrs.
Goodenough and we were to go there together. It is rather
expensive (155.), but I shall never see her again, and it is a
great enjoyment to me.
The children came up to-day, quite well and very happy.
Eka came to see us, and thought them so improved in looks for
the change. We have now unpacked everything, and settled
ourselves here as before, and I don’t mean to give up the rooms
again. Nothing can be more civil than the Pfahlerts are.
To Miss Emily Shaw-Lefevre
Sydney, August 8,1875. —. . . To begin where I left off. On
Friday after despatching my letters I dressed and went to Mrs.
Goodenough’s. I found her in a great state of excitement await-
ing the arrival of Ristori and her family to luncheon. She had
made her room look very pretty with the camellias I had sent
her, and the Queen’s christening cup was on the dining-room
table (you know she is the Queen’s goddaughter). The family
consists of the Marchesa del Grille, the young Marchese her
son, and a very pretty charming daughter, Bianca. There was
no one else except Mr. Stanley. We have a very pleasant
little luncheon. Madame Ristori is charming, so very jolly and
still very handsome, though of course she is no longer young.
She can’t talk a word of English, but we got on very well in
French, and she and I became quite friends. She was so pleased
to find I knew some of her friends in England, including “ Lord


Gladstone,” with whom she had breakfasted a year ago to meet
the Prince and Princess of Wales, and I reminded her of a
certain dinner at Mr. Senior’s long ago, where Jane was, and
where she met Jenny Lind for the first time, which she perfectly
remembered. She likes very much talking about her “ repre-
sentations.” Mary Stuart is her favourite of all. She told us
a great many interesting things; and then we found that she
knew Lady Stanley of Alderley very well, and many of the
family, and Madame Mohl, whom we all three knew, and others.
I was quite entirely delighted with her, and so are Mr. Stanley
and Mrs. Goodenough, and they were so glad that the other
persons they had asked could not come. She told us she was
going to Melbourne and Adelaide. I said I knew Mrs. Musgrave
a little, and Ristori said she wished I would give her a letter to
her, which I shall certainly do, though my acquaintance with
Mrs. Musgrave is slight. I think Ristori must feel the neglect
with which she is treated by Government House. They don’t
take the slightest interest in her. They haven’t yet been once
to see her, and have only just had her to luncheon. Surely her
rank alone ought to entitle her to some notice, even let alone
her great fame. Later in the afternoon, after they had left,
Mrs. Goodenough and I went to Lady Robinson’s reception, and
there again met Ristori and Bianca. Lady Robinson did not
take much notice of her. I immediately went up to her and
talked to her all the time. Mr. Stanley said I monopolized her,
which he thought a great shame. I said I didn’t care, and that
I should monopolize her whenever I had the chance. Lady R.
said, “You and Mrs. Goodenough are quite silly about Ristori.”
From Nevil
Woolpack Inn, Parramatta.— Dear, dear Papa—Yester-
day I went to spend the day with Mrs. Billyard. We had a
ride on the ponies—there was one for each. “ Charlie ” I rode
on, and Jack rode a pony called “Tiny.” We are in Parra-
matta now, and to-morrow we are going back to Pfahlert’s
Hotel. We go out and see the shops, and look at all the dolls
and toys in them. I like Parramatta very much.
Now we are come back to Sydney, and we are going to
Government House soon. I don’t much care to see Herkie
because he won’t kiss me. Rachael Havelock is going to Fiji
to-day. I’ll be very glad when I go to Fiji. I think I shall
like it very much.
Dear Father, I send my love to Arthur and a kiss. —Your
dear little girl, Nevil.


To Sir A. Gordon
Government House, Sydney, Sunday , August 22.—1
have just heard that the Hero is going to New Zealand
to-morrow, and I think it will be my last chance of writing
to you. We are all quite well and getting on very comfort-
ably here. Eka is gone to Duntram, a place in the bush
belonging to the Campbells, about two days’ journey from
Sydney, and Lady Eobinson has asked us to stay on another
week—we shall then have been here a fortnight. After
that I shall go back to the hotel for two nights, and then pay
our long promised visit to the MacArthurs for a few days,
and that, I think will only leave us time to pack up and get off.
I fully expect to hear from you that you are not ready for us,
and that we must wait another month. But I mean to go with
the engineers in any case, for it will be our last opportunity,
as the A. S. N. Co. are not going to run any more steamers
after this, so that it will be impossible for me to go to Fiji till
the regular steamers begin in December if I don’t go now.
The Company are inclined to be very civil to me, and
they are going to send one of their larger steamers, the Wentworth.
So that there really could not be a better opportunity of going.
I hope we shall not have to start before the James Patterson
comes back, for I hope by her to get some idea of what things
it is necessary I should bring with me in the way of furniture,
etc. I received your letter of the 2 Oth-2 3rd July by the
Reynard on the 16th of August. lam so glad that you are
all right again, for I felt a little uneasy after what you said
about your cold. I like the baskets you sent me and the
beautiful piece of tappa very much. Lady E. thinks the latter
horrid rubbish! I use one of the bags for work, and mean to
send the other home. lam afraid from what you say that you
will be hardly ready for us, and I am quite prepared for a very
rough time of it at first. Poor Mrs. De Eicci seems to have
written to many people here complaining of her great misery
at Levuka. I wonder how you will provide for the troops !
There are said to be three officers. One of them is married, but
I can’t find out whether he brings his wife and children. He
is Major Pratt, a brother of Lady Barkly, and Sir H. B. has
written to Sir Hercules about him. I wonder whether he has
written to you too! . . . Nevil and Jack are both looking so
well; we have had three days of most oppressively hot weather,
and I was very glad to have them out of town. Nevil is getting
on well with her reading —but I heard her explaining a picture
to Jack—“ Now, Jackie, b-a-r-b spells mare, that’s a mare”!


I think Jack has quite come round Lady R.; she seems quite
fond of him. I am on more comfortable terms with the
Robinsons than I have ever been before, I really like Sir H.
very much, now I know him better. I think he is very shy
with ladies. Lady R. says she has never known him talk so
much to any lady as he does to me, and he is extremely kind
and civil to me, and so, I must say, is she now. I can’t abide
Mr. Hutchinson. I have had several drives on the box-seat of
Sir Hercules’ drag!
Tuesday , 24 th August. —I had written so far on Sunday; on
Monday morning came the dreadful, dreadful telegram, and an
hour after the Pearl steamed into the harbour and anchored
close under Government House, with her yards “ scandalised ”
and her flag half-mast high. Sir H. had sent for Mr. Stanley
instantly to break it to the poor wife. The moment she heard
he had been sent for she said she knew it all; it was what she
had always expected, and she was quite calm and resigned when
he told her, and she has been so ever since—perfectly collected
and able to think of everything that must be done. But one
can see that her life is over. Her love for the Commodore was
simply idolatry. I went to see her a little while afterwards,
but there was nothing I could do, but sit by her and warm her
hands, which were very cold.
She was very much comforted by being able to go on board
and see him. He had been dead three days, but was very little
changed, and she sat with his body for two hours.
Sir H. has been very thoughtful and considerate for her.
She is going to the funeral to-day; it is to be a public one on
the North Shore, about three miles off. She is to go in one of
the Governor’s carriages, and the little boys are to walk with
Mr. Stanley. They were sent for by Sir H. and arrived last
night. You will see all particulars in the papers. He was
shot at Santa Cruz on Thursday the 12th; the wounds were
very slight, and for a week caused no apprehension, but on
the seventh day symptoms of tetanus showed themselves, and
on Friday the 20th he died. He suffered very much the last
two days. He had himself taken on the quarter-deck on
the Thursday, and spoke to his men and kissed each of his
officers.
We are all so miserable and upset —I do feel so much for
her, poor thing. I know you will be very much shocked and
grieved when you hear of it. When I told the children, Jack’s
first thought was for you. “ When father hears of it I hope he
won’t go to that island because he might be shot by a poisoned


arrow, you know.” Of course I thought of you too. Ido hope
you won’t run any risks.
The two sailors who have since died of their wounds are to
be buried one on each side of him. Their sufferings were some-
thing fearful, poor fellows.
I should write a longer letter, but I feel very doubtful
whether you will get this before we come. The Whampoa is due
here about the sth, and I suppose they will get the troops
trans-shipped as soon after that as they can, so that we may
arrive by the third week in September, but of course it is all
uncertain. They may be detained here by many things —the
Wentwoiih may not be in—so don’t be uneasy if we don’t
arrive. There seems to be a gloom over everything now.
To Mrs. Eyan
Government House, Sydney, August 25, 26, 1875. —
My dearest Jane —Two months before you can get this
letter you will have heard of the terrible event which has
happened here, and spread consternation over the whole of
Australia: —the murder of Commodore Goodenough in the
South Sea Islands. We had been staying here about ten days.
I had been getting on really very well with the Eobinsons, and
had written a long letter to Emily, which you will see. We had
all been particularly jolly here. Mrs. Goodenough in and out
every day, either at luncheon or at five o’clock tea, and looking so
bright and happy. I dare say you remember her. She has
very fair hair, and pink colour, and a particularly sunny face
and cheery smile. On Monday I got up at six, and we all drove
to the race-course in Sir Hercules’ drag to see the race-horses
take their morning gallop (the races were to take place this week),
and we were all very jolly. We had coffee and buttered scones
on the stand, and came back here to the usual 9.30 breakfast,
but as we were sitting down Sir H. called Lady Eobinson into
the next room ; the door was open and we heard her crying and
moaning very loud, and we couldn’t think what could have
happened. Soon after Sir H. came back and told us of the
dreadful telegram he had just got from the captain of the Pearl,
that the Commodore had been shot with a poisoned arrow on
the 12th August and had died on the 20th, three days before, and
that his body was on board the Pearl , and asking Sir Hercules
to break it to his wife. The Pearl was then off the Heads (within
half-an-hour of Sydney). We were all aghast and horrified.
Sir H. immediately sent for Mr. Stanley, who was happily
still staying here with Mrs. Goodenough, and told him, and


he had the dreadful task of telling her. I think I never
knew anything so sad. About an hour later I watched the Pearl
slowly steam into the harbour and anchor at her moorings just
under Government House, with her yards “scandalised,” and
her flag half-mast high, and, of course, then, everyone in Sydney
knew what must have happened. You will see all the particulars
of this terrible affair in the paper I send you. I can’t tell you
what it has been : everyone in the house was crying. Everyone
loved the Commodore, and we all knew that with his wife it was
absolutely idolatry , and we dreaded what the effect might be.
No one knew what to do. At last I persuaded Lady R. to go
to her at once, and go straight into her room, and we waited in
suspense till she came back. Poor Mrs. Goodenough, it is
perfectly wonderful how she has borne it. She was quite calm
and resigned, and told Lady R. that the moment she saw the
orderly with the letter for Mr. Stanley, she knew what it must
be; in fact, she had always expected it. She said she had been
much too happy. Her married life had been eleven years of
unclouded happiness. A little later I went to her. She told me
not to talk to her, but to warm her hands, which were very cold.
She was still very quiet, but the tears were streaming down her
face; it was most touching. Mr. Stanley had gone on board
the Pearl , and he came back and took her to look at her husband ;
though he had been dead three days he was not changed, and
she was able to sit by him for two hours, which seemed to be
the greatest comfort to her. Late in the afternoon, Lady R.
went to her again. She told her what comfort she had had.
She said she was quite collected and would do anything they
told her • that she intended to go the funeral (the next day) and
asked her to lend her the carriage. She had ordered her dress,
widow’s cap, and bonnet, and would have no help. She had also
had a long talk with Captain Hastings of the Pearl , and the
chaplain and the secretary, and had been told every smallest
particular. The two boys had been telegraphed for from school,
and arrived that evening. Lady R. took her some jelly and
port wine, which she took. She said, “ I have no nonsense about
me.” Sir H. was terribly cut up about it, he has been so kind
and considerate throughout. On Tuesday the funeral took place.
It was a public funeral. I watched from the window the two
sailors’ coffins put into the large steam launch with the whole of
the officers, crew, and marines from the Pearl. Soon after a
gig, which had the Commodore’s body in it, put off and rowed up
to the Governor’s private pier, and I saw Captain Hastings land
and walk up through the garden and take her , in deep mourning,
down to the boat, followed by the two pretty boys in white


sailor shirts and black trousers, each with a beautiful cross of
violets in their hands, and Mr. Stanley. As soon as they had
got in, the oars were reversed, and the steam launch of the Pearl
came and towed them over to the opposite side of the harbour.
The Governor and his staff, with the Bishop and Anthony Trollope,
followed in the Governor’s barge. On the other side, the pro-
cession had already formed, and the Governor’s two carriages
J . . . O
were waiting, and they fell in with it. The coffins were placed
on gun carriages covered with Union Jacks, the two little boys
walking next, Mrs. Goodenough alone in one carriage and the
Governor and suite in the other, (she insisted on being quite
alone). It was three and a half miles to the place where he was
buried. Her calmness and self-possession were quite marvellous.
She stood at the head of the grave between the boys and threw
back her crape veil during the service, and knelt down and
kissed the coffin. She never shed a tear : everyone else was
crying and sobbing all round. Sir Hercules said he never saw
her look so handsome. There was a dense crowd, the whole of
Sydney were present, the crews and officers of three ships, all
the Government officials, etc. The Commodore was quite adored
here. It seems dreadful that a valuable life like his should have
been sacrificed in this way by villanous treachery. Of course,
I thought of Arthur directly; there is no fear of such a thing
happening in Fiji, but I do hope he won’t go to New Guinea.
When I told the children, Jack’s first thought was his father.
He said, “ When father hears of it I hope he won’t go to that
Island, because/ie might be shot with a poisoned arrow, you know.”
We all thought that poor Mrs. Goodenough must break down
after such tension, but when Lady R. went there this morning,
she found her sitting in her drawing-room, in her widow’s cap,
very pale, but as calm as ever. One feels and sees, though, that
her life is over. I had seen a good deal of her lately and got
very fond of her. She is not a general favourite, for her manner
is rather short and abrupt, but I think I understood her, and
she has always been so very nice and kind to me. She and I had
a common cause. Her one thought and object in life was “the
Commodore.” She was so proud of him, and so ambitious for
him. She has had to bear so many long separations. Only
the day before she had been saying that he had been away ten
weeks—just half the time —and she could now begin to look
forward to the end.
The wound on his side which caused his death was a very
slight one. As soon as he got back to the ship he undressed
and had it examined and well cleaned out and cupped, and a
strong poultice put on it. It gave him no inconvenience, and
s


for five days he felt as well as ever he had done in his life. On
the sixth day symptoms of tetanus showed themselves, and he
knew then what must happen; on the seventh day he knew he
was dying, and he had himself carried on to Hie quarter-deck
and spoke a few words to his men, and kissed all his officers,
I (there was not a dry eye on board). The next day he died
very quietly, exhausted by the spasms. The two men who died,
suffered fearfully , one of them especially died in agony. The whole
affair is in many ways so very similar to Bishop Patteson’s end.
It is only three days now since all this happened : it feels
weeks. We have all been so upset and miserable about it. I
don’t think I can write about anything else this time. You must
send this letter to the others please, because I can’t write it twice
over. lam sure you must have been very much horrified when
you saw the telegrams in the newspapers. I don’t know when
Arthur will hear of it. He will feel it very much indeed. He had
become great friends with the Commodore during his voyage
down to Fiji. He liked and admired him very much indeed,
and he said he had the highest opinion of his abilities, and he
thought the liking was mutual. He was such a good man, so
very charming in manners, and agreeable. I did not see much
of him here, but I took a great fancy to him at once.
Mrs. Goodenough sent for Sir Hercules this morning and had
a very long talk with him. He quite dreaded seeing her, but it
was not at all painful, and he came back full of admiration of her
courage. She says she wishes to see me to-morrow. I went
this afternoon to take leave of Madame Ristori, who left to-day
for Melbourne. She and I and Mrs. Goodenough had become
great friends. She (Mad. R.) had wished so very much to see
Mrs. Goodenough once more, and she told me that Mr. Stanley
had been and taken her there just before, and she had had a
long talk with her.
Madame Ristori’s visit here has been my greatest pleasure
since I came to Sydney. I have been six times to see her act,
and have seen a good deal of her privately. If ever Igo to
Rome or Paris (very unlikely alas !) I shall keep up my acquaint-
ance with her. Lady Robinson did not take to her, because she
hates tragedy and can’t speak a word of French; but I think
she was at last thoroughly appreciated by Sydney, and in society
here the whole family were made a great deal of.
I feel very glad indeed to have been staying at Government
House at this time. I should have felt it much more if I had
been alone at the hotel. They have all behaved very kindly and
well throughout, especially the Governor and Lady R., and it has
seemed to draw us together, and I really believe now I should


always get on well with them. They all feel it dreadfully, and
the house seems quite silent and changed. I never saw the
Governor so upset. He can think and talk of nothing else. I
think now he likes talking to me; I used to find him very shy
and difficult to get on with. Lady R. says she never knew him
talk so much to a lady before ! I like him very much.
Camden Park, Sunday , August 29. —At last we have
accomplished our visit to the MacArthurs, and now we can
only stay three days, for our ship, the Egmont , is advertised to
sail on or about the Bth September , and it will take me fully a
week to do all my packing and finishing up of all kinds of
things, saying good-bye to some people, paying bills, etc. I
wrote last by the ’Frisco Mail on Thursday last. On Friday
morning I went to see Mrs. Goodenough, She was sitting in
her drawing-room, and looking so extremely pretty and sweet
in her widow’s cap. I was perfectly surprised at the quiet calm
way in which she talks about it all, though it was only the
fifth day after. She seemed pleased at the telegram with the
Queen’s sympathy. She asked me if I had heard how she had
been told ? Mr. Stanley said one word only— Santa Cruz , —and
she knew it all. She said that Sunday would be a very trying
day for her, as she was going on board the Pearl for the last
time to take leave of them all, and that she should go into his
cabin and look out some little remembrance of him for each of
his officers, —he had wished it. There is something so touching
in her submission. I can hardly speak when lam with her.
[Although two of the three following letters are of later date,
this would seem to be the most suitable place for their insertion.]
Lieutenant Hosken, R.N., to Lieutenant Olive, R.M.
H.M.S. Pearl, Sydney, August 29, 1875. —My dear Olive—l suppose
you will have heard long ere this of our sad loss ; our much beloved Com-
modore is dead. You who loved him equally with us will understand what our
feelings have been, what a sad trial it has been from the time of his being
wounded, up to the date of his being buried. I forward you a Sydney paper
with the summary in it, from which you will gather the outside news. But
you will not see him as he died, nor hear his loving words. It is about his
happy death that I wish to tell you, for I know that although you were not
present to hear his farewell words, yet you, as one of the officers of the ship,
were included. The day before he died he sent for all of us, and addressed us
as follows : —‘ ‘My dear officers, I have been very happy in you all, I love you
all very much, I have seen something worthy to be loved in each one. The
Doctor says that lam going to die. I want to tell you how happy all my
thoughts are, that I have spent a happy life. God has been very good to me.


Oh ! turn to God, He will be your friend. If ever I have been hasty, pray
forgive me, and to show that you have done so, come now one and all and
kiss me before I go.” He took us in his arms and kissed us. Can you realise
the scene, the overpowering grief that would allow of no response ? And so
he’s gone, our great and noble chief, and taken our love with him ; can he
see ns now and understand our feelings ? I pray that I may become more
worthy of his love, and will try to follow his footsteps. Whilst he was with
us we hardly knew his w r orth, but witnessing his death we feel how close he
must have lived to his God. He died a glorious death, no sign of faltering,
a thorough trust in and love for God. We have been greatly blessed in being
with him in his last moments. He had himself taken out on the quarter-
deck and addressed the crew. “ I love you, my men, and I want to tell you
how good God is and to pray you to turn to Him. You good-looking young
fellows, the ones I love so much, for my sake, when next you are on shore
and tempted, resist; you older men who have influence over them, exert it for
good,” and much more of the same kind. If the interview in the cabin w r as
affecting, this was doubly so ; the strong men wept, they strove in vain to
hide the feelings that did honour to them. If I could speak to you, my dear
fellow, I could tell you more, but it is painful to dwell upon the subject.
I felt that you might like to be told by one of ourselves, and not by the
newspapers alone, -of our great sorrow. I know I have imperfectly performed
my task ; but believe me when I tell you that his last text, “ God is love,” has
impressed me greatly ; and I feel in realising it that my heart is opened, and
a greater love is introduced for my friends and shipmates, amongst whom I
count you.—Goodbye, dear fellow, if I could convey his “God bless you,”
from the deathbed I should be glad. His was a noble nature, dying as nobly
as he had lived, trying up to the last to do some good.
From Mr. Perry (Commodore’s Secretary)
Sydney, October 14, 1875. —Dear Sir Arthur Gordon—l hope lam doing
right in writing to you, but if I am not, I know you will excuse me.
One of the last dying wishes which my dear Commodore expressed was
that no steps might be taken to punish in any way the natives of Santa Cruz
who caused his death. He was of opinion, up to the last moment of his life,
that their unprovoked attack on him was the result of some misunderstanding,
and he wished me to convey his deprecation of vengeance or punishment to
the proper quarter.
I according wrote to the first Lord of the Admiralty and told him what
Commodore Goodenough had said to me.
But, as I would not leave one stone unturned in carrying out his wishes,
and, as I believe you are to be, or are, endowed with some jurisdiction or
authority over many of the Pacific islanders, it has occurred to me that it
would be only proper that I should tell you the Commodore’s simple message
of peace towards them.
Your Excellency knew him personally, and will, I am sure, appreciate and
regard his last wishes in any action which may possibly be hereafter taken
regarding his murderers, should such action have to emanate from Your
Excellency. 1
1 Commodore Goodenough’s wishes were strictly observed.


All of us who went in the Pearl to Fiji know that you sympathise with us
in our great loss, on which I need not offer any further remark.—l am, etc.
From Mrs. Goodenough
H.M.S. Pearl, Melbourne, October 9, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur—
Thank you very sincerely for your kind letter which I received yesterday, and
for the sympathy which you express in it for me, as well as for what you say of
him. He had told me how much he had enjoyed your companionship in that
last cruise, and of how many subjects of common interest you had found
between you. You must allow me also to thank you for what you say in
your message to your Legislative Council. I hope you will not think it
impertinent if I tell you that nothing that has been WTitten or said of him
has been more in accordance with my own feelings and ideas than what you
have there said, and that I very much value the way in which you have therein
appreciated his character and life. Thank you also for sending me a copy of
Mr. Hosken’s letter. It is a comfort to me even now, and as time goes on will
I hope be an increasing one. I feel that his death as well as his life may be
used by God as a help to others. As long as one can keep one’s thoughts only
on him—on the triumph won and the present bliss—one can only praise God,
but the thought of life without him is a very dreadful one to face. My
kindest regards to Lady Gordon. lam so glad to see that she arrived safely.
I wish you both much happiness in Fiji. Again thanking you for your kind
letter. —Believe me, etc.
P.S. —I shall be very glad to send you a book from his cabin. Everything
is now packed, but I will not forget it. Meantime I send you a photograph.
I do not know which you would prefer, so I send both, and will you give one
of them to Lady Gordon V
Thursday. —We are all come back to the hotel again. I feel
rather bewildered at the thought of all I have to do. The
JVhampoa is due on the sth; any day after she arrives we may
be off. I fully expect Arthur will write and stop us, but I
mean to go all the same, for no more steamers are to run to Fiji
till the new line begins in December —this is the very last. I
walked down to Mrs. Goodenough’s this morning, but Mr.
Stanley would not let me see her; he said she was quite over-
done. He said I might come to-morrow. I have got such a
horrid bad cold in my head, I feel quite stupefied with it.
There were a few excessively hot sultry days, and then it got
quite cold again. This must be a most oppressive place in
summer. The children are both looking particularly well. I
told Jack he must not kiss me, and he said, “ but I wish to catch
your cold, because then you would not have it, Mammie.” It
is odd how stupid he is at learning —I can't teach him his letters.
We were to have gone to the Hawkesbury races this week, but
of course that and a large dinner at Government House were
given up. Sir Hercules wants me to go to the “ Derby ”on the


box-seat of his drag in about ten days’ time. I had ordered
a bonnet of his colours for the purpose (white and red).
Three gorgeous dresses for the races arrived from Paris to-day
for Lady Robinson and her two daughters, with bonnets and
parasols to match —much too showy for my taste. The
carriage alone came to nearly £2O. There were eight pair
of boots in the box, which did not fit anyone!
I have heard from Arthur once since I last wrote. It was a
very short letter. He has really no time to write. He was
quite well, and was going about in the Barracouta visiting all
the competing sites for the seat of Government, for he has quite
settled he will not have it in Ovalau. Levuka, he says, is a
most horrid place. He writes last from Suva in Yiti Levu,
which he is much pleased with. He only wishes he could find
time to write some letters to the Times.
I got your letter of the 24 th June a few days ago. I was
so glad of such a good account of all. lam afraid you are in
a fidget about the measles —I fancy it is quite over now in Fiji,
but the mortality has been enormous.
I shall write home again in a few days by the Suez
Mail. Send this to the others, and get Emily’s letter to read
yourself.
I hope to write next month from Fiji.
S.S. Egmont, Sydney Harbour, September 9, 1875. — Here
we are all on board the Egmont , and in eight or ten days I hope
we may arrive in Fiji. We had orders to be on board at four,
and I had to hurry to the last moment, and now I don’t believe
we shall get off till seven, and I should have been so glad
of the extra time. It is most tiresome. The ship is fairly
comfortable, all freshly painted and done up and very clean,
but small. We have got very nice cabins, really quite a good
size. I and the children two between us, with three berths in
each. Eka by herself. Mr. Maudslay has been so kind and
helpful, packing away himself for days before. He is so very
nice, I wish you could know him. The Robinsons have all
become extremely kind and friendly towards me. I really think
they like me at last, and Lady R. was most affectionate at
parting and invited me most cordially to come back and stay
there with the children whenever I like. I feel glad to have
parted on such excellent terms. When Lady R. is kind I
believe she means it, just as she shows it when she does not
like one. I took leave of poor Mrs. Goodenough yesterday;
she looked so sad. In three weeks she starts on her long lonely
journey home. Mr. Stanley goes with her and the boys.


To Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
Steamer JSgmont, at sea, Sept. 14 to 19, 1875. —My dearest
Mary—l am in great hopes that we may arrive in Fiji in time
to catch the ’Frisco Mail vid New Zealand, so as not to leave a
long gap between our letters, and I shall begin a letter so as
to have it ready to post at once if necessary. I wrote a few lines
to Mamma last Thursday (via Torres Straits). We had then
just got on board and arranged our cabins, and it was about six
o’clock. We had been waiting on the wharf for one and a half
hours for the Egmont to come up, talking to Mr. Stanley and
one or two others who had come to see us off. But it was ten
o’clock at night before we got fairly under weigh. It was a
great sell, as we might have dined comfortably on shore, and
got off without the usual hurry. We had not been long asleep
before we were all woke by the most horrid pitching and rolling
I ever experienced, not that it was so very rough, but this ship
has a peculiar kind of lurch which seems to turn one inside out.
We were all horridly sick, even /, — all , from the Captain down
to the stewardess, and nearly all the soldiers who had just come
off such a long voyage. Poor Jack was sick every half-hour,
but always went sound off to sleep again between whiles.
Nevil too was very bad and could not sleep, and crying with
the pain in her neck from the strain. It lasted all the next
day and another night, and we none of us could get up,—it was
horrid. Nurse, though horridly sick herself, was up and down
with the children every minute. On Saturday morning it got
better and we all got well, and since that, though very rough
at times, there has been no more sickness. The children have
got their sea legs and are quite well, and enjoying themselves
very much. It is a very small ship after what we have been
used to, but particularly clean, and the food excellent. Besides
ourselves and the Engineers (four officers) there are only seven
persons going to Fiji, and one second class (a barmaid). I have
taken care to barricade myself well with the officers at meals, so
as to have nothing to do with the Fijians on board! We have
now been five days at sea and have just passed Norfolk Island,
which we are told is nearly half way, and that we may arrive
in on the tenth day. I don’t know why they deluded us into
thinking we might do it in six days! However, it is quite
bearable, now we have got over the horrid start. So far it has
been very chilly, which I did not expect, I packed up nearly
all our warm things and had them soldered down in tin-lined
cases, but the children have got their ulsters, which keep them
very comfortable. It will be hot enough in a. day or two. The


Engineers seem very nice, especially Colonel Pratt, who is most
kind and attentive; they are very quiet and I have not talked
to them much yet. I sit between Mr. Maudslay and the captain
of the ship. I really felt quite sorry to leave Sydney when the
time came. There were a good many things I should have liked
to have done, and I should rather have liked another month there,
but this was too good an opportunity to be lost. It is a much
better steamer than they usually send to Fiji, and having it
almost to ourselves makes such a difference; they are usually
crowded by most horrid people. We got off very comfortably
on the whole, but I had a great deal to do. We have got about
seventy packages on board (not including what came in the
IFhampoa), but these include three beds, all the china and bed-
room crockery and a good deal of furniture, the washing
machine and the mangle.
Thursday , September 17, Bth day at sea. —Going much the
same. To-day is the first day it has not been unpleasantly
chilly on deck—that is, sitting down—and too shaky to walk.
To-day it is really delicious, but not at all hot. The children
are in great spirits. I don’t think they look quite so well as
they did at starting, which is no doubt caused by the change of
food and hours and getting no milk; however, to-morrow night
or Sunday morning we may arrive. I wonder how it will all
be ? I wonder whether the news of the Commodore’s death can
have reached Arthur yet ? I know it will be a great shock to
him. He would not know in the least when to expect us, and
will only get four hours’ notice by signal. I expect we shall
find Fiji pretty cool at first. In about a month the hot weather,
which lasts four or five months, will set in, and then it will be
dreadfully hot I fancy. Except for being together again, I
don’t look forward with much pleasure to my life for some time
to come. This voyage has been a very tedious one, though far
less uncomfortable than I expected. Our fellow-passengers con-1
sist of Rev. F. Langham and his wife, the head of the missionaries!
in Fiji, who lives at Mbau, about twenty-five miles from Levuka $
Dr. Morton of Parramatta and his wife—she is sister of oiuj
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Thurston, and is going on a visit to hei
brother; Mr. Woods, late Prime Minister in Fiji, now, I think|
manager of the Steam Navigation Company there—l think hef
is an objectionable person, but he seems very quiet; and twci
Levuka store-keepers, who dine at the other end of the tables
and never come near us; then there are the three officers and|
the doctor of the engineers. There is nothing whatever to say
about the voyage; one day passes just like another, and one’s


only object is to get through time between breakfast and
luncheon, and in the weary long interval from half-past twelve
to five, between luncheon and dinner. I spend a good deal of
time in amusing the children reading to them. We have got a
few books, among others, Tennyson’s Queen Mary , which I have
read half of, and cannot succeed in getting up the slightest
interest in. Eka seems very happy, and is looking forward
with intense delight to what she thinks will be a life of in-
cessant picnics and sight-seeing in Fiji. lam afraid she will
be greatly disappointed. But I can’t make her believe what a
very quiet and monotonous life it will be, and that seeing any-
thing out of Ovalau for many months will, at any rate, for her
and me, be out of the question. I wonder what you thought of
Jack’s photograph. Isn’t he grown big ? He looks quite six
years old now. I had a very nice one done of Nevil, and a
group of the two children, cabinet size, but unfortunately there
was not time to print them before I left, and it will be some
time before I can send you any. lam quite disappointed, for I
wanted so much to send some to you and Constance. Nevil is
very much spoilt by the loss of her front teeth, but I hope they
will soon come again. She has grown so much taller that all
the frocks have had to be let down, and some she can’t wear
any more. They play together just in the same way they used
from morning till night, always pretending , to the great amuse-
ment of Mr. Maudslay and others, Eka doesn’t trouble herself
about them much, but she is very good-natured to them, and
they are very fond of her. Mr. Maudslay is very fond of chil-
dren and thoroughly understands them now. He is greatly
amused at Jack’s entire unconsciousness of continually being
done by Nevil! At the same time she is very fond of him, and
dreadfully jealous if he prefers any other child to her. Mr.
Maudslay brought some books for them, which he deals out one
at a time, and they have been a great resource. Oh dear, what
a long time it seems since I heard from you! I have not yet
even had an answer to my letter written on the Brisbane! I
don’t know now when I shall get any more. Possibly I may
find some in Fiji, but I expect you will go on writing to Sydney
for some time, and I must trust to getting them from there
somehow or other. However, when our new Mail Service is
established it won’t be quite so bad, for we shall be ten days
nearer England than we were in Sydney. Any letters that you
don’t send by the Colonial Office please put via San Francisco on,
because otherwise they might come by the P. & 0. via Sydney.
I wonder and wonder what has been done about Spring Gardens,
and what you are all doing, and a hundred other things. My


last budget was rather shabby—only one from you, and that
not a long one. You won’t get so many from me in future, as
there will only be one mail a month instead of three. I think
you must allow that I have done very well about writing. But
excepting to you and Jane I have scarcely written to anyone.
I really had not time at Sydney.
Friday evening , September 18.—This is our ninth and last
night at sea. We have passed Kandavu to-day, and expect
to be at Levuka at daybreak. It has been very blowy all day,
and not at all hot, and I am still wearing my blue serge, and
have not even unpacked the cool dresses I brought for the
voyage, expecting to get into hot weather at once. The
children are very well—they have been playing all day in
the most amusing way. Jack made an instrument out of a reel
of cotton and a little wooden horse tied together, and was
looking up through it with his legs wide apart —so like a sailor.
He said he was “taking the sun.” “Now, Nennie, you pretend
to look at your watch while I take the sun.” He said it was a
much better “sexton” than the captain’s, and that he should give
it to father when he got to Fiji. Nevil said contemptuously,
“ Father doesn’t know anything about taking the sun ! ” When
we anchor at Levuka to-morrow we shall be J of a mile from
Nasova. I wonder how soon Arthur will know of our arrival,
and come on board. I forget whether I told you that Mrs.
Onslow came to see me twice the day before I left Sydney. I
got quite intimate with her, and like her very much. It was
quite a pity that circumstances prevented our knowing each
other before. I gave her as a parting present a copy of the
Burgomaster’s Family , which, as she had once paid a visit in a
Dutch family, she would appreciate very much. I let her have
one of the little ulster coats copied for her child. I send you a
nice kind letter I had from Mrs. Macarthur. I had a charming
letter from Madame Ristori after she got to Melbourne, sending
me her photograph en costume de ville —a beautiful one. She had
before given me one as “ Marie Antoinette.” The letter began
“ Chere Milady.” I like all the engineers very much, and think
they will be a great acquisition. Col. Pratt and Capt. Stuartj
have each got a wife and six children—there is not much chancej
of their being able to have them out, on account of the expense.)
Nurse and I are all packed up, ready to go on shore to-morrow* 1
morning, but as we shall not be able to get at our beds, which
are in this ship, for two or three days, I think it very possible
we may have to come and sleep on board !
CHAP.


Monday , 11 A.M., Egmont , off Levuka. — Here we are at last,
in a tremendous storm of rain, so thick that they can’t find their
way inside the reef, and we have been going round and round
waiting for the squall to pass off. A boat has just come along-
side from the Barracouta. Arthur quite well, which is the
first thought. The news of the Commodore’s death reached
three days ago —by the mail steamer from Auckland, which is
only waiting for the weather to clear up to go off, so I am just
in time. I shall finish up this, and write a few lines more if I
can. Arthur may be on board in a few minutes.


CHAPTER VI
PROGRESS OF AFFAIRS—VISITS TO LAU AND SUVA
LADY GORDON TO LADY SHAW-LEFEVRE
Nasova, September 23, 1875.—Here we are at last at the end of
our long journey. I finished off my letter to Mary just before
Arthur came on board the Egmont. He is looking very well,
and was delighted to see how well the children are. We all
went on shore with him at once, some in the Barracouta’s boats,
and some in Arthur’s, for Mr. Le Hunte, Captain Knollys, and
A. G. L. Gordon had all come on board too, so we were a large
party. We landed at Arthur’s pier, and walked up to the house,
Avhich is exactly like the picture in the illustrated, which I sent
you. Unfortunately it was a horrid day, pouring with rain,
and steaming hot, the first rain they had had since their arrival,
and it has rained incessantly for two days since, but to-day is
quite heavenly weather—cool, fresh, and delightful. Well, I first
went over all the house. It is a large one, with numbers of
small rooms in it, but excessively rough. It is built of reeds, so
that the Avails are nearly transparent, and every word is heard
from one end to the other. The staff were all anxious to give
up their rooms to us, but for the present it is quite out of the
question that we could all live in it. Fortunately, Arthur had
been able to secure a nice little house near, containing one bed-
room and two sitting-rooms, and there I established the children
and Nurses, and the Havelocks have asked Eka to stay Avith
them, so that only I and Mr. Maudslay are added to those actu-
ally liAdng here. The children only come doAvn for their dinner.
There is a very nice new building in progress, consisting of a nice
large drawing-room and tAvo big bedrooms for me and the
children. It will not be finished for tAvo or three weeks, but
when it is, and we are fairly settled there, I think we shall be
very comfortable, and I shall be able to make it very nice indeed.
Altogether, so far as I have seen yet, I am most agreeably sur-
prised at the place, and I feel as if I should like it very much


indeed. I have not of course seen much of it yet, for though I
have been here four days, we are in such a desperate state of
confusion and bustle that there is no time for anything. The
verandah, which goes all round the house on all sides, is paved
with large boulders of rough stone, which is very tiring to walk
upon, but to-morrow the engineers are to begin to lay down a
wooden floor over it, which will make it very nice. The dining-
room, which was formerly the Council Room, and is a very large
room, is already charming. The walls are composed of a double
row of reeds, and the ceiling, a hipped one, is pannelled with
matting between narrow borders of wood. The effect is exceed-
ingly good. The Fiji mats are beautiful. They use them for
everything, floors, ceilings, beds, table covers, and the tappa
cloth, which I admire extremely, is very much used for hanging
the walls and all sorts of other purposes. I long to send home
some of each. You would be delighted with it I know. There
are all kinds of things to be got here, such as clubs, spears, brown
and red pottery of the most fascinating shapes, dishes, pots, whales’
teeth, baskets, curiosities innumerable. How I wish Madeleine
had been with us. All the gentlemen are collecting and vying
with one another. Arthur has already got quantities of things,
—many have been presents, but A. J. Gordon has the best col-
lection of all. He has been about a good deal in other islands,
and has brought back all kinds of things. Between this house
and the sea there is a public path, and it is most amusing and
interesting to watch the natives passing along. Besides A.
J. Gordon, Captain Knollys, and Mr. Le Hunte, there are
living with us Captain Olive (2nd A.D.C.), Mr. Maudslay (3rd
Secretary), and a young Baron von Hugel, who is collecting
curiosities, and whom I find established in the house (though at
this moment he is collecting somewhere, and I have not seen him
yet), so that you see we are a very large party. If only I had
Madeleine here I should be quite happy, I think, unless it gets
too hot. I feel as if I had a great deal to say, but no time, and
I have felt so disinclined to begin writing that I have put it off*
too long. The packages from Heal are all right, and are at this
moment being carried up by eight or ten Fijians from the wharf.
1 shall not unpack them till the new rooms are done. We have
a hundred and odd packages which came with us; every thing is all
right. . . Will some one write to Lady Aberdeen and tell her that
we are arrived all right, and we find Arthur very well except for
hay fever. It is very cool here now, quite the perfection of
climate, but that of course won’t last. I found Arthur very very
much grieved at the death of the Commodore. He had only
known it for three days. He was so much liked here, and so


much associated with this place that it has made a great sensa-
tion. The flags were still half-mast high when we arrived. I
shall send you the Governor’s Minute, which I am sure you will
like to see. I was told I must be ready in five minutes, but
I can go on till the bag is closed. I feel that it will be months
before we can feel at all settled here. I only hope Abbey won’t
be knocked up, for he has everything to see after. The servants
are a most difficult lot to manage, and can hardly be got to do
anything. Mr. Maudslay has got a black boy from Trinidad,
who is a great help. Maids there are none. Mrs. Abbey, nurse,
and Marques do the rooms between them. The paths, such as
they are, are so excessively rough that I do not think I shall do
much in the way of riding—walking is out of the question,—my
boat must be my carriage, we have got a very nice one, and
another is building in Sydney. Arthur has to do everything at his
own expense.—l must stop —bag closing.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, September 22, 1875.— My Lord—One of the most important
questions of a personal nature which I have had to consider since my appoint-
ment to this Government has been that of the propriety or possibility of the
retention in an official position of Mr. Thurston, and, if so, in what capacity ?
2. I frequently discussed this subject with Commodore Goodenough during
my passage down here in the Pearl. The Commodore considered that Mr.
Thurston’s services should certainly be made use of, but considered it un-
desirable that he should remain Colonial Secretary, and on my arrival here,
I found, (somewhat to my surprise,) that Mr. Thurston himself was of the
same opinion. In the justice of his own unpopularity he of course does not
acquiesce, but he is fully aware of its extent, and considers, not without
reason, that his retention in a post where he would be brought into close
daily contact with all classes of settlers as the organ of the Government would
be attended by a friction and suspicion which it is desirable to avoid, and
would to a greater or less degree involve the whole administration in the
odium attaching to himself, besides appearing to affix to it somewhat of a
local party character.
3. After a careful observation of more than two months’ duration I have
felt compelled to concur in the soundness of these views.
4. I am, however, bound to say that, although Mr. Thurston is detested I
by almost every white man in the group, I do not think that the causes of his I
unpopularity are on the whole such as to do him discredit, and that he has 1
performed his duties as acting Colonial Secretary to my complete satisfaction. |
In a community much given to evil-speaking and bitterly hostile to him, it
may, I think, be presumed that any real misdeeds of Mr. Thurston would be
loudly proclaimed. But it is to be remarked that whilst free expression is
given to general denunciations and vague personal abuse, there is a singular
absence of definite charges against him, nor is he (like some of his late col-
leagues) under imputation of having been guilty of personal peculation during
his official career.


5. I am inclined to think that the hatred felt for Mr. Thurston by a large
majority of the settlers (which is quite remarkable for its intensity) is due
chiefly to two causes: First, the inability of the bulk of this community to
understand a man far abler and more clear-sighted than themselves, and the
suspicion and impatience which usually accompany such misunderstanding.
Secondly, his refusal to convert the native population into one of serfs for the
benefit of the planters. He went far in that direction, but not far enough
to satisfy the wishes of the community, and his refusal, although probably due
to the fact that he was clear-sighted enough to perceive that such a policy
could not be carried farther without provoking dangerous resistance, rather
than to any higher motive, is certainly not to his discredit.
6. On the other hand, whilst I consider his unpopularity as in a great
degree unjust, I regard him as a far from scrupulous man, and one not safely 1
to be too far trusted. His sense of honour and truth are, I should think, low,
and though I should be personally well pleased to see him replaced in a
position where he could be so useful, and to which, in a few years, it'
may perhaps be possible to restore him, at present I cannot deny that it
is an advantage to the new Government that, whilst retaining his valuable
services, it should not be prejudiced in the public eye by his being the medium
of communication on all occasions between the administration and the com-
munity.
7. I have therefore, with his own full concurrence, appointed Mr. Thurston
Auditor-General, at a salary of £SOO per annum, and combined the office of
Colonial Secretary with that of Receiver-General, an arrangement, I may
mention, by which a saving of £IOO per annum is effected. —I have, etc.
Lady Gordon to Mrs Ryan
Government House, Nasova, Fiji, September 30. —We have
been here about ten days, but we are still in a hopeless state of mess
and confusion and noise, and it will be a very long time before
we can feel at all settled, and longer still before I can get every-
thing into the nice order I should like. The children and nurses
are still living at a small house on the hill, lent us by Mr.
Thurston (Auditor-General). It is a very little way off, but
rather a steep pull for me to get up there. Nurse comes down
morning and evening to dress me, and brings the children down
to their dinner at one. Their other meals are carried up to
them. They are extremely happy up there. Eka has been
taken in by the Havelocks, who have a very nice little house a
little beyond the children’s, up a still steeper hill. I don’t know
how I shall ever manage to get up there, (Captain Havelock is
now acting Colonial Secretary and Receiver-General). I shall
send you a little plan of this house. There is a verandah which
goes all round it on both sides; it is at present paved with large
boulders which are most painful to walk on, but the Engineers
are now flooring it, and when that is done it will be much more


comfortable. On one side they are building new public offices
(a native reed house, thatched, with a verandah round it). When
they are finished, the present public offices wdll be turned into
offices for the Governor’s staff and the middle part will be all
bedrooms. On the other side of the house is a large wooden
building, also thatched, containing a large drawing-room and two
bedrooms. It is a good deal higher than this, and is approached
by a covered way and a broad flight of wooden steps. It is so
near the hill behind that I am afraid it will be rather hot in the
hot season. This building is nearly finished, but I expect it will
be a fortnight still before we can get into it. I think I shall
put the children and Eka into the two bedrooms in it, and take
the Governor’s present office for my bedroom, when the new office
is ready. As for the servants, they are perfectly hopeless.
Abbey’s description of them was quite correct, “They never
works unless they likes, and that is seldom.” There are eight of
them about the house, generally doing nothing. Mrs. Abbey and
nurse between them make the beds and do the house-work.
Captain Knollys has sent to Mauritius for two coolie boys, and
when they come I hope we may do better, but they may not be
here for months. In the meantime, it is very discouraging for
poor Abbey. Besides our own large party we have been having a
series of dinners—Chiefs, who are all assembled at Levuka just
now for Council. We usually have two Chiefs at a time, with
two interpreters and Mr. Olive. To the first dinner we had the
ex-King Thakombau (the Yunivalu he is called now) and another
’ Chief. They come in their native dress, i.e. a white shirt and a
sulu, which is a long kilt made of tappa cloth, with a good deal
of white tappa wound round and round the waist; bare feet
and legs. The Chiefs sit one on each side of the Governor, whq
talks to them through the interpreter. I was greatly interested
in seeing the Yunivalu. He is such a fine dignified old man,
with a most commanding manner, and perfectly at his ease. He
is a perfect gentleman in his manner. I talked to him a little-
through the interpreter. When he went away, I gave him,
through Captain Knollys, a Japanese bowl I had, full of Sydney
oranges, with which I heard afterwards that he was very much
pleased, though he received it with indifference, which is their
way. The next day we had Ratu Abel, the Yunivalu’s eldesl
son, a very fine-looking fellow, but not equal to his father.
lYesterday, Maafu, the great Tongan Chief, came; he is an ex-
tremely clever man, and the handsomest of them all. If it werq
not for his brown colour he would be like a very high-bred,!
rather large Frenchman! Their perfectly well-bred ease of]
manner is most surprising.


October s.—Yesterday we had a most pleasant day. We all
went in the boats to the next island (Moturiki) where we
picnicked and spent some hours wandering about. It took about
two hours to get there, partly rowing and partly sailing. The
Governor and I, A. J. G., and Captain Knollys and Mrs.
Havelock went in our boat, which is a beauty, and exceedingly
fast: the rest had another, and the luncheon followed in a third.
The islands are very lovely seen from the sea. We could see
about six of them, and had a distant view of Viti Levu (the
biggest). Eka made an outline for a sketch, but as she means
to colour it from memory, it won’t be very like! It was a
perfectly delightful day —not at all too hot. I daresay we shall
often make expeditions of this kind. We landed at a native
village close to the shore, and all went into a large native house.
We had our own mats with us and these were spread on the floor
and we sat down upon them, the Governor by himself, on a mat
of his own. There were four or five people in the house dressed
in nothing but their sulus (one woman with flowers stuck in
her hair). They all went on with their occupations without
apparently taking any notice of us, one of them weaving a mat.
Sitting is their attitude of respect; they never stand in presence
of the Governor, except they are told they may. It was so
picturesque : —the floor of the house was covered with mats, one
part was slightly raised for a bed, and had very fine mats on it,
and in one corner was a cooking place; there was a low door on
three of the four sides, with a log put across it to prevent the
pigs from coming in. Our native boatmen all sat on one side,
in their sulus and little Chinese coats of dark blue calico. We
sat silent for a little while, and then they brought in baskets of
cocoa-nuts and cut them open for us, and we drank the refreshing
milk out of them. It was then suggested that we should have
some “yaqona,” and large roots were brought in, and the drink
prepared in the usual way, by the boatmen and some of the
others, and some more men came in to sing and clap hands while
it was being done. It is considered a very solemn ceremony,
and we all sat silent. Now I must tell you that we have all
taken to the yaqona drinking—even I! If you look at Fiji and
the Fijians , pages 121-123, you will see an exact description of the
manner in which it is made, and the whole ceremony, and perhaps
you may think, as nurse does, that it is a most “ disgusting
practice.” We have each our own bowl, half a cocoa-nut carefully
prepared and polished by constant use; the yaqona forms a
beautiful white enamel with a kind of blue bloom upon it—some
of them are very old and most highly prized. Arthur has had
two most beautiful ones given him, and I have a very nice little
T


one of my own. We all take great pride in our bowls, and take
the greatest care of them, wrapping them up, when not in use, in
a piece of white tappa. Well, after we had partaken of the
yaqona, (all but Eka, who does not go in for it,) we all wandered
out and found a nice place near the sea with a most lovely view,
where Mrs. Havelock and I established ourselves, while the rest
set off for a walk, Arthur and Captain Knollys staying with us.
Here we had our luncheon, which had arrived in its boat, and at
about half-past 4 we started again and got home before dark.
Before I left Sydney, I had an opportunity of sending home
some parcels, and some time or other you will get a small parcel
containing a native Fijian basket, in which is a very fine piece of
tappa (native cloth). These things were sent to me by Arthur
just before I left Sydney. There are also, in an envelope, two of
the little plumes made of the inside of a cocoa-nut which the
Fijians wear in their hair, and two Chinese spoons, and two
cocoa-nut sticks for Willie. If I had had time and longer notice
I would have sent some more things. I shall send a box from
here by the very first opportunity. All sorts of nice things can
be got. lam sure you would like the native mats and baskets.
The little parcel seemed hardly worth sending, but it will remind
you of us. The mats can be got for about two shillings each, six
feet long; some are larger and dearer; nearly every day they are
brought here for sale ; some of them are very fine and soft, and
most of the gentlemen have them to sleep on instead of sheets.
I intend to get some for the children; they would be much
cooler than sheets. All the native houses are full of them, piled
one over another. The tappa I sent you is a very pretty piece;
I don’t quite know what you can do with it. Here we use it as
hangings for the walls, and the effect is extremely good.
October 10.—A small man-of-war schooner, the Renard , has
just come in unexpectedly, and brought a large double budget of
letters for me from Sydney, —dates, July 7 and July 22. You
had not even yet heard of our arrival at Sydney! lam so glad
to hear such a good account of you all, and that Baby is so well
this summer. How different it must feel at Ascot this autumn
from last year when we were all there, and formed quite a
powerful family clique! Fancy our having already got into our
new house, which was only begun two months ago! I cannot
say it is finished yet, but as we could no longer keep the little
cottage on the hill for the children, we cleared the workman out
of the drawing-room, which is almost done, and had some beds
put up there, and yesterday they and nurse and Marques all
encamped there. Of course there is nothing to dry in a wooden


house in this climate, and the moment it is built it can be lived
in. The drawing-room is very large. It has a nice wide
verandah round two sides, and feels delightfully cool and airy.
The two bedrooms will not be finished for some time, and till
they are ready, Eka must stay on with the Havelocks, as there
is really no room where we can put her. The children were not
very well when first they came; they had bad colds and could
not eat, and Jack was dreadfully bitten by mosquitoes, but they
are getting acclimatized now, and both seem very well. Jack,
especially, looks most blooming.
You ask if they are grown, and certainly they are, very
much. Nevil’s frocks have all had to be let down, and Jack
just fits the new sailor clothes, which were much too big for
him. He wears on week days dark blue serge trousers and
white shirts, which look so nice; on Sundays he is all white—
but then he requires two suits a day to look clean! He is
getting a very fine handsome boy. Fortunately, all the staff are
very fond of children, and they are made great pets of, but I
don’t think it hurts them. Nevil is a very good little girl now,
and not at all conscious. Jack has brought in some sea-weed
to-day, and he says he has made such a nice little sandy beach
in the verandah with stones and dirt! Nothing can pull better
together or be nicer than the staff. The four now living in the
house are all so very nice. Captain Olive lives about three miles
off, but he has a room here, and is constantly here, nearly always
at luncheon; he is particularly nice, too. A. J. Gordon, who is
six feet, is the shortest of the five ! The “ Baron ”is expected
back to-morrow. lam told, too, that he is “ one of our sort,”
and that I shall like him very much.
On Sundays we dine at two o’clock, and, besides our own
party, Captain Olive, Charles Mitchell, (Commissioner of Lands,)
and his clerk, Mr. Eyre, always dine with us. (I am presently
going out for a ride with A. J. G. and Mr. Maudslay walking by
my side. In one direction you can ride along the beach for four
or five miles.) The ponies answer very well, but they are not
beauties. My ride was not very successful, for after I had got
about half a mile, we found the tide was too high for us to go
on, and we had to turn back. A woman came this morning
with baskets. I bought four at Is. each. How I should like
to send you them; they are charming. One is a scrap basket,
or rather I will make it one. What a different kind of life I
lead to what you do ! I will describe oqe day ; but of course it
will be rather different when we have a drawing-room, for now
we have only one sitting-room, the dining-room.
We breakfast at 8.30. Most of the gentlemen have early


tea in their rooms, but I don’t give in to such an unnecessary
practice. Directly after breakfast, the Governor and staff go
off to their work. Mr. Maudslay and I stay in the dining-room,
and go on with our decorations. I give the children their lessons
in the verandah, and do various household things, but I have
nothing to do with dinners or actual house-keeping, which
Captain Knollys manages entirely. I don’t think he likes
interference, and I am only too glad to leave it to him, and
I seldom go near Abbey’s quarters. We lunch at 1, and the
children have their dinner at a small table at the end of the
room, waited on by Nurse. After luncheon, we make our plans
for the afternoon. I generally go out boating—one of them
is always ready to go with me and steer, generally either
Captain Knollys or Mr. Le Hunte, both of whom are first-rate at
boating. The new boat, which was built here under the
direction of Captain K., is a beauty, very fast and most com-
fortable. We have a crew of six Fijians. Sometimes I take the
children: Nevil likes it very much, but Jack is soon bored.
The boat only holds three besides the steerer, or rather, only
looks well with three in it! Arthur calls it my carriage. It
cost £9O. He is building a bigger one in Sydney, which will be
his state barge. When we come in, we usually sit in the
verandah and play with the children, and the Governor has his
Fiji master, who stays till dressing-time, so that I see very
little of him, for often he writes and does business all the
afternoon, as well as from breakfast till luncheon. We dine at
half-past seven, and after it we generally sit in the verandah for
a short time till the yaqona drinking begins. About nine o’clock,
they all go and change their clothes, and go to Captain Olive’s
rooms, where some of the Fijian Guard are assembled, and there
they have their “yaqona” with all the proper honour and
solemnity, and I see no more of them. They don’t like me to
go in, but some one brings me out my bowl, which I thoroughly
enjoy. It is rather like a slight mixture of Gregory’s powder
and soap-suds, but the moment you have swallowed it, a most
delicious taste comes into your mouth, and you feel most com-
fortable and refreshed. Before ten o’clock, Igo to bed. This
is the kind of life it will be, with slight variations. When the
drawing-room is done, I shall have one afternoon a week for
seeing ladies; as yet I have seen no one except Mrs. Havelock.
We constantly have three or four extra men to dinner, Officers
of the Barracouta , Engineer Officers, Planters, Officers of the
Government, and Chiefs. I don’t think we shall often have a
lady. Things have already greatly improved since I came, but
are very far from what I should like to see them. The servants


are such a trouble. Abbey came in to-day just before dinner,
and said : “I am very sorry, my Lady, that you can’t have any
soup to-night, but the soup and the tureen are just gone smash.”
The first day we used our beautiful new glass, one of them let
fall two decanters full of wine. We have returned to black
bottles since that, waiting for better days ; but I am going by
this mail to order out a fresh lot of glass and china from home,
as I know what we brought with us won’t last six months, besides
I was not prepared for such a very large house party. Captain
Knollys and Mr. Le Hunte went away for three days to Mbua
in a boat, and returned at about nine o’clock last night, bringing
back ’with them the “ Baron.” They all three walked in barefoot,
in their suits of boating flannel with their trousers rolled up to
their knees ! and then they were taken off to have some yaqona.
Baron von Hugel is a tali, good-looking young fellow of 21,
with a slight German accent. He seems very nice indeed.
He is brother to the man who married Lady Mary Herbert.
He is collecting curios for the British Museum, and seems quite
domesticated here for the present. He is a favourite with all.
Abbey says ; “ The Baron is a re-mar-kably nice young gentleman,
considering he is a German.”
October 18.—I have not written for several days, but there
has been nothing particular to say. We are going to have
a dinner party to-night; two Naval Officers, one Engineer do.,
two Missionaries, which with our seven selves makes twelve.
The cook and five of our Fiji servants are ill, so we are in great
difficulty, and Abbey is cooking the dinner himself. There are
workmen all round the house; on one side —the passage from
dining-room to kitchen—the verandah is all dug up, previous to
being floored, adding greatly to the difficulties to-night! There
are two large native houses quite close to this house—in one are
encamped, for the present, about twenty engineers, and in the
other live the Fiji guard, about thirty of them; these also form
the boats’ crews when wanted. The two sentries who pace up
and down before the house look so odd and picturesque in their
sulus of white tappa, and Chinese dark blue jackets, and their
great bushy heads of yellow hair.
From Baron von Hugel
Navuso, Rewa River, October 4, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur Gordon—
Your kind note of 30th September was a great pleasure to me, here in my
lonely retreat. Thanks very much for having my room kept for me, which
unfortunately was left in rather a disorderly state. But my snakes and
other spiritual “beasties” I did run over, so I hope none of my pets have


behaved disagreeably towards neighbours. Time slips by wonderfully quickly
here—though I hardly know how. It is a horribly lazy life lam leading, and
my usual collecting energy even seems to have forsaken me. Occasionally I
do skin a bird, but life of any sort is scarce here. Native 11 curios” are
likewise rarities, so that I pass the day chiefly in smoking, reading, sleeping,
and yaqona drinking. Amongst the few things that I have learned since
coming here is to paddle a canoe, and going across in a little takia is not bad
fun, for there is the excitement of being swamped—which I succeed in doing
at least once a day and getting to the shore just in time with the canoe full
of water. A longing shark or two may be thrown into the picture just to give it
a finish. Adi Kuila is still here, though she has been going to Bau ever since
Your Excellency’s visit here. Of course I have got on first-rate with her, and
we are on most affectionate terms ; she calling me her ‘ £ Gone,” 1 and I her my
“ Nan.” 2 The news of Lady Gordon’s arrival quite excited the old lady, and
necessitated the immediate unpacking of all her boxes. I was taken into
confidence and we held review of all her ladyship’s ‘‘wardrobe.” The
number of dresses, sulus, likus, etc., she brought out quite astonished me.
This is a dreadful bit of prose, but I hope you will kindly excuse it, for I
had no intention of imposing this infliction on Your Excellency. However,
it will show what a lazy wretch your humble servant is. I feel very much
flattered at Lady Gordon’s wish to see me, but “distance has its charm,”
which, lam afraid, would be summarily dismissed could Ibe seen now. Really
my miserable “outrig” frightens me ; and, for the present I think, with your
permission, I had better remain in the bush, and only show myself by and
by. Pray forgive this scrawl, and believe me to remain, ever yours sincerely.
P.S. Mrs. Witherow has just received the case of plants. They are in
first-rate condition, and I’ll see they are properly planted out.
. From the Attorney-General
Attorney-General’s Office, October 20, 1875. —My dear Sir—l observe
in the Gazette No. 11, dated 16th inst., which only reached me yesterday
afternoon, that Mr. Burt’s name is included among other persons whom you
have been pleased to appoint as Members of the Board of Health. Without
wishing in any way to reopen a very unpleasant matter, I would submit that
Mr. Burt’s official conduct towards me has been such that I must respectfully
decline to sit with him on this Board, nor do I wish to be associated with
him in any manner whatsoever. Apart from this consideration, I cannot
help thinking that, as a member of the Board, I should be placed in the
singularly invidious position of being liable to be brought into conflict in
legal matters with a person who has lately filled the post I now occupy,
and who possesses no professional status whatever, except such as is
temporarily conferred upon him by the Chief-Justice. Having regard also
to the constant calls which are already made on my time, and the numerous
duties which I have to perform, I trust that you will see fit to remove my
name from the list of Members of the Board of Health. I make this request
with the less hesitation, seeing how strong the Board is, and knowing how
little its action can be affected by my absence, and at the same time I wish
1 Child.
2 Mama.


to assure you of my desire at all times to further your views and the interests
of the colony to the utmost.
Mr. J. E. Mason to the Governor
Carnarvon House, Levuka, October 16, 1875. —Your Excellency—l
have the honour to inform you that in a recent trip in the paddle-wheel
steamer “Pride of Yiti,” to the Sigatoka River, Yiti Levu, we found it un-
advisable to penetrate the interior of the country, owing to the following
circumstances On the 9th instant we landed at Mr. Bucknell’s plantation,
about twelve miles from the Sigatoka River. He told us that a few days
previously a large number of mountaineers fully armed had surrounded his
house, but had retired without molesting him. In the evening of the same
day we anchored in a small bay, about half a mile from the mouth of the
river, and as James Burns (an old colonist with whom we wished to ascend
the river) was absent from home, Mr. Page, the master of the steamer, called
on Patrick Fox who lived in the bay. On Mr. Page’s return on board he gave
us such an alarming account of Fox’s tears that Sub-Lieutenant Ommaney,
H.M.S, Barracouta, went with me the same night to see Fox. He reported
that for several nights and days he had kept watch with armed Fijians, as
the mountaineers had threatened to burn his house and crops. That they
had already done considerable damage to some maize, and that he was in
fear of his life. He begged us to make a report of this. The next morning
we steamed to Hadroga to see Ratu Luki, Chief of the district, accompanied by
whom we next day ascended the river about two miles to the Sigatoko town.
After a consultation with his people, he told us that it was not safe to go
up the river, as the natives in the towns one mile farther up had thrown off
their cloth, etc., and that he did not care to lend us canoes or men to go with
us. About 11 o’clock the same night, a messenger brought a note from Fox,
stating that he had buried his goods, as he had again heard that the
mountaineers were coming. On being interrogated by Mr, Page, the messenger
said that a large number of men had that day come down from the mountains,
and were staying for the night at a town about one mile from us. We therefore
relinquished the object of our trip, and returned to Levuka. I have, etc.
Mr. Carew to Mr. Gordon
Cuva, Nadroga, October 18, 1875 —My dear Gordon —I have just heard
that a neighbour is going to start for Levuka. We arrived here last Friday,
staying two days at Serua. We had a meeting there, the different tribes
having arrived there for the purpose of having a‘ 1 burua or general feast
in connection with death of a chief. The Sigatoka people appear to be in
a disturbed state, but rumours both of natives and whites are evidently much
exaggerated. A man named Meader, a citizen of the United States, is always
in hot water with them ; he reports that they have just dug up all his sweet
potatoes and taken away all his corn. lam going to get an interview with
these natives to-morrow, I trust. I have to wait now until I hear from them
in answer to a message I have sent them. If I succeed in getting an interview
with them, I am confident of being able to put an end to these troubles, but this
man Meader is a notorious blackguard, an “ old hand ” from the Line Islands.


I feel confident he will have to be sent away from this part of the country
before long. I intend to read the “Prohibition Ordinance” to him.
Through the U.S. Consul he made the natives give him a piece of land as
indemnity for “ buturaka ”-ing him, and I believe this is the source of the
trouble. I have sent messengers to all parts of the interior ; when they return
I shall write and let you know, so that His Excellency may appoint a day
for the meeting here. I think the worst of the tribes are getting alarmed ;
the murderers of the people at Yatubau have been sent away from the parts
they have been harbouring in, and are now scattered about. When I get
this investigation over at Header’s place I shall send a report up to His
Excellency. I think a partner of Header’s, named Fox, has been shooting
lately at the natives. Ratu Luki tells me that Hr, Layard and his son came
here and were much annoyed at his refusing to accompany them up the
Sigatoka. He says Hr. Layard said, “You know lam the Consul, and there
is an officer of a man-of-war, you ought to go with us.” He very wisely
refused to go. The people of a village at mouth of the river advised Page
not to go up the river. All these troubles originate in the land. I believe
Ratu Kini must have sold land up there that he had no right to dispose of.
If I can only once get hold of these people I have little fear of not getting
on all right with them, the difficulty will he in capturing the murderers.
—Yours very faithfully, in haste.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasoya, Fiji, October 20, 1875. —Hy Lord—with reference to my
despatch No. 56 of the 10th ultimo, I have the honour to enclose a copy of a
letter addressed to me by Hr. James Hason, a Justice of the Peace for the
island of Taviuni, respecting the present state of the southern part of the
island of Vitu Levu, lately visited by him.
2. The picture drawn by Hr. Hason is, I think, not a little exaggerated.
The man, Fox, of whom he speaks, is a notorious alarmist; and there can, I
fear, be no doubt that he and a considerable number of the white settlers in
his neighbourhood wish to bring about a collision, which will eventually lead
to the destruction of the tribes who now occupy the extensive and fertile
plains of the Sigatoka. Those great tracts of rich lands will thus, they flunk,
be rendered easy of acquisition. Nor will it be easy to dispute the defective
titles which they have obtained from the late Ratu Kini of Nadroga, of lands
over which he exercised no shadow of authority, and to the property of
which he had no claim.
3. A well-known resident at the mouth of the Sigatoka, James Byrne by
name, Hr. Fox’s next neighbour, who only left that district several days after
the visit of the “Pride of Yiti,” was with me to-day, and informs me that
the alarming stories reported at the close of Hr. Hason’s letter were almost
groundless. I also enclose an extract of a private letter just received from
Hr. Carew, which points to a good deal of exaggeration.
4. Nevertheless, making every deduction for the influence of fear, cupidity,
and credulity, and for that of the pleasure of circulating alarming tales, there
remains sufficient to cause a very considerable degree of anxiety.
5. It is my own intention to visit this district very shortly, and Hr.
Carew is now making arrangements for a meeting there between me and the


Chiefs of the interior. If peace can be preserved up to that time I have little
doubt of its permanent maintenance ; and that it will be preserved I have
every confidence, unless steps are taken by some of the lawless white settlers—
Americans —to force on a collision.—l have, etc.
Mr. Carew to the Colonial Secretary
Yuba, Ba Province, October 29, 1875.—Sir—I have the honour to
acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, dated the 22nd October 1875,
referring to the alarming reports as to the state of affairs existing in the
neighbourhood of the Sigatoka Eiver, and enclosing a copy of a letter
received by his Excellency from J. E. Mason, Esq., and an extract from the
Fiji Argus of that date. In the absence of my journal, which is at my head-
quarters at Cuvu, Nadroga, I can only forward a general report of my
proceedings since leaving Levuka. I arrived in due course at Serua where I
found the Buli Eatu na Deuba expecting his people to come in to receive a
report from him of affairs transacted in Levuka during his stay there ; I
therefore awaited their arrival, and delivered an address, which gave great
satisfaction to the assembly. I then proceeded to Korolevu, and being
compelled to stay several hours at the residence of Mr. Bucknell, by the state
of the tide, I had every opportunity of discovering the real state of his mind
with reference to the natives of the interior in his neighbourhood. It
appeared clear to me that Mr. Bucknell’s family were subjected to annoyance
from the natives, who in their frequent visits to Korolevu —which is one of
their sea-coast villages, and immediately adjoining Mr. Bucknell’s house—
are compelled to pass through his plantation and at the back of his house.
Their object in staying about Mr. Bucknell’s house, as confessed to me by
that gentleman, is the gratification of the natural curiosity of savages ; —for
example, I was told by one of the family, that the pump alone was an object
of never-ending wonder to the people. I asked Mr. Bucknell twice, in the
most pointed manner, if he apprehended danger from these people; he, on
both occasions, assured me that he did not fear any attack. He is a hard-
working man, and a very old colonist in New South Wales ; he finds their
visits annoying and obstructive ; but, on the other hand, he appears to be
totally devoid of those attributes considered absolutely essential in dealing
with a warlike and uncivilised people. The Buli of this district has, I believe,
considerable influence and authority over the people, and although he would
not be able to prevent an assault being committed out of his sight, and on
the impulse of the moment* under excitement, yet I believe he is quite capable
of restraining his people from the commission of any grave offence ; moreover,
I hear from the natives on all sides that these people are well-disposed.
I then made the best of my way along the coast towards Cuvu, the resi-
dence of Eoko Tui Nadroga, and, landing at the plantation of Messrs.
Clark and M‘Donald in the vicinity, met an American citizen, named
Meader, who has a small plantation on the coast, two miles east of the
mouth of the Sigatoka,—a man named Fox lives with him. Meader at once
complained to me of the behaviour of a heathen tribe in his vicinity, called
the “ Kai Conua.” These people, after professing Christianity for some years,
finally returned to heathenism during the outbreak of measles. Meader
stated that they were in the constant habit of robbing his plantation, and


had stolen 700 fowls; also, during that very week, had dug up, and taken
away in one night, an acre of sweet potatoes and thirty bushels of maize.
During the conversation Header stated that Fox had fired at the natives
during the past week. I then proceeded to the village of Cuvu, and consulted
with the Roko Tui and other intelligent natives, and from this and other
conversations held with several of the white settlers, I arrived at the opinion
that Header and Fox were, in a very great measure, to blame for their
troubles, —being both of them hasty in temper, and given to the use of
threatening and abusive language. The opinion is general amongst the
natives, and I quite concur in it, that these reputed robberies should not be
regarded in the light of a political demonstration, but would merely be the
result of the natural thievish propensities of the natives, which are always
allowed, during the existence of heathenism, to run unchecked, unless the
party robbed is under the special protection or “tabu” of the chief. I am
also quite convinced that the robberies complained of by Header and Fox are
vastly exaggerated, if indeed they exist at all. I then sent messengers to
the portion of the Conua tribe living on the coast under “ Vaka-yava-nuka,”
nominally the Buli of the whole district, directing him to procure a
meeting, as soon as practicable, between me and these troublesome tribes.
After a delay of several days, we met at Yunavutu, the residence of the Buli
Cokoibusa, on the Sigatoka River, and two miles from its mouth. I then
explained most clearly the intention of his Excellency with regard to the
natives, both of the sea-coast and the interior, also my duties, and the
extent of my powers and jurisdiction. The conversation lasted for many
hours, and I received assistance from Emose Loca, the Hagistrate, and the
Roko Tui also explained the action of the Chiefs at Levuka, in installing the
Governor after native custom, and the full extent of the meaning thereof.
I told the meeting that there was one thing above all others they must
understand, once for all, in the clearest and most unmistakable manner,
that all must recognise the ruling of Great Britain, and obey it; that
murder, dragging off women, and robbery were forbidden, and must be
punished, not as offences against the individual, but as a matter of public
policy, and that they would readily understand that one person, or one tribe,
could not be allowed to endanger the peace of the whole country. I then
told them that in case they should say hereafter that I had deceived them,
I intended to take a number of officers into the interior, and there establish
a government village ; that it would not be a white man’s affair, nor a
Bau man’s camp, nor a camp of sea-coast people, but that I should ask all
the tribes to give me some young men to be trained as officers with the
others, and their duty would not be to protect evil, but not to carry oppression
to any section of the community, and told them that I was the declared
enemy of oppression in all its forms ; also that I would allow no “ lala ” to be
practised by those under my orders, but that all food, etc., required would be
fairly and honestly paid for ; that they might please themselves with
reference to religion, but that any person annoying them on the score of
their refusal to become Christians would be punished ; and, finally, that I
would not ask the tribes of the interior to pay any taxes. I then entered
into the matter of the alleged robberies at Header and Fox’s place, who were
both present at my request; they denied all knowledge of this, but ascribed
the theft to the children of a Christian village on the coast immediately


adjoining Header’s place, and called “ Korotoga they stated that these white
men constantly annoyed them with threats and abuse for a long time past,
and one of them had quite recently told them that war was declared against
them, and they would be carried off, and this had caused the greatest alarm
and consternation in their minds and that of their friends in the interior ;
that upon the arrival of the steamer Pride of Viti in the river they had
all believed it to contain a war party, and had assembled at a village called
“ Tavuni,” above the river, for the purpose of preventing the ascent of the
vessel and party. I then interpreted the “Peace and Good Order” Ordin-
ance to them, and read it to Header and Fox, explaining most clearly that
hasty and angry tempers alone, if considered dangerous to the peace of a
district and the safety of its inhabitants, might be considered sufficient cause
for the deportation of persons out of their district, in terms of the Ordinance;
that they must upon no account whatever use fire-arms except for absolute
and immediate protection of life, but that all persons killing another, even in
self-preservation, stood in deadly peril in the eyes of the law, and that onus
of proof rested with those using the weapons. Also that the very next time
they fired at a native, even if merely for the purpose of frightening him
(this in answer to a question by Fox), I should at once report them, and also
recommend that the Ordinance be carried out without delay. The meeting
lasted from 3 p.m. until 1 a.m. on the following morning, and the natives
expressed themselves as being much pleased and reassured ; and I have
no doubt whatever in my mind but that the best results may be expected
from it. A Christian native had informed me that a girl, between whom
and himself a mutual attachment existed, was betrothed to a heathen Chief
then present, and that the girl’s friends approved of the attachment. On
my applying to these men, they abandoned at once their claim to the
girl in the most cheerful and gratifying manner possible. I then decided that
the property paid at the former betrothal be repaid to those giving up the
girl, and that the marriage be delayed until my directions were complied with.
This gave great pleasure to all parties. The girl is now living in the house
of the Buli, and I regard this in the light of a victory over their prejudices
and ill-will. The meeting then separated, the Chiefs first asking me to get
Header and Fox to shake hands and be friends with them, and I finally
adjured them to prevent their young men from stealing and other evil practices.
I then crossed the Sigatoka, and walked to Header and Fox’s plantation,
and under their guidance examined the state of the plantation ; and assum-
ing that thefts had been committed, of which no other evidence appears to
exist than the unsupported statements of Header and Fox, I cannot value
the property said to have been stolen at more than 11s.; and, moreover, if
stealing does exist, I attribute it to the children of the Christian village
“Korotoga” in the immediate neighbourhood. The Buli Yaka-yavu-nuku
being present, I again counselled all parties to be on their guard as to their
future behaviour. A further shaking of hands then took place, and after
removing four men, placed as guards by Header’s request, by Roko Tui
Nadroga, before my arrival, and whose presence I considered calculated to
cause harm, I returned to Cuvu. After a short delay, I proceeded to Nadi,
and from thence to this place, Yuda, where I arrived on the 27th instant,
and had an interview with Bulis Yuda and Sabeto, and learned that
“Hatas,” sent inland some time since at my request, had not yet returned


to report. This I attribute to the difficulties arising in the interior from
their mutual jealousies and fears of treachery from one another. The
arrival of the Superintendent of Police with a party of men on the
afternoon of the same day appearing to me to complicate matters very
seriously, I requested the opinion of the Bulis Yuda and Sabeto, and other
leading natives ; ami as it coincided exactly with my own, that it would
have the effect of alarming the natives, and cause suspicion of our intentions,
and thus prevent the arrival of the Chiefs at Nadi to hold a preliminary
meeting with me on the subject of his Excellency’s proposed meeting; and
it being also quite certain that exaggerated reports of their numbers and
intentions would be spread far and wide throughout the interior, and would
cause most serious and irremediable mischief, I at once despatched two trusty
“Matas” to the tribes about the heads of the Sigatoka to report candidly
the reasons for the arrival of the police and the intentions of the Govern-
ment, and endeavouring to reassure them in every possible manner. I now
await the result, and the arrival of the messengers previously despatched.
A report reached the coast some few weeks ago that the “Qali-Mari”
tribe had burned the town called Korosamito, where the murderers at Yatu-
bau on the Ba River had taken refuge, and had killed the instigator of the
murders, fearing their presence in the vicinity would bring trouble on them.
This report requires confirmation. Having received intimation of the ex-
pected immediate arrival of His Excellency the Governor, I purpose remain-
ing here to await His Excellency’s arrival. Some difficulty has arisen in the
matter of settling the Sabeto people on their lands. I find it quite im-
possible to allow them to rebuild on their old site, as it is within the
boundaries contained in Mr. Cudlip’s deeds, and for other reasons. Mr.
Olive has, however, in conjunction with the Buli, discovered a site, which,
from his report, I consider admirable in every way. I propose going out
on Monday next to lay out the site for the buildings. In conclusion, I
have the honour to state my opinion that there are no grounds whatever
for fearing an outbreak, the reports taken to Levuka by parties interested
in creating a disturbance, partly from desire to obtain possession of much
coveted lands on the Sigatoka River, and partly from the widespread desire
of the settlers to see condign punishment dealt out to the natives, who, being
freeholders themselves, have neither occasion nor the desire to work for
the planters for lengthy periods of time, are purposely exaggerated with
the almost avowed intention to compel the Government to send an expedition
into the interior, for the capture of the inhabitants and the confiscation of
their lands.
At this time, Captain Stevens of H.M.S. Barracouta gave me
much trouble and annoyance. Having a cantankerous temper
and little to do, he corresponded at great length and in a
most disagreeable manner on all sorts of petty questions. I
afterwards was asked by Commodore Hoskins to estimate the
bulk of his letters to me, and found on examination that they
covered over a thousand pages of foolscap, pretty closely written!
His latest move was to ignore any control on my part over his
movements within the group, and he one day announced that


he was about to start on a cruise “to show the flag ” through
the group. The condition of the interior of Viti Levu was
at the time precarious. The “ devil ” tribes of the mountains
were suspicious and restless; the planters of the coast eager
for a collision with them, and eager to make the most of provo-
cations which they exaggerated. I felt pretty sure that if, as
he wished, he went down to the district, he would be induced
to interfere, and would bring about the hostilities I so strongly
deprecated. In fact he based his intention of going on the
appeals made to him by “British subjects,” and his own duty
as Senior Naval Officer to afford them “ protection and support ”
in their proceedings, having really no more business to inter-
fere in the internal affairs of an English colony than in those
of an English county. I was therefore determined not to let
him go, and this especially because to admit such claims as he
put forward to exercise independent interference would be de-
structive of my authority. The immediately following letters
are chiefly on this subject.
To Captain Chapman, R.N., Acting Commodore
Kasova, October 26, 1875.—Sir—I think it only right to inform you that
in writing to the Secretary of State for the Colonies I intend to express an
opinion that there is no longer any necessity for the permanent presence of one
of H. M. ships in this group. It is desirable that it should be not unfrequently
visited by them, but the constant presence of a man-of-war lying in Levuka
harbour is, I think, now as needless as it would be in any other of H.M. colonies.
As I know that the number of ships now on the Australian station is not
very great, and that it is sometimes difficult for the Commodore adequately to
provide for all its duties, I venture to hope that this intimation may not be
disagreeable to you, and, so far as I am concerned, there is no reason why you
should not at once act on it. At the same time, whilst of opinion that the
permanent presence of a man-of-war here is unnecessary, I wish you clearly to
understand that I think it highly desirable, and indeed essential, that the
group should be visited by them at not very distant intervals.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
October 27, 1875.—Sir—I have had the honour to receive a letter of
yesterday’s date, apparently from you, although unsigned.
I have the honour to state in reply that I consider that most serious
objections still exist to the Barracouta visiting the parts of the coast you
mention.
The official reports which I receive from those districts show the rumours
to which you refer to be much exaggerated ; and I am confident that the
presence of a man-of-war on that coast at this time would be seriously
prejudicial to the public interests.
A meeting of the Chiefs of the interior with the Special Commissioner


appointed to confer with them is, I believe, now taking place, and it is my
intention very shortly to confer with them myself. Until after the termination
of this meeting, I most strongly object to the appearance of a man-of-war at
the places in question, as calculated to frustrate my plans for the maintenance
of tranquillity and permanent pacification of those districts, and I am aware
that the Stipendiary Magistrate of the district shares that objection.
Should it hereafter appear to me requisite or desirable that a man-of-war
should repair to the places in question I shall not lose a moment in intimating
to you my opinion to that effect.
You will, I trust, forgive me if before concluding I call your attention to
the close of the first paragraph of your letter, which appears to me founded
upon a misapprehension. In countries not under the dominion of any
civilised power the duty of protecting British life and property doubtless
appertains in a great measure to the Commanding Officers of H.M. ships.
But I must remind you that in a British Colony that duty devolves
exclusively upon its constituted authorities, to whom however, at their
request, I am confident that you and all other officers in command of H.M.
ships will always afford all necessary assistance.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
October 28,1875. —I have had the honour of receiving your letter of this day’s
date informing me of your intention to proceed to-morrow morning to Kadavu.
I should have been glad to have taken advantage of your going there in order
to visit that island myself, as I have not yet been there and am desirous of
seeing it. I fear, however, your very hasty departure will render this im-
possible, and I should therefore be glad to learn whether the duty which
renders your presence necessary is so imperative as to make it essential that you
should leave Levuka before the hourly expected arrival of the Egmont with
the English mail ? I should also be glad to learn when I may anticipate
your return to Levuka.
I have not had the honour of receiving any acknowledgment from you of
my letter of yesterday, but I presume I may conclude that, in consideration of
my strong objection to your doing so, you have at present abandoned all in-
tention of visiting the south-western coast of Yiti Levu.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
October 28, 1875. —Sir—l this afternoon directed my private secretary,
Mr. Le Hunte, to take to you a letter from me, and in delivering it to ask you
whether you would delay your departure for Kadavu (of which you only
informed me at 1 p.m. this day) until the Government mails for Europe could
be prepared.
He states that you informed him that you would receive no message from
me and send none to me.
I regret that you should adopt a course so extremely unusual; but without
making any remark thereon, I now beg to request a reply to the following
questions :
Is the duty on which you are going to Kadavu of such immediate import-
ance as to render it impossible for you to delay your departure for a short
time, so as to enable me to send my mails for Europe by you ?
CHAP.


Will you delay your departure twenty-four hours if I make a requisition to
you to take me and my A.D.C. to Kadavu ? It would be very difficult for
me to make preparations which would enable me to go to-night.
Will you have the kindness to inform me when your return to Levuka may
be expected, as in the interests of the public service it is very desirable
that I should be informed on that point ?
May I also ask you to let me know whether I am right in the supposition
mentioned in the last paragraph of my letter of this morning ?
These are plain and simple questions to which I hope you will not object
to return an answer this evening.
I will not make further remark beyond observing that, although I have not
had the pleasure of seeing your instructions, and therefore cannot say that
you are acting against their tenour, I have reason to be quite certain that it
was the intention of H.M. Government, of the Admiralty, and of Commodore
Goodenough, that your movements in this Colony should only be effected
after concert and in co-operation with me.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
October 28,1875. —Sir—I have had the honour to receive your letter of this
evening’s date.
I regret to perceive that you return no answer to my question whether I
am right in assuming that it is not your intention, in opposition to my ex-
pressed wishes, to visit the southern coast of Viti Levu on your present cruise.
To that question, put in all courtesy, I, the Governor of these islands, and
responsible for their peace and good order, am, I conceive, in courtesy entitled
to receive a reply, and I now beg distinctly to ask whether you refuse to give
it me ?
I can hardly think that it is your intention to interfere in the internal affairs
of this Colony in defiance of my express wishes, but the phraseology of your
letter of the 26th, and your persistent silence on the subject, render it possible
that you may contemplate such a step ; I therefore think it right to remind
you that by Her Majesty’s Royal Charter, read in your presence on Ist ult.,
all her Majesty’s Officers, of whatever service, within the limits of the Colony,
are enjoined to be “obedient, aiding and assisting” to me in the discharge of
my duties, and that if at this time you go to the places referred to you will
disregard my most positive injunctions, and, far from aiding and assisting me,
will in all probability frustrate my policy, and place in extreme danger at
least one most valuable life. Against such a disregard of my official warning,
both I and all the members of my Executive Council are prepared, if necessary,
solemnly to protest. But I can hardly believe that any officer of your standing
and experience would deliberately adopt such a course, nor will such a protest
be prepared without obvious necessity.
I am by no means certain that I shall be able to leave by 6 p.m. to-morrow,
but in case I should find myself able to do so, I will forward a requisition to
you, as you desire, before 3 a.m. to-morrow morning. Meanwhile, in the
name and on behalf of the Executive Council of this Colony as well as my own,
1 beg again to request most courteously that you will inform me whether
you contemplate visiting any point between Serua and Nadi. On my own
behalf alone I may add that I should be grateful to you for information as to


any other places in the colony under my government which you may intend
to visit on the present occasion.
I regret to perceive that you question the correctness of Mr. Le Hunte’s
account of what passed between you and him to-day. It is certain that I
sent you a courteous message and received no reply, and Mr. Le Hunte still
maintains the absolute correctness of his statement that you declined to re-
ceive any message from me ; —that you declined to send any is repeated by
yourself.
To Captain Stevens, R.N.
October 29, 1875.—Sir—I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your various letters 50, 51, and 53, of this day’s date.
2. I am glad to learn that it is not your intention to visit those ports
where, I think, the appearance of a man-of-war would at this moment be cal-
culated to be prejudicial to the public interests.
With regard to the contents of your letter No. 50, I must observe that,
although I cannot profess to have your experience of the duties of a naval
officer, I am perfectly acquainted with those of the government of a British
Colony, and that any active interference in its internal affairs by those in
command of any military or naval force therein, except at the request of the
proper authorities, is not only altogether illegal, but subjects those taking
part in it to very serious penalties.
To Captain Chapman, R.N., Acting-Commodore
October 29. —Sir—I have the honour to enclose copies of certain corre-
spondence between Captain Stevens, R.N., H.M.S. Barracouta, and myself.
In it a question of some small importance is raised, the decision of which
according to Captain Stevens’s wishes would I fear entail a great increase of
trouble and anxiety in the administration of the already difficult government
of this Colony.
2. Captain Stevens appears to claim the right of “showing the flag” in
any part of this Colony, without reference to my wishes or policy, and with-
out previous consultation with me. Ido not now care to question his right
to do so, but I maintain that, if it exists, it should, not only from courtesy, but
with a view to the co-operation and good feeling which ought to exist between
different branches of the public service, be exercised, so far as the internal
affairs of this Colony are concerned, only in concurrence with me.
3. I was informed by a despatch from the Secretary of State for the
Colonies that the Barracouta would be 1 ‘ placed at my disposal ” for a certain
period, and a proposal to that effect was made by the late Commodore Good-
enough to the Admiralty. Cabins were erected for my use and that of my
staff, and it was evidently contemplated that I should be frequently on board.
4. I was therefore somewhat surprised to receive an intimation from
Captain Stevens, early in September, to the effect that he was about to start
upon a cruise, and, by his declining, except as regarded one place, to compty
with my request that he would name the places under my government which
he intended to visit. I informed him I deemed it inexpedient that he should
then visit the south-western coast of Yiti Levu, and he abstained from doing
so. There, however, the matter then ended. Ido not now claim as an official


right that I should receive such information, (whether entitled to do so or
not), but in ordinary courtesy and for the convenience of the public service
it should, I think, be furnished when asked for.
5. Lately, reports have been received from the district to which I then
referred, which show the natives in that region to be, as they were then, in a
somewhat disturbed state. These accounts have been greatly exaggerated,
partly by fear, partly by cupidity, (for the coast tribes and some of the white
settlers are most anxious that a fray should begin, which must result in the
destruction of the interior tribes and the confiscation of their lands), and
partly by credulity and the pleasure of spreading alarming tales. The Com-
missioner, a very able man, pronounces there to be at present no real danger,
but that a crisis might easily be brought about by any injudicious action, and
such is equally the opinion of the most intelligent settlers of the district whom
I have seen.
6. The Commissioner is now busily engaged among the interior tribes, and
lam to hold a meeting with them myself in a few weeks. In these circum-
stances I deprecate the appearance on the coast of a man-of-war. The interior
tribes now connect the idea of a man-of-war with measles, and would become
desperate with alarm, and the life of the Commissioner, a most valuable
public servant, would be exposed to great danger. On the other hand, the
coast natives and hostile whites would be so encouraged by the presence
and support of a man-of-war that it would be very difficult if not impossible
to restrain them from an attack on the mountaineers.
7. Such are briefly my reasons for deprecating the presence of a man-of-
war at Serua. They are shared by my Executive Council.
8. Whether they be bad or good, however, I must equally deprecate any
unsolicited interference on the part of H.M. ships in the internal affairs of
the Colony.
9. The correspondence which has followed will explain itself, nor will I
make on it any comment.
10. I am utterly at a loss to account for the tone of Captain Stevens’s
official correspondence. I made a cruise in the Barracouta to Suva, and I
was not aware on my return that we were on other than friendly terms. Even
after he had answered my private letters by official despatches, and expressed
his wish not to receive private communications from me on any official subject,
I remained —as indeed I do to this day—ready for any courteous intercourse
with him.
11. But I am bound to say that this state of things cannot continue, and
that it is impossible for me to govern this Colony with success, if I am to be
exposed to unauthorised interference on the part of captains of H.M. ships,
induced, by the representations of private and irresponsible individuals,
to act in a manner deprecated by myself, my Executive Council, and the
constituted authorities of the district affected. My efforts in that direction
shall not be wanting, but I fear I must candidly say that there is small hope
of future cordial co-operation between Captain Stevens and myself.
P.S.— Since writing this despatch I have received from Captain Stevens
the enclosed letter from which it appears that he has renounced the intention
of going to Serua and Nadi.
U


And so ended the matter for the time, but he never lost an
opportunity for giving some petty annoyance, of which perhaps
the most absurd instance was this : The flag of a Governor on
the water is the Union Jack with the arms of the Colony in the
centre; (on land it is the Union Jack simply). Fiji, when I
first came, had not any arms, so I had a round black patch
sewed in their place. When the arms were settled, the patch
was taken off the flag to allow the arms to be put in, and for
a single day the flag was without a badge. Captain Stevens
saw and noticed it —paraded his men on deck, made a great
fuss, and wrote officially the next day to inform me that “ a boat
bearing the Lord High Admiral’s flag” had been seen in the
harbour; could I throw any light on the matter ?
Lady Gordon to Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre
Nasova, October 22 to November 1, 1875.—We have now
been here five weeks, but don’t seem to be much more settled
than we were at first. The new building, which contains a
large drawing-room, fifty-one feet by forty-five, and two bed-
rooms, is covered in and sufficiently furnished for the children
to camp in the drawing-room: the bedrooms are still full of
workmen. There are workmen all round the main house too,
laying down a wooden floor to the verandah, which was paved
with large boulders. It is creeping on by slow degrees, but
everything in Fiji is malua (by and by) and it is almost im-
possible to get anything done. However, we manage, thanks
to Abbey, to get on tolerably well and live very much as one
would in England. Beef and mutton are fairly good; turkeys
and pork, excellent, and we have a good supply of English vege-
tables from seeds sown by Abbey, such as peas, French beans,
salad, etc. Milk is enormously dear, but we can get any
quantity of it, and we are going to set up two cows as soon as
we can get a house built for them. There is very little fruit
excepting pine-apples, which are abundant, (a very fine one costs
sixpence,) and of course bananas; but anything would grow here,
and I hope we may get plenty in time. I constantly get presents
of six or a dozen excellent large pine-apples, and large bundles
of cocoanuts, which are excellent too. A cocoanut usually
contains two tumblersful of water, the coolness of which is most
refreshing. I often have one instead of 5 o’clock tea. After being
about two months without any letters whatever, I at last got a
double lot by a man-of-war schooner, the Benard, which arrived
from Sydney on the 10th of this month; the dates were July 8


and July 23. When I shall get any more I can’t imagine, as the
mails from Sydney are at present most irregular. How Ido
wish and wish you had come with us. I really think you might
have liked it. You would at once have gone in for the mania
for collecting curiosities with which we have all been bitten.
Mr. Maudslay and I have been decorating the dining-room by
hanging them up on the walls. You can’t think how well it
looks. I am certain you would like it. The walls are com-
posed of reeds very neatly bound together and then white-
washed, and this makes a very good background. Such beauti-
ful and artistic patterns can be made with clubs, spears, bowls,
arrows, axes, paddles, etc. We have an immense collection
of these things now between us, increasing every day, and all
the others have lent theirs to be hung up. The room is large
and high, so that there is great scope for it. In the drawing
room I intend to have a collection of pottery, some of which is
really beautiful and artistic—very rude of course. I brought
in Nurse the other day to look at it, and asked her if it did not
look like the house of a great Chief ? She said, with a sneer,
“ It’s all very well to hang up their things, so long as you don’t
adopt their disgusting habits, and it looks like it.” Jack
and Nevil are becoming very Fijian. Jack said to me when he
saw the moon rising, “ Mummie, you must kiss your hand to the
moon and wish for something; you mustn’t say what you wish,
but I know what it is—you wish for spears and clubs.” They
are very fond of dressing themselves up in sulus, and winding
tappa round their waists, and strutting about with little clubs
in their hands, threatening to club every one. Sometimes they
pretend to be cannibals, and Jack says, “I’m going to club
Bones (his puppy) and cut him up and eat him.” Jack said to
Nurse one day, “I have heard that the people in this island
used to be savages and eat men ; I wonder whether Sam Weller
(Samuela) has ever eated a man. Perhaps he had eated a
little bit of a man.” Sam Weller is Captain Knollys’s black
servant, aged eight! Jack is most amusing now. He
talks a great deal in a very low confidential tone and is very
precise. He came in yesterday and said, “ Mummie, I have got
three pet animals, and do you know what they are ? They are
Harwigs (earwigs), and I have found a way of taming them. I
first tread upon them, and then they are quite tame, but one
Harwig stang.” They are both very much grown. I saw Jack
rubbing a dirty old cocoanut shell, and he said, “Do you know
what lam doing? I am polishing a yaqona bowl for myself.”
The things I like best are the bowls, there are a great variety
of shapes. Mr. Maudslay has a bowl with a handle like this


[sketch]. I covet this very much, but we have got some good
ones of our own, and some very fine yaqona bowls, which by
the constant use of yaqona get a beautiful bluish white
enamel upon them, a very fine polish. Over each of the
nine doors in the dining-room we have put up a very large
kava bowl, from three to four feet across, with a club on each side,
in this way [sketch]. The clubs cost from one shilling to four
shillings each. Very good bowls are sometimes as much as
fifteen shillings. I wonder whether you would care about them.
Arthur has had some of the weapons and bowls photographed
to send to [Mr. Franks at] the British Museum. I must try
and get one of the photographs to send you. Baron von Hugel
has got a very large collection. He is most eager about it.
When I arrived here, I found A. J. L. G. had just returned from a
walking tour through the big island of Yiti Levu. He has
written a short account of it and illustrated it with some very
good drawings. Arthur has had a few copies printed with
photographs of the drawings, and I shall send you one by this
or the following mail. . . . About once a week we have a
boating picnic. We have had two since we came. I told Jane
all about the first. Last Tuesday we all went, including Eka
and Mrs. Havelock, in the same order, in three boats, to the
other side of this island, where we went about a mile up a
beautiful river to a native village called Bureta. There we
landed and took possession of the Chiefs house, and as before
we all sat upon the mats, and had cocoanuts and yaqona.
Arthur, Eka, Colonel Pratt, and Mr. Le Hunte then set off for
a long walk, while we strolled about and had luncheon. After
they returned, all the children of that village and another came
and had a meke , and then had a little examination in reading and
writing by the Governor. First the Protestants and then the
Catholics were examined. Arthur is beginning to talk a little
Fijian now; he works hard at it in all his spare time, (which
is little enough). The school children looked so picturesque.
They had nothing on but their sulus and a wreath of flowers or
leaves, most tastefully made, wound round their waists or necks
or over one shoulder. The sulu is a yard and a half of cloth
(print or white) worn round the waist like a kilt. Our livery
is a scarlet sulu (of ingrain twill) made long, nearly to the feet,
a white jacket with very short sleeves trimmed with red, cut
square in front; round the neck is a broad black band of
Pandanus leaf like a ribbon, from which hangs a large white
boar’s tooth, grown into a complete circle, which looks very
well on the brown skin of the bare chest. A good many
folds of white tappa are worn round the waist as a sash. The


whole dress is most effective. The sulu is scalloped round
the bottom rather deep. They wear a great bush of really
dark hair, but quite light, almost yellow, on the surface
from the habit they have of limeing their heads from time to
time. They all do it, men and women; every now and then
one appears with his head closely plastered with white lime,
having just the effect of the head of a powdered footman ! We
were three hours rowing home after this picnic, which was
rather tedious, but a day of this sort does one a great deal of
good. I only wish I could take the children, but it would be
too long for them. Eka revels in these expeditions. It is the
one thing she likes, and she generally contrives to get a sketch.
She makes a capital large outline on the spot, but she takes it
home and quite spoils it by finishing it up till it is quite unlike,
and then plastering it up with white paint. Some of her slight
colour sketches, never touched away from the spot, are much
the best things she does, and they are really sometimes very
good.
Saturday evening. —The gentlemen are all gone to have their
yaqona. They all sit on the floor in a semicircle in Captain
Olive’s room (next this) whilst it is being solemnly prepared
by the Fijians, who are also sitting on the floor in another half
circle. They keep up a monotonous but not unpleasant chant
while this is going on. When it is ready, a small bowl of it is
brought to the Governor and poured into his own bowl, and
they shout and clap their hands. While he drinks they remain
silent, and when he throws down the bowl they call out again
and clap, and it goes round to all the others. Captain Knollys
will bring me in my bowlful presently. We go through this
ceremony every evening.
Sunday morning , October 2ith. —One of the great drawbacks
here is the difficulty (for me) of getting to church. It is about
a mile or rather more from the house —a very rough stony path.
I can go the first half of the way in the boat, landing at the
wharf in Levuka, but it is a very difficult landing, and the worst
part of the walk has still to come, and I get dreadfully hot. I
am to-day going to the Engineers’ service, which they have in
a tent half a mile from here. Colonel Pratt reads the service
there. Our clergyman, Mr. Floyd, whom Arthur rather likes,
is gone to Melbourne for four months, and our staff in the
meantime take the duty at the church between them. This
morning, Mr. Le Hunte will read prayers, and Captain Havelock
the lessons and sermon. In the afternoon, Captain Knollys
reads prayers, and Mr. Maudslay preaches. They take it turn


about, and wear a surplice when reading or preaching. Captain
Havelock is our best preacher, and looks most clerical. He is
a very good actor and gets up the part. He always reads one
of Eobertson’s sermons; the others take Kingsley’s, except Mr.
Maudslay, who sometimes gives us one of Sir James Stephen’s
essays. A. J. L. C. is so dreadfully nervous that he always makes
some mistake or other when his turn comes, and he never preaches.
It is rather a nice little wooden church, but much too small, and
very crowded and hot. lam thinking of having some sort of
a chair made in which I can be carried by two Fijians. But I
walk much better than I did. Sydney did me so much good.
Sunday , October 31. —It is a week since I have written any-
thing. We have been looking out day after day for the Egmont ,
which has at last arrived this morning, a fortnight behind time.
She brings me a quantity of letters. . . . She will stay here
three or four days and then take our letters to Sydney. She
will miss the mail, so it will be a long time before you get them.
I am sorry to say she brings the horrid news that the New
Zealand Government have refused to ratify the new mail contract
unless Fiji is left out, so there is an end to our hopes of getting
our letters quickly by the San Francisco route. ... You must
never feel uneasy now if you don’t hear for a long time. I shall
write by every opportunity and hope you will do the same.
Put a letter into the post constantly, not depending only on
the Colonial Office bag. I intend to adopt a new plan and write
a letter once a week and finish it up and then begin another,
instead of waiting till near the mail time.
It is six weeks to-day since we arrived here. The new rooms
are not quite ready yet and the children still occupy the drawing-
room. It is a delightful room, so very high and large, I long
to get into it. It has been pouring with rain all night and to-
day, — drenching. The hot season has regularly set in, heat and
rain, and will last four months. The children are very well,
but their appetites are not good, which of course one must
expect. I really believe, however, that though hot it is a very
healthy place when once one gets used to it. ... lam now
sitting in the great bow window of the new drawing-room and
the children are playing about in the room. They have each
a mat of their own, given them by Andi Kuila (Cakobau’s j
daughter), and they spread them out and sit each on their own, j
surrounded by toys, and “ pretend.” Dr. MacGregor gave them j
each a new little ula (a throwing club) [sketch], with carving t
on the handles, which he thinks were made for some chief’s '
children. Jack is very anxious to put on a liku that he may


look like a “ big chief.” A liku is a fringe worn round the waist,
made of leaves split and dyed most brilliant colours, or of a fibre
that looks like black horse-hair. Sometimes it is the only dress.
I have told Jane about the Chiefs coming to dine with us. That
was about a month ago. They all went away home to their
respective islands soon afterwards. Last week we had a visit
from Andi Kuila, Cakobau’s daughter. She is the widow of
a great Chief in Yiti Levu, and, after the Yunivalu, the greatest
person here. She came to stay for a few days at Driemba, a
native village half a mile off, where Cakobau has a house.
One day last week we asked her to luncheon. She had been
very anxious to see me, and had consulted the Baron, who
knows her very well, which of her dresses, (she has about a
hundred,) she should wear on the occasion. She rather wished
to come in an European dress, but he told her she had much
better wear the native costume, as she would look horrid in
anything else. She arrived at twelve o’clock—a large stout
woman, rather dark in colour, with a beautiful smooth skin.
Her hair was worn short and curly, and slightly and very care-
fully browned by lime. She had on a sulu of white tappa,
fringed at the end, a good deal of white tappa wound round her
waist as a girdle, and a little body of white checked muslin with
short sleeves, exactly like a shift cut short, reaching to the waist,
loose, very neatly made, and trimmed with narrow lace with a
ribbon run in round the neck. She has a very fine intelligent
head, with a nice good-natured expression and a charming smile.
She shook hands with me very heartily and told me through my
interpreter, (a young English lady who speaks Fijian very well,
whom I had asked to come and help me,) that she had brought
her little boy, and some baskets and mats as a present. So we
sent for her attendants, four Fijian ladies, and they all came in
crouching and sat on the floor. The presents were two large
open baskets, the size of cradles, for me, and two very nice mats
for Nevil and Jack. They brought in the little boy, Ratu
Timoci, about three years old, such a nice little brown boy in a
white tappa sulu. The little fellow was rather shy at first, but
is evidently very much spoilt and made a great deal of. He
has five nurses. I could not persuade Nevil and Jack to play
with him. I like Andi Kuila very much. She has all the ease
and dignity of her father, and nothing can be better or more
highbred than her manner. She seemed very much interested
and amused by all our things. She can’t, or says she can’t,
speak a word of English, but I think she understands a good
deal. While we were at luncheon, a man looked in who, she
said, was one of her people, and she went to the door and spoke


to him. He gave her a pen and ink-bottle, and she sat down
on the floor and signed a cheque, which he had brought, “ Arrietta
Kuila ” (Andi means lady); it was so curious. After luncheon I
took her to see the new rooms. She has very small hands and
feet. She stayed a long time, but I at last found out it was
etiquette for me to tell her to go, which I was anxious to do.
A few days after that we had another picnic. Arthur did not
go, as he had a cold. I asked Lady Hackett this time. After
eating our luncheon under a tree, we heard that some games
were going on down the coast, so we got into our boats and
rowed to the place, and found a great number of natives assembled
throwing long reeds with heavy wooden tops, which slid along
the ground on a sort of howling green , (only there was no grass).
It was a match between the “ soldiers ” and the villagers. I
was informed by a Chief who came to meet us that Andi Kuila
was present, so I walked up to where she was, and found her
sitting on a large mat with a young Chiefs daughter beside her,
I went and shook hands with her and sat down on the mat beside
her (which no one else was allowed to do)! It seemed so odd
to be watching a strange game in a native village, sitting by the
Chiefs daughter. Besides little Timothy she has three older
children at school at Bau. There is a very marked superiority
in the Chiefs over the common people : Andi Kuila one at once
feels is a lady. She is very imperious to her attendants and evi-
dently accustomed to rule. Nurse cannot get over her feeling
against the natives. When she had seen Andi Kuila she said,
“ Great coarse thing. I did hope to see something better than
that! ” Andi Kuila took the greatest interest in Nevil and Jack
—she took Jack on her knee and admired him very much. I
must send you a little piece of white tappa. These little pieces
cost one penny each. They use it for everything. I find it use-
ful for dusting, wrapping things in, etc. Some day Constance
will get a small box which I had an opportunity of sending by
Sydney. It contains a piece of Fijian pottery which I rather
like. It is of a very quaint shape, but lam very much afraid
it may be broken before it arrives, for I have since found it very
fragile. There are various little parcels inside. ... I have to-
day cut Nevifs hair quite short —she looks so funny —all eyes.
It had grown very long and was so pretty. It was a pity to me
to cut it, but I think it is better for her. Jack’s hair is kept
extremely short by Abbey, who cuts all the gentlemen’s hair.
. . . Poor Mrs. Goodenough had started for England and would
arrive about the middle of November. She wrote such a very
nice letter to Arthur and said she liked his “Message” better than*
anything that had been said or written about him. She went


to Melbourne in the Pearl , and had to wait there on board for a
week, which I fancy was a great comfort to her. If ever you
hear anything about her from Lady Stephenson or others, do
tell me. I take such an interest in her.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Nasova, Fiji, November 2, 1875. —Soon after I had finished
my letter (No. 1), the Egmont at last made her appearance, a
fortnight later than she was expected. She brought a large
budget of letters which had been waiting an opportunity at
Sydney—three from you, dated 3rd, 19th, and 25th August, so
that I have now had five letters from you since I have had an
opportunity of writing any ! and I see no hope of things being
any better, for the new mail contract vid San Francisco has
broken down, for New Zealand repudiates it, unless Fiji is left
out! This is a great misfortune for the colony, and such a
blow to U£. As this colony is too poor to afford a subsidy to
any line, we shall, I suppose, have to depend for our mails on
any chance steamer or sailing vessel coming from Sydney or
Auckland, and never have any certainty of getting them.
Arthur has been writing dispatches ever since he got up. He
has not been out, and only came in to dinner for a few minutes.
Sometimes I am afraid he will get ill with working so hard.
There are four of them now, copying as fast as he writes, and he
can keep them all going. There is a great deal of very im-
portant business just now. They will go on till midnight at least.
lam getting quite out of heart about our difficulties. I see no
chance of getting into the new rooms, or getting rid of the
workmen here. Abbey is quite beside himself with trouble
and bother about the servants. They disappear and run away
the moment his back is turned, and he has to do nearly every-
thing himself. I am so afraid he will knock up altogether;
and then, the Governor will have people to dinner, and just
now the kitchen is being rebuilt, and the cooking has to be
done in a tent. You have no idea of the trouble everything is,
and the utter impossibility of getting things done, and the
enormous expense of everything. W e have to pay a carpenter 16s.
a day for doing odd jobs when wanted. The Royal Engineers,
who were to have done great things, are very slow, and always
going away to their dinner or drill. They have been five weeks
flooring our verandah round the house, and only three out of the
six sides are done as yet; it goes all round on both sides. I
never could unpack properly at Sydney, and here my things


are in the greatest muddle, as I have no room even. The Baron
went away to-day. He is gone to a part of Yiti Levu, where
there are many cannibals, and the people are very wild. I
daresay he will turn up again before very long. Mr. Le Hunte
is soon going to be a magistrate somewhere. lam now sitting
in the dining-room alone—all the rest writing in their offices.
The Fijian soldiers are sitting on the floor drinking yaqona in
the next room, waiting for the Governor, but I don’t think he
will go to them to-night. I have just changed my dress, and put
on a dressing-gown, for it is dreadfully hot to-night. Some one
looks in from time to time. They are all so nice to me, and
ready to do anything I want. lam sure you would like the new
ones, Mr. Le Hunte and Mr. Maudslay—l hardly know which
I like best. Mr. Maudslay is established here, apparently for
good, as unpaid attache He is working very hard at the
language, and as he has not any regular work (though he is
always very busy), he generally sits with me. I have given
him a table in the nursery verandah, where he mostly sits.
He is most handy and useful in contriving all sorts of things,
and he always dresses the flowers, for which he has a special
gift. He is a very clever fellow, and he seems to have plenty
of money. The rain is just come, and it becomes cool and fresh
instantaneously. It is most drenching pouring rain. It will
probably go on all night. There are several leaks in my room,
one just over my dressing case; I must go and put it under the
bed ! There are no such things as bells here, and it is impossible
to get at Nurse unless Igo for her. She goes on very well,
and does not mind what she does; and she is an excellent maid,
so that I have not felt the want of one at all. She keeps all
my things in nice order, and makes up caps very nicely. She
has not tried her hand on a dress yet, but I think she could
manage a plain one. Mrs. Abbey has got a Wheeler-and-
Wilson machine, which I got in Sydney. She is entirely
occupied in housekeeping, she bakes cakes, makes pastry, and
many other things, and is most useful. The children keep well
out of the way. Teddy goes to school, and Arkie has a Fijian
boy who walks him out all day. Teddie is getting a very nice
boy. Mrs. Abbey has a great affection for you. She and
Abbey are making a collection of Fijian curiosities for you.
These are hanging up in his office —a large yaqona bowl,
several clubs, whales’ teeth, spears, etc., which I was told are to
be sent to you by the first opportunity, to hang in your own
house. I had a letter from Lady Robinson and Mr. Stanley
about poor Mrs. Goodenough. She left Sydney about a fort-
night after I did. Lady R. said she came up to Government


House again the last two evenings, and tried to be cheerful,
but she got sadder and sadder, and the last parting was very
miserable. They took her and her children and Mr. Stanley to
Melbourne in the Pearl , to meet her ship, the Durham , and as it
was not ready, she remained for a week on board the Pearl ,
and this quiet time was a great rest and comfort to her. But
the worst parting of all was from his ship, which she loved so
much. The officers of the Pearl pulled her on board the
Durham. Long before you get this, she will be at home. She
intends to live in London near her mother. I wonder whether
you will ever see or hear of her. lam sure you take a great
interest in her. She wrote Arthur two official letters thanking
him for the sympathy and address of the people here. They were
so beautifully done. She also wrote him a private letter, in
which she said that of all that had been said and written, she
liked his “ Message ” the best, it so exactly expressed what she
felt. I send you a copy of it, as I think you would like it.
She is so beautifully resigned. I don’t think she fully knows
how terrible his sufferings were. He has been a very great loss
to Arthur. They liked and appreciated each other, and had
many tastes and interests in common. Arthur had enjoyed his
cruise with him so much. The Barracouta, which has remained
here since, is of no use or comfort, for her Captain, who is a
great snob, has behaved very badly to Arthur, and he can have
nothing to do with him, and cannot or will not go anywhere in
the ship. It is really a great annoyance, and does a great deal
of mischief; however, we hope she will soon be relieved by the
Nymphe (Captain Grant Suttie), of which Cosmo Gordon is First
Lieutenant (you had better not say anything about the row).!
I hear 12 o’clock striking, and must shut up soon.
You can’t say my letters are short this time. It will take
you a week to read them!
Nevil to Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre
Fiji, November 2, 1875. —Dear Madle. —Fiji is a very nice
place. There is a piece of green grass which at present the
Kidgin is made on, which is going to be the front and now is
the back. On this grass we often see the natives throwing bits
of bamboo with wooden tips which we call arrows. Jack has
got three. They were all given him. He keeps them as curi-
osities. And I have got a arrow, a axe, and a liku, and a club,
and a whale’s tooth. I have dressed myself up in tappa. Tappa
is stuff made out of the bark of a tree. It feels very like


Chinese paper, but it looks like tappa. I have got four mats
of my own. Two, Papa gave me, two, Andi Kuila gave me, and
one Arthur gave me. We play at all sorts of games with them.
We are now playing at a canoe game; we sit on our mats and
pretend that’s our canoes. But I have got a splendid real nice
little canoe with three padilles. It’s got no mast, no outrigger,
and no sail. It came from Tonga; the Baron gave it me; we
keep it under a wardrobe in our room. We call it our boat-
house. Papa has got twelve brown men, natives, for boatmen.
Sometimes one six and sometimes the other six go in the boat.
They wear white sulus and blue jackets; they are dressed up
with flower necklaces, flowers in their hair, bracelets made of
big shells on their arms. One of the men is called Soani and
another is called Ambrose. These wait at table. They wear
red sulus and red and white jackets and a big boar’s tooth tied
round their necks with grass dyed yellow. One day a Fiji
gentleman—a Chief —stooped down and kissed my hand. There
is a man called Sakiusa who is the lieutenant of the Fiji soldiers
and he is a Chief too. This morning his face was painted black
all over his eyes and forehead. He wears beautiful grass
garters on his legs and sometimes flowers in his hair. Jack is
now deranging our pretence canoe. I’d like to see you again,
Maddle, very much. I won’t forget you or any of the aunts.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, October 30, 1875.—My Lord—One of the most important
questions which I have had to consider since my arrival here, is the degree
and measure in which native laws and customs should be preserved in force,
and how far English law should be at once generally introduced.
2. Under the former Fijian Government, there was a distinct and separate
system of native law, which, as regards many matters, was recognised by
positive enactment, and in the remainder was regulated by traditional usage.
Since annexation, the laws of New South Wales alone have, strictly and
technically speaking, been in force, but, practically, the native code has
received a tacit and indeed more than tacit, recognition.
3. One of Sir Hercules Robinson’s first acts after the cession was to
direct the issue of a circular to the Stipendiary Magistrates enjoining on them
an entire absence of interference in all native cases except those of certain
specified grave crimes cognizable by the central court. The preliminary pro-
ceedings in these cases were to be conducted by them in conjunction with a
native Stipendiary Magistrate. All other cases purely native were to be left
to the native Magistrates alone, to be decided by them according to their
own law and custom, though under the observation of the European officer.
4. I entirely concur with Sir H. Robinson as to the prudence and justice
of such a course ; but if English law be now generally introduced without
qualification, I could hardly repeat his action, for such directions as those to


which I havo, referred would have no legal validity whatever, and the
Supreme Court would of course take no notice of any such illegal order.
5. What then is to be done ? and which of the three following courses is
to be adopted ?
Is the whole body of English law to be imposed on all the population of
the Colony alike—on the hundred thousand coloured subjects of her Majesty
equally with the white residents ?
Is the English law to be nominally imposed, but with a power vested in
the Courts of modifying it in each case according to circumstances ?
Or, is there to be a distinct code of laws applicable to natives alone ?
6. No sane individual could, I think, seriously maintain the first pro-
position. It could be defended only in the narrow and pedantic spirit which
a century ago led to the attempted enforcement of all the peculiarities of the
English law upon the people of Bengal. The results of that attempt are
well known, and have been painted by a master’s hand. No one now
fails to perceive that the experiment was both unsound in principle and
dangerous in practice; but at the time there were not wanting men of
ability and great legal attainments who deplored its abandonment, and
maintained that it was for the advantage of the Hindoo himself that he
should, at whatever risk, or at the cost of whatever suffering, be at once
brought under the operation of a system of law which was regarded as well-nigh
perfect and of universal applicability. The confusion which must follow the
sudden revolution of deep-rooted habits would, it was argued, right itself in, ! at
most, a few generations ; the chance of insurrection, it was said, if foreseen,
might be guarded against. Fortunately for India, these views did not prevail.
Greater weight will not, I trust, be allowed to them in Fiji.
7. Not only would the imposition in all respects of English law be in-
equitable, but it would, I am convinced, be altogether impracticable to
enforce obedience to it, and any serious attempt to do so would, I have not
the smallest doubt, cause an insurrection, the limits of which it would be
difficult to define, and the suppression of which would cost an immense sum
of money, and would render necessary the adoption of measures which would
probably result in the extinction, at no distant date, of the whole native
race.
8. Practically, then, the alternative lies between exclusively European
Courts and exclusively English law, modified in its administration by a con-
sideration of native customs in each particular case, or a recognized native
code, in addition to the general law, and subsidiary to it. Of these two
methods, I have no hesitation of preferring the latter. Not to dwell on
other considerations, there are three objections to the former project, any
one of which, it appears to me, ought to be fatal.
9. In the first place, the exercise of this discretion would of course rest
exclusively with the European Judges, and the native Chiefs and Magistrates
would be deprived of all share in the administration of justice. This is most
undesirable. They would be rendered idle and consequently discontented ;
they would be degraded in the eyes of those who have hitherto looked up to
them, and by whom it is most desirable they should still be looked up to,
with deference and respect; for so long as the native population outnumbers
the European by fifty to one, it is through these Chiefs that the country will
be most peaceably, cheaply, and easily governed ; and I observe that in those


districts where, for one or another cause, the Chiefs have lost their hold on
the people, the administration of affairs is attended with a difficulty and con-
fusion unknown elsewhere. They would not improbably plot to recover their
lost power, and from being docile and useful instruments, would become a
constant source of trouble and even danger. Your Lordship has already fore-
seen, and with much wisdom observed, in your dispatch No. 2of the 22nd
March, that it will probably be necessary to permit the native Chiefs to retain
in their hands for some time longer the judicial powers they at present possess.
10. In the next place, although such a discretionary power as that which
would in this case be left in the hands of the Court would perhaps suffice for
defensive purposes, it would be available for defensive purposes alone, that is
to say, although the Court might admit evidence of native customs as excuse
for acts in themselves irregular, illegal, or even criminal, it would certainly
not do so in support of a prosecution in aggravation of penalties already legally
fixed, or as rendering acts culpable which are not forbidden by English law.
Consequently, many misdemeanours, which are serious offences according to
native usage, and which it is desirable should, at all events for the present,
continue to be so regarded, would altogether escape punishment. This fact
is, in itself, enough, to my mind, to condemn the scheme.
11. The third objection is the element of entire uncertainty which such a
system would introduce in the administration of justice. How far the strict
interpretation of the English law should be modified by native custom would,
in each case, rest with the Judge himself. Even in the Supreme Court itself,
a change in the person of the Chief-Justice might produce an entire change in
the canons by which this discretionary modification was governed, whilst in
the inferior courts it is not too much to say that there would be daily
instances of totally different decisions of similar cases, according to the
temper, knowledge, and prejudices of each Stipendiary Magistrate.
Now, if there is one thing about the unknown and much-dreaded law of
the foreigners which the Fijians fear more than another, it is the uncertainty
of its- operation, of which they have already seen some startling instances ;
and nothing can be conceived more calculated to increase that uncertainty to
the highest point than a system of law to be administered, not as it stands
written, or as it would be applied in the case of whites, but with such
deviations as in each case the Court, according to its own appreciation of
native usages, and the greater or less degree of respect with which it may be
disposed to regard them, may determine.
12. If it be determined to adopt the third course suggested, it will
become a question how far such a native code as is contemplated should
exist concurrently with British law, or in exclusion of it, as regards natives,
and to what class of gases its operation should extend. I believe that all
criminal offences of any gravity, with, perhaps, a few trifling exceptions,
might be at once brought under the operation of English law, whilst what
may be called police cases might be left to be dealt with by the native
officials, subject to a reference to the European Magistrate of the district, if
desired by either party to the case. In civil cases, however, our law would
often be wholly inapplicable, and there are many matters of much interest to
the natives with which it does not deal at all.
13. I propose to provide for this latter class of cases by the constitution
of a species of Council or Board for Native Affairs, consisting of some half


dozen gentlemen best acquainted with the native laws and customs, and that
this Council should be empowered to make regulations and bye-laws, which,
when approved by the Legislative Council and assented to by the Governor,
should have the force of law, subject, of course, to your Lordship’s dis-
approval. The members of this Board should, I think, like the members of
the Legislative Council, be unpaid.
14. It may be objected that no bye-laws affecting grave matters already
dealt with by statute law should be passed by such a Board; and this, no
doubt, is perfectly true ; but a means would be afforded by it of dealing with
innumerable matters, small in themselves, but of great moment to the natives,
and 'the regulation of which, under the sanction of penalties, is, in my
opinion, not only necessary to the proper working of their village and
tribal system, but also essential to the maintenance of the very existence of
the native race.
15. Matters of graver moment will have to be dealt with separately by the
Legislative Council. It will, for example, probably be necessary to adopt a
Native Marriage Ordinance, and an Ordinance for regulating the devolution
of native property, etc.; and many of the provisions of the Act XXXYIII.
of King Cakobau, passed by the so-called Parliament of Fiji, might, I think,
with great advantage, be re-enacted.
16. Of this Act, and of the laws of the Lau Tovata, which, although not
legally, are practically still in force in the eastern part of the Group, I
inclose copies. I regret that I cannot obtain, to forward to your Lordship, a
spare copy of the laws of Tonga.
Under them a population not naturally less indolent than those of Fiji,
are becoming, not only generally prosperous, but wealthy, and I suppose that
hardly any country exists where ease and comfort more generally prevail
among all classes. This result has been obtained by a judicious modification
of the native laws, some of the most salutary of which—for example, that
which compels every man to do a certain amount of agricultural work for his
own profit—are hardly in accordance with English legislation.
17. The Chiefs to the number of about 100 have lately held a Council at
Draiba, a village near Nasova, and have framed various resolutions as to
the lines on which they desire a native code to be based. The meeting
lasted about a fortnight. The minutes of its proceedings were every evening
transmitted to me, and I was much struck by the moderation, good sense,
and practical ability evinced by those who took part in its debates.
18. The Chief Interpreter, Mr. Wilkinson, who was engaged upon a
translation of these minutes of the resolutions agreed to by this assembly,
has unfortunately been compelled by domestic business to leave Levuka
suddenly, and until his return I must defer sending to your Lordship a copy
of this very interesting paper, which I should have wished to accompany the
present despatch. I enclose a Minute on the subject of the maintenance of
native law, by Mr. Thurston, which your Lordship will, I think, read with
interest. I have, etc.
P.S. —I have shown this despatch to the Members of my Executive
Council, who all concur in the views therein expressed.


From Mr. Carew
Yuda, October 27, 1875.—Your Excellency—l have but just received your
note of the 22nd inst., the steamer with Olive having anchored an hour ago
at a point two miles from here. I have had a hasty interview with Olive and
have just returned to write this in great haste. I consider that no apprehen-
sions whatever exist of any danger of an outbreak. lam firmly convinced
that at this moment of writing the people of the interior are more peaceably
inclined than they have been at any time during the past six months. I be-
lieve I have been successful in smoothing over difficulties, and am now here
with a view of making arrangements for a preliminary meeting of natives from
the interior. Our messengers have not yet returned, and I cannot yet see how
we can get the meeting off for another five weeks. In the meantime the
natives will be most fully employed in discussing matters relating thereto. I
have held a meeting of the Chiefs who are said to have caused the obstruction of
the passage of the Sigatoka. They are heathen ; they believed the steamer to
contain a war party, and were resolved to defend themselves. They are called
the Kai Conua. I talked with slight intermission to them for nine hours—
they were very much pleased indeed. I explained your Excellency’s policy,
my duties, and their extent. Everything appeared to give them great satisfac-
tion. lam convinced there is no danger of an attack being made by them.
I had the men Header and Fox present also. I found it necessary to read and
explain most fully the “Peace and Good Order Ordinance” to these men, who
had previously laid a charge against'the above tribe of stealing an acre of pota-
toes and 30 bushels of corn. I examined thoroughly the matter. I estimate
the loss or damage at 11s. in all. Even if this has been stolen by the natives,
of which I am not sure, I attribute it to the children of the towns close to
Header’s house, who are Christians. All the chiefs and most intelligent
natives attach no political significance to these troubles. I have been most
candid and open with the natives and await the results. Your Excellency’s
policy appears to give the greatest satisfaction to the natives. The Buli Nadi
and a friend of his who knows all about the interior, told me yesterday
that they believe the people of the interior will be pleased at a Government
camp being placed among them. I stayed several hours at Bucknell’s on my
way down. He told me most distinctly that he did not fear an attack from
the natives. I put the question twice in a most pointed manner. The natives
from the interior are compelled, to come right past the back of his house.
They are generally civil and obliging, they have given me to understand. I have
no time to answer the official letters, but will do so the moment I return to Cuvu,
my headquarters. lam rather afraid the arrival of Olive with the police will
prevent the meeting ; it may not, however, as the excuse exists that they are
helping to build a town, and as these have come, the rest may follow. I
wrote notes to your Excellency’s secretary, Mr. Gordon, and to Mr. Olive by
the first opportunity after my arrival, explaining my reason for delaying
report. I consider that I have been most successful in allaying anxiety on
the part of the natives. The difficulty now is not in getting them to meet your
Excellency, but how to get them out without their clashing one with another,
but I trust to be able to manage matters satisfactorily. Page and others who
will not leave the natives alone are animated by the sole desire to bring matters
to a crisis. If no other cause existed, they (the whites) are as a body so much


displeased by your Excellency’s native policy that they are most anxious to pre-
cipitate matters. I have no time to write more, but trusting your Excellency
will excuse the careless and hurried style of this, I remain, etc.
Me. Carew to the Colonial Secretary
Cuvu, Nadroga, November 4, 1875. —Sir —I have the honour to forward
the following information to supplement my despatch of the 30th ultimo ,
which, owing to the non-occurrence of opportunity of forwarding, I have been
compelled to detain, to await the arrival of the Pride of Viti steamer.
The above vessel arrived at Yuda yesterday, and having made most satisfactory
arrangements for the disposition of the Sabeto people forwarded by her, we
resolved to embark the police and proceed at once to this place, where we
arrived at about mid-day. I return to Nadi to-morrow to meet some Chiefs
from the forks of the Sigatoka River, about Beimana ; the rivers forming the
forks are called respectively the Wairoro and the Waitabucake ; these Chiefs
and their districts I am personally acquainted with.
I was fortunate enough to meet Roko Tui Ba at Yuda, he having arrived
en route to Nadi to investigate some charges against native teachers of interfering
with the planters’ Fijian labourers. I believe these charges to be groundless,
and founded entirely on misapprehension, and owing to the planters’ general
ignorance of the native language, and of their modes of thought and expres-
sion. lam quite convinced that no grounds exist for apprehending any further
disturbances on the Sigatoka River, at any rate for some considerable period.
On my arrival here to-day, I met Cokoibusa, the Buli Nadroga, a very
superior man apparently in all general respects. He informs me that our
meeting held at his village, Yunavutu, on the Sigatoka, and reported on in
my letter of 30th October last, is likely to bear most excellent fruit; the
Chief of Tavuni, who is the leading Chief of the tribes who have been causing
so much uneasiness and expense, and who declined to accompany the Chiefs
of Yatuvoka and Korokune (see map) because “he was ashamed” to meet
Cokoibusa in the latter’s own village, owing to his (the Chief of Tavuni) having
occasionally threatened to club the latter, immediately on the return of the
other Chiefs from our meeting, was so much pleased at their report of our
proceedings, that he at once declared himself averse to committing any harm,
but would go at once and report the good news to his friends and relatives at
Beimana and the vicinity. I consider the presence here of the armed police
quite unnecessary, and it moreover is, I conceive, likely to interfere very
materially with the ultimate success of my endeavours to procure a meeting
between his Excellency and the tribes, and I beg to suggest that they may be
recalled without delay, unless other reasons, unknown to me, exist for
retaining them in this part of the Colony.
Immediately on ray return from Nadi, I purpose going up the coast as far as
Namosi Province, calling in at the Sigatoka River, and all leading villages on
my way, when I shall forward a further report of proceedings in my district.
A number of people, war refugees, called the “Kai Se,” who have, until
very recently, been living in the district of Nadi, having, without permission
of any properly qualified official, taken upon themselves to build a village upon
land belonging to the Vaturu people now at Koro, I have ordered them to join
Buli Sabeto in his village, and this they state they are most willing to do.
X


I have the honour to suggest that the Yaturu and Kai Se people taken away
as prisoners of war by Cakohau’s late Government, and now working for the
planters at Koro and elsewhere, be returned to Yuda, with instructions to
Roko Tui Ba that they be ordered to build in the village of Buli Sabeto, and
called “ Koroiaca. ” 1
All the above-mentioned people are subdivisions of the Sabeto tribe, and
their general name is “ Kai Sabeto.”
I have now, finally, the honour to suggest for your consideration the non-
advisability of returning any Mogodro people, until I have had an opportunity
of making inquiries into their conduct, past and present; the men belonging
to that tribe, and now refugees in the interior, are the people who committed
the murders at Yatubau on the Ba River three months back, and I have the
strongest reasons for believing that, in their apprehension of punishment
being meted out to them for this and other deeds of violence, they are actively
engaged in endeavouring to prevent the success of my efforts to secure peace
to this section of the Colony.
From Mr. Carew
Cuyu, Nadroga, November 4, 1875. — Your Excellency—l received
your Excellency’s note yesterday at Yuda—that writtefi previously I have
not yet got. Immediately on receipt by Mr. Olive of his despatches, we
resolved to come on here after settling matters to the satisfaction of the
Sabeto people, and also the “Kai Se” who were building on ground the
property of the Yaturu men now at Koro. These latter I ordered to join
Buli Sabeto at once and build in the same town. The Yaturu people
now at Koro are also Sabeto men, and should be sent on with instructions to
Roko Tui Ba that they also build in Buli Sabeto’s village, which at Olive’s
suggestion they have called “Koro-i-Aca” in honour of your Excellency.
I found Buli Nadroga here to-day on my arrival ; he lives at “ Vunavatu”
on the Sigatoka ;heis a fine staunch bold fellow. He tells me that the chief
of Tavuni, who being madua 2 at the time did not come in with those from
Yatuvoka and Korokuna to the meeting I held at Sigatoka, immediately on
hearing from the others on their return home their report of what I had
told them, said—“ That is very good news indeed, lam very much pleased,
I shall do no evil, but I will go at once to Beimana and tell my friends the
good news.” This man is the head of those who made that dreadful
demonstration and hurt the feelings of the gentleman on board the steamer,
who saw “ people blacked and armed in crowds, and canoes full of armed
and black men passing to and fro.” The blacked and armed men were
there to support the war party they believed the steamer had on board, and
blacked their faces from lagilagi 3 it being considered manly to appear
pleased at the prospect of war. I believe that before two weeks are over I
shall be having all these people begging me to come inland to see them.
I have four Chiefs waiting for me now at Nadi. Igo off to them to-morrow.
They are from Naqaqa and tribes of the neighbourhood, and are personally
acquainted with me, I having visited them last year. I expect to hear
almost immediately of a messenger I have despatched to the Nabutautau
1 i.e. “Town of Arthur,” or Arthurstown. 2 Ashamed. s Swagger.


men. There is no fear of any disturbance whatever. I have just sent to
tell the people at the mouth of the Sigatoka and above it, that is, those who
threatened the steamer, and Header and Fox, the reasons why the troops
have come, and also that I promise them that not one shall approach nearer
to them than this town of Cuvu, “as I have the most thorough confidence
in their honesty of purpose, and wish them to have the same opinion of
mine.” This will have the desired effect I do not doubt, but the arrival of
these men perplexed me much at the time. I think they should return to
Levuka, their remaining here will only occasion mistrust, and if they return
it will be capital for me to work on hereafter in my dealings with these
people. The proposed meeting is, I fear, a long way off, but nothing can be
done hurriedly with the natives, and if the public will only let us alone, I
have but little doubt of ultimate success. I should not like to go into the
interior unless the police were accompanied by an experienced native officer
of sense and courage, such as Ratu Tevita, for instance. Olive does not like
the Chiefs, as it detracts from the respect, or rather they divide with him the
respect of the men. I most certainly dislike the idea of going into the
interior with these men unless a Chief of thirty-five or forty goes with us.
Olive over-estimates his power over these men. For my own part, I cannot
like them. The system they have been trained on is a most mischievous one
indeed—their temper, in my opinion, is such that being in the face of the
enemy and taking offence at any supposed slight or ill-treatment they are
quite as likely as not to throw down their arms and run off to the coast.
I and Olive have almost quarrelled about them already, but have now agreed
not to quarrel at all, on the condition that any man misbehaving is to be
punished at once. I should very much have liked to return the whole of
them at once to Levuka, but dared not take the responsibility, and Olive
would not have yielded without seeing the Commission your Excellency
gave me privately at Levuka, and thinking you would send for them on
forwarding the “Yaturu” men at Koro, I could not see that much expense
would be incurred by retaining them here until orders should reach us from
Levuka. At present everything is quiet, and likely to remain so. I have
no fear of any trouble whatever. Forced religion is the thing they are most
alarmed at the idea of, and lam removing the fear of that very fast. With
reference to “the canoes filled with blacked and armed men,” I cannot
understand what has become of the canoes which contained them. The
lower Sigatoka is so singularly devoid of them that as yet I have only been
able to discover one, and that so very small that two of us narrowly escaped
swamping in it in crossing the river. I have as yet heard of no new
depredations at Header and Fox’s place, but I have been told that Hr.
Cowan has been saying in Levuka that he had much to put up with from
the natives. Now I personally know that there are none but the most
harmless people in his vicinity, and moreover he assured me the day before
he left that the natives had not given him the slightest cause for complaint
for some years, and in this he was supported by his wife. Cowen also quite
ridiculed the idea of disturbances taking place in his neighbourhood. The
natives one and all living on the coast assure me there is not the least cause
to expect an attack on the coast, and they are generally great alarmists and
among the first to cry out when anything may be expected. I very much
hope our letters may reach Ovalau before the remainder of the police leave.


I have not yet seen Manu-manui-vudi, as he and Buli Namosi were absent in
the interior when I came past their places on my way down from Levuka,
but from the topographical formation of the country, the centre of the
“Colo” forming the centre of a circle of which the coast-line is part of the
circumference, news travels fast from all parts of the interior to all parts of
the coast.
Lady Gordon to Miss Maria Shaw-Lefevre
Nasova, November 5, 1875.—There is a sailing vessel going
to New Zealand this evening and it is worth taking my
chance of sending a letter. One must never lose a chance now.
We don’t seem to be any forwarder with the new house ; in fact,
for three or four days no workmen have come — why , we don’t know!
—but that is the usual thing in Fiji. lam very anxious to get
into the drawing-room. We have only one sitting-room, which
is not comfortable, and I long to be able to unpack and arrange
my things. At this time of year the least scratch, especially
with new comers, is apt to turn into a sore. Most of the gentle-
men, including the Governor, have got the so-called Fijian sores
on their feet. They begin with a slight cut or a mosquito bite
and are extremely troublesome to heal. lam myself very well,
but feel rather tired with the heat. It is certainly hotter now
than I expected, but during eight months in the year it is very
cool. ... It certainly is a great privation having no roads or
walks. You can walk along the sea-side for a little distance
each way, but it is a rough unpleasant path. We have got one
very nice boat, and there is a little steamer soon coming from
Sydney for the Government, which we may now and then get a
trip in. But there will always be the expense of coal to be
considered, as we cannot get anything done for us by the
Colony. Arthur gives up <£2ooo a year of his salary till the
Colony is better off, and £3OOO a year does not go very far
here, for the expense of living is enormous. We have just con-
tracted with a laundry to do our washing for £2O a month, not
including the staff or Eka. The contract for the new rooms
was £BOO. They are built in the rudest, roughest way, of wood
with a thatched roof, and raised on poles above the ground,
with a verandah nearly all round. It is full of faults, some of
which would not have been made if I had been here. But the
drawing-room is a very nice room. The Governor is paying for
it himself out of his own pocket. I hope some one will take it
off our hands when we leave. The bow window is considered
quite a wonder here. I don’t suppose there is another in Fiji. . . .
It is so amusing to watch the native soldiers playing games on


the green just outside the house, sometimes throwing reeds with
heavy wooden tips, and sometimes playing ball with large
oranges (shaddocks). They are childishly fond of play and
adorning themselves, and walk about hand in hand just like
children. They don’t look like soldiers, for their sole dress is
two yards of white calico folded on like a kilt. They usually
have a red flower or a sort of plume stuck in their hair, and
wear wreaths of leaves as necklaces, or garters , or some other
fantastic adornment.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Hasova, November 12, 1875.—My Lord—l have the honour to transmit,
for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation, an Ordinance [Ho.
XII.] “To prevent the evasion of Judgments, Decrees, Rules, and Orders of
the Supreme Courts of the Australian Colonies, and to give further remedies
to creditors against persons removing from any of the said Colonies to the
Colony of Fiji.”
2. I had some doubts myself as to the expediency of passing this law
before anything had been done to secure the fair division of a bankrupt
estate among its various creditors, for under this Ordinance a single creditor
resident in another and distant Colony may sweep off all the assets of an
estate without any warning to creditors on the spot, who may, from motives
of policy, have pursued a forbearing course towards their debtor, in the hope
of enabling him at a future time to discharge his obligations to them in
full, —a policy which would not influence a creditor at a distance, having
perhaps but one claim of comparatively small amount, and which the assets
as a whole may be sufficient to satisfy.
3. However, as the measure was strongly pressed by the Chief-Justice and
the Attorney-General, I, after consulting the Executive Council, assented to
it, though not, I confess, without some hesitation. The measure itself is a
perfectly proper one. Its opportuneness, before the enactment of a bankruptcy
law (that of Hew South Wales is not in force here), appeared to me open to
doubt, but as both the Chief-Justice and the Attorney - General are of a
contrary opinion, I am ready to believe myself more likely than they to be
mistaken on a question of legal administration. I therefore beg humbly to
recommend the Ordinance to Her Majesty for approval.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Hasova, November 12, 1875. —My Lord—l have the honour to transmit,
for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation, an Ordinance “For
the establishment of a Supreme Court of Judicature in the Colony of Fiji.”
2. This Ordinance is substantially the same as the draft Ordinance for
this purpose enclosed in your Lordship’s despatch, Ho. 2 of the 22nd March,
and it will only be necessary for me to notice those clauses in which, on the
motion of the Chief-Justice, alterations have been made.
3. Clause 6. This clause is a new one. Sir. W. Hackett was desirous


that he should he appointed Chief-Justice by Ordinance. As he was himself
anxious on the point, and as I saw no particular reason against the adoption
of this course, the Council readily assented to his wish.
4. Section vii.—(section vi. of the draft Ordinance transmitted by your
Lordship)—has been slightly altered. By the draft the officers of the Court
were to be “such and so many as to the Governor shall from time to time
appear necessary.” In the Ordinance this has been changed into “ such and
so many other officers as to the Chief-Justice, with the approval of the
Governor, shall from time to time appear necessary.” This is, I think, an
improvement. Nothing is said in the draft or in the Ordinance as passed as
to the authority by which the appointments are to be made. The Chief-
Justice considers that they should be made by him, or else by the Governor
subject to the subsequent approval of the Chief-Justice. This latter plan
appears to me manifestly inadmissible, but I have no objection whatever to
the absolute right of appointment being vested in the Chief-Justice. I pre-
sume, however, that persons so appointed would not be servants of the
Crown nor entitled to pensions, and they might consequently demand larger
salaries than would otherwise be sufficient.
The Registrar of the Courts is, however, so important an officer, that I
am inclined to think that an exception ought perhaps to be made in his case,
and that he should be appointed by the Crown.
5. Section viii. is section vii. of the draft somewhat altered ; sections
ix. and x. and xi. are entirely new, £he first relating to the payment to
the treasury of moneys paid into Court, and the other two to the appoint-
ment and function of the Sheriff.
6. A few slight alterations have been made in some of the succeeding
clauses, for example, in section xxi. an express power of revoking any
sentence of suspension pronounced by them is accorded to the Chief-Justice,
but the next important modification is to be found in section xxix. (section
xxv. of the draft), which considerably extends the number of subjects with
respect to which the Supreme Court is empowered to make general rules.
7. The last alteration made is one to which I wish to call your Lordship’s
special attention. It is in the thirty-fourth section (section xxx, of draft),
and relates to the appointment of Commissioners. In the original draft, the
Court was empowered to appoint ‘ c any fit persons within the Colony, to be
Commissioners of the Supreme Court.” In the Ordinance as passed, the
words “ within the Colony ” have been omitted.
8. I am myself quite clear that no Colonial Ordinance can give power to
make appointments beyond the limits of the Colony, and I remember this
to have been ruled in 1862 or 1863 in the case of New Brunswick, when the
local legislature passed an Act authorising the appointment of Commissioners
beyond the Province.
9. The Chief - Justice, however, so strongly urged the omission of the
words, that I consented to their withdrawal, for of course, if such a step be
beyond the competency of the Legislative Council, the mere absence of these
words will not confer any power to make appointments beyond the Colony.
I agreed to their omission, however, on the express understanding that the
question was at once to be referred to your Lordship for decision.
I enclose the report of the Attorney-General on this Ordinance, I have,
etc.


To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, November 12.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose, for Her
Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation, an Ordinance “ For the Relief
of Aliens.”
2. By the second section of this Ordinance any alien now or heretofore
resident in the Colony is granted all the rights and privileges of a British
subject with respect to real or personal property. It is but equitable that
those foreigners who settled here and purchased land previous to the cession
of the islands to Great Britain, should he placed by the transfer of sovereignty
in no worse position than before that event they occupied.
3. I have not, however, thought it expedient to extend this privilege to
unnaturalised aliens for the future. The influx of a large number of Germans
and Americans into the Colony is probable, and it may be anticipated that
they will become landholders to a considerable extent. It is manifestly
undesirable that any large section of the resident population should be free
from the restraints of allegiance to the Queen, more especially if it be one
in occupation of extensive tracts of land.
4. The remainder of the Ordinance provides for the naturalisation on
easy terms of foreigners now or in time to come resident in the Colony.
I enclose the Attorney-General’s report on this Ordinance.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
November 12.—My Lord—Sir H. Robinson’s despatches, noted in the
margin, will have made your Lordship aware of the disturbed state of the
Province of Macuata in the early part of the present year, and of the death
of its Chief, Ritova, whilst detained at this place in a species of unavowed
imprisonment.
2. On Ritova’s removal from the Province, Cakobau’s son, Ratu Timoci,
was in the first instance appointed by Mr. Layard to act temporarily as
Governor of the Province, as reported in Sir H. Robinson to your Lordship.
Ratu Timoci is well-intentioned, and not, I think, without some ability, but
he is young and careless. He found Macuata an extremely dull residence,
and after a very short stay there, sailed away to pay a visit to Maafu, the
Roko Tui Lau, which, I believe, he intended to be a short one. He, however,
found life at Loma Loma so pleasant that he remained there three months,
during which time he fell in love with, and finally married, a Tongan lady.
Meanwhile the taxes in Macuata were uncollected, the administration of
affairs in confusion, and the people exposed, without any head or guide, to
the panic created by the measles, for Ratu Timoci had taken with him his
second-in-command, and in the absence of both Chiefs the scribe of the Province
was afraid to open or answer letters, nor would any of the other Chiefs assume
responsibility by undertaking to act for the absent Roko.
3. The selection of a permanent successor to Ritova has not been easy.
4. Ritova’s four sons were excluded from the succession : —two by their
conviction for manslaughter, another by notorious misconduct, and the fourth
(Kaiatea) by his youth, inexperience, and want of education. Katonivere,
the head of the other branch of the late reigning house of Macuata, though a
man of energy and commanding the greatest following in the Province, would


be unacceptable to all the partisans of the Kitova family, whilst a strange
Chief would probably not be respected or obeyed at all, unless indeed, perhaps
it were one of Cakobau’s sons, and the only one of these at all qualified for
the post had already been tried and had failed.
5. I consulted the Council of Chiefs sitting at Drieba and found that they
were of opinion that, on the whole, the appointment of Katonivere, notwith-
standing the probable ill-will of the Kitova family, afforded the best prospect
of securing the peace and good order of the Province.
They recommended, however, that he should be accompanied to the
Province by a commission charged to explain his appointment to the people
and formally to instal him before them.
6. Both these recommendations I resolved to follow, and after appointing
Katonivere by publicly addressing him as “Roko Tui Macuata,” I sent him
down to Yanua Levu, accompanied by a commission consisting of the two
Rokos, Tui Cakau, and Tui Bua, and Ratu Iliatia, the native judge of Bau,
an old, able, and justly respected Chief.
7. The report of this commission I enclose. The translation of it is a
very literal one, and will, I think, interest your Lordship as a creditable piece
of native composition.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
November 19.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose a statement of
the estimated and actual revenue for the year ending 10th October last.
2. The revenue anticipated by Sir H. Robinson was £23,875, The
amount actually received has been only £15,619 :16 :11, a sum falling short
of the estimate by £8255 : 3 :1. In fact, the total receipts exceed by little
more than £6OO what had been looked for from customs alone.
3. At first sight it is natural to suppose that this great difference between
the anticipated and actual receipts must be the result of the terrible calamity
which befell the Colony at the commencement of the present year, but a
closer examination shows that, although it must undoubtedly have exercised
a depressing influence, it is not mainly to the epidemic that the deficiency is
to be attributed, the native taxes having, strange to say, yielded nearly as
much as was anticipated from a population one-third larger.
4. Customs which had been looked to as producing £15,000 only realised
£8632 :10 :11. The customs revenue of 1873-74 (October Ito September 30)
was £10,378 :11: 1. The imports of 1873-74 were not greatly in excess of
those of 1874-75, and the difference of £1745:9:2 between the customs
revenue of the two years must therefore be attributed to the hasty sub-
stitution of the tariff of N. S. Wales for that previously existing, a measure
for the adoption of which I have never been able to see any adequate reason.
5. The revenue anticipated from wine and spirit licenses was £750. It
has, in fact, amounted to less than a third of that sum—£22B : 6 :8.
6. Native taxes were estimated at £4500. £3BBB : Is. of this sum had
been received on the 10th October. Since that date arrears to the amount of
£578 have been paid into the treasury, so that very nearly the whole
amount of tax which it was anticipated would be raised from 145,000 people
has been raised from 110,000 : —a very curious result, and one for which lam
unable satisfactorily to account. It must be remembered that the tax is


strictly a poll tax, and therefore easy of calculation if the population be
known. Whether the population was originally under-estimated, whether
the tax has been more rigorously and systematically collected by the Roko
Tuis than in previous years, whether a less proportion than usual of the tax
has found its way into the pockets of the collectors, or whether, as I am
inclined to suspect, the result is due to a combination of all these causes, it is
impossible for me at present to determine.
7. The foreign labour tax, estimated at £ISOO, has only produced
£llO :3 :6. I found on my arrival that this tax had by common consent
been quietly laid aside. I was informed that no planter would pay it
voluntarily and that its payment could not be enforced, a statement which I
presume to be true, since it appears impossible to extract from a large
proportion of the planters even the wages due to their imported Polynesian
labourers, which have in most cases to be paid in the first instance by the
Government, with a very problematical prospect of ultimate recovery.
8. I intend that in future the financial year should commence on the Ist
January, and I shall transmit in an early despatch the estimates of revenue
and expenditure for the closing months of the present year. —I have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
November 19.—My Lord—l have had the honour to receive your Lordship’s
despatch calling for a report on certain claims for compensation instituted by
J. Pfluger and H, Luks, German subjects, against the late Fijian Government,
and now urged against Her Majesty’s Government in these islands.
2. After a careful inquiry into the origin of those claims I have come to
the conclusion that Messrs. Pfluger and Luks are not entitled to compensation
either from the Imperial Government or that of this Colony.
3. The Imperial German Ambassador appears to suppose that the losses
of Mr. Hermann Luks (who is a partner in the firm of Luks and Ridsdale)
and the losses of Mr. John Pfluger were caused by the interference of a British
ship of war “on the occasion of certain transactions between the natives of
the Rewa River and English settlers there ” ; that “Commodore Lambert, who
was called in by such English settlers , attacked the natives without having
made any arrangements with King Thakombau, and the natives revenged
themselves for that attack by wasting and plundering all foreign settlements
on the Rewa River.”
4. These suppositions, though not unnatural when the nature of the in-
formation before Count Munster is considered, are not altogether accurate,
and I will now state to your Lordship what, after inquiry, I have ascertained
to be the precise facts of the case.
5. During the years 1866-67 the King and Chiefs of Bau attacked and
conquered the “Yungali,” “Vina,” and “ Wai Kalou” tribes, that is to say,
the tribes upon whose lands the subsequent “ wasting and plundering” took
place.
6. While this native war was being prosecuted, certain Europeans, anxious
at any risk to obtain land at a small cost, followed up the retreating and
beaten enemies of Thakombau, and with muskets, powder, and lead purchased
the lands from which they were being driven.
7. Mr. John Pfluger was one of these persons ; a copy of his original title


deed, dated June 6, 1867, and witnessed by Mr. Hermann Luks, is now before
me. Both of these gentlemen, together with Mr. Kinross and other British
subjects, purchased their lands in the same manner, a manner unwise and
speculative in the extreme.
8. It is true that Thakombau afterwards recognised the validity of these
sales, and that he should do so is. not strange. He had partially —and but
partially—conquered several large districts. To recognise the validity of
titles to land therein would, and did, gain for him the support of those whose
titles he recognised. The European settlers to ensure their possession of land
acquired under a very precarious title found it advisable to assist in maintain-
ing Thakombau’s position, for it was evident to the most obtuse among them
that if the influence and supremacy of Bau so waned as to allow the conquered
people to gather strength and again come into power they would not be likely
to respect the contracts they had made in a moment of despair.
9. The fortune of war turned against Thakombau. In May 1868 his forces
suffered a severe reverse. A number of his leading Chiefs were killed and the
Bau force had to retreat. From this moment the vendors of the land com-
menced returning to their hereditary planting grounds. During the months
of May and June 1868 insults to and assaults upon settlers were matters of
daily occurrence.
Mr. John Pfluger (who was married to an Englishwoman, and who had
several children) was in constant trouble. He, together with all the other
settlers, who—in many cases with their wives—had unwisely ventured among
a heathen and cannibal people, were in daily danger of being put to death.
The letters of Mr. Pfluger and those of other settlers, the originals of which
are now among the archives of the Colonial Government, show how perilous
was the situation in which after Thakombau’s defeat they found themselves.
Complaints and applications for help poured into the British Consulate from
settlers of all nationalities. Of these Mr. Pfluger was one of the loudest in
his cries to the British Consul for assistance.
10. In these circumstances an application for help from all the European
settlers on the Upper Rewa was addressed to the British Consul and to
Commodore Lambert. To these documents the signatures of Messrs, Pfluger
and Luks are attached. Of that to the Consul I enclose a copy. That to the
Commodore was couched in nearly the same words. Hot only was the inter-
vention of the Commodore requested by the settlers, but so well satisfied were
they with the action taken by him that a letter expressive of their ‘ ‘ admira-
tion and entire approval of the manly way in which he had carried out the
wishes of the settlers' ’ was signed by all those on the spot at the time, Mr.
Luks amongst the number. It is true that Mr. Pfluger’s signature is not
affixed to this letter, but this was only because he was already on his way
down the river when it was written, having preceded his fellow-settlers in
their flight. It was signed by his brother-in-law on behalf of both, nor until
lately was his approval of the proceeding, of which he now complains, ever
repudiated by him.
11. Thakombau finally regained possession of the district in question, and
the European settlers were enabled to return in safety to the lands they had
gone through so many risks and dangers to acquire. Mr. Pfluger did so return
to his property, and Mr. Luks might also have done so, but preferred residing
in another part of Yiti Levu.


12. In concluding my report upon this portion of the subject referred to
by Count Munster I beg to submit, in the language of Lord Kenyon, that a
man cannot be permitted “to blow hot and cold according to the promptings
of his private interests.” Messrs. Luks and Pfluger invited the intervention
of Commodore Lambert, they approved the mode in which that intervention
was carried out, and it is illogical that they should now seek to recover
damages for results arising immediately from a compliance with their own
request.
13. I think your Lordship will see from this narrative that no fair claim for
compensation can be made either against Thakombau or against Her Majesty’s
Government in Fiji. The British Consul issued notices cautioning intending
settlers against purchasing land in the Upper Rewa district, and Messrs.
Pfluger and Luks were fully aware of the risks they ran in venturing at such
a dangerous time amongst a savage and cannibal people. After the defeat in
1868 of the Ban army, Thakombau was powerless to help them, and had it not
been for the intervention of Commodore Lambert, an intervention of which
they now complain, but which they themselves invited, they would most
certainly have lost not only a portion of tjieir property but their lives also.—
I have, etc.
Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
Nasova, November 12 to 19, 1875. — ... I have just had
the new sofas and chairs from Heal unpacked. They are very
nice and comfortable. I am going some day to have brown
holland covers made for them with a border of red fern leaves
in chintz which I got in Sydney, very pretty. It has been a
good deal cooler this last week, and I have consequently felt very
well, but I do not think it is healthy weather. ... I feel as if
I had nothing to say, so I will begin a sort of journal:—Yester-
day, November 11—After breakfast I went up to the nursery
and heard Nevil’s lessons in the verandah. . . . Something inter-
rupted me and I wrote no more that day (Friday), and now it
is Tuesday, and the Lewellyn is at last come in from Auckland.
She has brought a few papers but no letters whatever for us. . . .
Arthur is very much bothered with Fiji sores on his feet and is
getting quite seedy from want of exercise, which he cannot take,
being lamed by these horrid things. As soon as he gets better
he is going off for a little trip in the Barracouta to visit some of
the other islands, which will soon set him up again. I have not
yet been troubled with them, but both Mrs. Havelock and Mrs.
De Ricci have had them. Mr. Le Hunte is going away very
soon, having been appointed acting magistrate in Loma Loma.
We shall be extremely sorry to lose him, he is such a very nice
fellow. We shall feel quite a small party with Arthur away
and the Baron also.


Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Nasova, Fiji, November 17, 1875.—A steamer arrived a few
days ago from Auckland, but, to my great disappointment,
brought no letters for me. My last dates were August 25, so
it is an age since I heard anything ! I daresay the letters you
get from me are uncertain and far between now, but I hope
that will improve in spite of the failure of the mail contract
via San Francisco, for it is now settled that we are to have a
steamer from Auckland (which is only five days from here) every
three weeks, and our letters will come that way, I hope. I
have not much to tell you this time, and it is less than a
fortnight since I last wrote (by the Egmont , Nov. 2). We are
still going on in much the same way. Eka is still with the
Havelocks, and the new rooms have not progressed. I was
getting quite in despair about their ever getting finished, for
we could get no labourers to clear away the earth behind, and
till that is done the bedrooms cannot be lived in; but an in-
spiration came to Captain Knollys, that he might get Ratu
Timoci (the Yunivalu’s son), who is a very great man, to send
us a village to do the work, and accordingly he spoke to him
about it a week ago, and he promised us a hundred men, who
were to arrive to-day. The children were in a great state of
excitement looking out for them, and at eleven o’clock fifty or
sixty natives arrived, and set to work, and really worked with
a will, and I now begin to have some hope that it will be done
in time. In the meantime, I have fitted up the future nursery
for Miss G. Gumming, and she is to come down here this week
and occupy that till her room is done. The children still have
the new drawing-room. We have not had any picnics for the last
fortnight, as the Governor has been laid up with those tiresome
Fiji sores on his feet and legs, which have made him quite lame.
They are very troublesome to heal, but they are getting better
at last, and I hope he will be able to get away on Saturday for
a few days for a trip to Loma Loma in the Barracouta. He
wants change very much, for he scarcely gets out, and has not
been away for nearly three months. In fact, they are all
feeling the want of change, and there is a great deal of work to
do here. Arthur J. is away, and the Governor will take
Captain Knollys and Mr. Le Hunte, and leave Mr. Maudslay
alone with me, for the Baron is also away just now. But I
suppose Eka will be here by that time. The children are very
well, especially Nevil. Jack feels the heat much the most of
the two, and is rather languid. I am trying to teach him a


little, but he does not like lessons much. The other day, when
I called him to come and do his lessons, he ran away and said,
“ Oh, I’ve got such a bad pain, I must run and lie down.” Nevil
is getting on pretty well, and can nearly read. They are very
happy playing on their mats all day. They delight in every-
thing Fijian. We have had some bad stormy weather lately—
for a whole fortnight I could not go out in the boat. I have
just been reading in the Times, the life of Sir Edward Ryan.
It is very well done, I think, and extremely nice. I wonder
who wrote it. It is in one of the missing papers which only
turned up yesterday, so that I had not seen it before. We
take in the Times, Saturday Illustrated, Punch, Pall Mall Budget,
Guardian , and the Cornhill , Fortnightly, Contemporary, Blackwood,
Fraser, Macmillan, Edinburgh , Quarterly , Monthly Packet, Mission
Life , and two or three scientific periodicals. So you can think
what it is when the mail arrives, and we generally get the papers
of two mails all at once. They are all brought into the dining-
room in one of Andi Kuila’s big baskets, and I sort, cut open,
and arrange them, which takes a long time, —and keep them
neatly piled. There are several people who are glad to have
them in turn. I tie up the Times together in files of ten; about
fifty Times came by the last mail! We get no other new books.
Mr. Maudslay brought a good many, and he takes in the Spec-
tator, and the Havelocks the French Illustrt, and A Fashion Book,
so we do pretty well. There are two local papers, the Fiji
Times and the Argus, which come out twice a week each.
Yesterday, a little steamer arrived from Sydney, called the
Fitzroy, which has been bought by the Fiji Government, to go
about among the islands. I daresay we shall sometimes get a
trip in her, but, as we shall have to pay for coals when we use
her, it will come rather expensive. I went in her in her trial
trip in Sydney Harbour about a month before I left, and was
very much pleased with her. She is anchored just outside our
pier. The Governor went on board her yesterday and took
Jack and Nevil, who were extremely delighted. Lady Hackett
came to luncheon with me yesterday. They have got a house
on the other side of Levuka, and about a mile from here. Ido
not see much of her, as she cannot come unless I send the
boat for her and send her back, which, as one of the staff has to


go in it, is not always convenient. She is a great admirer of
Nevil, and thinks she looks quite as pretty without her long
hair. It alters her so much that I can hardly believe she is the
same child. I shall feel rather dull when Arthur is away; he
will be gone about a week this time, and about a month after
his return he is going off again for about a month. There is
very little variety or change to be got here. We have to be
very careful about money, for our expenses are enormous, and
everything we buy here is 150 per cent dearer than English
prices. It is excessively difficult to keep things down with such
a large number. Captain Knollys does his very best to keep
down expenses. We have just bought a capital cow which gives
2 J gallons of milk per day. She cost £25. The cost of her keep
is under £1 per month. Our milk bill had been £8 per month
(Is. per quart). The Havelocks pay £2OO a year for a very small
house (furnished) with two sitting-rooms and two bedrooms, and
a store closet in which Eka sleeps. They have built on a wooden
nursery at their own expense. The views of this island from
the sea are lovely , but that from Nasova itself has no great beauty.
In fact, the hills are so close behind that there is only the sea to
look at, and some islands in the far distance. The whole island
is surrounded by a coral reef, some half a mile from the shore.
There are openings in this reef at intervals; there is one
exactly opposite the town of Levuka. Our boating is all inside
the reef. The colour of the sea as it dashes on the reef with a
great roar, is perfectly lovely, and always changing. Eka has
tried to paint it, but her thick patch of body-colour on the sea,
plaistered with emerald green, doesn’t give the faintest idea of it.
(I don’t dare to say so.) I think that white paint in water-
colour is such a mistake; it does away with all the transparency
which is the great beauty of it. Her drawings are exactly
what Madeline said —very clever, but not art. Her outlines
and first washings are excellent, and there she ought to stop.
I forget whether I told you that Abbey is making a collection
of weapons and bowls for you!


Saturday morning , November 20. —Arthur is just off in the
Barracouta. The quarrel with Captain Stevens is patched up
temporarily, but is sure to break out again soon. Mr. Le
Hunte and Captain Knollys, the Auditor - General, and an
interpreter are gone with him, also a handsome Fiji footman
named Soani, and three of his native guard. Mr. Le Hunte
is to be left behind at Loma Loma, where he will be acting
magistrate for a year or two. I feel very sorry that he is
gone. When the flag was taken down as the Governor stepped
into his boat, Jack said, “ Never will Mr. Lee Unte put up
Father’s flag again.” The flag was his special charge. lam
really going away for two or three nights, first to a small
island called Bau, where the Yunivalu lives. The Governor and
staff will stay with him, and Eka and I with the missionary,
Mr. Langham. We are to go in the Fitzroy, and the Governor’s
boat is to meet us there, and then we are to go up the Rewa
River in her (in Viti Levu, which is close to Bau), and stay
another night or two with another missionary. I don’t much
like leaving the children, but I think the change will do me
good, and I daresay I shall like it. They are preparing a very
grand meke (dance) for our benefit on the Rewa River. It will
be three weeks, probably, before we get any more letters—you
can think how I am longing to hear.
From Mr. Gladstone
London, July 6, 1875.—My dear Arthur—l sincerely hope that the effect
of the great epidemic reported from Feejee may not be to increase the serious
difficulties of the task you have manfully undertaken, though I am afraid it
is too probable that in one way or other the disaster may operate unfavourably
upon you. As respects the future prospects one would suppose it must in
any case weaken elements of positive resistance.
We have been here all the season, but I rarely intervene in politics, and
am for the most part a passive but ill-satisfied observer. lu other interests
I find ample occupation more to my mind than on the floor of Parliament in
the present temper of what is called the public mind.


I send you herewith a copy of an article which I lately wrote on the court
of Victoria and Albert; and, for its nobleness, a charge of Bishop Douglas,
who, I am told, is dying.
In one way or another, and stripped of the aid of my private Secretaries
and their office, I am more busy, at least more in arrear, than ever; but I
must give you a short account in this letter of my proceedings and experience,
since your departure, in the sad Gordon affair. . . .
* ******
******
*******
Two articles in the Saturday Review followed, and noticed the publication
in Germany. But no other newspaper or public organ has deemed it right
so take account of this remarkable combination of serious crime, moral
enormity, and ecclesiastical arrogance and assumption.
I sent my short sketch to Mr. Murray yesterday. It forms part of a
preface.
This letter must not close without a word on Archbishop, now Cardinal,
Manning. Since we two have been almost equally intimate (as I believe)
j with him, I must make it known to you that his correspondence and conduct
: in matters connected with my tract on Vaticanism have made upon me the
j most painful impressions as to his sense of truth and honour. —Believe me,
, affectionately yours.
Notes: September, October, November, 1875
For a couple of months after the arrival of my family, I
kept hardly any journal, only setting down occasionally the
names of those who came to interview me, and the objects of
their visits, and that in a somewhat casual and fragmentary
manner. During the latter half of September, the Chiefs who
had attended my installation at Bau held a sort of Council at
my desire. They met at Driemba, the little village, about a
mile down the coast from Nasova, where Cakobau had a house.
All the Boko Tuis were present, and a certain number of Bulis
and magistrates from each province. I had given them, when
at Bau, a list of questions to which I wished answers, and they
were told they might also consider any other question they
desired to originate.
The first question discussed by them at my request was
that of Ida , an institution which from a mistaken idea of its


character was regarded with great disfavour by most white
settlers. Essentially, it is communal work, done for an indi-
vidual or for the community, under regulation of the Chief. If
a new house is to be built, all the villagers help the owner to
build it, he in his turn giving assistance when any neighbour
similarly requires it. To prevent clashing of rival claims, the
right can only be claimed with the Chiefs sanction. In the
same way, when the village has to furnish supplies of food or
tax produce, the Chief apportions the incidence.
* Some good speeches were made during the discussion.
Tui Lakeba said—
Do away with lala and the whole appearance of the land will be changed
for the worse. Who, of himself, can build a good house? And who desires
to see a town with only small and bad houses in it ? Who ever heard of a
man planting his garden all by himself, and then having plenty for his
family to eat ? Do not we Fijians do all things in companies ? How can a
single man alone build his house, plant his garden, and construct his canoe
and sail it ? To do this we must cease to be Fijians.
This was the general tone of the speakers. Maafu made a
very shrewd hit:
I do not think lala should be abrogated because here and there it may
have been abused in any individual case ; the law may take hold of such a
case. ... It is objected that lala is not according to British usages, and that
according to British usages every man is free to pursue any good or evil course,
and upon him alone fall the good or evil consequences. That is called Vaka-
peritania, and through the doings of the disobedient the land stinks. When
I have been stirred to rise and put it down, I have been met and hindered by
the culprits saying it is Vakaperitania, and thus Vakaperitania becomes the
shield of evildoers. As yet this is only presumption on their part, but if all
men are to be free to follow their own mind and pleasure in these matters of
lala, authority and position come to an end, and Vakaperitania commences.
But our people will still be Fijians for all that, and for a long time to come they
will only in name he British. Hereafter we may be all anglicised, but it is
not with the people of the next generation we have now to do, but with our-
selves, and our dark-minded half-awakened people.
It was finally decided to recommend to the Governor that
the custom of lala should be retained for the following purposes :
—house-building, planting, feeding strangers, cutting and build-
ing canoes, fishing turtle, and other works of public utility, and
that the custom by which the party benefited provides food or
payment for those engaged should be retained. Secondly, that
the Eoko Tuis and Bulis should be the only Chiefs authorised
to order lala, and that any other Chief or individual desiring
the benefit of a lala to help him in performing any of the
Y


works before specified, should apply to one of these, who would
in each case be responsible for its proper exercise.
On the second day, there was a good deal of discussion as
to the forms of respect to be used towards the Governor. The
forms of respect to high Chiefs were set forth and explained,
and a good deal of curious information obtained on that subject.
The great Chiefs never tamaka either a superior Chief or each
other, and there was much excitement about the Yunivalu’s tama
to me when we first met, and its signification. At last it was
agreed that the Eoko Tui Ea, Eatu Esekeli, should be sent to the
Vunivalu to ask what was his meaning in the act. His reply
was striking:
/
What I did at Nasova when I first met the Governor was from a feeling
pf profound respect and love for the Chief whom the Queen has sent to rule
lover us. I did it with a true heart, as my duty to the highest Chief in the
land. I wish all my children to do the same, and will not all high Chiefs
follow me in this ? Were we not of one mind when we discussed, decided,
and gave Fiji to England ? Did we not do so without any reservation.
Having then given our land, our people, our all to the Queen, shall we not
\ tamaka her representative ? Or shall we he divided about such a matter, when
we have been united about one so much more weighty, or- are wo children
that want to contend about trifles ?
Look at the whole question as becomes Chiefs. The tama is a thing of
the lips and tongue, a sound only. Which is the more important, our country
or our forms of respect to one another ? The one we have given of our own
free will. Shall we then withhold the one, or abstain from showing the
highest form of respect to the Governor who has come to rule over us ? The
Governor’s mission to Fiji is to promote its good, our good and the good of
the people, that we may die in peace and quiet. Do you suppose that lam
foolish or childish ? What I did when I first met the Governor I did of my
own will and with a true heart, not with the heart of a commoner or in the
spirit of a trader. I love the Queen who is now our Queen, whose representative
is now in our midst. Look at the case from another side. Had our land beer
stolen or taken away from us by force, had the Governor come with evi'
intent and with evil mind towards us, seeking to accomplish our ruin, he
would never have heard my tama. I should have despised him, met him as
an enemy, hated him ; we two could never have walked together on the same
path. But the coming of this Chief among us is w T hat we have ourselves
desired, and is to secure our true welfare ; it is the confirmation and completion
by the Queen of the work we began. He is our Chief. Shall we not then
perform our highest forms of respect and courtesy towards him ? True, we
Chiefs do not tama usually ; but to him all must tama to show our good will,
and that his residence among us may be respected by all. He is our Chief.
This is my message to the Council.
The Chiefs immediately resolved in accordance with the
Yunivalu’s wishes. It seems Fiji fashion that honour due to


the man belongs equally to the house he lives in, and accordingly
Nasova was declared tabu; and not only all persons passing in
front of it along the road, but all boats and canoes passing or
putting in there, were ordered to tama.
They also settled the Queen’s title to their own satisfaction,
and recommended that the punishment for wilful disobedience to
a Chief’s orders should be a fortnight’s work on the roads; but
were somewhat puzzled to define disobedience, and sent a
message to me to ask. Before breaking up, they asked me to
appoint Matanivanua, —a sort of native A.D.C.s, who act as
heralds and messengers and settle all points of ceremonies.
The third day’s session opened with a message from me, to the
effect that I meant all lawful orders of Chiefs to be obeyed,
which of course gave great satisfaction. In another message
I accepted merely symbolical first-fruits —ten yams from each
province; and by a third, in answer to a question put the day
before, to the effect that Government mails were to be carried as
Government service, that letters from settlers to Government or
the magistrates were also to be forwarded, but that letters from
settlers to one another need not be carried without pay. A
discussion then followed on the punishment for evil speaking
and spreading false reports, and they recommended that the
punishment in the existing native law, Na Lawa Eso, should be
continued. The fourth, fifth, and sixth day’s sittings were
taken up by a discussion on the laws relating to the relations
between the sexes, a matter of great moment to Fijians.
ancient times, the laws regarding adultery, or the enticing away
of women from a house, were severe, and on attaining practically
overwhelming influence in Fiji, the Wesleyan missionaries, partly
from a wish not rashly to disturb existing institutions, but chiefly
on religious grounds, got strongly penal laws passed in the
Na Lawa Eso. Of course these laws lapsed with the 1
promulgation of the constitution of the Colony, and though I
had continued them temporarily, comparatively few knew this,]
and the natives were everywhere told by the whites that!
adultery and fornication were no longer punishable. Captain
Stevens of the Barracouta indeed went so far as to threaten the
native Stipendiary Magistrate of Lau with punishment if he
continued to pronounce sentences ?rom the Na Lawa Esq,
After three days’ animated discussion, the Council recommended
that marriages performed by a magistrate should be equally
valid with those performed by ministers of religion, that
divorces also should be pronounced by the magistrates, and
that the punishments for adultery and fornication should
remain substantially as in the Na Lawa Eso. They also


recommended the confirmation of a good many more of the
laws in that volume.
On the seventh day of the Council, the subject of special
plantations for the growth of tax produce was dealt with,-and
in answer to a question from the Governor as to the proper
succession to the Roko-Tuiship of Macuata, Katonivere was
selected for the post. On the next day, the Articles of the
Native Provincial Regulations were read over, and, with some
amendments, recommended for confirmation. On a proposition
being made, for payment of town Chiefs, Maafu made a long
and eloquent speech pointing out that the proposition of such
an innovation had better be at least delayed. He said :
Let us be considerate: the Governor has already heard us in many
things and done much to meet our wishes and requirements. He desires
to consult us, and expects us to help him. If it be his duty, a stranger
among us, to show such concern and seek the welfare of- the people, what
ought to be expected of us ?—for it is our proper work, although as a Chief he
shares it with us. How inconsiderate of us if he reap only weariness and
fatigue.”
And the wise old Tui Bua summed up the whole discussion
thus:
True, our desires are accomplished. It is clear as noonday that there is but
one object in the Governor’s mind. He is seeking our true and real good, and
we must be true helpers to him in his great and heavy task. It is not enough
that we come here and see him and hear him, and go and tell him our little
affairs, or attend this Council and talk every day and upon every subject.
If we are true men and Chiefs, he expects us to return to our homes and do
our duties in a chief-like manner there. Our natural habits of indifference
and our ready excuses for not having done our work will not do in this age.
What is decided upon as to be done, that we must do. The Governor is our
true leader and helper, let our obedience be thorough.”
The discussion on the ninth day was somewhat desultory,
touching on the maintenance and work of prisoners, the making
of roads, the prevention of bush fires, and other matters of local
interest; and, finally, the position of the Chief Bukatavatava,
who they recommended should with his people be restored to
their lands and town at Sabeto.
On the tenth and last May of the meeting a very important
subject, with reference to which much feeling prevailed, was
brought up, —that of the hiring of Fijian labour to work on
distant islands of the group. The recommendations of the
Council on this subject were singularly moderate and sensible.
They were that young children should not be allowed to go to
distant islands without their parents; that bribery of Chiefs to


procure labour should be strictly put down; that Chiefs should
be strictly prevented from forcing men to go, and the engage-
ment made, in fact as well as name, really voluntary. They
also urged that the regulations in regard to their residence and
conduct in the province they go to be made very clear, so that
they may not be left to their own ways.
On the 29th September all the Chiefs assembled at Nasova
in the great room where the Fiji Parliament used to assemble.
The Yunivalu and I sat side by side on the mats at the head of
the room, on the low dais, and the memorial of the Council, in
thirteen articles, was read in Fijian by the Chief Scribe. I had
a translation before me, and answered each article as it was
read. Then there was a solemn yaqona-making, and a bowl oT
yaqona being placed in my hands I pronounced it the drink f
of the “ Roko Tui Macuata,” and sent it to Katonivere by the
hand of my Matanivanua, thus “ drinking him in ” to office and
recognising him as Roku Tui.
We went steadily on with work in the Legislative Council,
and passed several useful laws. Of the first set of Ordinances I
have already written. On the 28th September we passed, as
well as a useful Interpretation Clause Ordinance, one for estab-
lishing a Public Hospital at Levuka, placed under the control of
a committee, to be nominated by the Governor. On the 7th
October we adopted a somewhat ambitious Public Health Ordi-
nance, modelled to a great extent on my old Trinidad one. It
constituted a board of five, including the Governor, and gave to
the board the power of naming the local authority in each sani-
tary district. The first part regulated the powers and functions
of the board; the second defined nuisances; the third gave
great and exceptional powers, to be exercised only in case of need;
and the fourth dealt with the enforcement of the Ordinance, and
procedure under it. At the same sitting we passed an Ordinance
to prohibit the supply of liquor to natives: —mere prohibition to sell
spirits to natives under a penalty has proved so very inefficacious
elsewhere, that I have hit on the novel device of adding to the
penalty the provision that the price of liquor supplied to natives
shall be irrecoverable; —and also an Ordinance to prevent the
evasion of judgments in Australia, on which I have commented
at p. 309. On the 28th October we passed three Ordinances—
an Alien Law, described at p. 311, one for the establishment of
the Supreme Court, described at p. 309, also one to give the
necessary powers of examining on oath, etc., to the Lands Com-
mission, and such other Commissions as I had appointed or might
appoint.
On the Ist November we passed a very important law. The


Supreme Court Ordinance provided for the exemption by the
Governor of any district from its jurisdiction. The Ordinance
we now passed provided for the exercise of judicial functions by
a Commissioner, who, as regarded whites, had the powers of a
Stipendiary Justice, and as regarded natives unlimited powers,
except that his capital sentences must be confirmed by the
Governor, and that he was to be governed by the principles of
English law. On the 11th November we solemnly declared
by Ordinance the irresponsibility of the Crown for Cakobau’s
liabilities, and on the 18th November I named Eupert Eyder of
Mago and Mr. J. C. Smith of Levuka the first unofficial members
of the Legislative Council, which up to that time had consisted
exclusively of officials. In administrative work, a good deal of time
was taken up in seeing, selecting, and giving instructions to the
new Stipendiary Magistrates. They had to be carefully instructed
not only as to what they were to do, but also what they were
not, for many imagined that they were to be the executive heads
of their districts, and it required a good deal of lecturing to make
them understand that their intervention in executive matters, so
far as natives were concerned, was only to be by way of advice ,
and that the Eoko was in fact as well as name the chief executive
officer in all native affairs. Nor was it always easy to impress
on them that the native Stipendiary Magistrate who sat with
them was not to be regarded as a mere cypher.
One matter which much occupied me was the arrangement
of steam communication. After a good deal of trouble I suc-
ceeded in buying a small steamer, the Fitzroy , for the use of the
Government, and in subsidising a monthly service from New
Zealand, and an interinsular service among the islands. When
the first steamer came from Auckland (the Llewellyn) a luncheon
was given on board her, to which luckily I went. I say luckily,
for though I could not prevent Mr. Layard making a foolish
speech, my presence prevented worse mischief. It was most in-
considerate to leave Layard in the island for months after my
arrival with nothing to do, and the natural disposition of a man
to find fault with the successor who displaced him, and hint what
he would have done had he been confirmed in the Government.
It was unfair to him, and equally unfair to me, not to give him
another post, or allow him leave till one could be found him.
The Llewellyn brought down representatives of the Bank of New
Zealand, with whom I arranged the Government banking business,
and who discussed their claims on Cakobau’s Government. On
this they were reasonable. I told them we could admit no claim,
but were willing to treat them with consideration, and they are
ready to take debentures at low interest.


Journal for Lady Gordon
Friday , November 19. —Sailed in Barracouta for the large
island of Goro. Reached Goro at 5.20 p.m. Timoci “swam
off ”to deliver the presents —masi and cocoanuts. The ceremony
of “swimming off,” qalovi , is a survival in name but not in fact.
They do not swim off.\ but come out in canoes, swathed in in-
numerable folds and lengths of tappa, and carrying many whale’s
teeth, whkh they deposit on the deck, and then go through a
long and elaborate process of undressing, the coils of tappa
stripped and unwound off them being placed in a heap at my
feet. Qalovi is a ceremony performed by the local Chiefs only
on the first visit of the Chief paramount.
Sunday, November 21.—Did not get up very early. Went
on shore after breakfast to church. Were met by a good
crowd on landing. Rested a few minutes in the Chief’s house,
and then went on to the church. I was pleased to find that I
understood nearly the whole of the sermon. The preacher
spoke of God and set forth that each Person of the Trinity
was God —Explained the work of each, but yet that there was
only one God, Jehovah. Dwelt on His everlastingness. Man
was born —became a boy —a young man —a married man —died
was buried and came to an end. Fruits ripened, waited a
while on the tree, fell, and rotted. God was ever young. Chiefs
passed away —God was their Chief for ever. Like the parasite
on the bough , He had no beginning, no end. He loved men
and He watched them continually. How then should we have
Him ever in our thoughts ? The singing was good. English
ladies, planters’ wives and daughters, were present. Waited a
long while and dawdled. Had dinner. Went on to Mr. Hilton s.
Saw his cotton plantation. Thence to Mr. Chalmers. Called on
Mrs. Chalmers and her pretty daughters. Went down there in
boat, but walked home. Conversation with Timoci after dinner.
The village at Nabuna is really very pretty, and so is the little one
between it and Mr. Chalmers’s place. They are backed by rich
wood on a flat in a valley. Over the bathing place near the
church, at Nabuna, are a few really fine trees, and behind them
is the site of the old town, now deserted and overgrown. The
house we dined in was quite a new one, clean, and well furnished
with mats, etc.
Monday , November 22. —Landed early and had a meeting with
the Bulis and town Chiefs at Nabuna. In answer to questions
as to land disputes, said that the Commission would decide, and
meanwhile possession was to be respected. Was asked about


laws. —Told them old ones were to continue in force till new ones
were made. Was asked about adultery.—Tried to explain to
them that though the punishments were not similar, it was a
mistake to suppose it was not punished in England, as it involved
there both a fine and a tabu. y
Asked about the purchase of a boat for the community. —
Gave answer inclining to negative.
Had breakfast. Walked down the coast. Beautiful grove
of ivi and fig-trees. Called at the various settlers’ houses.
Otway’s —Wretched place.
Cunningham’s —Bather nice little house, full of cats, black,
white, and yellow. Valley sheared bare.
Swan’s —Between two swamps, but well placed on a plateau
in a fine amphitheatre. Every stick of timber cut and clean
shaved off. Cattle and cotton —Malicolo figures of gods and
animals.
Martelli’s —An Italian surveyor who has a rather pretty
place and nice flower bushes. From hill behind really fine view
of coast and sea. Hot walk back. Yaqona. Sailed for Loma
Loma— Barracouta is one of the most uncomfortable ships I ever
was in. After a plunge and kicking up her heels, she gives a
sort of wriggle with her stern quite peculiar to her, and like
that of a waterfowl’s tail after diving.
Tuesday , November 23.—Had to go round the Loma Loma
reef an immense way to reach its entrance. Passed Mago.
Entered Loma Loma reef soon after ten. Anchored off* the
town at noon. The island is very pretty indeed, and not unlike
Seychelles without the higher mountains. To our horror, we
found that Maafu, Mr. Emberson, and Mr. Booney were all away.
It was a great disappointment to Le Hunte to miss Emberson,
and to me to miss Booney.
The first thing that struck me on landing was the home-like
English look of comfort; the next, the fences of all the houses,
vaka Toga. I —We walked along the beach to Emberson’s house,
which he had left untouched for Le Hunte, and with large labels
on everything, to say what they were, and for what use. His
house is, as usual with Tongan houses, oval. In the centre, his
court-room and sitting-room; at one end, his bedroom; at the
other, storerooms. The house I thought rather low, dark and
close, for it opens chiefly on* the landward side. But it stands
in a very nice compound , short grass and cocoanut trees. Behind
the compound runs the road, of which Vanua Balavu is proud,
as well it may be, for they have fourteen or sixteen miles of very
1 Tongan fashion.


good road, and I doubt if any other part of Fiji has so much. We
walked first to the north, chiefly under cocoanut trees, with
occasional large Barringtonias and Dawas and an occasional
Dilo for variety. The Barringtonias very large, old, fine and
picturesque in their decay. Here and there also a Baka or
Banian. After a mile or so under the cocoanuts the road turned
round a point whence was a pretty view. Eeturning, we met
Mr. Levick, late J.P., and walked with him to the Botanic
Garden, which may be nice if taken care of, but is at present
almost a wilderness, with a few nice plants struggling for exist-
ence in a jungle of weeds.
Next we walked through the town, admiring the fences and
neat gardens, or rather orchards, and then down to the south
about two miles, the same sort of road, pretty, but rather
monotonous. Came to a little village and sat under Barring-
tonias on the seashore. In returning, called on Hennings and
Levick. The former has rather a good house, but too near the
sea. Levick’s is better placed, having in front of it a very English
lawn with a Norfolk Island pine, and a great part of it sheltered
by a splendid “ Dilo.” Mrs. and Miss Levick dined on board.
After dinner we returned to shore for yaqona at Maafu’s house.
Maafi did the honours in Maafu’s absence. The thing was done
Tonga fashion, —no singing, each name called out separately,
followed by a cry from the strainer sounding like “ Endina ep ! ”
After yaqona we talked more or less confidentially with Maafi
about his judgments, and rather reassured him.
Wednesday , November 24.—Landed early and walked with Le
Hunte and Knollys up the north road. Really very pretty in its
way, and there is a general well-to-do-ness about the people. After
breakfast went to the schools. The Fijian one a very good one,
the arithmetic especially above par. The Tongan school did not
please me equally, but was good. The school buildings both good,
especially the Fijian one, which is really a fine room, adorned
with stained glass ! Many of the children very picturesque. One
or two were glossy with sandal wood oil, powdered all over with
the tiny daisy-like petals of a yellow flower. The effect was to
make their arms look just like those sticks of brown sealing-
mixed with gold-leaf, which used to be in fashion some years ago.
Schools over, there was a presentation of yams and turtle which
did not take long, and then Knollys and I walked down to the
south end of the island. The latter part of the walk very pretty
indeed. The hot springs we did not see ; only some warm water
in the sand. Called at poor Mr. King’s. Poverty there evidently
very great. On getting back to town examined the great canoe
Ra Mamma. Wind very high, but nevertheless embarked at


3.30. Very sorry to leave Le Hunte behind. Got out of the
reef just before dark and had a very rough night of it.
Thursday , November 25.—This morning we were passing
between Gau and Nairai, off which latter place we anchored about
8.30, and landed immediately after breakfast. We found a pretty
good road, and a dirty dilapidated village, Dalici. Crossed the
island to Tauloa, where Timoci ought to have been but was not.
The road excellent and the cultivation very good. I was al-
together much pleased by the jaunt. We saw and gathered
“ Sosomi ” plums, which are decidedly nice, and also saw the sweet
smelling Laqakali in flower, —a small orange-coloured flower,
very sweet, —also a Hoya. The road passed over two hills, from
which we had a pleasant outlook, though the island is on the
whole rather bare. I liked the village of . There
were pretty trees about it and a nice fence round it. Small
cocoanuts.
We sailed again about two, and went over to Gau, the ap-
proach to which is pretty; it reminded me of the lower slopes of
Bourbon. Anchored near Sawayake and sent Wilkinson and
Knollys on shore to make arrangements for landing.
Friday,November 26. —Landed early. The “swimming off” was
performed by the Sawayake Buli with a string of whale’s teeth,
whereof I took one. Then followed palaver. The Alosi case
—the laws—Cakobau’s tabu. The school-house at Sawayake
is the finest I have seen and well filled with children —130, of
whom over forty can read fluently. The cultivation in the three
old broad concentric ditches, which surround the town and in
old times formed its defence, is also fine, and there is a clear
stream near, wherein I bathed, under the shade of fine old ivis.
Breakfasted on pork and fowl. After this, Wilkinson and I set
out to walk to Wai Kama. Our path was a good one and very
pretty. It led through the town, then up a narrow valley, then
into another up on a ridge, along the ridge, whence a good
view of wooded mountains on left. Past the deserted town of
Mata-ni-wai, all the inhabitants of which died of measles. Bed
blossomed tree ; the “ Vunga,” full of flower and very handsome.
Down hill—Walk through pretty park-like scenery to Wai
Kama, a large town, outside of which is a sort of square bath
three feet deep, with stone border, about sixty feet long and forty
broad. This is full of hot water, which however is not boiling
like that at Savu Savu, but simply warm. The people most
picturesque. Had yaqona in house. Boat from the ship sent
to fetch us, went by the mouth of the inlet without seeing it.
Sent fleet runners to catch her, which they did, and brought


her back. I liked our stay at Wai Kama. It is a pretty place,
and the Highland-like loch which runs up from it is very pleasing.
Sailed back to the ship, found Barracouta under weigh. Got on
board near entrance of reef and sailed for Kadavu. Fair night.
My birthday.
Saturday , November 27. —Oft' Kadavu at daylight. Steamed
into Galoa Bay about eight. Passed Mayo in straits. He came
on board cross. Landed after the “ swimming,” the speechifying
in which was sung in a high chant. Am disappointed with
Kadavu, which looks bare and the inhabitants very kaisi and
dirty and stupid. The European inhabitants also seem a bad
lot. Met Swanston on the beach. Went to his temporary
house and theijce to Mayo’s tent. Mayo has had row
with Sergt. Foster, and is wanting in tact and temper. "Walked
and Swanston, the Stipendiary Magistrate.
The latter is a wind-bag, and wants puncturing. In afternoon
went with Wilkinson to Galoa Island and old town of Galoa,
picturesquely situated on a narrow creek. There is a very
fine house there, about ten years old, situated close to the
water on a sort of quay of stone, very picturesque. Wandered
over the little island, then to boat again. After landing on
main island, stumbled through mud, mangroves, and salt water
for half a mile, and then reached a village, whence we found a
decent path to the other side of the island, here very narrow.
Fine bay on north side. In returning went by canoe from village
along a twisty-twisty canal under overhanging mangroves of good
size, though not equal to those on the Nateva, in Trinidad.
Eeturned on board to dinner, and after that meal went ashore
to Cagi Levu’s for a palaver, and to hear what the white settlers
had to say in support of their abuse of the Eoko’s administra-
tion. The landing was very picturesque. Fires had been made
on the beach, and large torches were carried by men, throwing a
fine illumination on the cocoanut trees and the water and the
people. The Eoko had taken a hint from the Ban installation
and laid down mats from the house to the beach. Most of the
English were there, and we had a long talk, the upshot of which
was that there had been great cry and little wool about the tabu.
Mr. Berry was very violent and rather amusing. Cagi Levu
has lately undergone the cokolosi operation and was consequently
unable to move from his mat.
Sunday , November 28.—0 n shore to church. Mr. Eobson,
the Wesleyan missionary, preached. Did not understand him at
all. Sailed about 3.30.
Monday , November 29. —Eeached Levuka about ten. German


man-of-war there. Germans at luncheon. German ball. After
all, the Frisco mail arrived, and a great row thereupon ensued
about her quarantine.
To Mr. Le Hunte
Nasoya, November 29, 1875. —My dear Le Hunte —We returned here
this morning after a very pleasant cruise. We had a rough night on
Wednesday, but reached Nairai in good time next morning. It is a very
pretty island, though'small. There was a good road in it and very good
cultivation. We walked over the hills from Dalithi to Tauloa, and then
back again by another town. Sailed in the afternoon and anchored before
night off Sawayacke in Gau. After Loma Loma, I like Gau best of all the
islands I have seen. Query, is one of the elements of the comfort and well-
to-do-ishness of the population to be found in the fact that there is not a
single white man in it ? The town in capital order, and the cultivation
round it really splendid in its luxuriance. The school a capital building
with glass windows (not stained glass, however), and 130 children in it! We
walked by a very pretty path to the village of Wai Kama, where is a curious
hot spring. It is not a boiling one like Savu Savu, but hot. It forms a
kind of bath some forty feet long by thirty wide, with stone edges (artificial).
Then over to Kadavu, which much disappointed me. It is a stupid and
hare-looking island. I had a picturesque nocturnal yaqona drinking at Cagi
Levu’s, and had all the white complainants there to state their griefs, which
collapsed considerably on investigation. I trust you are getting on all
comfortably. Write often. That poor boy of Molloy’s is dead. All well
at Nasova.
From Mr. A. J. L. Gordon
Dela ni Yanua, Sunday , November 14. —I went over this morning to
Namena to see Eastgate, who returned from the Rewa last night. He tells me
that Roko Tui Dreketi is quite a reformed character, that he has not touched
spirits for ever so long, and that the state of his town is much improved as
regards cleanliness and order, and that it is now well worth seeing, especially
the church, which he describes as the finest Fijian building in Yiti Levu —the
roof inside being ornamented with white shells and sinnet work, and the
pillars which support it well polished. Eastgate has, he thinks, settled
Witherow’s and Ellis’s affair by lecturing the latter, and finally giving him
written instructions to abstain from further trespass. While at Bau, Eastgate
was surprised by Ratu Abel’s asking him to make that place his headquarters,
and further offering him a site for his house on the spot where Milne’s house
stood (on the hill near Langham’s). Eastgate is half inclined to go there,
but would not think of doing so without your permission. While I was
talking to him, I thought this a very odd move of Abel’s, but on my return
here I think I discovered the solution. The Buli of this district, Yitu Yatu
by name, commonly called Sawakasa, after the name of his town, has just
come back from Bau after having finished his share of the house-building
there, and it appears that he and his people were much abused there for
having complained about this forced work, it being believed at Bau that it
was through their complaints to Eastgate and Taylor that the matter reached


your ears. Now it seems to me that Abel’s anxiety that Eastgate should
reside at Bau proceeds rather from a wish to get him out of this district, and
out of reach of such complaints in future, than from any particular love for
him. This only struck me after seeing Sawakasa and hearing his story, but I
feel sure that lam right. Ratu Abel told Eastgate that a Mr. Wilson, who
lately went down to Bau with Ratu Timothy, told him that after Christmas a tax
of two shillings per head was to be imposed, giving Thurston as his authority,
—and Abel, like a fool, immediately issued orders to that effect. He should be
again warned not to believe every story he hears, and, above all, not to act
upon unofficial communications. Poor old Ratu Ilaitia is somewhat discon-
tented with his pay, and I certainly think that if any changes are to be made
in the salaries of the native magistrates that his should be increased—he only
receives £24, and that, as he says, only covers the expense of keeping up his
taro and yam gardens—and I believe he is most hard-working and worthy.
I hear that Ratu Isikeli has put up a fine building for your accommodation
at Navuavua in Rakiraki Bay—the place to start for Kau Yaudra from. I
fear we shall not get off until Tuesday. We are delayed by not being able
to procure taro as food for the men. We shall now get some, as Sawakasa
has returned ; before, all the men were away at Bau, and the women dared
not sell any.
Raeawai, Ba River, November 19, 1875. —I am writing this at Mr.
Macintosh’s plantation and have asked him to be so good as to take it to
Levuka, where he is going in a day or two. We arrived at Sagunu yesterday
morning, and as Taylor cannot manage to leave again before to-morrow I
came up here and got Macintosh to take me up the river as far as Fitzgerald’s
place, and had a slap at the ducks on the way. They are much in want of
rain here and it is very hot weather. The Roko read your letter. That
scoundrel Moore has been here personating the magistrate, but was unable to
impose upon the Roko, who felt sure he was an impostor. He (Moore) has
now gone to the Yasawas, and is, so the Roko hears, carrying on the same game
there, and has even attempted to appoint Bulis, etc. This, however, will
soon be checked by Taylor, who will shortly be going there, but one cannot
say how much harm he may have already done. I was rather amused at
hearing that Fitzgerald, on his return to the Ba from Levuka, gave out that
he had had a most pleasant interview with you, and had found in you an old
Indian acquaintance !
No news here from Nadroga. I hope to be there now in a few days.
Everything is perfectly quiet here. The Roko is collecting muskets from
the neighbouring towns, and I believe they are coming in fast. There is no
further apprehension among any of the planters, and Taylor is paying off the
special constables. Sabeto is finished, fourteen houses having been built.—
With much love.
Macintosh has been very civil to me ; —if convenient, ask him to dinner.
He is obliged to go to Levuka, much to his inconvenience, as he is summoned
by the Attorney - General as a witness in the Wolcott and Kennedy case—
although he saw nothing of the row.
Na Rewa, Nadi, November 23, 1875. —We arrived here yesterday morn-
ing after having been much detained by head winds on our way from Ba.


We had to put in for the night in Taurau Bay, and slept at a certain Mr.
Clay’s house—l was very sorry to be obliged to go there, as he is one of the
wrong sort, very anti-native, and likely, I should think, to become anti-
governmental. The estate, I believe, belongs to Mr. Ireland, and Clay is
looking after it. In talking about people making suggestions to you, etc.,
{i.e. where those suggestions differed from Mr. Clay’s notions) it was that
gentleman’s opinion that the Governor should “just take them by the
shoulders and kick them out of the house 1” We talked also about the pro-
hibition of the use of dynamite, and I must say it appears to me that if it is
to be prohibited, there should be some clause exempting certain districts where
food is scarce—there might of course be a limit fixed even in these cases.
Clay was down upon the Boko’s new road from Ba to Nadi, and said it was
perfectly useless on account of bad engineering and steep ascents. I have
just inquired here about it, and am told that a Mr. Markham who has lately
passed that way gives, on the contrary, a good report of it —does not complain
of the hills—but pronounces it to be a good road, and one by which one could
travel on the darkest night. Here and there, however, there is a want of
culverts and drainage—as might be expected. Nadi Bay is very beautiful,
and from the low hills at the back of the plain there is the finest view of a
stretch of land that I have yet seen in Fiji. I have not yet seen the proposed
site for a capital except at a distance, but from what I have seen, and hear, it
sounds and seems a good one. The river is a fine large one—beautiful clear
water and plenty of it. The natives have lately changed the site of their
town to a place closer to the river-mouth than formerly, and where the floods
are said not to reach. They (the natives) have a large extent of the low rich
root - producing land, and food is abundant. We slept last night at the
brothers Muir’s place ; Tough, honest Scotchmen. Eidsdale, Gordon, Mark-
ham, and other settlers have been most anxious to show hospitality—even to
boring one. We go to breakfast with Eidsdale, who is certainly the best of
them, this morning. If you are thinking of doing so, I hope you won’t make
that little whipper-snapper a J.P. He is entirely one-sided, and, I
am afraid, a sneak. Olive seems to have been recruiting rather lavishly.
There are from twenty to thirty new men here. They have been living here
for some time and being fed by the Buli (Navula) on pigs and all the luxuries.
I told him that it was quite unnecessary to give them pigs and all they asked
for, that if he gave them the ordinary police rations it was quite sufficient,
and that the Government would naturally pay for that, but that he could not
expect the Government to pay for pigs ad lib. The old fellow was much
relieved, as he thought he was obliged to keep these men at his own expense
and give them what they asked for. He laughed, and said, ‘‘ Sa vinaka, sa
vinaka, kakua na vuaka tale." 1 Olive ought never to have left him without
instructions. We are off for Nadroga to-night, and I hope to catch Olive, who
is expected here soon. Letters to Ba with a note to the Roko to forward
them by land will reach me.
F.S. —The weather here is blazing hot but perfectly dry, and would suit
you, —but a change is expected, as it has been like this for so long.
Na Eewa near Cuvu, November 27, 1875. —I hope you have received
my letters from Ba and Nadi. We left the latter place on the evening of the
1 Good, good, they won’t get pigs again.


23rd, the strong wind which has latterly been blowing all day obliging us to
travel by night. By early morning we had passed Navulo Point a good way,
and the wind rising again we put in at an old deserted plantation, where we
spent the rest of the day. The country after leaving Nadi becomes un-
interesting and ugly, but the climate is delightful, and at night, even at this
season, quite cool. Starting again at night we reached a plantation about
9 a.m. beyond the Tuvu River—named Tadola, the person in charge, Mr.
Thompson Smith, has just died —and we found a certain Mr. Tailor, a
neighbour (and not an agreeable one, I should think), in charge of the
premises. Here we breakfasted and spent some weary hours waiting for the
tide and the moderation of the wind. That evening we reached Qali Dradra,
a plantation belonging to Mr. Grayburn, who is now in partnership with that
small piece of conceit and importunity, Montague Cholmondeley J !
Here we also met a Mr. Strange or Le Strange, a connection of Mr. C.
J ’s, and an old German whose name I did not find out, but who
appeared to be as much a part of the establishment as the chair he sat on—
and probably about as useful. I should like you to see Grayburn. He
arrived here some six or seven years ago from New Zealand, suffering, I fear,
from somewhat of the same complaint that forced a celebrated man to re-
linquish the Treasurership of Mauritius some years ago. He is well educated
and decidedly a clever man—well disposed towards the natives, and, I should
think, in a position of authority would become very influential among them.
He is something of a doctor, and, I believe, worked very hard among the
people during the measles, and is loud in his condemnation of the want of
action of the Provisional Government during that epidemic. His views, as
expressed to me, (and possibly to a certain extent influenced by a shadowy
hope of employment,) are decidedly in favour of your policy —at the same
time he spoke as if in earnest, and I was the more inclined to believe this
from his expressing his disapproval of one of the new appointments, viz.
Emberson’s on the Land Commission. He “could not understand what
qualifications that gentleman had for the post, while there were so many, in
his opinion, well fitted from longer residence and experience for the work.”
He mentioned one source of native industry that is worth noting, as I am not
sure whether you have thought of it—the collection of Drega, (Dakua
gum,) which, according to him, is' to be found easily in large quantities, and
commands a price of about £2O a ton, for the manufacture of varnish.
Grayburn, like many of the planters, is very badly off, and has a wife and
five children, and is only waiting for the settlement of land claims to try and
sell out and leave the country.
On the morning of the 26th we walked on to this place, which is about a
mile and a half from Cuvu, and found Olive established with his sixty men on
a piece of land of about sixty or seventy acres in extent, which was leased by
Government three years ago for five years. Olive’s notion is that the lease
might be extended and the place kept by Government as a police depot and
prison—the advantages being that it is some distance from any town, healthy,
and that there is plenty of land to cultivate provisions for the police and gaol.
He has already got about an acre under cultivation, and has established a
large fowl-yard, and even now, while purchasing food, he declares the cost of
the force to be about two-thirds of what it is in Levuka. The men are
certainly in excellent order, and kept pretty hard at work and at drill and


gardening the whole day. As soon as the Bua men arrive he talks of sending
drafts of them and the Lakeba men to the out-stations in this island, and
returning the men now doing duty there to Levuka.
lam disgusted at not finding Carew here he has gone up the coast towards
Serua, but no one knows how far. I have despatched a messenger to follow
him, and I await either his arrival or his instructions as to how to find him—
it is no use my going after him, as he might be on his return and we might
miss each other. From what I have seen of the difficulties of reaching this
place by sea in a small boat, I should most certainly not advise you to come
until after the bad season. You would be wearied to death with the forced
delays and the waste of time you could not afford. Taylor leaves for the
Yasawas this afternoon. Poor fellow, he is rather sore about the way in which
he was deluded into taking his present appointment in preference to Yanua
Levu, while he was at the time in perfect ignorance that the latter would have
given him £3OO per annum while here he only gets £250. Had he known this
when he accepted Ba Nadi and Nadroga, (for when first offered he did not
understand that the Yasawas would form part of his district,) he would not
have given up Yanua Levu, unless expressly desired to do so by you. As it
was, he was under an impression, gathered from what Carew told him, that
the places were of equal emolument, that Yiti Levu was considered more
important, and that you wished him to take his present post. It is certainly
rather hard upon him —for as regards dangerous boating work, and constant
risk of, at least, loss of property, this coast is worse than any in the group.
The Baron is staying with his drunken skipper, Jim Burns, on the Sigatoka.
I have not yet seen him, but hear that he is again hard up for trade and
money ! What he has done with it all I can’t think. He went perfectly
wild, so Olive says, over the celebrated club (which Olive has secured for you)
and offered to give his breechloader for it.
November 29.—1 have, lam sorry to say, done but little since I wrote the
above; that little, however, I will proceed to narrate. Yesterday (Sunday)
I walked over with Olive to Naduri—Mr. Cowan’s place—about three miles
from here (Nadi way); the house is perched upon a high rock, and Cowan
has taken much trouble in laying out his ground and planting hedges, etc.
I rather like the man, he appears to be honest and is decidedly hard-working.
He can turn his hand to almost anything—planting, boat-building, sugar-
making, carving, gilding, and oil-painting ; fortunately for him his efforts in
the former occupations seem to be attended with more success than in the last-
named art, specimens of which, like bad dreams, stare one in the face from
the walls of his drawing-room. He has two men living with him, men in
reduced circumstances. One, a man named Foxton, a sailor by trade, but out
of work by the loss of his right hand ; the other, Lee, a seedy-looking creature
that might have been anything, but it is hard to say what. They are at
present engaged in boat-building ; their first attempt is just completed, and I
had some difficulty in dissuading Olive from buying it on the spot for £33.
No doubt a boat would be most useful here at present to run between this and
Nadi, where yams, etc., are far cheaper than here ; and what Olive says is, I
believe, quite true, that in four months’ time the saving by having a Govern-
ment boat would cover the expense of purchase—that is, saving £3 a trip with
a boat carrying a ton weight. My reasons for advising him not to buy the


boat in question are these : —-First, the uncertainty of the force being kept
here sufficiently long to pay off the cost; and secondly, the unsuitability of
the boat itself: —(l) Made by novices in the art of boat-building. (2) Not
“ faithfully ” built, there being many iron nails, although supposed to be copper
fastened. (3) 28 feet long with 8 feet beam and timbers but little larger than
those of your new boat, yet supposed to carry from three to four tons weight
of freight. I must say lam inclined to think that it would be as well to
establish a depot here—unless Carew can give any good reason to the contrary.
Olive has certainly got the men into excellent discipline and hardworking
habits, and if he, as he talks of doing, supplies the different districts from
here with men, recalling the men from time to time for a brush-up, and
establishes a system of communication round the island, dispatching two men
per week each way, who would gather information and carry letters both
private and for the public service, the benefit, I think, would be felt by the
Government and public at large, and encouragement given both to the
Rokos and planters to construct roads from district to district; while in case
of an emergency an armed force would be at hand near the most likely place
for an outbreak among the mountaineers to occur. Then, I believe, the cost
of keeping men here is decidedly less than in Levuka, and, according to Olive,
his men are now in such a state of efficiency that he could safely leave them
for a time to carry on by themselves. This latter statement, however, lam
inclined to be sceptical about. And, in any case, I don’t see how Viti Levu,
Ovalau, and Yanua Levu can he policed without an additional European officer,
if not two.
To-day, I started with Olive to walk to Cuvu, and poor Olive, being bare-
foot, came to grief over a stump, and cut his little toe rather badly, and thought
at first he had put it out of joint. He was so hurt that he could not walk,
and I went back to Na Rewa and got some men and a temporary litter to carry
him in. I was much disgusted at the want of promptness on the part of these
men when they heard of the accident and that their services were required to
help a man, their chief, and one who has invariably been so more than kind
to them as Olive has. It would, I believe, have broken his heart to have
seen their want of gratitude, and, although for his own sake he ought to know
it, I had not the heart to tell him. After this little contretemps , I went on
with Constable Brown to Cuvu, and saw Ratu Luki. He has built a very nice
new house. The village is prettily situated on the sea-shore and among trees.
Ratu Kini’s grave is a prominent object there, a circular heap of stones narrow-
ing towards the top and about 14 or 15 feet high. Many of the stones form-
ing it having been brought great distances by the mountaineers ; on the top
there is a square block of white cement, and two upright stones, giving it
quite a Mahomedan appearance. I called on Thompson and Rennie ; the
former I am inclined to think has been maligned, and on further acquaintance
I found him, as far as outward appearance and manner, to be by no means a
bad fellow. He talked pleasantly and sensibly, and professed concurrence in
your policy with regard to natives, and, to my surprise, in the appointment of
Carew. He undoubtedly has great knowledge of the natives, and speaks this
dialect well. At Cuvu I heard that Carew had left word there that he would
go to Yeivataloa (beyond Serua), despatch letters from there, and await answers.
I shall join him as soon as possible, Thompson also told me that Carew had
told him before leaving that the Chiefs were ready for the meeting, and I
Z


therefore conclude that he has written to you to come over at once—if this is
the case, the sooner the better; but if you don’t come in the Barracouta, don’t
risk the small boat business, but hire something larger.
I must now mention one or two subjects that have either come under my
notice, or have been expressly mentioned to me. It is a pity that Taylor’s
district could not have been positively defined before he left Levuka, as
everybody is asking how far it extends, and he is uncertain whether it
comprises Nadroga or stops at Navulo point, which by the by is part of
ISTadroga. Mr. Thompson tells me that Carew is now decidedly of opinion that
the whole of the sea coast of ISTadroga should certainly be under Taylor, and
that his own jurisdiction should be confined to the Kai Colos ; while Thompson
is of opinion that depriving the district as it were, of a portion, by holding
Courts only as far as Navulo point, would be likely to raise dissatisfaction and
jealousy among the natives. (You must not think that I discussed Govern-
ment affairs with Thompson, I only let him talk, which he was ready enough
to do, and held my tongue.) I will mention another thing, although no
doubt you have thought of it. With regard to the new gun licence, I suppose
it must apply equally to “Foreign Labour” as to Fijians and Whites —yet it
seems very hard that after working their term of years, these men, or at least
those from Tanna and some other islands, should not, without being taxed,
be allowed to receive the only thing they the least care to take back to their
own countries. Certainly it may prove a serious danger in the future to
would-be settlers in Tanna and elsewhere, should many arms be introduced,
but at the same time planters here are not likely to obtain men from those
places should labour be returned without arms. This no doubt would hasten
your plan of Indian immigration ; but are the present set of planters here at
all likely to be able to conform to the laws with regard to such immigration ?
I must say, I think not. I may add also, with regard to the gun tax as
applying to Fijians, Have you thought of the possible effect upon the Kai
Colos, who are practically for the present out of reach, of the almost total
disarmament of the coast tribes ? I forgot to mention, when I began this
letter, a matter which struck me on passing through Tadola. The estate
belongs, I believe, to Hennings, but for some time no one has been living on
it, and I hear that the Mr. Smith who lived close by, on consideration of
being allowed to make use of the Tadola labour on his estate, gave an eye
occasionally to the premises. Smith as you know has just died, and the
labour, consisting of between twenty and thirty Tokalaus, (chiefly women,)
still remain on the estate, I believe their time has long expired, but they
have not been paid off, and there they are with nothing to do, and no one to
look after them, living on the crops that remain in the ground, but probably
too improvident to think of planting more. I believe there are planters in
this neighbourhood who would be glad of their services—in fact some have
told me so—and until there is a ship to take them to their homes, instead of
returning them to the Immigration Office which would tbe an expense, would
it not be as well to authorise Taylor or Carew to ascertain those who are
willing to serve another term and;hire them out again to those who want them,
reporting the contracts entered into to the Immigration Office, and returning
to the Depot the remainder ? Many, almost general, complaints have been
made to me of the want of courtesy of the nominal Postmaster in this district,
Mr. M ‘Caig, who lives close here. Letters are seldom, if ever, forwarded by


him, and have been known to lie for two months in his house, although
addressed to his next neighbour, whose men have frequently to pass close
to the Post-Office. I believe the man receives nothing from Government, and
I should propose, that as long as the Police are stationed here, that the
Mail-bag should be addressed to Na Rew T a, under Olive’s care, who is quite
willing and better able to forward the letters immediately on receipt. I
hope to leave this to-morrow in Mr. Taylor’s boat—the man I have before
mentioned as being in charge of the late Mr. Smith’s property. He is on his way
to Levuka and will take this letter. He will drop me at Yeivataloa where I
hope to find Carew, or if not I must wait for him there. I heard from the
Baron this morning, begging me for more trade. If you come to this meeting
I think your uniform is very necessary—Knollys’ undress would be quite
sufficient, otherwise you would be quite cut out in the estimation of the Kai
Colos. I have written a long letter. If I have written much nonsense, as I
cannot but fear I have, I hope you will forgive me.
Cuvu, November 2>oth. —l have just come over here, and leave this evening
in a Mr. Edward Ball’s boat. I shall stop at the Sigatoka to-morrow and see
the Baron, and then Ball takes me as far as Culanuku, a place about fifteen
miles from Yeitavaloa, where I hope to find Carew. I take little Walley with
me as interpreter.
From Mr. Carew
Suva, November 20, 1875.—Your Excellency, I have just arrived here
with despatches which I forward overland to-morrow to Navuso to be sent on
to Bau and Levuka. I have made all arrangements as far as practicable
for the coming of the chiefs to Navola, and I anticipate favourable results
from the meeting. I had a great meeting at Nadi. There were many
Chiefs present, but none from below Beimana, as they are not acquainted
with the Nadi people. Our meeting here was a great success—the Naqaqa
Chief wished to join me at once, and I could have gone in and established a
camp above Beimana at once, had I deemed it politic to do so. The Chiefs
present at Nadi asked me to come in with a camp “ and rule them and put an
end to their ‘discords.’ ” I have no doubt that we shall have a good attend-
ance, although the Qali Mari say they fear the Naqaqa people will come down
on their food plantations if they leave for the sea-coast, but I will endeavour
to smooth off any difficulties that may arise and spare no efforts to bring
matters to a successful termination. The people are very warlike, very
reckless of consequences, and not deficient in courage ; and I still adhere to
my opinion that we should have not less than 150 men ; if things go on all
right after the rainy season we can divide and form two camps. Everything
is going on right in every other part of my district; this, Sigatoka is, I
believe, the only part in which any trouble may be anticipated, although
they declare that religion is the only thing they hate and fear. If I get the
camp properly constituted and entrenched I have no fear of the ultimate
results. I am careful and watchful, and shall not fall into the deadly
mistake of whites, that of despising the enemy. Your Excellency’s note,
recommending me to take care of myself, I received just previous to leaving
Nadroga for this, and I am most grateful to your Excellency for your kind
consideration and most complimentary expressions contained therein. I leave
here on Monday for the Navua river, and purpose waiting about this


neighbourhood for an answer to my despatch and which Fexpect will signify
the day when your Excellency will be prepared to meet the people at
Navola.
Mr. Carew to Mr, Gordon
Suva, November 20, 1875.—Dear Gordon—l write you these few lines
in haste.
I detained the Baron for a few days before allowing him to leave Cuvu to
ascend the Sigatoka ; the Buli Nadroga, who lives at the mouth, having
reported the whole country open I let him go, but not very willingly.
When I told him he could get all he wanted without going up the river he
appeared so excessively wretched that I let him go —although I cannot
conceive how he is going to manage, as he has no funds, not more than a few
shillings, and appears to have thrown up natural history altogether. The
Nadroga coast is perhaps the most barren hole you ever saw. I have not
been able during the whole of my stay there to get a fresh-water bath, and
that means of course no soap ! I have also poured into myself a very con-
siderable amount of brackish water down here. I have had a vast amount of
talking to do with the natives, who like it; it appears to me that they never
do any harm so long as plenty of talking is being done at the time. We had
a very fine yagona meke at Nadi at our meeting. I adopt the plan of telling
the people of the interior that I have really nothing to tell them, except that
they must acknowledge the ruling of Great Britain and commit no murder,
and then in the course of conversation I manage to tell them everything.
Olive is camped about a mile from Cuvu. By-the-bye, if you come down with
the Governor, do not come if possible in a gig, as the sea is very rough down
here, but try and come in a vessel of some size, and be sure and bring
everything his Excellency will require, as we have little or nothing here,
and Navola is some days’ journey from Cuvu. I hope you are in good health ;
we were very sorry to hear from the Baron that you had been suffering from
neuralgia. I forgot while in Levuka to speak to the Governor about Adi
Kuila’s pension ; the Baron tells me it is all right, he believes.
From Mr. Carew
Navuso, Naitasiri, November 29, 1879.—Your Excellency—l wrote to
the Colonial Secretary from Na Yeivatuloa, Namosi Province, nine days back,
and for the sake of greater despatch ran down to Suva next morning and
forwarded it on by the way of Navuso and Bau. I then returned to Namosi
and occupied myself to good purpose for several days, and also visited the
settlers on the Navua river. They were making a great outcry at not having
yet received a visit from a magistrate, but on listening carefully to all they
had to say, I found they merely wished a visit from purest motives of curiosity.
My well-timed visit to Roko Tui Namosi’s village has, I hope, been productive
of much good. I found that he and the magistrate were going all wrong
as fast as they possibly could, and I have had to administer a good deal of
schooling to both of them. Roko Tui Namosi amongst several other faults
had been to Beqa (island) and brought away thence a very fine young girl,
about twelve years of age, as another addition to his already very numerous
“ harem ” ! I arrived at his village suddenly during his absence in the bush,


and noticed that the girl differed in features, &c., to those around her, and on
questioning her she told me she had been “ unwillingly given to Roko Tui
Namosi by her father,” also she had come away unwillingly and wished to go
back. I had to exert a great deal of tact to get this girl away before he had
any opportunity of effecting his brutal intentions with respect to her, but I
am glad to say that I was most successful, not only in making him thoroughly
understand that I must do my duty, but also that I was right in doing my
duty. I had also to explain a good deal to the tribe, who were under the
impression that a great affront was about to be offered to the dignity of their
tribe. They gave in very graciously in the end, and fortunately, as I quite
intended to take the girl at all hazards. Roko Tui Namosi and Cagi Daveta,
the magistrate, have also been to Deuba, belonging to their hereditary enemies.
They held a Court there and unjustly sentenced two men to work for a
fortnight each, which they afterwards commuted to one day ! I have
had to explain among many other matters that they were usurping your
Excellency’s functions in remitting a sentence. I find great difficulty, very
great difficulty indeed, in not believing that this was a determined attempt
to embroil the Deuba people with the Government, or possibly excite them
to open insurrection. I feel very thankful that Roko Tui Bais at the other
end of my district, looking out there. I should not feel comfortable if many
Chiefs held this appointment. I have many complaints to make against
these two, but I wish to defer them to your Excellency’s arrival at Navola.
I do not think it quite politic as yet to make them as yet the subject of
formal complaint in a despatch requiring also a formal answer. I came on to
Rewa with the girl I took from Roko Tui Namosi, and handed her over to
Mr. Friend. I also considered it very desirable that we should have a
conversation in order that I might instruct him, he being a stranger to this
part of the coast, and also that we should understand one another, I came
here to-day, expecting to find here an answer to my letter asking for the
appointment of a day for our meeting. I write from here to the heads of
Rewa river; but lam most glad to say the people on all the rivers are
behaving most remarkably well. I left Cuvu 17 days ago and do not know
how the Baron succeeded in his trip up the Sigatoka. I hear here that a Mr.
Drury, who has been appointed to a position in the police, is travelling about
amongst the people of Solo-i-ra and Matailobau. Now it was proposed that
these two districts should be without the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court,
and I am afraid he will do a great deal of mischief, in fact I am given to
understand he is having a house built there to reside in permanently. Olive
is so far off that a note to him could probably not receive attention here
again in less than a month, so I am supporting an intention of Mr. Friend’s
to send for him at once to transfer his services to Rewa. I have nothing
more to inform your Excellency of, which is a good sign, and trusting you
had enjoyed your trip to Windward Islands and have returned in good
health.—l am, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji.— December 4, 1875. —My Lord.— l have the honour to enclose,
for your Lordship’s information, the estimates of revenue and expenditure for
the four months ending on 31st December.
The estimates framed by Sir H. Robinson only sanctioned expenditure up


to 10 th October, so that fresh estimates would in any case have been necessary
for the period between that day and the end of the year ; and as considerable
changes were contemplated, it was, on the whole, thought best to omit the
estimates from the list of measures in the Past Laws Continuation Ordinance,
and to include in fresh ones the whole period subsequent to the proclamation
of the charter.
The estimates of revenue call for but few remarks. They are based on
the assumption that existing sources of receipt will remain undisturbed until
the end of the present year ; nor do I propose to suggest any of the changes
in the incidence or character of taxation, which appear to me to be expedient,
until the estimates for 1876 are brought before the Council.
It is not anticipated that more than £5440 will be collected during these
four months.
Previously to submitting these estimates to the Board, I had, however,
received intimation that the sum of £40,000, voted by the Imperial Parlia-
ment in aid of Fiji, had been paid to the Crown Agents on account of the
Colony.
The estimates of expenditure require more lengthened comment.
The estimated expenditure on account of establishments amounts to
£7053 :14s.
I need hardly assure your Lordship that I have used my utmost endeavours
to limit the number of those in official employment, and I wish that I could
feel as well assured that adequate provision has been made for the discharge
of public duties as I am that unnecessary employments have not been created.
The services, exclusive of establishments, for which votes are asked, consist,
as usual, of two classes—those which are of a permanent character, and those
which are called for by special and passing exigencies.
The former amounts to about £7OOO, and the latter class to about £18,500.
Taking, first, those expenses which may be looked on as permanent, and
a vote for the renewal of which will be annually asked for, it is unnecessary
to dwell on such items as those of the pensions to the Yum Yalu and to Adi
Kuila, or those for the administration of justice, the purchase of stationery,
the food and clothing of police and prisoners, necessary repairs to buildings
and boats, or the incidental expenses of the various departmental offices.
They have all been estimated with the most careful economy, and almost
the only large sum asked for which requires notice, among those which may
be expected to become an annual charge, is that for military expenditure.
This amounts to £999 :13 :B,or at the rate of £3275 :16s. a year, and has
been asked for in accordance with your Lordship’s instructions.
It may be remarked that a charge of £176 :13 :4or an annual charge of
at least £530 is incurred in consequence of the establishment of a public
hospital. On the other hand, it is hoped that the fees paid by the public
for the use of the hospital will in a measure meet the expenditure incurred
in its maintenance.
The amount paid as rent for public offices also merits some observation.
It is so large that a single year’s rent (£720) would probably be sufficient
to cover the expense of erecting buildings superior to the miserable edifices
which now do duty as public offices ; and if Levuka remains the seat of
Government, it will probably be desirable at once to commence their con-
struction.


Turning now to the expenditure of a more special character, that on
account of the reduction of debt first claims attention.
Sums of £5OOO and £5500 are asked for to pay off liabilities incurred since
the cession to the Fiji Bank and to the Bank of New South Wales, on which
interest, and in some cases heavy interest, is being paid.
The sum of £lOB2 : 4 : 6 advanced by the Government of New South Wales
does not bear interest, but it is only right that undue advantage should not
be taken of the liberality of that Colony, and that repayment of this amount
should be effected as soon as possible.
A vote for £748 is asked for on account of new works. Of this £2BB
is for the erection of the new public offices at Nasova, £4OO for the
barracks for the Royal Engineers, and £6O for the construction of the
engineer workshop and offices. The amount estimated as required for repairs
is £250. This, besides actual repairs, includes alterations and additions to
the Court-house considered to be essential by the Chief-Justice, as well as the
addition to the hospital of a laboratory and dispensary, and the flooring of
a part of the verandah at Nasova. The addition to the building at Nasova,
rendered necessary in order to provide for the accommodation of my family,
has been effected at my own cost and without expense to the Colony.
It has been thought necessary to purchase boats for the Stipendiary
Magistrates, and a sum of £l5O has been placed on the estimates for that
purpose.
The cost of the wages and passage-money for returned immigrants, which
will have, in the first instance at all events, to be borne by the Colonial
Government, is estimated at £lOOO. This sum is, of course, a charge upon
the estates of those on whose behalf it has been paid ; but I fear, as regards a
large portion of it, I can hold out no sanguine hopes of its ever being replaced.
Under the head of “General Transport” the expenses attendant on the
removal from Goro to Sambeto of the people of the latter town, long detained
as prisoners of war at Goro, are included, as are also those of the Commission
for the Settlement of the Province of Macuata. I have in separate despatches
reported to your Lordship with respect to both these transactions.
Under the head “Miscellaneous” will be found one large item (£6000)
for the purchase of a steamer.
Your Lordship may perhaps remember that before leaving England I was
strongly of opinion that it would be preferable to enter into arrangements for
subsidising a commercial steamer, and not resort to the very costly proceeding
of purchasing and owning a colonial vessel, and I was instructed in this
sense by your Lordship. Nevertheless, although desirous of obtaining the
services of a chartered vessel, and most unwilling to incur the cost of such
a purchase, or the risk of loss which must always attend the possession of
such property, I was at length compelled, though reluctantly, to admit that
the terms on which only a chartered vessel could be obtained were such as
to render purchase, as recommended by Sir H. Robinson, to be on the whole
the best arrangement for the Colony.
I have in another despatch reported fully to your Lordship on this subject.
A sum of £2OO and £lOO respectively was expended for the maintenance
of the Chiefs assembled at the Council of Draiba, and the presents made to
them on the occasion of the Proclamation of the new Government, and I
have now to ask your Lordship’s approval of that expenditure.


The sum may be thought large, but the occasion for the expenditure will
not recur, and it is felt by my Executive Council as well as by myself that
it was of the utmost importance that the numerous body of Chiefs assembled
should have no reason to complain of any niggardliness on the part of the
Government, and that it would be in the highest degree injudicious to afford
ground on which any ill-disposed persons might sow the seeds of discontent
in the native mind.
Your Lordship will at once perceive from the statements that the financial
position of the Colony is not one of a satisfactory nature. The revenue has
fallen very far short of Sir H. Robinson’s estimate, whilst, on the other
hand, the expenditure has much exceeded what was anticipated; and,
notwithstanding my strong desire to devote the proceeds of the loan from
the Imperial Government exclusively to the payment of debt and the
construction of public works, I have been compelled to apply a portion of it
to meet the claims of ordinary expenditure.
The fact that the estimate of receipts has not been realised is no doubt
in part due to the terrible visitation from which the Colony has suffered ;
but it is to be remarked that the chief deficiency is not in native taxes, but
in customs duties, a result which may be attributed to a somewhat too
sanguine anticipation of the effect of the customs tariff substituted by the
Provisional Government for that previously in force.
I have for a considerable time been engaged in a very careful inquiry into
the mode of raising revenue most applicable to such a country as Fiji, and
I shall now very shortly be in a position to report to your Lordship the
results of that inquiry, and the methods which, with your Lordship’s sanction,
I propose to adopt in order to secure an adequate revenue for the year 1876.
I need hardly add that it is the object of my constant care to keep the
expenditure of the Colony within the narrowest possible limits.—l have, etc.,
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
. Nasova, Levuka, Fiji, November 25 to December 4. —Another
mail will soon, I hope, be coming in, and this time I think I
must get some letters —I daresay a double set as usual. Since
Arthur went away on Saturday (the 20th), we have been going
through a great course of cleaning and tidying up the house
(which was in a dreadful state of dirt and confusion), and we
have done little else. Mr. Maudslay is a great help in that
way —he is the only one of the staff who has any idea of neat-
ness, and he and I have put the Governor’s office and papers
into a thorough state of order. Abbey has taken the oppor*
tunity of having the whole wardrobes of the six gentlemen
spread out on the lawn and thoroughly scorched in the sun, to
get rid of the fish moths and cockroaches which were swarming
in them. On Monday and Tuesday the villagers came to dig
out the earth behind the new building, which is keeping out
the ventilation. There were about 100 men swarming over


the place like bees, laughing and talking and looking in at
all the windows. They had a great yaqona drinking at the
end of each day’s work, and they really got on; but on Wednesday
Dr. MacGregor, who had been away for a fortnight, came upl
for his usual visit of inspection, and was extremely angry atl
seeing what we were about, and said we were doing our best!
to make the place unhealthy by turning up the earth, and that|
not another spadeful must be dug till we all went away. It isf
very provoking, but, of course, after that there was nothing to|
be done but to dismiss the villagers with a present of tobacco.#
When Captain Knollys comes back, we shall have to give them!
a feast of yams and pigs. I think the Doctor is right, for thereV
have been several slight cases of fever lately among the nativel
servants. Dr. MacGregor is very anxious to get the children!
away for a week or two, while the works are finished up, andl
the two native houses, which are close to the nursery
removed. One contains twenty native soldiers, and the other
twenty Royal Engineers, and they are much too near for the
healthiness of the place. The question is, where to go 1 Eka
came here at last on Saturday. She was very seedy and weak
after the fever (a slight attack) she had had. But she has
picked up again since; no doubt the change has done her good.
She is really quite well now. She is occupying the future
nursery, as her room is not ready, and the children are still
in the drawing-room, and I am still very uncomfortable, and I
really see no end to it. I have to-day ordered two large tables
for the drawing-room —a round and a square one. They are to
cost £i and £5, which I think is, for Fiji, surprisingly cheap.
The great expensiveness of this place is most annoying and dis-
appointing. Poor Captain Havelock was complaining bitterly
of it to me last night, and there is so little to show for it. I
have given up the idea of having things nice, the servants are
so abominably bad. Abbey has just told me that they have
broken twenty of his lamps. I don’t mean only shades and
chimneys, they are all gone, as a matter of course, but actual
lamps. All the glass and china is getting broken wholesale, and
all kinds of things that one supposes can’t break, such as cans,
pails, tools, etc., are broken by the dozen. Then things have to be
replaced in Sydney, and the freight from there is quite enormous ;
and the amount of pilfering right and left is disgusting. Abbey
says he shall only send in half a loaf to us in future, as he never
sees what comes out! There are generally a dozen or more
men (Fijians) waiting round the pantry to carry off what they
can get. The kitchen used to be full of them, but since the new
one has been built they have been kept out by a device of Abbey’s.


He has had the door cut in half [sketch], and locks the lower
half, with the cook (who is supposed to be in league with them)
inside; and he has to pass out his dinner through the top half !
This effectually keeps them out. I don’t like to ask for a thing
extra, as I know Abbey will have to do it. If I want tea,
and ring, no one comes; the three footmen cut away directly
after luncheon, and don’t come back till dinner. The gentle-
men, except the Governor, all go to Abbey’s room, where there
is always tea to be had from 3 till 6 o’clock, and help them-
selves, and I have to get nurse or Mrs. Abbey (if I can find her)
to get me a cup. I feel quite ashamed when anyone is here,
only I know they are all in the same case. Poor Abbey is
fairly beaten by the servants, and often quite out of heart. It
is very disheartening, for I do like to have things refined and
nice. I have felt better myself lately, because it has not been
so hot. There has been a strong breeze for the last three weeks,
making it almost impossible to go out boating. lam much
stronger in some ways than I used to be, and can walk much
better; but then there are no walks ! For about half a mile
one way, and a mile the other way, you can walk along the
sea ; but it is a rough stony path only wide enough for one;
the hills, which rise up in many places close on the other
side of the path, are to me quite inaccessible. It makes one
feel dreadfully shut up in this close bay. And then boating,
which after a time becomes rather monotonous, is not so easy
after all. First, the crew of six have to be collected; then
twelve men must be found to carry the boat out of its shed, and
one of the staff must see it done; then I can’t go out without one
of our staff to steer, and now A. J. L. G. (who hates boating)
and Mr. Le Hunte are away, there only remain Captain Knollys
and Mr. Maudslay, who have a great deal to do, so that I can’t
expect to get out every day in the boat. And yet Dr. MacGregor
says the children must go out every day. I think I must try
and get a little safe pair-oared punt with a steady man, which
we could potter about in to get some air. *
Sunday , November 28th. —On Friday a big ship steamed
inside the reef. Jack ran in in great excitement, “ A Majesty
ship! a Majesty ship! She can’t be the Barracouta, for she
hasn’t got paddle-wheels, and she’s got nice square port-holes.
Perhaps she’s the Nymphe ! ” She turned out to be a German
man-of-war, the Gazelle. Yesterday morning the Captain, Baron
von Klemwitz, and first Lieutenant came up to call (in full
dress, cocked hat, etc.). They both spoke English perfectly well.
The Gazelle has come here for scientific purposes —like our


Challenger. I am so sorry the Governor is away, as he would
have liked particularly to have seen them. I got a message in
the afternoon to know if I should like their band to come up
and play, which, of course, was quite a treat; so we collected a
few people, about twelve or fourteen, in the verandah, and they
came about 5 and played in the square of the house, and we
had tea, and it really was rather pleasant. The Captain and first
Lieutenant also reappeared, without their cocked hats ! (I had
seen some sailors hanging about with cocked hat boxes in their
hands.) Mr. Maudslay and I contemplate having a few of the
German officers to come here to-morrow. We can’t do much,
now the Governor is away. We have offered them the use of
our three ponies while they are in here. Abbey proposed
yesterday that he should take Nevil out for a ride every morning
at 6, after he had milked the cow. It would do her the greatest
good, but I told him I thought he had not time. “ Miss Nevil’s
’ealth comes before the ’ouse,” he said; accordingly, she had
her first ride this morning on the quietest of the ponies, and
Abbey on another with a leading rein. They can only ride up
and down for about a mile, but she enjoyed it extremely, and
ate a good breakfast after it. We have got much more comfort-
able in the house since Arthur has been away, and I have
arranged a place for myself in the dining-room and taken
possession of a good writing-table out of one of the offices, and
now I shall get on much better till the drawing-room is finished,
and I have made various other improvements which I could
not well do while they were all here. When Captain Knollys
is away I can give orders myself, and get things done. We
have also just got a new servant, an Indian, who has just
arrived from New Caledonia. He came for Sir William Hackett,
who does not want him at once. He seems sharp and active,
and I think will be quite a comfort. He is to have <£4 per
month, so on the whole things look more encouraging. The
Governor is not come back yet; he has been gone nine days. I
have not heard from him, but Eatu Timoci, who had seen
him on one of the islands, returned yesterday, and says he
thinks he will be here to-morrow. Eatu Timoci, whom you
know by this time is one of the Yunivalu’s sons, is such a
jolly, good-looking fellow, so sleek and well-bred looking; he
looks a Chief all over. There is the greatest difference between
the Chiefs and common people. Eatu means Lord, or, rather,
master, and is the title given to Chiefs. Timoci has lately
married a Tongan girl, named Yani (Jane). They came to
Driemba, (a village where the Chiefs stay when here, about half
a mile from Nasova,) soon after their wedding, and great festivities


took place there. I watched the procession carrying the presents
pass along by the sea, and thought it would never end. Turtles,
pig s > yams, taro, and great roots of yaqona (for the grog), all
carried by natives single file. Afterwards they feasted upon
them, and had a* grand meke (dance). Timoci brought with
him a most splendid big canoe, in which, and in his father’s
yacht, the Lurline, he swaggered about for two or three days,
after which the newly married pair went in the Lurline to Ban,
a small island about twenty miles off, where the Yunivalu lives,
and there they met with a most grand reception. They now have
a home at Bau, but Timoci is very fond of coming to Levuka,
and often turns up here. He is a very taking fellow, and so con-
ceited ! They all pet and spoil him here. He has very good
taste in dress, and knows what becomes him. The last time I
saw him he had on a blue shirt and a brilliant green sulu (kilt).
It seems an odd combination but looks uncommonly well. I
have not seen Yani yet; next time she comes to Driemba I
shall tell Ratu Timoci to bring her to see me. Timoci and
Ratu Joe, the youngest son of Cakobau, talk English very
well; they have both been in Sydney.
December 3. —I have not written for some days. Arthur
came back on Monday morning, just in time for the luncheon
which Mr. Maudslay and I gave for four of the German officers
and the Havelocks. His trip has done him a great deal of
good. It is settled that we are all to go to Suva, to-morrow,
in our steamer, the Fitzroy. It will take about a day to get
there. I am afraid it will be very rough ! Suva is in Yiti
Levu. There is a large house there which was built for a
hotel, and is now empty, and we are to take possession of it.
It is furnished and said to be fairly comfortable. We can get
fish and milk there, and we have to take a pen of fowls and twa
sheep, and all our stores. Dr. MacGregor insists on our]
going. I don’t expect to like it much. Eka is to go from*
there on a mission tour with Mr. and Mrs. Langham (the chief/
of the Wesleyans here) which will take about three or four
weeks. We are to be away about a fortnight, and when we
come back, I hope to find the drawing-room ready. I think the
change will do us all good, but I expect it will be dreadfully
dull, and Arthur will not be much with us. I only hope it
won’t rain all the time. We are all off to-night. I shall send
the children to sleep on board the Fitzroy , and go myself with
Arthur in the middle of the night, and I suppose we may get
to Suva about eleven. Mr. Maudslay is going with us, and we
take Nurse, Anthony (the Indian), Soani (native footman), the


cook and his mate, and about four others. It seems such a
business when we go anywhere. Abbey is to go for the first
few days to settle us there, but he can hardly be spared from
here. I sometimes think that my letters are too long! and I
am afraid of their becoming twaddly, for there is so little to
say. However, it must all be new to you. The German
Captain has just been to say good-bye. The Vunivalu was
here at the same time, with his interpreter. He kept making
little set speeches. “ I see before me the representatives of
two great nations.” “I am glad to hear that the Marama
(Lady) finds herself happy at Nasova.” He is a wonderful
old man, when one considers what his antecedents have been.
I like him very much. He is so dignified and at ease in his
manner. He told the German Baron that he wished to visit
his ship, and he said a boat should be sent off for him at once.
Ratu Timoci and Ratu Joe are always hanging about the
place. All the royal family are very imperious, and expect
to be treated with great respect. They are generally followed
by one attendant, at some distance behind; sometimes he is an
inferior Chief. You would be surprised at Jack now. He
looks so big and old ; no one will believe he is not six. He
strides along with a kind of swagger, and he is so gentle and
affectionate. I think he is the great favourite, except with his
father and A. J. L. G., who both adore Nevil. He is so happy
with his letter. Of course Nevil said: “Nobody ever writes
to me ! ” I send you a rough plan of the house, which may
amuse you. There is a public path in front of it, and then a
slope down to the sea, and our pier runs out opposite the Flag-
staff. The new public offices are on the kitchen side, in a line
with the Governor’s office. The new building is built on piles,
and raised some twenty steps above the main building; it is
built of wood, and thatched; and over the thatch is thrown a
network of reeds. It looks exceedingly well, and the rooms
are very high. Altogether, the effect of the whole is imposing.
In front of the bow window, and sloping down to the sea, is a
kind of grass lawn, on which are two large native houses, and
here the native soldiers drill, and have their games, which are
going on nearly always : —football with large oranges, throwing
reeds, etc. They are like so many children, laughing and
shouting. It is very amusing to watch them. The rooms
at the back of the new building, which is on a slope, are
actually partly cut out of the hill, which rises up steeply
behind them. The drawing-room is so large that I hardly
know how to fill it. I possess two sofas and four arm-chairs,
and about eight other chairs, two large and three small tables,


and that’s all! I have had a broad low seat put round the
bow, to have cushions covered with mats, and at the end (next
the bedrooms) three rows of book-shelves, about three feet
from the ground. On the top shelf there will be a row of Fiji
pots. It will be a delightful room, and I long to get into it.
One gets so tired of sitting in a big dining-room with incessant
cloth-laying. By the time we come back, it will, I hope, be
finished, and I shall have time to arrange it all before Eka comes
back from her tour. This plan [plan] is not in proper propor-
tion, but will give you an idea of it. The little verandah between
the drawing-room and nursery I shall let the children have, and
there they can spread their mats and play, and have a little garden
of their own in front. The main building is built of a double
row of reeds neatly strung together with sinnet in this way —
[sketch]. There is a space of eight inches between the two
slender walls, but you can perfectly well see through, as there are
little cracks everywhere. Each of the bedrooms have two large
French windows opening on to the verandah, on each side. In
the dining-room there are nine of these windows, and in windy
weather draughts can’t be kept out. The Governor has oc-
casional presents of enormous coils of beautiful sinnet—most
useful. He brought back two of them from his last tour; also
three beautiful mats, a great many pieces of tappa, a whale’s
tooth from every village (eleven in all), and some cocoa-nuts.
Sinnet is a kind of string made of cocoa-nut fibre. It is used
for everything —lines nailed across the room serve as towel-
horses ! Poor Marques has just heard of the death of her
mother. She is in great distress. But she had been bed-ridden
and out of her mind for many years. You must let the others
see this letter. I know I ought to write to many outsiders , but
I do feel so disclined—one has such a long story to begin upon !
I really must stop, for I have a good deal to do. Soon the
children will go on board. I have watched boat-load after
boat-load of our luggage go off. It seems quite absurd for so
short a time! I don’t quite like going entirely out of reach of
a doctor.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Saturday , December 4.—Went on board Fitzroy soon after
midnight. She is small and stuffy, and very lively withal. When
I went on deck in the morning we were nearing the Suva reef,
after entering which Captain Champion most gratuitously ran us
on a sandbank, without the least necessity or excuse. But luckily
we did not stay there long, and landed at Suva between 9


and 10. We took possession of our hotel, which is one of the
few two-storied buildings in Fiji, but has not much else to boast
of. We were busily employed most of the day in settling our-
selves, and then dawdled about in the afternoon, up at the Joskes’
and elsewhere. The views of the bay and the opposite coast are
everywhere most beautiful. To me and Maudslay the great
drawback to Suva is the want of bathing facilities, the sea near
the shore being shallow and with a muddy bottom.
Sunday, December 5.—1 and Maudslay went to bathe at the
inlet beyond the Joshes’, where some red rocks at the edge of
the water gave promise of greater depth. But it was very un-
satisfactory, the rocks when wet being unpleasantly greasy to
the touch, while the water was not clear, and smelt of mangroves.
Afterwards we went to church at the native village, which is
beyond the foolish cane-fields about a mile and a half to the
south. The congregation as usual most quaint. The people
prostrate themselves when praying, without quitting their cross-
legged sitting position. That is to say, there is no movement
of their lower limbs, which remain exactly as before; only the
body and arms are thrown forward flat on the mats, a feat of
gymnastics which seems difficult, but is not really so when one
tries it. I understood most of the sermon, which was on the
text “They that sat in darkness have seen a great light,” The
preacher divided the subject into three heads —(1) Who sat in
darkness % (2) The light; (3) The repentance. The hour of
service was fixed somewhat poetically, “ When the last leaf of
the bauhinia opens ” (they close at night). Had much talk with
Carew, who has come over here to consult, and in the afternoon
called on the Joskes.
Lady Gordon to Miss Emily Shaw-Lefevre
Suva, December 6.—lt was rather suddenly decided that as
there was a good deal of painting and a good deal of digging
out to be done before we could get into our new rooms it was
necessary for the children to be taken away for a time. Dr.
MacGregor has a great objection to the turning up of old soil.
And there are one or two large native houses close to the new
rooms —one of them just under the nursery windows —to be
removed. So it was decided that we should come here and take
possession of an empty house, meant for an hotel, but now
deserted. Suva is one of the proposed sites for the capital,
and I think the most likely to be taken. It is a very beautiful
place, with a fine large open bay and a magnificent range of


hills on the opposite side. It is on the big island of Yiti Levu,
about nine hours by sea from Levuka. We had the new
Government steamer, the Fitzroy, to bring us here. Mr. Mauds-
lay and Eka came with us, and the cook and his mate, our new
Indian servant Anthony, one of the footmen, Soani, three or four
others, and the boat’s crew, who also form the Governor’s
personal guard. The children, Nurse, and Eka went on board
at 6 p.m. and went to bed ! the rest of us embarked at midnight.
We had a most wretched night, for there was a heavy swell
outside the reef which made even me sick, —(one feels it so much
in a small ship). Nevil slept well, but poor Jackie, and in
consequence Nurse, were sick all night. We arrived here about
9 on Saturday morning, feeling very tired and headachy. Abbey
came with us, just to unpack and start us, and went back again
in the Fitzroy the same day, as he could not tear himself away
from Nasova. Suva at present consists of three or four houses,
a small disused church, a large disused sugar-mill, and this dis-
used and deserted hotel.
Tuesday , December 7. —Yesterday we had a very pleasant
picnic in our own boat. We rowed across the bay and explored
two rivers, one of which was most lovely. We landed at a native
village; it was a perfectly delicious day. 1 When we got back we
found a messenger had just arrived from Levuka with a mail-
bag brought by H.M.S. Nymphe , which arrived just after we left.
There were three packets for me, two sent by Madeleine, with
a letter from her dated September 23, and a good many en-
closures ; the other a short note written on her way to Dieppe,
and more enclosures; the third was a small vestige of a foreign
1 From Sir A. Gordon's Journal. —Maudslay and I tried to bathe this
morning from the dilapidated pier in front of the old sugar-mill, but it was
not much better than the Joske rocks. The day was heavenly—bright, calm,
and yet cool. We made an expedition in my boat, chiefly up the Lami river.
We landed at the native town for luncheon. The village was laid out with
some taste, a good sanded walk up to it from the bank, bordered with Fiji grass
{amaranthus) and bright flowers. In the Chief s house, which is a good and
neat one, was a remarkably fine spear. Leaving Rachael to repose there
awhile, Maudslay and I sallied forth to bathe. The vegetation was too dense
and overhung the river too much to render the banks accessible anywhere
except just at the village landing-place ; but from the boat we were able to
get a dive and a swim in a nice deep silent reach of the clear stream, a great
enjoyment after our last twd days’ experience. We also set the crew off on
a swimming race, prize sixpence. The vegetation was very pretty, sweet-
scented flowers abundant, singing birds plentiful. The whole expedition
thoroughly successful, and Rachael heartily enjoyed it —and there is not over-
much here, I fear, that gives her pleasure.


envelope, all torn, enclosed in another by Mr. Hutchison, with a
few enclosures, but no letter from any of you —the letter had
evidently fallen out and got lost —so tiresome and disappoint-
ing. You must be careful to send the letters in good strong
envelopes to the Colonial Office, carefully sealed or gummed up,
—for often they come open,—and carefully directed. ... I
don’t write many letters to outsiders now—at least here. I
find it so difficult with only one sitting-room. All day long
there is nothing but racket and laying of dinner, and in the
evening I am generally tired, and the mosquitoes bite one’s
hands. ... I am going with Arthur on Thursday for a trip
up the Rewa river, which will take two nights. From there
he will have to go back to Nasova with Captain Knollys, who
is to meet us at Rewa, and I return here with Mr. Maudslay
for a week or two more. The children seem already better for
this change, and are in tearing spirits : Nevil does look such an
odd little thing without her hair. I have got Abbey to cut it still
shorter, close to her head behind like a boy’s ; you would hardly
know her. Jack is become a very great talker, and more affec-
tionate than ever. When I took him up one day he said, “Oh
put me down, put me down, I know I much much too heavy for
you to carry, and I don’t like you to be hurt.” I had a great mis-
fortune the other day, and lost my only felt hat. It came on
to pour and blow when I was walking down the Havelock’s hill,
so I took it off and put it inside my cloak, and put on the
hood, and when I got home I found it had slipped out and was
gone. It is a thing I can’t get in Sydney, and often want very
much. We have had another picnic to-day up a third most
lovely river. There are no end of excursions to be made from
here. Sometimes we land at a village where two or three years
ago we should have been killed and eaten.
Mr. Maudslay to his Mother
Suva, Fiji, December 11, 1875. —. .. We certainly made the best use of
our time while the Governor was staying here : we explored all the rivers and
creeks that run into this beautiful bay. For the first half mile or so, and
sometimes further, the rivers are fringed with forests of mangrove, but not
enough to make the colour monotonous as in some of the West Indian
rivers ; then by degrees one gets into the forest-land of the tropics, with long
lianes and festoons of creepers hanging down from all the trees, the woods
swarming with bright-coloured parrots, and there are more birds with pretty
notes than I have heard in the tropics before, one with a song exactly like a
blackbird at home. We take our lunch with us, and land and eat it on some
shady bank, a thing not easy to find in the dense vegetation, or in one of the
queer little picturesque native villages. I have sent you some photographs of
2 A


the native houses, and you can judge from them a little what they are like, but
no one but a Dutch artist could give you any idea of the quaint picturesque
interiors. The houses are made on a framework of large half-trimmed timber,
and the yellow reed walls are supported with pillars of black tree fern. The
high-pitched thatched roof is a beautiful brown from the smoke that curls up
from the wood ashes in which most of the cooking is done, and the fireplace
itself with its four roughly carved posts, and the rounded stones to support
the great earthen cooking pots, is perhaps the most picturesque thing of all.
The two shelves above the fireplace are always covered with curious shaped
earthen vessels or wooden bowls, and hanging from the wall there is sure
to be a bright coloured liku or sulu (dress) of tappa or perhaps a bundle of white
hibiscus fibre for straining yaqona, and sometimes one can spy, tied to a
post, a curious shaped war club, or, half hidden in the roof, a beautifully
carved spear. There are no windows, and as all the light has to come through
the low doorways, it is some few minutes before one can make out the shapes
and use of the different objects,—one can hardly call it furniture.
We went last Thursday with the Governor to pay his first official visit to
Rewa, rather a handful in the whaler against a strong headwind. When one
once gets into the river mouth the change from the rugged mountain scenery
we have been used to is most complete. Considering the size of Yiti Levu
the Rewa is certainly a most gigantic river. The breadth near Rewa town is
quite that of the Thames at Westminster. When we landed a large number
of natives were assembled on the beach to meet the Governor. All were
squatting in the attitude of respect, and a splendid tama was given by
the men directly the Governor landed. Soon after our arrival all the native
Chiefs and aristocracy came to the house to drink yaqona with the
Governor, the drinking was of course done with full ceremony, and the coho
(clapping of hands) when H. E. drank was the best I have ever heard, it
is a combination of sounds quite impossible to describe. Lady Gordon went
to live at Mr. Webb, the missionary’s house, and the Governor and all of us
took possession of a large native house that had been cleared out for us.
The programme for Friday was first, an examination of the school children ;
then the Roko, Tui Dreketi, Chief of the district, was to be sworn in and
presented with his staff of office, and then were to follow some mekes (native
dances). Next morning, after bathing in the river, we went to look at the
church, really a very fine building, all native work. Walls of coral lime
plaster, a high-pitched roof supported on two fine rows of wooden pillars, and
outside the end of the ridge pole is ornamented with the large white shells
that are generally used to decorate the canoes of the Chiefs. The church
would hold a thousand natives I am sure. Some of the beams inside are
covered with sinnet (cocoa-nut fibre) work of very pretty designs.
I amused myself watching the country people come into town with their
smart dancing dresses tied up in bundles. Some of them with their faces
already painted, and their hair done up in tappa in the oddest way possible.
All the time the lalis (native wooden drums) had been making a great row in
the square opposite the church. And when all the people were assembled we
walked into the square and took over seats under a canopy of mats that had been
put up to screen us from the sun. The school children —it is hardly right
though to call them children, as many of them were grown up—had formed in
single file round the square, and passed one by one before the Governor, each


reading a verse of the Bible as they come up. They very nearly all read well,
though some were very nervous. But there were such a number that after
250 of them had read, the remainder had to be passed on without. Then some
of them came up and wrote from dictation, and the performance was very
creditable indeed. Then came the school meke. Each school retired a little
and then came towards us in a body, moving in the most perfect time, and
chanting as they came. The chant was a sort of Fijian version of “Nunc
dimittis.” All their movements were most perfect, and the way in which
the tune, if one can call it such, was first of all sung by those in front, and
then taken up a third lower by those behind, was very effective. When they
had come close enough to the Governor, at a signal from the teacher they all
sat down and then began a geography lesson. The teacher (native) called out
the name of a country, as Peritania (Britain), then in a low minor key, one
of the children began to chant “Peritania sa matanitu ” (Britain is a kingdom)
and then a third higher, some other words saying where Britain is, etc.,
and then with a swaying motion of their bodies and a rythmical clapping of
hands, they all joined in a chaunt descriptive of the extent, government, etc.
of the British Empire, in fact, school geography turned into rather a pretty
song. In this way they went through nearly all the countries of Europe.
After this, the school children went off, and the ceremony of presenting the
Roko with his staff was gone through ; the Governor administered the oathsi
to him, and then made a speech, which Mr. Webb interpreted. Then camej
what was to be the event of the day, the meke. The first was to be one not
often given, known as the flying-fox dance. From the half-hidden roads
leading out of either side of the square, i.e. half-hidden by the banana
plantations, came two bands of men dressed in likus (sort of petticoats)
of green and coloured leaves. They were beautifully made, the leaves
lying very thick one above the other and reaching below their knees,
such fine chopping fellows the men were, many of them Chiefs. Some
had their faces blackened, or painted black and red, and their heads done
up in the most elaborate way with white masi; garlands of flowers and
leaves hung round their necks, and they had garters and armlets of bright
coloured leaves on their arms and legs. To describe this dance to you is far
beyond my power. I can only give you the bare outline. There must have
been about 200 men and 70 children taking part in it. The two parties
approached one another in the usual meke form. It is an odd mixture of
march, dance, and chaunt, and then, after what seemed to be a consultation,
they agreed to rob a banana tree of its fruit. This plant, I must tell you,
was tied up to a pole in the middle of the square and had a large artificial
fruit, made of round nuts (?) filled with oil, and a black square gin bottle at
the end of it, full of oil, I believe, and not gin. After the consultation
messengers were sent out from either party to see that all was safe; they
went flying round the square with their arms stretched out, and making a
noise like the flying fox. Then with a great deal of dancing, the main body
approached the tree, and one of them climbed up, whilst the little flying foxes
circled round it, crying with delight at the sight of the fruit. The fox in
the tree hung by his legs and flapped his arms and went into raptures of
noisy delight over the fruit, when another climbed up the tree after him, and
they bit and scratched and squalled just as the big bats do, and the first
comer was turned out: all this time of course the dance was going on below.


The time was wonderful, every swish of their likus 1 was in unison, and they
were most clever in adapting themselves to any inequality in the ground.
The whole dance must have lasted half an hour, and after each figure there
■was a slight pause. The dance was carried on to a musical accompaniment
of native drums and hollow bamboos played by about twenty gaily dressed
old gentlemen. At last some one stepped out and shot the fox in the tree, he
fell dead, and the dance was ended. Next came a club dance. The square,
I forgot to tell you, was, except on the church side, surrounded by planta-
tions of bananas and bread-fruit trees, so that one saw nothing of the pre-
parations—forming into line—and one heard the chaunt and shouts before
the war parties came in from the different paths. First there came two
parties, each about 70 strong, marching three deep, one from either side of the
square, armed with short spears made of bamboo cut into fantastic shapes at
the end, and with the shafts painted, or covered with a matting of reeds.
There was a band of music as in the last dance, old men playing on Mis and
bamboos. As the two parties approached one another they chaunted and
swung their bodies from side to side, thrusting and parrying with their spears,
every hand and every foot moving together. When about twelve yards from
each other, each body wheeled away from us, and we saw coming from a
distance a body of men armed with clubs. Every man in the front row,
there were twelve of them, had on a splendid large breast-plate of whales’
teeth and pearl shell. The dresses in this dance were even more brilliant
than in the last. Each man had a liku of strips of pandanus dyed black,
yellow, and red. Their bodies and faces were elaborately painted black and
red, and their heads were done up in folds or with strips of brown or white
masi. Many had large boars’ teeth hung round their necks, and armlets,
garters, and bracelets of shells, whales’ teeth, pandanus or black water weed, ac-
cording to each man’s fancy. Some had long streamers of white masi hanging
from their heads, or in thick folds round their waists, with streamers behind,
and some few wore what I had never seen before, a sort of turban of masi of a
bright blue colour. The meke was wild and picturesque ; there must have
been 300 men dancing in it, all of them fine well-made fellows, for they were
all Chiefs or men of high birth. The next dance was the most graceful of all.
The dresses were much the same as before, as some of the men from both the
previous mekes took part in it. There were also a number of children with
bright likus, and garlands of leaves and flowers. It was called the “Waves
of the sea,” and represented the tide coming up on the reef. First of all they
formed into a long line, then, breaking the line, danced forward, ten or twelve
at a time, for a few steps, bending down their bodies and spreading out their
hands, as the little shoots from a wave run up on the beach. Then wave
after wave rolled in, and those at the end of the long line ran round, first a
few at a time soon falling back again, then more and more, as the tide runs up
on the shore side of the reef, and nothing but a small island of coral is left.
The band kept up a sound like the roar of the surf, as the tide rose, and the
waves began to meet and battle over the little islands. Their arms were
thrown over their heads as they met, and their white masi- covered heads
shook like the spray. The people sitting round shouted with delight. The
idea of the dance could not have been more artistically carried out.
1 Kilts.


Next came a meJce representing a pig hunt. It was exceedingly pretty,
and very amusing ; they pretended to be hunting in thick bush and long
grass, moving along and making their way most cautiously, then catching the
pig by the tail and running back with him. Some of the head-dresses were most
elaborate—large plumes and tufts of coloured feathers fixed into a sort of
framework of reeds. . . . After this came another short meke which I missed
seeing. There must have been (counting both dancers and spectators) quite
5000 natives present, and as Mr. Webb told me that none of them came from
a distance of more than six miles, and there are very few women present in
proportion to the number of men, it shows that the district must be very
thickly populated still, though the measles made fearful ravages here, Mr.
Webb losing in his district, which is a large one, 8000 people.
Lady Gordon to Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre
Suva, Fiji, December 14, 1875. —There is a brig, the Nil
Desperandum, leaving this for Melbourne to-morrow, so I shall
take my chance of sending this letter by her. You may or
may not get it before the next mail. My last letter from you
was a scrap written on your way to Dieppe ages ago. The
day I last wrote, the 11th, we started on our expedition to
Eewa, which was a most interesting one. Arthur J. L. G.
having heard by chance of the arrival of the Nymphe with
Cosmo in her, contrived to get here and join us. He had
walked almost all round this island (Viti Levu)and appeared in his
walking dress, —trousers and shirt sleeves rolled up above his
knees and elbows, and his arms and legs the colour of mahogany , —
so we all started together: Arthur and I, and A. J. L. G., Mr.
Maudslay, (who is now gazetted as Private Secretary,) and Eka,
in our own boat, another boat preceding with the baggage. We
were five hours pulling against wind and tide across Lauthala
Bay to the mouth of the Rewa river. I thought we should never
get there. After that, it was easy enough going up the stream.
We landed at a little creek for a few minutes and ate our
luncheon. It is a beautiful wide river. When we had rowed
up for about an hour we saw a canoe with six natives in it.
They fired off guns as soon as they saw us, and then paddled off
as hard as they could scuttle, to announce our arrival. As we
approached the town we saw hundreds of people sitting on the
banks in attitudes of respect, looking out for us. It was a
curious sight to see all the Chiefs (hundreds) crouching on the
ground and giving a loud tama as the Governor landed. Cosmo
Gordon had come over from Levuka to meet us in the steam
launch of the Nymphe , and he and Captain Knollys were on the
little pier, which had been turned into an arbour. Mr. Webb,


the Wesleyan missionary, was also there, and he took Eka and
me up to his house, while the Governor and his staff went to
the Strangers’ House, which is a very large and high native
house containing one great room. There there was a grand cere-
monial yaqona drinking. They all sat on the mats, and when the
yaqona was ready it was poured into the Governor’s bowl,
which he had brought with him, and he drank first, they clap-
ping hands all the time he was drinking. It was the Governor’s
first visit to Rewa, which is one of the largest and most im-
portant towns in the group. He and all the staff slept on mats
in the Strangers’ House. I was given a most comfortable large
bedroom in the missionary’s house. Mr. Webb is a very
good specimen of a Wesleyan missionary. He is a well-
read, agreeable man, with rather a nice wife and three
children, and they have a very nice house with a verandah all
round it, and seem to live most comfortably. At any rate
they entertained us most hospitably. The Governor and
Captain Knollys came to dinner both nights. 1 The next dayy
1 From Sir A. Gordon’s Journal. —Maudslay and I rather improved our
bathing arrangements by going out in a boat to the reef, but even that was
not very satisfactory. We took Rachael on another expedition, going to the
beautiful inlet under Cuthbert’s, and up the Tanavua river, which is most
attractive. On Thursday 9th December we were to go to Rewa, and as I was
out very early that morning, strolling towards the village, whom should I
meet but Arthur, walking up from the sugar-mill, where he had landed
from a canoe, which had ferried him across Namuka Bay and Suva Bay. He
had heard at Yeivatuloa of the Nymphe’s arrival, and at once set off to walk
here, trusting to chance canoes to get him across bays and along inaccessible
beaches. His face and bare arms and legs were almost as brown as a native’s.
So I at once carried him up to the hotel for breakfast and off with us to Rewa,
where Cosmo was to meet us. The wind was high and the sea rough in
Lanthala bay, and our heavily loaded boat (self, Rachael, Arthur, Maudslay,
and Eka), took more than five hours to reach one of the smaller mouths of the
river, where ducks were most abundant. We stopped at the first little green
mound covered with cocoa-nut palms, and there landed to have luncheon and
let the crew rest. On going on again, the river took a sharp turn at right
angles to its previous course, and soon brought us out into the great river and
opposite Rewa town. The stream here is really majestic, at least as broad as
the Thames at Woolwich. Crossing the river and passing the R. C. church
we went up a narrow arm past the “carpenter’s quarter” of Rewa. On one
side was a most picturesque old boathouse turned into a dwelling-house.
Then we entered a broader channel and, passing the missionary’s very
smart house and crowds of people seated crouching on the bank, we reached
the pier, which was highly decorated with flowers and leaves. The steam
launch of the Nymphe and her other boats were moored in mid-stream, and
Cosmo was among the first to meet us on shore. I went off straight to a
solemn yaqona meke, and afterwards dined at Mr. Webb’s, where Rachael and
Eka were comfortably established. But the latter was forthwith carried off


directly after breakfast, we all went to a large open space in
front of the church, where seats and a canopy of mats had been
put up, and the proceedings began; first an examination of
school children, 700 of them walked by in single file, each
with a Bible, and each read one verse in Fijian, till at last they
had to stop the reading, as it took too much time; then a certain
number marched by with slates, on which they had each written
a few lines (also in Fijian); and then came the school meke. They
sat down in a large square and answered questions put by the
native teachers in a low musical native chaunt with a great
deal of gesticulation: this lasted some time, and was most
curious. They were of course in native costume, and nearly all
decorated with flowers, leaves, etc., their heads sprinkled over
with finely powdered sandal-wood. Their movements were
so graceful. After this, the Roko, who is the principal
Chief of Rewa, came forward, and was presented by Arthur
with his staff of office, which is a long stick of native wood in-
laid with whales’ teeth. Arthur made a short speech, which
was translated into Fijian by Mr. Webb. There must have
been 4000 or 5000 people present. Then came the great event
of the day, the grand meke or native dance. There were five
distinct dances, each performed by a different set of people. I
should think between 300 and 400 men took part in three of
them. In the others the numbers were smaller. It is quite
impossible for me to describe these wonderful wild dances—l
wish I could. The one I admired most was what they call “ the
breaking of the surf ” meke (pronounced maykay). They were
all dressed in likus —a sort of fringes round the waist, of coloured
grass or split banana leaves —some green, some brilliant colours,
red and yellow, excessively full and sticking out in a great panier
behind, with scarfs of white tappa. They advanced in three
divisions—first the middle, then the two sides. First, gently,
shaking their likus with a soft rustle, then more wildly, bend-
ing and gesticulating, and then rushing past one another, first
to one side, and then to the other, getting more and more wild
and crying out, imitating waves. It was done with such perfect
order and regularity, and the dancing was so light and beautiful,
by Mr. Langham, who had promised to take her a cruise inland, but would
not put off his going for a day to allow her to see the melee, of which I fancy
he really disapproved. He was very peremptory, not to say rude, but he
carried his point, and carried her off, rather to my amusement. I slept, as
did all the gentlemen, at the Strangers’ House. Arthur J. L. got stung by a
small scorpion. In the morning we had a bathe in a backwater of the river,
which was very Thames-like —I mean as regards its banks and the trees on
them, not as regards the colour and consistency'of the water.


no ballet on the stage could have been better; indeed it is a
shame to compare it to that.
The club dance was exceedingly fine, but more savage and
grotesque. Then there was the “Flying Fox” meke , also very
grand. The “Pig” meke and the “Turkey” meke followed.
I could not have imagined they could have got up the
whole thing so well. The dances followed one another quietly
and quickly, and, as I said, there were 5000 or 6000 people
present, at least so Mr. Webb said; but we thought there
could not have been more than about 4000. They all came from
within a circle of five miles. They only perform these grand
dances on some great occasion, and they had been practising
them for three weeks, for the Governor’s visit to Rewa. I
don’t suppose we shall ever see such a good meke again, but
Arthur intends to encourage them, and I shall try and make
them get one up for us at Nasova when Igo back. It lasted
about two hours, and the whole proceedings were not over till
2.30 o clock p.m. The Governor then went to see and examine
the Roman Catholic schools. Mr. Webb told me that in his
district, which is a large one, 8000 people had died of the
measles, besides about 1000 Roman Catholics. They died
mostly of dysentery from getting cold after it, rushing out into
the river or sitting in draughts to cool the fever; many died
of starvation or improper food, for they had nothing but yams,
and no doctors, and they were so terrified that they could
not be made to go near to help to nurse, or take food to the
starving people, or in many cases to bury the dead.
The next morning, the Governor and Captain Knollys,
A. J. L. G., and Cosmo Gordon departed in the gig of the Nymphe,
towed by its steam launch, back to Levuka,and Mr. Maudslay and
I returned here in our own boat. With a fair wind and tide we
had a lovely sail back, and did it in two and a half hours (instead
of six), and did not have to eat the plentiful luncheon supplied by
the Webbs —cold plum-pudding, pork sandwiches, a cut-up chicken
and cakes, all nicely packed in a pretty Rewa basket, (I saw the
like being put into the Nymphe's boat for the Governor). But we
made a capital dinner on it with the children when we got back
to Suva. It may interest you to know that I wore on this
occasion the print dress I bought of Emily, (once your’s,) which
has been most useful to me, and always looks nice when clean.
I found the children extremely well, and very much improved
by the change of air; but it is very hot here, especially indoors.
We occupy the upper story of the hotel, which is the oddest
little place you can imagine. It consists of one large room with
a verandah all round. It is divided by half partitions about


seven feet high into six small bedrooms and one sitting-room,
and every whisper even is heard all over it, exactly like one
room. I can have conversations with Mr. Maudslay three rooms
off! One has to get accustomed to this sort of thing here. Of
course we all hear the long conversations which take place
between Nevil and Jack, which are most amusing. Jack very
much disapproves of Captain Knollys’ position in the house, and
is always making remarks—(l forget whether I told you)—“Why
does Captain Knollys ring for our milk— he's not the master —
Father’s the master of this ’ouse,” and he said the other day
“ Mr. Maudslay thinks he's the mistress now.” Abbey, after he
had settled us here, returned to Nasova, and Mr. Maudslay and
Nurse keep house between them. We have eaten one of our
sheep, and for nearly a week have had to subsist on chickens
only, as beef or mutton can’t be got here; one gets rather
tired of them. There is plenty of fish to be got, but it’s not
very nice. Fortunately there is a family close by, of the name
of Joske, to whom the hotel belongs, and they supply us with
as much milk as we can drink and plenty of fruit— i.e. pine-
apples, grenadillas (which are delicious), oranges, and papaws,
also excellent butter and cream cheeses. Ellenkulle, our cook,
can make pretty good bread, and we have brought tinned soups
and vegetables. Mrs. Joske is a lady and rather nice, and there
is a grown-up daughter whom I rather like, a son, and two
small children. They are excessively kind and attentive to us,
and, as their house is much cooler than our’s, Jack and Nevil
spend most of their time up there playing with the Joske
children. Mr. Joske is a German. Mr. Maudslay and Igo out
for the day in the boat and explore the lovely rivers and creeks.
He generally fishes while I steer the boat, and we take Miss
Joske with us.. I hope Arthur may return to-morrow or the
next day. He thought he might come down in the Nymphe
and stay a few days, and take us all back in her.
I forgot to say that when Arthur left Rewa between thirty
and forty Chiefs came down to see him off, many of them gray-
haired old fellows who had been cannibals in old times ! I had
a visit from three ladies of rank, who were very anxious to
shake hands with the “Marama” (Governor’s lady).
There are some large shady trees near here by the sea, where we
send our mats, and go and sit with the children in the mornings ;
as I was sitting there this morning seventeen ladies came walk-
ing by, and recognised me, and they all came up and shook
hands with me and said “ Siandra Marama ” (good morning,
Madam), and squatted down all round, and we looked at each
other; at last they got up and went.


I believe it is now about the hottest time in Fiji. I hear the
thermometer at Nasova has been standing at 85° since we left;
this will last till April. I rather dread going back. Here,
though excessively hot, we are not shut in and get the breeze, but
when the tide is out there is a large expanse of mud, and behind
the hotel there is a Mangrove swamp, which sounds bad, but I
don’t think is unhealthy.
I have had no letter since I last wrote, so have no remarks
to make. I wonder what is going on, and where you all are
this Christmas; I shall think of home, but in the tropics I never
can realise Christmas, it isn’t the same thing. I hope Arthur
may bring a budget of letters, as the Lewellyn is come in, but it is
uncertain. I get long and amusing letters from Lady Robinson
by every opportunity. She says she will do anything for me,
and missed us dreadfully,—so amusing. .. , I must stop, but you
will hear again soon, this is an extra.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
My Lord—l have recently visited several different localities in the Colony,
and it is perhaps right that I should give your Lordship some account of my
expedition, although I fear I have little of interest to report.
2. On the 20th ult. I left Levuka in H.M.S. Barracouta, and proceeded to
the Island of Goro, which I reached the same evening. I remained there two
days, during which time I visited most of the European settlers on the
Island, and had much conversation with the Bulis and other native officials
on matters of local interest.
3. The Island is very fertile, and likely to prove a favourite resort for
planters. The number of settlers is, however, at present small, and they are
all congregated on one side of the island. With one exception, they are all
leaseholders under Thakombau, who claims the island as his private property.
Like most small communities they are greatly divided among themselves,
and I have seldom seen such an exhibition of bitter hostility towards each
other, on the part of a small number of Englishmen thrown together in a
remote locality, as is shown by the settlers in this island.
4. From Goro I proceeded to Yanua Balavu. Maafu was absent, as was also
the Stipendiary Magistrate, and I made but a short stay. I remained, how-
ever, long enough to be much struck by the neatness of the town of Loma
Loma, which is laid out in rectangular streets and squares, each house stand-
ing by itself within its own trim hedge or fence of reeds, in the midst of
flowering shrubs and fruit trees. I visited the schools, both Tongan and
Fijian, and was much struck with the latter, in which not only the writing of
the scholars was, as usual, remarkably good, but their knowledge of arithmetic
and geography appeared to be more advanced than I had found it to be else-
where. The schoolhouse is a really handsome building, altogether in the
Fijian style, excepting that it has stained-glass windows, and the teaching
is entirely conducted by the natives.


5. There is a good road in Yanua Balavu, and the use of horses by natives
of wealth as well as by Europeans is not at all uncommon.
6. In the absence of Maafu I met the Chiefs under the presidency of the
native Stipendiary Magistrate, and answered many questions put to me on a
great variety of subjects, small and great, relating to the working of the laws
and the administration of the Government.
7. Yanua Balavu is an extremely pretty island, and I should think a
pleasant residence.
8. From Yanua Balavu I went to Nairai. I walked across the island,
and visited a couple of villages ; and then proceeded to the neighbouring, but
much larger, island of Gau (Angau). In both these islands the population
appear well off, and their cultivation is extensive and well attended to.
9. At the large native town of Sawayake I met the two Bulis of the island,
both remarkably intelligent men, and had a good deal of conversation with
them on the state of the island, and on those questions of laws and land in
which all Fijians feel so deep an interest.
10. I was much struck by the school at Sawayake. My coming was un-
expected, so that no preparations could have been made, but, on the sound-
ing of the school drum, 135 children rapidly assembled in the schoolhouse.
Of these, over forty could read fluently. The schoolhouse is a large and hand-
some native building, furnished with glass windows. Much of the success of
this school must be due to the schoolmaster, an active and energetic as well as
remarkably eloquent man. He is a native of Kandavu.
11. The town of Sawayake is a good specimen of the old class of native
towns. It is surrounded by a circular wall, beyond which are three deep
concentric moats now filled with magnificent taro plantations, whilst the
broad embankments between them serve for roads.
12. After admiring the careful cultivation of the irrigated terraces in the
neighbourhood of the town, I walked across the island to Waikama, where
there is another large village, in the immediate vicinity of which is a remark-
able spring of hot water. The island is a very beautiful one ;it abounds
with streams and watercourses, and the mountains, which rise to a height of
nearly 3000 ft. are still thickly clothed with fine timber. On my way across
the island, I was shown the site of a small village of which the whole popula-
tion had died during the measles. What their number was, however, I could
not accurately ascertain.
13. The roads in Nairai and Gau are the best roads of purely native con-
struction which I have yet seen ; that in Yanua Balavu, which is a better
one, having had the benefit of European supervision.
14. There are no white settlers either in Nairai or Gau.
From Gau I proceeded to Kandavu, in order to settle some disputes which
had arisen between the Roko Tui, the Stipendiary Magistrate, and several of
the white settlers. The enclosed extract from one of the local newspapers
gives a not very inaccurate general account of the proceedings which followed
my landing. On the whole, I came to the conclusion that there was some
slight ground—though but very slight—for the complaints made, and I
cautioned the Roko Tui accordingly to be more careful in future. But at the
same time it was very evident that the settlers were of opinion that a native
who declined to sell them anything they wished for, either because he intended
to make use of it himself or reserved it to sell for a higher price to another


party, was guilty of an act of contumacy wliicli ought to be summarily
punished. One of them put the following question to me in a tone of
plainly aggrieved astonishment: ‘ ‘ Does your Excellency mean to say that if a
native has got something we want, and are willing to pay him something for,
we mayn’t take it ? ” My answer was “ Certainly not, without his consent.”
15. I was somewhat disappointed with what I saw of Kandavu ; the
harbour is undoubtedly a fine one, but the settlers are of a low and discredit-
able type, and the natives appeared to me apathetic and despondent, while
their villages are ill cared for; nor are their churches and schoolhouses as
neat and well attended to as similar buildings are elsewhere.
16, From Kandavu I returned to Levuka, but shortly afterwards went to
Suva and Rewa.
S 17. When their staves of office were presented to the different Roko Tui’s
at Ban, on the 10th September last, I withheld those of the Roko Tui of Rewa
(Tui Dreketi) and Roko Tui of Ra (Ratu Esikeli) as their conduct had been
in some respects by no means satisfactory, and I thought it right to make
them undergo a period of approbation. The conduct, since that date, of
Roko Tui Dreketi has been most favourably reported on by the Stipendiary
Magistrate, and I therefore determined to deliver his staff to him before
Christmas, on the occasion of my first visit to Rewa.
■ 18. This large town is situated at the junction of one of the minor streams
which form the delta of the great river with the main channel. The country
for miles around is almost a flat, intersected in every direction by arms,
channels, and hackw r aters of the “ Wai Levu” (which, and not “Rewa,” is
the proper name of the chief Fijian river). The soil is rich, and the country
densely populated.
19. The day after my arrival from Suva, the installation of the Roko took
place in the square before the great church, one of the largest buildings in
Fiji, and raised on a high stone platform. Its matted floors, bare whitewashed
walls, and aisles extending the whole length of the building, and separated
from the nave by tall wooden pillars, gives a very mosque-like appearance to
its interior.
20. My visit was made the occasion of a public holiday and festivity.
An awning had been rigged up, under which seats were placed for Lady
Gordon and myself, the Roko Tui, and the other principal persons present,
whilst the townsfolk, and the country people, who had all the morning been
streaming into the town in their gayest dresses, sat round the square. The
proceedings commenced with an apparently interminable procession of school
children, of whom there were about 700 present. Each as he or she passed
read a verse from the Bible, and on passing a second time wrote a sentence
on a slate from dictation. Time, however, did not permit us to examine in
this manner more than some 200. Then the whole body of children danced
forward until near the place where we were sitting, when on a signal they sat
down, and commenced singing a geography lesson, in the course of which they
described most of the states of Europe. Before retiring they sang several verses
of “God Save the Queen.” I have been thus particular in describing the pro-
ceedings of the school children, because I know that all connected with the edu-
cation of the rising generation of Fijians will be of interest to your Lordship,
but I shall not dwell with equal minuteness on the remainder of the festivity.
21. After the retirement of the school children I delivered his staff to the


Roko, accompanied by a suitable admonition, and a series of native dances
was then performed, which were extremely curious and beautifully executed.
As in each dance, with one exception, the performers were different, and as in
one dance alone there were over 120 men engaged, the number who took part in
them may be estimated. Altogether, including native spectators, there were
about 5000 persons on the ground, all of whom I was assured by the Rev. Mr.
Webb, the European missionary of the district, had come from within a dis-
tance of six miles—a proof that this part of the country is still—notwithstand-
ing the losses it sustained in the measles—very well peopled. Of course, on
such a day as that which I have described, an unusual animation and bustle
pervaded the neighbourhood, but on a subsequent visit to Rewa I had occasion
to observe that there was always a considerable life and movement along the
river, canoes sailing up and down or ferrying across it, and single figures or small
parties of men, women, or children traversing the paths along the high banks
in a manner which reminded me of the groups of wayfarers to be seen on the
banks of the lower part of the Nile.
22. After another visit to Levuka to hold a Council and send off the mail
which conveyed my last despatches to your Lordship, I returned here, where
I had left my family, who had been ordered by the C.M.O. to quit Levuka for
a time on account of the present unhealthiness of the site of Nasova.
23. Till the Commission appointed to consider the question has reported
I shall not trouble your Lordship with further remarks as to the site of the
future capital. When that report is prepared, I shall at once submit the
matter for your Lordship’s decision, and I have little doubt that this place,
which seems marked out by nature for the purpose, will be the site ultimately
chosen.
24. I am not without apprehension that I shall have wearied your Lord-
ship with this long detail. If so I have only to request forgiveness for having
occupied your time unnecessarily.
From Mr. Carew
Cuvu, Nadroga, December 14, 1875. —Your Excellency—l received
your note of 9th inst. yesterday evening, and I observe that Mr. Gordon has
totally misunderstood me. I can assure Your Excellency that I never for a
moment supposed that the meeting at Matailobau was to come off yet—our
conversation at Suva was perfectly clear to me. Mr. Gordon was very much
occupied with his home letters, which he was almost hopelessly endeavouring
to read in a very dark hure at Culanuku, and 1 am not at all surprised at the
misunderstanding. The natives on the other side are not at all surprised at
the delay in holding the meeting in their part of the country, neither are
they offended in any way, I sent a letter to the Nagarawai people from
Namosi on my way up to Suva. At Navuso I wrote to the Wai-ni-mala
tribes, and sent the proper Naitasiri mata to Matailobau, with orders for
these latter to report to Nalawa, etc. I have seen a number of Nagarawai
men since, and sent further messages, and I assure your Excellency that there
is not the slightest cause for uneasiness. All the people of that part of Yiti
Levu have the fullest confidence in me. After leaving Mr. Gordon, I called at
Serua and made a report to the Buli, and then on to Navola, where I found


Manumanuivudi, who told me that Bull Serua had sent a mata to some of the
neighbouring villages, requesting them not to assist either in building the
house for your Excellency at Navola, or in preparing magiti 1 for the meeting.
This was corroborated on the spot by the mata , who chanced to he present. I
at once despatched a note to Buli Serua, and then heard that Bisiki, a Chief
of a petty division of the Nuyakora tribe, had been to an inland village in
the neighbourhood and had taken two guns, killed pigs, etc.,—also that the
Koro Nasau people had been to Naqaqua and had taken away a woman of
theirs who had come to the coast and formed what they considered a too
hasty marriage. They say, lam told, that the teacher hurried the marriage
to keep them from taking the girl. I gave instructions to Manumanuivudi
to endeavour to get the woman back quietly, and then went on to Korolevu.
The Bucknells informed me that a great many Nadrala men had visited them
and had played about a good deal, but were not angrily disposed, only
excessively rude—trying to take Mrs. Bucknell’s hair-comb and brooch off
her person to look at, declaring the brooch had goats carved on it. Mr.
Gordon met these men, and saw Bucknell after this visit had been made.
Bucknell also told me that these natives had threatened to treat them
as they had treated Burt and Underwood, by burning their houses, taking
their cattle, killing them, and then throwing them into the water, etc.
And that their servant, a Yatulele man not then present, would repeat
everything these men had said, and would corroborate it. I saw this man
next morning, both privately and in the presence of the Bucknells. He
denies the whole affair, but says he cautioned Mr. Bucknell, whose conduct
is offensive to the natives, to keep quiet, as these were the men who had
been to Burt and Underwood’s, and had, etc. Ido not know what to
believe, but at any rate the Bucknells did not appear at all alarmed, and
I am inclined to think they invent a little, alter a little, and embellish a
little. I then went on to Sigatoka to the village of Yunavutu, the residence
of the Buli Nadroga, stayed there all night and requested him to send
and ask the Nadrala people what they had been doing at Korolevu, and
then on here, where I have been ill ever since, with the prevailing cough
and cold. Matters are very quiet all over the district, and I have sent off
letters to-day to Ba, Nadi, etc., informing the Chiefs of date of meeting at
Navola. Since my return I have received back the note I sent to Buli Serua
concerning the magiti for the meeting, and without answer or comment.
Olive sent yesterday Ratu David and the young Macuata Chief to ask his
reasons for this piece of discourtesy. David was very anxious for me to give
him permission to bring the Buli back with him, but I declined to allow him
to do this, and gave him orders to act politely and properly in every respect.
I daresay it has originated in some misconception, but if not so, Roko Tui Rewa
will have been at the bottom of it. The logs of sandal-wood I really can do
nothing with for some time, as, if I wrote instructions for them to take them to
Rewa, they would not do it until January, as they profess to be very busy always
at this season preparing for Christmas. Mr. Friend could easily dispose of them
to Mr. Page at Rewa, who would, if they are really of any value, go for them
with the Pride of Viti. I have not seen Mr. Taylor. He left a note here
for me and tells me he has nothing to do with Nadroga, that his district is
1 Food.


Ba, Nadi, and Yasawa. I had supposed that he and Friend would have
taken the coast work, which would have relieved me of cases in which whites
alone are concerned. lam going, in conjunction with the native Magistrate,
to hold court to-morrow for native cases, and then to hear applications for
divorces. This latter will be regarded by the people as an immense boon.
Mr. Thomson has behaved uniformly well since my arrival. He has an
intimate knowledge of the language and the customs of the people here, and
is respected by those on the coast. He has shown every disposition to assist
me in an unobtrusive and most gentlemanly manner since I came here, and
I cannot refrain from acquainting your Excellency with these facts. He has
avoided interference thoroughly, and must have exercised great abnegation in
doing so, he having lived so long here with the people. He wishes for employ-
ment, and hints that your Excellency had promised to remember him in con-
nection with a magisterial appointment in some part of the group. He is
honest, I am convinced, and has totally avoided native women, etc., and was
always regarded in Otago, New Zealand, as a remarkably clever man of business
in general matters and shipping, etc., and if he had ever anything against his
character or antecedents I should have heard of it. I forward separately to
your Excellency all the information I can gather with reference to Grayburn
and Ball.
Cuvu, Nadroga, December 23, 1875. —Your Excellency—l forward
herewith for your Excellency’s approval a draft of letter to be read at the meet-
ing at Navola. I intend leaving here for that place in advance on Monday next.
I believe we shall have a good attendance, as the son of Manumanuivudi came
to me last Monday and told me the people inland were so anxious about it
that many wanted to start at once. I gave him a thick piece of string with
knots on it corresponding to the number of days remaining previous to the
day for the meeting. Roko Tui Ba has written to tell me that he intends to
come himself. I have found Ratu David very useful, although we have both
of us only just recovered from influenza of a fortnight’s stay. I saw Olive
to-day. He is quite well, with the exception of a bad foot. I have left space
at the end of the letter for any observations your Excellency may wish to
make with regard to the Tavua-i-Colo people, or the Mogodro men and others
who are at work as prisoners of war under Cakobau’s late Government. It is
unadvisable to make the letter long ; it will be better to talk more unre-
servedly to the people after the reading of the letter. In my last note I told
your Excellency that Gagabokola had returned a letter 1 of mine to him un-
answered, and that Olive had sent Ratu David to inquire into his reasons. I
am glad to be able to tell you that it originated in the mistake of a teacher,
and Na Gagabokola was in no way to blame in the matter.
The weather has been very dry and windy since our arrival and the grow-
ing crops of food will probably suffer much.
The Baron is still about here, but appears to have altered his mind about
going up the Sigatoka river for the present.
I have really nothing of any importance to tell your Excellency just now,
and that should really be the most welcome tidings.


From Mr. Gladstone
Hawarden Castle, Chester, September 12, 1875.—My dear Arthur—
Though inaudible, we often think of you and your very arduous work, and I
think it may interest you to read the enclosed small volume on the Slave
Trade and its adopted child, or alter ego as I fear it may too commonly be
called, the labour traffic. In this volume you are justly commended : Layard
and the late Government, at another place, rather absurdly condemned.
The ensemble is rather sad, and it seems to show that we are in the back-
ground as compared with some other Governments.
I also send you my second pamphlet, in case it should have escaped me
to send it before, i.e. at the time of publication. It is heavier metal than the
first, but has only circulated in this country to about one-sixth of the extent.
With this, I put a reprint of an article from the Quarterly, with the
preface. These make up the volume. Manning has not noticed the challenge
in the Gordon case. His own declaration about war for the Temporal Power
he has interpreted with his usual impudence ; I can use no weaker word, and
I must avow to you that some phases of his conduct, which I have had to
follow closely in this, I trust now ended, controversy, have left on my mind
exceedingly painful impressions as to his sense of honour and veracity. •>-
We are full of the anticipations and preparations of our double marriage—
Willy to Gertrude Stewart, and our orphan niece Gertrude Glynn to George
Pennant of Penrhyn Castle : this last will have the pleasant effect of making
us in some sort your relations.—With all good wishes, I remain affectionately
yours, W. E. Gladstone.
I send you likewise a copy of a noble charge by the Bishop of Bombay,
who I fear is dying.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, November 26, 1875. —My dear Sir—As you may imagine
since your departure I have had my hands pretty full of work. To carry on
the tukutuku 1 of my lakolako , 2 —as soon as H.M.S. Barracouta had got under
weigh I started off to see the Kings. I found them just as I suppose you
did, so I need not dilate on the subject. I have got the boy here now. On
the whole I am not disappointed. He is clean, respectable, and, I believe,
truthful. He speaks the language very fairly, but alas, cannot read or write
it at all. I was at work last night on the Na Lawa Eso, and had to
unravel it as well as I could by myself, which, as you can imagine, was not
very satisfactory work. However, he is shqrp enough, and in time may be
useful. I shall be very glad when my clerk is appointed. In the meantime
I must do as best I can and work. hard at the language. The house is still
in rather a mess, but I hope to settle down in a few days—up to this I have
not had a spare moment. The two servants are very good, and the police all
right, so I think I shall do well as regards my neighbours. The old man-of-
war’s man, Grant, is very respectable, and when, as is I hear sometimes the
case, he gets very drunk, he does it respectably and gives no trouble ; his
1 Tale or report.
2 Literally “ walking,” i.e . proceedings.


help in the garden will be invaluable to me. The Levicks are kind, and Mr.
Levick is very good-natured in putting things before me straight —I mean in
Custom-house work, where I find myself rather adrift for want of experience.
Of the Hennings I have seen but little, hut they seem willing to shew me
anything that it is my business to know with regard to them. By the way
I must cry peccavi indeed—Mr. W. Hennings left yesterday morning for
Tonga and I found that what with all I had to do, I had forgotten to give
him your letter. lam indeed very sorry for this. I have given it to his
brother, who says that it shall be sent to him at the earliest opportunity. I
do hope it was nothing important. Mr. Emberson left things in very good
order, but in many things it is a great disadvantage to me not to have seen
him. If I do make mistakes at first you must put this down on the credit
side as a sort of excuse. There is a man who keeps a public-house here,
O'Neill. I fear the house is anything but a respectable one, and complaints
are made by his neighbours about it. He has been warned by Emberson,
and I intend to go down there to-day to tell him that if any further complaints
are made to me I shall recall his licence and “come down” on him heavily.
As regards Mafi, he and I have had several talks together. I have told him
that, though I am not going to interfere with his Courts, he must never
punish anyone for great or little things without hearing both sides of the
question, and deciding on the case in public , and that although he is perfectly
at liberty to give his advice to either side or both when they complain to him
in private, he is never to punish either until the case has been heard and
determined by him in public. I have given him the Na Lawa Eso and directed
him to follow it. He says he will let me know whenever he is going to try
a case, so that I may know about it; I think we shall get on together. He
wanted to know if I had any “ giant-powder ” to give him, and I told him
that you had tabued it. He expressed his astonishment, for he said
Emberson always used it, and gave it to Maafu and to him to use when they
wanted it. I told him that I was not going to say whether Emberson was
right or wrong, but I said that you had said it was not right, and therefore I
hoped it would not be done ; and I added that I thought Maafu agreed with
you in thinking it was not a very wise thing to do, as it drove away the fish.
I intend, however, to tell Maafu about it, and make him let the people know
what you have said about it. He came to me this morning to tell me that a
Tongan woman had complained to him that her husband was living apart
from her and that he had committed adultery with other women, and there-
fore she wished to be divorced. He asked what he ought to do. I told him
that divorce was such a grave matter that in England it had to be given by a
high Court and that the High Court at Levuka had that power. I told him
that I was not sure that he could do it, but that the best thing he could do
would be to summon the parties to the next Court, and if the case was proved
against the man to give his judgment that they should live apart, but that
neither was to marry again until he had received instructions from Levuka
as to whether he could give the divorce or whether the case would have to go
to Levuka. This will not interfere with any punishment that the man is
liable to for the crime, under the native law, of adultery. From the law
as stated in section 12, p. 10, of the Eso Na Lawa , I am of opinion that the
divorce can be given here ; but as to which of the officials to whom a peti-
tioner ought to apply, I am not quite sure ; to Maafu as Tui Lau, or to Mafi
2 B


as native Judge? If it is to be given here, Maafu ought to pronounce it
although Mafi hears the case. Unfortunately I cannot find my copy of the
Lau Tovata, and nobody seems to have one. But if that section did not
clearly state that a divorce can be got from somebody here, I should have had
no hesitation in saying that no court in the Colony had cognisance of such
suits excepting the Supreme Court. When the case is heard I shall be there
not to order, but, if asked, advise, and I shall report it officially for the opinion
of the proper authority. If, however, there should be an opportunity of
answering this, I should be very thankful if you would tell me what is the
right thing to be done. I did not wish to tell Mafi that I was in doubt as to
whether Maafu or he had the power of giving divorces, for it would only have
led to a discussion as to the limit of his authority as compared with his
Roko’s, which would not have been advisable, and might have led to an ill-
feeling if I had decided against him. Have I done right or wrong ? At any
rate the judicial separation is clearly legal, and a few weeks longer for a
divorced woman to wait before she marries again will be no hurt to her
or her second husband. The woman had come to me in the first instance—
she had another girl with her—she told me she had seen me at Nasova, and
said at one time she used to wash clothes there. She asked after Gordon and
Knollys, and giggled to a great extent when I mentioned Olive, so she is an
old acquaintance of most of us. I asked her if she had been to Mafi about it,
and on her saying no, I told her that he was the proper person to go to in the
first instance, and tell him what her complaint was, and that, if he did not
know what to tell her, he would come to me and I would tell him what to do.
This I think advisable. If people do not go to him first, it is evident that
they will in many cases hear different advice from Mafi and myself. They
must believe one, not both, and the one that is not believed is disregarded.
By his coming here when he is not able to decide and taking back to them
what we both agree on, his decision is acted upon, and, what is more, he
cannot ever say that he could not know what my mind was about things, for
people come to me and get advice and go away without his ever hearing of it,
until one fine day his decision is met with the answer that it could not be
right because I had decided in a contrary manner. I trust that you agree
with me about this. I also told them that I was very glad to see them, but
I did not wish women to come to my house by themselves, that if they
wanted to see me here it must be with their father or brother or husband or
some other male relation, that I was always ready to come and see them at
their own homes where their own people were about, but that people were so
fond of telling lies about Government officials that I thought it was better to
make this a rule, and therefore no lies could be told about them or me.
This I also told to Mafi, as well as that respecting their going to him for
advice first; he said it was very good, and that he would let it be known.
One other thing. This morning Hennings sent back to their homes some
Tai Levu natives who had been engaged to work after the expiration of a
sentence given under the old Government. They were sentenced to work
here, and Hennings after they had finished engaged them as labour for a
time which has just expired. I went down to see them paid off, and inquired
if they were satisfied, and they said (their Chiefs—they were two—said it for
them in their presence) they were, and did not show any signs of not being
so. Some few had died during the measles, and Hennings asked me what


he should do about their trade. He said he usually asked the Chief who
were the nearest relations of those dead, and gave it to those pointed out.
I saw no reason why this should not be done, so we carried it out. I told
Hennings that if there was any dispute between them as to who should have
it, I should retain it until I received instructions as to its disposal; but he says
that they always manage to agree that someone is the brother or father of the
deceased. Mr. Levick mentioned to-day that with respect to the postal
arrangements in the various islands he does not know what to do sometimes
(he has been acting honorary Postmaster here for the last year, and he hopes
somebody else will come, or else that he will be paid something for it), for he
gets mail-bags addressed to “The Postmaster, Cicia,” or other places, and
as there doesn’t happen to be any Postmaster there, or even an acting one,
the consequence is the bag is given to the first white man there, who opens it
and sends it on to someone else. Under existing circumstances I do not see
what can be done, but to use the best care and only entrust the bag to the
most trustworthy messenger who may be at hand, if to a white man, make
him give a receipt for it. What do you think ? He mentioned a Mr. Borron
as being the best man to make Postmaster at Cicia.
Mr, C. Hennings has just been here to ask me about paying his labour
with guns and ammunition. He said that Mr. Emberson had advised him not
{i.e. declined to allow him) to let them have any guns or powder, and then he
asked me whether there was any definite rule about it. I told him that I
should have done exactly the same as Emberson had done, and that it was
a thing that was to be discouraged. He said he did not know what to do,
as he had just taken out his licence to sell ammunition, etc., and that if I
was writing at any time to Levuka he would be glad if I mentioned the
thing to somebody or other. Of course if I did write to anybody officially
there would be precious little to answer, except that if a man thought he
could not sell powder he ought not to take out a licence ; so I hope you will
not mind my asking you about it.
I caught my sergeant out to-night in a matter which I hope you will
not think I determined wrongly. He is, it seems, a friend of the prisoner
here, Epeli, who was convicted of theft and sentenced to six months’ hard
labour. To-day he appeared with some money in his hand, and asked me
whether Epeli could buy off the rest of his time. I told him certainly not,
and then he asked if he might go and buy a sulu for himself, and then I
began to smell a rat, and it turned out that when the prisoner was arrested
his father had given this money, about one pound and a few shillings, to
the sergeant in order that if a fine was inflicted it might be paid, and if he
could buy off some of Epeli’s time he was to do it, and he might buy clothes
for himself as a present. I gave him a lecture on the subject and told him
always to give up to me any money either found on or given to him for a
prisoner. I took the money, £1:0:6 and a Chilian half-dollar, and gave him
a receipt which he was to give to Epeli, and which would be given back to
me when his sentence had expired, and when the money would be given back
to Epeli by me.
And now my tale is done for the present. I fear it is a long and unin-
teresting one, but it is, I think, all I have done of any interest.
I shall be very glad when Maafu returns. I must say I wish the whites
were out of the question—they are very good, but I like working with natives


better ; but this is rather too much to say when I have only been here two
days.
Yet one more thing. A white man, a planter from Cicia, Lenox by
name, whose appearance I do not like, turned up yesterday reporting that his
boat the Ku Klux had arrived, and had been dismasted and nearly lost—he
had some copra and cotton on board. It appears that he has no papers con-
cerning his boat—he says they are all with Smart, the Collector of Customs at
Levuka : he does not know when he paid for his licence to trade, and in fact
I believe he has no papers, and has never paid for a licence. I warned him
that he was making himself liable to a heavy fine, which I should not fail to
inflict if necessary. He said he would write to Emberson about his papers,
and I told him I should report the case, and ask for information about his
papers, and whether any money was due from him to the Revenue for non-
payments of licensing fees, etc. He is a sort of respectable-looking man, so I
Spread this over with a thick layer of civility, and I think he sees that I intend
to do what I say without having a row about it. I have written officially to
Havelock about it. Emberson will know more about it than I do. There
are a quantity of labourers of a Mr. Brownell (dead, I think) — “ Santo ” men
—men who have been brought here by Mr, Emberson to be sent back to their
homes ; at present they are working for Mr. Hennings at the rate of 6d.
per day and food. I have no doubt Emberson will have told Mitchell about
them.
And now I think this is all.—Ho, one little thing more. The Mary , which
is taking back these labourers to Tai Levu had license to recruit labour
signed by Emberson, but not dated—it was good for twelve months. Mr. C.
Hennings asked me about it; he stated that it had been given him in
January, so I made a note on it that it was to hold good till Ist January
1876. If the Revenue has lost a fee, it is Emberson’s fault for not dating
the permit.
And now I will conclude with an apology for my scrawl. I hope you had
a pleasant voyage to Angau, etc. Please give my best respects to Lady
Gordon.—Believe me yours obediently and sincerely.
Loma Loma, December 3, 1875. — My dear Sir — as the Emma is expected
shortly at the back of the island I will begin my tukutuku of what has
happened since I last wrote. The night after the Mary went I was turned
out at a very late hour of the night to see about a man who was drunk, etc.,
at Mr. Hennings’. His name is “ Capper ” and he was one of Mr. Hennings’
overseers. He had some row with one of the Hennings, and, being very
drunk, he hit the latter in the eye and knocked down the lamp, thereby
nearly setting the house on fire. I took him in charge and locked him up
for the night. I had to turn the Fijian prisoner into the constable’s hure
and I assure you Mrs. (was it Glegg or) Pullen’s linen on the mind was a joke
to what I went through that night. Everytime a cocoa-nut fell I was sure he
had pulled down the house (it cannot be called a gaol), and when a cocoa-nut
leaf came rattling down I w r as out of bed like a shot to catch the prison-
breaker. Luckily he was too drunk to do anything but roar all night, but
unless some provision is made for white prisoners here, (though they are very
rarely known,) before long I fear the billet of Stipendiary Magistrate for
Lau will be only a stepping-stone to Bedlam. In the morning, as Mr.


Hennings did not wish to press the assault, and as Capper was then sober
and rather ashamed of himself and it being Sunday, I let him go with a
caution about future conduct.
On the same day, Sunday, I dined at Mr. Levick’s, and at the end of
dinner Mali came in to tell me that Bayley had taken a girl from her home
and refused to let her go back. I went off at once to the girl’s home, heard
the statements of her uncle and brother with whom she lived, and it appeared
that she had gone to Bayley’s of her own accord. I went with Mali to
Bayley’s house (which stands just outside my fence) in order to ask the girl
if she was being kept there against her will. Nobody was in the house but a
labour boy, and I have no doubt but that, having got wind of the fact that
Mafi knew of it, they had gone out together. In the morning I went over to
Bayley’s house and spoke to him about it, and told him that the fact of a native
girl lying with a white man was a crime as respected the girl, and that he was
not to suppose that he or any white person could give protection to the natives
against their recognised law. I apprehend much trouble from many
and especially from him, as to this ; but I hope you will not be afraid of my
shirking it. I disagree with Mr. Emberson, on this ground : he states in his
official letter that he pointed out to Mafi that the Fijian law of fornication
can only apply as between Fijian and Fijian or naturalised Tongan, and not as
between Fijians and whites. This is, I maintain, both wrong and unreason-
able. The criminal code of Fiji (native) makes it a crime for a woman to
commit fornication, quite irrespective of the person with whom she commits
it. A Fijian stealing a white man’s watch is surely as much subject to the
native law as if he had stolen the watch from the Yuni Yalu, the only
difference'being that in the latter case the interest of the white man is not
involved, while in the former it is. In the case of theft the case would
be tried by the white and native magistrates, in the former, unless a claim
on the girl’s services as, for example, that she was legally bound to serve him
as servant for such a time (in which case again his interest is involved) is
made by the white, I should decline to interfere with the process of the
law against the girl. I told this to Bayley —not, however, the “servant”
part of my remark to you. Of course he professed perfect compliance with it,
but stormy clouds are on the horizon. There is one rather peculiar case that
I have heard of on the island. But lam going to return for a moment to
what I said about not interfering with the execution of the law against the
native girl. I am in doubt as to whether the native officers are justified in
taking the girl from the man by entering his house and carrying her off. I
am of opinion that they are, though I should think it a very unadvisable
thing to do. It is quite clear that no white can harbour a criminal who is
such by the English law, and the question then arises—ls the native criminal
code such a recognised law of English Government that offenders against
it are in the same status as those against the English criminal law ? I
think they are ; that the English criminal law and the native law as it
now exists are concurrent in their interpretation, action, and power ; that
they are two channels forming together the medium through which British
subjects in Fiji are to be governed (with respect to crimes), and that it is only
a question as to which channel an offence is turned into in order to be adjudi-
cated. I fear I am not very clear, but if I could tell you, I think I could
make it more easy of comprehension (by “it” I mean my argument). The


peculiar case is this : Some time ago a Fiji woman was divorced by the native
authorities from her husband, who was a white man. She then went to live
with a man of the name of Perry (an overseer of Captain Sewell’s) who lives
not far from here. She has been there about six months, I believe, and Mafi
is anxious to have her punished. I told him that it was a matter for him to
decide, that in every case of this sort he had a perfect right to try and punish
a woman, and that he was to take care that evidence was brought to prove the
case before convicting anyone of it—that the mere fact of a girl being seen in
a white man’s house was not sufficient, but the fact of a girl livdng with a
man was reasonable grounds for her being tried for the actual offence forbidden,
and that, if possible, direct evidence of the commission of the act ought to be
produced. I think he understood me. He also asked me about certain girls
who belonged to other villages, but who were staying at Loma Loma and doing
no good—he asked me about sending them away back to their villages, and I
agreed with him that it was advisable to do so, but I intend that Maafu shall
give the orders about it. The man Lenox I told you about came to see me
the other day. I liked him better than I did at first; he has something of
a gentleman about him, though it is not apparent at first sight. He has
evidently been fleeced of every penny he had in the world by the various firms
in the Colony, and having speculated in cotton and being a fool, evidently, in
many ways, he has not made much out of his venture ; he asked my advice
as to his relations with Messrs. Hennings, which I refused to give. He took
out his licence, etc., for his boat. I find now that the only thing I could have
done to him was to seize his boat and cargo, and my polite hint about heavy
fines and back payments of revenue is all “smoke.” However it had a
salutary effect. He asked me a question that I could not answer, though it is
my business to know it. He has several Polynesian labourers on his planta-
tion waiting to be sent home—they are overtime men. They were paid at
the expiration of their term of agreement and he has been putting aside
cotton in his plantation as a security for the payment of their overtime
work. He says, and I find all the planters have the same idea, that the
wages of the labour are th q first charge on an estate, that his creditors cannot
touch this cotton, and that he wants to know whether he may sell any of it
himself in order to buy requisite food, etc., for keeping up his plantation.
How I am ignorant as to its being a fact that it is laid down by law that no
produce of an estate shall be sold, etc., until the wages of the labour have been
paid. It is a very excellent maxim and one that the planters would do well
to follow always (I am told they always do hold by it). lam aware that by
the English law, where a man’s house, etc., is seized by an execution creditor
the wages of the servants must be paid (in the case of ordinary servants for a
month’s time, and in the case of agricultural labourers, I believe, for the
remaining portion of the year of their engagement) out of the estate before
anything else ; but the case of Lenox’s labour and the cotton is quite different,
and, though I quite agree in the advisability of not touching it, I think he
would be justified in selling so much of it as was necessary to maintain his
house and plantation in absolute necessaries. I told him to write me a letter
on the subject, and I would forward it to the Colonial Secretary for an opinion,
but I should be very glad if you would tell me what you think about it. On
Tuesday the Xariffa returned from Lakeba, and the next day the Caroline ,
with Charley Maafu on board, came from the same place, reporting that the


Jubilee was on shore on the reef at Lakeha and that she was likely to become
a total wreck ; he also reported a great want of food and a large amount of
sickness there. We are nearly as bad here. The people are very hard up for
food. I cannot get any for my men, so I have to give them maize with the
yams—l have very few left of them (yams) —which they hate. In another
fortnight or so we shall have bread-fruit in again, and I hope there will be
plenty, but the wind has damaged the prospects a good deal. lam planting
kumalas for the men, and they have a fair lot of yams to come on by and by.
There is a great complaining everywhere just now about the scarcity of food.
As to sickness, I have my hands full: there is an epidemic passing through
the country just now ; men and women seem to get it alike. It is a sort of
cold—husky voice and difficult breathing, pains in the head, chest and side.
I hear at Lakeba they are just the same. I have been very successful in my
treatment —a few grains of Dover’s Powder, and if bad a few drops of
Paregoric Elixir with the Dover’s Powder seems to have a very beneficial effect;
at anyrate I have not poisoned anyone and have cured a good many. My
medical knowledge goes very little further than this however. The Govern-
ment medicine chest is all very well in the hands of someone who knows
what the different medicines are and what their use is. Mr. Emberson knew
this, but I don’t, and I think certainly where a medical chest is left under the
charge of anyone not a doctor, a few simple directions as to the use of the
medicines in the chest would be extremely advisable. The labels too are off
one or two bottles, and Ido not know what they are. Mr. Rooney is expected
back daily and he knows, I believe, all about it, so he can tell me ; but I
would humbly suggest the above to the C.M.O. I wish to know one thing.
Mr. Newfon King sent a line to me asking for some medicine for his daughter.
I gave him a little, but I want to know whether I am justified in dispensing
medicines to whites from the Government chest. In his case it is a charity
to give him anything of the sort, but I don’t know whether I ought to give
it him from my own resources, (but even money won’t buy medicine here, for
there is none, or very little, to be bought,) or whether I can dispense it from
the Government stock. The boy improves in manner very much ; he is a
gentleman at the bottom, but his ignorance of the written Fijian is a dread-
ful “stopper” to me. I have not had a Fijian letter written to me yet, but
when I do, if I cannot make it out I shall have to apply to Mr. Rooney, and
I have so many little things to do that I hardly get time for a read at Fijian
any day in the week.
On Thursday evening H.M.S. Barracouta arrived with Mr. Layard en route
for Tonga. I dined on board in the wardroom. By the way, when I went on
board I had an interview with Captain S . Anyone who had seen it would
have said that we had never met before in our lives. We were both very polite,
and (as I had never seen him before) I offered to do anything that lay in my
power for him if he required it; and, at the end of our interview, he politely
asked me whether I was going to see the officers, or whether he should order
my boat, etc. I did pitch into the fresh meat at dinner ;itis a great
pull to have no fresh meat for the first time in one’s life, but I expect to get
used to it. They sailed the next morning, taking Miller, a half-caste,
as interpreter, etc., and as she steamed out, Maafu with eight canoes (small)
came sailing up —it was such a pretty sight. There was a fresh breeze, and
Maafu with his pennants, etc., came flying along; they sailed up on to the


beach full sail, and there was the canoe almost out of the water, with her sail
bellying out and straining to get free ; they did not lower it, but unloosed it
from the canoe, and then two or three men carrying it at the bottom went
sailing along the sand with it till they came to the proper place to deposit it,
when they dropped it and it collapsed. I have only seen Maafu for a few
minutes as yet. lam going to have a talk to him, and will let you know all
about it. I gave him your letter.
Mafi came to me about the payment of his salary—he said that he had
not had it for some time, and wanted to know about it. I cannot find any-
where here any paper or book referring to payments made by Mr. Emberson
on account of the Government, so lamat a standstill. I cannot tell when
my constables were last paid, or how much pay they get. lam writing by
this mail to Mr. Emberson about it. I suppose he has some memorandum of
these sort of things—he is said to be very careful with his accounts, but he
must have taken them away with him—his receipts for monies paid to him
are all right. I find lam ignorant of ever so many things I ought to have
found out. Ido not know whether the returns of labour employed in the
district have to be made by me, or whether the Immigration Office will send
me a return. Emberson has a book in which the labour is entered, but I
cannot understand it; there are sundry notes and marks in pencil which I
think are only known to him, and the numbers and dates are not clear to me.
Then as to the taxes (native): Am I responsible for their being rightly collected;
or do I only transmit them to the Treasury from Maafu’s hands ? Havelock
told me that the tax for December would be 2s. per head ; but I do not know
whether any official intimation has been given of it yet. There had been
some complaints of yam-stealing at some plantations at Mavana (Mr. Yeezsey
came to me about some at his plantation there). I went over there to Tui
Mavana and told him about them. He has found out the thieves (two
Fijians)—they confessed to having stolen yams. Mr. Yeezsey some time ago
had some stolen, and told Maafu about it, and Maafu punished the men who
did it, and I think the best thing will be to hand these over to Mafi to be
tried by him, or rather sentenced, for they have confessed. It is not quite a
case of dispute between whites and Fijians, so I do not think there is any
reason for my interference ; but I should like to know how far you think it
is good to leave these sort of cases for the native magistrate. And another
question I should like to ask. Have European magistrates the power of
pronouncing the sentences of the Na Lawa Eso , or have they cognisance
only of English criminal law (or at the present time the Hew South Wales
Law) ? I shall be very glad to hear your wish and orders on these points ;
but I shall be still more glad if I can have the chance of talking about them
sometime soon. You will think me very incompetent; but these things keep
cropping up fresh in my mind, and I want to know exactly how to act on
them.
Sunday, December 5. —Yesterday morning the Emma arrived at the back
of the island with Captain Sewell. She has gone to Mago, and comes back
here on Tuesday or Wednesday to take away some Ra coast men who have
been in Captain Sewell’s employ. I shall have to go over and see them before
they embark. Captain Sewell is staying at my neighbour the old man-of-
war’s-man’s hotel. He came and paid me a visit yesterday evening; I like
his looks, etc., very much. I suppose you saw him at Hasova. I hear you


have had no end of exciting things at Levuka—Prussian men-of-war, balls,
Kadavn Mails (Dr. Mayo seems to have been a little de trop with his refusing
to give pratique , etc.). To-morrow there is to be a meeting of the different
native authorities ; lam going to it, and will tell you about it. Mr. and
Mrs. Rooney have just arrived in Mr. Hennings’ cutter from the shipwrecked
Jubilee. I have not seen them yet, as they are busy settling themselves
after their travels. The Emma brought your letter yesterday, many thanks
for it. I am glad you liked Agau. I entirely concur in the suggestion as
to the cause of its prosperity. I have not been able to go anywhere yet
—you saw what my boat looked like in the water—l find she is absolutely
useless ; she is stove in on one side, makes water at a great rate, and is in
many places rotten and unsafe. There is only one man here who I believe
is competent to repair her. lam going to ask him to give me an estimate
of the expense (he is Mr. Levick’s engineer and general handy man). Ido
not really think she is worth repairing, her enormous weight —the men by
themselves cannot launch her makes her useless to me here. What is
wanted here is a strong light boat, not a heavy thing such as she is. But I
know I shall wear out the little patience that this letter will leave you, if
I begin a “Naval Lament,” so I will not go on about the boat. I shall try
and hire a canoe from some one to see the islands just about here, and then
I can tell you about the place for the house.
December 6. —I have just come back from the meeting, it was very short.
Mafi gave them directions about keeping their villages clean. I was asked
two questions, neither of which I could well answer. The first was, What
quantity of arrowroot would be required in order to pay one man’s tax ? I
said I hsfd no instructions about the payment of taxes in kind, and could
tell them nothing about it. The second was about their collecting the
cocoa-nut husks. They said you had told them that if they collected the
husks, somebody would buy them—they did not know who was to buy
them, and when would they be bought ? They cannot make out whether you
or the Government are going to invest in them. Bayley has just been in
about the payment of some money which Maafu owes him, as a judgment
of the Central Court, given, if you remember, shortly after our arrival in
Fiji; he wanted me to go down to Maafu with him about it. This I
declined to do. I think it would have looked as if I wanted Maafu to
pay what Bayley wished, but I intend to ask Maafu about it by myself.
Charley Maafu has just been in too, asking a question. Some two years ago
he leased a small bit of land in the town to a white man (Mr. Hennings’
cooper) for two years. The time having expired, the persons living on it
asked him whether they might stay on. He came to know what he ought to
do. I pointed out that no transactions in land were allowed between natives
and whites, and that my advice was to tell them that they might stop on at
a monthly tenancy, and that he was to make no other terms with them. I
am not sure whether I am justified in saying this, but at any rate it seemed
reasonable, and no great loss can come if they don’t pay their rent at the end
of the month. Mr. Charles Hennings, who came back from Windward, says
that the people in many of the islands are in great distress from want of
food—that in one place (Naiau) they were living on bread-fruit leaves, and
came off to the cutter to beg for a few yams or kumalas. He is going off
again to Ono, etc., shortly, with some food. Mr. Rooney called here to-day,


lie is very furious against Mali and the divorce cases. But I think we shall
get on together. I am going to do some Fijian with him now and then.
Just a line to say that Maafu paid (through Hennings) Bayley the amount
asked for, before I saw him. I think, as it was a judgment debt, he was wise,
and is well rid of Bayley. We had a long talk over many things, of which you
shall hear. C. Maafu, by my subsequent advice, has made a bargain for a
weekly tenancy with the people. He will not get so much rent, but as he
cannot sue for his rent under the existing ordinance, he is safer with a weekly
than with a monthly tenancy. Sickness at Lakeba reported getting all right.
Jubilee off, damaged. Please give my best respects to Lady Gordon.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Cutter Emma, Loma Loma, December 11, 1875.—My dear Sir—Mr.
Ryder yesterday just came over for the night, and is going back to-day, and
as Mr. Rooney is going to Mango on Tuesday for a night I am going with
Mr. Ryder to spend a couple of days with him and return with Mr. Rooney on
Wednesday. Things have been going on all right since I last wrote. Mr. W.
Hennings returned yesterday from Tonga in the Marion Renny which left
this morning with our mail for Levuka. I have had some satisfactory talks
with Maafu, but I have no news to tell you about them. I have had some
complaints made to me by people against Mali ; in every case I have gone
straight with the complainant to Mali and heard both sides out. In each
one Mafi, though sometimes hard, has had the right on his side. There was
only one case I had some doubts as to what was right to do. Tui Daku, the
headman of a village near Loma Loma, and under the district control of Tui
Loma Loma, was ordered by Mafi to do some little thing to his (Mafi’s) house.
Some time before I came a Council was held, at which Tui Lau and the leading
Chiefs were present, that settled that if either of certain specified people (of
whom Mafi was one) ordered any one to do something and they refused with-
out good reason they should do something extra by way of a fine. Tui
Baku’s men were away balolo-fishing, and Tui Daku evidently disliked being
ordered by Mafi (another case of Fijian v. Tongan) and refused to do it, but
instead of saying he was unable to do it—it was a very trifling piece of work
—waited a week and then returned the root of yagona which Mafi had
sent him with the order, and said he could not do it. On this Mafi said he
was to thatch the house, and on that not being done he told him to do the
sides as well. Tui Lau and Tui Loma Loma were both away at the time, and
Mafi seems to have been granted more authority in their absence than he is
otherwise entitled to. I told Maafu about it; he gave Tui Daku the character
of never acting straightforwardly in anything. I forgot to say that Tui Daku
put forward the plea of being engaged as well on the church—this Maafu said
was an old song. I held an enquiry into the whole case very minutely (by
Maafu’s advice and concurrence), and decided that Tui Daku should thatch
the house as the fine for not saying out at once that he was unable to do any-
thing ; and I told him a bad character had been given to me of his goings on.
I told Mafi that when Tui Loma Loma was at home he ought to ask for any-
thing he wanted done through him as being the Chief of the town, and that if
Tui Loma Loma would not do it they must refer the case to Tui Lau whose
province it was to decide all such questions, and that in all cases such as these
brought to me I should always tell Tui Lau of them before having anything


to say to them. lam anxious to support Mali, but he is hard upon the
Fijians, and Tui Loma Loma is the big Fijian here. Mafi said that in all
cases where he wanted anything done of any magnitude he always did tell
Tui Loma Loma. Both he and Tui Loma Loma expressed themselves
satisfied at the result. I told Tui Baku that if he was not he had his
proper Roko to go to, but he evidently thought he would not escape so cheaply
from him.
This morning I got the enclosed letter from Mr. Lenox. I have not had
time to keep a copy, so may I ask for it back. I shall merely say that he
may tell the people complaining that he has reported the case. As to what
to do, what do you wish ? My idea is, though of course there may be different
sides to the case, and I have only heard a version of one side, that supposing
Tui Cicia to be the highest Chief on Cicia he had, according to Mr. Lenox, the
right to beg for the turtle, i.e. to get possession of it, but that if the man
sustained any real damage through the destruction of part of his fence, in his
absence, I think Tui Cicia ought to be responsible for it, as it could hardly
have been within the limits of the steps which would be necessary to take in
order to get the turtle. Ido not, however, take Mr. Lenox’s statement of the
law of turtle-fishing as unquestionable until it is confirmed. I shall ask
Maafu about it, but I shall take no steps in the matter until I hear your
directions. I have heard it said more than once here that the common people
think that under the British Government their Chiefs have been deprived of
all the old power of taking things from them or making them work for them.
About coming to Nasova for Christmas, I should like to know whether
you think I shall have time. The Court to be held at Loma Loma is fixed by
the Gazette for 4th January. I need hardly say I should like nothing so much
as to come to you for Christmas, and moreover I should like to ask you about
various things before going my circuit. If I knew that there would be a
chance of getting back here I should not hesitate in coming. If you think it
well I will take the best opportunity of going to Levuka in time for
Christmas day. We have just arrived at Mago. I will let you know all
about my visit. The Emma goes on directly to Levuka.
To Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, December 15, 1875. —My dear Le Hunte—Many thanks for your
letters of 26th November, and 3rd and 11th December. I cannot write quite
such long letters in return, but I assure you yours are not a bit too long, and
indeed that they cannot be two minute or “ prolix ” for my taste.
Before answering your numerous questions let me say generally that I
think you have judged rightly in all the matters with respect to which you
write, with possibly a shade of doubt in one case, to which I will hereafter
refer.
Also, before I begin, let me express my regret and amazement that the
cares of office should have made you forget your George Eliot. It was neither
Mrs. Glegg nor Mrs. Pullet, but Mrs. Poyser; and she hadn’t linen on her
mind, but milk.
lam in much the same doubt as yourself with regard to divorces. Sa
sega ni macala na Lawa I—and 1 —and I think your conversation with Mafi most
1 The law is not clear.


judicious. In Wilkinson’s absence I hardly like to give an opinion on the
point, and will leave it for discussion at Christmas. I rather incline to the
view that a divorce can be obtained locally.
You have shown very sound judgment in making folks go to Mafi first:
I quite agree with your reasoning thereon. I need not say that I also think
you quite right in refusing to see “unprotected” females.
Don’t you think the “ trade” of deceased Fijian labourers might he more
likely to get to their real representatives if it was distributed by the Magistrate
of the district they belong to rather than by the Magistrate of the district in
which they have been working ?
As to Post Office, we shall, I hope, have an Ordinance ready next month.
When you speak of Hennings paying his labour in guns and ammunition
I don’t know whether you refer to foreign or Fijian labour. If the former
they must be allowed to take them. In the latter case I agree with you, and
think it a fraud to give as payment an article which is at once taken away
for want of a licence to hold it. The arms are coming in rapidly. Mr.
Friend has collected over 500.
I have seen Lenox and thought him an ass. In Mitchell’s absence I can
say nothing as to the Santo labour.
Now for the questions in your second letter.
You will see from the note I wrote on Emberson’s report in re the Bailey
case how entirely I agree with you as to the non-protection of Fijians from
their own law by the mere fact of their living with a white man. I enclose
a copy of it. Ido not , however, as at present advised, feel at all sure that the
native officers could enter the white man’s house to enforce the sentence, and
am very sure that, in any case, it would be most imprudent to do so.
I cannot answer Lenox’s legal question.
Medicines ought to be sold to those who can pay for them, and only
distributed gratuitously to those who cannot. I will speak to C.M.O. about
instructions as to their use.
I don’t understand about the salaries. According to Havelock there is
only one month’s pay in arrears, for want of opportunity to send it. You
must examine this thoroughly.
I do not think you ought to pronounce the Eso na Lawa sentences.
The cocoa-nut husk is being collected for coir manufacture.
I am sending the Fitzroy, with Arthur on board, to some of the islands said
to be ill off for food. I daresay there is some exaggeration in the matter. I
am sure I hope so. They will come to Loma Loma to pick you up and bring
you here for Christmas.
The JVymphe arrived here three days after the Barracouta sailed.
MacGregor ordered us away from this house whilst the earth was being
levelled, so we all went to Suva in what Jack calls the £ £ Fisteroy , ” and I am only
up here for a day or two to hold a Council. We are comfortable enough at
Suva, having got the whole of the hotel, and we have hitherto had fine
weather.
You don’t say whether in conversing with Maafu anything was said about
dynamite. Pray remind him that he has never answered my long letter, and
that he has never sent me his monthly tukutuku 1 of his doings.
1 Report.


lam in a little doubt as to the turtle case, supposing the facts truly
reported. I am sure the Chief had no right to break the fence, and I doubt
whether he had any right to take the turtle by force, though he may have
been entitled to it, and the man punishable for neglecting the custom, if the
proper preliminary present was made to him.
The Mali -Tui- Baku case you decided I think rightly. How could
JaZoZo-fishing, which only lasts one day, be an excuse for not working a week
after ?
The “Fisteroy ” will take you back after Xmas in time for your Court, and I
shall then send you with Thurston to enquire into charges against Tevita
Ului Lakemba brought by white residents.—Ever yours, A. H. G.
Arthur is not going after all. If you can put off your Court from 4th
January to a rather later day so much the better. Come in Fitzroy.
From Captain Olive
Na Rewa, December 9, 1875. —My dear Sir—Your letters of 2nd and 10th
November arrived. I was much pleased at seeing Gordon, he stayed here two
days and then weqt on to Carew.
Very many thanks for sending Brown. I had intended taking a constable
to Koro, but at the eleventh hour I thought that the speedy arrival of the
men from Bua and Macuata would be of greater importance, so I sent Drury
to tell Tui Kubulau to make haste and come over, but did not tell him to get any
number above twenty, in fact, I told him that if Tui Kubulau had not his party
together, to come over with what men he had with him at the time of his
arrival, and not delay a day on any account after having started Tui Kubulau.
I told him to come over to me and bring my boat to Yuda, which he has
not thought fit to do, thereby putting me to considerable inconvenience. lam
very sorry to think I have incurred your displeasure in moving on to Narewa.
I did it for the best, and trust should you visit this place you will appreciate
my efforts at rendering these men efficient and more amenable to discipline.
The recruits from Ba, Nadi, Yasawas, and Nadroga have arrived, number-
ing fifty-six ; they are very decent men, and there are several young Chiefs
among them. I have eight mountaineers among them, including two Chiefs,
one of considerable importance. Two of these men were, as I thought, a little
old for the work, and was about to send them away, but they begged so hard
to remain, even as cooks, that I had to give in, and I am very glad I have
done so, as they are intelligent fellows and are possessed of a great deal of
useful information. Ido not like the Nadroga men so well as the others ;
they appear to have but little respect for anybody; two have already deserted.
Extract from Diary, October 24, 1875. —“Shortly after my arrival at the
place of embarkation (at Koro) I discovered a strange-looking parcel, which
on inspection turned out to be a body, lashed up in a mat ready for loboni,
(interment,) and tied on to a pole ; the husband and children had gone on
board the Pride. I went up to the said parcel and found it contained life,
so investigated further and looked in a little, and found that it was an old
woman. One of the bystanders asked her if she were alive. She replied,
but I could not understand the reply. One of my men tells me she said,
‘ Let me die and then bury me. ’ They said, ‘ Let her die and then bury
her. ’ They could not take her back to the town, and wished to bury her


j alive (not being able to take her with them), but she objected, saying,
/ ‘Let me die and then bury me,’ to which they consented. I then told
| them to cut loose the vines, and found a withered old party with plenty of
life. I asked her to come out, but she was rather delicate at this request,
being sparely clad, so I took my boy Lion’s sulu, (much to his disgust,)
and gave it over to her. Having completed her toilet she sat up, and I
ordered her some food, of which she partook heartily ; when the bystanders
saw her they gave a shout and appeared surprised. I handed her over to the
I Buli of the Qali Yaka Bau, and told him to take her under bis care and
' provide for her. He promised to do so.”
V My reasons for coming over to Narewa were—
Mr. Carew’s advice, who told me when at Yuda that it was the custom
among these people, that when a town like Sabeto returned, for the people
who had assisted to turn them out to house them, rebuild their town, and
find them in food, and that any interference on my part in assisting or
otherwise would give offence and delay the work ; this opinion was backed
up by the Buli Yuda and Bukatavatava himself, to whom Mr. Carew
interpreted your message, as well as telling them of the kindness you had
shown in allowing them to return and rebuild their town.
I had taken up my quarters in Yuda close to Sabeto, where Nabukatava-
tava was staying at the time, and in consequence of the magiti being so
constantly presented much against my will and protestation, and seeing that
there was a scarcity of food at the time in the district, I thought that as my
men were idle and living in a large town, that it would be better for them to
be at work.
I thought again of the distance I was from the Sigatoka, the place where
my services might be required, and if I had to find my way across I should
take considerable time and cause a heavy expenditure in moving my stores.
I took Mr. Carew’s advice and moved on to Cuvu, camped for two days
outside the town, and then took up our quarters at Na Rewa, a plantation
leased to the Fijian Government about two and a half years since for five
years. I commenced at once to get my men into working order and put
in food ; I am only waiting now for the rain, when I shall be able to plant
sufficient to keep the whole of the police of this district. The place is
situated about one mile and a half on the Ba side of Cuvu, cut off from Cuvu
by a large creek, and is a fail- distance from any town. The expenses of
rations, etc., are very slight in comparison with Levuka, and in the course
of another three months, provided this place is kept on, I could maintain a
force at a little more than their pay and clothing.
I have nearly finished a large fish-fence, which will bring down the
expenses considerably. I have built one house, and as soon as I hear from
Levuka I will make what arrangements you may think fit.
My men are behaving very well indeed and working very hard ; in fact
this is the first time since I have been in Fiji that I have had a chance of
handling my men, and certainly they have gone beyond my expectations.
I have commenced starting weekly messengers round this island, they
will call in at every town and at every planter and settler ; at the same time
I start men in the opposite direction so that people can correspond. My first
three have not turned up yet, so I cannot give you any definite account of
their work.


This district seems quiet at present; the people come from very great
distances to sell their produce, and I cannot help thinking that if I were
ordered up the Sigatoka to-morrow, the money for buying the food for my
men would be the only expense to the Government. I think, if practicable,
that it will be well to keep a small force at this place for a dep6t or a prison ;
for both purposes it is admirably adapted. Brown has turned out capitally,
and I think he had better remain, he understands well the working of
prisoners (I give him all my defaulters), he will soon be able to keep accounts.
I have put myself in communication with the planters in the neighbour-
hood, and have endeavoured to show them that my ideas are not altogether
Fijian. The reaction has set in, for at a meeting a short time since some
one was kind enough to endeavour to sow the seed of discord ; but he was at
once sat upon, and apologised to the company. Tubuna has not turned up
yet; I hear he is at Rewa, so if Knollys has not sent for him I will. I was
much surprised to hear of the party Tui Kubulau brought over. I will
endeavour to teach Mr. Drury a lesson for the extra zeal he has displayed
in this matter. I need my boat very much just now ; I have bought a punt,
but it is nqt fit to go to sea in. I have commenced to distribute my party.
As soon as the other Bua men turn up I intend for the first six months
to let them work with the Stipendiary magistrates, at the expiration to have
them relieved by Macuata men. As soon as this system works there will be a
constant flow of news. The men will not remain at any one place sufficiently
long to go astray, and the men themselves will feel the benefit, as each man
will have so many months service every year and be relieved regularly. It
would make no difference where the depot were placed ; I should recommend
that this force, when complete, build the gaols at such places as require them.
I have some men ( Lau) under training, and could within six weeks or two
months have a prison erected at any part of Viti Levu, and place every-
thing in proper working order. The principal part of my store accounts are
now done by a Fijian, and the whole of the issuing.
From Captain Olive
Na Rewa, December 14, 1875. —My dear Sir—Very many thanks for your
kind note. I sent Brown to Levuka on Saturday, as I was anxious to hear
from Headquarters. lam annoyed with some sores, but they do not prevent
me from getting about. My men are busy at drill, school, and planting, are
behaving well and giving me no trouble. I have come across a very promising
young man possessed of a fair amount of brains, has a gentlemanly bearing,
and is not mixed up with the ot 7 roXXot. I have taken him on as a constable,
but trust you will allow me to bear him on the voucher as “ Paymaster.” He
is content with the salary of constable, together with what I give him for
early and late hours. His name is M‘Gonigal. He has a fair knowledge of
Fijian, is a good book-keeper, and can work all hours without thinking he is
over-worked. He is a nephew of the much maligned Mr. M'Caig (the only
decent man in the neighbourhood). I hope you have enjoyed your trip, I was
quite surprised to hear of you at Suva. lam glad you appreciate Tui Kubulau,
I shall be sorry to have him away from me, but can lay my hand on no other
Chief I have in the force who is so fit as he is to be close to you. I trust he
may be under the orders only of Government House, and not be answerable to


any other, either European or native officer. You will find him thoroughly
posted in all that is going on ; he is about at all hours of the night, and I
must say had it not been for him I should not know one-third of what
I now do of the Vdka Viti.
From Captain Olive
IST a Rewa, December 21, 1875.—My dear Sir—l fear both my last notes
must have missed you. I have had rather a bad foot, but it is better now.
Three of my men have returned from a tour round this island, and report
favourably of the roads, etc. On seeing my men the Chiefs and people set
about the work with extra speed : where the roads were bad they did not fail
to complain. They were received most courteously, and having money with
them they would not accept the magiti, and when necessary produced their
money and moved on without delay. I shall repeat the operation as soon as
I get into the interior ; it keeps the districts on the alert. I trust that lam
not overstepping my tow 1 in this matter. The new man, Mr. M ‘Gonigal,
has turned out very well indeed, he devotes his whole time and energy to the
improvement of my men—many can now read and write. I have planted a
great deal of food, and if this place is kept on as a depbt or gaol there will
be plenty of food for the coming year. I have charge of a few prisoners. I
purpose leaving Brown here in charge with a prison guard, to look after the
prisoners and see to the food. Should you approve of my work, I will put in
fifty acres of cane ; there is a mill on the next plantation, and with that
amount of cane I shall be able to pay the whole of the expense of the police
force in this island, including the pay of officers and men. My men can
plant about three acres a day. I have put in about an acre already, but don’t
like to put in more until I have your consent and advice. I have put in
also about acres of beans, 1 acre of Indian corn, 2 acres of Kumalas, and
about 400 Bananas, Fijian and China. I fear there will be a very great
scarcity of food in this district in consequence of the drought. I hope Lady
Gordon and the children are well. I have got some spears and curios which
I think I will send to Levuka by the Fitzroy. I have one very fine old man’s
staff, which I think will please you much ;it is the best I have ever seen. I
send it by bearer together with my tribute.—With respect, I am your faithful
Henry Olive.
F.S. —The much abused Mr. M'Caig is the best man I have met in Fiji,
and is the only person fit to have charge of the post-office, unless it is at the
depot.
[My journey back to Ovalau in the Nymphe’s boat was slow
and tedious, with much scraping over and sticking on reefs oft'
the south end of Moturiki. We had waited on shore there some
time to let the tide rise, but not sufficiently. Did not reach
Nasova till near midnight. After some days of Councils and
estimates, I returned to Suva.]
1 Task, —appointed duty.


Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Suva, Fiji, December 21 to 24. — 1 find that the mail from
Kandavu is to be sent this time, and I must get my letters ready
for it in a great hurry. But I have written a long letter to
Emily, which you will see, and I shall write you a long one next
time. Here, in this hot hotel, one small noisy sitting-room,
racket all day, and clouds of mosquitoes in the evening biting
one’s feet and hands, writing letters is very difficult. We have
now been here three weeks. Captain Knollys and Mr. Le Hunte
are coming down to spend Christmas with us. lam writing on
Christmas Eve. I wish I knew what you were all doing, and,
above all, how Papa is. The children are both much better for
this change. Though hot, there is no doubt that it is a far more
healthy place than Levuka. We make nearly every day pleasant
excursions up rivers in the boat, taking our luncheon with us.
We land at some shady spot on the banks, and the gentlemen
get a bathe. It’s very hot, — very, sometimes. I have got a large
native hat with a thick puggery, and don’t know what I should
do without my big umbrella with its white cover, which Eka
made me get. I think we shall go back to Nasova next week,
and hope to find everything done, and the native house under
The nursery windows cleared away. Eka has all this time been
away on a mission tour, with the Langhams (head of the
Wesleyan Mission); I don’t envy her, sleeping every night in a
native house, and really roughing it! and I don’t much think
she likes it either. Nevil has got so sunburnt, it makes her
look less delicate. Jack is as fat as ever. He feels the heat
very much, his face is generally streaming with perspiration, but
he looks very well. We have eaten our second sheep, and are
reduced to thin chickens and an occasional thin turkey, but we
have plenty of milk and fruit. I expect you will get the last
batch of letters at the same time as this, you must never be
uneasy if there is a long interval, as the postal arrangements are
not decided on yet. I must stop. I shall think of you all to-
morrow.
[After Christmas I had again to go for a few days to Levuka to pass the
Estimates and Appropriation Ordinance before the end of the year. Knollys
and I went up in the Fitzroy. We had a tedious, rough, and unpleasant voyage,
and a curious companion on board. This last was no other than the absconding
cashier of a bank in Hull, who had fled to Fiji as a safely out-of-the-way place,
but who was caught by the police under Knollys’ directions, and now was
being brought up in the Fitzroy to be imprisoned at Levuka till a police officer
from England could come over to take charge of him. I may here mention
that such an officer did in time come, and took the prisoner to England, where
he was duly convicted and punished. The officer got the reward offered for
2 C


the thief’s apprehension, and was much praised by the Judge on the Bench
and by others for his “courage” in going out to Fiji —by railway across America
and in a mail steamer to Fiji—and “ capturing ” a criminal already in custody,
and handed over to him by the Levuka police. Notwithstanding all my
representations, Knollys got neither reward nor praise. ]
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Saturday , January 1, 1876. —Floyd had an early service at
eight, to which we all went, and all received the Holy Com-
munion. On our way to church we met MacGregor, who told us
that H. Thurston had just been with him saying that his brother
had fever, which, from his account of the symptoms, seemec
to be typhoid. This intelligence much disturbed me. After
church we went on to Waitovu, and after a bathe had breakfast
there. Two men of the guard jumped in from great heights.
The regatta followed, for which the day was perfectly
adapted—bright and breezy, though not too breezy. I did not
go, as I was busy all day, but I looked out occasionally at the
little sails which enlivened the harbour. Floyd called and
talked at some length of his plans and prospects. Mr. Weston,
who assents to my terms. Mr. Ansdale and Mr. Shave who
want land. Mr. who wants a place. Very tired all
day. After others, came MacGregor with a very reassuring
account of Thurston. The native soldiers and MacG. sailed in
Fitzroy just before dark. After dinner, I had Timoci and tho,
Bulis of this province to yaqona , and gave them a charge. My
points of instruction were—(l) To see that sufficient food was
planted; (2) to see that the tax produce was raised; (3) to get
as much more raised as possible for their own profit; (4) to get
children to school; (5) to clean the towns; (6) to make roads;
(7) to protect all from all. Timoci was present and behaved
well. Buli Gau very intelligent.
January 2, Sunday. —Went on board Nymphe at 5.30 a.m.
and sailed for Suva, where we arrived between one and two.
All well. Walked with Le Hunte on the new road. One very
nice view on it. On the edge of a sudden and precipitous fall
of ground in the woods stands a large ivi tree. Its stem and
lower boughs on one side and the leaves of a large foliaged tree
on the other formed a frame through which one saw a charming
picture. The bank, as I have said, falls precipitously, and at
one’s feet a forest-covered plain stretched out to the sea. In
the middle distance were two eminences, one covered with trees,
the other cleared; on the latter a house of reed and palm-leaf
thatch of golden ripe-wheat colour, behind it two wreaths of blue
smoke rising from wood fires —a patch of brown dry scorched


reeds—rich forest—the gray ice-like calm sea within the reef,
and then—separated from it by a narrow line of snowy white—
the deep sapphire blue of the open ocean. The house was just in
the proper place as the eye of the picture. Captain Suttie and
Cosmo Gordon came to dinner, rather to Rachael’s horror; but
it is better to give them even a bad dinner, and put ourselves to
some inconvenience in doing so, than in these regions to seem
in the least inhospitable.
January 3.—Sailed about eight and reached Serua about
three. The view of the mountains of Viti Levu when off the
Navua river was very beautiful.
At Serua found the Fitzroy, Carew, and M‘Gregor. Landed
at a new jetty decorated with arches of palm branches and turned
into a bower like that at Rewa. Went to Ra Deuba, or Na
Gagabokola’s house—a very handsome new one. There we
had yaqona, etc. talk, and then came out to a school meke in
the rara. About fifty of the children could read. After the
school meke came a spear dance, but it was rather spiritless—only
one good dress —a man with a sort of liku from shoulder to
foot of white glossy fibre. Glorious sunset.
January 4. —Maudslay and I bathed at the edge of the
reef. Such lovely little ultramarine blue fishes, and others
nearly as bright, playing about, and such exquisite coral flowers.
Under weigh between seven and eight, and reached the reef
off Navola about ten. Went ashore in ship’s boat proceeded
by Carew to show us the pass through the reef. Landed under
a salute. Went to house built by “ Banana Bird.” Crowds on
beach to receive me, headed by Luki, with his Roko’s staff. The
house, a nicely built though small one, but without enough
doors and windows. Cut some at once. Tui Kubulau on
sentry, beautifully dressed. Had yaqona. Got in a wild Chief
from Beimana, a rather handsome youth of sixteen or seven-
teen, stark naked, having never yet gone through the vaka
malotaka ceremony. Plenty of “ devils ” about, with big heads
of hair, blackened faces, and no clothes but the malo. Presents
of food kept arriving, which were distributed among the people.
Saw a “ Kai Colo ” kill a pig with his club. It was a rather
curious performance from the way in which he stalked the beast.
The meeting was held in the afternoon. On the whole satis-
factory. Ratu Tevita spoke much and well. Attempt to get a
bathe with Maudslay—but the shore reef extends so far out and
is so shallow that it was rather a failure. Close by our bathing-
place was a wood of cocoanuts, reserved by its owners.
Usually this is indicated by knots tied in leaves girdling the


tree, but in this case the symbol was unusual, the tabu consist-
ing of a club, an ula. On our return found melees begun. Had
devil meke by torchlight—very striking. Dinner. After it
reception of principal Chiefs. Yaqona and talk—much talk.
Speech at Navola.
To you assembled—l am going to make a speech to you. Now, all of you
have heard of the great meeting that was held at Navuso last year. You all
know how all the Chiefs of the interior came down from the heads of the
Waidina, the Wai ni buka, the Wai ni mala, and from Namosi, Naqarawai,
from Noe Roso, and from the banks of the Sigatoka River, and from all the
interior of Navitilevu, and gave in their allegiance to the Queen of Great
Britain. Well, after a time the Queen sent me, a Chief of Great Britain, out
here to govern Fiji, to put an end to discord, murder, and cannibalism, and
to rule all alike, and to prevent oppression. Well, I arrived, and all the
great Chiefs of the various islands and coasts of Fiji held meetings at Levuka
and at Bau. At the former place I was installed, and read my Commission
from the Queen, At the latter, the Chiefs all assembled, and prepared the
yaqona. The yaqona was made, and the Yum Yalu at Bau, in the
presence of all, handed the cup to me, and I drank. All Fiji gave there its
solemn pledge of obedience. Now, heretofore it would have been impossible
for any one person to have ruled all Fiji, and it would even now be difficult
to do so, but for one circumstance, and that is the perfect unanimity of all
the great Chiefs, such as the Yuni Yulu at Bau, Maafu, Tui Cakau, Tui Bua,
the Chief of Macuata, the chiefs of Rewa, Nadroga, Kadavu, and in fact of
all the Chiefs, in regard to this matter.
They believed that if a Chief of Great Britain were sent to govern Fiji,
there would be an end to their perpetual jealousies, so that now, if any one
Chief or tribe or section of the country were to become unruly, all the others
would assist the Governor in suppressing any disturbance. So you see that
peace is secured to Fiji by the fact that all are equally interested in and com-
pelled to put down any disturbance that may hereafter arise. Well, all this
could not be if Fiji were ruled by a native Chief, and the country is now
strong to suppress evil because all are of one mind in the matter. Now, all
those tribes in the region of, and on the other side of the great mountains
which separate the waters that flow out at Sigatoka mouth from the waters
that flow into the sea at Rewa are now enjoying the benefits of peace, and
are living in plenty and comfort, and without fear of attack from without.
And now I ask, why is this ? I will tell you. Because those Chiefs are
men of truth, they are men of character. At the meeting at Navuso, when
asked a second time if they were sure they meant what they said when they
declared their allegiance to the Queen, they replied ; “We are Chiefs ; we are
men of truth y we never alter what we have once said to deceive others, as
some of the coast Chiefs do. We have given our allegiance this day to the
Queen, and we intend to abide by it. We think it will be well for us, but,
even if it should turn out to be for our harm, we abide by it all the same,”
And they have kept their word, and are continuing to act as Chiefs should
act; and I tell you they are much respected at this present time for their
upright behaviour.


Now, you must know that those tribes I have been talking about are very
populous; they inhabit a country thick with trees, with steep hills and
precipices and waterfalls, a really difficult country and of large extent. I
see present the Chief of Nabuto, who also attended that meeting, and has a
good knowledge of the men and the districts I have now spoken about; he
can confirm all I have said of them to you.
The district from which you present have come is of altogether a different
nature, consisting of low hills, open and grassy, that can be ridden over by a
man on horseback, and of comparatively small extent.
Now, some of you belonging to this small part of the interior, and which
is of such easy access, have been acting in an unruly manner lately ; and,
while all the rest of Fiji is at peace, some of you alone are causing disturbance
by bad conduct.
Now I ask you to cease doing evil; remember your women and children,
and live at peace. Travel to the salt water whenever you wish to do so ;we
like you to visit us on the coast. Plant plenty of food, instead of going
about making disturbance. Let us all live at peace, so that guns will be of
no further use, and let the defensive works of your villages be thrown down
and the trenches filled up.
I tell you let there be an end of all this trouble ; of what utility is all
this evil doing ?
Of one matter you may rest assured for ever—the Governor will never
oppress you, neither will he allow the Chiefs on the coast to make requisitions
of you or to interfere with you.
You have constantly said that you feared and detested the coast Chiefs
on account of their overbearing manner to you heretofore. Now I tell you
that is at an end ; and with reference to religion, you are perfectly free to
accept Christianity or not, at your free will and pleasure, but you may not
adopt or continue practices calculated to bring trouble on the people, or to
cause war or ill-feeling between tribes. No person can become a Christian
except through the sincere conviction of his own mind. I think religion is a
great benefit to all, but I shall never insist on your becoming Christians
unless you wish it; neither shall I allow any one to molest you on account
of your refusing to do so. But it is different with regard to the laws I make
for you. I make them for your good, and they must be obeyed by all.
There is one matter of the very greatest importance, you must recognise
and obey the rule of Great Britain,
And now there are five other things of great importance that are strictly
forbidden to you, that is :
1. You must not commit murder.
2. You must not drag off women nor compel them to take men they
dislike as husbands, for this leads to adultery, and that to murder, and wars
between tribes.
3. You must not steal, neither may you annoy the settlers on the coast.
It is a very good thing for you to go to the coast, and you shall not be pre-
vented, but you must not molest the settlers.
4. You must not allow the carrying about of false reports calculated to
cause trouble.
5. You must give up wrong-doers to justice, no matter who they are, nor
what crime they are charged with. It is intended to establish a camp in the


interior in your midst, and to appoint a person to live there with a body of
police, and he will act as the Governor’s substitute, and orders will be given
him from time to time what to do. You must follow his counsels, obey him,
and he will assist you, and generally take the lead in ruling the interior.
The Governor himself has much to do, as there are many islands in Fiji,
and no person could possibly do all the work himself.
As for the police, they will not be allowed to act oppressively, and all
food taken to them will be honestly and well paid for at the time. By reason
of this, and on other accounts, the people of that district where the camp
shall be established, will become more wealthy and have more influence than
that of any other part of Yitilevu.
Now also the laws for the ruling of the people of the interior will be made
more simple and easy of comprehension than those for the ruling of the people
living on the coast under the Rokos, as at Rewa, Nadroga, Nadi, and Ba.
You will be ruled under a different system to these, but this is not to interfere
with matters of trade or barter amongst you, nor to affairs of neighbourly or
friendly good-feeling.
Also this is provided you—you will not, at least for some time, be asked
to assist by contributing to the support of the Government of the country ; it
may be for a year, or for two or three years, or for five years. When you
become sufficiently enlightened to be able to understand the principles under
which the country will be ruled, you will then have to do the same as those
on the coast have to do.
Understand this: it is not pretended that Great Britain has conquered
you, as though you had been taken in war, to be enslaved or carried off to
other places.
You are not a conquered people, but Great Britain has joined you to her
in order that peace might be established in the country, and for the welfare
of all alike. Now remember what you have been told on this point.
And now, as it is not good to give too many orders, little remains to say
but this.
Remember the welfare of your wives, your children, and your old people,
and plant abundance of food, and live at peace ; and any person committing
crime shall certainly be punished for it. He may hide for a year or for
several years, but he will certainly be caught at some time and receive punish-
ment. Of this rest certain.
Now, some of you Chiefs will come to my house to-night and converse
with me on many matters, and when you return to your homes, you can tell
those who have shown distrust by not coming here, that I do not feel pleased at
their conduct, which is unbecoming in men holding the rank of Chiefs of Fiji.
This is all the Governor has to say at present.
January 6. —People dispersed. I went back to Serua in
Carew’s boat —a long hot pull. But I liked seeing the coast
and canoes we passed. Eejoined Nymphe at Serua.
January 7. —Went up inner harbour before breakfast.
Then over to Beqa in the Nymphe. Beqa very pretty indeed —
a little land-locked harbour, long and narrow.
Arthur and I went in a boat up the harbour and then re


turning, landed, and walked along the coast. Very fine groves
of “ ivi ” and the finest “ dilos ” I have ever seen. A large
village with good church, semi-Tongan in style. Also a jetty
of stone. Children collected in the church. Over forty could
read. They were on the whole the best-looking lot I have seen
in Fiji.
January 8. —Ashore early with Maudslay. We bathed,
walked to nearest village, and fell in with “ Cannibal Jack,” who
told me his real name was Diaper, and gave me some of his
MSS. Sailed for Suva at nine.
Reached Suva at two. Pleasant afternoon.
January 9, Sunday. —Bathed. Went to native church in
native town, early. Had church ourselves afterwards at Suva,
Le Hunte and Arthur officiating. Walked in the afternoon
with Maudslay on the Tanavua —Navuso road. Very unsatis-
factory, and got thoroughly wet through.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Suva, Fiji, December 29, 1875, to January 10, 1876. —I don’t
feel certain of your having got my letter of the 24th December,
which I sent by Kandavu, for there seemed to be some
doubt whether the steamer would go on to San Francisco
from there after all; the Fitzroy , which took our letters to
Kandavu reported some real (or pretended) breakdown in her
engines, and that she might be obliged to return to Sydney; if
so, I don’t know what will become of our mails. The mails are
in the most unsatisfactory state just now, and can’t be depended
on at all! We have now been here a month, and we are still to
stay on another week. lam getting rather tired of this “ hugger-
mugger ” uncomfortable way we are obliged to live in, with only
one small sitting-room. The Governor, Captain Knollys, and
Mr, Le Hunte who came down for Christmas, all left on Monday.
lam again left alone with Mr. Maudslay. Fortunately, he and
I get on exceedingly well together, and he doesn’t at all mind
the discomforts, nor having the children nearly always with us,
as they have no room. He is very fond of them both, and they
of him, though Jack did say in a tone of triumph when Captain
Knollys arrived, “ Mr. Maudslay is no longer the mistress now ! ”
We constantly make long expeditions in the boat together, and
usually ask Miss Joske to go with us. I will tell you about our
picnic to-day. We started at 9.30, Mr. M., Miss Joske and I,
and took a Soloman Islander with us in the bows as pilot, as the
navigation of this harbour, from its numerous shallows and


rocks, is very difficult. We rowed to a place called Lasilasi,
on the other side of the bay, which took about two hours. As
the tide was out, we couldn’t get near the shore when we wanted
to land, and we all had to be carried. Two of the boatmen,
Settivini and Bartholomew, made a sedan chair of their arms for
me. I felt rather nervous, for it was such a long way. I think
they found me rather heavy ! They were in fits of laughter the
whole way, and I thought every minute they would let me drop.
We had all our things, luncheon, books, waterproofs, carried out,
and found a delightful place under a big tree, where we deposited
them, and then set out for a walk, followed by three of the
boat’s crew, to carry us over streams, etc. It was a most delight-
fully cool fresh day, with a fine sea breeze, and we walked on
for about a mile till we came to the native town, the nicest and
cleanest I have seen yet. There were little avenues of bananas
and palm-trees in every direction, all neatly swept, and such tidy
houses. We very soon met with a native teacher dressed in a
flannel shirt and a long white sulu, who had heard of our
arrival, and came and shook hands with us, and took us
into his house. It was a very nice clean reed-thatched house,
as usual with no windows but an open door on each side •
the floor was covered thickly with fern leaves, and over that
several layers of mats, so that the whole floor was like
a soft cushion, and beautifully clean. We all sat down on
one side, and our boatmen and about fifteen other Fijians
dropped in and sat down on the opposite side, and looked at us.
Soon they brought in a basket of young cocoanuts, and broke
some open, and we drank the water, which was most refreshing.
Then came in a present of a big bunch of bananas, more cocoa-
nuts, a wooden howl of steaming Taro, (a root rather like yams,)
which I particularly dislike, but was obliged to taste; more
bananas, and at last a big yaqona root was brought in, followed
by a large yaqona howl and a strainer, and four or five of the
men began to chew the yaqona root, after having carefully
cleaned it and cut it up into small bits. A large brown Fiji
crockery pot full of water was then brought in, and as soon as
the yaqona was chewed, Settivini began to strain it in a very
solemn way, and all the rest chanted and clapped their hands.
When it was quite clear, some was poured into a small bowl and
handed to me. I drank a little, with the usual sort of cheer and
clapping, which they always give the Governor, or chief person
present, and then it went round to the others. After that, a
fine root of yaqona was brought in and presented to me. We
then got up and shook hands, and returned to our tree, followed
by our men, and three Fijians carrying our presents. We


walked along by the sea-coast, and I saw such quantities of
shells. I wished I had brought the children. Soon after we
got back, we were joined by the native Teacher, the Chief of
the village, and several other important persons, who all came
and sat near us, and we shared our luncheon with them; they
were particularly pleased with some cold tea which we mixed in
tumblers and gave them, and I observed that they carefully
collected the empty bottles and scraps of paper and took them
away ! They brought with them another root of yaqona, and
a tanoa (yaqona bowl), and we had to go through the ceremony
of another brew, and to drink some more! After that, we took
a stroll along the sea-side till the tide suited us to return home.
It was delightful—quite the pleasantest of the many we have
had, as it was not too hot —generally one gets roasted in the
boat. While we were sitting on the beach, about nine very
young girls (with the merest pretence of a sulu and nothing else
on) came walking along in single file, and they stopped and put
down their bundles of leaves and squatted down all round us.
Miss Joske, who can speak Fijian, told them who I was, and
they seemed exceedingly amused and delighted with my rings,
watch, etc., which I showed them, and jabbered away in Fijian.
We had nearly as far to be carried back to our boats. I have to
hold on round the brown oily necks of the men! But lam
getting quite used to it now. The boat’s crew are fine fellows,
but such children. The moment we land anywhere, oft' they go,
shouting, laughing, playing all sorts of pranks and games, pelting
each other with fruits or nuts. Sometimes they jump into the
water and dive and swim and splash, and make little boats of
banana leaves ; it is quite amusing to watch them. If I have
the children with me, they carry them about and make toys for
them, and seem to delight in playing with them. I don’t often
take the children, as lam afraid of the sun; it is so difficult to
hold an umbrella over them. We are going to have an awning
made for the boat. The heat has been intense here the last fort-
night, but I hear it is worse at Nasova. There is no doubt the
children are much better here. The Miss Joskes are surprised
at the change in Nevil. They thought her such a puny delicate-
looking child when she came. She has got fatter and quite
brown with the sun. They are out of doors nearly all day,
which they can’t well be at Nasova.
This is New Year’s eve. I hope Arthur may come back
either to-day or to-morrow, for two or three days. The Nymphe
is to come here on Tuesday to take him and all the staff for his
official visits in Yiti Levu. There is to be a great meeting of
mountain Chiefs on sth January. He thinks he shall leave Mr.


Le Hunte with us. He will be away a fortnight or three weeks.
Mr. Le Hunte has now got a place; he is acting Magistrate at
Loma Loma (about two days from Ovalau), but he is just now
at Nasova for his Christmas holidays.
January 4.—Arthur did not come back till Sunday—much to
my disappointment, as I counted on our being together on New
Year’s day. But he had no way of getting here. On Sunday
morning he arrived in H.M.S. Nymphe , with Captain Knollys,
A. J. G., and Mr. Le Hunte. We were rather dismayed at such a
large party, as we had eaten up nearly all our stores; and I
found he had asked Captain Grant Suttie (of the Nymphe) and
Lieutenant Cosmo Gordon to dinner. Eight in this wee little
room, and we only have six spoons and forks, and four wine
glasses ! Fortunately, we had had a turkey killed, and with
potted salmon, potted soup, our last bottle of tart fruit, and
plenty of milk and eggs, Nurse and Mr. Maudslay improvised a
very decent dinner, and we sent up to the Joske’s and borrowed
glass and plate and a branch candlestick, to add to our feeble
little lamp. Of course the candle blew out several times during
dinner, and the room was very hot, and the waiting indifferent.
After dinner, A. J. G. and Captain Knollys returned to the ship to
sleep, which is rather a relief. It is decided that we must stay
here another week, for there is no way of getting back sooner. I
know it is the very best thing for the children, but we are getting
hard up for clothes as well as food, and altogether it is rather messy
here, and Nurse is almost over-worked—having to attend to me
and the children, and the house-keeping, and weighing out the
rations for the crew and other Fijian servants, which is a long busi-
ness, every day, (they have sweet potatoes and biscuits,) besides
making all the beds, and seeing the rooms done by Tambouna, a
Fiji man. She finds them very difficult to manage, as they never
think of coming when they are called, or doing anything they are
told, unless they like ! As for Soani, (the footman we have with
us,) his one object is play. He will go out flying a little kite all
day, or playing his nose-flute, or amusing himself in some childish
way, and only just appears for his waiting at dinner, which I
must say he does uncommonly well, and he is so graceful and
good-looking that one can’t help liking him. We have got a
few potted soups and other stores from the Nymphe , so now I
hope we shall do. Yesterday, we had another picnic. In
addition to our own party, we were joined by Captain Grant
Suttie and four officers of the Nymphe , and I asked Miss Victoria
Joske, who is a very nice good sort of girl. We had three boats,
and pulled up the Tanavua river for about three or four miles —


as far as the big boats could go at high water. Miss Joske
and I then got into a skiff of the Captain’s, which draws hardly
any water (leaving the two other boats),and the gentlemen came on
in the native canoes, and in this way we got up three or four miles
higher, till we could get no further, and we came to a nice place
on the bank where Miss Joske and I landed with the luncheon;
while the Governor, Mr. Maudslay, and Mr. Le Hunte went up
the river nearly to its source, partly in the canoe, but, mostly,
wading or swimming. They did not get back to our luncheon
place till half-past four o’clock. The rest fished, and came back
to lunch with us. They brought a large supply of good things
from the Nymphe, as well as what we had. When we had
finished, we sent the little skiff back to the boats, with the
luncheon boxes, and told the coxswain to come back for us
ladies, but we waited hour after hour, and they never came, and
at last we discovered that the water was so low (the tide having
gone down), that it was impossible to get the skiff back ; in many
places the bed was nearly dry. As we should have had to wait
till eight o’clock for high tide we were in a great fix. At last
they decided that we ladies should go in one of the canoes, and
be dragged over the dry places, so in this way we started, sitting
back to back in the tiny canoe, which is a log hollowed out, not
above four inches wide, with a narrow little platform on the top,
and an outrigger on one side to prevent its upsetting. There
was just room for our feet in the canoe, which was full of water,
and it was pouring with rain the whole way. It was the most
absurd scene —for the least touch will upset these canoes, and the
Governor and Captain Knollys and Arthur J. L. and two Fijians
were wading and swimming through the river, holding on to the
canoe to keep it steady, dragging it over the shallows, or
swimming through the deep pools for three or four miles ! At
last we came to the boats, and when we got near, the skiff came
to meet us and towed us the rest of the way, the Governor and
Arthur J. L. still swimming beside us to steady the canoe, which
was a particularly unsafe one. The smart man-of-war’s men were
all in fits of laughter when they saw the odd procession, and
recognised the Governor in his flannel shirt and white trousers,
up to his neck in the water! They rather liked the fun and the
swim in the cool water; fortunately, Arthur had a dry suit of
clothes in his boat, and he changed, and we all had some tea,
which the sailors had made over a big fire, before starting to row
back to Suva, where we got at half-past seven. The Governor
went on with Captain Knollys to visit a native village on the
top of a hill, and did not get back till nine o’clock. He had to
go through the yaqona ceremony, and presents, and came back


in a big native canoe. 1 While we were going up the river, our
boat’s crew adorned themselves with wreaths of flowers on their
heads, or a big double red hybiscus stuck in each side of their
bushy hair, and some had painted their faces, or rather blackened
1 From Sir A. Gordon's Journal. —We had a delightful expedition to-day-
up the Tanavua River—Rachael, Miss Joske, staff, and some of the Nymphes.
The river is very picturesque. One passes up it a short distance through
mangroves, and then, taking a turn at right angles, one goes on through fine
wood, which generally shuts out the sight of anything but itself. At one
turn, however, a high cliff towers above the trees and shows one the little
town of Tanavua perched in a most inaccessible and romantic situation. The
river, which at first is of a good breadth, rapidly narrows and shallows, and
flows, a narrow dark stream, under the shade of big trees, the boughs of which
often almost meet overhead, and at last quite do so. The turns, the changes
of character—now very shallow, now opening out into delicious deep bathing
pools, and the variety of vegetation, were charming. The forest was full of
gaudy red and green parrots, chattering and hopping about. Leaving the
ladies in a pleasant nook, I and some of the other men pushed on nearly to
the source of the stream, now in a takia, 1 now scrambling through the bush,
now splashing and wading up the shallow bed of the stream, now swimming
across the deeper pools. When, very hungry and late we got back to the
ladies, we found them in rather a predicament. We had left the ship’s boats
below the first sandbank and brought the ladies up in the Captain’s skiff,
which had been sent back again to the other boats for the men’s dinner, with
orders to return. But the tide fell so much that they could not get back !
So after much talk we put Rachael and Miss Joske into the little taJcia, back
to back, and as these are the crankiest of all craft, and the top weight con-
siderable, Knollys, Arthur, and I walked or rather waded on each side of it,
holding it steady, and swimming through the deep pools, which became more
and more frequent as we came down the river, till for some miles it was
nearly all swimming with one hand and holding the canoe steady with the
other. As long as one was in the water it was good fun, but when at last we
rejoined the others one found wet flabby chilly ducks rather a bore. Luckily I
had brought a change, foreseeing one would get wet through. The others had
not been so provident, but we all had towels with a view to bathing, so they
stripped and rubbed themselves down by a great fire the sailors had made,
and dried themselves and garments as best they could. Here we parted
company, the rest going home to Suva, while Knollys and I climbed up to
the town of Tanavua. Seldom, very seldom, have I seen anything so wild
and picturesque. The upper part of the isolated pinnacle of rock on which
it stands is as nearly perpendicular as may be, and has to be ascended by the
help of hand and foot holes, and here, on all manner of levels over the upper
part of the rock, is the little town itself, looking right down on the river. We
went to the Chief’s house, had yaqona, and greatly admired the effects of
sunset light. Then we went down, not to the river, but about half-way,
whence a path inland led to the main high ground, which, high though its
cliffs are, is for the most part invisible from the river. Thence we walked
down to the bank and went home in the Chief’s canoe. We did not arrive
till long after dark. A most enjoyable day.
1 Small dug-out canoe.


them in great spots or stripes. I see them all outside at this
moment flying a little kite ! The Governor, A. J. G., Captain
Knollys, and Mr. Maudslay all departed this morning in the
Nymphe, leaving Mr. Le Hunte in charge of us. I like Suva
more and more, and, if it becomes the new seat of Government,
it will be a delightful place to live in. The view of the moun-
tains opposite is most lovely, and always changing, and it is such
a beautiful large bay. The position of this hotel is, unfortunately,
as bad as could be; it is very low, intensely hot, and quite
close to a large mangrove swamp; but the house where the
Joske’s live, which is on rising ground, a very little way off,
is delightful, cool, and fresh, and I should think particularly
healthy. We spend the greater part of our time up there, sitting
in their cool verandah. I think, as soon as ever it is decided,
that Arthur will run up a temporary house in a good situation
here, and we shall come to live here a good deal, while the new
Government House is building; but even that must take time —
months—more than a year probably. I think I shall finish up
this letter and perhaps write another nearer the time, as there
are still three months to write. Only think of my disgust at
finding that the Cyphrenis, which was to take the mails to San
Francisco when she arrived at Kandavu, found she could not go
on, and actually came to Levuka with her mails, and finally
returned to Sydney, so that it may be five months before you
get our letters of the 24th December ! I hope you will not
forget to mention when you get them (all the letters), and the
dates. I keep a list myself of every letter I get, and write, and
the dates of receiving and sending, and find it most useful.
January 8. —We have had three days of intense heat. I
don’t think I have ever —anywhere —felt so hot. The children
felt it a good deal. I found threading beads a great resource in
the way of keeping them quiet. I got some beads in the store
here, and Nevil made an elaborate red and white necklace for
Soani, who waited in it to-night and was much gratified ! He had
his boar’s tooth (which he always wears as part of his livery)
hanging from it. This is Saturday the Bth. The Governor and
suite went down the coast in the Nymphe on Tuesday. The
heat was so intense that Mr. Le Hunte and I could only make
one expedition while he was away. We took the children with
us, and went up one of the rivers, and I sat on the bank with
them, while Mr. Le Hunte and Victoria Joske walked up to a
native town, —much too steep a climb for me. When they came
back they were followed by the Chief of the village and a party
of natives, who came to see me, bringing the yaqona root and


bowl, and sat round me while they made their brew. Jack
being the chief person present, the bowl of yaqona was handed
first to him, but he would not take it. Afterwards, they made
him a present of a root! When I got home, I overheard Nevil
saying to Nurse, “ Do you know ‘ Andi ’ is the Fijian for ‘ Lady ’ ?
I ought to be called ‘Audi Nevil,’ because I am a Chief’s
daughter! ” She knows a great many Fijian words, and
aggravates Jack by answering him in Fijian. I heard him ask
her to do something for him, and she said, “ Malua, Jack, mbeka ”
(By and bye, perhaps), which made him very angry. When she
thinks no one sees, she can sing a very good Fijian meke
with the proper gesticulations. But I can’t get her to do it
before any one. After this came the great heat, and we could
do nothing but have a little row late in the evening, and the
mosquitoes so bad at night that there was nothing for it but
to go to bed at nine o’clock ! On Saturday morning, the Nymjphe
came in again. We had no notice, and of course the larder was
quite empty this time, and Arthur had again asked the Captain
to dinner—again a party of eight, for all the staff came back
with him! However, Nurse managed wonderfully, and produced
a very respectable dinner. Excellent tinned soup, potted salmon,
two chickens (killed just before dinner), stewed mutton, (tinned,)
sweet potatoes. Stewed pineapple and pancakes. Oh ! I forgot
the tinned sausages, which surrounded the chicken! And, after
all, Captain Suttie and Cosmo Gordon never turned up, for it
poured with rain. Arthur’s meeting of Chiefs had gone off very
well. Some of the Mountain Chiefs—savages —came down to
it. They had the big heads, which I have not yet seen. This
is Sunday. Arthur is gone to the Fijian Church in the native
village about a mile off. When he comes back we shall have
service in the little church here, Arthur and two or three of
them taking a part. We are really too large a party for this
hot little hotel. We are all to go back to Nasova in the Nymjphe
to-morrow, so I shall finish up for the present.
Nasova, Fiji, January 19, 1876. — 1 tis more than a month
since I got any home letters, and my latest dates are October 15,
such a long time ago. I wrote last on the 24th December to
Mad., from Suva, but I feel rather doubtful if you will receive that
letter before this ! We stayed five weeks at Suva, and I think the
change did us all good, especially Nevil, who looks much better and
stronger. I have written Jane a long account of our visit there, and
told her to send it to you, so I will not repeat it. We came back
here on Monday, January 10, in H. M.S. Nymphe , leaving at half-past
eight o’clock. Captain Grant Suttie was most kind, and made us


very comfortable in his cabin, where he gave us an excellent
luncheon, and he brought all the staff and boat and crew, and all
the servants except three. It took about eight hours. When we
got near Ovalau, it came on to blow, and the children were very
sick; it rained in such torrents that Captain Suttie could hardly
see his way through the reef, and we had a narrow escape of spend-
ing the night at sea, and it was fortunate we got in. I never was
out in such rain—in rowing here from the Nymphe’s anchorage,
about a mile, it rained so that we were drenched to the skin in
spite of waterproofs, and sat up to our knees in water. We
found the whole place in nice order, and wonderfully improved
by all the digging out. The two native houses close to the new
drawing-room (each of which contained twenty to forty men)
have been removed, and the Fijian soldiers are put under canvas
at some little distance off. This is the greatest improvement.
The new nursery is quite finished, and is very nice and comfort-
able, and much more airy than I had ever expected it to be, and
the large new drawing-room was quite ready. I had the furni-
ture, which had all arrived, put into it, and at last I had some
hope of getting settled. But, alas! that very night it came on
to blow more and more, and became almost a hurricane, and the
thatched roof of the new building began to give way in every
direction, and a very little more would have blown it right away!
Of course, the rain got in, and the place was nearly flooded.
Arthur, all the staff, and Abbey, were up nearly all night in the
drenching rain, trying to fasten down the roofs, barricading
everything, getting the boats in, doing all they could to stop
damage being done; but the next day, though the wind went
down, the whole place looked in a sad mess, and now I must
wait till the roof is repaired before I can get regularly into the
drawing-room, which is very disappointing! It is more than a
year since I began to pack up, and I long to be able to get
settled, I have put a few tables and chairs into the room and can
manage to sit there, but most of the things are piled up in the
middle of the room and covered with mats, for fear of rain. Two
days after we returned, Miss G. C., who had been for a tour up
the Rewa River (in Yiti Levu) with the Missionary, Mr. Langham,
and his wife, also returned. She had been away for five weeks,
travelling in the Missionary boat, and sleeping every night in
some Fijian house, and had seen a great deal, both of native life,
and country, and made a good many sketches, some of which are
really very good. She arrived in the greatest state of excite-
ment, in Mr. Langham’s boat, followed by a canoe which she had
chartered for herself, containing an immense number of curios,
which she had picked up as she went along, for almost nothing —


Some very nice things, clubs, spears, bowls, I think fourteen
large necklaces of whales’ teeth, and innumerable small things.
She has ever since been occupied in decorating her room with
them. She had enjoyed herself immensely, but I must say I
should not much like that rough sort of travelling in the great
heat we are having now! I think we are settled down here for
some time now, and shall probably lead a very quiet kind of life.
I hope next week to get the drawing-room finished, and then I
really must take some steps about seeing people (ladies), which
hitherto has been an impossibility, with only the dining-room.
We have had an American man-of-war, the Tuscarora, here for
a few days, and some of the officers, who were a very gentleman-
like set, came to dinner. We asked some of the Nymjphe officers
to meet them, and contrived to turn out a very good dinner.
We are gradually improving in all household matters, but the
servants are still most aggravating, though at times they do
very well. Eka and I disappear to our rooms when we leave
the dining-room, as there is nowhere else to go! The children
are both very well, but Jack feels thn heat a good deal, and is
always streaming with it; however, it doesn’t seem to hurt him.
Arthur takes him out to bathe with him every morning, and he
and A. J. G, slip him into the sea from the end of the pier. He
is then wrapped in a bath-towel and carried back by Soani, one
of the Fijian servants. lam going to get Nevil a little bathing-
dress and she is to be taught to swim. We are going to send
home a great many of our curiosities to the British Museum,
and I have been making a few pencil sketches of the oil bowls
before packing them. I have done about thirty, and there are
not two alike—and this is not half our collection; and Mr.
Maudslay has also some beautiful bowls which he is sending
away. I don’t think I have ever seen two exactly alike. Arthur
is also going to send off a large case of pottery; there are some
very beautiful shapes among them. I shall try and make up a
small box to send you by the same opportunity (a ship going
direct), but I don’t feel sure that I can manage it. The children
are very happy in their new nursery, with its broad verandah,
where they play all day and tear about in spite of the heat.
Nevil is very much grown, I think, and a good deal altered, but
I think she is quite as pretty as she was, even without her hair.
She is a very good child, and begins to get quite useful in
running messages, and doing all sorts of little things for me.
She is much less of a baby than she was. The thermometer is
about 87 in my room now, which, when there is no breeze, is
very hot indeed. However, we are getting gradually through
the hot season, and the five weeks in Suva was a great help.


All the gentlemen come to dinner in white shirts, black
trousers, and bright coloured sashes. They look so nice. I
have given Arthur J. L. and Mr. Maudslay those little
Lama shawls I had, red and blue, for their sashes. Mr Le
Hunte is staying here now (on leave from Loma Loma), so we
are a family party of seven. Mr. Maudslay is gazetted as
private secretary, and does his share of the work. He is very
nice. The children get very much petted by them all. Nevil
informed me a month ago that she had become Mrs. Le Hunte,
but she has changed her mind since, and is now Mrs. Maudslay !
I have not half enough thin washing dresses, but I have sent to
Sydney for four white picques, and shall manage to get on with
them. I can get very nice prints here, but there is no one to
make them. It is almost too much to expect of Nurse, but she is
trying her hand on one now. Jack is being fitted out by the
quartermaster of the Nymphe. lam going to put him into white
“ jumpers,” rather tight shirts, which are worn over the trousers,
and have open sleeves. I think they will be cooler. All the
blue jackets wear them here. He requires three suits a day in
this weather. He has never recovered his beautiful complexion !
Nevil has just had a brown holland habit made. She goes out
riding with Abbey every morning.
2 D


CHAPTER VII
DOMESTIC LIFE AT NASOYA, JANUARY TO APRIL 1876
LADY CORDON TO MISS MARY SHAW-LEFEVRE
Fiji, January 25, 1876.— 1 wrote to Maria last on the 19th
January, and sent it via Kandavu. This mail goes vid Auckland,
and you probably won’t get it for five weeks later, such is the
unsatisfactoriness of mails here. It makes one feel farther off
from home than ever. A mail came in from Auckland two days
ago. To-day a steamer has come from Kandavu—Mail—con-
taining a packet for me, enclosures only, and a letter from Con-
stance, date October 23, which I was delighted to get. Now we
have papers dated up to November 26, a fortnight later than
your letters—so aggravating. I wish you would sometimes put
a letter in the common post , between mails, I am sure I should get
it somehow, perhaps by Sydney, but don’t post vid anything and
let it take its chance. We see by a telegram in a Sydney paper
that Johnnie Aberdeen has been made a Duke !!!
It is only six days since I wrote last, so I have not a great
deal to say. Ever since we came back from Suva, now a fort-
night, we have been repairing the damages of the blow, or rather
waiting to have it done. We also thought it a good opportunity
to plane the floor of the drawing-room before I get into it, prepara-
tory to giving a ball there, which we intend to do in about a
month’s time. Fancy our having a ball in Fiji! But it is a
much more civilised place than one had any idea of. The shops
are really capital, some of them, and improving every month.
The heat has been intense lately. I don’t think I have ever felt
it so great in any place I have been in. I have not got half
enough cool things. What I should like would be, everything
clean twice a day, and nothing but white. I brought no white
dresses, and always feel too hot. The gentlemen never wear
coats, and even dine in their shirt sleeves with no braces, and
bright-coloured sashes. I have distributed nearly all Nevil’s
and my sashes for the purpose. 0 dear, the mosquitoes are so
bad. I can hardly write for them biting my hands. Often there


is nothing for it but to go to bed, or to take refuge inside the
nets ! I have, however, invented a plan, which I have tried to-
night for the first time, with great success: I put on boots, and
then gaiters made of newspapers, up to my knees. That at least
protects one’s legs, which otherwise get dreadfully bitten from
the knee to the ankle. One doesn’t feel them all day, —it’s only
in the evening they get so troublesome. Nevil’s complexion is
particularly clear, and she looks very pretty. Jack has just
got his new clothes from the Nymphe —white “jumpers” ( i.e .
shirts that don’t tuck in), with blue collars, and a large cap with
a white cover —the regular man-of-war rig. He looks very
business-like and manly. He still “ disposes ” and “ dispects ” ;
and “ dispises,” and wants to “ conchange ” (exchange) with
Nevil, and he says he is very “ constravagint ” with his jam, and
is rather babyish in his talk for such a very big manly-looking
fellow. He is a very great talker now. We are getting ‘the
house into very fair order now, and can turn out a very respect-
able dinner indeed, —quite wonderful, considering what the state of
things was, —but I am still very uncomfortable without a drawing-
room. I hope in a few days now that it will be ready. Arthur
is very happy here, in spite of many worries which always must
happen to Governors, wherever they may be. The warm climate
suits him so well; it is like life to him. I cannot say it is un-
healthy.—ln spite of this great heat (Therm. 87), I don’t feel so
languid or done up as I did either in Trinidad or Mauritius, and
since we came back from Suva, the children have both been very
well. Our troubles with servants here are very great. Antony,
the new Indian, who was going to be a sort of sheet-anchor,
turned out to be a thief, and has this morning been dismissed,
and just now we are nearly without any, but two boys are
expected to arrive from Mauritius.
Lady Gordon to Miss Mary Shaw-Lefevre
Fiji, Febmary 9, 1876.—1 don’t think it is my turn to write
to you, but I must thank you for your nice long letter of nine
sheets, which almost made up for your past deficiencies. It was
most interesting. Nevil made me read it to her, and though
she couldn’t have understood a word of it, she seemed deeply
interested! She remembers every little thing about you all,
and, lam sure, will not forget you. I have at last got into my
new drawing-room and bed-room, after five months of extreme
discomfort here, and I may say for a year, for I have never
been able really to unpack my boxes since I left Ascot! You
will perhaps like to hear about the furniture, which is at last


unpacked, after blocking up the verandah in its five huge cases
all this time. The drawing-room is, as I told you, this shape
[sketch]. It is built inside of rather dark wood, and has a
high barn roof, thatched, showing the beams, which, being very
neat, look rather well. It is very high and large. The floor is
covered with mats, twenty-five to thirty of them, and over them
in the bow is the Servian rug, which looks extremely well. In
the bow window I have had low wide seats fixed, with thick
cushions, and at present these are covered with some very
artistic dull green silk (rather faded) which we found in the
Government Store (had been curtains)! This window forms a
delightful seat. There is a small tea-table covered with a very fine
mat on it —on the rug. Your sofa you see at X, in the middle
of the room. It is going to be covered with brown holland,
with a border of red fern chintz (ditto your chairs C C). They
are all very comfortable and successful. There is another sofa,
which I had made in Sydney—a large wide couch without a
side, in the large window. There are also two small cloth-
covered tables, made for me in Sydney [sketch], and three very
handsome good-sized ones, made here from my designs, light
wood, which have turned out most successful. One is a writing-
table. Various chairs, mostly of a doubling-up sort, two of
them very nice, French ones with leather backs and cane seats.
I must say it is a very nice comfortable room. Ornaments there
are none, except the Queen’s photograph, very nicely framed in
Sydney, and mounted on velvet, and a few bits of china; but
there are plenty of books and papers about, and quantities of
Fiji fans, and though somewhat scantily furnished for its great
size, it looks very nice. The five beds were only unpacked two
days ago. They are very nice indeed—exactly right. We have
been so uncomfortable without them, having only a scratch collec-
tion, and Nurse had to sleep on the foot of the children’s bed.
I was so glad to get into my bedroom. It is a very large room,
covered with mats (the floor is only cement). I have had to
get a wooden lining put on Captain Knollys’ side, to keep off
sound. I have got a wardrobe (made here) and three chests of
drawers, and an immense dressing-table (muslin and pink), made
out of an old packing-case. Before it is the old Servian rug —
Madeleine’s, now rather shabby, but it looks very imposing. I
wish you could see the house. lam sure you would like it, and
suggest all sorts of improvements; but I am rather sorry to
think that we may have to move before long to Suva, (not that
I think there is much chance of it, but Arthur declares we shall ,
and is most anxious to leave this). I really require a good
house, for my life is, as I expected, almost entirely indoors.


That is really the great drawback here. Eka manages, most days,
to clamber up the hills, and sit somewhere where she can get a
view, but that is a thing I can’t attempt, they are so very steep
and slippery. On the Levuka side, about half a mile off, is the
Havelocks’ house, very high up on the hill, with a long and very
steep ascent of steps. Now and then I manage to get up to see
Mrs. Havelock, but it is a stiff climb for me, and very tiring.
This is the only change I can have, except boating. I have just
had a chair made with long poles in which I shall try being
carried to church next Sunday. People used to say that “ you
can, of course, choose your climate,” but that is easier said than
done. You cannot go about, even if there were means of doing
so, (which there are not), with an establishment like this, consist-
ing of thirty or forty persons, without a good-sized house to go
to. Besides which, we should have to take a ship-load of supplies,
for nothing can be got anywhere out of Levuka. The trouble
and discomfort of going to Suva were very great, and I was
heartily glad to get back, though the visit there did us all a
great deal of good. We never can go again to that hotel, as it
has'since been re-opened as a hotel again. However, now that
I have got good rooms to sit in, and a comfortable bedroom, it
is infinitely better, and I shall soon get into the way of not
caring to do more than potter about in the little flower garden
and verandah ! Time seems to pass wonderfully quickly. I
don’t know how the weeks go by. Since I began this letter the
worst of the heat has, I think, passed away, and it is much
pleasanter, for the rain has not regularly set in. I feel more
and more the comfort of my new room, and when it is really
cool don’t care much about getting away. I have not seen
much of the society yet, for people have not found out that I am
ready to be called on, and it would be too formal to put a notice
to that effect in the papers; so we only tell people to spread it about
when they can. The Hacketts and He Riccis live so far off that
they find it difficult to get here, and impossible in hot weather.
Mrs. Havelock is our nearest neighbour. I see a good deal of
her, and like her very much.
Lady Gordon to Mrs Ryan
Fiji, February 10, 1876.—F0r the first time since we came
here, the San Francisco Mail did stop at Kandavu, and we got
our letters direct, dates December 15, under seven weeks from
England. The Government steamer, the Fitzroy, went there on
the chance, and to our great surprise and delight, came back on
January 31 with the ’Frisco mail on board. It is, I hope, quite


decided now that she is to call there once a month and that the
Sydney and Auckland steamers are to meet her there, so now I
hope we shall get our mails, and you will get our letters regularly,
and under the two months, and by this route a week sooner than
they get them in Sydney. Kandavu is about eight hours from
here, eight days from Sydney. . . . Think of the difficulty I shall
have in getting a governess some of these days ! I dread the idea
of it, and I know I must have one in time, for I can’t teach well
enough, and could not give up time enough. Even now it takes
me about one and a half hours a day for the two, and I don’t think
I manage well, for Nevil gets on very slowly, and Arthur thinks
she ought to read well by now. She is exceedingly intelligent
and rather likes her lessons, —if she is not inclined to do them, I
always let her off! Jack asks for a holiday every day. He spends
all his time in drawing ships, and is always giving me drawings to
send home in my letters. They are both very well just now, Nevil
particularly so. She is growing a great tall girl, and has, I think,
altered a good deal. I wish I could get them photographed
together in their sailor caps, with white covers, and jumpers;
they look so nice. lam having some white drill shirts trimmed
with navy blue made for Nevil for boating, and then they will
be just alike. Every one here says it is the hottest summer ever
known in Levuka—unlucky for us —I have felt the heat here
more than in any place I ever was in, and we all find it the same ;
even Arthur, who delights in heat, is beaten by it at last. I think
the nights are the worst; often I can’t sleep for heat, and get up
and go out into the verandah. Poor Jackie has felt it very much ;
he often comes to me and says, “lam so hot; I wish we’d never
come to Here.” Still, I must allow that, though uncomfortable
to the last degree, I don’t think it an unhealthy heat, and I feel
well and not so languid as I did either in Trinidad or Mauritius.
The children have baths three times a day, and the gentlemen
are swimming about in the sea at the end of the pier at least as
often. We have not yet been able to get the water laid on to
our new baths, and I have to be contented with a tub. I wish
I had brought more cool clothes. One ought to wear nothing
but white, and change three times a day. I have not half enough
washing things and no white Tussores, and Chinese silks don’t
answer at all. Of course, I can get nothing here, and could not
get it made; sending to Sydney, now that the steamer, the
Egmont, has ceased to run, is an affair of months.
One good thing is that we have got into our drawing-room at
last. It is a very large cool room, cheerful and pleasant, and
I am gradually making it look very nice—though, having a
thatched roof, not lined inside, it must always have somewhat


the look of a barn ; however it is very high, and the walls, of
darkish wood, look well; the best part, I think, is a low broad
cushioned window seat round the large bow window, where we
have our five o’clock tea; it looks out on to a large green lawn
on which the Fijian soldiers, who live in tents on the other side,
are all the afternoon, either being drilled or having games.
Beyond that is the sea. My life being just now almost entirely
indoors, you can think what a comfort it is to have a room to
sit in besides the dining-room. Yesterday I took possession of
my bedroom, and, for the first time for nearly a year , unpacked my
boxes and arranged my things in the wardrobe and three chests
of drawers. I have scarcely been out at all since we returned
from Suva a month ago, for it has been too hot for the exceedingly
rough and disagreeable walk along the sea, and my boat has been
at the boat-maker’s, under repair. Yesterday there was a change
in the weather; it became much cooler, and tremendous heavy
rain set in, so much that you can hardly get from one part of
the house to another without getting wet through, and it is
coming in through the thatch, in every direction. This will
probably last, off and on, for two months. Though it is much
less hot, we are obliged to keep nearly all the windows shut on
account of the rain and wind, which makes the house stuffy and
close.
Eka generally goes off by herself either morning or afternoon,
and climbs up to some spot where she can get air and a nice view,
and there she sits for hours. She seems to like being here very
much, and delights in the climate, which is never too hot for her.
I fancy she wouldn’t stand a Scotch winter. There is nothing
she cares to sketch in Qvalau, but she did some beautiful sketches
while on her tour in Viti Levu. It is odd that a person who
can draw so well, can also draw so vilely ! Now I will tell you
what we did to-day. Breakfast, 8.30. After breakfast, Igo
up to the drawing-room and do the children’s lessons. Eka
retires to her room, and often does not show again till luncheon,
as she did to-day; she went off for a scramble up the hill. It
has been a lovely —though hot —day, no rain. After lessons,
I arranged a few household matters with Abbey, and then drew
till one o’clock luncheon. I have begun to draw the pieces of
Fiji pottery, before sending them home. After luncheon, Eka
came and sat in the drawing-room, and we both drew a little
more, and very soon Mr. Mitchell came in to say that Ratu
Marika and his wife, Andi Miriam, had come up to measure
the room for some large mats, which are to be made by their
people in a neighbouring island. At present the room is
covered with twenty-five to thirty small mats, which look nice,


but the least gust of wind sends every one of them flying all about
in a most aggravating way. Well, they came in, and we shook
hands, and the lady sat down by me, and we smiled at one another.
She is a nice, fat, brown, jolly, creature, with such big arms and
legs, and a short crop of curly hair browned by lime and decorated
with two flowers. She wore a short petticoat of violet lama, and
the usual little pinafoa of white muslin. He had a long sulu
of chiefs tappa, 1 into which a white shirt was tucked. I showed
them the Queen’s photo, which delighted them. I forgot to
mention that in the morning I received a present of the
prettiest basket I have seen here, this shape [sketch], perfectly
even and regular in shape, of a dull black with brown stars
worked on it. It was sent me by Yani, Ratu Timothy’s wife,
with a message that she had made it with her own hands.
After Ratu Marika and his wife had gone, Mr. Eyre came in,
and Eka asked him to take a walk with her, and we all started
together as far as Driemba, the native village. Eka and Mr.
Eyre went on, and Mr. Mitchell, Jack, and I pottered about
in the village, and I sat for a little while in Mr. Mitchell’s
house. He and Mr. Eyre live together in a Fiji house at
Driemba, a kind of hut, with a high thatched roof, con-
taining one large room thickly covered with mats. The end
where they sleep is slightly raised, and has a large mosquito net
drawn across it at night, and the mats are very fine and soft,
and laid down on a bed of ferns—most comfortable, they say.
Everything they possess is in this one room. Their kitchen is in
a little hut outside. We then walked home; as we passed Ratu
Timothy’s house, we saw Yani sitting in the doorway, so Mr.
Mitchell stopped and her, and asked her if she knew
who I was; she said, “No,” so he told her I was the Governor’s
Lady. She jumped up in great surprise and said, how could she
know when she had never seen me; and she asked me to come
in, which I did, and shook hands with her. She is a Tongan
lady of high rank, and certainly very pretty, with a charming
smile and manner, and a great air of high breeding.
I told Mr. Mitchell to say how very much pleased I was with
my basket. One or two of her attendants were in the other
end of the house. The floor was covered with fine mats, and
there were beautiful pieces of tappa (very like the piece I sent
you) hanging on the walls. We then walked home and had tea,
and Mr. Mitchell departed. The Governor and Mr. Maudslay,
who had been for a long walk, came in to tea, and then Mrs.
Havelock came and sat a little while with me, and I walked part
1 Chiefs tappa is light brown with a number of black lines and circular
black patches on it.


of the way back with her. Nevil had been riding up and down
all the afternoon on the pony, led by a Fiji boy. Eka came in
just in time to dress for dinner, very tired. That was Friday,
a very fine day ; Saturday, it rained again, so we did nothing
in particular. My chair came home. Sunday, this morning,
after breakfast, we sent for four of the guard, and first Mr.
Maudslay tried my chair and then I did; but it proved a total
failure, being so heavy that four men could not carry it. It has
taken a long time to make. There is something wrong in the
construction of it. It is very tiresome, and I must again give
up going to church, as I cannot manage to walk so far. We are
going to have another made on a new plan. I don’t much like
Sundays here—they seem so long when one doesn’t go to church,
but it is much better now I have a drawing-room. There is
nothing so depressing as to sit and eat in the same room. We
are a small party now, for Mr. Le Hunte, after a visit of six
weeks, is gone back to Loma Loma. Captain Knollys and
Arthur J. are gone to a place in the mountains of Viti Levu,
called Nasauthoko, thirty-six miles walk from Nandi. There
was likely to be a disturbance among the mountain Chiefs, and
the Governor thought it advisible to send Arthur and Captain
K. to see how things stood, and to take a large quantity of food
and trade ( i.e . knives, scissors, beads, etc.) to Captain Olive, who
is encamped there with the native troops. We heard from them
to-day. Arthur had walked on to Nasauthoko, leaving Captain
Knollys at Nandi in charge of the baggage and a hundred men
to carry it, to follow on as soon as possible. Arthur said that
the walk was simply excruciating from the badness of the road,
but the views magnificent. He found everything going on
smoothly and the Chiefs inclined to be friendly, but vigilance
required. These are the mountain Chiefs, who are still savages
and cannibals , some of them, and wear no clothes ! Captain
Knollys is coming back as soon as he has got the baggage up to
them, but Arthur will probably remain there for a time. They
have been gone eight days. It certainly is much cooler to-day,
and I hope the very great heat is now over. We shall get
another mail in a few days. I get so anxious for letters now.
Arthur is so pleased to have them. I have had three rows of
deal shelves put up across the end of the drawing-room —about
the height of a chair from the ground. On the floor below them
stand two models of old Fijian houses, given to Arthur by the
Yunivalu, and two great rolls of sinnet, like a carpet-roll, most
beautifully even, and of two shades of brown, done in a pattern
[sketch]. Sinnet is a kind of cord made of cocoanut fibre, about
this thickness [sketch]. We have had presents of three of these


enormous rolls; they are really valuable. By the way, lam
told that my pretty black basket is worth <£2. They are scarcely
ever made now, and are thought a great deal of by the Fijians.
We are getting our garden into shape now. Abbey manages it
entirely, with seven “ labour boys ” under him (i.e. men with an
indenture from the Solomon and other islands, and who work
much better than Fijians). They are hideous, and a contrast to
the handsome, graceful, lazy Fijians. We have now got three
Fijian footmen—such nice handsome young fellows. They wait
most charmingly. I never saw anything better, and they look so
well in the picturesque red and white native livery, with the large
boar’s tooth tied round their brown necks with a long ribbon of
black grass with a big bow behind ! But they do nothing else —
and the moment dinner is over, off they run, and leave the
washing up to be done by three “ labour boys.” I can’t help
liking them, too, especially Soani, though I know he is a
rascal. Our two coolie boys from Mauritius have not yet arrived.
I believe Abbey has decided to make housemaids or valets of
them, as they won’t work with Fijians; so he will have them
in the pantry. I had such a nice letter from Miss G-oodenough,
to whom I wrote from Sydney. She told me about Mrs. Good-
enough’s arrival, and said they liked so much what the Governor
had written and said about her brother in the Minute. “It was
so appreciative, and generous, and discriminating.”
Thursday , February 15.—The mail goes to-morrow. I have a
good deal of writing to do. lam sure you can’t complain of the
shortness of my letters. lam almost afraid they are too long
sometimes, and dull. Now the first novelty has worn off there
seems to be so little to say. [This is some paper Mr. Maudslay
gave me; it has one merit, that it won’t tear, but it is not
pleasant to write on!] I have been reading Le Bdcit Tune Soeur,
by Madame Augustus Craven. I like it very much, indeed. 1
always find plenty to read in the periodicals, and don’t feel the
want of books. It is much cooler to-day—really quite pleasant.
I think the hot season is over, and after the rain we shall have
several months of delightful weather. I wonder how you would
like a hot climate. I wish and wish you could look in upon us
here; it is such a different sort of life in some ways, but one
doesn’t feel very different after all. I am going to write to
Maddie next time. I can write so much more comfortably now
I have a room. I mean to have a writing-table put in my bed-
room, and' then I can write in the evenings. I have given the
children a holiday because it’s mail day; they like to spread
several mats in the verandah and spread out all the toys, shells,
and rubbish they possess, and there they play all day. They


are very good children and really no trouble. The nursery is very
nice. Nurse has hung up their little clubs, whales’ teeth, and
other toys and curiosities, and made it look quite pretty. They
never see any other children except Rachel Havelock. I wish
they could sometimes, for I am afraid of Nevil growing imperious.
The Abbey children are kept entirely apart. Mrs. Abbey is
very useful, and does a great deal of work. I think Nurse is
very happy, though she must sometimes find it dull. She has
just had a proposal from a Portuguese man who does our wash-
ing ! He is rather a nice-looking man, and very well off. (He
gets £25 a month from this house only). He told Mrs. Abbey
he had never met such a charming young lady ! He proposed
through Abbey. She has refused him, but I think she was
rather pleased. She gets dreadfully chaffed about it by Abbey
and all the staff.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
February 13, Septuagesima Sunday. —Miss G. C., Maudslay,
and I went to church. The curate preached a very tiresome
and silly sermon. Aboryb one we saw the Fitzroy coming in.
Maudslay and I went to the pier-head and watched its progress
with some anxiety. When we saw the boat from it push off
with Captain Champion alone on board, we were a good deal
frightened, but a few minutes brought him to the pier steps with
very satisfactory letters. Arthur, who had got up to Nasaucoko
in one day, reports “ Everything is going on smoothly.” Carew
does not anticipate any attack, although vigilance is of course
still necessary. He has had many satisfactory talks with the
surrounding people, and the Beimana Chief is now all for us. He
says “ it was a most excruciating walk, I can use no other term for
it,” but adds, “ the views along the road are truly magnificent.”
Carew says (to Knollys), “Everything all right and promising
well. Olive in good health and spirits. The ‘ devils ’ the reverse,
and beginning to feel the weight of the presence.’ ” To me he
says much the same. Knollys says that he has ordered Fitzroy
back on account of there being no good anchorage at Na Rewa.
He says “ Roko Tui Ba has done everything for us very well
and smartly. He has sent about a hundred men from Ba as
carriers, so we have not to take any more men from here,”
The alarming reports circulated last night by Mr. Woods’
servant Koli to the effect thatMatanitabua had stated that the camp
was surprised last Sunday whilst at lotu, and Carew and Olive
killed and eaten, had naturally created some uneasiness, and we
observed Timoci and tail loitering about, ostensibly looking at


the new thatch, but really waiting for news. So Maudslay told
him all was right.
Monday 14. —The Lewellyn came in, but brought no letters
except one from Dr. Bakewell, which was simply a grumble at
the prevalence of Scotchmen in Otago.
The mail left in the Fitzroy on Wednesday at midnight. I
sent some important despatches—one on the estimates—and one
on native taxation, which was not a bad one.
Mr. Weston left by the mail, and the day he left brought
Mr. Dumoulin, Mr. Horton’s successor, to see me, who gave me
a very strong letter of recommendation from Sir George Grey.
I wrote but few private letters.
Thursday 17. —A Council. We passed the C. - J.’s
“Fugitives from Justice Ordinance,” in spite of the Attorney-
General’s opposition, or rather demurrer. We altered the said
Attorney’s “Admission to Supreme Court Bill” till he hardly
knew it again, and passed the Oaths Ordinance and the Board
of Health Ordinance. I was disgusted to hear this morning that
Mr. Chalmers, before leaving for Auckland, stated publicly that
the C.-J., Havelock, and De R. were all dead against the scheme.*
Walked up the hills behind Nai Koro Koro in the afternoon.
Friday was a wet day and I did not go out far, nor indeed do
much at home.
Lady Cordon to Miss Emily Shaw-Lefevre
Fiji, February 16. —We were greatly delighted three months
ago at getting our letters via San Francisco-—by Kandavu,
The Fitzroy went to Kandavu on the chance, and found the big
“ Frisco Mail ” there for the first time; and I believe it is now
settled that one is to call there once a month with the Fiji,
Sydney, and Auckland letters, and we shall now get our letters
regularly and in seven weeks from London—this is really a great
boon. My last letters from home, which I got on the 31st
January, were dated December 15 (under seven weeks). Nevil
takes the greatest interest in the house, and likes me to read her
all my letters. She is so very companionable now, but lam
afraid she is rather backward in education. I think she has
grown very much lately, her frocks look so short, though they
have all been let down very much. She has got such stout legs
now, only her little face looks small and white. Nearly every
day she rides on one of the ponies, (which they call Jessie because
it is a chestnut!), in her brown holland habit and cloth sailor cap
with the Nymphe ribbon, —I got it for Jack, but it was too small
for him, so I sent for another, and Nevil had this. It is very


becoming to her. Jack does not often ride, because “Jessie’s”
back is too broad, and the smaller pony is not so quiet, and I
am afraid to trust him on it with only a Fiji boy. However, he
is rather a coward, and doesn’t care about it half so much as
Nevil. Jack has been several times with the gentlemen to
bathe from the end of the pier, and A. J. L. swam about with
him on his back, but he has taken a dislike to it. I think it
rather frightened him. How I wish you could look in upon us
here ! I really like the house very much now we have got the
drawing-room, better, 1 think, than any Government house we
have had. It is not exactly convenient, but exceedingly quaint,
and unlike anything else, and the drawing-room is a delightful
large cheerful room, if only I could get a few more things to
ornament it with ! The Servian rug is our only good bit of
colour. lam so glad to have it. There are many things I now
wish I had brought, especially ornaments for the dining-room
table. The house is now being entirely re-thatched, a new roof
put on over the old one, which was found to be rotten and unsafe.
This makes a great mess everywhere; the damp and mildew and
cockroaches and fish moths are worse here than in any place I ever
was in—everything gets spoilt. I never open a drawer without
dozens of cockroaches running out, and they have a most horrid
smell. I had a visit from the Yunivalu yesterday. Arthur
brought him up into the drawing-room. He is come over from
his island, Bau, to stay at Driemba, the native village, half a mile
from here, on business. Arthur sent his boat to fetch him here.
He is not at all well, poor old fellow, I am afraid he is breaking
down ; he seemed depressed and said he had got a bad cold. He
admired the new drawing-room very much ; his interpreter came
with him. I believe his daughter Audi Kuila arrived yesterday
in his yacht the Lurline ; I must ask her up to luncheon. He
has got a house at Driemba, and there are three large houses
there built by the Governor for the use of the Chiefs when they
come for Council. The Chiefs are very superior to the common
people here; you see at once the difference of breeding—like
another race. They have beautiful small hands and feet, especi-
ally all the “ royal family.” I like them all very much ; I rather
wish I could speak to them, but it is a most difficult language.
Arthur has worked hard at it and can now talk pretty well, but
not with ease. He has a lesson every day from 6 till 7 in the
afternoon —never misses. Nevil knows a good many words.
Give my very best love to all. In four or five days I shall get
my letters, which I long for —it does seem such a long way off.
lam very tired and must go to bed, though it is only ten. Arthur
is going to sit up and write till twelve, when the steamer leaves.


Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Saturday , February 19. —Nevil feverish. Went in the boat
with Mitchell and Maudslay to Cawaci and walked up the path
to Lovoni. It was a very pretty walk. The valley is one of
the largest and most broken in the island. Immediately behind
Wilson’s house and above it are a few Fijian houses forming a
small town. We took a path to the right, which, after passing
round a hillside among thick and rather pretty wood, (young
trees, with here and there a fine “ivi,”) tended downwards
till we came to the valley, which was terraced in a succession v of
taro patches, and through which, among rocks and boulders, ran
a fine clear foaming stream. We went up its course some dis-
tance, and came to more very fine taro cultivation. We were
very near the top of the pass to Lovoni when the fading light
warned us to come back. We returned another way, mounting
up the bed of a waterfall and then by a path through forest up
to the top of a range, whence we had a very fine view of the
valley and mountains about. We followed down the ridge till
we came to forest, at the outskirts of which was a little |own
very picturesquely placed. The gate into it was formed by an
opening in the trunk of a “ baka ” tree growing on the wall and
right across the entrance. From just outside, and well encadr6
by the boughs of large trees, there was a most pictorial view
across the valley, or rather a valley, —for it was not that which
we had ascended, —with a little cascade in the middle and a
splendid cliff of rock in the background. Our path rejoined
that which we had quitted at the little town above Wilson’s, and
there we had cocoanuts. One piece of the way was particularly
bad—a glacis of slippery smooth rock, across which one had to
walk. We sailed home in the dusk.
Eyre had been at the public meeting 1 and reported that the
difference of opinion had been great, and that an amendment
postponing the consideration of the petition until next week was
carried by a large majority. Smith asked if it was a public or a
private meeting, and, if the former, why they had not elected their
own chairman ? This rather puzzled them. Smith opposed—
so did Wilson —so did Sturt —so did Murray. Truscott spoke
oratorically of “ the sea in front and rocks behind ” Levuka, and
was reminded that this was indeed precisely the case, and was
what rendered it unfit for being the capital. In short the
agitators were not a little confounded, and adjourned for a week,
instead of’passing their resolutions by acclamation.
1 In favour of the retention of the capital at Levuka.


Lady Gordon to Miss Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre
Nasova, Fiji, March 13.—My dearest Madeleine —You
must be prepared for a very stupid letter this time, for I feel as
if I had nothing to write about. By some unfortunate ill-luck,
the last mail viA San Francisco did not turn up at all at Kandavu.
The Fitzroy went to meet her as usual, and after waiting a
fortnight came back without the mails, so that for nearly two
months we have had no letters or papers at all. You can
imagine how disgusted I was ! However, it is nearly time now
for another batch, and we shall most likely get the two mails
all at once. In the meantime, you see, I have nothing to
answer, and the homeward mail leaves a few days before the
outward one arrives.
We have not been doing anything particular lately. It has
been too hot for boating to be pleasant, besides I have got
rather tired of it, and the children don’t like it, so I don’t often
go out, and there is really nothing else to be done here. Capt.
Knollys and A. J. L. returned from Nasauthoko, the camp in the
mountains of Viti Levu, having marched up them successfully
with provisions, etc., and found everything going on quietly.
There had been some disturbance among the mountaineers, and
they were a little afraid of fighting, but everything is amicably
settled, and the mountain Chiefs are nearly all favourably
disposed towards the Governor. Arthur has done three or four
capital drawings since he came back, from notes he made on the
spot. He is certainly very much improved by the lessons he
had at Poynter’s. Some of his figures are very good indeed.
I think he will send them to the Graphic (but not by this mail),
so look out for them in another month.
There was a great meke [dance] at Bau about a fortnight
ago, and Eka received an invitation to go to it from Andi Kuila
(who, I hope you remember by this time, is Thakombau’s
daughter, and the greatest lady in Fiji). Now Bau is an island
twenty miles off 1 , where a great many Chiefs (all the royal family)
live. The only white people there are the missionary and his
wife, Mr. and Mrs. Langham. Well, Eka was wild to go, but
had the greatest difficulty in managing it, and we could not
help her. However, after rushing about town, she got two
people, Captain Havelock and Miss Whalley, to go with her, and
she went to the missionary in Levuka and got him to lend her
his boat, and she took his mosquito net and pillow and water-
proof, so as to be ready to sleep in a Fiji house, and they set
off at 7 o’clock one morning. It was a very hot day, with not


a breath of air, so their six men had to row all the way, and it
took them eight hours ! and they were nine hours getting back !
However, she said it amply repaid her for the exertion and
trouble, for it was a most interesting and curious sight. An
immense number of Fijians from all parts had assembled for
this meke , and they had been practising for weeks before.
What I should most have liked to have seen was the ladies,
dance, There were about 150 ladies in two parties, led, one by
Andi Kuila, and the other actually by old Audi Lydia herself,
the late Queen, Thakombau’s wife. They are both very large
women (Andi Lydia is enormous), but both Captain Havelock
and Eka say they looked magnificent, their dancing was so
wonderfully graceful and dignified. They were dressed alike,
both in black tappa sulus and pinafoas made of soft white silk
trimmed with black velvet. One peculiarity of the family is
their excellent taste in dress. There was also a children’s dance led
by little Ratu Timothy (Andi Kuila’s son), four years’ old. The
Yunivalu’s three sons, Ratu Abel, Ratu Timothy, and Ratu Joe,
all danced in one of the mekes. I must try and get them to
have this meke for me some day, when I can get to Bau in a
steamer. I could not stand so many hours in an open boat.
Eka was put up for the two nights by the Langhams, v who were
most kind. She has been writing a long letter with an account
of this meke to her aunt, Lady Arthur Lennox. I have no
doubt it is capital. Try and get at it if you can. I wish
you could see some of these native Chiefs. lam sure you would
admire them as much as I do. They are most taking. lam
really quite fond of Andi Kuila. She is such a lady.
March 19. —Since I began this letter, which is nearly a week
ago, we have had something very like a hurricane—a pretty
severe blow. For some days it has been unsafe for any ship to
go to sea, so that the mail has not been able to go to Kandavu.
The ship from San Francisco was due yesterday, and there is
scarcely the ghost of a chance of the mail (which leaves to-night)
catching it, as it is fourteen hours from here. So lam afraid you
won’t get these letters for a month later than they are due, even
if they go round by Australia, which they may possibly do.
This rough weather has been most disagreeable. For a day
or two we were very much afraid the roof of the new drawing-
room would be carried away by the wind, or that the whole
house would be flooded by the torrents of rain, which caused
rushes of water to come pouring down the hill, and which all
hut did happen; but they got some men to cut little channels
to direct the torrents into the stream which runs into the sea.
The noise at night was dreadful. Captain Knollys kept a lot


of men about the house all night, to be ready in case anything
happened; but fortunately there was no damage except the
washing away of the boat-house, and all the boats had been
before that drawn up into the verandah. The weather has got
cooler since the storm began, and we all feel better for it. The
children are in great spirits. It has subsided now, but we do
not feel sure that it is over. Everything is dreadfully damp.
I never saw such rain ; 4 \ inches fell in twenty-four hours. In
England the average is 23 inches per year. I do hope now
we shall have some nice cool weather.
Nevil has at last found out that she can read to herself, and,
like her father, she always has a book in her hand. She rather
bores Jack by reading to him, but he doesn’t like to say any-
thing, as he thinks she does it to give him pleasure, whereas it is
entirely for her own amusement! They draw a great deal, and
are very fond of their portfolios. When Eka shows off her
drawings, Nevil generally thinks it necessary to produce hers !
I wish you could see her with her short hair. It has grown
excessively thick. She looks so nice in her boating dress. I
must try and get them photographed here. They still “pretend”
as much as ever; they are quite happy pretending to fish with
rods and lines over the verandah and catching pretence fish.
The other day she was pretending to put imaginary violets into
an imaginary basket, and making them up into pretence
bunches. Nevil is still Mrs. Maudslay, and Jack quite constant
to his wife, Miss Victoria Joske, whom he adores. [I have some]
paper wdiich will not take the ink —so tiresome. I think it is
greasy on one side, so I shall get on quickly to the next page.
It is supposed to be of a very superior quality that won’t tear,
and is very expensive, but I think it is rather a failure.] I
have been going on drawing pots and pans, but for the last
week have not been able to do any, on account of the light
being so bad. Eka has also drawn a great many of them (many
more than me), but in a style of her own. She does them on
dark tinted paper, rather small, almost entirely in body colour
(which she is wedded to), and then thickly gummed up. I
never saw any one draw with such rapidity as she does. Some
of her drawings are very clever, but I think she is accus-
tomed to be considered a very great artist, and is surprised if I
criticise. She persists that white paint is now the thing, that
it is used by a certain school of artists who are superior to all
others—is this so 1 If so, she does not know how to handle it,
I am quite sure.
2 E


Lady Gordon to Miss Maria Shaw Lefevre
Fiji, March 22. —My dearest Maria —Though the letters
did catch the San Francisco mail last time, we have a suspicion
that there was some mistake about them, and that they didn’t go
after all. It will be rather tiresome if you don’t get them, for,
though they contained nothing of importance, it makes a break.
The dates were March 18, and I wrote a long letter to Made-
leine, and one to Jane. The mails are a great trouble here,
always something going wrong about them. I told you in that
letter of my horrid fears about nurse, and they have been
realised, for yesterday I was informed by Captain Knollys that
she had the previous evening accepted the hand of the washer-
man Antony. He proposed to Abbey for her about a month
ago, but we all laughed at it, and so did she, and we chaffed her
unmercifully; but very soon after she gave him permission to
court her. You can think how disgusted I am. She cannot be
replaced here or in the colonies, and sending home for a nurse
is out of the question. I have told her I must have six
months’ notice, and I have a faint hope that within that time
something may happen to break it off. For her' it is a very
imprudent affair. He is a Portuguese and a Roman Catholic,
and though he has borne a good character during the fifteen
years he has been here, she can’t possibly know enough about
him. He makes her believe that she is going to do no work,
and live like a lady, and that very soon he shall make a fortune,
and take her home. She had, I believe, made up her mind to
marry some one or other from the time she came here, so it was
inevitable, and this is her third offer. I have not yet decided what
I shall do. It seems to have come on so quickly. She has
really done so well ever since I left home, now just a year ago,
and made me such a good maid, besides being always so nice
with the children, that the arrangement seemed perfect, and I
have not felt the want of a maid at all. Fortunately I have
Mrs. Abbey to fall back upon in case of emergency; but it can
never be the same thing again, and already I feel that she is
taken up with the creature, and will always be wanting to be
after him! She always was rather a flirt, but I had no idea
she was so determined to marry, as I hear she has been for a
long time. It is very hard on me, and I think she ought to
have given me a hint before she came.
I read all the letters aloud to Nevil and Jack, who take the
greatest interest in them. Nevil so perfectly understands all
about it, and Jack thinks he does. It is rather amusing to


hear Nevil explaining —“Fatigued, that means very tired.”
She thinks herself so superior to Jack. I was reading them a
little story about a child with golden hair. “ How could hair
be golden ? ” Jack said. “ Oh, it means silver , of course, Jack,”
said Nevil.
There have been several cases of fever (simple fever) in
Levuka lately, (don’t be alarmed, for it is in the low part, more
than a mile from here, and Nasova is particularly healthy just
now). One is Mrs. De Ricci (the Attorney-General’s wife).
She has been and is very ill indeed.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan 1
Nasova, Fiji, March 23, to April I.— My dearest Jane —
Mrs. De Ricci is very ill indeed with fever—in fact it is quite
a toss up if she will pull through. As soon as we knew how ill
she was, Eka volunteered to go and nurse her, and she has been
there for five nights, sitting up in turn with him. All the
nourishing things are sent from here. The very strongest
chicken broth that can be made goes twice a day. The account
is as bad as possible this morning. Unless the temperature
down soon, she will die —I sent Mrs. Abbey there ready to sit
up, with more chicken broth. Her hands and feet cold and her
temperature 106 J. Both Dr. MacGregor and the doctor of the
Nymphe are extremely alarmed. There is nothing to be done, it
is a case of nursing and feeding. Dr. M. makes them keep a
journal of every symptom. He came in to dinner to-night and
said she was a little better and might pull through. I am so
sorry for her; she is very young and very pretty. Wherever
there is illness they come to us for soup, wine, etc. We are all
well at Nasova, with the exception of these Fiji sore feet or leg-
boils. There is such a tendency to breakings out. No one
here but Captain Knollys has escaped it. A. J. Gordon thought
he never could have anything of the kind, but last week he had
both his feet bandaged up ! It may keep off other things.
Only think of my annoyance —Captain Knollys informed me
to-day that nurse had last night accepted the Portuguese washer-
man ! It has quite upset me. I really do not know what I
shall do. I have had the most searching inquiries made, and
can’t find out anything against him. Arthur had a long talk
with her, and pointed out the imprudence of such a mar-
riage, and told her that he thought I ought to have six
months’ notice, to which she consented, and during that time
1 In this and some other cases where Lady Gordon has written two letters
very similar to each other, they have been compressed into one.


I hope something may happen to prevent it. But she is
perfectly satisfied with her choice. She told me that of all
the people she had thought of, and they were many , he was the
most straightforward, and most respectful! I believe she was
most anxious to marry, and would have taken almost anyone.
This is the third offer she has had here. Ido think it is rather
hard on me that she should have made up her mind to marry
as soon as she came here, and never given me a hint of such a
thing being possible. I might so easily have tied her down for
two or three years, or brought a better person than Marques.
Mrs. Abbey told me she had several lovers both in Mauritius
and Ascot, but they never quite came to the point —and she is
so hideous ! I find it difficult to speak cordially about it to her,
for she doesn’t seem to think it matters to me at all, I can’t
yet decide what steps to take about replacing her —Marques,
alone , is almost useless. I shall miss nurse so dreadfully in
every way. We have quite altered our establishment lately.
We have now got two Indians from Mauritius, who are excellent
servants. One of them, Abelak, was an old servant of ours
there. Their work is to clean boots, valet all the gentlemen,
do all the housemaid’s work, (bed and sitting rooms,) and come
to the drawing-room bell. There are three Fijian footmen in
smart native clothes —handsome picturesque lazy fellows, who
wait at table to perfection, and do nothing else whatever —and
there are three foreign labour boys who clean plate, wash up,
and do all the dining-room work.
The Indians relieve Mrs. Abbey very much, and she says she
thinks she could take nurse’s work, and be my maid as well,
and wants me to try it before sending for anyone. She says if
I want to go anywhere she can always put out little Arkie.
She keeps a boy for him here, so that he is quite off her hands,
and Teddy goes every day to the curate, who teaches him.
But I feel that I shall never again have the same comfort in
the nursery nurse understands Nevil so thoroughly, and
manages both so well, Eka, who is not fond of children, says
she never knew any so good as mine, and I am sure it is mostly
from nurse’s good management. It seems to me that nurse knows
very little about her intended. He comes from Peru, and
came here originally as mate of a ship. He has been here
fourteen years. His name is Antonio Perez, but he is only
known as Antony. She thinks he is going to make a fortune
here, but I don’t think she takes in that it is a great come
down in position for her, and I feel sure she will have to work
very hard. Though I have insisted on the six months, I feel certain
she will not hold out so long —and I don’t feel sure that it will


answer to have the creature always hanging about the house;
and I am afraid her heart will no longer be in her work —she
began to think about her trousseau before she accepted him !
I think perhaps I had better try and get on until the children
are old enough for a governess; if Ido get out another maid
she is certain to marry, —and then I don’t think anyone would
take this long journey alone.
March 27. —We have all been considering the possibility of
going away somewhere. They know of a house which might be had
on Viti Levu, about four hours from here. It contains three small
rooms, which would just hold Eka and me and the children.
We should have to take furniture and a cow, and Captain
Knollys and Abbey would have to go ther*fe some days before and
get a native house built for the gentlemen, and some sheds for
various other purposes —cooking, native servants, etc. —so that
it would be a great business. It might do the children good to
go there for a month, but I know I shall hate it. It would be
so dreadfully dull, for of course there would be no walks, and
Arthur would have to be here mostly. There is a native village
a few miles off, but no other house near it. Unfortunately I
have no taste for a life of “ roughing it.” I dislike it exceed-
ingly. It is just the sort of thing Eka would delight in—but
she is a capital hand at scrambling, which I can’t do. I even
find sitting on the ground so tiring, I can hardly manage it, it
makes my back ache so now. I have had a kind of chair made
for picnics, with a seat and back and no legs. Eka usually sits
on the ground from choice.
I have lately been having some lessons in Fijian, from a young
lady who speaks it very well. Mrs. Havelock joins me in them.
I find it very difficult, and don’t get on at all. Everyone tells
me that unless you talk to the natives you can’t learn it. It
can't be learnt from books, and I never have an opportunity of
talking to them, excepting two or three times to Andi Quila.
Arthur has worked hard at it with a master every day since he
came, from 6 till 7. He rarely misses his lesson. He also goes
to the native service every Sunday, before ours—but even he
doesn’t know it yet. He can understand them, and read and
write it, but he always talks to the chiefs through an interpreter.
He gets a great many letters in Fijian. Nearly all the natives
can read and write in their own language. lam afraid it’s rather
hopeless my ever learning it!
March 31. —I have not written for several days. It is more
than a week since Eka went to nurse poor Mrs. De Ricci. She
has been getting worse and worse —tossing about for days in
restless delirium. They got the fever under, but dysentery set


in. This morning they subdued that, and she became conscious,
and seemed better, but this afternoon Eka sent here, in great
alarm, for Mrs. Abbey to go there immediately. I fear there
is no hope; she is sinking fast. Dr. Mayo, who was dining
with us, was sent for directly after dinner. It makes me feel so
unhappy. In our small community one knows everything that
happens, and it seems like one of the family. Nearly all the
food they have given her has come from here, and we are con-
tinually sending.
The disease is simple low fever, but I think she is a bad
subject. There are no other bad cases in Levuka, and none here
at Nasova, though we are rather thickly populated, for there
are forty Fiji soldiers living close by. People say they have
never known such an unhealthy season in Levuka. I can’t
go to bed for thinking of what is going on there (a mile off).
I feel that the first news I hear in the morning must be that
she is dead.
The children are beginning to look better. Jack says he is so
sorry that poor Mrs. De Ricci is “ much more badder,” —he is
rather fond of her. I sometimes feel so anxious about them
both, and when I think of losing Nurse, v who watches them so
carefully, lam miserable. How I wish we were all safely back
in England, but, as Arthur is always telling me, there are plenty
of changes and risks there too. I wish I could like this place
better. Indoors, lam now very comfortable and fairly happy,
provided it’s not too hot; but I long to be able to take the
children out —out of the valley and away from the hills.
Saturday . —lt is all over with poor Mrs. De Ricci. She lay
unconscious all night, and died at 5 o’clock this morning.
Poor little young thing! she was not more than twenty-four.
They had left their only child, a beautiful boy of three, in
England, and I believe she fretted for him. Her husband is
beside himself with grief. lam so grieved about it. And this
is a climate in which all the books and reports told us “ fever
is unknown.” Eka and I, and Mrs. Havelock and the Gover-
nor, and all the rest of us are going to the funeral. We go first
to the Church in Levuka, and then all but me will follow in
the boats to the cemetery, which is a mile and half on the other
side of Nasova. It is a very steep climb up to the place after
landing, and I don’t think I shall feel equal to it after the walk
to church.
Eka came back to breakfast very tired and very sad, after
nine days of nursing. Mrs. Abbey remained to do all she can.
Poor man, he means to go home on leave by the first steamer —
in a fortnight. I don’t expect he will ever come back. Eka


has behaved very well. She is a capital, untiring nurse. What
they would have done without her I cannot tell. She had
almost everything to do, feeding her every hour, and latterly
every half-hour, and sitting up half of each night and sometimes
the whole night, and she did it capitally.
I have just come back from the funeral. We went a little
way in the boat and then walked —about half a mile. It was
so sad, and while the service in the church was going on the
most drenching pouring rain came down. Mr. Maudslay made
a beautiful cross of white balsams and lilies, which was laid on
the coffin. One could hardly realise that she had only died in
the morning. We then followed the coffin, which was carried
by six gentlemen. First walked Mr. De Ricci, and then the
Governor and me —pouring with rain all the while, nearly dark
by this time, and over one’s boots in water and mud in the
horrid rough street of Levuka, in many places wading through
pools of water. Some one had taken off my waterproof and
umbrella, and I couldn’t find them in the dark. I was drenched
when we got to the pier. The coffin was put on board a man-
of-war’s boat, and all but me followed in boats to the cemetery
and had a steep climb in the dark, and the same drenching rain,
up to the place they had chosen. I walked home. Poor little
thing, I know she has been so dull and unhappy here, so much
alone, and pining for her child; for six months they lived in
one room in a boarding-house, and had only just got settled in
their own house, which she had made so pretty and nice, though
it was very small and not healthy. It reduces our very small
party. Lady Hackett is very soon going home, and then there
only remains Mrs. Havelock.
Well, this is rather a melancholy letter, but one can only
write as one feels at the time, so I think I had better finish it
up and begin again when I feel more cheerful. I have felt this
very much. It seems to cast a gloom over the place. So I
shall go to bed before the musquitoes finish me.
Tuesday evening , April 11.—I have half a mind to tear up my
letter now. It has been such a lovely day —cool and bright,
making everything look more cheerful. Since dinner I have
been sitting out in the verandah in the lovely moonlight, having
a long talk, first with Mr. Maudslay, then with the Baron (who
I am very fond of), and Arthur J., and they were all so nice and
kind. They came up with their cigars after the yaqona. I
think Mrs. De Ricci’s death has depressed me very much. I
can’t get it out of my mind. In the afternoon we went out
for a sail—the Governor, Mr. Maudslay, Mrs. Havelock, the


children, and I. It was very pleasant. I think you would
hardly know Nevil—she looks so different. She is very tall,
and her little face so exceedingly small and white, more so in
contrast to her very dark eyes, and has a very anxious expres-
sion ; but she has capital stout legs, and is in the highest spirits
—quite noisy-. Everyone remarks how fragile she looks, but 1
think it is her delicate complexion and very short hair which
makes her look so. She is really perfectly well, and has an
excellent appetite. She is made a great pet of by them all.
While we were at church on Sunday, she got hold of the Baron
(who is a Roman Catholic), and obliged him to read “Joseph
and his brethren” to her. Jack is very stout and manly, but
rather pale too.
Eka has gone for a tour in some of the islands with the
Langharas, Missionaries, in the mission ship, the Jubilee.
The change will do her a great deal of good. To-day a ship
came in with eight wounded men from the Barracouta , which
has had a fight with the natives in Samoa. Three had been
killed. We can’t find out much about it, and I daresay
you will see an account of it in the papers. The Nymphe
is going to New Zealand at the end of this week, and we
shall then be without a man-of-war for some weeks. Jack
came running in just now and said, “ There’s a cutter com-
ing in through the reef, and 'what do you think I dispect she’ll
bring ? I dispect the cutter will bring a letter from Eka.” He
is so precise. He said one day that he had been up “half
of the half ”of the hill, “ Dispose you take an orange and cut
it in half, and then cut the half in half, that’s what I mean.”
There has come a sudden and blessed change in the w r eather.
The thermometer has gone down 12 degrees, and to-day it has
been delightful.
The children already look better. I have had their hair
cut again as short as possible. Nevil looks most comical. Her
head is so small; it is cut like a boy’s behind, but the square
left in front. She begins to read quite nicely now, enough to
amuse herself and bore Jack, and is never without a book in her
hand. I hear nurse is more infatuated than ever about her lover,
but they all say it won’t last out the six months. I don’t like
the look of the man at all. She has nearly decided to become
a Roman Catholic to oblige him. Silly old thing.
Wednesday , April 12.—Weather continues delightful. We
have had to put off our ball indefinitely, partly because there is
no ship here, and partly on account of Mrs. De Ricci’s death. I
have had a great many letters to write this time, and feel quite


tired, as I put them all off. Every one has been writing since
breakfast, and will go on till 10 to-night. The mail leaves at
midnight. Baron von Hiigel and Captain Olive are both come
back, so now we are a large party again. Eka certainly was most
kind about poor Mrs. De Ricci. The doctors (MacGregor and
Mayo) said they never saw better nursing, and she did not mind
what she did. She came back very sad when it was all over,
and I am glad she is able to go on this expedition, for it will
do her good. I daresay you may hear a great deal against Fiji
through poor Mr. De Ricci, who goes home by this mail, but
you need not believe it all. Of course you must make allow-
ance for him; he is sure to hate the place after all he has
gone through. Certainly there has been a good deal of fever in
the town, but no cases in Nasova, and now the cool season has
set in there is nothing to fear. As far as climate goes, it is
really delightful, and I shall never stay here another hot
season.
Sir A. Gordon’s Journal
Monday , April 10. —We were up and off 1 betimes this lovely
morning, Knollys, Mitchell, and Heffernan first, in Knollys s
ship, Maudslay and I soon after. We passed them in the
Yanutha Lailai channel—then they caught us up again, and
we both arrived at Nasova nearly together a little before nine.
The remainder of the day, a most lovely one, was devoted to
writing letters and despatches. In the afternoon we were
amazed by the appearance of Olive, who marched in, without
apparent reason, from the Star of the South , in low spirits and
apparent ill-health.
Tuesday , April 11.—Writing all day except a little turn in
the boat with Rachael. Letters from Carew not so satisfactory
as they usually are.
He abuses Olive roundly. “He has been from beginning to
end a source of most trying anxiety to me, not so much from
his total want of experience, as from the infirmities of disposition
he labours under, and which he confesses to. From the time
of our arrival to the day of his departure for the sea-coast his
general conduct with reference to his duties has jeopardised con-
tinually the work of the district. The very first time a conflict
with the natives takes place, he will most surely be the first
man shot, as he loses his head entirely and becomes no longer
answerable for his conduct. He confesses moreover that he
invariably looks at the dark side of things, and seems secretly
to rejoice and find comfort in the reflection.”
1 From Moturika.


Wednesday , April 12. Mail day. Except reading a chapter
of Alice to the children was at work nearly all day till
11.30 p.m. Saw De Ricci for a few moments before he went.
Thursday , April 13. Council. Read a second time a very
useful Ordinance, that on Summary Convictions, but we took
four hours about it. Roko Tui Ba came down with one of the
prisoners who had escaped from here, but unluckily Tawase
had escaped again, and that twice. He was taken by Tui Ba’s
officers, and, whilst crossing a river in the dusk on the way to
Sagunu, sa dro. 1 He was again captured and brought to
Sagunu, where he was watched continuously, one guard waking
whilst the other slept; but, one Sunday, the waking guard took
it into his head to go to church, and of course, Tawase, though
bound hand and foot, made off.
Leefe and Garrick dined, and I had much talk with Leefe,
who, I think, seems inclined to keep civil. Sat up late. Adi
Alisi has come with her husband, and one of her husband’s
letters to me announces the birth of a child, evidently a great
family event.
Ko Adi Kolora na luvena na Roko e Ba kei Adi Alisi sa sucu e na
siga Wenisite e na ka 6 ni siga e na vula ko Janueri 1876 e nai ka 9 ni kaloko.
Sa rua na nona vula na kenai ka tolu e sucu kina. Keitou sa reki tiko ni sa
bula na gone kokoya. Sa vaka sucu mai ko Di Alisi.
Sagunu
An sa volavola yani vei kemuni e na vuku ni sa yaco mai vei au na nomuni
vola ka sa mai wilika kau sa vakavinavinka kina. la ka ena vuku ni waqa
ka vola yani ko Sabori na waqa kau tawa kila koi au : e kila ga ko Sabori kei
na matai sau. la ni yau ka solia ko Sabori vua na matai-na tabua e walu-na
kuro ni vavalagi e rua na matau e rua na vuka edua. la nai yau kece
oqo sa vakasuka tale ko Sabori, ka sega sara e dua me nona na mataisau
ka sa qai yaloca kina na matai, ka mani kauta mai kina na waqa ki Ba, ka
qai mai solia sara vei au kau qai mai wa domotaka ka buturarataka e Bau,
kau qai solia vua na matai e tolu nai lobu sulu. la kau sega ni kaya men
sauma na waqa. la na waqa kau solia, kau tauyadua taki ira na dau qoli
vonu, e dua ki Yuda, ka dua ki Veitogo, ka dua ki Yunitoleka. la ka sega
ni soli ki vuda mei sau ni waqa koya, Au sa tukuna yani oqo vei kemuni,
mo ni kila e dua tale na ka Edua na tamata sa yavitu vaka matea na watina.
Sa bula na alewa ; ka sa dro na tagane ki Naqaqa, ha yacana ko Tamai
Wagale. la na alewa ko Tinai Wagale au sa tale mai Yasawa kau qai mai
kila. E moku e na siga Mqneti e nai ka 6 ni Maji, ka qai ciba e na siga
Yakarauleka e nai ka na 11 ni siga. Au sa loloma yani vei kemuni.
Marji 28.—Isaka—Au sa volavola yani vei kemuni meu tukuna na niu sa
tale mai Yasawa. Ra sa yaco kina e dua na neimami soqoni vata. Na
veikoro sa lakomai ki na soqoni ko Yasawa keina Cula kei Matacawalevu, kei
Nauti, kei Yiwa. Ko Waya ga e yali e sega ni lako mai ki na soqoni—Sa
yaco na soqoni mai Matacawalevu. Sa vakatekivu ena siga vakarauleka.
1 He ran away.


Good Friday , April 14.—T0 Church. At home all the
afternoon. Stormy. Despatches from Blyth of some interest.
Ritterhoff offers lease.
Easter Eve , April 15. —Wrote a little and arranged papers
a good deal. Received Ratu Yuki and two of his Bulis. He
gave me a beautiful stick. Adi Alisi came to see Rachael. Saw
Garrick about Distillery and Police Ordinances, also Medical
ones. Ratu Timoci and Roko Tui Ba dined here and stayed
to yaqona. Had a long conference with Roko Tui Ba on the
following points ;
1. Vakaevei ko Tawase kei na ofisa sa cala ?
2. Nodra veikoro ko Dakaibitu, kei na nona tamata.
3. Nodra veilvere ki Yasawa.
4. Ko ira na tamata sa caka-caka kei Evens.
5. Na nodra kuro ki Tailevu.
6. Ko ira sa sega na nodra waqa ni sili dri.
7. Nodra lala ko Ratu Isikeli Nodra lialia kina naqu
yasana ena vuku ni Isikeli. Ka tubu ca kina.
8. Nona cakakaca ko Tui Ba.
9. Nodra tabua na ka Mogodro ni tiko ki Ba a kedrai
lakovi sa tiko ki koro.
He thinks he will quietly be able to get Tawase again. He
suspects, like me, that Tawase was let go purposely. He advises
that the Mogodro men should not go back yet. A first-rate
Chief. Would there were more like him.
Easter Sunday. Hot. To Church. Holy Communion.
Children went to church with me in afternoon to a stupid
children’s service. They were carried in the chair. Mitchell,
and Draiba drunkards. Roko Tui Ba and his two Bulis at
yaqona in the evening.
Easter Monday. —Dr. Corney. Lent him Seemann and
Williams. Tui Ba and Bambougau. In boat with Rachel.
Easter Tuesday. —Saw Swayne. Rather like him. Du
Moulin came to luncheon. I rather like, him too. Gave him
back the Bank papers to have actual prices put. Colonel Pratt.
Walked with him to Draiba. Letter from Eka. Abel came
up to-day. They expected me at Bau last week. Abel came
up to yaqona. Whilst we were drinking it, a messenger came
up from Timoci with this letter.
Saka—Au sa tukuna saka yani e dua nai rogorogo sa rogo mai vei yau ena
yakavi oqo. Edna na waqa kau wa kelea me vaka lelesi ran na Buli ki Koro,
e kainaki sa mate e wai. Sa soko mai Koro ena siga vaka oti vola ka qai
luku mai e daidai e dua na waqa kau tale e wai. Sa lomaqu men laki qara e
na mataka. Kevaka sa vinaka moni tukuna tale mai vei au. Sa oti saka
noqui tukutuku, Oyau Timoci Tavan* 1


This broke us up, and I wrote a few lines to tell him he
might go. It does not appear from this whether the Bulis were
drowned or not.
Eka’s letter saith :
As we came past Mr. Burt’s estate, close to Hasau, we found tlie young
man, Hooker by name, whom he has recently taken in as his working
partner, looking very white, and, on inquiry, found that two of his Solomon
men had a few minutes previously come at him with large knives to kill him,
and he was only just able to back into his house, and snatch up an unloaded
revolver, at sight of which they dropped the knives. A few weeks ago
one of them threw a spear at him which was only caught by another man just
in time to save him, and that night the whole body came and surrounded
his house, holding consultation whether to kill him or not. He represents
to them that their killing him will do no good, as they would probably be
hanged.. To which they reply that they would just as soon be hanged
as be kept there any longer in slavery. It seems the whole seventeen
were kidnapped six and a-half years ago under circumstances of varying
brutality, and hired by Mr. Burt, who at the end of three years compelled
them to stay on three more. This second term—all of course unpaid labour,
—expired about six months ago, since which time he has detained them
week after week, on one pretence or another, till they are nearty mad. All
the more so, as Mr. Swann’s men close by, who are unavoidably detained
a few weeks, get their weekly wages paid regularly and are quite happy.
When Mr. Burt could invent no more excuses he went off to Levuka and put
on the unhappy young Hooker, who was not informed of the circumstances,
and who, apparently, does his best to soothe the men, but who nevertheless
runs a very fair chance of being killed as Burt’s representative. The latter
has promised week after week to return and dismiss them all. But he never
comes, and now the men believe he will go off and bolt from Fiji and leave
them in the lurch, and as he has only a lease of the land, he leaves little
behind him. Mr. Hooker has now promised the men that unless Burt returns
within a week, he will take a crew of them and row across to Levuka to state
their own case to the Governor. Possibly he may get there before this reaches
you. —“Ho slavery in Fiji! ” These men have never received a penny since
they landed. The night we were at Hasan the village Chief went up to sleep
at Hooker’s place to protect him in case of a further row—but the men had
been down in the afternoon looking at the school meke, and that had
given a turn to the current of their thoughts. Literally they had scarcely a
rag for a sulu till the other day Mr. Burt sent up some cloth to buy
cocoanuts for copra, and Mr. Hooker took upon him to divide it amongst
them. He would be kind to them if he could, though he’s no great shakes
himself.
Blyth reports to Mitchell that at Motukobuli there are:
(Ist) eight Apia men (3 dead), no provision made for payment.
(2nd) Fifteen Viti Levu men (2 dead) no provision. (3rd)
Eight Yiti Levu men ( + 3 dead) brought against their will from
Na Sawa, No provision for payment. Not one of these has
ever been passed before a magistrate.


Wednesday , April 19.—Abel brought John Colata, who did
not get what he wanted. Abel had luncheon with us, also Mr.
and Mrs. Corney, the latter very nice. Walked with Eyre to
call on Chief-Justice. The path to his house nearly impassable.
Mr. D’Arcy Murray dying. Abel wanted to collect his pro-
vince’s tax out of a second province!
From the Chief-Justice
April 19, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—l have perused the despatches re
the Polynesian Company, and think they contain the substance of what was
agreed upon by the Council. The letters were not easy to write. It is never
pleasant to have to tell people that they have no right to property which they
imagine to be theirs, but I think you have done it with as little unpleasant-
ness as possible.
Thursday , April 20.—N0 Fitzroy. Council. Passed Appeal
Ordinance, and Summary Offences Ordinance. In the afternoon
arrived the following unpleasant letters.
Yatukarasa, Epereli 18. —lsaka—Sa ca na neitou yasana e na vuku ni
nodra tevoro. Sa kama kece ko Batiri. Sa moko ira eso na gone na alewa,
na tagane eso ka sa vana kh laueo ka eso. Sa lalai mai ko Korotogo.
Au sa tawa kilai iratou nai Yakavuvuli ko Nafitalai ga kei rau tu tiko oqo.
Sa bera saka ga na kena macala keitou sa vakaloloma tiko koi au na
wekamuni. Ko Esala Seru.
The above letter is to the teacher at Serua. The next is
to Webb.
Epereli, 18.—Esaka—Sa qai yaco na ca e neitou yasana. Sara moku
ko ira mai Batiri. Sa kama kece na koro ka yaco mai ki Korotogo.
Sa ka levu sara, na tamata sa moku, au sa sega ni kila vinaka na kena levu.
Ko iratou nai Yakavuvuli, au sa sega ni kila na vanua eratou tiko kina.
Ko Nafitalai ga mai Korotogo keirau sa tiko oqo.
Sa kunea mai ko koya na tamata eso era moku. Edua na Buni gone e
moku ka rua na veitinani ka dua na bunigone e lauvana na domona, ka dua
na tamata bula sa cauravou ka lauvana mate. Ka dua e laucoko ke ne
tube vatu. Oqo keitou kila sa bera na kena macala. Sana ka levu na tamata
e mate.
Ko ira ka ravuravu ko Tavuni ko Nadrala Yatukoro ke ira kece na tevoro.
Ko turaga-ni-lewa mai Tavuni sa lauvana ka kainaki sa yavalako. Sa mate
tale edua na tacina kale 3 tale. Ko ira ga oqo ka kilai sa bera ga na kena
macala mai tukutuku. Sa ca neitou yasana. Ena mataka ga oqo ni moniti
ka yaco kina na ka oqo. Au kerei kemuni me dua mai vei au na veva kei na
waqa ni vola meu drau volavola yani ki ni sa oti na veva vei au. Au sa vola
kusakusa sara nai vola oqo. Au sa loloma yani. Esala Seru.
And this from the Roko of Rewa to me.
Rewa, Epereli 19.—Isaka—Au sa volavola yani vei kemuni e na vuku
ni valu sa ia mai na noqu yasana mai Ra. Sa kama e lima na koro. Sa ka
levu e bau moto ke so e lauvana ena dakai. Au sa tukuna yani vei kemuni,


me keitou taki vaka tawani ira na kai Korolevu. Ke sa lomamuni me keitou
lako ki ra moni tukuna totolu mai vei yau, me so raai na nuku ka dua mai na
noqu tawa e vuna, Sa oti saka. An sa loloma yani vei kemuni.
Koi an saka na wekamuni dina, Ko Roko Ttji Dreketi.
April 21.—N0 Fitzroy. Very wet day. In afternoon came a
letter from Bulls Yuda, Nadi, and Sabeto, which gives a worse
complexion to matters. I fear we are really in for native
troubles. Alas that this should come to me; that this should
be the end of my self-confident boast that I at least should have
no native wars. Shall send Arthur to Eewa to collect the arms
there, take them to Nadroga, and report all he observes.
This is the Bull’s letter received Friday evening.
Ko Mereki e Yuda, Epereli 14.—Isaka—An sa vola yani vei kemuni na
neitou tukutuku ; koi keitou kecega na Buli ni tikina. Era sa lako Saka
mai nai valu mai Colo. Sa kama nai veikoro eso. Sa kama, Saka, ko Devo,
ko Yana-sarawa, kei Yunamoli, kei Naloqa, kei Nawaqa. Oqo Saka ga na
keitou tukunia yani vei kemudrau na Kovana kei na Turaga ni vain, mo
drau kila Saka tiko mai na ka sa tubu tiko oqo e ra.
la ko keitou sa tiko vakarorogo tikoga oqo me lewai, Saka, mai e dua na
ka vei keitou se me keitou lako vua nai Sosomi ki Colo se me keitou sa tiko
mada ga e na neitou veivanua. Mo drau lewa, Saka, mai vei keitou nai
tukutuku oqori. Sa oti ga, Saka, nai tukutuku.
Koi au Sabori —KTavula—Bukatavatava Daura, na wekamuni dina.
April 22. —Still no Fitzroy. Arthur was off in Friend’s
boat soon after daylight. Saw Colonel Pratt, who was utterly
impracticable. He said that if I put the suppression of the
disturbances in the mountains into his hands as a military
operation, he would not move a man till he had obtained rein-
forcements from India or the Cape, or Mauritius. I pointed
out to him how widely the trouble would spread if not speedily
dealt with, and how friendly districts would be harried or forced
into rebellion through fear. This did not move him the least;
on the contrary, he urged that the more joined the revolt, the
more land there would be to confiscate, the more chance of.
“clearing off” the natives, and the more attention would be'
attracted to its suppression. I will do it myself, as a policej
matter, with native police. I have not yet called in the military,!
and now I will not. I will treat it as a mere case of resistance'
to the enforcement of warrants. Saw Eitterhoff, and Garrick
(about Eitterhoff’s lease). In afternoon saw Emberson about
Drew’s case and other things, Floyd de rebus ecclesiasticis,. and
MacGregor about doctors for the force. Whilst he was with
me letters came from Carew. Star of the South came in
afternoon. Letter from Le Hunte. Eachel and Mrs. Havelock


went to see Yani. Olive, I hope, rather more rational. Carew’s
letter was chiefly written before the outbreak. It is dated
April 12. He says he will number his letters, as I desired ; that
“the meetings got up by Rabalabala and Yakayavanuku have
resulted in absolute barrenness, but nothing worse.”
News received to-day of the missing Kadavu canoe. It
foundered off Koro. Nine Draiba men and two women drowned.
Two men swam ashore, one, a Tongan, came here.
Sunday , April 23.—Went to loin in the guard’s hure. New
military chaplain rather eloquent. He preached out of Phil-
ippians and preached of the heavenly Jerusalem. I did not go
to church, but stayed with the children. I read to them.
Nevil learnt a hymn very well. Mitchell, MacGregor, and Eyre
at dinner. Talk with Olive.
Was unable to get off* the Star of the South till Wednesday >
afternoon. Col. Pratt and his engineers went to Suva, Olive
to Serua, Knollys and MacGregor to Nasaucoko, Tui Ba to
Sagunu. In the morning the English mail at last came in, but
had no very special news. Nothing of the High Commission —
or Admiralty Commission —or Ceylon. The delay in the arrival
of the Fitzroy accounted for in a singular manner. Captain
Champion heard at Kandavu of his wife’s serious illness, and
forthwith deserted , going off to Sydney by the mail, and leaving
the Fitzroy helplessly anchored in Galoa Bay. Luckily Thurston
arriving there turned his old nautical knowledge to account and
brought her back to Levuka safely. Induced Cocks to take
the Fitzroy: a very ludicrous transaction. I sent for him and
found him unwilling to undertake the post, and yet rather
attracted by the offer. I was trying to show him that in the
present position of affairs it was his duty to give us his services,
without which the transport of soldiers and stores would be
much retarded, and all operations in the big island greatly
crippled, when there appeared at one of the open windows of
the verandah a gaunt and austere woman in rusty black, with a
severe black bonnet. She stood in an attitude in the window,
and then advanced a step into the room, saying solemnly, “ I am
his wife.” I got up to shake hands with her. She repeated
with even greater solemnity, “ I am his wife, and I forbid him
to take command of a ship again.” I respectfully declined to
discuss the matter with her, and told her that as I never dis-
cussed business in the presence of ladies, if she did not leave us
I must leave the room, and rising took Cocks with me into the
Private Secretary’s Office. He had kept silence till then, but on
getting into Arthur’s room he at once called out, “ Lock the


door, lock the door ! ” which I did, though, as the lady might
have walked in through the window, had she not remained firmly
in her seat in my office, it was not of much use. I soon succeeded
in convincing him that he really had no option. He accepted
the appointment, and the happy pair walked slowly away home
together in grave conversation. On Thursday, Eyre, Maudslay,
and the Baron returned from Bau. On Friday we went to Bau,
taking with us Lady Hackett and Adi Alisi. Yaqona at Yunivalu’s.
Saturday. —Saw Abel, the Vunivalu, etc. Discussed taxes,
gardens, Kumi, etc. etc. Walked about Bau. Yaqona with
Abel at his very pretty new house.
Sunday. —To Soso church. Joeli preached. It was rather
a good sermon. Theme, the difficulty of abandoning bad habits
and the need for doing so. Illustrations really good, and one
describing the approach of death made every one attend care-
fully. In the afternoon went to the Court church, where also,
rather to my surprise, Joeli preached. It was an even better
sermon than in the morning. The ladies came to see Rachael.
In the night a messenger arrived from Havelock with a very
alarming letter from Carew, dated 17th, and saying that “a
most extensive rising has taken place of the heathen tribes of
the Sigatoka River, and that I have just received a note from
Buli Yuda to inform me that if a town called Burua and now
threatened, should fall, there will be nothing to prevent the
devastation of the country to the sea-coast.” He also says he
is in hourly expectation of an attack on the camp, and that
matters are hourly assuming a more serious aspect.
On the whole I thought it wisest to adhere to my original
plans, and not to show alarm or haste by cutting short my visit,
though I must now go myself to Yiti Levu as soon as possible.
Went on Monday with Abel to Kumi, sailing there in his
canoe, and coming back in my own boat. The Drews were
absent. The place is very pretty but neglected, and almost
abandoned. We saw Drew’s overseer, Mr. Porter, and also
the people of Kumi town. The difficulties will, I think, be got
over without any very great difficulty, but fresh troubles have
arisen with the town of Koro-ki-Sera, the Buli from whence has
written to the Roko only a day or two ago with a formidable
account of damage done. Altogether Kumi might be made one
of the prettiest places in Fiji—the view from the house is
charming —the ground about it nicely undulating, and an abund-
ance of good trees, chiefly “ivi.” After our inspection we
went into the house and sat round a table. Mr. Porter handed
glasses of milk to Wilkinson and me; the Roko of the province


he would not serve, and signed to a labour boy to give him some.
Ratu Epeli said and looked nothing, but he declined the drink,
and I am sure he marked, felt, and resented, the slight. Re-
turned in my boat. After returning talked to Friend. East-
gate dined with us. Yaqona at the Yunivalu’s, who was in a
very chatty humour.
Tuesday. —Rain. Talked to Eastgate and to Wilkinson.
Fitzroy returned. Meke in afternoon. The ladies’ meke was
the only really good one. It was led by Adi Kuila with great
dignity, in a sulu of fine black tappa very much crimped and
pleated. The ladies were prettily dressed and all carried
paddles, with which they performed slow and graceful move-
ments. The music played by old Joeli as leader was much
better than usual, and the sound “ tulia, tulia,” somehow irre-
sistibly brought to my mind the idea—“ turn about, turn about,
set to your partner.” To Abel’s in the evening and had much
talk. His house is a very handsome one.
Wednesday.—Fitzroy on her return brought fresh letters
from Carew, very much more satisfactory. Returned to
Levuka by the north end of Ovalau—a very pretty sail, —and
on our way had a distant sight of what was said to be a fight
between a thresher and a whale.
Mr. Maudslay to his Mother
Nasova, Fiji, April, 1876. — .. . Mr, Langham, the Missionary, is
going for a three weeks’ cruise among the islands of his district; his wife goes
with him, and during their absence they have lent the Governor their house
at Ban. Igo ahead to-morrow in the gig. The Governor and Lady Gordon
will wait for the Fitzroy to take them. She is expected back this evening
with the mails from Kandavu. It is only twenty miles by water from Levuka
to Ban. Baron von Hiigel goes with me.
Bau. —We came down here very easily under sail nearly all the way.
As the water was too low for us to pass inside the reef round the Island of
Moturiki, we had to row out through a very narrow passage to the open sea.
The great big breakers were rolling in, ten yards on either side of us, and
when in the hollow of the waves, we could see the bright-coloured coral not
more than a couple of feet below the keel of the boat. The swell was very
heavy outside, but luckily the wind was light, and we had smooth sailing all
the rest of the way. For some miles round Bau, wdth the exception of one
narrow passage, the water is very shallow, but this gives little trouble to the
natives, whose canoes are of very light draught, and who know every reef
and every bank by heart. The missionary’s house is right at the top of the
hill, and the view from it is very charming. I don’t think any place ever
impressed upon me, so much as Bau, how very small a town may be and yet
be famous, or perhaps infamous. From reading accounts of it, I had begun
2 F


to look on the story of Ban and Fijian history much as one looks on the story
of Troy. It was shrouded in a sort of mysterious past, and even meeting
some of the actors in it, apart from the scene of action, did not make the
story itself more real for me. But looking over the hill where I sit writing
this, seeing the place where the cannibal oven stood, counting the death notches
scored on the trees, and looking on the very stone against which the victims’
brains were dashed out, whilst all around are the same houses, the same
canoes, the same people, makes it very real indeed. It is not like unearthing
the ruins of Troy, or rebuilding the voers of Thingalla, and peopling them
in imagination with a race that has passed away. The scene itself is actually
before you, and it wants very little change to turn that double canoe I see
gliding away towards Ovalau, with fifty dark figures on its deck, to a war
party off on a marauding trip. The island itself does not measure much
more than a quarter of a mile in any direction, and the houses cannot be
counted by hundreds ; but there is a dramatic atmosphere about the place,
and one cannot help feeling that one is in a city, and amongst a leading
people. And though no one can say that Ban is beautiful, it is certainly
beautifully picturesque. On one side of the island, where there is but a strip
of land fifty or sixty yards broad between the steep rocks and the shalloAv
sea, stands the town of the Yunivalu [Thakombau], a cluster of some five or six
houses, his own of great size, and his kitchen and store-room nearly as big.
There is a certain air of quiet and grandeur about the place that I cannot
describe. Nothing ever looks new about a Fijian house ; the walls and
thatch so soon turn to browns of every shade. Clumps of hibiscus, with
their green leaves and bright scarlet flowers, grow half wild about the doors.
Beyond the kitchen is the large canoe shed : it holds but one double canoe,
but that canoe is over a hundred feet long, and would hold 500 men.
Imagine what the size of the single mat-sail must be to carry such a ship
along. The canoe is called “The upsetting of the land,” a traditional and
suggestive name that has belonged in turn to all the biggest war canoes of
the Yunivalus of Ban. The present one is being rebuilt, and lam looking
forward to a promised sail in it when finished. The hulls are old, but a
new deck, mast, and deck-houses are being made for it. These large hulls are
made from hollowed trunks of trees, cleverly pieced together, every joint
fastened with cocoa-nut sinnet [cord], and not a single nail or metal bolt is used.
In old days they built their canoes with the aid of stone tools ; only now,
plane-irons tied with sinnet into wooden handles, adze-like, have taken the place
of stone axes. It is a splendid sight to see a big canoe shooting along with a
good breeze, and the dark, half-clothed figures on the deck form the most pic-
turesque groups. The Chief standing in the stern to manage the huge steer-
oar, the man with his hand on the sheet watching every movement of the sail
and the thavia [outrigger] (for safety depends on his skill and quickness as much
as on the helmsman himself), whilst a man forward, half-hidden in the hold,
bails out the water that always foams in over the pointed bow, and the crew,
grouped round the deck-house, beat the lali (drum) and chaunt their quaint,
monotonous songs. Then, when a tack has to be made, all is bustle and
excitement, for the foot of the great mat-sail has to be dragged by sheer
strength from one end of the canoe to the other—no easy work with any sea
running. lam always hearing Fijians abused for the clumsiness of their
canoes —I think most unfairly—for they are the only people I know of, who,


without the use of metal, and with no knowledge of building, have made
boats safe to go to sea in, and able to heat to windward. But lam forgetting
all about the Yunivalu’s house. Lying on the mats, and looking up into the
roof, one’s eyes lose themselves amongst the smoke-coloured rafters and the
platforms and store-shelves, where lie great bundles of sinnet, and rolls
of mats, and canoe sails—in fact, everything that means wealth to Fijians.
The first time I went into the house was in the evening. The old Chief was
sitting on his mat, his wife and daughter a little below him—not on the same
mat, that would have been a breach of good manners—and in a semicircle in
front of him, some lost to sight in the gloomy corners, sat groups of men and
women. It was just meal time, and the dinner began by a good-looking girl
bringing some large green leaves with boiled yams in them, which she, kneel-
ing down, spread out before the old Chief, and then, still bending down, she
crawled back to her place near the door, for no one stands up in so great a
Chiefs presence. After the yams came fish, served in the same way, and
when the Chief had finished his food all the people clapped their hands ; then
came tea and bread and butter, in which I joined, and when the tea was over
there was more clapping of hands, and then all the rest fell to and dined off
what was left. There seemed plenty for them all; they ate in silence, sitting
in groups —men on one side of the door, women on the other. After dinner
we had some conversation ; but ray interpreter, a Fijian, was so cowed in
presence of the great Chief—generally he is the most free and easy scoundrel
—that our talk was not very lively, and I was rather glad when the teacher
came in, and we had family prayers, and the evening hymn sung with the
usual Fijian drawl; whatever the time, they always manage to end in a
minor key. After prayers came yangona and selukas (cigarettes), and then
the old gentleman went off to bed. We persuaded Andi Kuila, his daughter,
to take us to her own little house close by, and to send for one of her ladies
to make another brew of yangona and roll selukas for us, and there, chaffing
and talking, we spent the rest of the evening.
Yesterday we spent the morning wandering about the town, visiting
different houses and looking at the big canoes. We went into a house where
the women were at work making masi (native cloth); such a row they
made as they hammered out the bark on a resounding log of wood. The
Baron, who is well known here, has brought no end of presents —a smart sulu
or pinafore for every pretty girl, and presents for some of the old women too.
Luckily his affection for the young ladies is very evenly distributed, and they
all seem to like him very much in return. Andi Kuila, with whom he stayed
some weeks at her house at Navuso, always calls him her son, and is really
very fond of him indeed. In the afternoon we went to look at the Yunivalu
quarters by daylight, and Andi Kuila showed us over the big kitchen, and
then we walked back with the old Chief, who was on his way to afternoon
church. He was as pleased as possible at our praising his town. There is no
end of church-going here. Every morning the lali rings at sunrise for morn-
ing prayers; again, about 5.30, when work is over, there is afternoon service
and a sermon, and in the evening family prayers in every house ; and on
Sunday they manage to find time for another sermon and a Sunday school, at
which even grown-up people attend. All this goes on just the same when
there is no white person in the place.
Bait, April 24. —Here I have been for a week, and the Governor has not


yet arrived. Every day last week we were on the look-out, expecting to see the
Fitzroy appear in sight. Last Saturday, however, a canoe came from Levuka,
bringing me a letter from the Governor, saying that the Fitzroy had not yet
returned with the mails from Kandavu, and that should he not arrive by
Wednesday, I am to return to Nasova. lam sorry to say, he also sends me
news of burnings and slayings by the Mountaineers of the Sigatoka district, of
which lam most anxious to hear further particulars. What with hourly
expecting the Governor to arrive, and the rainy weather, I have not left the
island during the whole week, and am beginning to know which houses in the
town have the softest and cleanest mats. As there was a very low tide this
morning all the young ladies of the place were off out fishing, about fifty of
them, with Andi Kuila at their head. They wade and swim about from reef to
reef, and forming large circles gradually close in, till with a great deal of
shouting and splashing—they are close enough together to make a complete
ring with the oblong nets they carry in their hands. They were away all
day, and in the evening we had presents of fish from Andi Kuila, and other
ladies, so we were well off for supper. I was quite sorry when Wednesday
passed and the Governor did not appear. We drank many farewell bowls of
yanqona that evening, and at 6.30 the next morning started in the gig for
Levuka. We arrived at Nasova about 4 o’clock. The Governor was stand-
ing to meet me at the end of the pier, with the news that the Fitzroy had
just come in, and that they were off to Bau to-morrow, so our journey back
was useless, but there had been no means of stopping us. The next morning
we started for Bau: we were a large party of ourselves, and Andi Alisi, the
wife of the Roko Tui Ba, her brother Joni, and some of her attendants, came
with us. The Missionary’s house could not hold nearly all our party, so some
of us took up our quarters at the Yunivalu’s, and some at the native strangers’
house, where we were very comfortable. I told you in another letter that I
had to return to Nasova again to make arrangements for starting with the
Governor for the N.W. Coast of Yiti Levu : I managed, however, to get back
to Bau in time for the great miki (dance) on Tuesday. Unluckily it was
showery nearly all the afternoon. Only two days’ notice had been given, yet
about a thousand people came over from the mainland, and some of the mikes
were excellent. One, danced by men from the Big - land was particularly
curious. It was an old heathen mike, and was supposed to represent the
actions and powers of a certain god. The men dancing in it were all dressed
alike in likus and garlands of green leaves. I could not understand a word
of the song, and even Mr. Wilkinson (our interpreter) could only catch a word
now and then. The movements of the dance were curious, but very graceful,
and it ended by the god (represented by two men who sat on the ground with
their backs towards us) asking for food. The dancers moved up in two lines
from opposite sides, and, as each man passed the god, he pretended to place some
food before him. But the god was very hungry, and as soon as one man
brought food he beckoned to the next man to come on, waving his hands up to
his mouth to show that he wanted more. The men came quicker and quicker,
and the god’s four hands kept beckoning and waving them until the men came
racing up to him. At last he had eaten till he could eat no more, and then
he (the two men) fell flat on his back with his hands stretched out behind
him. But the event of the day was a Tongan miki danced by the ladies of
Bau led by Andi Kuila. It was pretty but rather monotonous. Each woman


carried a little paddle in her hand, and I believe the song had something to
do with canoeing, but what it was I could not find out. The band consisted
of old Joeli, the chief native missionary minister at Bau (who is a Tongan),
and two assistants, who played or rather beat time on a very noisy log of
wood, and sung the beginning of every line of the song, which was taken up
a third lower by the dancers. It was very different from any Fijian meki I
had seen, and was, I believe, first brought here for the opening of the Mission-
ary College at Navoloa, when a number of Tongan ladies were invited and
entertained at Bau for several months, so that the Fijians might learn to
dance it properly. We should all of us have liked to stay longer at Bau, but
it was important that the Governor should go off to the disturbed districts as
soon as possible. So on Wednesday morning we all went back to Levuka in
the Fitzroy. Our few hours at Nasova were very busy ones, for we were
to start again in the Fitzroy for the N.W. Coast of Yiti Levu early the next
morning. There was a fortnight’s provisions to be got on board, a police
guard to be armed and got ready, and despatches to be written for the English
mail, which would have left before our return. Mr. Wilkinson (the chief
interpreter) was to come with us. With all our hurrying it was ten o’clock
before we started, and though we had a fair wind down the coast, the sun had
set some time before we dropped anchor in Rakiraki bay, opposite to Na
Vatu, and it was too late to land and sleep on shore as we had intended.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Fiji, May 5 to 10, 1876. —My dearest Jane—lt seems such an
age since I got a letter from you —for there was none by the
last mail, to my great disappointment. You must have been too
late in sending it, for I feel sure you did write. I heard from
all the others—they were just getting settled in the new house.
It is three weeks now since I wrote last to you, and in a few
days the mail will be due again, but, alas! I fear there is an end
of the S. ’Frisco steamers calling at Kandavu any more. The
Fitzroy is to go there once more, but it is a forlorn hope, I am
afraid. The Company finds Fiji does not pay, and as we can’t
afford to give them the subsidy they ask, they say we are to be
knocked off, and our letters will have to go and come round by
Auckland at uncertain intervals. If we don’t get any this time
there will not be another chance for six weeks —think how horrid !
And then the uncertainty of these letters going makes it very
difficult to write at all. We shall send a bag to Kandavu on
Wednesday (16 hours). If the steamer does not call the bag will
come back here, and go about a fortnight later vid Auckland—
and all the letters will be so stale by the time you get them. I
am quite out of heart about it—cut off as we are not only from the
outer world, but even from the small world of Fiji. I have been
writing a long letter to Emily during the past three weeks, which
I daresay you will see. After waiting and expecting the mail for


nine days, it came in at last on Wednesday the 26th April. We
had had a house lent us at Ban belonging to Mr. Langham, the
Missionary there, during the three weeks he and his wife and
Eka were to be away making a tour in their district in the
Mission ship, the Jubilee —and for those nine days we were all
packed up waiting for the mail, as we could not go till the Fitzroy
came back to take us. Mr. Maudslay and the Baron had been
sent on before in the Governor’s boat to make preparations
for us, and they were waiting a whole week at Bau hourly
expecting our arrival. At last they came back thinking it was
no use waiting any longer, and found the Fitzroy had arrived, and
they had to go again to Bau with us the next day. Bau, you
may remember, is a small island close to Yiti Levu, and twenty-five
miles from Ovalau. It is almost entirely covered with Fiji houses,
and there the Yunivalu and most of his family live; in fact it is
a kind of Fijian stronghold. There are no white persons living
there but the Langhams, who have a very nice house on a hill
about the middle of the island.
A few days before we went to Bau, the Governor got news
from Yiti Levu of a fresh outbreak among the mountaineers,
which made him think it advisable to send off Captain Knollys
and Captain Olive with reinforcements to the mountains, and also
to send A. J. Gordon to another part to see what was going on,
and try to conciliate the people, so that we were left with only
Mr. Maudslay and the Baron, However, Mr. Eyre was asked
to go with us, and also Mr. Wilkinson (an interpreter), and I
invited Lady Hackett, as she had not been well, and seemed out
of spirits, so that with the boat’s crew, guard, and servants, we
made a large party, twenty-eight in all. I was exceedingly glad
to go away, for we had been here nearly four months without
change and seldom going out, and I had not been feeling very
well, and we were all quite knocked up by the heat, and the
children, though well, both looked excessively pale —and since
Mrs. De Ricci’s death, I had felt a sort of growing dislike to the
place, increasing every day.
Well, we started on Friday, the 28th April, in the horrid little
Fitzroy , which took six hours to do the twenty-five miles. They
had given up expecting us at Bau, so there were not many people
to receive us, but the Yunivalu was on the beach, and Ratu Abel,
his eldest son, and a few others. We had to anchor at some
distance off, and rowed to shore in the Governor’s boat, which we
brought with us. The crew had their new dresses for the
occasion, white sulus and short-sleeved jackets all trimmed with
red —they looked so nice. The Yunivalu took the Governor’s
hand (after he had shaken hands with us all) and led him up to


the Langhams’ house, and we all followed—it was a pretty steep
pull—but we were very comfortable there. All the gentlemen
except the Governor slept in the “Strangers’ house,” a very nice
native house in the town, covered with mats, where they had
nothing to do but to put up musquito nets and sleep on the floor.
They have all taken to sleeping on mats here, laid on the beds,
and are quite accustomed to it. [You asked me once about the
mats. lam afraid it would hardly answer to send them home,
after all, as they don’t wear well; we are always having to renew
them here. I have got a double layer of them in my bedroom,
which is very large and has a concrete floor, some forty or fifty
I should think, —the “ sleep mats ” are rather of a different kind,
very soft, and can be doubled up, —but when I do send a box I
shall put in one or two as specimens. lam sure you will admire
them.] We had to take everything with us in the way of food, as
nothing but milk could be got. We took a joint of mutton for
the first day, two chickens, two ducks and a turkey alive, and
quantities of tinned provisions, and bread, besides yams for the
men. We only intended to stay three days, as we thought the
Langhams would come back—but the Yunivalu told the Governor
that he meant to get up a very good for us, and insisted
on our staying two days longer to give them time —for messengers
had to be sent over to the mainland to get people to come for it.
I was rather sorry I brought Lady Hackett, for she was (I think)
very much bored—besides, she was not very well, and did not like
the rough way of living, and evidently did not like the natives,
who to me are delightful. I only wish I could go among them,
and see more of them, but, as Governor’s wife, I can’t do so; it
would not be considered etiquette. The Baron and Mr, Maudslay
spent their whole time in loafing about from one house to another
giving presents, lying on mats, smoking cigarettes (which were
made for them by Fijian girls) and drinking yangona. I was
delighted with Bau. It is so picturesque and new, and far fresher
and cooler and healthier than this place. I like walking about
the native town, and watching the people; you can’t think how
nice it is. The houses are all so clean and large and picturesque,
and so thoroughly Fijian. On Sunday we all went to church.
Of course I couldn’t understand a word. The service was
performed by a fine old man, Joelle (Joel), who preached a long
sermon with a great deal of action. He told his congregation
that I was present! “ Andi Nasova ”is the name they give me
—or the “ Maramma ” (lady). In the afternoon the ladies came to
visit me ; first Andi Kuila alone, and soon afterwards Andi Lydia
(the wife of Thakombau) arrived with a number of followers, and
Senimile, Andi Kuila’s little girl (about Molly’s size, seven years


old) and little Ratu Timothy. Mr. Wilkinson came to interpret.
Andi Lydia is a very stately queen-like old thing, immensely fat,
with such a grand air; she kept the whole conversation, for
Andi Kuila is nobody when her mother is present; all the others
sat outside in the verandah. Andi Kuila had on a sulu of black
tappa and a white silk jpinafoa; the Queen had a brown tappa
sulu with large black spots (worn only by chiefs) and a cotton
pinafoa. They took a good deal of notice of the children, and
admired them very much. I presented them each with their
photographs. Kevil sat by little Senimile, whom she likes very
much, and stroked her soft brown skin: she had nothing on but
a little sulu. Jack won’t have anything to say to the Fiji children.
The Baron amused himself by feeding Timothy with large lumps
of sugar. After they had all gone, I sent the Baron down to
them with my presents for Andi Kuila and Andi Lydia, some silk
pinafoas, and bottles of sandal-wood oil, and some white silk
pocket-handkerchiefs for the Yunivalu. The next day we went
to see Thakombau’s big canoe, which was in a boat-house, being
repaired; it is a wonderful structure, about 100 feet long, a
double canoe with a kind of bridge across it, on which is a house.
It requires seventy men to sail it, and will hold 400 or 500
people. The Yunivalu has promised to take me out for a sail in
it some day.
The next day I went down with the Baron, Lady Hackett,
the children, and Mr. Wilkinson to return the visits of the ladies.
Andi Kuila is now on a visit to Bau, where she has a house,
but she usually lives at a place called Navuso, ten miles up the
Rewa River, where she has a very fine house. We went first
to the Yunivalu’s house, which is a very large and high one.
He, Andi Lydia, and Andi Kuila were sitting there on their
respective mats, various attendants round the room, but they had
put some chairs for us. The house is divided by an immense
screen of most beautiful tappa, painted in the style of the bit
I sent you; on the other side Was the Yunivalu’s bedroom.
Andi Lydia had a little house of her own close by. I admired
the house immensely. Thakombau kept the conversation to
himself. He asked me if there were Chiefs among the natives in
Trinidad or Mauritius, and then he said in a very sententious
way “ The prosperity of Fiji may be entirely attributed to our
system of Chiefs,” etc., all of course translated for me by
Mr. Wilkinson. After a time he asked me if I should like to
see his kitchen, and he said “We can cook for a whole nation in
our cook-house, and every kind of cooking —boiling, frying,
baking —can be carried on at the same time,” and it certainly
is a very fine kitchen, full of people, cooking, making mats,


washing, etc. I then went back and wished the Yunivalu good-
bye, and told Andi Kuila I should like to see her house, so she
and the Baron (who is a great friend of her’s) hurried on to
prepare it for us, and by the time we got there they had put
down good mats, and tidied it up, and she had changed her sulu
and pinafoa and was sitting on the mat ready. She is such a
jolly good-natured creature, very clever, and full of fun. She
wanted to take Jack on her knee, but he wouldn’t let her. I
proposed to her to exchange Jack for little Timothy, but Jack
didn’t see it. She told me that she and Andi Lydia were both
going to dance in the Paddle m6k6 the next day. She also is
very fat and has enormous arms, but beautifully made hands and
feet. I would send you a photograph of her, but they don’t give
the slightest idea of her. I think it is her smile and manner which
are so attractive. Senimile is a very handsome child; she always
comes and takes my hand and walks about with me : to the
attendants she has the same imperious manner as her mother,
most amusing to see. There are two other boys besides Timothy,
one I have never seen, at school, and Ratu Navola, about six, a
very pretty boy. They are unmistakable little Chiefs, so different
to the common children. The next day (Tuesday) the
took place. It poured with rain all the morning, and we were
afraid it would not come off, but it cleared up towards two
o’clock, with occasional showers. Mr. Mitchell came over for it
in a canoe, and there were also two other gentlemen (magistrates),
all of whom dined with us that night, making a party of ten
in our one sitting-room, with only forks and tumblers (no wine
glasses) enough for five. I don’t think Lady Hackett much liked
it. At about three we all went down to see the mtkL A
canopy of mats had been put up for us in a large open green in
the middle of the town, where the dancing took place. Ratu
Abel and a few others were sitting there on mats. Chairs had
been put for us. The dances were most curious and interesting,
and they were beautifully got up with a great deal of snowy
tappa, and bright likus. All the mdkds had some meaning: in
one, they pretended to be big fish catching little ones, and a
shower of whales’ teeth was thrown out from the middle, supposed
to be little fishes. These teeth were afterwards collected and
laid at the feet of the Governor, but he returned them all but
two or three. When I send a box, I shall put in some whales’
teeth. (This reminds me, by the way, that Abbey told me to-day
that he was very soon going to send Mrs. Ryan a box of clubs
to “ ’ang up in ’er ’all.” I hope it won’t be great rubbish !)
There were six or seven different mAkds, danced by men who
came from the villages on the mainland, but the most interesting


by far, was the Paddle m6M, danced by the Ban ladies and led
by Andi Kuila herself, looking most stately and dignified, (the
old queen did not dance). There were about 125 ladies, all
dressed in sulus with bright yellow likus (thick fringes of split
leaves about ten inches long) round the waist, very much bunched
out, and pinafoas of every variety of colour, and a flower in
their hair behind each ear. Every lady had a paddle [sketch]
which they waved about in the figure in time to the music.
Andi Kuila had a black sulu and belt of fine mat and white
pinafoa trimmed with velvet. They were perfectly drilled, and
the time was wonderful. I can’t describe the dance, it was
exceedingly pretty ; when it was over, I sent for Andi Kuila, and
she came and sat on a chair by me. She presented Jack with
her paddle, which is a particularly nice one, with the name
ADI ARIETA KUILA, , • ti.ii
BAU cut upon it. Jack then consented to sit
on her knee, and said he did like Andi Kuila. He was delighted
with the paddle. Nevil had one given her afterwards, and I
hear her singing little Paddle mdktfs with a flower stuck behind
each ear. Each m6H brought their own music, which consisted
of twenty or thirty persons sitting on the ground, each on a
banana leaf, in a mass, beating Fiji drums, stumping hollow
bamboos on the ground, and singing the usual monotonous
chaunt; it sounds absurd, but really the effect is admirable.
The next day we left Bau and returned home. Some fresh
news which came from the mountains (I send you a paper with
an account of it) decided the Governor to go to the Coast himself
immediately, so that he might see what was going on, and talk
to the Chiefs, and having sat up nearly all night, writing, he started
off early the next morning, with Mr. Maudslay, leaving only the
Baron with us. I don’t know how long he may be away, probably
a fortnight or more, but I don’t feel uneasy, for there is no risk
for him. He has established a post, so that I shall hear from
time to time. He went in the Fitzroy , taking his boat with him.
We all feel much better for this little change to Bau. The
children are wonderfully improved in appearance, and now we
have come to delightful cool weather, so I hope we shall all get
on better. After the Baron and I had spent two days alone, Eka
arrived from Bau, having stopped there one night on her return
from the trip. On the whole she had enjoyed it very much,
though she must have suffered great discomforts. Sea-sickness
in the Jubilee , excessive rough fare, tinned provisions and tea only ,
without milk and often without sugar, sometimes a pig, chickens
or fish dressed by the natives, sleeping on mats the whole time,
and bad accommodation, sometimes native houses, not over clean,


and more than once sleeping in a church. Every night when
they came tired to a new place they had to rig up two rooms
with partitions of mats, and to hang up their musquito nets
themselves. They only passed one night in the Jubilee , and slept
on deck. But she doesn’t mind discomforts, and she has seen
more than any other lady (except a missionary’s wife) can have
done of Fiji. She brought home some pottery and baskets and
stone hammers and a few other curiosities, and it has certainly
done her a great deal of good. She was away just a month.
May 10. —Letters must go to-day, but I will add a little.
Will you please send this letter to the others when you have
read it, and get Emily’s, for I can’t write the same things over
twice. I don’t think there is any objection to your showing the
first five sheets to any one who would care to see it. The weather
has been really delightful for the last week or so; as long as one
does nothing it is perfectly cool, but the least exercise makes
one very hot, and reminds one that we are in the tropics. How-
ever, there is not much temptation to take exercise; in fact it is
almost an impossibility. We are really very comfortable now, as
far as regards house and servants. Abelak and Jungeree, the
Indians, are real treasures, and I have no longer any fear of Abbey
being knocked up. We live very well indeed, and I like the
house extremely. If we could only get constant change I should
not dislike the place, but every one feels the same thing after two
months of Nasova, a longing to get away —anywhere, and they
all do go excepting me and the children !
I like the Baron very much, and we get on so well together
alone. He is very busy with his book, and packing up his
curiosities to send them home. He has made a very large
collection. He is an exceedingly clever and agreeable young
fellow. He and I have given two or three little dinners, the
Havelocks, etc., about two at a time ! What a different life it is
to what one leads at home, so many men about one, and so few
ladies. Mrs. Havelock is the only lady with whom I have an idea
in common, but there are always two or three nice men to be had.
Jack and Nevil are particularly well now, and look much better,
though they have not much colour. Nevil is devoted to “ Mr. the
Baron ” just now. She brought me in a large stone axe (native)
just now, and said “ Look what a beautiful present Mr. the Baron
has given me, something really woi'th having.” They treasure up
their “ Delection.” Abbey likes the place extremely. He works
hard in the garden from five o’clock every morning and is getting
it into nice order, and we have quite a farm now, so much live
stock: two cows, three calves, three horses, several pigs, and an


immense quantity of turkeys, ducks, guinea-fowls, and chickens,
which he manages himself. It is really quite wonderful what he
does. I have still hanging over me Nurse’s departure in
October, though I doubt if she will stay so long. lam extremely
annoyed about it, and it is a marriage I cannot approve of, and
feel certain cannot turn out well. She is as infatuated as ever
she can be with the creature. However, she is perfectly satisfied
and happy. I believe her great object in life was to get married
—to anyone ! . . . I must stop.
It may be six weeks before I get your missing letter or any
others, my latest dates are March.
Lady Gordon to Miss Emily Shaw Lefevre
Fiji, Easter Eve to May 10.—My dearest Emily—l don’t
quite know who I ought to write to this time, but it seems a
good while since I wrote to you. lam beginning in good time,
you see, for the mail has only been gone three days, so there is
nearly a month to wait. There is so little now to write about
that is new , that I shall try the journal plan I think. Well; the
day after the mail left—Thursday—nothing happened—then
Good Friday. We went to church, 1 carried as usual in my
chair. I always start ten minutes after the others, as the men
trot along and soon overtake them. It is a horrid stony road
through the beastly little town of Levuka. It rained most of the
afternoon, so we stayed in, and Mr. Maudslay built a palace for
the children.
To-day, Saturday, it was settled that after luncheon I was to
have a visit from Andi the wife of Tui Mba, a rather
important Chief, who has just arrived at Driemba to see the
Governor. (Driemba is the native town half a mile beyond this
on the sea-shore. The Governor has built three houses there for
the Chiefs to live in when they come on business from other
islands.) Roko Tui Mba arrived yesterday from Mba in Viti
Levu. They came in four canoes with a large suite. After
luncheon, Mr. Heffenan, the interpreter, went off to Driemba to
fetch Andi who was very much alarmed at the idea of
seeing me. When we saw her coming, Arthur J. went to meet
her, and led her up the steps by the hand into the drawing-room,
where, as soon as I had shaken hands, she flopped down upon a
mat, overcome with shyness! She brought two attendants
(ladies) with her, who carried the presents, viz., a large root of
yangona and a basket full of very nice picked pieces of tortoise-
shell. I talked to her a little through the interpreter, but it was


very difficult to make her talk. She is a tall, gaunt woman, with
an ugly but certainly nice face. After a bit, I gave her my
present, viz., two yards of white Chinese silk to make a “ pinafore,”
with red braid and lace to trim it with. I then told her she
might go, and she went down to the yangona room, where she
had a smoke and some grog with the gentlemen, and became
very talkative and jolly. I was sorry I didn’t go in afterwards.
It was rather showery, so I didn’t go out, and the Havelocks
came to tea and sat some time. We had Roko Tui Mba to
dinner, with Ratu Timothy and the interpreter, which made us
ten, as without Eka we are now seven. The Roko, who is a
most intelligent man, might be an European if it were not for
his colour. He sat next Arthur, who talked to him a great deal.
He had on a white shirt covered with large dogs’ heads in red,
and a white sulu. Timothy sat next me. He can talk very fair
English. He is such a handsome fellow. He is a great favourite
with the children. Nevil told me yesterday that she had met
Ratu Timothy, who shook hands with her and Jack, “and he
did look so nice in his black tappa sulu, white sash, and gray
shirt.” After dinner all the gentlemen, instead of coming to
the drawing-room, repaired to the yangona room, and I had a
bowl of the grog brought up to me by Arthur J. after the
Governor had drunk.
Easter Sunday. —(Last Easter Sunday we embarked at
Marseilles in the Anadyr.) We all went to church dined
early. Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Eyre always come to dinner on
Sundays. I told you, I think, that the Baron (von Hugel) and
Captain Olive had returned, which makes a large party on
Sundays. After dinner the Governor took the children to
church (to a children’s service at 3 o’clock). They were
carried together in my chair, and thought it the greatest fun
and enjoyed themselves very much. Captain Knollys walked
with them also. They both look very pale—Nevil is quite
colourless. There has been a little return of hot weather and
rain—still it is much better than it was. The children are
certainly very happy here. They are made a great deal of
and have always someone to play with. “Mr. the Baron” (as
they call him) is a great favourite, especially with Nevil, who
is always curling herself in his lap with her head on his
shoulder! Jack’s greatest friend has always been Mr. Mitchell,
but last Sunday he told him he no longer cared for him, that
he had got a new friend, Captain Olive, whom he liked much
better.
Easter Monday evening. —We are all looking for the mail, one


gets restless as the time draws near. It is settled that the day
after the mail arrives we are all to go to Mbau in the Fitzroy for
a week or so. The Langhams (who are now away on a mission
trip with Eka) have lent us their house, which, for Fiji, is a very
good one. It is only twenty-five miles off. Mr. Maudslay and
the Baron go there to-morrow in the Governor’s boat to make
preparations for us. We shall take seven or eight servants
besides the crew, and the Governor’s Mata, i.e., native A.D.C.
This is a new institution, a very useful one. The Mata is a man
of some rank; he is always in personal attendance on the
Governor—takes out messages and makes himself generally
useful. All the great Chiefs have Matas. The office is heredi-
tary in particular families, and their rank is rather high.
Arthur’s Mata is called Samweller (Samuel). We have just
attached another individual to the establishment, a man-of-war’s
man who had taken his discharge from the Nymphe. He is to
have charge of all the boats. I think he will be most useful.
In his spare time he is to work in the garden, and I think he
might also make Jack’s clothes !
Tuesday 18.—No Fitzroy with mails; it’s so tiresome to wait
and wait after it is due. The children went this afternoon to the
cemetery to put flowers on Mrs. He Ricci’s grave, which they
like doing very much. I am in daily fear that Nurse will tell
me that her Washerman won’t wait, and that she must go at
once. It is undoubtedly a mesalliance for her, but he has made
her believe he is the son of a nobleman ! I don’t mean to let
her go till her six months are up. Captain Knollys says he is
cpiite certain she will come crying to be taken back before six
months are over after her marriage, but she is infatuated about
the creature.
Wednesday 19.—Waiting all day for the mail in vain. A
new doctor, named Granville Corney, and his wife, who have just
arrived, came to luncheon. He brought a letter to Arthur from
a friend. . . . She is very pretty, self-possessed in manner, and
has plenty to say, and picturesque, rather artistic in dress,
to all appearance quite a lady. It has been close and stuffy
all day. I took a little turn along the sea quite late, and
felt very much bored, very tired, very dull. I forgot to
mention that Ratu Abel (the Yunivalu’s eldest son) also
lunched with us, and an interpreter. Abel is very solemn
and very Fijian, and can’t speak a word of English. He
brought a present for the Governor of a hundred yams of
enormous size. The Governor must give a return present, prob


ably a “ bolt of cloth ” (in calico). I have been getting a few
presents for Ban —to give to the ladies there—some bottles of
sandal-wood and other scents; six smart little boxes containing
three cakes of scented soap each; some silk gauze, black with
coloured stripes and spots, for pinafoas; very pretty striped
muslin in different patterns, two yards of each, also for pinafoas ;
pieces of braid and cheap lace for trimming the same; (this is a
“pinafoa ” [sketch] it just reaches to the waist; they often wear
them in a jaunty way —one sleeve on and the other hanging down
below the arm !) some pieces of Chinese silk; and prints of a
variety of patterns, rather showy, two yards of each for sulus.
The sulu is worn just put round the waist and tucked in in front.
(How they keep it up, I can’t think.) Over their sulus they
sometimes wear a thick coil of white tappa wound round and
round till it is a great size; this is very becoming to the figure,
though you would not think so. They all delight in getting
presents. I hope I shall see a good deal of Andi Kuila, who is
now at Bau. It is very difficult for me to see much of the
natives here. I think I have given up learning the language as
a hopeless task. Even Arthur, who has worked hard at it every
day for a year, cannot yet venture to talk; he understands it and
can read it, and write a little.
Friday , April 21.—Two more days of waiting for the mail,
and no sign of it. It has rained heavily nearly all yesterday and all
to-day; a good many small leaks are beginning to show, and we
shall be very damp after it. Arthur is very busy. News came
of a fresh disturbance among the mountaineers —nothing very
serious, but A. J. Gf. is to go off to-morrow to Viti Leyu to see
what is going on. He takes an interpreter, and will pick up an
armed escort at Rewa on his way to Serua. They don’t think
there will be any fighting. (N.B. —Never believe anything about
Fiji which you may see in the English papers. Those stories
about the rebellion were quite untrue.) Arthur J. is delighted
to be off. He has been all day getting provisions and making
preparations. Captain Knollys is getting up the ball, which is
to take place in nine weeks (but again put off). Very long
notice is necessary, as we shall ask all the people in the Group
who are supposed to be respectable. The d’Estes will be asked,
and Montague Cholmondeley Johnstone (Aunt Sophy’s friend).
It is a very long list, but I fancy very few will come from other
islands. I don’t know what on earth we shall do if it rains, for
they must walk, and many of them live two miles off, and the
roads are awful. There are a great many large hotels and board-
ing houses in Levuka with billiard saloons, and such a horrid lot


of people frequent them. It’s a disgusting town. But I must
say the shops are not at all bad. People come to Levuka from
all parts of the Group to shop.
April 26. —After five days more of waiting the Fitzroy is at
last come. The ’Frisco steamer was behind time at Kandavu.
The line is not properly established yet, and always something
going wrong. It is sixteen hours from here to Kandavu. Mr.
Thurston (the Auditor-General), who is a great man here, had
gone to Kandavu to meet his wife, who had been spending some
months in Sydney. Captain Champion of the Fitzroy also ex-
pected to meet his wife there, but found instead a letter to say
that she was dying in Sydney; so he deserted his ship, and
went oft* to Sydney in the return steamer. Fortunately, Mr.
Thurston had formerly been a sailor, and was able to bring the
Fitzroy back. Of course poor Captain Champion loses his place,
but Ido feel so sorry for him; he had lost all his children (six)
one after another, two of them since he came here with the Fitzroy
five months ago, and he was quite mad when he heard about his
wife. He was a good, careful captain, and suited so well. Captain
Knollys and Captain Olive went off to-day to Nasauthoko, the
camp in the mountains of Yiti Levu. As Mr. Maudsky and
the Baron are still waiting for us at Bau we were actually alone
at dinner to-night—Arthur and I —for the first time since we
left Mount Street (except once in Sydney). This delay of the
Fitzroy has put out all our plans. We have been packed up for
ten days waiting for her to take us to Bau. The verandah is piled
with cases of tinned meats, groceries, and wine (supplies for one
week !), rolls of mats, a bed or two, etc., etc. And now we don’t
know what to do, for the Langhams may be back any day, and
we hardly like to be in their house when they return. lam
afraid I shall lose this only chance of a change. I had asked
Mrs. Havelock and the child Eachel to go with us, but they did
not go. Mr. Maudslay and the Baron will come back to-morrow,
having spent ten days waiting for us at Bau. They had not
much food, and probably had to subsist on yams and yangona
the greater part of the time, but I have no doubt Andi Kuila
took care of them. When the chiefs come here we always
have to send them daily supplies to Driemba of bread, tea and
sugar, and tobacco. Tui-Mba has now been there for some time
with his large suite. I have spent most of my time to-day in
reading my letters over and over again. The children c&me and
opened them all and mixed them up together, so that it was
some time before I could find them all! the dates are about March
9, not so very long ago. I have none from Jane this time—an


unusually long one (for her) from Maria. The children were
much interested in it. They insist on my reading them all.
“You haven’t read Emil’s.” Jack said “1 want to tell you
something, Ido so want to TALK to Grandmamma.” He is such
a talker now. He tells very long histories in his little gentle
voice. Nevil talks rather loud. They like to hear all about the
new house, and never seem to forget anything. Jack was re-
minding me about the two little Christmas trees of 1874 and
everything that was on them—“ mine was the most nearest the
door.”
May B.—l have written a long letter to Jane with an account
of our visit to Bau, and I have told her to send it to you; it
comes in here, you see. It is impossible and unnecessary to
write it twice over. We came back on the 3rd of May, all feel-
ing much better for the little change of five days, and the children
looking so much better. While we were there Arthur got some
more news from the Mountains which decided him to go himself
and have a talk with the Chiefs, and the day after we returned
from Bau he went off with Mr. Maudslay, leaving only Baron
von Hiigel here, as “mistress of the house,” as Jack says. He
manages everything for me and is most kind and attentive, and
I find him a charming companion. Two days after, Eka returned ;
she had been away a month. She is very proud of having seen
and done so much more in Fiji than any other lady, and the trip
has done her a great deal of good. Poor Mrs. De Ricci’s death
had tried her very much.
You will see an account of the “ disturbances in the interior ”
in the Fiji Argus of May 5, so be sure and look for it. I am
sending Jane a copy of that paper. (I don’t mind anyone that
you think would care seeing this letter.)
Tuesday , May 9.—1 have just heard from the Governor from
Nandi. He says all is going on well in the hills, and he will be
back next week. He says I should like Nandi—fine open
country, and the air pure and bracing. We had an alarm this
afternoon. We heard that Lady Hackett was very ill with low
fever, so Eka and I sent for the Harbour-Master’s boat (ours
having gone with His Excellency) and we rowed to the other end
of Levuka. There was a good deal of wind, and it was so rough
that we couldn’t land at any pier, and we had to row the boat
on to the beach and send for a chair to be carried on shore.
Then we toiled up the horrid steep hill, which has become nearly
inaccessible since the rain, to the Hacketts’ house. Eka had
packed up her things, in case she found it necessary that she
should stay and nurse her, as we knew there was no one else to
2 G


be got. So we were greatly relieved when she came into the
room herself, and we found it was a false alarm about fever.
She is not at all well, but it is only a case of liver from hot
climate, and she ought to go away as soon as possible. She is
dreadfully dull, poor thing, imprisoned up there ; scarcely anyone
goes near her, and she never goes out now. She and Mrs. De
Ricci were great friends. They had a boat between them, and
went out in it every day, I think she felt her death very much,
and has never been in the boat since.
I took the children with me and left them at the Consulate
with Mrs. Layard, who delights in them. Jack said he had
“ de joyed himself very much.”


CHAPTER VIII
LEGISLATION —MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE
Du king the three months which preceeded the outbreak of the
cannibal tribes on the 12th April, the principal object of my
thoughts was the condition of affairs in Colo. Sometimes success
in establishing the authority of the Government there without
any collision seemed certain, sometimes probable, sometimes doubt-
ful. But most of the papers relating to this business, subsequently
to my visit to the south coast of Yiti Levu in January, have
already been printed in my Story of a Little War , and need not be
reproduced here.
The most important measure considered by the Legislative
Council during this period was the Native Taxes Ordinance. By
care and good management I secured for it the decided support of
all the four non-official members of the Legislative Council, all of
whom spoke in its favour. The officials of course had to support
it, and most of them did so heartily, but both the Chief-Justice
and the Attorney-General were opposed to it, the first silently,
the second openly. They disliked it as being “un-English”;
while with the majority of the planters it was unpopular, because
it removed the chief instrument of pressure on natives to engage
as labourers in distant islands.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, February 16, 1876. —My Lord—ln my despatch No. 83 of
the 30th October last, I brought under your Lordship’s notice the difficult
and important question of native law.
The question of native taxation is neither less important nor less difficult, and
all attempts hitherto made to deal with it have only resulted in total failure.
2. Forming as they do, ninety-nine hundredths of the inhabitants of the
Colony, causing as they do, a large part of its expenditure for police, ad-
ministration of justice, etc., it is only right that the native population should
contribute, and that in no inconsiderable measure, to defray expenses in-
curred—as to some extent they undoubtedly are—for their protection
and on their behalf. The mode in which such contributions may best be
made, is, however, by no means easy of determination. To the ordinary
sources of revenue, the natives pay little or nothing. They use few articles


on which duties are leviable, they do not consume spirits, they do not take
out licences, and they have no need of stamps. Any impost felt by them must,
therefore, be one of a special character.
3. The tax imposed on natives by Cakobau’s Government was an uniform
poll-tax of £1 per man and 4s. per woman throughout the group. I, how-
ever, find it difficult, and indeed impossible, to suppose that revenue was the
object contemplated in the imposition of this tax, or that its payment was
ever seriously looked for. If any such expectations existed, they were doomed
to disappointment, for the largest sum ever obtained in any one year from a
population of, at that time, certainly not less than 150,000 was,
And of this sum, a large part, as I will presently explain, -was not in fact
received from natives in payment of their tax, or indeed from natives at all.
4. I believe that the main design of the native poll-tax, when first im-
posed, and as it existed on the arrival of the Royal Commissioners, was that
of furnishing through its instrumentality a large supply of labour to the
plantations of the white settlers. And in this respect it no doubt worked
successfully. The unknown consequences of disobedience to the order of the
“ Matanitu ” 1 exercised a mysterious terror over the minds of the natives,
which induced them in many cases, in consideration of the advance of their
taxes on the part of a planter, to contract with him for a year or more of
gratuitous service. These, however, were of course the exceptions. In the
majority of eases the tax was simply not paid. When this happened, the
legal penalty for default was six months’ labour on the plantation of any
settler who would pay to the Government the amount of the defaulter’s tax.
But though six months was the limit allowed by law for such assignment,
the Magistrates of that day were not very scrupulous in their reading of the
Act, and sentences of a year, and even eighteen months, were very frequently
pronounced, whilst by a judicious system of imposing heavy costs, and assuming
that the default of their payment might be similarly punished by ‘‘ imprison-
ment on a plantation,” even these periods were almost indefinitely extended.
A faint glimpse, and but a faint glimpse of the working of this system is
given by some of the in closures to Sir H. Robinson’s despatch of the 16th of
October 1874. The more search I have made into the records of this time,
and the better I become acquainted with their contents, the darker does that
period appear to me. I have in vain endeavoured to obtain accurate statistics
of the numbers torn from their homes and consigned to servitude under the
operation of this law, but its effects are sufficiently visible. Whole districts
have been well-nigh depopulated, and the reckless deportation of the male
inhabitants has left the formerly fine provinces of the Ba and Ra almost
deprived of cultivators. The memory of these times is terrible to the native
population, and I should profoundly deprecate any step which might seem to
he in the direction of renewing them.
5. I should add that the amount paid by planters to Government for
these assignments of labour appear under the head of native taxes, as do also
of course those to which I have previously referred, where the payment was
made by the native, though advanced by the planter. With these deductions
the amount of tax actually paid becomes very small; but even of this
small amount, a large portion, as mentioned by Sir H. Robinson in his despatch
1 Government.


of the 16th October 1874, was actually paid in kind, the articles taken being,
as mentioned by Sir H. Robinson, estimated at a low valuation, or, as I was
particularly informed by the late Commodore Goodenough, invariably at a
third or fourth of their proper value.
6. Sir H. Robinson felt strongly the impossibility of maintaining such a
system. He at once abolished it, and substituted an arrangement by which
all but adult males were excused from taxation, and the tax of these men
fixed at twenty days’ labour in the year, redeemable by money payments of
various amounts, according to the supposed wealth or poverty of the district
in which they lived.
7. Sir H. Robinson, I fancy, imagined that redemption in money of the
obligation to labour would be nearly universal, and at first, accustomed as the
population were to a money poll-tax, this was to a great degree the case ; but
as a better knowledge of their liabilities has spread, and especially since it
has been found that the redemption payment cannot as heretofore be made
in kind, there has been a disposition to claim the right of discharging the
obligation by three weeks’ labour.
8. This, therefore, is the problem which I have had presented to me :
Should I continue the labour-tax of 1874 ; should I re-enact and attempt to
enforce a direct tax in money ; or should I endeavour to provide some sub-
stitute for the existing system which should bring a larger return to the
treasury, and yet be neither oppressive nor opposed to the traditionary habits
and feelings of the people ?
9. The labour tax in its existing form is clearly unsustainable. It is im-
possible to transport the whole population for twenty days to those places
where public works are being carried on. Such places are few, and in most
districts of the Colony there are really no public works for the inhabitants to
be employed upon. In such cases, either works have to be invented which
are not needed, and which lead to an employment (or rather waste) of labour,
in no way beneficial to the Colony, as well as an expense for supervision
wholly thrown away ; or the tax is quietly permitted to fall into disuse.
10. The practical alternative, therefore, was the renewal of the poll-tax of
the old Fijian Government, or the substitution of some system as yet untried
in this Colony.
I have already mentioned some of the reasons which rendered a return to
the poll-tax of former times impolitic and objectionable ; but even if it were
not associated in the minds of the natives with ideas of tyranny and misrule,
and were as efficient, as it proved in fact an inefficient agent in the production
of revenue, I should still think it open to objections which would be in my
mind fatal to it:—
(1) Its inequality of incidence, the greatest chief and the poorest servant
paying alike.
(2) The faculties it affords for corruption. The Collectors are, necessarily,
for the most part natives of inferior rank —often mere local constables or less,
and the instances of favouritism on the one hand, and oppression on the
other, are, I have every reason to believe, countless.
(3) Its individuality ; and this I think one of the greatest faults as a
system of native taxation. Among natives, the individual invariably acts as
part of a family or village, and the traditional feeling of centuries will only
slowly change under the influence of altered times and manners. As yet no


change has taken place in this respect, and it is necessary to accept the fact,
deal with it as we may.
11. But, if the idea of re-enacting a poll-tax be abandoned, no other
direct money-tax can be imposed. In fact, there is a species of absurdity in
the imposition of pecuniary taxation, on a population, nine-tenths of which
possess no money. I know that it is said that if they do not possess money,
they at least might all become possessed of it by engaging to work for
planters. I confess I am unable to see the force of the argument. The
ordinary wages given by a planter to an able-bodied man is Is. a week, or
£2 12s. per annum. This is a small sum from which to pay a tax ranging
from £1 downwards, even if the wages be paid in money, and not in worthless
“trade.” Whether it is to the native’s advantage to leave his taro patch
and yam plantations, his own village, his generally comfortable home and
his family, to work on some distant estate for 525. a year, may be questioned,
nor do I think he can reasonably be expected to do so, except under strong
compulsion.
12. But if a money tax be not enforced, all that remains is the alternative
of contributions in produce, or the performance of gratuitous services.
Either of these aids to Government would be in accordance with the habits
and usages of the people, but there are obvious reasons why the latter should,
if possible, be avoided.
13. The idea of a tax in produce which should he so managed as to
promote cultivation and foster production among the natives, had crossed my
mind previous to my arrival here. This idea was not discouraged by Sir H.
Robinson, and received warm support from some of those best acquainted
with native usages and modes of thought. After my arrival, the same plan
was independently proposed to me from more than one quarter.
I inclose a copy of a memorandum submitted to me by Mr. Thurston on
the subject, and I have also received papers in a similar sense from Mr.
Wilkinson, Mr. Carew, and others, copies of which, when they have been
transcribed, will be forwarded to your Lordship. At the great meeting of the
Chiefs at Draiba, the payment of taxes in produce was warmly advocated and
strongly recommended to me.
14. The payment of taxes in money is of course preferable to their pay-
ment in kind, but, payment in money being impracticable, the real question
in this case was between payment in kind or payment in labour, if any
payment is to made at all.
Although taxation in money is preferable and taxation in kind unusual,
the latter is by no means unknown or unprecedented in a British possession.
The present Earl Grey, who, by the way, was perfectly aware that, in
semi-civilised communities “taxation maybe more easily and justly levied in
the shape of tribute from the tribe than that of taxes due from individuals,”
once w r rote as follows to the late Sir Harry Smith: “The most convenient
form of imposing a land-tax in a rude state of society, I believe to be that
of requiring from all who cultivate the soil a tithe or some fixed proportion
of the produce as their contribution towards the public expenditure. This is
a mode of raising a revenue for public purposes which seems to have been the
first adopted by mankind in the earliest stages of civilisation, and to have
prevailed generally among all nations in the remotest periods of which we
know anything from history, while in Asia it continues to the present day to


be almost universal. It is also a mode of taxation which, in any early stage
of civilisation, when money is scarce, and when little capital has been invested
in land, seems to be the least burdensome that can be had recourse to, though
in a more advanced state of society it is the reverse.”
In the soundness of the principle of these remarks I entirely concur.
15. After much consideration I came to the following conclusions ;
(1) That the native taxation to be effective must be levied on the district
or village, rather than on individuals.
(2) That a tax of produce could be easily raised, with the best possible
pecuniary results, and with the yet greater advantage of stimulating native
industry and largely increasing the amount of trade in the group.
(3) That it would be undesirable that the Government should take part
in any complicated trading operations or commercial dealings.
16. The plan I devised to carry out these conclusions was as follows :
That the Legislative Council should annually assess the amount to be paid
by each province.
That the Government should invite tenders for the purchase of certain
specified articles of local produce at fixed prices.
That the amount of the tax to be raised in each province should consist in
the production of such quantities of one or more of these articles as will, at
the prices agreed on, realise the amount of tax assessed by the Legislative
Council.
That this produce should be brought to certain fixed points by the tax-
payers, and taken over at these places at stated times by the contractors, the
Government being thus relieved of all risks of transport or storage.
17. The question which I have had to consider was one with which I was
not wholly unfamiliar, for the subjects of land tenure and taxation among
semi-civilised races, or races possessing a different kind of civilisation from
our own, though to some perhaps uninviting, have long had for me a special
attraction. Nor had such a measure as that which I have described the
novelty in my eyes which it may wear to others, whom it may startle, and
who may possibly be disposed, in consequence, to regard it unfavourably.
18. I should, however, have wished to consult your Lordship, and, had
time permitted, I should most certainly have done so. Had my mind been
.made up at the moment of my arrival here in June, I might have received a
reply from your Lordship before the end of the year, and possibly in time to
regulate the preparation of the estimates for 1876. It took me, however,
some months to form a deliberate judgment on the subject, and when at
length my opinion was definitely formed, it was necessary without delay to
make provision for the financial needs of the ensuing year. I could not con-
tinue the existing labour-tax—to do so would have been to abandon all hope
of realising any considerable native revenue. And I have little doubt as to
your Lordship’s choice between such a system as that which I have now
sketched in outline and the revival of the abandoned poll-tax.
19. The measure I have described was recommended to the Legislative
Council in my Message of the 28th December, and the resolutions, of which I
have the honour to enclose a copy, were unanimously adopted by the Board.
An Ordinance to give effect to these resolutions was subsequently introduced,
and was passed through all its stages, though it has not yet been signed or
published. Of this I enclose a copy.


It provides for the annual assessment of the Provinces by the Legislative
Council, and for the construction of Boards of Assessment in each province,
by which the necessary measures will be taken to realise the required amount.
Provision is also made for objection and appeal, as well as for the enforce-
ment of the regulations to be framed under the Ordinance.
I shall, however, explain in greater detail the clauses of this law when
forwarding it by next mail for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and con-
firmation.
20. When rumours as to the nature of the proposed taxation were publicly
first circulated, some alarm was excited in certain sections of the community.
The most absurd reports gained currency to the effect that all trading on
the part of the natives was to be forbidden by law, and that a system of
culture closely resembling that instituted in Java by the Dutch was to be
introduced throughout the Group. These tales were not confined to the
Colony, and I had the pleasure of seeing a short time since in a leading New
Zealand newspaper an article gravely denouncing “the Ordinance passed in Fiji
prohibiting the natives from trading with Europeans,” of which it spoke as an
undoubted and accomplished fact.
As, however, the nature of the scheme became better known, a decided
change of opinion was manifested, and sounder views of its character and
probable effects now prevail. Indeed, I believe that its suitability to the
natives and their circumstances, and the benefit it is likely to confer on agri-
culture and commerce, are now generally felt and appreciated. There could
not be better representatives of the Colony found than the three unofficial
members of the Legislative Council, and your Lordship will perceive from the
report of the debate on the first reading of the Ordinance, which I have the
honour to enclose, that it was seconded by Mr. Hennings, and warmly sup-
ported by Mr. Ryder and Mr. Smith. I also ask your Lordship’s
attention to the speech of the Auditor-General, Mr. Thurston, which will
repay perusal.
21. I trust that your Lordship may regard this measure as I myself regard
it; but I am aware that at a distance it may wear a different aspect from
what it does on the spot; and, moreover, that, from very familiarity with
them, I may have failed to make use of arguments which appear to me
obvious, or to meet objections which are in my judgment trivial. If, how-
ever, your Lordship should unfortunately hesitate to concur in the views
which I have expressed, I would at all events ask that they should receive a
fair trial. The natives have, with something like enthusiasm, everywhere
begun their cultivation of produce, the organisation of the districts is already
far advanced, and the offers of purchases have been already made and closed
with. Were the new tax system at once upset, no other tax could possibly be
collected in its place during the present year, and the results would be
financially disastrous. In two or three years’ time the effect of this measure
will be fully seen. If I have erred in my estimate of its work, it may then,
more gradually, be abandoned. If, on the other hand, it secures, as
1 believe it will, an abundant revenue, and one easily capable of further
augmentation, —if it stimulates the industry and doubles the produce of the
Colony,—if under its influence the mass of the population are content and
prosperous,—it may then trust to its own merits for its future maintenance,
and will stand in no need of my feeble advocacy.


From Mr. Thurston.
Saturday Evening. —My dear Sir—l have read, as you directed me, your
draft despatch upon the Native Tax System, which I should think will fairly
counter any letter or memorial that may be sent home against the scheme.
In paragraph 9, you say, “It is a return to the primitive community
system.” Is it worth while to point out that the break in the community
system only lasted from 1872 to 1874, and that the attempt to collect an
individual tax ended in failure ?
Speaking of the several objects of the Ordinance—paragraph 11—or of the
objections to it, paragraph 15 —I may remind you that one object was to
remove from the native that temptation to get into debt which the individual
money tax system was found to foster. In many cases the native found him-
self unprepared with money upon the visit of the tax-gatherer, nor had he
any produce ready to dispose of for cash to the itinerant trader. In such
cases the trader usually advanced the money to a native, if of any authority,
taking an acknowledgment and a promise to pay within a given period. As
a rule the given period was exceeded. New w r ants had arisen, or other
itinerant traders had stepped in and anticipated the produce prepared for
the earlier creditor. Then a new, and, to the natives, a singular, custom
was originated—interest, payable in nuts, oil, copra, or other produce was
added to the original due, and nothing was wanted by the traders but the
aid of law, to augment personal pressure, (in the shape of constant dunning,
and chronic threats of appeal to “Consuls” and “Men-of-War”), and make
the native a veritable slave.
The payment of produce and the imposition of the tax upon the district
or village put an end to this evil.
In connection with paragraph 14, it is strongly enough shown that the
native not only pays no more than a part of his produce, reserving the rest to
himself to do with as he pleases, but that for that part the Government
obtains for him its highest value.
By the Dutch (Java) system, the Government receives native produce at
a fixed minimum price, and sells it at a maximum price in the markets of
Europe, for its own benefit. In Fiji the Government, by public competition,
first ascertains and fixes, for native benefit, an annual maximum price for
native produce, and thus enables itself to impose an annual minimum tax.
I see by my last Saturday Review that Sir David Wedderburn has pub-
lished in the Fortnightly Review a “very lucid and intelligible sketch of the
mode in which the Dutch carry on their peculiar form of government in Java
and its dependencies.”
Have you received the December number from England yet ? It may be
worth looking at.
From the Attorney-General
Levuka, February 27, 1876.—My dear Sir — The more I consider the
possible nature of the regulations which may be framed under the “Native
Taxes Ordinance, 1876,” from a purely legal standpoint, the more difficulty
do I feel I shall have in reporting upon that measure otherwise than adversely
to the Secretary of State. U
This, however, would be a duty so disagreeable and irksome to me, that


although I am aware I am leaving myself open to the imputation (having
regard to the repeated objections I have already urged against this scheme)
that I am now approaching the subject without warrant, nevertheless I feel
bound to do so. I feel assured that the contemplated interference with the
liberty of the subject, which now appears to me *to be of the essence of this
Ordinance, however it may be glossed over by other advisers of your Ex-
cellency, who doubtless fail to estimate its true constitutional importance,
cannot be regarded in any other light than as arbitrary and oppressive, and
as amounting even to slavery.
But while it is my duty to express to your Excellency the legal imperfec-
tions of this scheme in its present form, I am also of opinion that, if modified
as I would with much deference propose, it would probably be productive of
all, if not more, of the good effects now anticipated from it, with none of its
most glaring objections.
“ Proposed Modification.
“That natives in common with all other British subjects, irrespective of
colour, are liable for certain purposes to taxation, and shall be rated accordingly
at a certain sum per capita, which must in such manner as may be hereafter
prescribed, be satisfied in good and lawful money of Great Britain, or its equi-
valent, after a tariff to be agreed upon, or at the upset market price, and in
default thereof, shall be liable to the punishment of compulsory labour on
Government plantations, or public works, to be established for that object.”
Trusting this suggestion ma} 7 receive favourable consideration.
To the Attorney-General
Nasova, February 28, 1876. —Dear Sir—l have only just received your
letter of yesterday.
If you object, as I know you do, to the provisions of Ordinance No. IV.
of 1876, you are quite right to report adversely to it; and I have never sup-
posed that you would do otherwise, either with respect to this Ordinance or
to No. VI.
I am sorry you find the duty an irksome one ; but I am afraid we all from
time to time find that to be the case with regard to some of the duties we are
called on to discharge.
I have, as you are aware, already weighed the objections you have urged
against this measure, and you can hardly suppose that if a consideration of
those objections on their merits did not, in my judgment, render any change
in the plan necessary, I am now likely to be induced to alter it for other
reasons.
Your suggested “modification” (which, however, seems to me to be not
a modification of my plan, but an essentially different one), embodies a
scheme to which I should not be at all disposed to assent.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, March 14, 1876. —My Lord I have the honour to
transmit, for Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation, an Ordinance
“to Regulate the Assessment and Collection of Native Taxes.”


2. A copy of the draft of this Ordinance was enclosed in my despatch No.
22 of the 16th February, in which despatch 1 also explained at some length
the objects of the Ordinance, and the motives which had led to its enactment.
I will now proceed to explain in detail the clauses of the Ordinance itself.
3. The preamble recites the resolution of the Legislative Council on which
the measure is based, and the first section (a purely formal one) provides a
short title for the enactment.
4. The second section directs that the Legislative Council shall annually
by resolution assess the amount of the tax to be paid by the native inhabitants
of each province during the following year, and this is the most important
clause in the Ordinance.
5. The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth sections provide for the creation of
provincial Boards of Assessment, to consist of the principal white and native
authority in each province, and of two Assistant Assessors, to be chosen by
local native Assessors, whose election is afterwards provided for by section
ten. These Boards will be presided over by an officer to be called the “ Pro-
vincial Assessor,” but whose jurisdiction need not be, and, as a matter of fact,
wull not be, limited to a single province. Each Board will regulate the
manner in which the contribution imposed by the Legislature is to be spread
over the district, and the amount of produce which must be raised to realise
it, and the seventh section makes it the duty of the Assistant Assessors to
carry out the directions—as to reports, inspections, etc.—they may receive
from the Provincial Assessor. The eighth section provides that all objections
made by any village or district to the amount of their assessment shall be
considered by the Governor in Council.
6. The ninth section gives authority to the Governor to divide the pro-
vinces of the Colony into districts and wards for the purposes of this Ordinance.
The tenth section provides for the election by the native inhabitants of a
local Assessor in each district.
7. The eleventh section empowers the Governor in Council to make
regulations for carrying out the details of the Ordinance, which may be en-
forced by fine not exceeding £2, or imprisonment not exceeding twenty-one
days ; and the twelfth provides that all such regulations shall be laid before
the Legislative Council at its next subsequent meeting ; whilst the thirteenth
provides that any fine or imprisonment incurred for breach of such regulations
may be commuted for one day’s labour for every shilling of fine, or two days’
labour for every day of imprisonment.
8. The fifteenth section, in order to meet the effect of unforeseen calamities,
such as hurricanes, floods, or drought, authorises the Governor to remit any
part of the assessment made on any province.
9. Finally, as the year 1876 had already commenced when the Ordinance
was passed, the sixteenth section enacts that the assessment contained in the
resolution of the Legislative Council of 31st December 1875, shall be the
assessment for the present year.
10. In my despatch No. 22 of the 16th February, I observed that I might
very possibly omit to use arguments, my familiarity with which made them
appear too obvious to require mention, and on re-reading that despatch I per-
ceive that this has been the case in at least one instance, and that I have
neglected to point out the strong objection to the money poll-tax, founded on
the fact that its practical effect on the natives was not only not to stimulate


production, but, if I may make use of such a term in such a connection, to
exhaust their capital.
11. The Fijians, though eminently an agricultural, are not a producing
people, so far as regards any articles except those used for their own con-
sumption. In the days before European influence was brought to bear upon
them, they worked in community, either to supply the wants of the tribe
(and to neglect them meant famine), or by the orders of their Chiefs, whose
commands were enforced with the club.
But their ideas of work are almost entirely of collective work, and to
satisfy a demand made upon him individually by a money tax, a native will
sell anything he may have in his possession, such as carved weapons, and
bowls, as curiosities, to a white man, or he will strive to collect the produce
nature has already provided, such as cocoa-nuts, pearl shell, and h£che de mer.
To plant a grove of cocoa-nuts from which no return could be expected for
some years, or to cultivate any plant, (except those the produce of which they
themselves use,) with a view to selling it for money, does not enter into a
Fijian’s mind, neither, indeed, would it meet the immediate object of supply-
ing him with the means of defraying his taxes for the current year.
12. That the natives are really skilful gardeners and workmen there is no
doubt, as is attested by the extensive and cleverly laid out and irrigated taro
beds to be seen along the course of every rivulet, and the remains of much
larger works of the same description, deserted on account of decrease in
population, bear witness to their skill and industry in the days when the
power of their Chiefs w T as far greater than it is now.
But were the money poll-tax renewed and enforced, I have no doubt that
in a few years’ time the capital, if one may so call it, that nature has provided,
or the forethought of the old Chiefs has left them, will be exhausted. The
cocoa-nut trees will gradually disappear, and the over-fished reefs will fail to
yield more pearl-shell oysters, or Mche de mer.
The people, with nothing left with which to satisfy the demands of the
tax-gatherer, will take refuge in the woods, (as they did in former days when
suffering from famine, or driven there by the misfortunes of war,) where they
would probably become at least as great a source of annoyance and trouble to
Government as the negro squatter in the West Indies, if not a source of far
greater danger, or they would crowd Government prisons as defaulters to the
tax, and it would be impossible to find public works on which to employ
them.
Some, it is true, would go to the plantations of white men to work, but
there is not room for the employment there of the whole population, nor,
however desirable it may be to encourage such labour, is it at all desirable to
promote it to such an extent as to involve, as in such a case it would, the
complete destruction of the race, all hopes of preserving which must be given
up if the people are to be severed from all ties of kindred and home, and are
to see their village system and tribal organisation broken up.
13. I must now turn to the Report of the Attorney-General on this Ordi-
nance, which I have also the honour to enclose, and which is one of the
strangest documents of this description which has ever come under my
observation.
It cannot properly be described as a Report upon this Ordinance, for it
contains no analysis of its provisions, or statement of the effect of its different


clauses, almost the whole of the paper being devoted, not to any examination
of the provisions of the law or even to a discussion of its political expediency,
but to comments on a single sentence in the speech made by the Auditor-
General Avhen moving the first reading of the Ordinance, the sole statement
made by the Attorney-General with regard to the provisions of the Ordinance
itself, being one which I can only characterise as utterly incorrect. To this
statement I will address myself before I proceed to deal with the general
argument of the Report itself.
14. The Attorney-General commences his Report with the startling
announcement that “the principal legal effect of this Ordinance is to enable
his Excellency the Governor from time to time to make certain Regulations
for imposing and levying native taxes.” But this is not the fact. No clause
of the Ordinance grants any such power. On the contrary, the second section
of the Ordinance carefully reserves to the Legislative Council alone, the right
and duty of imposing native taxes.
The eleventh section of the Ordinance is, I presume, that to which the
Attorney-General alludes. But this only gives power, no unusual one, to
the Governor in Council to make regulations, not for “ imposing and levying
taxes,” but for carrying out the details of the Ordinance.
It is perfectly clear, on the most superficial perusal of the Ordinance, that
no tax can be “imposed” except by the authority of the Legislative Council,
or “levied” in any other manner than that prescribed by the Ordinance
itself.
15. One phrase in the preamble to the Ordinance is also noticed by the
Attorney-General. It is that which refers to the meeting of Chiefs at Draiba,
to any mention of which he objects, on the grounds that the Chiefs there
assembled were “ barbarous” ; that their approbation of the new scheme was
“qualified”; and that it was dictated by selfish motives.
M. de Ricci is quite mistaken in supposing that the new arrangement is
one likely to be specially advantageous to the Chiefs. On the contrary, whilst
the former system was one which afforded them ample opportunity of favour-
ing their own friends, or making illegal exactions from those they disliked,
and of retaining in their own hands, without risk of detection, moneys due
to the Government, such opportunities are, under present arrangements,
altogether wanting.
M. de Ricci is equally mistaken in supposing that the approval of this
scheme (an emphatic and not a “qualified ” one) was simply the expression
of selfish preference on the part of the Chiefs.
In the first place, it is remarkable how even indifferent Chiefs feel them-
selves bound on public occasions to think and speak for their people ; and
secondly, that, though the meeting was popularly called one of Chiefs, the
presence of magistrates and scribes made it very thoroughly representative.
The mode in which the largest amount of taxation could be raised from
the native population with the least difficulty and harshness was one of the
points for the consideration of which the meeting had been called, and I can-
not think that the assent and approval of those about to be taxed is a matter of
indifference, or a fact unworthy to be mentioned ; nor do I altogether assent
to the Attorney-General’s use of the word “barbarous.”
That Fijians are as yet very imperfectly civilised is no doubt true, but
when the great advance made by them during the last twenty years is con


sidered, the term employed is, I think, too harsh. Between the educated,
orderly, Christianised natives of the coast provinces, and the wild highlanders
of the interior, there is well-nigh as great a difference as between the coast
Fijians and ourselves. I myself place them on much the same level as the
Hovas of Madagascar, whom, in many respects, they very strongly resemble,
and who have certainly shown no want of aptitude for civilisation.
16. I now turn to the general argument of the Attorney-General’s Report,
which is based chiefly on a single sentence of Mr. Thurston’s speech, to
which I have referred, and deals less with provisions really contained in the
Act than with the legal effect of others that he believes that it is intended to
insert in it, though when or how he omits to state.
17. The Attorney-General argues that the system to be introduced by
this Ordinance is virtually a system of slavery, and considers it to be so
because the taxpayer is allowed no option as to the mode in which his tax is
to be paid. He says: “Practically, between the one and the other” ( i.e .
between slavery and the system to be established under this Ordinance), “no
moral difference exists, for it will be observed that under such conditions the
individual native is afforded no option as to the manner in which his taxes
shall be paid.” But what taxpayer is afforded the option of paying his taxes
in such manner as pleases him ? The Englishman is made (there is no option
in the matter) to pay his taxes in money, for the simple reason that it is the
most convenient plan. The progressive though slow advance of civilisation
having occasioned the overthrow of the older systems suited to a rude or
semi-civilised society, a money-tax has been substituted for personal service
or payment in kind.
18. The Auditor-General [Mr. Thurston’s] words as printed were : “But
the only interference here is that we propose to make a man work to pay a
certain article of commerce —kidney cotton, for instance —whether he likes it
or not, certainly. But this Bill does not contemplate interfering with what
he (the native) does with the remainder of his crop. He may sell it to whom-
soever he pleases.”
What difference in principle would have been involved had the words run
thus :—“ But the only interference is that we propose to make a man pay a
certain number of coins—shillings, for instance —whether he likes it or not,
certainly ; but this Bill does not contemplate interfering with what he does
with the remainder of his earnings or capital.”
The fact, however, seems to be that the Attorney-General is disposed to
see a special magic in money that he cannot see in money’s worth. He is
opposed to what I may term first principles in dealing with the native race.
It would, in his opinion, be just and lawful to impose a money tax on every
native in the Colony, and in default of payment to imprison or otherwise
punish him.
To procure money in order to pay his tax the native must sell produce of
some sort ; he must sell it at a sacrifice ; he may have infinite vexation and
difficulty in conveying his goods to market, and in finding a purchaser, but
still the Attorney-General would have him pay in money; “he is,” to use
his own words, “to have no option.” Money or the treadmill. To accept
produce, or to order taxes to be paid in produce, so as to spare the native
much vexation and trouble, to take no more out of his hands for taxes than
will find its way into the Treasury, is to do him a wrong ; to help him to


raise his crops is to create “ Government plantations ” ; and to teach him an
intelligent system of agriculture is to initiate a system of slavery.
19. The charge of being an abettor in the introduction of a system of
slavery is one at which I can afford to smile. Whatever my errors, my
official career during the last ten years affords, at least, ample proof that my
disposition has been rather to be too keenly sensitive to the possibilities of
oppression than to show any indulgence towards those who were disposed to
exact involuntary servitude from their fellow-men.
Were it worth while, I could easily show that the money-tax system, as
worked here two or three years ago, really did introduce a form of slavery,
and that, although it might now be more carefully supervised, its tendency
here would always be in this direction.
The Attorney-General (who has evidently never read Sir James Stephen’s
masterly exposition of the difference between them,) appears to confound all
compulsory labour with slavery. How* is it, then, that the law lately in
force requiring twenty-one days’ labour from every male Fijian, does not
come under his ban ? lamat a loss to understand.
20. When the Attorney-General says that the Fijian is not told “You, in
common with all other British subjects, are liable for certain purposes to
taxation, you are taxed accordingly at a certain sum which must, in such
manner as may be hereafter prescribed, be paid in good and lawful money of
Great Britain, or its equivalent, after a fixed tariff to be agreed upon, or at the
upset market price, or in default thereof you shall be liable to compulsory
labour on the public works of the Colony, or on Government plantations to
be established for that purpose,” I presume he means that this is what he
ought to be told. But what benefit can come of telling a native anything
about “good and lawful money of Great Britain,” who can be induced (as on
the visit of the Cossack and Gazelle to Matuku) to accept a penny in pre-
ference to a shilling because it is larger ? Why indeed, talk about “good and
lawful money of Great Britain,” when our own white countrymen and women
here are living on maziena and yams, and are so poor that the Colonial
Government has to pay off and return their labourers to their homes. The
necessity of the day is to produce something without which no “no good and
lawful money of Great Britain,” or any other country, will gravitate in this
direction.
21. The Attorney-General does not say that the tax imposed is too high,
that it can be increased or diminished at the pleasure of the collectors, that
it obstructs the progress of the natives or of the Colony at large, nor offer any
other reasonable objection ; but he avers that the natives to all intents
and purposes are told, “You shall have no option as to the manner in which
your taxes are paid : whether you like it or not you must work on our
Government plantations, or in default you shall be fined or imprisoned.”
22. Why the Attorney-General should have introduced the term “Govern-
ment plantations ” into his Report I know not. He is not unaware that
these plantations are solely and absolutely the property of the natives.
Certain persons who desire to monopolise the time and labour of the Fijians
attempted unsuccessfully to fasten the term “ Government plantations ” upon
them, because the term seemed suggestive ; but the Attorney-General must
know better. I again say that there are no Government plantations, and
that such plantations have no existence except in the imagination of the


Attorney-General and of the Levuka gossips, from whom the learned gentle-
man appears, in this instance, to have drawn his inspiration.
23. That it is intended that natives shall pay their taxes in the manner
prescribed, “whether they like it or not,” is undoubtedly true ; but at the
same time I beg leave to say most emphatically that there can be no question
as to the very decided preference of the natives for the mode of taxation
introduced by this Ordinance.
24. “Native district plantations,” in the provinces of Tai Levu, Eewa,
and Naitasiri, have been made by the people since the Ist of January last,
under the direction and advice of one person. The native population of these
provinces is between 30,000 and 40,000. If the natives had not liked the
plan, it would have been simply impossible to make them carry it into effect
with so very little assistance. What I here say in respect to these provinces
is strictly applicable to the whole of the Colony.
Had there been time to have them copied, I would have inclosed some
very interesting reports on this subject.
25. As to giving the natives an option, in addition to all other reasons
against it, I may say that such a course would, as things are, be quite un-
workable. The natives would simply sit still and do nothing, Bau would
wait to see what Rewa did, and Rewa would wait to see what Kadavu did,
and so on. Again, in matters of this sort, there is nothing that a native so
much dislikes as to be told to please himself.
This may seem strange to one who, like the Attorney-General, has never
been beyond Levuka, is unacquainted with a word of the native language, and
has never had any confidential or free intercourse with a single native, but it
is true, and it is an instance of the difficulties any gentleman is likely to
experience who legislates for a people with whose habits and modes of thought
he is unacquainted.
It is better therefore to avoid both the right of “ option ” and the adoption
of a mixed system. Produce, every native can raise, money he cannot. No
practical good can come from ordering the people to pay ‘ ‘ in good and lawful
money of Great Britain, or in its good and marketable equivalent,” when it
is a matter of public (and unfortunate) notoriety that they have neither the
one nor the other, and that to gain the first they must raise the second.
Technically it might be expedient to use this language, as the words have
something of a statutory jingle about them, but I see no other reason for so
doing.
26. That the plan adopted is by no means a perfect one I am painfully
aware. Practically it is not possible to attain to anything like perfection in a
matter of taxation, any more than in any other department of politics. It is
only a choice of difficulties, and what is even absolutely right has often to
give way to wdiat is expedient and practicable. It is the business of the
Legislature to look to the practical results and influences of different taxes or
modes of taxation, and to resort in preference to those by which the revenue
may be raised with the smallest inconvenience. But in this, as in every
similar matter, the welfare of the people should be the prime consideration,
and that mode which is the best fitted to promote it is the one to be
preferred. —I have, etc.


The other Ordinances which principally occupied our attention
in the Legislative Council during the first four months of 1876
were mostly of a legal nature—a set of laws well drawn by Sir
William Hackett with respect to criminal offences, to the status
and functions of stipendiary magistrates, and a Summary Convic-
tion Ordinance, largely my own work, and founded on that which
I introduced in Trinidad.
11. The negotiations which took place with the Bank of New
Zealand and its agents with respect to the Bank of Fiji, are
sufficiently described in the following dispatch :
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 19. —My Lord—l have the honour to enclose copies of a
correspondence which has taken place between myself and Mr. W. Weston,
the Inspector and Agent of the Bank of Fiji.
2. In Your Lordship’s despatch (unnumbered) of the 4th March last,
instructions were conveyed to me with respect to the manner in which the
claims of the Fiji Bank under the charter from Cakobau should be dealt with.
3. In the month of August last, I communicated to Mr. Weston the
substance of these instructions, and of the terms proposed by Sir H. Robinson
and sanctioned by Your Lordship as those on which a new charter might be
granted.
4. Generally speaking, I entirely concur with Sir H. Robinson as to the
justice and liberality of these terms, but I am of opinion that the request of
the Bank to be permitted to lend money on landed security is not unreasonable,
and I beg to recommend it to Your Lordship’s favourable notice. A similar
privilege will, I think, have to be conceded to any bank attempting to do
business here. lam not prepared to recommend the concession of any other
of the special indulgences requested by the Company.
5. My object throughout this correspondence has been on the one hand
steadily to refuse to the bank the grant of any exclusive privileges likely
to deter other and perhaps better managed banking institutions from
establishing their branches here, and to insist on the limitation of its action
to legitimate banking business, but, on the other hand, not to insist on so rigid
an adherence to the strict rules laid down for Colonial Banks as should induce
the Company to withdraw altogether from its operations in Fiji. The object
of the directors of the Bank is naturally to retain as much as they possibly
can of the privileges formerly granted to them.
6. The claims put forward in the draft Ordinance forwarded by Mi.
Weston in his letter of 22nd November are manifestly inadmissible, but as I
have already observed, an absolute adherence to the rules laid down in the
Colonial Office Regulations does not seem to me expedient either in the case
of the Fiji Bank or in that of the Bank of New South Wales, should it
establish a branch here. Land is in fact the only security here that can at
present be offered for an advance.
7. That with respect to which I am most anxious is the establishment ot
a complete severance between the past and the present of the Company, and
the clear recognition of the fact that, as stated by Your Lordship in the
2 H


despatch above referred to, its Charter has been “necessarily rendered void”
by the t£ effacement ” of Cakobau’s Government. This recognition the
Company is equally anxious to avoid, and contends, as will appear from the
enclosed letter from Mr. Whitaker to Mr. Weston “that the union did not
destroy the privileges granted by the preceding Government, but the
concessions made to the Company survived.”
8. I trust I may at an early date receive Your Lordship’s decision as to
this application.
111. I have mentioned in another place 1 that a good deal of my
time was occupied in correspondence with magistrates who wrote
to me for instructions. Some idea of the nature and bulk of
their correspondence may be gathered from the following letters,
though of course my correspondence with Mr. Le Hunte was
both more full and more familiar than with the other magistrates.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, February 18, 1876, 10 p.m. —Dear Sir— I have justTj
received this from Mr. Rooney (enclosed in a letter to him from Mr. Fisonl
of Lakeba). Maafu was leaving to-morrow morning for Lakeba. I went toj
him at once, and the result is Tripp and I go with him at 7 a.m. to Ono
to-morrow morning. I cannot tell when the Fitzroy will be down, and
so thought it better not to lose a moment in case there should be any row.
We come straight back here. Of course I will write fully when I return.
I hope you will not think I ought to have waited for the Fitzroy instead
of incurring the expense of the Xarifa for the Government. Wind now
N.W., fresh blow expected ; if it goes to the S.E. we shall be back in four or
five days. I thought it better to come back straight, and go to the other
places in the Fitzroy when she comes down, —Believe me, etc.
[Mr. Fison’s Note. ] Everything quiet here. I have something to say aboutf
Maafu and the copra for the vessel at Lakeba. This I will write when I come;
back. If Maafu be in Loma Loma, please tell him from me, as soon as possible,!
that there is a serious row at Ono. Tui Lovoni and the old people have written?
to Tui Nayau to beg that some one may go at once to Ono, or there will be
fighting. I firmly believe, from what I saw when I was there, that the
fault is on Tui Ono’s side. He and the young people are against all the resL_
They say they can’t put up with his goings on.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, March 2, 1876.—My dear Sir—l have just received your
letter, for which many thanks. lam sorry to hear Nevil has been unwell,
I hope she is better now. I was glad to hear that Knollys and Gordon got
back safely, and with good reports to make. I have very little to add to my
official letters, which are, I fear, both numerous and prosy ; but the one about
Ono would perhaps interest you. I heard at Lakeba that the row was a very
serious one, one man having been clubbed and another speared, but neither
1 p. 236.


dead. The result shows how one can believe anything one hears. I do not
think, however, that I was too hasty, for even Tui Lau, though he was
inclined to laugh at the idea of a war, half believed that there was something
“up.” We had a trip that I really did enjoy, except the last two days
which were dead calm. The Xarifa is a very fast and good sea-boat, and
the crew sail her well. It was a deliciously lazy week. You would not
like Ono, —very barren, and the mosquitoes! during this month the
natives themselves are conquered by them ; the islands swarm with rats. I
did not go to the large town as we had very little time, and it was some way
off. Tripp went there to sleep the one night we spent at Ono. He didn’t
sleep, for the mosquitoes, in spite of nets, were invincible. He did not get
across the lagoon in the morning to Doi in time for the native Court, and to
my surprise, with Mali to explain to me, I got right through without sticking,
and as I had to give an opinion to him on the merits of each case, I was in
better luck than I expected to be without my interpreter. You would have
been pleased to have heard Tui Lau’s speech ; he did give it them ! We had
a bit of really bad weather leaving Ono, but emerged little the worse. I
should not like to have been in a bad boat on that occasion. The very day I
came here I heard of a white man giving drink to natives of a town close
here, Dakui Loma Loma. I bolted off and got him, and next day him
£3, He was a drunken wretch, without any money, but he contrived to
borrow some and paid the fine. I think he had 30s. of his own, which I
believe, must have been his all. I want to ask you one thing about these
cases. I think that the giving half the fine to the informer might be at the
discretion of the Court. The informant on this occasion was a native teacher
who, scandalised at the proceeding, ran to Mrs. Rooney, who sent him to me.
At the native Court I made them bring up all the natives who had been
drinking the grog with the white man, and on conviction they were fined
more or less heavily according to the degree of their condition when caught.
In connection with this there is another point I would like to have your
advice and counsel upon. When a Fijian is sentenced to pay, say £l, or work
two months, is he to be allowed to pay 10s. and work one mouth. The case
occurred, and I refused to take any portion of the fine but the whole, other-
wise the man must work the time. Mali was away at the time, otherwise I
should have left it to him to decide ; as it is, I told the man when Mafi came
back to bring the whole fine, which, I daresay, he will do. Of course in our
law the course I adopted is the one laid down. The whole fine or whole
work. But I do not know whether it ought to be the one laid down here.
In the particular case the individual was a young boy, and I knew that if he
got a little more time he could get the rest of his fine quite easily, so I
thought it better to do that than send him to work, and take his money as
well. But I should like to know wdiat you think. One thing I should have
said about the fine going to the informant. I gave the people notice that if
the informant was proved to have been one of the people drinking, that I
would not give him a penny, because the law did not mean that a man should
help others to do wrong and get a reward for confessing it. I don’t know
whether that is wrong or not. It appears to me to be just.
I should like to draw your attention to the fact that Tui Havana, who is in
Yanua Balava of rather greater importance than the Tui Loma Loma, and has
always a weightier voice in legal and other matters of business here, is paid as


a second-class Bull, and Tui Loma Loma as a first-class one. Of course, I have
not said anything to them about it, but I think they ought to be put on an
equal footing. He is really a greater Chief than Tui Loma Loma in influence,
although I believe the latter is of a better family.
Everything is flourishing quietly and soberly, no trade amongst the
business people, and no rows amongst the idlers. I hear a report of a foolish
row at Cicia where, I believe, Tui Cicia will have to be pulled up very sharp.
It appears that two men belonging to two towns, Tokalau and Na Ceva, com-
mitted adultery with the wife of the native teacher on Cicia. Tui Cicia
arrested the men, flogged them severely, so the report says, (I have heard it
from three sources, two native, one white, and they both agree, for a wonder,)
and sent his men to the two towns giving them orders to destroy all the pigs,
yam gardens, etc., which was duly done. If this latter is true, Tui Cicia has
exceeded his paternal authority, and will find himself in the wrong box, but,
of course, I shall find out, or try to, all about it when I get there. I saw Tui
Lau’s Queen at Lakeba : she is not so fat as Adi Lydia, but much less refined-
looking. Tui Nayau is a good-looking oily-tongued man. I can quite
believe he is a rascal. Old Tui Ono is a plausible old fox, but was really not
much to blame in the “Ono riots.” I don’t think the matter ever reached
his ears. The people are all anxious to hear about the taxes. I can only
say, “By and by Mr. Thurston will come and tell you all about it.”
I don’t think I have anything more to say this time.
Please give my best respects to Lady Gordon and Miss G.-C., and with
much of the same to yourself.
P.S. —Mr. Newton King asked me to send this to you, and wished me to
read it first, but I refused, as, in my present position, I do not intend that he
shall say anything through me, or to which I can give a concurrence.
Mb. Le Hunte to Captain Knollys
Loma Loma, March 2, 1876. Dear Knollys Have you got back all
right ? Do let me have one little bit of news about your campaign, you need
not be afraid of my writing to the Fiji Times a true and faithful account by
“our special correspondent.” I enclose a check for £ls payable to you, with
many thanks for the loan of the money. The cat very well (two kittens).
“Rags” is a disgrace to “Snip.” She must have met with some bad treatment
on board one of the vessels, (they were both transhipped with a small boat at
Cicia), for whenever her name is called she lies down on her back, and as for
following me about, nothing that I can do will persuade her that I am not
going to kick or beat her, and she crawls away tail entre legs. Now, as I
never had any animal about me that was afraid of me before, I think there
must be a screw loose in the dog; at any rate, in her present condition, I would
not give a pinch of snuff for her. When will the Fitzroy bring my “ Spoon 1,1 ?
I trust that she has been tended carefully in my absence, but that she has not
been a nuisance to anyone. You will see in an official letter about a breach
of discipline amongst the constables. When I was away before I heard of
several little things of the kind, so when this happened I thought it better to
drop on them a little heavier than I otherwise should have done, especially as
1 His new boat.


they well knew the boat was not to be used, except on duty, without my
leave, and also as women are “tabu’d” to them when they are within the
fence or in the boat. I hope I did right. I had a very jolly trip to Ono.
We had a heavy gale on the Wednesday night leaving Ono, The Xarifa
is a tip-top craft in speed and sailing, but it is a pity she is not kept in
better trim. We had a close-reefed mainsail storm-jib and reefed trysail,
so you may imagine the wind was not the balmy zephyr wind that usually
blows here. A very heavy sea was running too, and as the cabin sky-
light leaked, we got a benefit of it. 1 trust all are well. I see the Star
of the South coming round the point, so I will stop until I hear further
news.
I have just got your letter, many thanks for it. I am very glad things
are all right or nearly so up there. I hear from Havelock that my big boat
is a myth. I have asked Abbey to have the “ Spoon ” sent by next trip of the
Star of the South. I made two journeys for a few miles in the old boat here.
The constables have nearly applied to me to get their discharge in conse-
quence, or at any rate that I ought to insure their lives for the benefit of their
families. I hope Nevil is better now, I was so sorry to hear she was ill.
Best remembrances to all.
Emberson’s letter has money in it, will you kindly see that he gets it all
right.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, March 3, 1876. —My dear Sir—ln the hurry and bustle
of yesterday’s letters I quite forgot to mention the matter of the copra here.
However, as the Marion Rennie leaves for Levuka to-morrow, this letter may
not be much later than the other. Every man in Lau has had to make two bags
of copra, which has been shipped in the Brunette for England, The price of
this is to pay for, or go towards the payment for, a schooner which Tui
Nayau wants at Lakeba. When I arrived here from Levuka it was almost
all made, and this vessel nearly loaded, so I thought it better not to say any-
thing about it. Maafu told me that the Lakeba people had helped him to buy
a vessel before, and that it was vaka viti for him to help Tui Nayau in
return. He said the schooner would be employed in collecting the taxes
amongst the islands. It is not difficult to my mind to see that this is a piece
of Mr. Hennings’ work. The vessel is to be bought from him. The price he
gives to Maafu for the copra is low—what, exactly, I do not know, about from
five to six shillings a bag, one person told me, but I cannot be sure ; the entire
value of the copra I think is estimated at £2OOO, and two bags to each man
ought to fetch much more than that at the price. Copra in good condition
is now fetching £ll per ton. Of course all the other traders are furious, as
Hennings has by this stroke engaged the whole copra in this part of Fiji.
The natives have grumbled about it, and when I have been pressed for an
answer I have said, “ If your Chief tells you to do what he is not allowed to
enforce, he will be stopped,” or words of the same ambiguity ; for I cannot
honestly say that I think Tui Lau had any right to do such a sweeping thing
for Hennings as this. I think that with advantage he might be told by you
that before engaging the work of every man in his district, he should ask your
permission, and if you approved of the object well and good ; but this savours
very much of a private bit of business, the results of which will be a con


siderable enlargement of Mr. Hennings’ balance at the bank. I don’t impute
any “sharp” practice to Hennings—the one up here is a straightforward
man—but his influence with Maafu is so great that the latter might be led
to do what he otherwise might hesitate about. At any rate I think the
vessel should be employed so as to be as useful to the people here and elsewhere
in Lau as at Lakeba, and, if you do make use of her in collecting the taxes, I
think it would be a good thing. And I think a speedy caution about this
would be a good thing, as no doubt if Mr. Hennings finds it a good speculation,
another vessel for England may appear on the scene, and another freight
gained at the expense of the people here.
You must not think I am looking at it in the same way that whites
generally do here in Fiji. I think Tui Lau ought to get your permission before
doing such a thing, so that the influence of anyone else should not lead him to
exceed his recognised, or tacitly acknowledged, power. I believe he is under
the impression that you were aware of the object of his order some time ago.
I remember your saying that if the Lakeba people wanted a vessel they ought
to pay for it themselves ; but he said that besides it being vdka viti to
help Lakeba, the people there had not enough copra to buy one with by
themselves, and he thought you had given him leave to buy it for Tui Hayau.
One thing I told him, and that was that whatever mercantile speculation
might engage the work of the people in Lau, he ought to take care that every
penny’s worth of the tax-produce is to be made for the Government first. I
also forgot to tell you about M‘Gregor. I sent for him here, and saw him a
a short time ago. He said he should like to stay if there was anything to
do, but that he had doubts about leaving the ship, as he had promised the
Captain to work for him to England. He was under the impression that
nothing was to be got in Levuka and he had no money, and the Captain (a
very good old fellow) told him he would give him a. passage home ; and, when
he found what a good man he had got, he told him he would give him £6 per
month, and find him his way from England to Mauritius if he wished it. When
the old Captain heard that he had an offer of staying here, he told me he would
not stand in the man’s way, but that he was far and away the best man in the
ship, and as he was very short-handed he would be very loth to lose him. I
left them to settle it, and I saw M‘Gregor on board to-day. He sent his
respectful obedience and gratitude for the offer of staying, but said that the
Captain had stuck by him when he was laid up, and treated him so well that
he would not like to leave him now, and so he goes in her next week. From
what he said to me I expect he will, if he gets a good place, stay at sea
instead of going back to the Mauritius Police. I regret that Ennis has gone,
it will be a black spot in the annals of justice in Fiji. Poenapede claudo may
be more successful elsewhere. If you can’t get the Post-Master-General at
Melbourne to go to De Ricci, why not send the latter to him, we might have
a chance of getting a simple ordinance or two passed during his absence. I
don’t think I have anything more to say.
To Mr. Le Hunte
Hasova, March 20, 1876. . . . You showed your usual judgment and
good sense in the Ono affair, and I entirely approve of your action therein.
2. The principle of part fine, part imprisonment, is recognised in the
Indian Code, and we have adopted it here.


3. I quite agree with you as to not paying an informer against drunkards
who had himself been drinking. lam glad you have got some convictions
under this head.
4. lam afraid I cannot let you off paying for your prisoner’s food. I
would if I could, but I really cannot see any rational excuse for so doing.
5. I have not been at all pleased about the copra business, and send you a
copy of my letter to Maafu thereanent.
Fitzroy is mending. She must, when mended, go first to Kandavu and
Taivuni; then she may be able to take you on your tour. I hope myself to
visit Loma Loma again ere long, if the Nymphe stays here. We have had a
bit of a blow, but not a hurricane by any means. All is going on well in
Colo. How I wish I had half a dozen other men like you at my disposal.
I have mislaid the last of your three letters, which I am sorry for, as I think
there was something else for me to answer.—Yours ever, etc.
I begin to agree with Knollys as to the use of law. The Attorney-General
now says Blackraore cannot be prosecuted without getting the Postmaster-
General at Melbourne to come over here as a witness !
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, March 23, 1876.—My dear Sir—Since I last wrote I have
very little news, as I have had an idle time of it during the last three weeks.
Alas ! what will you say when with tears I have to tell you that almost
everything valuable in that case of plants was dead when we opened it. If
you remember, it lay three weeks at Isasova after it was opened by Mr.
Emberson and Mr. Yeitch, and when it came down here I made all the haste
I could to get the ground cleared for the plants, but what with the few men
I had, and the weather that we had all last week, in which it was not possible
to do anything —it was a good fortnight before Mr. Lomberg, who is a good
gardener, and I could get them planted. I remarked that everyone of the
plants in pots had died much sooner than those that were planted in the soil
of the case —their roots were all rotten. I think that most of the plants in
the case were more fitted for upland country —at least, looking out about
them in Rhonid’s Vegetable Kingdom, I found that a great many required high
land. Fruit-trees do well here, and if you will be gracious enough some time
to send us another case, I would venture humbly to suggest that your Private
Secretary may be employed for a few minutes on a letter to the Director of the
Botanical Gardens, from which the case comes, asking him to send such things
as a low and rich soil suits best. I have been very hard at work in the gardens,
and I hope to get them into a little bit nicer order than they were in before by
the time you come here. You will be sorry to hear that Maafu is breaking up
the big canoe Marama ; at least he began it and I told him I thought you would
be sorry, even though it would soon go to pieces by reason of being rotten, yet
it was a relic of olden times and therefore to be respected (in Fiji at least, if
not in England). Ido not think he has touched it since. He is very busy
superintending the new court-house, which I believe will be a really fine
thing in that way. lam sure the noise that goes on all day and the state
the place is in from the combined effects of building and feasting are enough
to drive one wild. Shall Ibe dismissed the service if I refuse to sign
distress warrants against Fijian or Tongan debtors under the Attorney-
General’s Small Debts Act ?—according to that, no judgment can be enforced in


any other way, but, unless you think I really ought, I do not feel at all in-
clined to follow the Act in that respect. It needs amending. I have just
received your kind letter, for which many thanks. lam so glad you approved
of the Ono affair. As to the prisoner; I told Havelock I knew I ought to pay
and only asked officially in order that an official refusal might be a warning
to other S. M.’s making similar mistakes. I enclose the list of the plants,
will you kindly show it to Emberson if he asks for it. I have not had time
to see Tui Lau about the copra yet, or indeed master your letter to him. I
hope Lady Gordon and the children and Miss G. 0. are all well. Please give
my best respects to them.
I weep for Ennis—l don’t know whether it would he a joke to say that
“ he was Hulled about the line ” in the parlance of marine warriors.
I do not wish to say anything that might seem foolish, but I really cannot
help thinking that a white prisoner on Is. a day here would not trouble the
Government as much as the minister who buried him —cause of death, starva-
tion. Havelock surreptitiously offers me the price of the man’s food for the
first twenty-four hours, but does not say whether the 4s. or the Is. will be
allowed to me.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Loma Loma, April 1, 1876. — My dear Sir — A chance for a rather hurried
line by the Emma has just turned up. I don’t think I have anything more to
say. I see the Native Taxes Ordinance is passed. Are we to go to work on
it at once, or wait for instructions ? There are two cases in which I should
like you to advise me. The first is a very bad case of incest. A man and his
sister living together on one of the islands. The man was, I believe, a teacher.
Maafu has sent for them and is going to keep them until I hear from you.
He is very much disgusted, and I am sure would like to put an end to their
lives: it is an offence particularly odious to the natives here, who do not allow
a brother and sister to have the most ordinary intercourse of every-day life.
I cannot find in my books that this is now a criminal offence against either
the English or Colonial laws: it used to be a capital offence a short time ago,
but I cannot make out whether it is one at all now. If it is a felony, I
suppose the proper thing will be to send them for trial in the usual way, but
if it is not, I think they should be punished by a native tribunal of higher
power than the Magistrate’s Court. If you think Maafu could sentence
them, will you say what limit you desire to affix to the punishment ?
The other case is that of bigamy. I believe there is more than one case
of it here. The woman was married by a Roman Catholic Priest, and if the
information I received is right she was married to another man subsequently
by a Missionary. She is of opinion that the Lotu Popi was ineffectual,
and therefore she is free to marry again. What steps do you think ought
to be taken in cases of bigamy amongst the natives ? The Court-house is
progressing, “all the natives in the country have been subjected to the 1 Lala ’
with a vengeance ”is the remark of every white person. Tui Lau is intent
on having the best native house in Fiji for our Court-house. I hear from
Emberson that there is some illness in Levuka, what he does not say. Ought
any Board of Health precautions to be taken about it ? I trust all at Nasova
are well. lam going to Cicia on Wednesday to inquire into the reported row
there, of which I think you have heard before. Maafu is away and I have


had no chance of asking him about the steps he is going to take with regard
to the rest of the copra, for I believe the £2OOO is not all done yet. I presume
after your letter he will stop the making of any more.
To Mr. Le Hunte
My dear Le Hunte —I could not write to you yesterday as it was mail
day, and every scrap of my time was most fully occupied. I will try to
scribble a few lines by the Marion Rennie to-day. You have of course heard
of poor Mrs. De Ricci’s death. It was a very sad affair, for, until the day
before she died, it was supposed that she was mending. There has been a
great deal of sickness of the same kind (low fever), but, as yet, no other fatal
case. Poor Mrs. De Ricci has been buried in a very pretty place at the
extreme end of Drieba Point, under an overhanging mass of rock. The
scramble up the hill in the rain and dark was not easy, and we were obliged
to have to enable Floyd to read the service. The delay was caused
only by the usual malua.
De Ricci himself has gone home. I have, I think, shown some generosity
in allowing him to do so, instead of merely giving him a long holiday in New
Zealand, for, as the first official returned from Fiji, he will naturally be
listened to as an authority, and of course will do his best to thwart and
reverse all my policy. Very sorry as one is for the sad cause of his going,
and much mischief though he may do one in England, it is impossible not to
feel relief at his being gone. With Garrick one can deal as with a sensible
man, and he may possibly be of real assistance to the magistrates.
In your last letter to me, you made some allusion to the Petty Debt
Court Ordinance, but that will never now come into force, I am happy to
say, having been entirely superseded by the Supreme Court Summary Juris-
diction Rules, which are in full force, and have been so ever since the Ist of
March.
You will have heard of the grand mess Stevens has made in Samoa, and
how he has got three men of the Barracouta killed and eight wounded—some
very seriously—by his stupid blustering. Perhaps the C. 0. will now repent
its delay in sending me the High Commission.
The Nymphe has gone away to Auckland. Whether she will come back is
doubtful. Suttie has been rather making a fool of himself, too, over quaran-
tine, “jurisdiction,” etc. These sailors cannot get it drilled into their heads
that Fiji is British ground, where they have no more independent jurisdiction
than in Cornwall. I hear rather contradictory accounts of the new Commo-
dore, and I vainly wish and wish —oh, how I wish—that Goodenough were
still here to act in the right spirit, in the right way, at the right time, and
with full cordiality of co-operation.
The Baron went on dawdling at Raki-Raki, more or less seriously ill, so,
at last, I sent Maudslay down with a warrant for his seizure, on the strength
of which he is now here, consigned to custody at Nasova under Lady Gordon’s
care, until such time as the Chief Medical Officer of the Colony shall issue a
certificate setting forth that he may be released therefrom. I like him very
much ; but I think the others perhaps rather snub and sit on him more than
is necessary, though it is all in good humour, and everyone feels he is an
excellent good fellow.
On Monday we were amazed by the sudden apparition of Olive, who walked


pn utterly unexpected and unannounced, just arrived from Colo by the Star of
Uhc South. He is in low spirits and apparently not in very good health. He
jgave no explanation whatever why he had come, nor could one be extracted
Jfrom him, but it is clear that he and Carew cannot get on together. But
|what to do -with Olive now that he has come, I am sure I don’t know.
In the absence of all ships of war, it is impossible to say when I may get
over to Lau again.—Yours ever affectionately.
Nasova, April 21, 1876. —My dear Le Hunte—ln answer to your letter of
the Ist inst., I am sorry to say that it is even so, and that incest is not now,
in the eye of the law, a crime !
I have spoken to the Chief-Justice on the subject, and, rather to my
surprise, he is quite of opinion that something illegal should be done. He
thought Maafu ought not to be allowed to kill the parties (though it did not
seem to me as if he would violently resent even this !); but anything short
of this he would certainly shut his eyes to. Deportation—separately, of
course—to bare, thinly peopled, and remote islands, which would be a virtual
prison, with perhaps flogging, is what suggests itself to my mind.
Yon case of bigamy is really one of biandry, which is less doubtful. I '
should feel some question about punishing a Fiji man for having two wives,
but there can be none in punishing a Fijian woman for having two husbands. I
But I think it is the native parson who married them who is really the person
to blame—not the parties—for he should have known better, and the parties
would have followed his advice ; and he should be hauled over the coals for
celebrating an illegal marriage. Surely the missionaries won’t back him up
in not recognising the validity of a Popish marriage ! We intend to have a
ball on the 24th, for which I hope you will come over.
From J. A. Witherow to A. J. L. Gordon
Verata, Rewa, February 8, 1876. — Dear Sir — Trusting to your kindness
to forgive the liberty I am taking in troubling you, I enclose a letter from
Mr. Truscott in behalf of Mr. Ellis, and beg your advice about it. Do you
think Mr. Eastgate has done wrong in issuing the summons. We do not
know where he is or how to get a letter to him, so cannot ask his advice.
The Ellises still continue to annoy us in every possible way. Is it usual
for lawyers to send such letters as the enclosed ?—Yours very sincerely,
J. A. Witherow.
{Draft of Reply.)
Letter only reached here 17th. Such letters are not unusual from lawyers.
He wishes to bully you into withdrawing the summons. If you did so, it
would be construed into an admission of Mr. Ellis’s rights. Mr. Eastgate
has undoubted jurisdiction in a case of trespass. The question of rightful
ownership he cannot settle. You will have to show that the land has been
in your occupation since October 1874, and that Ellis has trespassed in
opposition to your warning.
To A. Eastgate, Esq.
Nasova, February 17, 1876.—My dear Mr. Eastgate —Mr. Ellis’s solicitor,
Mr. Truscott, has written a rude and bullying letter to Mr. Witherow, of which
I enclose a copy.
474
CHAP.
FIJI


You need have no hesitation as to your jurisdiction in a question of
trespass, x A Stipendary Magistrate has no right to adjudicate on a question
of title or proprietorship , but a question of trespass is distinct from these.
Any person who is in bond fide occupation of, say, a house and land
adjoining, has a right to prevent others intruding, and a mere claim to be
the real possessor would not excuse the trespasser. He has his remedy if he
is kept out of his property, hut he must not take the law into his own hands
and trespass forcibly on what is in another’s occupation. The popular idea
that the Chief-Justice in his judgment in Drew’s case, has pronounced that
the Stipendiary Magistrate cannot entertain a case of trespass without a fence,
is altogether erroneous, x
You may therefore safely proceed in the case, if you do not go into the
question of title, but confine yourself to the question whether Witherow was
in bond fide occupation in October 1874, and has continued to be so in such
manner as to constitute Ellis’s encroachments a trespass. You may also add
that you imagine the Lands Commission will not look very favourably on
cases in which the injunction not to disturb existing occupation has been
disregarded.
I have read the passage in this letter between the marks x x to the
Chief-Justice, who pronounces it to be “perfectly sound,” but this fact you
must of course keep exclusively to yourself. I merely mention it for your
encouragement and confirmation.
IV. The following despatches and letters will show some of
the petty worries to which a Governor at a great distance from
home is exposed by the interference of the Colonial Office as to
small local matters, and its habit of procrastinating decision as
to all important ones.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 25.—My Lord—l have had the honour to receive Your Lord-
ship’s despatch, No. 81 of the 10th November, respecting the suspension of
Mr. Swanston.
2. I fear Your Lordship hardly realises, and indeed it would be difficult
for you to do so, how hard it is to effect, with a staff necessarily so small, the
transcription of even the most essential documents, but I should, notwith-
standing the labour, have caused all the papers in Mr. Swanston s case to be
copied, had they been requisite to Your Lordship’s understanding of the case.
But this was not so. The defiance copied in my despatch, No. 31 of the 20th
August, was at once the main point of Mr. Swanston’s answer, and the cause
of his removal, the original charges being cast into the shade by the
pretensions therein made ; and having given this at length, it did not appear
to me essential that the remainder of the correspondence, containing 271 folio
pages, should be copied, although, no doubt, had there been no pressure on
my clerical staff, I should have desired that everything connected with the
case should be copied in proper official form.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 25. —My Lord—l have had the honour to receive Your Lord-
ship’s despatch, No. 82 of the 10th November, requesting an explanation


of an advertisement which Your Lordship had perceived in the Fiji Gazette
calling for tenders for the erection of public offices at Nasova.
2. I thought I had already at the time explained this matter, but I find
that amid an overwhelming pressure of heterogeneous topics it escaped my
recollection. J
3. I have at all events already informed Your Lordship that I had taken
up my residence in the buildings at Nasova formerly used by the Parliament
and Public Offices of the late Fiji Government. In doing so, the Colonial
Secretary’s Office was necessarily displaced, and the public offices referred to
are an extension of the Nasova building sufficient to accommodate that officer
and the occupants of the two new offices of Lands’ Commissioner and Auditor-
General.
4. TV ith reference to Your Lordship’s remark as to the intention that all
such works should be executed by the Royal Engineers, I would respectfully
observe that I arrived here in the month of June, and the Royal Engineers in
October, and that the Colonial Secretary, Auditor-General, and Commissioner
of Lands could not well continue to transact business in the bedrooms of
myself and staff, nor yet remain for a quarter of a year without shelter. It
is not I think, a matter for regret that these buildings or rather additions
were erected prior to the arrival of the Royal Engineers, for, constructed as
they were by contract, and with the aid of native labour, they were completed
at an expense of only £2BB, whereas, had they been built by the Royal
Engineers, the short working hours and high working pay of that corps would
have at least doubled the cost.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 25, 18/6.—My Lord—l have had the honour to receive Your
Lordship’s despatch, No. 84 of the 10th November, on the subject of the
purchase of a vessel for the service of this Colony.
2. I will, in the first place, reply to the suggestions contained in the third
paragraph of Your Lordship’s despatch.
3. A sailing vessel of the character indicated would not in any manner
meet the requirements of the Colonial Government. The wind here usually
blows from one and the same quarter, and a voyage from west to east is as
tedious and uncertain as a voyage from east to west is usually of ready
accomplishment. The late Commodore Goodenough deprecated the idea of
the purchase of a schooner for the Colony quite as strongly as myself.
4. Your Lordship is aware that I greatly preferred the idea of hiring a
private steamer to that of purchasing one for the exclusive use of the Govern-
ment, but when I found that the most advantageous terms on which I could make
such an arrangement would have involved the hire of a small and old vessel,
without any decent passenger accommodation, at an annual cost very nearly
equal to that at which I could effect the purchase of a new and well-built
steamer, I had no hesitation in abandoning my own preconceived idea in
favour of the juster views of Sir H. Robinson.
5. I have, in a previous despatch, reported the circumstances under which
the purchase of the Fitzroy was effected, and it is with some surprise, as
well as with regret, that I perceive that in Your Lordship’s despatch now
under acknowledgment, it is assumed that I shall take no further step
CHAP,


towards supplying the wants of the Colony in this respect without a previous
reference to Your Lordship. #
In Sir Hercules Robinson’s scheme of expenditure for the past year, a
sum of £SOOO is put down for the purchase of a steam-vessel for the Colony.
In commenting on this scheme of expenditure, Your Lordship remarks in
your despatch, unnumbered, of the 4th March, as follows:—“It is not
possible for me now to express an opinion on each item, but I may observe
that if, as I anticipate, you find it necessary to provide that steam com-
munication among the islands shall be at the command of the Colonial
Government, independently of Her Majesty’s ships, it may be preferable to
enter into arrangements for subsidising a commercial steamer, and not to
resort to the very costly proceeding of purchasing and owning a colonial
vessel.” That is to say: —Your Lordship anticipates that I shall find it
necessary to provide that steam communication among the islands should
be at the command of the Colonial Government independently of Her
Majesty’s ships, and suggests that I may find it preferable to make this
necessary provision in one mode rather than in another. That I shall make
it in some manner seems to be assumed, and I certainly understood a certain
amount of discretionary power to be thereby entrusted to me as to the mode
in which I should secure services which were admitted to be necessary to the
working of Government.
7. I had several conversations with the late Commodore Goodenough as
to the species of vessel best suited for service in these waters, and my present
experience has firmly convinced me that such a vessel as is described in
his letter of the 10th June (and to which description the Fitzroy nearly
answers), will fully meet all the requirements therein set forth ; nor do I
understand on what data such a vessel has been supposed inadequate for the
contemplated service. A vessel of 169 tons burden would, unless peculiarly
built as to draft, be unable to cross the bar of any river in Fiji.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, January 26, 1876. —My Lord—l have carefully re-read
my despatch, No. 43 of the 21st August last, and I confess that I am unable
to see in what manner I have misapprehended the course Your Lordship
intended me to pursue. I fear that, on the contrary, I must myself have
used ambiguous language, which has failed to render my own meaning clear.
2. I had, and have, no difficulty whatever as to the application of the
“broad principles” laid down in Your Lordship’s despatch.
3. They are principles in the soundness of which I heartily concur, and
to give effect to which I always perceived, and was glad to perceive, that it
was Your Lordship’s intention that I should, if necessary, call to my aid the
legislative, as well as executive powers of the Government. But the
despatch does not only lay down broad principles, it does more. It asserts
that a certain deed has had a definite and particular effect and operation.
This is not the enunciation of a principle, but the. statement of a fact, and
this a fact which has not been suffered to remain unquestioned.
4. The principle laid down by Your Lordship, and the soundness of
which I think unquestionable, is that Crown grants should be deemed
essential to the confirmation of title, that such grants should be made to all


bona fide purchasers of land previous to the Cession ; but that of such bona
fides the Crown shall be the judge.
5. If all the lands of the Colony were transferred to the Queen by the
deed of Cession, power to effect the desired object has been already placed in
the hands of the Government, and legislation respecting it is unnecessary ;
all that is required being a public declaration of the fact. If such rights
over the land are not given by the deed of Cession, it would still be desirable
to confer them on the Crown by Ordinance ; but in this case it could hardly
be said that rights that were, in fact, conferred by the Ordinance, were con-
ferred not by it, but by the deed of Cession.
6. It was on these points that I wished for an authoritative explanation,
it being contended here, first, that the assertion contained in paragraph 13
(1) of Your Lordship’s despatch is erroneous; secondly, that if this be so,
and if the rights claimed for the Crown were not conferred by the deed of
Cession, it is beyond the competence of the local legislature to confer them
by subsequent enactment ; and thirdly, that the decision of a law court
being requisite to establish the rights of claimants, the recommendation of
the Lands Commission, even when approved by the Executive Council, and
confirmed by Your Lordship, are valueless and nugatory.
7. I believe with Your Lordship, that the rights in question are conferred
by the deed of Cession. It was, nevertheless, my intention to have passed
an Ordinance to remove all doubt on the subject; and if I have, from
prudential reasons, abstained from pressing this measure, Your Lordship
will, I hope, give me credit for not having done so without grave cause.—l
have, etc.,
To the Earl of Carnarvon,
February 10, 1876.—My Lord—l have had the honour to receive Your
Lordship’s despatch, No. 88 of the 19th November.
2. I have carefully compared Your Lordship’s original despatch (unnum-
bered) of the 4th March 1875, with the printed copy now sent.
There are many small discrepancies between them, but there is only one
passage, besides that quoted in my despatch No. 43 of the 21st August last,
in which these discrepancies affect the sense.
3. This passage occurs in paragraph 2, the language of which, in the
manuscript original is more favourable to the continuance of Cakobau’s
pension at the existing rate than that of the printed copy now sent. In the
former; I am told that if Cakobau “has been given distinctly to understand
that so large a pension as £ISOO a year will be proposed in his case, and
expects to receive that amount, it will probably be desirable not to reduce
it.” That such a sum would be proposed by Sir H. Robinson as the amount
of his pension Cakobau had been made aware by Sir H. R. himself, but the
words “ will be proposed” are altered in the printed copy to “is likely to be
allowed,” which is by no means the same thing. I believe, however, that
Cakobau had not only been informed as to the amount proposed, but also
been oiven to understand that the proposal would almost certainly be assented
to. At all events the subject is now set at rest by Your Lordship’s despatch,.
No. 78, of the 30th October.


To The Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, February 16, 1876. —My Lord —In my dispatch, No. 83,
of the 30th October, I made mention of the proceedings of the Council of
Chiefs at Drieba, and explained the cause which made it impossible for me,
at that time, to forward a translation of the minutes of the meetings of that
Assembly.
2. These minutes I now have the honour to enclose, and I venture to
think that they will appear to Your Lordship, as they do to me, of very
great interest and value.
3. It will be observed that Cakabau did not attend the meetings of this
Council. He considered that if he did so, there would probably be an
absence of that freedom of deliberation which was desirable, and he
accordingly declined to preside over the discussions, remaining however in
a house near that in which the meeting was held, and frequently com-
municating with the members of the Council. When their “Memorial and
Report” was finally agreed upon, he came at the head of the Chiefs to present
it to me, and expressed his own entire concurrence in its contents.
4. The recommendations made by the Chiefs in this memorial, will be
commented on and dealt with in other despatches.
5. I beg to request Your Lordship’s attention to the letter from the Chief
Interpreter, Mr. D. Wilkinson, printed at the close of these papers, which
conveys his impression as to the general character of the deliberations of the
meeting. As no man in Fiji has had equal experience of such meetings, his
opinion as to its successful issue is entitled to great weight.
6. This despatch was written by me as long ago as the month of
November last, when I was in daily expectation that these papers which I
had ordered to be printed, w T ould be returned to me from the press. Not-
withstanding constant inquiries for them on my part, and constant
endeavours to push them forward, the other demands on the press have so
hindered their progress, that they were only struck off to-day. This example
will furnish Your Lordship with a good illustration of the difficulties which
I experience in getting papers placed in type. The delay in this instance
has deprived this record of some of its interest, but I think Your Lordship
will still find it by no means unworthy of your attention.
Y. In the same category of petty worries might perhaps be in*
eluded my relations with the Chief-Justice and Attorney-General.
The former was an honest, upright man, and in his way an able
one, but intensely touchy and sensitive as to his own dignity,
and anxious that every one should recognise that it was a great
piece of condescension on his part to have consented to accept
office in Fiji, even temporarily. Much of my time was taken up
in soothing his ruffled vanity, and as, unfortunately, we lived at
the extreme opposite ends of Levuka, between which communica-j
tion was not easy, the word in season which would have at oncq
calmed down matters was not always spoken. The Attorney-i
General was a very different sort of man, conceited and ignorant/


who wished to pose as an opponent of the Governor, and the
champion of white interests.
To tjhe Earl of Carnarvon
January 19, 1876.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose an Ordinance
for the establishment of Small Debt Courts passed by the Legislative Council
on the 17th December last.
2. I regret that I cannot recommend this Ordinance, although assented to
by me, for the gracious allowance and confirmation of Her Majesty.
3. It was brought in and urgently pressed through Council by the
Attorney-General at a single sitting, and without having been previously seen
by the Chief-Justice and other members.
4. I am informed by the Chief-Justice that the Ordinance is obscure, and
that in his opinion it cannot be made to work. A similar dissatisfaction
with its provisions has been manifested by every Stipendiary Magistrate
whose duty it will be to administer it.
It is the intention of the Chief-Justice to provide for the summary hearing
and determination of petty debt cases by Rules of Court, as suggested by
Your Lordship in your despatch No. 2 of the 22nd March, and when these
Rules are completed, it is his intention to move the repeal of the Ordinance
now transmitted.
5. I should therefore recommend that this Ordinance should be neither
confirmed nor disallowed by Her Majesty, as it will probably be repealed
before it comes into operation.
6. Your Lordship may very reasonably ask why, in these circumstances, I
assented to the Ordinance. I should not have done so, had my assent at
once brought it into operation, but its last clause provides that it shall only
take effect from a date to be fixed by proclamation, and that proclamation I
shall not issue. Considerations of local convenience with regard to the
disposal of business before the Council made it, in my judgment, more
expedient to assent to the Ordinance and refrain from proclaiming it, than to
refuse my signature, I enclose the report of the Attorney-General on this
Ordinance.
7. The limitation of £SO to which he takes exception was, I may observe,
proposed by the Chief-Justice with my entire concurrence. I regret that I
cannot concur with the Attorney-General in his opinion as to the perspicuity
and comprehensiveness of this Ordinance.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 25.—My Lord—l have the honour to transmit for Her
Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation an Ordinance “ to make provi-
sion in relation to Criminal Law and Procedure.”
2. This Ordinance is founded on the draft sent out in Your Lordship’s
despatch, No. 2 of the 4th March, the provisions of which have for the most
part been adopted in it.
3. Some clauses, as X. and XL of the original draft, have been omitted
as unnecessary, the provisions they contain being embodied in other enact-
ments, whilst a series of clauses, XXIV.-XXXI., and L.-LXYIIL have


been introduced with respect to the functions and mode of selection of
juries.
4. I have the honour to enclose the Report which I have this moment
received of the Attorney-General on this Ordinance.
5. The Attorney-General states in this Report that he has introduced in
section XXIV. a provision taken from the Austrian Code. This is true, but
the inference naturally to be drawn from the sentence would be that the
Ordinance was adapted to the local circumstances of the Colony, and moulded
into its present shape by the Attorney-General; an inference which would
be erroneous, as that duty was performed with much care and skill by the
Chief-Justice, Sir W. Hackett, the suggestions of the Attorney-General being
confined to that now under consideration, clauses XYIII. and XIX. and
a very few others. This “Vienna clause” was adopted on the motion
of the Attorney-General by a majority of the Board on a division, the Chief-
Justice and myself dissenting.
6. In the opinion of the Attorney-General as to expediency of limiting
assessors to members of the coloured races I cannot concur, and it appears
to me that he entirely misapprehends the object of their appointment,
which is not, I apprehend, to afford evidence which they might be summoned
as witnesses to give, but to assist the judge by the expression of their
opinion.
7. Clause VI., to which the Attorney-General now objects, was inserted by
the Chief-Justice and called forth no dissent in Council. Clauses XXXVI. and
XXXVII. form part of the original draft sent out, and their intention seemed
both to the Chief-Justice and myself to be manifestly desirable, at all events,
until such time as a Magistrate’s Ordinance containing similar provisions
had been framed, adopted, and published.
From the Chief-Justice
January 27, 1876.—My dear Sir Arthur—l am sorry we did not discuss
the subject of the fugitive criminals question before, as I am decidedly of
opinion that the law requires amendment, or at any rate to be made clearer
than it is at present. I have not had time to think over what is absolutely
required, but as at present advised, I think it might be sufficient to give
every Stipendiary Magistrate, or the Chief-Magistrate, authority to arrest
and to remand for further evidence, on well-grounded suspicions. Of course
you would have to leave it to the discretion of the Magistrate whether there
was reasonable ground for the suspicion or not. When I use the words
well-grounded suspicions, I have in my mind such things as telegrams, letters
from England, photographic likenesses, warrants issued in England (appar-
ently) but not proved on oath , and any other circumstances which would lead
a reasonable man to believe that the person charged was guilty. It would
be necessary also to provide that no person should be kept in custody under
the Ordinance for a longer period than months, allowing sufficient time
for the forwarding of the necessary evidence from the country where the
crime was committed. If no evidence was forthcoming at the end of that
period, the prisoner should be discharged. I think some such provisions
would be a useful supplement to the 6 and 7 Viet., by which we are now
governed ; but I will add that the suggestions are crude and will probably
require correction. lam disposed to think that the judgment after all will
2 i


not be a political one, and I do not think there will he any necessity for re-
ferring to yon. As you do not require me at Council, I will devote the day
to Court matters, as to-morrow I must be “in another place.”
From the Chief-Justice
January 28, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—Early in the present month I
sent in a requisition to Government for a punkah for the Supreme Court,
not, I submit, an unreasonable one, with such a Court-House and the
thermometer at 92° in the shade. To this requisition there was no reply ; I
believe on account of your absence from Levuka. A few days ago I directed
my clerk to inquire why the requisition had not been attended to, and to my
great surprise, in answer to his inquiries a letter was received from the
Colonial Secretary to the effect that ‘ ‘ there was no provision on the estimates
for the supply of a punkah to the Supreme Court,” —nothing more. I feel
bound to say that in an experience of more than fourteen years, I have never
known a requisition from the Chief-Justice for a trifling addition to the
Court-House, indispensable in his opinion not only to comfort but to health,
treated with such scant courtesy. By my instructions, my clerk wrote again,
stating that what had been asked for was absolutely necessary. The reply to
this is certainly extraordinary. First, the Colonial Secretary states that he
has no authority to authorise expenditure of any kind that has not been
sanctioned by the Legislative Council. Secondly, he states that in such a
case as the present a requisition from the Head of the Department requiring
the service should be transmitted to the Colonial Secretary for the consider-
ation of the Governor, and that the requisition should give the details of the
service required to be performed, and an estimate of its probable cost. How,
as to the first ground, I will only say that many alterations have been made!
in the Court-House since my arrival here, and expense has consequently been!
incurred, and I know that in none of these cases had the expenditure been
sanctioned by the Legislative Council. As to the Colonial Secretary’s second
position, it is enough to say that a formal requisition from the head of the
department was transmitted to the Colonial Secretary on the 4th January.
As to the Colonial Secretary’s concluding remarks, I now for the first time
learn that it is one of. the duties of a Chief-Justice to make estimates of the
cost of repairs to the Court-House. As this correspondence seems to me to!
show an intention to annoy and to thwart the Chief-Justice in making a
most reasonable requisition, I do not for a moment suppose that you are
cognisant of it, and I therefore bring it to your notice before taking
further steps in the matter.
To the Chief-Justice
Hasova, January 29, 1876.—My dear Sir William—There is nothing I
should more regret or condemn than a disposition on the part of any officer
serving under me to “ annoy and thwart ” you, and you may safely rely on my
determination to make very short work of anything done with such an inten-
tion. But lam convinced that Captain Havelock is as incapable as I am of
any intention to fail in the respect due to your office, or the courtesy owing
to yourself.
From what he says I rather think that he considers that it is he who has
received but “scant courtesy,” not from you, but from your subordinates.


There is clearly some misapprehension to begin with, for Captain Havelock
is under the impression that he received no requisition or letter from you on
the subject, but simply a curt communication from your clerk to the effect
that a “punker” (sic) was to be at once put up iu the Court-House, I shall
have some further conversation with Captain Havelock to-day, and will after-
wards either write to you or see you, probably the latter.—Yours, very
sincerely.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, February 1, 1876. — My dear Sir William — Mr. De Ricci, I find,
did not comply with my wish that you should see the draft of his Ordinance
—I accordingly now send it. He introduced it with a speech similar in
substance to the letter I now send. The draft does not contain any of the
restrictions or safeguards we agreed upon on Sunday. He gave us to under-
stand—though, upon reflection, I cannot say he said so in so many words—
that you agreed with him. If you have changed your mind as to the practi-
cability of such an Ordinance, it was rather hard not to let me know, as of
course it would have entirely altered my intentions. I think myself—and
fifteen years’ experience as a Governor goes for something—that he makes a
confusion between an Ordinance attempting to give jurisdiction beyond the
colony, and one taking cognisance of facts which have occurred beyond its
jurisdiction, but which are brought to its knowledge within it. Let me
know, please, what you think, and, if you are of the same mind as on Sunday,
please make, or suggest to De Ricci to make, the necessary alterations, which
appear to me to amount almost to redrafting.—Yours, very sincerely.
P.S.— Havelock is very penitent, but maintains that he supposed the
requisition not to be signed by you.
From the Chief-Justice
February 2, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—You do not say what Mr. De
Ricci said, but I think you must have mistaken him, as he had no authority
to speak for me. Ido not agree that legislation of this sort is ultra vires of the
Legislative Council. All the Australian Colonies have passed laws of a similar
character—as far as jurisdiction goes, I have read the Ordinance, but do not
think it will do. I am afraid I cannot fall in with your proposal that I
should suggest the necessary alterations to the Attorney-General. A joint
responsibility is always unpleasant. Instead of this, I will, within the next
few days, endeavour to find time, or make time, to draw an Ordinance, which,
without running counter too violently to the principles of English law, may
remove some of the difficulties experienced in a recent case. I think we
cannot be too careful in legislating on this subject. The more one examines it
the more clearly one sees the difficulties which surround it. You will see that
even in England, with the legal ability of the whole empire at the command
of the Government, great difficulty is found in forming a satisfactory law.—ln
great haste, yours, very sincerely.
From the Chief-Justice
February 27, 1876.—My dear Sir Arthur—l send a copy of the proposed
Summary Rules. The first 19 rules are the “ Small Debt Rules ” properly so


called. The remainder are rules for providing a more easy way of administer-
ing the estates of deceased persons.
The question for the Council will be whether these Rules or the Small Debts
Ordinance are to come into force.
The Attorney-General will naturally he mortified that the Ordinance on
which he bestowed so much pains, should be, as it were, still-born, and one
cannot help feeling a certain sympathy with him. However, I have drawn
my Rules, and if it is thought that they are more suitable to the actual circum-
stances of the Colony than the Attorney-General’s elaborate Ordinance, they
are very much at its service.
If, on the other hand, it is considered more advisable to bring the Attorney-
General’s Ordinance into operation, I shall not feel in the least mortified.
You will observe that there is no appeal —but in all cases over £lO the
proceedings must be revised by the Supreme Court. It will be easy to make
Appeal Rules hereafter if it should be found necessary.
To the Chief-Justice
My dear Sir William—l cannot have a moment’s hesitation between your
Rules and the Attorney-General’s Ordinance.
Before all personal questions I have to consider which is on public grounds
preferable, and I cannot doubt that your few clear and simple Rules will
prove more intelligible, practical, and acceptable than the elaborate but
awkward machine provided by the Ordinance. Nor when I turn to personal
considerations do I find any cause to modify this decision. I have no wish
to mortify the A.-G., and should not go out of my way to do so. On the
other hand I am not disposed to sacrifice the smallest public interest in order
to save him mortification. His appointment was in the first instance a 1
scandalous job, and was only not protested against by me because, as Lord,
Carnarvon had allowed me to appoint almost all the officials, I felt it would J
be bad taste on my part to make a fuss about almost the only nomination |
made by him.
I have behaved with forbearance to him, for I have neither to you nor'
others here said anything of his past history ; but he is aware that I know itl
in detail, and I imagine hates me accordingly. On the other hand I
have every reason to wish that the labour you have bestowed on these Rules:
should not be wasted.
From the Chief-Justice
Levuka, February 28, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—The alterations sug-
gested by you in the Summary Rules can be easily made by a short supple-
mentary rule, which would be a safer way than by striking out any portion of
the Rules as at present drawn. I will draw a short rule which I will submit to
you, and if it meets the contingencies mentioned by you, it can be passed any
day that the Council meets.
In the meantime the Rules as I sent them to you are printed, and it would
cause a good deal of inconvenience to alter them.
Is it settled that there is a meeting of Council to-morrow.
lam glad you approve of the Rules. They will, I think, do as a temporary
measure ; I do not claim for them any higher merit than that.


From the Chief-Justice
Court House, March 1, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—l send you a draft
of an Ordinance in re the Seal, and also two rules to be added to the
“Summary Rules” in order to provide for the contingencies you mentioned.
It will be necessary for Government to re-appoint the officers of the Court,
except Mr. Hobday, who is merely a personal officer. I suppose Mr. Thomas
must continue to act as Sheriff as well as Registrar, although the combination
of the offices is not desirable. But—you cannot appoint a separate sheriff
without giving him a salary, and —Mr. Boyd, the bailiff, is a useful man, and
might, I think, be retained on the staff of the Court, discharging the functions
he now performs of looking after the Court generally, and keeping the keys
of the Courthouse. He would also be available as bailiff whenever he might
be required. Mr Molloy is neither useful nor ornamental, and might well be
dispensed with, as I am afraid he is rather in the way.
From the Chief-Justice
Court House, March 3, 1876.—My dear Sir Arthur—Why were we told
nothing of this objection to English law yesterday ? I knew nothing about
“ Okes ” being ordered, and lam quite at sea about the whole matter. It
appears to me that our resolutions of yesterday should not be rescinded with-
out some good reason. If that suggested by the Attorney-General is a good
one, it seems strange that it was not brought forward before.
I think a summary Ordinance, such as the one suggested by you would
be useful.
I am very glad to hear that you are better.—Yours very truly.
P.S. —My punkah is a very good one, but there is no one to pull it. Could
not the Superintendant of Police spare a man or two when the Court is sitting.
I am afraid I can scarcely ask Mr. Molloy to derogate so far from his dignity,
although I have no doubt the exercise would do him good.
From the Chief-Justice
March 10, 1876.—My dear Sir Arthur—l have read the Attorney-General’s
report on Ordinance, No. VI. of 1876, but inasmuch as the questions raised by
him of “repugnancy” and ultra vires must have been long since con-
sidered and settled, it would only be waste of time to enter into a discussion
with regard to them, and I am quite content to leave the Ordinance to be
dealt with on its merits.
It appears, by reference to other Colonial Ordinances on the same subject,
that a similar Act was passed in 1850 in New South Wales, and in 1862 in
New Zealand, and as these Acts are, as well as I can ascertain, still in force,
I presume that the Law Officers of the Crown did not object to them on the
grounds now relied on by the Attorney-General.
For these reasons I think it would be quite useless for me to enter on a
lengthened discussion as to the meaning of “repugnancy,” and as to the limits
of the powers of Colonial Legislative Councils. I will only say that Ido not
share the opinion of the Attorney-General that the Ordinance must prove
abortive: on the contrary, I hope that if it remains in force it may secure
the apprehension of criminals who would otherwise have escaped from justice.—
Believe me, etc.


From the Chief-Justice
Court House, March 13, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—Herewith I return
the Polynesian papers.
I think your reply to the Memorial is very good. But was not the Charter
granted by Cakohau prior to formation of the so-called Government ? vide
the end of second paragraph of your letter ?
It will be necessary to make some change in the mode of “publishing”
Rules of Court. It is obviously necessary that they should he in the hands of
the public as soon as they become law. Now the “Civil Procedure Rules,”
although they were in print before the Ist, and were passed on the 2nd March,
have actually not yet been distributed. I was informed on Saturday that
they had n'ot yet reached the hands of the Chief Police Magistrate.
The practice in force at the Straits prevented these difficulties arising.
The Rules came into force the moment they were sanctioned by the Judges.
They were then laid on the table of the Legislative Council at its next
meeting, and required to be sanctioned within ascertain time, I think six
weeks, otherwise they ceased to have the force of law.
Has the Criminal Procedure Ordinance been proclaimed ? If not, it should
be done at once, as we shall require it in April.
I had rather a fortunate escape of the “Forms Seance" —you do not say
whether or no you completed them.
I am seeing how far we can utilise the Trinidad Ordinance.—Yours, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, March, 13, 1876. —My Lord—l have the honour to transmit for
Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation an Ordinance “To make
better provision for the apprehension of fugitives from justice.”
2. This Ordinance was introduced by the Chief-Justice Sir William Hackett,
and, as he informed the Council when moving its first reading, * ‘ contains not
a single provision that is not already law in one or more of the neighbouring
Australian Colonies.”
3. The Ordinance was, however, very strongly objected to by the Attorney-
General, as your Lordship will perceive from his Report upon the Ordinance,
which I have also the honour to enclose.
4. In the debate which took place upon the Ordinance the Chief-Justice
fully pointed out the fallacy of the Attorney-General’s assumption that the
Ordinance was one, in the adoption of which, the Legislative Council ex-
ceeded the powers belonging to it.
He is confident in the propriety of the Ordinance, and quite content to
leave it to be judged by your Lordship. The Chief-Justice also authorises
me to add that “ He does not share the opinion of the Attorney-General that
the Ordinance must prove abortive, and that, on the contrary, he believes
that it will secure the apprehension of criminals who otherwise would have
escaped from justice.” The experience of the recent case of Ward or Ennis
shows that without some such Ordinance there would be great danger of this
Colony becoming a place of refuge for criminals who might remain here for
months unmolested, and proceed elsewhere with impunity when a sufficient
time had elapsed to render it probable that a warrant against them had been
transmitted to Fiji, from the place where their crime had been committed.


5. The Ordinance does not conflict with the Imperial Act. No one can
be sent back to England for trial, or proceeded against in respect to any
offence committed beyond the Colony, without the endorsation of the Chief-
Justice on an original warrant, which endorsation can only be given as pro-
vided by the Imperial Act. What the Ordinance does enact is that any
person within the Colony against whom there is reason to believe that the
operation of the Imperial Act has been or will be invoked, may be detained
until a reasonable time has been given to ascertain whether the machinery
provided by that enactment has been set in motion or not. If it has, the
person charged is arrested under the provisions of that Act, and by it all sub-
sequent proceedings in the case are governed. If on the contrary, no such
proceedings are taken, the suspected person is, after a reasonable interval
released, nor is any attempt made to render offences committed beyond the
Colony punishable under a local statute.
6. I have communicated the report of the Attorney-General to the Chief-
Justice, but he informs me that he considers “it would only be a waste of
time ” to enter upon a discussion with respect to it.
From the Chief-Justice
Court House, March 14, 1876.—My dear Sir Arthur—Although I have
not time to go into the Attorney-General’s lengthy report, I have no objection
to being quoted as supporting the Bill —or to the substance of my private note
being communicated. The minute which you enclose states clearly the
object and scope of the Bill. lam writing to Sir J. Pauncefote, to whom the
Ordinance will probably be referred.
By the way I have found on reperusal a contradiction between the Fifth
and the concluding sections. It will be necessary to alter this, and I have
drafted a short Ordinance, which I enclose.
I think the Summary Jurisdiction Ordinance will be ready for a first
reading on Thursday, but if there is nothing else in which I am concerned,
Mr. Thurston or some one else might move the first reading in my place, as
we propose having a sitting of the Lands Commission.
I have just had a note from Mitchell in which he states that the Council
will not sit until three on Thursday, so that I shall be able to be present.
I am not aware that I have any objection to abbreviated forms ” (as such),
and I certainly did not authorise any one to make such a declaration. On
the contrary, I think brevity, if unaccompanied by obscurity, is a decided
advantage.
Do not blame me for the blotted condition of the paper, as the water is
pouring through the roof of my chambers, and my books and papers are
saturated.—Yours, etc.
From the Chief-Justice
March 22, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur —The introduction of the “Forties”
into the question of the Polynesian claims complicates matters, and raises
points which it would require the arbitrating powers of a Cairns to settle
satisfactorily.
First come the Polynesians, to whom we say, We don’t admit the validity
of your charter, but, as you have paid your money, you shall have it back.


Before, however, we have parted with the money, up come the “Forties”
and say, The money which was paid was ours, and was paid in consideration of
certain lands sold to us by the Polynesians, and which we now claim.
If the “Forties” have really paid their money fairly and honestly, I
think it would he the duty of the Government, before paying the money to
the Polynesians, to inquire whether any, and what portion of it ought in
fairness to be paid to the “Forties.”
If the “Forties sued the Polynesians in a court of law, they would be
entitled at the very least to a return of their purchase-money with interest.
I do not know how much land they supposed themselves to have got under
their contract with the Polynesians, but of course that would have to be taken
into account in considering their claims.
The “ Forties ” no doubt have strong, indeed, in reality the only equitable
claims, as between themselves and the Polynesians ; but on the other hand,
the money was paid through the Polynesians, and ostensibly by them. The
Government therefore has to decide whether it will take up the position of
having no concern with the persons who bought from the Polynesians, being
a private matter with which the Government has nothing to do, and for which
redress must be sought through the ordinary channel, or whether the Govern-
ment will stretch a point in favour of persons who have paid their money
honestly and may be in danger of losing it altogether if the Government
does not interpose in their favour.
If the intervention be possible, that is to say, if the Government can
arbitrate satisfactorily in the matter, my own feeling would be in favour of
the latter course.
But, as the Auditor-General says in his minute, it may, for reasons of
policy, be “ impossible for the Government to go beyond the Company, with-
out raising an unnecessary, inconvenient, and interminable correspondence. ”
I am afraid, whichever way the matter is settled, there will be a howl of
disappointment, as no one will get as much as he expects.—Very sincerely
yours, etc.
All this tension was far more wearying and worrying than
would appear from these letters, which are but specimens out of
a great mass, and specimens not specially selected, but taken
because they happen* to have been accidentally preserved, while
many others, more numerous and perhaps more characteristic,
have been destroyed. Among the Chief-Justice’s other complaints
as to the insufficient amount of respect paid him was the want of a
military or police guard. “In the Straits Settlements,” he wrote,
“the Judges always had a Sepoy guard in attendance, even at
their private houses. In Ireland Her Majesty’s Judges of Assize
are always attended by a military guard, and you can always tell
the Judge’s lodgings by the sentry who paces in front.” The
same ever present sense of his own dignity and importance used
sometimes to place him in comical situations. He and the
Attorney-General used to row their wives about the harbour in
a small boat which they possessed between them. The Attorney-
General pulled stroke in ordinary boating rig, but the Chief-


Justice never divested himself of the black swallow-tailed coat
and tall black silk hat, the wearing of which he (or Lady
Hackett), deemed essential to the maintenance of his official
dignity. The figure he cut, with his swallow tails hanging down
to the water in the bottom of the boat as it washed about from
side to side, and with his tall hat bending to each stroke of the oar,
was ridiculous enough, and it was rendered all the more so by
the almost universal adoption by the white male community of
Levuka of the costume of flannel shirt, flannel or drill trousers,
and waist blanket (as a sash was elegantly styled in Levuka),
which was affected by myself and my staff'.
But the Chief-Justice was always open and honest, and alt
his moves were made above board. He had, moreover, a sense
of official duty, and though he spoke his mind openly, he, when
necessary, acquiesced in measures of which he did not himself
approve. But, of course, he hated the place and wished for
more civilised regions. Lord Carnarvon offered him his choice
between the Chief-Justiceships of Ceylon or Gibraltar. He|
chose the former, as intimated to me in the following letter
From the Chief-Justice
March 25, 1876. —My dear Sir Arthur—l have had much difficulty in
deciding what answer to give to Lord Carnarvon. The otium non sine
dignitate of Gibraltar, and the opportunities one would have of indulging
one’s love of study are certainly strong temptations, not to mention the charm
in the idea of being within easy reach of every place of European interest.
But I scarcely feel justified, just as yet, in retiring from active life. I
agree with De Toqueville that ‘‘ la vie n’est pas un plaisir, ni une douleur ;
mais une affaire grave dont nous sommes chargees, et qu’il faut conduire et
terminer a notre honneur.” I therefore feel bound, though not, I admit,
without many a longing, lingering look, to give up the idea of retiring, and
accept the onerous and honourable post at Ceylon. If the C. 0. had chosen
for me, I should have been perfectly satisfied with their choice, whatever
it might have been, and I heartily wish they had not put me into a position
which I find so embarrassing. —Yours, etc.
It was an unfortunate choice for him, poor man, for he diecTj
of cholera in less than a year. It was not without regret that'
I saw him leave, but it was manifest that he was wholly out of
place in such a country as Fiji.
The Attorney-General was a very different sort of man.
One never knew what he was at. He would apparently acquiesce
in what he secretly set himself to work to subvert, and was
always trying in an underhand way to effect little personal
objects of his own. This was manifest from the very first
moment of his landing in Fiji, as I have already shown in a


previous part of this volume (p. 138). Even before that date
he had tried to put forward his own interests. When in Sydney
he had called on me to pay on account of the Colony his hotel
bill of <£6B odd. I had to point out that he, like other officials,
had received an allowance for his travelling expenses, and if thei
time spent by him in Sydney were specially paid for, the hotel
expenses of Dr. MacGregor, Dr. Mayo, Mr. Mitchell, Sir William;
Hackett, and Capt. Havelock would have to be paid also,
which the Colony could ill afford. But he insisted on having;
the question referred to the Secretary of State, as well as another]
whether he was to have a clerk at the public expense or pay his
own. /
He also claimed a right to employ at the public expense
any legal assistance he chose. On this point I wrote to Lord
Carnarvon as follows :
2. Pending the receipt of instructions from your Lordship I have allowed
the Attorney-General all the assistance he desires, but I confess I have some
doubts the propriety of this course.
3. The points raised by the Attorney-General are—
(l) That it is “vested in him as a matter of courtesy, if not of right ” that
he should employ any extra legal assistance either in the Supreme Court or in
the Magistrates’ Court (I presume on behalf of the police) when and as he
chooses without special authority.
(2) That it would involve “loss of dignity” for him to appear in a
Magistrates’ Court.
(3) That he ought not to be compelled to ask leave to employ such extra
assistance in each particular instance.
4. I can only say in reply to the Attorney-General’s first point that my
experience enables me to say that he is entirely mistaken.
5. On the second point I am inclined to think him mistaken also. It is
true he is called “ Attorney-General,” but he is the sole law officer of the
Government, and I am not at all certain that it was intended that, receiving
as he does a very large salary, he should do only a part of its legal work. I
see no good reason why he should not appear if necessary before the Chief
Police Magistrate at Levuka. His advice is not likely to be asked by this
gentleman, who is of many more years’ standing at the Bar than Mr. De Ricci,
and he never could be called on to appear in any other court. Nor do I think
much of the loss of “dignity” involved. In so rough a state of society as
exists here, and in the foundation of a new state, all from the Governor
downwards are constantly obliged to do many things which they would under
other circumstances avoid, and become very careless as to conventional dignity.
But I do not feel certain on this point, and have consequently allowed Mr.
De R. to follow his own judgment in the matter.
6. On the third point I entirely differ from Mr. De Ricci. I think it
essential, if he is allowed professional assistance, that authority should be
given in each case in which he seeks for its employment. If this is not done
there will be no check whatever on the expense to be incurred. I may observe,
moreover, that it is not in the Magistrates’ Court only, but in the Supreme


Court also, that Mr. De Ricci has employed the assistance of the gentleman
with whom, on his arrival here, it was his intention to enter into partnership.
I would respectfully submit that it would be more economical at once to appoint
Mr. Truscott (the gentleman in question) Solicitor-General or Crown Solicitor at
a fixed salary, rather than to afford him constant employment at his own fees.
7. On the whole, then, I think that the Attorney-General should only be
allowed additional legal assistance in very special cases, and that in each
instance application should be made for permission to incur such expense.
How inconvenient the Attorney-General’s attitude sometimes
was may be gathered from the following dispatch :
To the Earl of Carnarvon.
Nasova, February 23, 1876.—My Lord—A short time since the Attorney-
General, in conversation with the Chief-Justice and myself in the Council,
Room, and immediately before the commencement of a debate, expressed an 1
opinion that no Colonial Legislature had power to make any law in any way |
at variance with an English 'Act of Parliament. This proposition the Chief-
Justice and I hardly felt it necessary to combat, the experience of every
Colony pointing in a different direction, and the practical dead-lock which
its acceptance would entail being obvious.
2. But although we have not felt this doubt to be worthy of serious
notice, it is otherwise with a clause of the Royal Instructions, which, as now
worded, may be made the instrument of serious mischief.
3. The twentieth article of the Royal Instructions runs thus—“ You are
not to propose or assent to any law whatever in relation to any of the matters
mentioned or referred to in the said recited Charter, and in these our Instruc-
tions, which shall be in anywise repugnant to or inconsistent with such
Charter or Instructions, or any law which shall be repugnant to any Act of
Parliament, or to any order made or to be made by us in our Privy Council,
extending to or in force within our said Colony, and any such law or
pretended law shall be absolutely null and void to all intents and
purposes.”
4. This article is one which, so far as I am aware, always finds a place in
Her Majesty’s Instructions to the Governor of a Colony, and was probably
inserted in mine without special thought or any particular reference to the
state of affairs in Fiji.
5. It would be difficult to deny that some of the enactments which have
been adopted here during the past six months are not only at variance with
the provisions of English Acts of Parliament, but are in some instances
directly repugnant to them. *, I would particularly instance the “Peace and
Good Order ” Ordinance ; those sections of the Criminal Law and Procedure
Ordinance which provide that in the trial of certain criminal cases juries may
be dispensed with ; and the power conferred on me by the Supreme Court
Ordinance of exempting districts and persons from the jurisdiction of that
Court; and more especially the twenty-sixth and twenty-eighth sections of that
Ordinance, by the first of which “ statutes of general application ” are extended
to the Colony, (a measure which would he unnecessary were they already at
that time in force,) and by the second of which all Imperial laws extended to


the Colony by that Ordinance are declared to be so extended, subject to any
existing or future Ordinances of the Colonial Legislature.
6. The drafts of all these Ordinances were, however, transmitted to me
by your Lordship, with instructions to adopt them, and it cannot be
supposed that your Lordship was either unacquainted with the Royal
Instructions, or could have given me directions inconsistent with them.
t . I therefore assume that the article of the Royal Institutions is only
intended to refer to those Acts which, by express enactment of the Imperial
Parliament, have been, or may be, extended to Her Majesty’s colonial posses-
sions ; and that other English statutes have only been brought into force in
the Colony by the Ordinance No. 14 of 1875, and with the limitations therein
contained.
8. To this it is answered that in the absence of any enactment of the
Imperial Parliament to the contrary, or any express provision on the subject
in the Charter of the Colony, the laws of England came into force ipso facto, on
the proclamation of Fiji as a British Colony, and that,being thus in force from
and after the Ist September 1875, the Ordinance passed subsequently, which
sought to limit their operation, was itself an infraction of the Royal Instruc-
tions, and as such ah initio null and void.
9. The adoption of this doctrine would not only reduce the functions of
the Legislative Council to such insignificance as to render it nearly useless,
but would be attended with so many practical absurdities and inconveniences,
as to make the work of government impractable.
10. But, whilst I think that it is sufficient to state the idea that the
Statute Law of England is necessarily introduced wholesale into every new
English Colony, in order to insure its rejection, I confess I am not so clear in
my own mind as I could wish to be, whether the Common Law of England
may not have been thus introduced, and whether some of the provisions I
have quoted are not repugnant to it; nor am I at all confident as to the
answer which might be returned by a court of law to these questions. I
think, also, that if the meaning of the article be what I suppose, that mean-
ing is not so distinctly expressed as is desirable, and that it may fairly be
contended, according to the present wording, that when once the provisions
of any Act of Parliament have been “extended to,” or “in force in the
Colony ” —even if brought into force in the first instance by a local enactment
—they cannot be subsequently repealed or altered.
11. I would therefore suggest that the article should be modified, so as
either to define clearly that it is only to statutes expressly extended to the
Colony that its prohibitions refer, or to reserve to the Queen the decision
whether any law passed by a local legislature is or is not repugnant to the
law of England. If the former course were adopted, the meaning, or at least
what I take to be the meaning of the provision, would be made perfectly
clear ; if the latter, all danger of the paralysis of Government by a sudden
declaration by a local law court of the nullity of Ordinances passed by the
Legislative Council, would be avoided.
12. As matters at present stand, I fancy that any one refusing to obey the
provisions of one of the Ordinances I have just quoted, might if prosecuted,
plead its nullity, and that the Supreme Court would have to decide on the
validity of the plea. The decision of the Court moreover, would be given
upon technical grounds alone, whilst considerations of policy and expediency


would certainly not be overlooked by the Imperial Government before Her
Majesty was advised to declare the nullity of any enactment of the Legislative
Council.
13. This is no purely theoretical question, it is one of practical and press-
ing interest. I trust it will never be necessary for me to avail myself of the
powers conferred on me by the “ Peace and Good Order” Ordinance, though
even that is possible. But occasions for putting in force the Ordinance which
substitutes in some cases, trial by a judge with the aid of assessors, for trial
by jury wilPundoubtedly soon arise, and it is my intention to except a large
part of the Island of Yiti Levu from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
14. Mr. De Ricci is not a reticent man, and the provisions of the Royal
Instructions, as well as his own*opinion as to the want of power in a Colonial
Legislature to legislate on any matter dealt with by an English Statute, are,
I have no doubt, widely known, —in fact I have seen the subject dealt with in
a local newspaper in language almost identical with that used by the Attorney-
General,—and I hold it to be probable that when a case occurs in which, under
Ordinance No. 14 of 1875, a trial in which assessors are substituted for a
jury ought to take place, objection will be taken to the legality of the pro-
ceeding. It is moreover not impossible that this objection will be admitted
by the Attorney-General.
15. I beg therefore to request that your Lordship will instruct me on the
following points :
(1) Does Article XX. of the Royal Instructions apply only to Acts of
Parliament expressly extended to the Colony, or to Acts the provisions of
which have been extended to it by subsequent local legislation also ?
(2) Did the Common Law of England become ipso facto the law of this
Colony on the proclamation of its Charter ?
(3) What course am I to pursue in the event of such an occurrence as that
the probability of which is suggested in the previous paragraph ? I have, etc.
I enclose two amended forms of the article in question, which will show
how very slight an alteration would effect either of the suggested changes.
No. 1 —Proposed Amended Form of Article XX. of Royal Instructions.
You are not to propose or assent to any law whatever in relation to any
of the matters mentioned or referred to in the said recited Charter, and in
these our Instructions, which shall be in anywise repugnant to or inconsistent
with such Charter or Instructions, or any law which shall be repugnant to
any Act of Parliament which shall by such Act or by any subsequent Act of
Parliament have been extended to our said Colony, or to any Order made or to
be made by us in our Privy Council, extending to or in force within our said
Colony, and any such law or pretended law shall be absolutely null and void
to all intents and purposes.
No. 2. Proposed Amended Form of Article XX. of Royal Instructions.
You are not’to propose or assent to any law whatever in relation to any
of the matters mentioned or referred to in the said recited Charter, and in
these our Instructions, which shall be in anywise repugnant to or inconsistent
with such Charter or Instructions, or any law which shall be repugnant to
any Act of Parliament, or to any Order made or to be made by us in our


Privy Council, extending to or in force within our said Colony, and any such
law or pretended law, which shall be declared by us to be so repugnant to our
said recited Charter or these our Instructions , or to any such Act of Parliament
or order , shall be absolutely null and void to all intents and purposes.
I am glad to think, however, that our attention to his wife
during her illness produced in the end a somewhat kindlier
feeling between us, as is shown in the last letter I ever received
from him, immediately before his departure.
From the Atorney-General
Levuka, March 29, 1876. —My dear Sir —I hasten to thank you sincerely
for your most kind letter. Before accepting your very generous proposal on
the subject of my leave, I would, with your permission, ask for some little
time to consider myself, and to consult with the Doctor. Thanking you and
Lady Gordon very much for your great kindness to us at this time. —I
remain, etc.
V. Some of the ordinary current affairs of the Colony during
the first three months of 1876 are dealt with in the following
letters: —
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, March 4, 1876.—My Lord— On the 19th of last month a
public meeting of the inhabitants of Levuka was called together, according to
previous announcement, for the purpose of adopting a petition that this
place may be allowed to continue to be the seat of Government.
2. It might have been supposed that, if at any place such a petition
would be unhesitatingly adopted, it would be at Levuka itself. This, how-
ever, did not prove to be the case. Speaker after speaker rose to show that
Levuka was ill-suited for the purpose, and when the question of the adoption
of the petition was put to the vote, an amendment to adjourn the meeting
for a week, in order to allow time for the further consideration of the question,
was carried by a large majority.
3. At the adjourned meeting few of the original supporters of the petition
appeared, and a resolution to the effect that the selection of the capital should
be left to the Government was almost unanimously adopted.
4. The fact is that the disadvantages of Levuka are so obvious that selfish
interests only could blind men to them, and that the land on which Levuka
stands is the property of so small a number of individuals that the great
majority of the inhabitants are only leaseholders on short leases, and except
as regards the immediate inconvenience of removal, they have no reason to
deprecate a change to a site where freehold land may be more easily obtained.
5. The petition, which was not adopted by the meeting, will probably
still be signed and sent to me, for the influence of the three chief proprietors
of Levuka —the Wesleyan Mission, the Fiji Bank, and the American Consul,
—over their tenants is, of course, considerable. But the extreme unsuitable-
ness of Levuka for the site of a town of any size, and the inconvenience of its
position for the seat of Government are, I think I may say, now generally


admitted, and the removal of Government offices, etc. to another place, at no
distant date, regarded as inevitable, even by the petitioners themselves.
6. I have the honour to enclose a report of the proceedings of these meet-
ings for your Lordship’s information. —I have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, March 16, 1876. —My Lord—l have the honour to invite
your Lordship’s attention to the fact that the recommendations of the fourth
and last “Court of Arbitration convened for the purpose of adjudicating all
matters in dispute between citizens of the United States of America and the
natives of the Fiji Islands,” have not, up to the present time, been fully
carried out.
2. As your Lordship is aware the matter in dispute, between the Govern-
ment of the United States of America and the natives of Fiji, was the
validity of certain claims of compensation preferred by some citizens of the
United States of America residing in these Islands (notably Mr. J. B.
Williams, United States Commercial Agent) for damage done to their
property by the natives.
3. The earliest of these claims dates back as far as the year 1849, and
although the amounts originally demanded may have been in excess of the
value of the property destroyed, the right of their fellow citizens to com-
pensation was acknowledged, and the substantial justice of their claims
allowed, by a Court of Arbitration convened by the Commander of an
American man-of-war the St. Mary in the year 1851.
4. But in the year 1856 a second Court was held under the presidency of
Commander Boutwell, U.S.N. on board the John Adams. This Court
not only upheld the decision of the Court previously convened, but very
largely raised the amount of all the claims. That of Mr. J. B. Williams
alone was increased from $6166.19 to $19,365, although no additional losses
were alleged by him or claims preferred beyond those for which five years
previously the former sum had been deemed an ample compensation.
5. The general indignation felt and expressed at the injustice of the
decision of this Court, and Commander Boutwell’s mode of enforcing it, and
the stringent comments of the press on the whole of the proceedings, induced
the Government of the United States once more to send a ship-of-war, the
Jamestown to Fiji with orders to inquire into all the circumstance of the
case. That case will be found very fully and clearly stated in an article
written by Captain Hope, R.N., in Blackwood's Magazine for July 1869.
6. In the meantime another claim of $1054 had been allowed to Mr.
Williams by Commander Sinclair of the U.S. ship Vandalia in 1858 in
compensation for further damages sustained by Mr. Williams during that
year ; and in 1868, Cakobau, the Chief whom the American commanders
had seen fit to hold responsible for tjie payment of these claims, being him-
self totally unable to provide so large a sum of money, had got out of his
difficulties by making over a large tract of land, and giving a monopoly in
trade, banking, etc., to a company formed in Melbourne, and known as the
Polynesian Company, on condition that this Company should undertake to
satisfy all the demands of the American Government, which it accordingly
at a subsequent period did in full, to the amount demanded by the second
Court of Enquiry presided over by Commander Boutwell.


7. On the arrival at Fiji of the U.S.S. Jamestown in the autumn of
1869, a fourth “Court of Arbitration” was convened on board under the
presidency of Commander W. F. Truxton, U.S.N. This Court decided that
all the claims of the American citizens were founded on justice with the
exception ot the claim of Mr. J. B. Williams, and that in his case, no reason
could be found for the great increase in the amount of his claim since the
time when it was first preferred. It was further stated that “under these
circumstances the Court is obliged to {sic) the aforesaid sum of ($19,365)
thousand three hundred and sixty-five dollars should not be paid
to the credit of the said J. B. Williams or his estate; but, as the whole
liability of the original sum has been assured by the Polynesian Company
for and in consideration of certain lands deeded to them in fee simple by
King Thakobau, it is beyond the power of this Court, and would be a double
act of injustice to Thakobau to relieve the aforesaid Company from any part
of their liabilities, —their duty to pay is clear and binding. The Court do
therefore most strenuously urge upon the Government of the United States
the propriety of refunding to King Thakobau the sum of $19,365, less the
sum of $7,199*67, 1 when and after the full amount of its liabilities shall have
been paid into the hands of the United States Consul at this place, by the
Company aforesaid, and in compliance with their indenture. Provided no
evidence exists in the records of department as forwarded by U.S.S.
St. Mary , Vandalia , or Tuscarora , to account for and substantiate the
unaccountable difference between the registered and allowed claims of Mr.
Williams. By this means tardy justice will be done to king Thakobau, etc. ”
8. The last and final instalment of the amount of these claims was paid
to the United States Consul by the Polynesian Company in September 1871,
but the $12,165*33 has not, up to the present date, been refunded by the
United States Government as the Court recommends, nor has the “tardy
justice ” which it advised been done.
9. I trust your Lordship may see fit to have such representations made
to the United States Government as will ensure a speedy consideration of
this matter, and the correction of what must be an oversight on their part,
due probably to some failure of action on the part of the United States
Consular Agent here, who may have omitted to bring to the notice of his
Government the fact that the conditions under which the refund was recom-
mended had been complied with. It is worthy of remark that the present
United States Agent was also the private agent and administrator to the
estate of J. B, Williams, and, as such, eager to press in their most exorbitant
and exaggerated form the claims of which Commander Boutwell had en-
forced the admission.
10. The repayment of the sum advanced by the Polynesian Company for
the satisfaction of the American claims will probably be undertaken by this
Government in accordance with the recommendation of Sir H. Robinson,
and in this case the refund by the United States Government of so much of
the sum as is admitted to have been unjustly paid will be of no slight
assistance to this Government.
1 The difference between this sum and that of $6166'19 originally allowed
to Mr. Williams is accounted for, I presume, by the addition of the $1054
allowed by the Vandalia, although the figures do not quite agree.


11. As it is the case stands shortly thus A Court of Enquiry recom-
mended the payment of certain compensation to American citizens, another
Court greatly increased its amount, a third added a new claim without,
apparently, going into the old ones, and a fourth again reduced it, but
recommended that as arrangements had been made for the payment of the
whole sum demanded by the Commander Boutwell it should be paid,
but that $12,165 "33 should be refunded to Cakobau.
The payment in full was accordingly effected, but the refund has never
yet been made. —I have, etc.
P.S. —Your Lordship will find a clear statement respecting these claims
in a Confidential memorandum by Consul March, 16th May 1873, printed
for the use of the Foreign Office.
Statement sent to Commander of U.S.S. St. Mary , 1851, of damage done
to property of Mr, J. B. Williams (with interest up to that time ?) and
interest subsequently added. .... $6166T9
($204875 of this is interest —Consul March.)
In 1855 John Adams arrived with Commander Boutwell; claim increased
to ....... $19,365-00
In 1858 Vandalia allowed a claim for damages, sustained in that
year ........ $1054*00
July 1869. —Article appeared in Blackwood.
October 1869.—Court of Arbitration on board Jamestown; Captain Truxton
allowed the original claim with interest, and the additional claim of
1858 (which had been allowed by the Court of j Vandalia), amounting
in all to . . • • • . $7199*67
Sum paid by Polynesian Company .... $19,365*00
True claim ....... 7,199*67
Balance due to Cakobau ...... $12,165*33
To the Earl of Carnarvon
March 17, 1876.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose returns of the
Revenue and Expenditure of the Colony for the months of January and
February.
2. Your Lordship will observe with pleasure that the Returns of Revenue
are satisfactory, especially when compared with those of the corresponding
period of last year. In 1875, the revenue for the month of January only
amounted to £782 :12 :10. In 1876 it only fell short of £2OOO by £6 :9: 4.
The Revenue for February 1875 was £1747 :15 :2. For the same month in
the present year, it has been £2233 : 4 : 5.
3. Should the average of these receipts be maintained, (and there is no reason
why it should not,) the income of the year will exceed £25,000, without
taking into account the native taxes. Even should the amount of those taxes
therefore, (which in the first year of an untried system must be somewhat
uncertain,) fall short by several thousand pounds of the amount I have antici-
pated, the estimated total revenue of £40,000 would still be realised.
4. The expenditure of course exceeds the revenue collected, but I
have sanguine hopes of being able to keep the ordinary expenditure of the
colony within its receipts. The expenditure of the month of January was
2 K


£2584 :55., of which, about £3OO may be said to be not fairly chargeable
to ordinary expenditure but to the loan. The expenditure for February was
£5746 :10 :4. Of this sum £2070 :16 ;11 may be set down to extraordinary
expenses, chargeable to the Imperial loan. £147 :8 :9 was expended in the
payment of liabilities outstanding from 1875, leaving £3528 :5 ;6 as the
amount properly chargeable to the ordinary expenditure of the Colony, an
amount which, even if, instead of exceptional, exceeding that for January,
it were to be taken as the average for every month in the year, would imply
an expenditure decidedly within the revenue (exclusive of loan) on which I
count for 1876.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, March 27, 1876.—My Lord—The Fiji Government
“Gazette” of the 10th February 1875, issued by direction of Sir Hercules
Robinson, contains a notification to the effect “that in all cases in which
default has, or shall have been made by employers, in payment of wages due
to Polynesian labourers, or of passage money for their return to the islands,
and in which cases have, or shall have been made by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, all sums so paid by the Government shall be a first charge upon the
lands in respect to which the services of such labourers have been rendered.”
2. Of this notification, Your Lordship "has in your dispatch to me (un-
numbered) of the 4th March 1875, expressed entire approval.
3. A somewhat difficult question has, however, arisen with respect to the
interpretation of this notification. Its words are, that ‘ ‘ 411 sums so paid by
the Government shall be a first charge upon the lands in respect to which the
services of such labourers have been rendered.”
4. But in some cases these sums have been been disbursed in payment of
labour employed by persons only holding a lease of the lands on which the
labour has been engaged, and which, perhaps, form a part only of the lessor’s
estate. Of course these persons are themselves personally liable in the first
instance for their debt to the Government; but supposing, as is usually the
case, that they have nothing with which to satisfy such claims, is, or is not,
the land to be held responsible for them ? And, if it is, should that responsi-
bility extend to the whole of the proprietor’s estate, or only to that portion
of it which may have been leased to the actual employer of the labour ?
There is something to be said on both sides.
5. It may of course be argued with some force, that it is hard to make the
proprietor responsible for the debts of the lessee ; that having already,
perhaps, suffered from having a bad tenant, who has neglected the property
and paid him no rent, he should be yet further exposed to the possible loss of
the land itself on account of that tenant’s default.
6. On the other hand, it may be argued, not only that the proprietor
benefits by the improvement of the land effected by the labour employed on
it by the tenant, but that if it be admitted that sums advanced by Govern-
ment are not to be considered a first charge upon the lands when advanced in
payment of labourers by a lessee, it will be possible to avoid all liability on
this score by, in all cases, providing a nominal tenant by whom the labour
should be ostensibly engaged.
7. This last consideration has great weight with me, and, on the whole,
I am disposed to consider that the lands should be bound, whenever the
labourers employed on it are paid off by the Government, whether they have


been employed by the proprietor or by a leaseholder ; but that, in the latter
case, only so much of the lands as have been so leased should be held liable.
I have, however, promised to submit the question to Your Lordship for
decision, and I now enclose copies of a correspondence which has passed
between Mr. M‘Connell of Taviuni and myself on the subject. —I have, etc.
VI. Eastgate, Magistrate at Tai Levu, writes thus about the
Yasawas :
In the year 1868 or 1869 Messrs, Evans and Sandilands purchased from
Ratu Abel a block of land on the island of Matacaulevu, which I am informed
by many of the local Chiefs was wrested from the “Taukeis” in a most arbitrary
manner. The local Chief “Semi” was asked to sign the deed of sale, but
refused, whereupon he was bound, and carried on board a vessel lying at
anchor, and then threatened by Ratu Abel that unless he signed he would be
carried away. This was the first land sold by the Bau Chiefs, and occupied
by Europeans for plantation purposes. Two other blocks had been bought
by Mr. Harman and Stark from the “ Taukeis,” at Somo Somo and Nasogo, on
the island of Na Viti, prior to this. The next land sold was, I think, the
northern half of the island of Yaqueta, bought by Messrs. Marsh and Bennett,
who also claim to have purchased at a later date the other half from Ratu
Isikeli, but disputed by the resident owners. Quickly following on this, in
the year 1869, Mr. Evans bought from Ratu Abel the remaining portion of
Naviti, and the whole of Yiwa, Otarawa, Agate, and Fox Islands. Of the
righteousness of these sales I trust, at the proper time, the native resident
owners will have an opportunity of being heard. From this period dates
the marked downward course of the Yasawa people. The lands of the group
suitable for planting purposes is limited, the best being the low alluvial flats,
which are mere pockets varying from ten to forty acres each. A large portion
of these are very light, sandy soil, suitable principally for cotton culture.
Consequently the settlement of the European planter of necessity interfered
with the planting grounds of the natives, and in many instances with the
position of their towns, upsetting the whole of their social arrangements. So
much so was this the case in the Island of Naviti that a continuous succession
of complaints were occurring between the Messrs. Evans and the natives of
the towns near to which they planted. One great bone of contention, arising
out of the relationship in which they stood to them, as claiming to be the
owners of the land, was the attempt of the Messrs. Evans to exercise certain
control over them to supply labour for plantation work. Another, and equally
difficult one was their assuming absolute right over the whole of the cocoanuts,
a most absurd and cruel right to assume, these being an article of the native
daily food. I mention these matters to show Your Excellency the causes which
ultimately led to the necessity for these unfortunate natives being removed
from their homes to other land. In the year 1873 the incessant worry the
natives of the towns of Keu Masi and Tai Levu, on the windward side of the
island, were subject to—being constantly threatened with ejectment, con-
tinuously prosecuted in the local court, and restricted in numberless ways —
induced them to apply to the then Government for protection. I accompanied
them (a number of local Chiefs) to Levuka, when it was arranged by Mr. G.
A. Woods, and consented to by Mr. Evans, that the “Leku,” or lee side of
the island should be given as a native reserve. The Chiefs accepted this, and


agreed to remove the towns, which after some delay and trouble was accom-
plished. I wish to repeat here that only the towns of Keu Masi and Mai
Levu were included in this arrangement. After this the people of the group
were settling down, and recovering somewhat from the many troubles they
had been subject to, when, unfortunately, in the February of 1874, a fearful
hurricane swept over the islands, destroying every atom of cultivated food,
and all the fruit-bearing trees, leaving the population in a most deplorable
condition. On some of the islands not a single building stood to give them
shelter. The unfortunate people were struggling to overtake this trouble and
make the best of it, when they were called upon to pay their taxes, which had
previously been collected in a manner which enabled them to pay without
their being seriously felt. Now, however, a new regime came in. Mr. J.
Harding had been appointed as Commissioner, and had paid his first visit, I
think in the month of May, when he had been requested by Messrs. Evans to
remove the inhabitants of So So from their town, situated at the south end
of the island of Naviti, to the land previously mentioned, viz., Leku Leku
now occupied by the Kesi, Mano, and Mai Levu people. Mr. Harding held
an inquiry, and, against the protest of myself and Mr. J. Blyth, then Deputy-
Warden, he gave the people one month’s notice to quit. Again in the month
of July, while Mr. Blyth and myself were at the northern end of the islands,
Mr. Harding made his second visit, and then commenced his work. He
commenced at the island of Waia by making a night attack on the small town
of Na Yoli, some of the people of which town were charged by a Mr. Corses
with assaulting him. After surrounding the town, and making all the people
prisoners, those accused were flogged and sent away with a Mr. Cameron to
work as prisoners at Yanua Levu for twelve months. With these were also
sent two girls from Keri, who were accused of some trivial offence against Mr.
Evans. Mr. Harding then made his grand sortie upon the town of So So,
the people of which town had not left as he had commanded them. He landed
with his men at the back of the island, climbed over the hills, and pounced
down on the town, seized their property and drove the inhabitants over the
hills to the Luka land, at which place, two weeks after, I saw men, women,
and children living under the trees and scrub. He then held a Court, and the
punishment w T as certainly unique. The lash did its work, the jail was filled
with old and young, men and women. I know some old women who were
sentenced to hard labour for six months for the heinous offence of digging up
the tapioca roots which their husbands or sons had planted on the land
occupied by them previous to their removal; and young children, for gathering
wild beans, were sentenced to three months’ labour, while men and boys for
“stealing” (?) a cocoanut were flogged and sent away to labour for twelve
months. The soldiers who accompanied him were allowed full liberty to
plunder and destroy property at will, and to ravish women at their pleasure
their only fault, according to the Commissioner’s own words to Mr. Blyth
and myself, “to be fools enough to be found out.” In the town of Gumi, the
property I then occupied, only one girl escaped the ruffians—every married
and single woman fell a prey to them. On the Leku side of the island, after
killing every pig and fowl and robbing the dwellings, they wantonly cut
down the people’s bananas, and abused the people in the most foul manner.
Some of the old men afterwards came to me with their pitiful tales and said
“Mr. Eastgate, are we men or rats? We are afraid to speak when these men


are near.” The news of this man’s doings spread rapidly through the Yasawa
group, and when he gave out his intention of sending away defaulting tax-
payers to Lailo, I can scarcely express the terror and alarm of the people. I
certainly wished myself in any other position than that I then occupied as
late Collector. Your Excellency will readily understand from what I have
previously stated that the people would be but poorly off, and to make
matters worse, all the settlers had left off planting since the hurricane. Thus
the means of finding employment, and getting guarantees for their taxes, as
previously, failed. Every conceivable article was presented to me in payment,
many of which I could not accept, but purchased them myself until my very
limited means were exhausted. Then came the question of young men and
lads going away to work to assist their friends, and to save themselves from
the threatened banishment. Of this 1 have previously informed Your
Excellency, and need not repeat.
I will now refer to the island of Yiwa, which Mr. Evans claims to have
purchased from Ratu Abel, but which the inhabitants refuse to recognize, and
in which I have always supported them. They never owned allegiance to
Bau, were never consulted on the sale, never signed the deed, and did not
receive any payment, and have persistently refused to give Mr. Evans pos-
session. By some means Mr. Evans secured a Crown grant from the late
Government, though the native owners never had an opportunity of knowing
the time for protesting. On this grant Evans entered an action, and secured
a verdict to eject certain of the native Chiefs, as also one Murray who claims
an interest in the island. In the month of July 1874 Mr. Harding arrived
on the island, ejected three of the old Chiefs, and put Mr. Evans in posses-
sion, who immediately placed himself in position as “monarch of all he sur-
veyed.” “ Tabu ” was his word. No more nuts to be touched. This means
on the coral island of Yiwa, at certain seasons, no more drink, as they have
no water beyond that saved in the small basins of the rocks from the rainfall.
On that day nearly the whole population left the island. Soon after this
Mr. Blyth and myself went to Levuka and represented the matter to the late
Mr. St. Julian, who immediately granted an injunction, and upon which I
afterwards sent the old Chiefs back to their homes.
Happily for the Yasawan people, annexation took place, and Mr. Commis-
sioner Harding had no further opportunity of ‘ ‘ putting the Yasawas in order.”
My residence among these people for a period extending over four years,
and my intimate connection with them in various capacities, has given me
an intimate knowledge and interest in them somewhat more than ordinary,
and I desire to mention that these people have been placed in circumstances
and subjected to treatment at various periods of their history, which has had
the effect of making an otherwise finS, intelligent race of people, slavish in
their ideas, indolent in their habits, and hopeless for their future. Enjojdng
a delightful climate, with soil sufficient, when cultivated, to supply them with
abundant food, and, if properly directed, resources which might become of
benefit to the state and themselves. The waters abound in turtle ; the reefs
have a fair supply of beche-de-mer and shell, and though the hurricanes of
late years have been severely felt, yet I think the planting of the cocoanut
should be insisted on, this being in former days a great source of revenue.
Failing other articles, arrowroot may be produced in large quantities of a very
superior quality, every niche of ground teeming with the root. The people are


also famous for making sail mats, which are much sought after, and are readily
saleable. They might also be instructed to plait these mats into bags for
sugar, a large local market being available. I take the liberty of suggesting
that these people require something more than the ordinary official routine
attention. With kind and firm treatment they may be made a better and
useful people.
I trust the attempt to give your Excellency a short sketch of the condition
of the Yasawa group during the period above mentioned may be of some service.
I could have wished to have given it more in detail, but unfortunately all my
memoranda have been destroyed, and I have been dependent entirely on memory.
VII. Captain Stevens, R.N., H.M.S. Barracouta, continued to
be a cause of annoyance and discomfort, as the following letters
will show.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
April 4, 1876. —My Lord—Your Lordship’s dispatch No. 14 of the
18th February suggests a question which is, I think, not unworthy of your
Lordship’s serious consideration, viz., the nature of the relations which should
exist between a Governor and the commanding officers of H. M. ships within
the ports of the Colony under his Government.
2. At present the Governor has no direct authority over them. They
may proceed to any part of the Colony, however injudicious he may deem
such action on their part to be, and conversely they may refuse to go where
he considers their presence really necessary.
3. This is not the case with the military service. The officer in command
of troops in a Colony must station them at such places as the Governor
appoints, and cannot, in the face of the Governor’s prohibition, march his men
to localities where their presence is considered undesirable by the Governor.
4. I cannot but think that a similar rule ought to apply to both the
military and naval services, and that whilst a Governor should of course
interfere in no way with naval discipline or professional duties, and should
have no power to retain any ship in the Colony if ordered elsewhere, he should
be able, (subject of course to objections on nautical grounds,) to say where
vessels should be stationed whilst in the Colony, and, above all, should
have authority to prevent vessels from going to places which he deems it
objectionable that they should visit.
5. In this Colony we have lately had an example of the danger attending
the present system. Captain Stevens of H.M.S. Barracouta , in compliance
with a request made to him by a planter, wished to go to the Sigatoka river
in order to support certain parties who considered or professed to consider
themselves in danger from the natives, and was not at all moved from his
purpose by my representations ; only yielding at last to the intimation that
a formal protest would be made by myself and by the Executive Council if he
persisted in his intention.
6. I have not hitherto sent home the correspondence on this subject,
partly because I did not wish to trouble your Lordship about a matter which
I had already satisfactorily terminated, and partly, —little as he might himself
suppose it, —because I was unwilling to do Captain Stevens such a disservice
as to call attention to his letters. I now enclose some extracts fiom his


correspondence with me on this matter, and from my letter to the Acting-
Commodore.
7. Had Captain Stevens persisted, I have not the smallest doubt that a
collision would have ensued, and that instead of sending your Lordship
continued satisfactory accounts from the interior, as I am now doing, I should
have to report to you the progress of a sanguinary and expensive contest.
But Your Lordship will observe that I was powerless to prevent this, except
by way of remonstrance ; whereas had similarly injudicious conduct been
contemplated by the officer in command of the troops I should have had an
actual authority to prohibit his action.
8. Suppose a similar case to occur in some other Colony in which both the
military and naval commanders may be hot-headed and ill-judging men, and
may think from the representations of the inhabitants of some district that
it is desirable to send a military and naval force there, while the Governor
is of a totally different opinion, and considers that the appearance of such a
force would render inevitable the collision he desired to avoid. In such a
case the Governor would be able to prevent the military force from going to
the spot, but he would have no right whatever to order the naval force not to
do so, if the naval commander chose to persist in following his own opinion.
9. It appears to me that the Governor should possess with regard to the
naval force actually in the Colony, powers equivalent to those he possesses as
Commander-in-Chief with respect to the military force ; or, still better, that
his position as the Sovereign’s Representative should be recognised by the Navy
as it is in the Army. It is in virtue of this position that the Governor gives
the “word” in garrisons, camps, etc., and it is important on many grounds
that this personal representation of the Sovereign should be recognised and
kept up, for, during the fifteen years that I have had the honour to serve
Her Majesty as the Governor of one of Her Colonies, I have witnessed a marked
change in this respect, and there is now a very strong and growing disposition
to regard “the Civil Governor” as simply one of three or four independant
and co-ordinate authorities, and as holding an office which, though giving him
precedence, is no way different in kind from those filled by the heads of the
military, naval, and legal professions. .
To the Earl of Carnarvon
April 8,1876. —My Lord—l have had the honour to receive your Lordship’s
despatch No. 14 of the 10th February.
2. Your Lordship is certainly quite right in supposing that Captain Stevens
must have very grievously misapprehended my meaning in attributing to me
the preposterous statement contained in the seventh paragraph of your
Lordship’s despatch, and if Captain Stevens, with whom I had not at that
time had the slightest difference, and whom I supposed to be on terms of
easy and cordial intercourse with myself, thought fit to make notes, for the
purpose of transmission to England, of what was a purely private conversa-
tion, I must express my extreme regret that he should not have afforded me an
opportunity of expressing my assent to, or dissent from, the correctness of
his representation of it.
3. At this distance of time I cannot pretend to recollect with exact
accuracy what I did say to Captain Stevens on the occasion referred to, but


I remember that I was very anxious that in communicating to him my
opinion as to the error he had committed in assuming magisterial jurisdiction
in the islands of this Colony, I should give him no cause for offence, and
should make the communication in a manner as little unpleasant as possible.
I believe that I told him jocularly that if he, in virtue of his commission
acted as a magistrate in the Colony, he must expect to find me acting as Vice-
Admiral—a title which, as your Lordship is aware, is, as well as that of
Commander-in-Chief, usually given to a Governor. I remember also very
distinctly to have told him, more seriously, that I did not possess a commission
of vice-admiralty, although I expected shortly to receive one.
4. It was not for some weeks after this conversation that any misunder-
standing arose between Captain Stevens and myself. If I had entertained the
smallest idea that he intended to take and make use of notes of a conversation
which I supposed to be a purely private one, I should of course have taken
care to express myself with official gravity and reserve, and not attempted to
handle the subject in that lighter and more familiar manner which I have
often found of great use in avoiding a disagreement, when forced to enter on
an unpleasant discussion, or obliged to make an intimation likely to be
distasteful to the person to whom it is made.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
April 12, 1876. —My Lord—When at Sydney in the month of June last I
saw several gentlemen connected with Samoa, and came to the conclusion from
what I then heard and read that the acting British Vice-Consul (the son of
Consul lately dead) was hardly fitted from various circumstances to deal
with the questions likely to arise there. I therefore telegraphed to Your
Lordship suggesting that pending the issue of my commission as H.C. in
Polynesia I should receive some consular or other powers with respect to Samoa
alone.
2. On arriving here I continued to receive communications from Samoa
relating to British interests there, and expressed a wish to Commodore
Goodenough that he should visit those islands on his way from hence to the
New Hebrides. This he was unwilling to do for reasons which he fully ex-
plained to me, and recommended that I should myself go down there in
the Barracouta so soon as I received my appointment as High Commissioner,
the arrival of which we both then anticipated by every mail.
3. In the month of October a gentleman of the name of Young called on
me and gave me an account of cruelties practised on imported labour, and
also a strange history as to the proceedings of Col. Steinberger, and the
apprehensions of the white residents as to their possible consequences.
Among the letters which I received at this time from Samoa was one from
Dr. Turner, of which I enclose a copy. This gentleman had been recommended
to me in the very highest terms by Commodore Goodenough.
4. About the close of the month of November arrangements were made
for the conveyance of Mr. Layard to Tonga in the Barracouta , and this
appeared to me no bad opportunity of obtaining some impartial report on the
state of affairs in Samoa. Had I not distrusted Capt. Stevens’ discretion I
should sooner have requested him to go there; but under existing circum-
stances I did not like to do so. Now that an opportunity afforded itself of


allowing Mr. Layard to visit the place en route to Tonga, while the possible
stay of the ship at Apia appeared to he limited to some forty-eight hours, —
too short a time, as I thought, for any mischief to be done, even if Capt.
Stevens did not listen to the advice of Mr. Layard,—l had no scruple in
satisfying my own wish to obtain reliable information, and Mr. Layard s
desire to visit Samoa, by requesting Captain S. to touch at the Navigators
Islands on his way.
5. My parting caution to Capt. S. was on no account to interfere in any-
thing, and my parting request to Mr. Layard was that whilst he keep his eyes
open he would express no opinion till his return here.
6. On the January Mr. Layard again arrived here in the brig Vision,
and I learned from him with no small dissatisfaction, that he had not been to
Tonga ; that Capt. S. had remained in Samoa the whole of the past month
and was still there ; and that several altercations had taken place between
him and the Samoan authorities ; that Capt. S. had, at the request of the
American Consul, dismantled an armed vessel said to belong to Col. Steinberger,
which had been seized by the Consul for a breach of American law, and that
Capt. Stevens and the foreign Consuls, with the aid of Mr. L., had conducted
a somewhat singular inquiry into the nature of Col. Steinberger s position
and character and credentials.
7. I at once foresaw that further trouble was likely to arise and telegraphed
to Your Lordship for permission to go to Samoa with authority to check any
injudicious action of British subjects.
8. By subsequent arrivals from Tonga I learnt that after Mr. Layard’s
departure the Consuls and Capt. Stevens issued a somewhat singular pro-
clamation, and that Col. Steinberger had been dismissed by King Malietoa
from his office of Premier and been received by Capt. Stevens on board the
Barracouta as a prisoner in accordance with a request made by the U. S. Consul.
On the 2nd April the barque Etienne arrived here from Samoa, bringing in-
telligence that the party attached to Col. Steinberger had deposed the King, who
had retired to the island of Savai, that Capt. Stevens had brought him back
in the Barracouta , and that after a good deal of discussion it was arranged
that a meeting should be held for the purpose of deciding whether he should
or should not retain the throne. At this meeting, which took place on the
13th March, Capt. S. gave orders to disarm some Samoans carrying rifles,
and who he believed to have an intention of attacking him and the Chiefs of
the King’s party during the conference. This order was not unnaturally
resisted, and a conflict ensued in which three men of the Barracouta were
killed and eight wounded, some very seriously. These wounded men were
brought down here by the Etienne. Special arrangements were at once made
for their reception in the public hospital, and they have since received every
attention which it was in the power of this Government to afford.
9. On the 4th inst, the Barracouta itself arrived, having been relieved by
the Sapphire, sent from Sydney for that purpose by the Commodore.
10. The Barracouta had Colonel Steinberger on board as a close prisoner,
and a Mr. Coe, the former American Consul, was also on board in simile-
custody, also at the request of the present U.S. Consul. I pointed out to Capt.
Stevens that if the American Consul here complained to me that two American
citizens were in illegal custody on board a ship in this harbour, or if he
appealed to the Chief-Justice for a writ of habeas corpus on their behalf, very


unpleasant results might ensue ; and in the course of the day, after, I believe,
consulting the Chief-Justice, Capt. S. directed both his prisoners to be landed
on the beach here.
Col. Steinherger’s brother, Dr. Steinberger, was also a passenger in the
Etienne. He called on me and informed me that he had no wish to defend
his brother if he had “committed any indiscrepancies ,” and he also kindly
volunteered to furnish me with an account of the origin and progress of the
skirmish, of which he had been an eye-witness. He has not, however, done so,
having, as I understand, been almost continuously under the influence of liquor
from the time of his arrival here until now.
The Barracouta left for Auckland on the Bth inst. Colonel Steinberger
and his brother still remain here ; but I believe proceed to Kandavu to-day
en route for
11. I have thus given an outline of what appears to me the most important
features of the recent transactions in Samoa. Many other matters of the
most trivial character have been discussed, dwelt on, and squabbled over at
great length, all of which have become so confused together as to render it
difficult to obtain a clear view of the really serious points at issue.
12. Capt. Stevens has, I think, committed some grave errors in the course
of these transactions ; but it appears to me only just to him to say that much
concerned and displeased as I am to find that he had prolonged his stay at
Apia instead of proceeding to Tonga with Mr. Layard, I cannot deny that
the requisition of the Consuls and residents afforded him a fair reason for
remaining, and that it would have been difficult for him to have -refused to
do so. I must also express ray conviction, that however irregularly effected,
the exposure and removal of so unprincipled an adventurer as B. Stein-
berger must be of advantage to both the European and native community in
Samoa.
13. The enormous mass of the correspondence submitted to me with respect
to these affairs, amounting to many hundred pages, precludes all possibility of
my having it copied for transmission to your Lordship, moreover they will
probably have been communicated to Your Lordship from the Admiralty.
I enclose, however, copies of the request of the Consuls and residents to Capt.
S. to remain in Samoa —of the two proclamations issued by the Consuls and
Capt. S., and of the requisitions for aid sent to Capt. S. by the American
Consul.
VIII. Missionaries. — I have said nothing of my relations
with the Wesleyan missionaries, who formed a very important
factor among the forces which had to he taken into consideration
in the administration of Fiji. Practically, the Wesleyan church
in Fiji was a hierarchy. The group was divided in a number of
“ circuits,” in each of which was one white clergyman, who ruled
like a bishop over the native clergy of that region. Above all,
! was the chairman of the “ district,” Mr. Langham, whom we
: usually designated “ the Cardinal,” and who ruled the whole
machine with a firm and strong hand. Accustomed to direct his
flock in secular matters as well as spiritual, it was clear that one
day the relations between him and the Government would become


strained, but in the early days of my administration my known 1
sympathy with missionary objects and my strong testimony to
the value of the work they had done secured me their ready help.
Mr. Langham, indeed, in his quarrels with Mr. Waterhouse made
a point of the latter not having afforded me the help he might,
and did his best to prejudice me against his “ dear brother,” who
had declined to lend me a printing press, the use of which the
Government temporarily required. It is not worth inserting any
of the letters about this trumpery discussion. Mr. Waterhouse,"*
a mild, scholarly man of no force of character and in no way a
match for Langham, held that the native ordained ministers
were, in their district meetings, equal to any other ordained
clergy. Mr. Langham insisted on their being treated as a,
separate and inferior order. Mr. Langham, of course, carried
the day with the heads of the society in Sydney, and Mr. Water-
house was with much politeness deprived of the management of
the great Navaloa college, of which he was head, and relegated
Ito a charge in Australia. His successor at Navaloa was a clever,
shallow, and not too scrupulous man —Mr. Fison. He really
knew a great deal about native tenures, relationships, etc., but?
when he came to theorise about them he generally floundered
out of his depth. I shall never forget hearing a conversation
between him and Mr. Hay, a very clever Presbyterian minister
from Melbourne, who, by a discreet use of the Socratic method,-
in a very short time reduced poor Fison’s vague generalities and
comfortable assertions about the institution over which he presided,
to a state of utter confusion. hisjirst letter to me :
From the Rev. Lorimer Fison.
Lakemba, September 16, 1875.—5 i weeks ago I read a paragraph
in the Fiji Times which stated that you wished for communications from
persons acquainted with the country and its people, stating their opinions as
to Fijian affairs. Had I felt quite sure that there was sufficient authority for
this paragraph, I should have ventured to address you at once, and I am
emboldened to do so now by your saying—(as reported in the Fiji Times) —
that you were sorry so few had accepted the invitation to lay their opinions
before you. It has not often come in my way to address gentlemen in
positions of high authority ; and this, I am sure, will be my sufficient excuse
if my letter do not shape itself into proper form. It is simply impossible
that any omission on my part, or any offence against formal propriety, can
be owing to want of due respect towards your Excellency. Perhaps it is just
within the bounds of possibility that you may be aware of my having written
in the colonial daily papers against the Labour Traffic. I have argued for its
suppression, not because I thought it would, or even could, be suppressed,
but because it seemed to me that if I could show good cause for its suppres-
sion, it would be perceived that there was at least a need of more stringent
regulations.


I am fully convinced that, though the evil days of the past are not likely
to come back upon us again, the traffic still needs careful watching. If the
Government take it into its own hands the worst abuses connected with the
importation of the islanders may be guarded against; but it seems to me that
it will still be extremely difficult to exercise a supervision of them on the
plantations sufficient to insure their good treatment. That they have been
well treated, as a general rule, I fully believe, simply because I have faith
enough in human nature to believe that humane men are in the majority ;
and, if our countrymen in Fiji are no better than our countrymen elsewhere,
they are certainly no worse. But the fact remains that the treatment of the!
imported labourers on the plantations depends on the personal character of'
their employer, and not on any sufficient legal safeguard for their protection, j
This seems to me to be a very important consideration, and one which touches
the present as well as the past. For, although under the new regime addi-
tional safeguards will doubtless be provided, they cannot be efficient unless
they come within the native’s reach—that is, unless he be able to avail him-
self of them. In order to secure this two things are required—first that he
have adequate means of bringing his complaints before the authorities, and
secondly that he be taught how to use those means. At present, Ido not
think the imported labourers are, as a rule, even aware that they can prosecute
an employer. Certainly they neither understand how to do it, nor have the
means of doing it. There is a case in point in my immediate neighbourhood
Some months ago a white man here abandoned his plantation, and left his
workmen without wages and without food or medicine, though they were
only just beginning to recover from the measles. A number of them were
taken to Loma Loma by Mr. Emberson, but several of them are here still,
getting a living as best they may. Ido not think they know that they have
the right of proceeding legally against their employer, who is still at large in
Fiji, no one calling him to account for his doings ; nor have I enlightened
them on that point, for it seemed to me that to do so would be a mockery,
inasmuch as they have neither the knowledge nor the power necessary for the
exercise of that right. The man is, according to common report, an insolvent
debtor, and this is an additional reason for abstaining from legal proceedings.
He ought to be punished, but his punishment would not benefit his unfortu-
nate workmen. Probably when they return to their homes, they will revenge
their wrongs upon some innocent white man, if such an one should fall into
their hands.
Moreover, if the native have no means of redress other than an appeal to
the lawcourts, the expense of such an appeal will put it far beyond his reach.
If his first step towards justice be the payment of a fee, this will be just that
first step which is so often the fatal difficulty. It may be urged that the
local magistrates have afforded sufficient protection to the imported labourer ;
but these gentlemen were in most instances themselves employers, and it is
no injustice to them to say that the matter ought not to be left in their
hands. The feeling of caste, with all its prejudices, is very strong in Fiji. I
have been startled by some exhibitions of it. Even in the event of an in-
dependent official being appointed, whose duty it shall be to inspect the
labourers on the plantations, I fear it will not be easy to ensure the bring-
ing of all wrong-doing to the natives within his knowledge. Plantations put
on their holiday garb when the inspector comes : in most cases he is obliged


to be the planter’s guest; and the native who has cause of complaint against
his master is not likely to expect impartial justice from the man whom he
sees eating at his master’s table. This may appear trivial enough to the
general public, but no one who understands the ways of savages will fail to
see its importance. It may here be noted, by the way, that the case referred
to by me brings out two defects in the Labour Traffic as hitherto carried on :
(1) the fact that the importer of the natives is not responsible for their
return ; and (2) the system of deferred payment of wages.
As to the employment of Fijians on the plantations, I can see no valid
objection to it which can be urged from a missionary’s point of view. It is
true that it is, to a certain extent, injurious to our work, but no such injury
seems to me to afford an argument against it. All that we, as missionaries,
have a right to ask for is fairplay ; and I do not see that we can urge the
Government to prevent our people from leaving their homes, if they choose
so to do, simply because mission interests may suffer. The mission must
stand on its own merits, and fight its own battles. It must meet all its
difficulties as best it may. If it cannot hold its own against them, let it go
down.
Nevertheless I think that Government interference is fairly called for here,
to provide—
1. That no Fijian shall go to work on a plantation save of his own freewill.
Great care is necessary to ensure this, because in many cases a native
would not dare to express unwillingness if his Chief had ordered him to go,
and the Chiefs consent may not unfrequently be gained by a present of suffi-
cient value. If it be urged that the Chiefs authority is now at an end,
because the group has been annexed to the British Empire, I reply that
something more than the mere fact of annexation is needed to undo the work
of ages. Not at once will the authority of the Chiefs be destroyed ; nor is it
perhaps even desirable that it should be.
2. That there be taken from no tribe a number of men so great as to cause
insufficient tillage of the food plantations.
It should he borne in mind that the men who work for the planters are
the most efficient food-producers for their tribes, and that in most cases they
leave behind them nonproducers who were dependent upon them. Hence
their departure not only lessens the tribal efficiency ; it adds to the tribal
burden.
I venture to add a few words concerning revenue, although the subject
does not at first sight appear to fall within a missionary’s province. It is,
however, only of revenue as it affects the natives that I propose to offer any
opinion. I take it for granted that a poll-tax will be demanded from them,
partly because it has already been established, but chiefly because it is the
simplest and easiest form of taxation. And here I would point out the fact
that the Fijians do not all stand on the same footing with regard to this
matter. On the larger islands, where their only means of money-raising are
personal labour and the sale of native produce, such as yams, dalo, etc., they
are at a great disadvantage as compared with the natives of the smaller
islands here to the eastward, where the cocoanut flourishes in great abun-
dance. If, on Navitilevu, twenty days’ labour be a fair equivalent to a tax of
ten shillings, then I do not hesitate to say that a native of Lakemba can earn
money at least twice, as easily as a native of Navitilevu. By the substitution


of copra for cocoannt-oil the work of money-making has been made far easier
to the Fijian who has cocoanuts at his disposal—that is, to the native of the
smaller islands on whose coral sand the palm flourishes so much more luxuri-
antly than on the alluvial soil of the mainland.
In addition to the Government tax I am quite sure that our people here!
could easily pay a small sum annually to their tribal Chiefs, and this would I
meet one of the difficulties inseparable from the transition from the old ordejJ
to the new. I believe, too, that this local tax would be popular among the
natives, provided, always, that the Chiefs were made to understand it very
clearly as a substitute for, not an addition to, their old “ benevolences.” The
Fijian would gladly pay his Chief a stated sum on the understanding that his
pig, his fowls, his food-plantations, etc. were to be absolutely his own, if he
could only be sure that the understanding would be carried out; and, here at
least, he is perfectly able to make the requisite payment. Either something
of this kind will have to be done or considerable difficulty may be expected
in putting a stop to the exactions of the Chiefs. Lakemba furnishes a case in
point. The King, David Uluilakemba (whose title is Tui Nayau, for Tuß
Lakemba is the name of a god, and therefore not to be assumed by a mera
mortal). This David is a well-meaning, foolish fellow, who, if he had lived!
in the old times, would soon have got himself knocked on the head, an®
who, in these days, will, I fear, get himself into trouble. The Government!
cannot afford to give large salaries to such as he. He gets some £lO a
I believe, and lives at the rate of several hundreds. When he has anything
he gives it away to the first applicant, and when he has nothing he goes in
debt, if the trader will trust him, or begs from his friends, and especially from
his missionary. How the Government tax will certainly cause intense dis-
satisfaction among the natives if they find it to be simply an addition to their
former burdens. But what can a Chief like this Lakemba king do with his
nominal salary unless he supplement it by requisitions upon those who were
his people in the old times, which are only a few months old ? Last year I
spent about six weeks in the Friendly Islands and was intensely interested by
observation and inquiry as to the system on which King George carries on his
government. Among other things L found that each Tongan pays 275.
or 28s. a year Government tax and 3s. to his tribal Chiefs. The missionary
at Nukualofa assured me that no Chief could exact anything more than these
35., and that the people were even too decided in their refusal to do anything
more for their former lords. I made inquiry from a remarkably intelligent
Chief of Yavau as to the time requisite for earning the money for both these
taxes, and was informed that, with fine weather, from four days to one weeks’
work -at copra-making was amply sufficient. Knowing that taxpayers and
tax-receivers do not always look at things from the same point of view, I asked
as many of the Fijian-speaking Tongans as I could fall in with —and they
were not a few —for information on this point, and in no instance did I hear a
contradiction of the Yavau Chief’s statement. Both missionaries and traders
also confirmed what he said. Ido not think that the Tongan’s facilities for
copra-making are greater in proportion to those of our people in this part of
the group thah as 3isto 2. That is to say, our people could earn 20s. as easily
as a Tongan can earn 30s. This is stating the case within the mark. The
3s. tax is not given in toto to the head Chief. Thus, on Lakeba, let us say
that a native of the village of Vakano pays 3s. yearly. He has his own


Vakano Chief as well as the Tui Nayau. Moreover there are Lakeba Chiefs
of equal rank with Tui Nayau who might reasonably expect something. A
local tax of 2s. or even Is. 6d. would provide for them all.
P.S.—l have just been reminded of another matter which ought to be
brought under Your Excellency’s notice, viz. the currency. I have been
reminded of it by the placing under my charge of a considerable sum of
money which two Fijians have brought to me. Fully one half consists off
foreign coins, many of which are Bolivian and comparatively worthless.!
Your Excellency has probably been made aware of the fact that all sorts of
coins are, or have been current in Fiji, and in out-of-the-way places coind
which will not pass at Levuka are still being palmed off upon the natives.
Many of the coins are perfectly good—such as five-franc pieces, American
dollars, half-dollars, and quarter-dollars—but the question is Are they
current in Fiji ? I have advised our people to take none but English money \
and to refuse even this if the coin be clipped, pierced, or so worn that the
“ head ”is not discernible. I venture to suggest that much good might be
done by the passing of an Ordinance, if that be the proper term, which shall
define the currency, and make the passing of non-current money an offence
punishable by law. A man who had thus passed a large amount of such
money among the natives actually claimed to be deserving of praise because
he had not put more Bolivian coins into circulation, and coolly proposed to j
buy back all the money excepting the Bolivian (which he would not take \
back at all) at a discount of 15 per cent. In explanation of the last clause (
in my letter, which I perceive to be obscurely worded, I may add that I do not '
suggest a local tax of 2s. or Is. 6d. in addition to the 3s. but instead thereof, i
It is not without considerable diffidence that I venture to add a few words
concerning a matter which is certainly no business of mine, but I have been
so disgusted by the scurrilous abuse heaped upon Mr. Thurston that I cannot I
refrain from speaking a word on his behalf. I left Fiji before he took office, |
and as I returned only in June last I am not qualified to speak from personal
knowledge of his official career, but I knew him well when he was Acting
British Consul. I know also the state of affairs in Fiji when the late Govern-
ment was established, the difficulties he has had to encounter, and the tools
with which he has had to work. I had on more than one occasion to apply
to him on behalf of the natives, and always found him ready to do all in his
power to secure justice for them ; and when I consider the enormous dis-
advantages under which he has lain, and the extreme difficulty of doing what
he had to do, even with efficient instruments, I am filled with admiration of
his courage and ability.
All that I know of him personally is in his favour, and though I cannot
take upon myself to pronounce an opinion upon the morality of his adminis-
tration of affairs during my absence from Fiji, I can easily account for his
great unpopularity. In a community such as this of ours the bitterest
hostility and the most virulent abuse may be the result of a determination to
secure as much justice as possible for the weaker race.
But the man I liked best among the missionaries was the |
Kev. Arthur Webb, missionary at Rewa. He had acted at Ban I
during Langham’s absence, and I entered into something like


intimacy with him. Here are a few of his letters during the
latter part of 1875 and the earlier months of 1876 :
Rewa, November 2, 1875.—1 do myself the pleasure of enclosing the
letters of the native minister who has the pastoral oversight of Bemana,
which letters Your Excellency expressed a wish to see, and I forward another
letter as well giving a description of the Sigatoka district, or rather, the
upper portion of it.
I heard yesterday that Kuhunataha (a hill town in that district) had
refused to receive back its teacher. Kuhunataha has, until recently, remained
true to the Lotu, although the teacher has been absent for a couple of months.
We sent him back again a few weeks back, but I am told they will not receive
him. Also that they will not allow the Noedavutukia Chief “Rabalabala”
to come down to the coast, saying that he must stay and valcatawana them as
the soldiers were coming.
I am sorry to see this, apart from its religious significance (the declining
the teacher I mean), as it shows that the mountain folk are strengthening
their alliance and gaining fresh supporters.
Your Excellency will be glad to know that everything is quiet and
satisfactory on the Wai ni Mala. I examined a young Chief whom I had sent
up there as a travelling evangelist, and he tells me that he was well received
everywhere, that the people are anxious for more teachers and are in earnest
about the Lotu. They have left their old towns and have built new villages
on the banks of a stream connected with the Matailobau River—a very good
sign. Next week I hope to see a young native minister and a small hand of
teachers go up to live and labour among them.
Rewa, December 13, 1875.—1 have this morning received another letter
from Na Wai ni Mala, which, as you have seen the previous one, I consider
right to be shown to Your Excellency also. The bearer of this to me was a
senior teacher from Nawaibasaga, a chief town at Wai ni Mala—a native of
Nawaibasaga (and a very favourable specimen) accompanied him. lam glad
to see, both by the letter (which I enclose) and by minute cross-questioning of
the two men, that matters are brighter on Na Wai ni Mala than the first
letter led me to suppose. lam told that the teachers are well looked after,
are kindly received, and their sermons listened to, while the children study
the alphabet with great earnestness, and are at it even by torch-light. It is
true that the people of the town where the native minister resides (Narokoroko
Yawa) will persist in the indecorous Baki, despite his remonstrances ; and this
it is, the teacher thinks, which depressed him so much —he having evidently
yet to learn to be more patient with a people first emerging from heathenism,
and who like owds find their old gloom more grateful than the new light
which Ilaisa would flash upon them. The spearing affair was this morning
confirmed, and explained to me. Nadurutamata going to a part of a stream
where he had built a trap for eels found that some one had been interfering
with his property. Asking who had done this he was told that it was his
nephew, Nakotokoto. Meeting this youth, Nadurutamata thrust a belaka
spear into the lower part of his back—the wound was not fatal. The nephew
subsequently tried to revenge himself upon his uncle by shooting him, but a
teacher, Pita, seized his gun and so saved bloodshed. As Your Excellency


intended to forward Ilaisa’s first letter to Mr. Carew I thought I should be
carrying out your wishes by forwarding a copy of the original now enclosed
so that Mr. Carew might see a little of the other side from the same man, and
Mr. Friend going down the coast to-day, I had a copy made and it has gone
by him. I had some trouble in extracting some information on this curious
subject—the Bdki. I got enough to show me that it is a queer thing, and worth
a more minute inquiry, which I will give it. The outlines which I elicited
to-day I may briefly give as follows (though the sketch needs filling up):—
The Bdki is a heathen practice peculiar to Narokorokoyawa, though other
towns are admitted to part of the proceedings. For three years and more do
the Rokorokoyawans practise in the bush, and secretly, their Elusinian
mysteries, and on the fourth year there is a public ceremony to which a
concourse comes from many surrounding villages. There is a place in the
bush walled in with stones, but with entrances left open, and in the centre is
a gentle ascent or low mound. On the top of this may be seen a pig’s head
or portions of eels (part of the food eaten by the performers) these are dedicated
to the demon. To the enclosure come a party of men and women, and a
portion of the performance consists in the women all crawling up the ascent,
over the top and down the other side, the men watching them from below.
The women having nothing more on them than a liku of three or four
inches in breadth, an indecent exposure intentionally takes place, in which
largely centres the interest of the performance. But there is a superstitious
feeling which is the other bulwark of this beastly practice that Ilaisa is so
earnest in suppressing. They say that the Bdki is as important as the Lotuf
and that if they cease from it they will die. They strongly object to intrusion
when observing the rites, and say that the spirit will strike with maundering
madness the rash one who dares to act the spy. I must find out more yet
so as to be able to give a more complete and succinct description. It strikes me
as being something analogous to the Feasts of Astarte, the Saturnalia of the
Tartars, or the Temple worship in India, in so far as the grossest bestiality is
connected with a religious rite. Though not a savoury subject, I have ventured
to give Your Excellency such information on it as I have already got—such
being Your Excellency’s own request, and this was my motive for marking this
letter “private.” I have to-day received a letter dated Bth November, from
the Rev. J. Robson, our missionary at Kadavu, in which he mentions to me
certain things. It has struck me that Your Excellency might like to know of
these matters, and therefore I send an extract or two—not as a complaint
(Mr. Robson has not the slightest idea of what I am doing in sending on a
part of his letter), but simply as a little private information that might possibly
be not unacceptable. . . .
Revva, December 16, 1875. —1 return the catechism kindly lent me, with
many thanks for an opportunity of perusing it. It does not go deeply into
Romanist doctrine, and does not fulminate at all, having only one quiet blow at
us, quite mild. But I have heard of another catechism published by the priests
in Fijian, which was said to have been very bitter and trenchant ; and that it
was io furnish a reply to that , and to counteract its influence, that the Catechism
was translated of which the Priest at Rewa complained to Your Excellency.
I do not think that the Fijian of the catechism now returned is by any
means masterly. In many places it appears incorrect.
1 Christian Religion.
2 L


I cannot understand the French priests complaining of what we write
against them, (we say and preach very little,) for they are the reverse of
scrupulous themselves towards us in this respect.
I called upon the priest, my neighbour, when Your Excellency had left, and
he has since returned my visit. I told him I had never been aware at the
time of any pressure being laid upon his people by ours, and 1 should never
countenance such a thing at any time.
Rewa, December 21, 1875.—The Roko being absent, and the Stipendiary
Magistrate as well, and it being also the native custom to report occurrences
of importance to the leading Chief, the Turaga Buli (Ro Namusadroka) goes
to Suva to report a fire which occurred here last night, and has asked me to
write this letter to Your Excellency that he might take it with him. Ten
houses were burnt in Dorokavu last night, adjoining the recently burnt
quarter of Rewa called Nasigatoka. No lives were lost, but most that the
people possessed was consumed. The church -was placed in the greatest
danger. Providentially it was a calm night; had the strong trade wind been
blowing that we have had of late, the whole of the “carpenter’s quarter”
would have gone, and the flames extended towards the Catholic church. Had
even the usual land breeze been blowing nothing could have saved our
church, (worth doubtless over £500,) and in all probability the greater part
of Rewa would have gone, and Mr. Friend’s house been placed in great danger.
A formal enquiry has not yet been made into the origin of the fire, but it
seems to have occurred through carelessness in imperfectly quenching the fire
in one of the houses in which dwelt an old man who had just been burnt out
of Nasigatoka. This fire, the third I have seen at Rewa during the past
twelve months, and the fifth large fire I have seen during the same period,
tempts me to make a suggestion, with all deference, that it would be a most
desirable thing to make some strict regulations for natives with respect to
putting out their fires, or to institute a fine for the careless use of lighted fire-
wood or of torches. It w r as so strictly a tabu thing in the old days to fire
the town of Rewa, that no matter how accidental the fire might be, the
originator (or perhaps some one else) would certainly have been clubbed. They
always demanded a life or two, it little mattered w 7 ho so long as some one was
killed, as compensation, and as the Tcenai loloku of the fire. They complain
that the people have grown careless, now that they no longer have to fear the
club.
There is another matter, Your Excellency, upon which I feel anxious, and
the Chiefs with me. There are three or four houses in close proximity to the
church which place it in perpetual danger. The Chiefs wish these to be re-
moved, I am told, but the people don’t care to go, although there are very
many empty yavus 1 in this large town to which they might be removed. Some
day I anticipate that our church, which has cost much labour and some money,
will be destroyed through the carelessness of some old woman in one of the
miserable straw 7 dwellings which stand close by. Am I asking too bold a
question of Your Excellency in inquiring if something could be done in this
matter ?
Rewa, December 30, 1875. —I have made inquiries as you wished with
reference to the dye used to colour the turbans of the Tonga people who
1 Foundations.


danced at Rewa. Ratu Wiliami was wrong in saying that they were coloured
with banana juice—a teacher saw the people colouring up their head-dresses
before the dance began, and they used washing-blue mixed with oil. It is
true that the juice of the Soaqa banana was in former times used to dye
salas. It was used together with a fruit called Na Jcau ni soma, which was
divided and the juice obtained and mixed with the juice of the said banana,
but the dye was poor, they say, and nothing equal to washing blue.
Rewa, January 27, 1876.— Some news arrived last night from down the
coast, and, not knowing whether Mr. Carew had been able to communicate
with Your Excellency from inland, I thought that the information conveyed
in the enclosed letter might possibly be acceptable. I hear in addition that
the Kai Colo actually lay in wait to attack Captain Olive’s party on their
way to Nasaucoko, but that their courage failed them. They are now
couchant but before they heard of his march inland they were rampant ,
and preparing to attack the Batiri and Noe Toga towns on the coast. Captain
Olive’s march inland happily effected a diversion, and gave them something
else to think of. The Buli of Serua with a body of irregulars is mounting
guard over the white men on the coast—the mountaineers having asserted
that they intend ransacking them for arms and powder. From all that I
have heard both inland and from Ra, the hill people in that part of the
country where they are now rising are anything but convinced that the
Government is the stronger party—they have become possessed with an idea
that they are an important and dreaded power in the state and that it is the
policy of the Government to conciliate and not intermeddle with them. I
hope they will learn a lesson, for I know them to be a bad, scoundrelly, in-
solent lot, and about the worst set of men in Fiji. One of the Nuya Koro Chiefs,
Nabisiki of Namoli, has been drilling sotia 1 and using them for making
raids on quiet people. Not long back he entered the Lotu tow T n of Yeinuga,
belonging to Namosi, and took away the people s mats, and the mats from
the teacher’s house and the tabakaus from the church. He endeavoured
to frighten the people out of their Lotu, and talked of removing them to
Navosa. I have heard that he has since made a similar raid on another
town. The rebels have communication with Na Nuya Mala. Some young
men were present from Na Nuya Koro while I was at Narokorokoyawa. 1
don’t know whether they will try to influence them or not. Perhaps not. I
have however written to-day to the native minister up there that neither he
nor his teachers are to leave their homes to attend our Quarterly Meeting
at Rewa. I have also sent back Levu teachers who had come up from the
coast to attend the meeting. I found the tribes which I have recently visited
well affected towards the Government, and wholesomely impressed with its.
power.
Rewa, February 10, 1876. —News from the coast this morning both
by letter and by the Turaga Buli of Serua. He says that the tevoro 2 are
yalovinaka 3 now, and that Mr. Carew is coming through Koroinasau down
to the coast. A native letter gives the same good news, but adds that the
Nuya Koro cata na Matanitu . 4 They, however, are of little significance now
the more important tribes have submitted. At one of the insurgent towns
1 Soldiers.
2 Devils.
3 Well minded.
4 The Nuya Koro hate the Government.


near the coast Yatuvoko or Naitavuni, they were trying Na Kalou
rere, a process by which they are supposed to become as invulnerable as
Achilles, not even excepting the heel. One man was brought out and his
being shot-proof was put severely to the test by a bullet being fired at him
from close cpiarters. His superstition was rudely dispelled by the ball passing
right through him, and through the wall of a hut close by into the body of a
young man sitting on the mats. They lifted the fallen man to carry him
dying into the house where, to their astonishment, lay the second unfortunate
bleeding to death. The Bete (priest) made a rapid backward movement into
the reeds, and then turning, fled at the top of his speed.
But though the Wesleyans everywhere predominated, and in
many provinces held exclusive possession of the field, the Roman
Catholic Church had clergy at Rewa, Levuka, Bua, and other
/important centres; while the fact that Tui Cakau was himself aj
I Roman Catholic deprived the Wesleyan Church in the great!
I province of Cakaudrove of that semi-state character which it hadj
* assumed to itself in other parts of Fiji. All the Roman Catholic
Missionaries were French, (Marists,) and at the head of thel
mission, as Vicar-Apostolic, was an excellent old man, Father
Breheret, who had arrived in Fiji forty years before annexation,
whilst all the islands were still in their wildest and most
dangerous condition, and before any Wesleyan missionary had,
settled in the island. But the Roman Catholics were nowhere
very numerous except in Cakaudrove, where, of course, a very
large part of the population followed their Chief.
The Church of England was represented by one clergyman
only, Mr. Floyd, and during the autumn of 1875 he was for
many months absent, having gone to England to beg. His
ministrations were wisely confined to the white settlers and
the imported labourers, and consequently all angry disputes
with the Wesleyans were avoided. During his absence the
services at Levuka were kept up by my staff, as has been
before mentioned (p. 293),
Miscellaneous Letters
I conclude this chapter with a few miscellaneous letters, either
omitted in their place, or coming more properly as a sort of
appendix by themselves.
From Baron von Huger
Saguntj, Ba, January 15, 1875. —My dear Sir Arthur Gordon, At
last lam off to the mountains. It is a trip I never thought of till a few
days ago and I was induced to undertake it by having got as far as this
with Dr, M‘Gregor. I intend, namely, to walk to Tavua then to Raki Raki,
and leaving the coast there strike inland for Matai Lobau, (visiting Kan-
Vadra on the way up,) where I hope to be able to follow my old track up the


Wai ni Malo, and eventually find Carew somewhere on the Tuba ni Wai
(Sigatoka). Once there it will of course be easy for me to follow the river
down to Mua Sara (Byrne’s house). I hope by that time to have got a few
things together worth looking at, so that I will not feel ashamed to return
to Nasova. Of course I cannot tell how long I shall be over this trip. I
have given myself six weeks to do it in, but I cannot tell exactly until I have
accomplished the walk. At all events please accept the above as an excuse
should I not turn up at Nasova in a month, as I told you I hoped to do at
Navola. I trust you had a pleasant sail back to Levuka. The Dr., Mr.
Taylor, and self passed a night in the native town at Yuda, during which it
blew quite a gale. Our sleep was disturbed by the momentary expectation
of the house—which was a high, rotten, old concern—coming down. At one
time we made sure it was the beginning of a hurricane, but the wind abated
towards morning, and the following day was quite fine. On the Doctor 3
proposal I made use of the Fitzroy as far as this, and landed in Mr. Taylor’s
boat. He remained here a day, held his Court and left for Yuda the day
before yesterday, so now I am alone in my glory. Ba has been an agreeable
surprise to me, for I have never heard any good of it. The river is much
larger than I expected, though I hear it is very shoal immediately above
this town, and flows through a very extensive plain which in size certainly
rivals Nadi; for though not as wide, the country is level much farther inland
and seems to be bounded by very high mountains. All the low T er portion of
the river is unfortunately lined with mangrove, and a day’s heavy rain in
the mountains floods the whole country to such an extent that here in Sagunu
all the houses are built on very high foundations (mounds ?) and, notwith-
standing, occasionally get water into them. lam living at the Roko’s. He
seems a very good sort of fellow and really anxious to do good. The town
is clean and well kept, the roads all round it in excellent repair, and Sagunu
is better supplied with food than any town I have yet seen. As to the
natives I cannot say much for them—the teacher (Joseva) seems a really
honest fellow, but then he is, I think, a “ Kai Rewa.” However I manage
to get on all right with them, though I cannot understand a word of the
confounded Ba talk, with the exception of turn Jcilatia, which interpreted is
Sa sega ni Mia. 1 I thought the tabu Mlasia of Nadroga bad enough, but
I think this turn monstrosity beats it. Do or dou is used for segai 2 and
sounds uncommonly like no. Buying “curios” has been difficult here, the
people would not bring their things, so at last I walked round the town and
by looking into every house managed to ferret out a few things. One of
these is really good. It is a very old ai ula, shaped something like this
[sketch], and came out of the old devil lure which has long since been
done away with. The Roko said it was makawa sara 3 and had put to
death many a good man. There are fifty notches in it, and the Chief
assures me it is the register of the people it has killed. On my doubting
it he got quite angry, and assured me it was “ edina, edina sara ,” 4 so I
fancy there may be some truth in it, especially as I had great difficulty in
getting it at all. Now I must really stop. I had the best intentions of
sending you only a line, but I have filled five pages instead. The worst of
it is that I have been so sleepy over this letter as hardly to be able to keep
1 “I don’t know.” 2 No. 3 Very old. 4 “True, very true.”


my eyes open. However, as it is 2 a.m., there is some excuse for it, and with
your usual kindness please excuse incoherent sentences. I would have
written it in the morning, but I intend starting before dawn, and the heat
is so great during the day that it is quite impossible to write then. Kind
regards to Lady Gordon, who I trust is well. I must just add, and then I
have done, how the short talk I had with you at Havola has set me up.
I was in wretched spirits, and everything looked very dark. Unfortunately
I am such an abominable fool that I cannot say what I feel. Thanks a
thousand times for all your kindness to me. I really do not know what I
should have done without it.
P.S.—l have just killed a centipede good four inches long. It first
crawled up my leg under the sulu, but I could not find the brute and only
heard it fall on the mat. But now its corpse is entombed in my grammar,
where I found and killed it. These brutes are quite abundant here, also
scorpions (very small species), and mosquitoes are most troublesome.
From Baron von Huger
Raki Raki, March 18, 1876. — My dear Sir Arthur Gordon — l have only
just received your kind note and box of medicine, etc. The delav was caused
by Mr. Moore’s getting stuck at Dranu owing to the bad weather, and thus
the noble Star had returned to Levuka before I knew anything about her.
I cannot sufficiently thank you for your kindness in thinking of me. The
quantity of comforts quite frightened me, as one by one came out of the box.
It made me almost regret having written to the doctor, especially as, though
not yet well, I am a good deal better.
To-day I am busy packing, so as to be ready to start by the first boat
which calls here, in obedience to your Excellency’s “ most positive and express
commands.” lam sorry to hear about the mails having missed last
month.
Excuse scrawl, for my hand is very shaky and I am writing this on an old
box which I have just packed full of skulls.
Mr. A. J. L. Gordon to his Mother.
March 18.—I send you a few little drawings of the young ladies of Uasau-
coko who, as you will observe, are not overburdened with garments. The
action in the one marked “ Wada ! Wada ! ” is intended to denote astonish-
ment, while the words—pronounced “Wanda! Wanda!”—have a curious
similarity to our wonder. I had frequent opportunities of exciting this
expression of surprise that I have tried to depict, a knife, a piece of looking-
glass, the texture of a bit of cloth being amply sufficient to call forth the
most extravagant signs of surprise and pleasure. The picture marked “Qi
dua,” and pronounced “Ngindua” is intended to represent a young girl,
whom I asked in fun to carry my rifle and walk on in front of me as I was
afraid, while she, appreciating the joke, said “ Qi dua,” “I refuse,” in such
a pretty way, that I determined to make a picture of her ; but I regret to say
I have not done her justice. The one with the bundle under her arm is the
young lady who used to bring our vegetables every morning wrapped up
in a banana leaf, while she said, “ Will you buy, Sirs, for you eating Sirs,
My Lords.” That is a translation of what is written on the picture. -


From Mr. John Hill
Rambi Island, March 11, 1876. —Your Excellency—l have the honour
to congratulate you on the introduction to the Council of the Bill to
regulate native taxation, etc., as a very important move in the direction
shadowed forth in my private letter to you of October last, and which you
did me the honour of acknowledging in such flattering terms—flattering
because you said my views very nearly corresponded with your own in the
matter. I trouble you with this line only to show Your Excellency that /, as
doubtless many other thinking members of the community, are fully alive to
the quiet but steady manner you are advancing towards a solution of the very
important native question in Fiji. Certain people may fret and fume over
what they call the slowness of Government, etc. etc. ; these growls are some
of the privileges Englishmen claim and possess, and are very good safety
valves to let off dangerous steam. On asking sensible growlers ‘ ‘ What would
you do if you were Governor or Government ? ” the reply invariably is “ I can
hardly tell, it would take time to think it over.” In this matter of native
taxation and collection of produce, very few, I regret to say, seem to look at
it in the light which Your Excellency does. Our previous correspondence
(already referred to) indicates that it is not merely as a mode of raising so
many pounds, shillings, and pence that Your Excellency views this Bill, but
its tendency to the elevation of the native Fijian people, their civilisation and
permanent good. I regret in reading the report of the proceedings in the
Council (27th January) on the introduction of this Bill, that none of the
Honourable members who spoke to the motion (except perhaps the mover)
seemed to grasp the subject in its real spirit. As a mere scheme of taxation this
plan is objectionable on many grounds, and would not probably meet the
views of a British financier, but in the present case I take it, that it is not
so much of present finance as the future good it may lead to. I trust Your
Excellency will, however, go a little further still, either in the present Bill or
in future legislation, and make provision for what I mentioned to you in
October, viz., enacting that each individual Fijian or Community shall plant
certain quantities of certain articles of produce each year —such cultivation to
be done in the best method. I should strongly recommend that cocoanuts
will be named most particularly as one of these products—they are simple of
cultivation, understood to some extent by the people, safe as an investment,
and will, in a few years, add in an immense degree to the wealth and pro-
sperity of the Colony. Many matters of detail suggest themselves connected
with this matter, but they are not fit to add here. Enough to say that
with the Fijian properly employed, and for his own benefit financially, he
will be raised in morals and civilisation, at the same time the Colony is ad-
vancing in wealth and prosperity. But with these people continuing in their
idleness, poverty and trouble will be the result.
END OF VOL. I.
printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh.










