





FIJI IN 1870:
BEING
The Letters of “ The Argus ” Special Correspondent,
WITH A
COMPLETE MAP
AND
Bazetteer of the Fijian Archipeago.
BY H. BRITTON.
SECOND EDITION.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.
Melbourne:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 COLLINS STREET EAST,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
MDCCCLXX.


FIJI IN 1870.




FIJI IN 1870:
BEING
The Letters of "The Argus ” Special Correspondent,
WITH A
COMPLETE MAP
AND
Bazetteer of the Fijian Archipeago.
BY H. BRITTON.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.
||lel bourne:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 55 COLLINS STREET EAST,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
M DCCCI.XX.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The letters which form the first portion of this little volume were originally
published in “ The Argus/’ the newspaper for which they were written,
and they are now re-printed by the permission of the conductors of that
journal. The articles were written hurriedly for the press, and they are
re-issued without any opportunity having been afforded for revision. This
is to be regretted, inasmuch as the arrangement of the various subjects
dealt with is susceptible of improvement. It is hoped, however, that the
index to the letters will in- a great measure remedy any defects of this
nature. The information they contain is the result of a tour of sixty-four
days’ duration through the Fiji Islands, in the months of May, June, and
July, 1870. The Gazetteer of Fiji has been compiled from personal obser-
vation and authentic sources. I desire especially to acknowledge my
obligations in this matter to Mr. Edward Eeeve, of Sydney, late Chan-
cellor of the Hawaiian Commission, who kindly furnished me with a copy
of his Gazetteer of Central Polynesia, a very valuable compilation published
in 1857, and now, I believe, out of print. The accompanying map is a
copy of the latest admiralty chart of the Fijian Archipelago, obtained by
the photo-lithographic process.
Melbourne, November 10th, 1870.


INDEX TO LETTERS.
LETTER I.
I ntroduction.—Geographical position and extent of Fiji.—lts early history.—The PAGJ,'S-
proposed cession of the Islands to the British Crown, and the circumstances which
gave rise to the offer.—The history of cotton growing in Fiji... .. 5 to 9
LETTER 11.
Growth of trade from 1866 to 1870.—Value of Fiji cotton, and the difficulties attending
its production, shipment, <&c. —Imports and exports.—The Ramie plant.—White
population, and amount of land in possession of the whites.—Native population.—
Method of growing cotton, and average yield per acre.—The planters’ mode of life.—
The Fijians, their character and appearance.—The institution of mbuturaka 9 to 16.
Erratum. —Second column page 12, line 26, for one-third, read two-thirds.
LETTER m.
The labour question.—Method and cost of obtaining labour, both Fijian and foreign.—
Alleged slavery.—Possible abuses of the labour traffic.—Seizure of the Daphne.—Cost
and method of obtaining land.—Peculiar land tenure of the Fijians.—Causes of
disputed titles.—Cost of establishing a cotton plantation.—Climate.—Plantations of
Messrs. F. & W. Hennings and Ryder Brothers. 16 to 22
LETTER IV.
The Polynesia Company.—Questions affecting title and character of the Company’s lands.
Will the natives ever rise against the whites’—Sources of native disputes.—H.M.
Challenger’s boat expedition up the Rewa.—lnjurious effect of half-measures with the
KJia llB 22 to 28.
LETTER V.
The two leading chiefs in Fiji, Maafu and Thakombau.—Objections to Tongan rule.—
Tongan designs on Fiji.—The political divisions of Fiji.—The Lau Confederation, and
the General Confederation which preceded it.—Life of Thakombau.—His coronation
by the whites.—The Constitution granted by him.—His Cabinet Ministers 28 to 34.
LETTER VI.
Lakemba.—South Sea reefs.—The cocoa-nut. —Debates in the Lau Parliament.—Break-
fast with chiefs.—A Fijian Methuselah.—Fijian women.—Kandavu. Native preaching
—Manufacture of tapa. —Missionary institute at Richmond.—Coast scenery 34 to 39.
LETTER VII.
Levuka.—The town, mountain scenery of Ovalau and water-fall.—The Rewa.— Kava, or
native grog.—Tui Dreketi and other Rewa chiefs.—The white settlement. — Malua. .. 39 to 43.
LETTER VIII.
Cotton plantations on the Rewa river.—Murder of the Rev. Mr. Baker.—Thakombau’s
expedition to punish the criminals.—The Wai Manu.—Pleasures of boat sailing 43 to 48.


LETTER IX.
Canoe voyage to Mbau with Ratu Ndranibaka.-A Fijian canoe.—Description of Mbau.
—lnterview with Thakombau.—His appearance and dwelling described.—Evening
entertainments proffered by Ndranibaka and Ambrose.—Canoe voyage to Levuka. .. 48 to 53.
LETTER X.
Wakaya. The bread fruit tree.—Trip round the east, north, and west coasts of Viti Levu.
—Viti Levu Bay.—Midnight dance and serenade by Fijian girls.—Rakiraki, and
Nandi Bay.—Extensive cotton plantations.—Dance of Sandwich islanders.—Heathen
town of Nakoro Tambu.—Unpleasant voyaging outside the reef.—Careless boating in
Fiji —The Navua river.—lnterior of Viti Levu. to 60-
LETTER XI.
Voyage from Levuka to Taviuni.— Beautiful scenery of Koro.—Fijian Sabbatarians.—
Visit to a native church—The native language.—Musical party of whites and Fijians.
—Plantations of Vuna point, Taviuni.—Wairiki.—Tui Thakau.— Solevu, and Parlia-
ment of the Lau Confederation.—Cotton planting in Taviuni. .. ■ 60 to 64.
LETTER XII.
Entire absence of law or official control in Fiji.—The powers of the American Consul,
and the lack of power of the British Consul.-Struggles for self-government, annex-
1. i 64 to 68.
ation, or a protectorate.
LETTER XIII.
The Wesleyan and Roman Catholic Missionary bodies.—Prospects in the mission field.—
Voyage from Levuka to Newcastle, N. 8. W.—Concluding remarks 68 to 73.


FIJI IN 1870.
No. I.
The jj iji Islands have for some years past
excited a growing interest in the minds of
the enterprising colonists of Australia, to
whose bounds they geographically belong.
Notwithstanding the indisposition shown by
the British Government to encourage a Euro-
pean settlement of the group, and the many
dangers and difficulties incident to pioneering
in a new and savage country, this fertile ter-
ritory is being rapidly peopled from the ad-
joining colonies, and there can be no doubt that
ere long the Fijis will be of great commercial
importance to Australia and New Zealand.
The white settlements have already assumed
dimensions which demand some better system
for their protection than that which they
have hitherto had to rely on. The islands con-
tama white population of 0ver2,500, and a tide
of immigration seems to have steadily set in.
It is indisputable that the natural resources of
the country are great, and that there is a very
promising future before it, but it is by no
means certain that in the present condition
of things a rapid influx of intending settlers,
especially those who bring wives and families,’
will be attended with happy results. It I
will be well if all those who contemplate I
breaking up their homes in Victoria, or
elsewhere, with the view of casting in
their lot with the Fijians, first under-
stand the nature of the difficulties they
will have to encounter, and the means
they must possess, before they can hope
for even a moderate share of those high
rewards which have been so plentifully pro-
mised of late. Some disappointment has
already been felt by persons who have given a
oo ready credence to exaggerated accounts
°t their prospects in this new Eldorado; and,
wnfle there is a very good opening for men
With capital, who can adapt themselves to the
country, anything like indiscriminate immi-
gration will assuredly lead to the most de-
florable consequences,
jf ijian Archipelago consists of over 200
ands and islets, less than one-half of I
which are inhabited. Occupying the
central portion of Western Polynesia, mid-
way between the Tongan Islands and
the French colony of New Caledonia, it
extends across the South Pacific Ocean 300
miles from east to west, by 200 miles from
north to south. Levuka, the principal white
settlement, or the commercial capital as it
may now be called, on the east coast of the
island of Ovalau, is distant 2,160 miles from
the port of Melbourne, 1,730 from Sydney,
[ and 1,180 from Auckland. It is computed
that the superficial area of the group is equal
to that of the Principality of Wales. The
great bulk of the planters are resident upon
the two large islands, Viti Levu and Vanua
Levu, each of which has a circumference of
250 miles, or 100 miles more than the
circumference of Mauritius. The other
islands next in importance are Kan-
davu, Taviuni, Rambi, Koro, Ngau, and
Ovalau. Situated between the meridians
of 176° east and 178° west longitude, and
the parallels of 15° and 20° south lati-
tude, the climate is tropical, but not un-
healthy. The mean temperature of the group
is 80° Fahr. The lowest register recorded is
62°, and the thermometer has occasionally
risen as high as 121°, but the heat is mode-
rated nearly all the year round by the N.E.
and S.E. trade winds.
Though more than two centuries have
elapsed since the first discovery of Fiji by
Tasman, comparatively little was known of
the country until the visit of the United
States Exploring Expedition in 1840, of which
Commander Wilks wrote an elaborate and
highly interesting account. Captain Cook in
his second voyage sighted some of the islands,
and so did Bligh in his compulsory boat
voyage after the mutiny of the Bounty, but a
landing was not attempted. The missionary
ship Duff also entered the group in 1797, but
the attitude of the natives prevented the
missionaries from having any intercourse
with them, and the introduction of Chris-
tianity was delayed for 40 years, when through


the Tongan influence the missionaries gained
a footing in one of the Windward Islands. Long
before this, however, the natives had made
acquaintance with white men, and unhappily
with some of the worst of their kind. Very
early in the present century an adventurous
party of escaped convicts from New South
Wales found their way in an open boat to the
islands, and were treated with kindness by
the natives. The little colony received an
occasional addition to its numbers from ship-
wrecked seamen, and oftener still from sailors
who ran away from whalers, which now began
to call in for provisions, Jack finding a life
of luxurious ease among the savages more to
his taste than the hardships of interminable
whaling voyages, in ships in which he
was in those days often very badly treated.
These men were received like princes (as,
indeed, some of them represented themselves
to be) by the native chiefs, and were provided
with every luxury the tropics afford in
return for a little instruction in the use of
firearms and occasional assistance in native
wars. It is said that one of the earliest white
residents abandoned his clothes, painted him-
self, and became a thorough Fijian, often
leading a tribe to battle; and, heading the
column with his single flint-lock musket,
which was considered equivalent to an army,
often changed the fate of dynasties in an
hour. Only a few of these early settlers
survived any length of time. Removed
from all restraint, their evil passions had full
sway, and some of them sank to lower depths
than their cannibal neighbours, who were at
length obliged to kill them in self-defence,
while others died from privations suffered
in their „wild and careless life. Vague and
magnificent accounts of the productiveness of
the Fijis occasionally found their way to
Europe and the colonies, and about this time
vessels, of them sailing from the port of
Sydney, began to visit the islands, for the
purpose of trading in sandalwood and beche-
de-mer, for the China market, tortoiseshell,
cocoanut oil, &c. The masters of ships fitted
out for this purpose found this trading, though
very hazardous, extremely lucrative. Itwasnot
safe for the men to go ashore unless well armed,
and bartering was often carried on with the
boats at anchor by means of a long pole—a
fashion which has been kept up by white
traders in some districts until within the last
three or four years. Vessels occasionally got
lost on treacherous reefs, and sometimes the
crew were massacred. When opportunity
offered there were severe reprisals, and the
stories of these old traders recall to mind the
old buccaneering times, as told in tue starring
narratives
41 Of Raleigh, Frobisher, and Drake,
Adventurous hearts who bartered hold
Their English steel for Spanish gold.”
The white population now slowly increased.
About the year 1835 some small traders
gained a footing on the beach at Levuka, and
a settlement was established. The com-
munity led a free and independent life, every
man being a law unto himself and doing that
which seemed good in his own eyes. The
country would probably have come into
notice some 10 years earlier but for the gold
discoveries in 1851, which drew all the adven-
turous spirits to Victoria, and it is only now
that there is a decline in the yield of our
mineral treasures that interest in liji has
again revived. Many gold-seekers on their way
from California to Victoria called in at Fiji,
and a few of these, charmed with the freedom
and lawlessness of the country, returned to it
when it was no longer easy to make rapid for-
tunes in Australia. In 1859, Mr. Pritchard,
then British Consul at Fiji, being impressed
with the conviction that it could be made a
great cotton-producing country, exerted him-
self to direct attention to its advantages as a
field for emigration. In 1861 the European
population numbered 166 adults, a large pro-
portion of whom were highly respectable
people. An impression having gone abroad that
the British Government had determined to
take possession of the islands, new arrivals
from New Zealand were frequent at this time.
Some brought with them small cutters, and
remained in the group to trade ; but the ma-
jority of the new-comers, on discovering that
the Imperial authorities had declined the
proffered cession of the islands, returned.
The circumstances which led Thakombau*
to desire the British Government to take
possession of the islands are as followOn
the 4th July, 1849, while the late Mr. J. B.
Williams, then American consul, was cele.
brating the national anniversary by the firing
of cannon and letting off of squibs, on the
island of Nukulau, his house took fire, and
was burned to the ground. A crowd of
natives collected, and in the confusion his
property was pillaged. On the arrival of
the next American man-of-war he claimed
compensation for damages to the amount of
5,001 dollars 38 cents. At this time there
* To avoid confusion, native names and -w ords will
be spelt without regard to the orthography estab-
lished by the missionaries, and laid down in H zel-
I wood’s Dictionary, which often does not convey to
' Europeans the smallest idea of the pronunciation.


were about 50 whites residing in Levuka.
The chief of this town, Tui Levuka, was on
friendly terms with Thakombau, who was at
war with some hostile tribes. Though not
actually subject to Thakombau, he was
frequently allied with him in war, and was
generally regarded as one of his party. The
white residents also, as a rule, sided with
Thakombau. In 1853 a boat belonging to
some of the whites living at Levuka was
captured and pillaged by natives at Malaki.
The crew escaping, reported the outrage at
Levuka. The whites organised an expedi-
tion, and with Tui Levuka and a native
contingent, made a raid on IVlalaki, which
they took and burned, the native force
killing a number of the offending towns-
people, though no resistance was made.
The inhabitants of the destroyed town com-
plained to the chief of Viwa, to whom
they were subject, and it was asserted
by the whites that the Viwa chief applied to
lhakombau for permission to avenge the
injury by destroying Levuka. Thakombau
denied all knowledge of any such applica-
tion, but he was not believed, and the whites
kept a regular night watch to guard against
surprise. In spite of every precaution, how-
ever, the town was fired in the night, and the
greater part of it consumed. A native
teacher belonging to Viwa,' living in the
town, was looked upon as the incendiary.
As it was generally believed that the town
had been destroyed by Thakombau’s direction,
the whites joined Tui Levuka in declaring
war against him. A few buildings were
rapidly thrown up, a fence was built round
them, and fortified with a few pieces of
cannon, and every preparation was made to
sustain a siege. But they were never attacked,
and lhakombau sent frequent assurances of
Ins regret for the destruction of the town
promising that he would do all he could to
punish the guilty parties. The crime was
never satisfactorily traced to any responsible
person. The native teacher and the Viwa chief
who were charged with the deed were killed
a few days after the occurrence by the
mountaineers of Ovalau, and the manner of
its perpetration remains a mystery. Complaint
was made by the American citizens of the
losses they had sustained, and Thakombau
was saddled with the whole responsibility,
though there was no evidence whatever to
show that he had been instrumental in the
destruction of any of the property. After
some preliminary investigations on the part
ot the United States Government, Commander
Loutwell was sent to Fiji in the year 1855 to
inquire into the justice of the American
claims in a fair and impartial spirit—" not to
take for granted that all the allegations
against the supposed offenders are true”—and
that ‘‘a close and thorough investigation
upon the strictest principles of justice should
be made into every case presented for adjust-
ment. ” The result was an entirely ex-parte hear-
ing, and on the representations of the United
States Consul, himself the largest claimant,
an award of 30,000d01. was made against
Thakombau. This award was afterwards in-
creased to 45,000d01., 15,000d01. being added,
as Commander Boutwell said, “on account of
the interference of the English missionaries,”
who desired to act as counsel for Thakombau.
Mr. Williams’s claim, originally 5,000d01., was
finally set down at 18,331d01., and the award
stood thus“ To Mr. J. B. Williams,
18,331d01. ; Chamberlain and Co., 7.300d01. ;
David Whippy, 6,OOOdol.; owners of barque
Elisabeth, I,OOOdol. ; owners of brig Tim
Bickering, 2,800dol.; Thos. Ryder, 1,OOOdol.;
WTlkinson Brothers and Co., Sydney,'
4,000d01. ; Messrs. Shattack and M‘Comber[
2, OOOdol. As Nukulau was «ot subject to
Bau when the consul’s, house was burnt,
and Thakombau maintained that he had
nothing to do with the act of incendiarism at
Eevuka, he would not have been willing to
pay even had the exorbitant charges been
fairly investigated ; but he was terrified on
board the American man-of-war into signing
an acknowledgment of the justice of the
claims and a promise to pay the amount in
two years. On returning to Bau, however, he
addressed a protest to the United States Consul
at Sydney, in which he represented that he did
not sign the treaty of his own free-will, but
under the greatest fear, Commander Bout-
well having stamped on the floor and
threatened to take him away to America, be-
sides telling another chief that he would hang
him. The injustice of the whole of this trans-
action was frequently remarked upon by other
officers of the United States Navy visiting Fiji,
butthedemand was never abated. Thakombau
being quite unable to satisfy the claim, he in
1858 offered to cede the islands to Great Britain,
on condition that he should retain the rank an d
title of Tui \ iti (King of I iji), which has always
been accorded him by the American Govern-
ment, and that in consideration of his con-
veying to Queen Victoria 200,000 acres of land
the American debt, about £9,000, should be
paid for him.
The deed of cession, signed by Thakombau
and the leading chiefs, was conveyed to Eng.
land by Mr. Pritchard in the early part of the


year 1859. Greatinterestwasfeltin the colonies
in the proposed cession, and some exertions
were made to induce the British Government
to entertain the proposition favourably, as
good proof had just been obtained of the
capabilities of Fiji as a cotton-growing coun-
try, while the supply of that staple for the
home markets had been greatly diminished
by the American war. Some months later
Colonel Smythe, R.A., was appointed
to proceed as a commissioner to the
islands, to inquire into the state of
affairs, and report as to the advisa-
bility, or otherwise, of accepting the pro.
posed cession. At this time the military
muddling in New Zealand was causing very
serious embarrassment, and the Imperial
authorities having quitp enough to do with
one native war on hand, were in no humour
to accept the responsibility of managing
Thakombau’s unruly subjects. The commis-
sioner’s report, as might almost have been
anticipated from his instructions, was against
the acceptance of the offer, which was ac-
cordingly declined. Colonel Smythe was of
opinion “that, whether by natives, or by
white planters with native labourers, the
supply of cotton from Fiji can never be other-
wise than insignificant.” The bestcommentary
upon this will be found in the export returns,
which show that, in spite of the difficulties
settlers have to contepd with in a country
without a government, and where the pror
duce has to be sold at a price much below its
value for want of shipping facilities, £45,000
worth of cotton was exported in 1869, while
there is every probability of that quantity
being doubled in tbe present year. Dr. See-
man, the botanist of the expedition, formed
an entirely different opinion of the capabili-
ties of the country, but it is perhaps not to
be regretted that the British Government re-
fused to take possession 10 years ago. This
would, in all probability, have led to a
sudden influx of capitalists who would
have monopolised tbe lands, while, as it is (
the most valuable portions have been gradu-
ally passing into the hands of cultivators of
small means, whose pluck and enterprise
have compensated for lack of money. The
American debt hung over Thakombau for
several years, causing him the greatest uneasi-
ness and alarm, until at length t was taken
up by the Polynesia Company, whose oper-
ations will be referred to hereafter.
The history of cotton-growing in Fiji dates
from the year 1859, when Mr. Pritchard re-
turned from England with the valuation of
native-grown Fijian cotton quoted in “The
Manchester Cotton Supply Reporter” for
March of the same year—viz. 7d. to Is. (Rd.
per lb. Cotton of the coarser kinds had been
known in the group for 30 years, but no effort
had been made to cultivate if. By direction
of the missionaries some of the native chiefs
now ordered the planting of cotton. Dr,
Brower, the present American consul in Fiji,
was the first successful planter, his island of
Wakaya producing a very good sample of the
New Orleans variety. Dr. Seeman about the
same month planted at Somo Somo,
Taviuni, but the Sea Island which he
had brought out with him failed. The
distinction of being the first to raise Sea
Island cotton in Fiji seems to belong to Mr.
J. B. Smytherman, who sent some samples to
the London Exhibition of 1.862, from bis
plantation on the island of Nukulau, on the
Rewa River. Mr. Pritchard started Mr. Jacob
Storck on Nukumotu, on the Rewa, and this
plantation was afterwards carried on by Mr.
F. W. Hennings. Mr. St. John produced
cotton on his plantation at the same time,
but Mr. Storck was the first to export it.
Mr. M‘Clintock, a nephew of Sir Leopold
M Clintock, had also begun a plantation on
the Rewa with Sea Island cotton ; but the yield
was so small in comparison with the coarser
staples grown by his neighbours that the crop
was considered unprofitable, and he unfortu-
nately abandoned it when another six months
would have made the experiment a success.
About the first cotton sent to Sydney was a
parcel of native-grown, exported by Mr,
John Davies in the seed, and also some
cleaned by band. Great difficulty was expe-
rienced in getting Sea Island seed, the supply
for a long time being limited to Dr. Seeman’s
parcel, a small quantity brought by Mr.
M‘Clintock from the Sydney Agricultural
Society, a little packet Dr. Brower had sent
from home, and a bag Dr. von Mueller, of the
Melbourne Botanical-gardens, gave to Mr,
Hunter, who again gave it to Dr. Brower. In
1863, Dr. Brower, who had been growing Egyp-
tian and kidney for three years previously,
planted the Sea Island variety, and gathered it
mixed with the coarser kinds. This was sold
in the seed, and sent to Sydney to be cleaned.
When the American war had ended, believing
that it would be impossible to compete with
other cotton-producing countries in the supply
of the coarse staples, he determined to plant
nothing but Sea Island. Some of this cotton
shipped to Liverpool in 1865 brought 3s. lid.
per lb. This, of course, greatly stimulated
the planters, and seed from Dr, Brower’s
plantation has since been used in all parts of


—
1866
1867.
1868.
I860.
British ship* entered
£6
21
49
90
Foreign ships entered
3
1
3
3
7,450
Gross tonnage, British
ships
4.024
3,707
6,830
Gross tonnage, Foreign
shios
290
130
730
450
the group. The first cotton-gin came down
from Samoa in 1862, and the importation was
looked upon by some as a very wild specula-
tion, but it was not long before its value be-
came known. Shortly after this a store-
keeper wrote to his agent in Sydney for a gin,
mentioning the particular American brand
he required, and got for answer that the house,
having none of the brand named, had for-
warded some very good old tom instead.
In 1863 Mr. F. W, Hennings, who settled in
liji in 1859, when the white population was
less than 100, and who, by his energy and enter-
prise, has done more to forward the com-
merce of the group than any other settler,
erected a windmill, and ginned 30 bales of
cotton. In the mean time 30 acres of kidney
cotton had been got in on Nukumotu, and 2s.
9d. per lb. having been got for some of it,
though this was a fancy price owing to the
continuance of the American war, the success
of cotton-growing in Fiji was regarded as an
accomplished fact, Mr, Hennings then went
to Sydney, and succeeded in getting a vessel
laid on to trade direct with the islands. On
his return, being fully satisfied with the cotton-
growing capabilities of the country, he induced
many residents to embark in planting, giving
them land at cost price, and advancing them
stores. The Rewa district was the first
opened up. Many occupied land a consider-
able distance up the river, in spite of the
great risk to life and property at this time.
Some of them were remarkably fortunate, and
a substantial settlement was soon established.
Becbe-de-mer, tortoiseshell, and cocoanut oil
were now neglected for the new industry, and
cotton became the great staple export of the
country. In 1868 Mr. Hennings brought down
from Melbourne Dr. De Rohm and Mr.
Rentsch with machinery to extract oil from
cotton seed, but just as the machinery was
being got into working order the two latter
gentlemen unfortunately died, and the com-
munity lost the benefit of their labours.
The profitable character of cotton-growing
having been fully proved, settlers began to
flock in from the neighbouring colonies, and
in 1867 the white population had risen to 500.
Plantations were opened up in various parts
of the group, and abundant evidence was
soon given of the adaptability of the soil on
all the islands for the growth of the famous
Sea Island variety. Sea Island cotton, which
has the longest staple as well as the finest
quality, and fetches a much higher price than
the common varieties, had hitherto only
been grown in perfection on the coast of
South Carolina, Georgia, and a small part of
Florida, and hence the interest excited by the
discovery that Fiji was in every way adapted
for its production. The absence of any settled
form of government has deterred many large
capitalists from entering the field, but indi-
vidual enterprise has in a measure supplied the
want. Many settlers, with scarcely any means
beyond a few stores obtained on credit, pushed
out into unsettled districts, where they were
entirely dependent on the Fijians for labour.
One planter, though only possessed of a few
pounds, took up a piece of land in the midst
of a thickly populated native district on Viti
Levu, and by dint of great industry and en-
durance-living on little more than a cocoa-
nut a day for the first half-year—ultimately
succeeded in establishing himself in a posi-
tion which put him on a level with the small
capitalists around him. Others pushed out
to windward, and having become the owners
of small islands, are leading a sort of Robin-
son Crusoe life, with the man Friday multi-
plied a hundred-fold, and in spite of many
hardships and difficulties, are gradually hew-
ing fine estates out of the tropical wilderness.
Some of these small islands produce the best
samples of cotton, and there is now scarcely
any point of the group from which a plan-
tation cannot be found in a day’s journey.
No. II.
The shipping returns of the port of Levuka
for the past four years show a steady in-
crease in the trade of the group, as the
following comparative statement testifies :
The slight falling-off in 1867 was attributed
to one or two ships in the trade having been
replaced by vessels of smaller capacity,
better adapted to navigation in the islands.
The trade of the group is principally carried
on by British ships belonging to the adjoin-
ing colonies. The shipping has increase
enormously during the past year, and the re-
turns for 1870 will be fully double those for
1869. The goods imported consist chiefly of
those necessaries of life which are not easil
procurable in a new country, and machinery
and agricultural implements latterly. Spirits,
not always of the best class, are imported in


Article.
1865.
1S66.
1867.
1868.
1869.
Amount
Value.
Amount
Value.
Amount
Value.
Amount.
Value.
Amount
Value.
Cotton, ewt...
2,400
£
9,300
5,880
£
19,800
7,586
£
34,004
7,300
£
30,975
10,500
£
45,000
Cocoannt oil, tuna ..
500
11,000
4S0
9.000
150
3,260
250
5,000
260
5,500
Beche-de-mer, picul-
500
1,200
300
600
880
1,600
188
300
75
Wool, lb
10,120
400
8,396
320
496
134
4,800
195
2 000
80
Tortoiseshell, lbs. ..
750
375
2.000
1,000
1,700
812
17,500
8,000
2.300
1,150
Coir, tons
50
500
-
••
20
197
25>
215
Sundries
500
250
••
159
500
••
2.000
£23,275
£30,970
£39,969
£45,167
£57.020
large quantities, and there being no draw*
back in the shape of port charges, dues, or
imposts of any kind, they are sold at very
moderate rates. Square gin holds a promi-
nent place among these items, and has some
claims to be considered the national beverage
of the country. The returns also show some
articles of a special nature, such as muskets
made to trade with the natives. They are
bought for a few shillings in Birmingham,
and sell in Fiji at about 30s. each. As many
ships enter the group without touching at
Levuka, it is impossible to arrive at more
than an approximate estimate of the value of
the goods annually landed in the country. In
1867, the acting-consul estimated the imports
to amount to £29,000, £26,000 being set down
to traders, and £3,000 to private settlers. It
may fairly be assumed that since then the
commerce of the group, owing to the success
attending the cultivation of cotton, has more
than doubled, and large consignments to
merchants and planters of the goods most
sought after, together with live stock, are
constantly arriving. The stores in Levuka
are kept well supplied, and many of the ne-
cessaries of life can now be obtained there at
Sydney and Melbourne prices, though on some
articles large profits are made. The island
traffic is carried on by a little fleet of small
craft, measuring in the aggregate 600 or 700
tons. The want of one or two small steamers
is greatly felt for collecting cotton and other
products in the outlying districts, where
there is not always sufficient water for large
vessels. The boats at present in use are ill
adapted to this purpose, as they always have to
beat against a trade wind oneway. A meeting
was recently held in Levuka with a view to
forming a company to purchase a steam
vessel, and there will no doubt be one trading
in the group before long. Messrs. F. and W,
Hennings are now in treaty with the owners
of the screw steamer Jane, a vessel of 38 tons,
■with two eight-horse power engines, and a
speed of eight knots an hour. The employ-
ment of such a vessel would greatly facilitate
trading operations in the group, and do away
with the vexatious delays which those en-
gaged in the island traffic are now subject to
from adverse winds and calms, which make
communication with the various settlements
extremely uncertain and irregular. The
navigation of the group is considered safe
from April until December, when the pre-
vailing wind is the south-east trade ; but
from January to April, which is the rainy
season, the islands are liable to be visited by
severe hurricanes.
The following comparative table shows the
annual exports for the past five years
In addition to these articles of export,
there are cash remittances, the amount of
which cannot be estimated. These returns,
prepared in the British Consulate, are, if any-
thing, under the mark. A very large increase
in the item of cotton may be looked ior in
the present year. It must be borne in mind
that the planters, in their early efforts, have
had to contend against the difficulty of get-
ting good seed, their Sea Island being often
mixed with the Kidney and Egyptian formerly
grown in the islands, while they have also
had to sell their cotton in the seed to the
storekeepers at from 3d. to sd. per lb., for
want of machinery to clean it. Their pro-
gress has likewise been retarded by the loss of
time occasioned in many instances by having


to root up the old plantations of the coarser
varieties of to make way for the Sea
f Island, which may now be said to be the only
kind grown by white men in the group. In
1867 the greater part of the cotton grown was
of the commoner kinds, which were sold at
lid. per lb.; while now a large proportion of
the Sea Island produced brings from 2s. 6d. to
3s, 6d. a lb. The substitution of knife roller-
gins for the old saw-gin, which spoils the Sea
Island, though it is adapted to the short
staples, is also making a very appreciable
difference in the returns ; and with the large
importations of agricultural implements and
ginning appliances which have recently been
made, the export of cotton for the year 1870
will not fall far short of £90,000. The trade
of the group has hitherto been exclusively
with Sydney and New Zealand, but so fair a
field for commercial enterprise cannot long
escape the attention of Melbourne mer-
chants.
The expense of shipping cotton to the colo-
nies is a great hindrance to the planter.
Direct communication with England is very
much needed. With the present charges
a planter who has to sell his cotton in the
seed loses something like 16 per cent, of the
value of his crop. The freight upon cotton
to Sydney is from to Id. per lb., and the
charge for conveyance thence to England is
about the same. The cost of ginning, pack-
ing, freight, and brokerage on cotton con-
signed to England vid Sydney amounts to
from 3|d. to 4d. per lb. The Kidney and
Egyptian varieties of cotton, which used to
bring an average of 9d, and lOd. per lb. in
Levuka, have now been entirely superseded
by Sea Island, for which an average price of
Is. per lb. is obtained. Advices from Eng-
land place the value of Fijian cotton, ac-
cording to variety, at from Is. 3d. to 4s. lid.
per lb. The secretary of the Manchester Cotton
Association, in a recent communication to
Mr. J, B. Thurston, Her Britannic Majesty’s
late acting-consul in Fiji, remarked that the
Fijian Sea Island cotton was superior to that
grown in Georgia as regarded length of staple,
silkiness of texture, and purity of colour, but
that it was scarcely so strong in the staple,
and he believed this was owing to the method
of growing it. He suggested that the cotton
should be better cultivated, and that if the
plants were hilled up they would produce a
stronger staple, when Fiji cotton would ex-
ceed the finest samples from Georgia, The
natives grow Kidney and Egyptian cotton in
limited quantities. They sell the cotton in
the seed at 3 cents per lb. It is generally very
dirty, but it sometimes fetches Is. in the
English market.
The falling-off in the produce of oil in 1867
was attributed to serious injury sustained by
the cocoanut trees in a violent hurricane
which visited the islands four years ago, and
from which the trees are only just recovering.
The beche-de-mer. trade, which was formerly
carried on with great profit on the Mathuata
coast, north side of Yanua Levu, has
almost died off. The fisheries have in
part been exhausted, and, owing to the
large influx of Europeans, native labour
has been directed into more, congenial
channels ; but the trade will no doubt be
revived again in a few years, when some
better method of securing this Chinese deli-
cacy than that of employing natives to dive
for it has been hit upon. The fish brings an
average price of 365. per picul (1401 b.), but the
market fluctuates very much, the price some-
times varying from 245. to 40s. per picul.
The value of tortoiseshell has fallen greatly,
the price in the colonial markets having
changed within the last few years from 20s. to
9s. per lb. If the natives would exert them-
selves, a plentiful supply could be obtained.
It does not appear probable thatEiji will ever
be a successful wool-growing country, but
sheep are, nevertheless, being imported in
considerable numbers ; and the increase
in cattle, which thrive admirably in many
parts of the country, has been considerable
within the past two years. The item of sun-
dries includes pigs, timber, and fruit, of
which very little is exported, the rapidly
growing population consuming everything
the natives can produce in the way of food,
while all the timber made is required for
stores and houses, the demand being vastly in
excess of the supply. The cultivation of
sugar has not yet been attempted on a large
scale, the absence of any properly constituted
Government deterring capitalists from em-
barking in so expensive an enterprise. Seve-
ral varieties of the sugar-cane, however,
flourish in Fiji, and as the country is in many
parts peculiarly adapted to its growth, sugar
may be expected in a few years to form a
staple article of export. There are a few
coffee plantations in the group, but the berry
has not yet been exported in any quantity.
Mr. Geo. Burt has grown upland rice in Kan-
davu of excellent quality, and both coffee and
rice may be expected shortly to form articles
of export ; together with indigo, tobacco,
vanilla, and many tropical productions to
which no attention has yet been given.
A new industry which has been recently


attracting the attention of settlers is the
manufacture of coperah, as the dried kernel of
the cocoanut is called. This article fetches
£8 a ton in Fiji, and a very high price
is obtained in the home markets. The
oil is expressed from it by machinery
in England, and the residuum is used
as oilcake for fattening cattle. As much
more oil can be obtained from the
cocoanut in this way than by the native
fashion of exposing the flesh of the nut to
the sun in a rude trough, pierced with holes
at the bottom, the exports of coperah will pro-
bably soon exceed those of oil. Mr. A. Moore,
on his island of Naitamba, one of the wind-
ward group, is devoting his attention to this
industry. Mr. Redman, whose island of
Kanathia produces some of the best cotton
grown in Fiji, is also embarking in this enter-
prise, and many planters who have an abun-
dance of eocoanuts on their grounds are be-
ginning to turn their attention to it.
The Ramie plant, or Chinese grass, has also
been found to grow well in Fiji. There are
at present only a few plants in the country,
and they are sold at £1 each. The ramie
bears three crops a year, is said to require less
cultivation than cotton, and to be four times
as remunerative. It is largely exported
from China under the name of “Sea
Grass,” to make silk-mixed goods, and
the present price of the raw fibre is
sd. per lb. The laborious process of
cleaning the fibre by hand has until re-
cently prevented attention being directed
to its cultivation in Europe, but newly-
invented machinery enables the manufac-
turer to dispense with this tedious process,
and the ramie is now being grown extensively
in Louisiana and Texas. The ramie is peren-
nial. It is planted by laying the stalks in rows
2in, or Sin. under the prepared earth. The first
crop reaches a height of only 2ft. or 3ft. when
it is cut close to the ground. These stalks
do not produce the best fibre, but new plants
arising from the stubble attain a greater
height, and are again subjected to the knife
until fine crops are eventually obtained every
season. The plant sometimes grows to a
length of 20ft. In its unspun state the fibre
is nearly white, and has the gloss of silk. The
stalks resemble flax or hemp, and it is said
that the plant will yield from 6001 b. to I,ooolb.
weight per acre per crop.
The white population, now fully 2,500, is
steadily increasing. There are about 2,300
British subjects in the group, and the remain-
ing 200 are chiefly Americans, with some
representatives of various nations, in addition
to which there is a body of some 20(1 half,
castes, who are chiefly employed as sailors,
and do not associate with the Fijians. Be-
tween March and August of the present yea?
400 European new arrivals were landed at
Levuka, or nearly as many as the whole white
population five years ago, and several vessels
with passengers for the islands have since
sailed from Melbourne and Sydney. The
native population is gradually decreasing.
This is attributable, as regards the uncivilised!
tribes of the interior, to frequent wars, and
their horrible customs of strangulation of
widows, cannibalism, and foeticide. Among
the christianised tribes the last custom still
prevails to some extent, in spite of the exer-
tions of the missionaries and the watchful-
ness of the native teacher who is stationed
in every town. They are passionately
fond of spirits, and Tui Levuka, who-
died a few years ago, has been known to
consume the greater part of a case of gin in a
day. The whole native population of the
group may now be set down with a large
margin for probabilities as not exceeding
130,000. About one-third, simply the coast
tribes as regards the two large islands, are
under missionary influence.
It is estimated that about 350,000 acres of
land have passed into the possession of white
residents, and that of this quantity 275,000-
acres belong to British subjects, while 10,000*
acres are under cultivation. The price of
land has increased enormously within the
past two years. The average value of land
in Levuka is 18s. per foot, and small frontages
have been leased for £1 a foot per annum.
In Taviuni, land has been sold for planting
purposes at £1 per acre. The greater part of
the island of Ovalau has become the property
of Europeans. Five years ago the machinery
in the group was represented by two cotton-
gins and one windmill; now every seventh
planter may be said to have a gin, reckoning
that some have three or four, and there are
from 12 to 15 steam-engines employed,
A brief glance at the cotton plantations in
Fiji is sufficient to show that the great ma-
jority of them have been begun with very
small means, and carried on under great dis-
advantages. It is rare to see any land fenced.
The plantations are usually hemmed in by
the uncleared forest or scrub out of which
they have been cut, and few landowners could
point out their exact boundaries. The lax
system which has prevailed in this respect
will soon be found to be a source of
continual annoyance. Everything is ex-
tremely rough, but the appearance of the


holdings has been gradually improving.
Great advances have been made in the last
12 months. The old system of planting with a
stick or knife is being superseded by ploughs,
harrows, and planters, with other scientific
appliances, which always follow in the wake
of capital. Very few of the settlers had any
practical knowledge of cotton-growing to begin
with, and they have had to learn by experi-
ence. The planting months are from Septem-
ber to February. Sea Island cotton is generally
planted in rows, six feet by four ; but a few
have tried drilling, as in America, with a
distance of five feet between the rows, and
30 inches between the plants. Three or four
days after the seed has been put in the
ground the cotton-tree makes its appear-
ance, and the weakly or inferior plants
are then thinned out. In two or three
months the plant has grown into a
bushy tree, bearing a beautiful flower
of a delicate yellow, which gradually as-
sumes a crimson tint. In about five months
from the time the seed is put in the ground
the tree has reached a height of from three to
five feet. The blossoms then give place to
little bolls, at first not much larger than
an acorn, which gradually expand into
pods, which, rapidly reaching maturity,
burst. The cotton is ready for pick-
ing a day or two afterwards. It is picked
from the pod with one motion of the fingers,
the quantity being about enough to fill an
egg-cup. It is estimated that one tree wil
produce five pounds weight of seed cotton
annually. There are three crops of Sea Island
in the year. An immature crop is generally
obtained about February. There is a heavy
picking in July and August, and the
remainder is gathered a month or so
later. In the process of ginning, by
which the cotton is separated from the
seed, the fibre loses rather more than two-
thirds of its gross weight, 4lb. of cotton in the
seed being reduced by passing through the
gin to a little more than lib. of clean. The
gin is a very simple machine,which can either
be worked by hand, or horse or steam
power, and the best can be landed at
Fiji for £3O. All varieties of cotton in
Fiji are perennial, and the trees will bear
profitably for two or three years. They will
produce cotton for 12 or 14 years ; but after
the third or fourth year, unless they are
pruned, the seed becomes disproportionately
large, and the staple short and wiry.
When the cotton is ready for picking
all the available labour on the planta-
tion is set to this work, the planter even
begrudging himself apersonal servant until the
cotton is in, as a few heavy showers while it is
hanging on the bush may destroy half of it.
The pickers are supplied with canvas bags.
When these receptacles are filled they are
emptied upon vatas, or raised platforms made
of reeds, and the cotton is exposed to the sun
for a couple of days until it is thoroughly dry.
It is then stored in the cotton-shed to await
the gin. If the planter has to send it to a
storekeeper to be ginned, as is often the case,
he must pay £6 a ton, and run the risk of
having inferior cotton accidentally substi-
tuted for his own. The cotton having been,
passed through the gin, from which it falls
in creamy flakes quite free from the large
black seeds previously adhering, is gathered
up, pressed, and packed in bales of about
3501 b. weight each, which are then ready for
shipment. The seed is useful either as
manure, or fuel for the steam-engine. An
acre of well-cultivated land should produce
2001 b. of clean cotton, which, if pure Sea
Island, ought to fetch 2s. per lb., making the
average value of an acre of cotton £2O. Por-
tions of some plantations have given nearly
double this yield. It is sometimes difficult,
however, to get a stand of pure Sea Island, as
the seed is often mixed when purchased, and
the Sea Island plant is liable to be inoculated
by the shorter staples when they grow toge-
ther.
The planter’s life is generally speaking an
isolated one, his nearest neighbours, in
many cases, being several miles distant.
In a few districts, such as the Kewa
and Vuna Point, Taviuni, the plantations
are tolerably close together and within
easy visiting distance, but this is the ex-
ception, not the rule. He commonly lives
in a native house, built of reeds and thatched
with grass or leaves. Imported weatherboard
houses, however, with iron roofs, are rapidly
coming into fashion. The native houses are
very cool, and, when floored with boards and
fitted with English doors and windows, can
be made extremely comfortable. A first-class
house of this description, 30ft. by 15ft., with
walls Bft. and a roof 15ft. high, with cheap
fittings, will not cost more than £2O, and less
pretentious edifices of this kind are built by
the natives for £6. They usually consist of
two rooms, separated by a reed partition
thrown across the centre of the dwelling.
Some of the planters have well-furnished
houses, but bachelor establishments rarely
contain more than a few chairs and some
trestles covered with mats, and enclosed by a
mosquito screen on which the oecupanta


leep with a single blanket. If the native
houses escape violent hurricanes, they will
last for two or three years. Many prefer
them to the European structures, but they
have their disadvantages. If they once take
fire there is no hope of preventing a general
conflagration, for they burn like match-wood,
and this is a consideration in a country where
the fire-stick is an institution. A centipede
lOin. or 12in, long will occasionally drop from
the thatched roof into the planter’s cup of
tea, but this is not an everyday occurrence.
The centipedes, though they are of enormous
size, are said to be almost harmless, and no
inconvenience is felt from the bite of one of
them after the application of a few drops of
painkiller. Thesnakesof Fiji, which are nume-
rous enough in some parts, are not venomous.
The planter’s dress consists of a straw hat,
Crimean or linen shirt, and white trousers.
Boots and socks are very frequently com-
pletely discarded. New arrivals are liab'e, if
they drink spirits, to be afflicted with what
are called Fiji sores. The smallest abrasion
of the skin, in spite of every care, developes
into a deep ulcerated wound, which often
lasts for three or four weeks, and the
feet are peculiarly liable to suffer. It is
then impossible to wear boots. Bare feet
being found much more comfortable, walking
in that way becomes a habit. Bandages of
cotton leaf are the common remedy for these
sores. The planter’s diet consists of yams,
poultry, pork, sea biscuit (which is always full
of weevils in this climate), salt junk, or any
preserved meats and fruits he may choose to
order from the storekeepers. The neighbour-
ing forest often provides cocoanuts, bread-
fruit, bananas, and other native fruits, bu
these are not obtainable in all parts of the
group. Ihe meat of the Melbourne meat-
preserving companies would be a compara-
tive luxury, but none of this seems yet to have
reached the country. A storekeeper recently or.
dered some through an agent at Sydney, who
sent him, instead, Sydney preserved meat, which
is inferior. Some of the well-to-do planters,
who have their wives and families with them
live extremely well. With a well-kept poultry
yard living is very cheap, and the addition of
a cow, which many of them now have, and
properly baked bread, the homesteads ara
comfortable enough. The Fijians make good
cooks, and the boys, with a little training,
wait at table admirably. A few of the settlers
have engaged African cooks, and fare sump-
tuously every day, for money will purchase
almost everything in Fiji. Cows, which were
not long ago sold at £3O each, can now be
bought in the group for £ls, Fires are
never made in the dwelling-houses, A punkah
is kept going at meal times, or the boys in
service on the plantation stand by those at
table with fans to keep the flies away. The
yam when roasted resembles in taste a floury
potato, and many prefer it to that vegetable.
If a settler is fortunate enough to have neigh,
hours, he meets his friends frequently in the
evenings, when they are entertained with
square gin and euchre. Pianos and other
musical instruments are not unknown, and
when I left Taviuni the completion of a new
cotton-house was about to be celebrated by a
ball. The planters are very hospitable, and
strangers travelling are always sure of a
shakedown, and the best the house * can
afford. Now and again an old settler may be
met who has taken to wife a Fijian or half-
caste woman, but this is extremely rare. The
arrangement has only been made faule cit
mieux, on the principle, as the old song has it—
“ Better be married to something
Than no be married ara.”
There is not the smallest probability of the
two races ever amalgamating. White women
are still scarce, and an amusing story is told of
an English lady at Levuka, who for the las-
two years has been regularly besieged by
suitors every time a boat-load of planters
arrives from any of the outlying districts. She
has not capitulated yet, say the gossips.
Surrounded by his labourers, foreign or
Fijian, the planter is a patriarch, with the
power of life and death over his people, and
subject to no law. His men are armed with
broad 15in. knives and axes, and he is often
within an hour’s walk of hordes of cannibals,
who, as an act of politeness, in tne most re-
mote districts, will occasionally offer him a
portion of their horrible repast, though well
knowing he will decline it. He sleeps in a
house so fragile that the stars can be seen
through the walls, yet it is comparatively rare
to find him with arms. Trusting in Provi-
dence, he retires to rest with his doors and
windows open, well knowing that any resist-
ance he could offer to an organised attack would
be useless. This confidence reposed in the
natives is rarely abused, unless provocation
has been given, and those who thoroughly
understand the native character have not
much to fear while they deal fairly with them.
The position of those, however, who know
little of the language is not so simple, and
more difficulties have arisen through mutual
misunderstanding, than from any other cause.
It is no easy matter to understand the Fiji*
man. His character is full of contradictions.


One day he will be extremely amiable, and
disposed to give away everything he pos-
sesses, and the next he will do nothing
for you, and not be content though
you gave him your all. To-day he will
carry you across the stream on his back
joyfully, and to-morrow be will not do
it for a dollar. The Fijians are entirely
devoid of the sense of gratitude. There
is no word in their language to express thanks.
The nearest approach to it is vinaka (good),
and they do not even say that when anything
is given to them. Their dress consists of a
fathom of navy blue or white tapa (native
cloth) worn round the waist. This is called a
sulu. With the exception of being slightly
oleaginous, from their custom of smearing
themselves with cocoanut oil, they are decent
and cleanly enough in appearance. The dress
of the foreign labourers is usually more scanty,
Themannersof theFijiansdispensinghospital-
ity in their own houses are very agreeable,
but, if the truth must be told, they would be
equally polite and attentive in the evening
though they had determined that their guests
should die in the morning. Never thinking
seriously on any subject, they have a keen
sense of the humorous, and treat nearly every-
thing as a joke. A settler who loses his tem-
per can do nothing with them, but if
humoured a little, and treated with firm,
ness and kindness, they are not so difficult
to manage as might be imagined. The
natives belong to the darker of the two great
Polynesian races, but the coast tribes have
received some admixture from the lighter
coloured race of Tonga, with whom they have
had intercourse for many years. There are
various shades of colour, but the prevailing
tint is a dark olive. In the eastern group,
where the Tongan influence predominates,
there are inhabitants almost as light as a
white man, but among the inaccessible hill
tribes they are often a positive black. They
are a well-made, handsome race. Some of
the chiefs are fine-1 ooking fellows, with
grand and courtly bearing, which would not
ill become an English nobleman. Their gait
is something to marvel at, and the European,
in walking with them, is apt to wonder why
he ever allowed tailors to make such a guy of
him. The old King Tanoa, Thakombau’s
father, said to Commander Wilkes, “Your
men are no doubt very good warriors, but
they waddle like ducks.” The remark was
Unkind, but there was a world of truth con-
tained in the criticism.
•It is very essential that a settler should not
e the mistake of paying too much atten-
tion to one chief if there is another of eqnal
rank in the same district. If he does, the
one who is slighted, being extremely jealous
and desirous of securing the white man’s
friendship for himself, will very probably
burn him out in the night, in the hope that
the act will be attributed to the favoured
rival. The settlers, as a rule, prefer dealing
with the cannibal tribes, or devils, as they are
disrespectfully called, to those who have
embraced Christianity. The reason of this
is, that while the former are unsophisticated
■children of nature —wild flowers of the forest,
with some chivalrous qualities in their nature
—the latter are learned in the trading tricks
of the white man, drive hard bargains, and,
having lost much of their respect for the
European by intimate association with him,
are apt to regard themselves as his equals.
Among various little unpleasantnesses to
which a planter is liable is the peculiarly
Fijian institution of mbutiraka. This means
jumping on a man until there is no longer
any sign of life in him. The perfection of
the art has been attained when the subject
is left at the last gasp, though still capable
of recovering $ but it is the private opinion of
many of those who have undergone the
•operation that it is a matter of extreme in*
difference to the Fijians whether the victim
dies or not. The punishment is applied to
compensate for any act of cruelty or
injury suffered at the hands of the white
man, and in some instances it has
been richly deserved. The natives have
occasionally told the missionaries that the
conduct of such and such a planter had be*
come so unbearable that they were obliged to
administer the mbutircoha, and that the effect
had been most salutary, the said planter haw-
ing been on his good behaviour since. When
an American planter was burnt out at Ndronga
a year and a half ago, the natives, in perform-
ing this war dance on his chest, became so
excited, and crowded so thickly round him,
that more blows from the clubs fell on their
own number than on him. It is said that when
he recovered consciousness he found himself
bathed in blood which bad flowed from the
self-inflicted wounds of his assailants. Forsome
time before the perpetration of this outrage
the imported labourers on the plantation had
carried arms, and the two parties had more
than once been in collision. Advantage was
ultimately taken of a rainy day, when the
arms were put away, to make a descent on
the plantation. The cotton sheds were well
stored, and the loss was very serious. It has
been stated that but for the want of tact of


one of the managers, who refused an offer of
reconciliation, the catastrophe might have
been averted. An award of £IO,OOO has
been made against the offending tribes, for
the property destroyed on this occasion.
When the next American man-of-war ar-
rives, steps will be taken to enforce it
by the confiscation of land. Had the com-
plaint been made against Thakombau, as it
might have been, this amount could have been
recovered ; but the tribes which have been
made responsible do not possess land sufficient
to realise the sum claimed. Outrages of this
kind are, happily, not frequent, and they are
always to be guarded against by good-
humoured tact and fair dealing.
No. III.
The great qucestio vexata of Fiji is the labour
question, and on its satisfactory settlement
the future progress of the country will mainly
depend. The demand for labour with the
present limited population is already far in
excess of the supply. The enterprise of the
planters is sadly cramped for wantof a regular
and certain number of field hands, while the
waste of cotton, simply from the want of men
to pick it off the trees, has been considerable.
The question of Fijian labour, after many and
repeated trials, has been settled beyond a
doubt. The aboriginal population will not
work for any fixed period (though they will
occasionally carry out small contracts and
help in the picking season for as long or as
short a time as it pleases them) while within
reach of their native towns ; but when re-
moved to an island distant from their own
homes, and cut off from all opportunity of
making their way back, they become
excellent workmen, and are especially
serviceable in clearing heavily timbered
laud, using the American axe with great
dexterity. In this way planters living on
Taviuni and other windward islands are
enabled to engage Fiji labour for twelve
months from the coasts of Viti Leva and
Vanua Levu, the two large islands. The
wages paid are from £2 to £2 10s, in trade,
which generally includes a musket, and it
costs from £2 to £2 10s. per head to land them
on the plantations, with an additional ss. per
head to return them at the end of the year.
Fiji labour is principally supplied from the
north and north-west coasts of Viti Levu, and
from the south coast of Vanua Levu,
a consideration being sometimes paid to
Thakombau for permission to take men
from the former district, and to Tui
Thakau for the right to engage them
from the latter. The custom is for the cap*
tain or supercargo of the boat seeking
labour to make a few presents of firearms
to the chief in whose territories they propose
to negotiate for men, and if he is
willing and able to supply what is asked he
musters the townspeople, and having stipu-
lated for the wages to be paid, directs as many
as may be mutually agreed upon to go on
board, or sometimes the men volunteer with-
out interference from the chief at all. If the
planter seeking labour is a man whom the
natives know to have behaved well to his ser-
vants, his operations are much facilitated ; but
if, on the other hand, he has ill-treated or
starved them' his chances are very poor. In
any case, however, this supply of labour can-
not as a rule be relied upon. Sometimes more
men are ready to engage than are required,
and at other times the planter who is depend-
ent on Fijian labour will lose his crop in
consequence of being unable to procure hands
to pick it. If the tribes which are accus-
tomed to supply labour should happen to be
at war, as they very often are, it is impossible
to get men at all; and should war break out
between any two kingdoms, the plantation
hands belonging to those kingdoms would
have to leave off work immediately, and re-
turn home, or their lives would not be safe.
This traffic for Fijian labour with firearms
is a sore grievance to the white residents of
the two large islands, which have the most
numerous population of planters. They see
men whose services they cannot engage daily
leaving ior the employment of their neigh-
bours to windward, and returning with arms
which they well know may any day be used
against themselves. In the Nandi district an-
association has been formed to prevent the
introduction of firearms, and it has been suc-
cessful to a certain extent; but sooner or
later all the natives will be well armed, as
they will give anything for powder and mus-
kets. When, in spite of all the precautions
taken, the Maories while in open rebellion
can always obtain the munitions of war from
European traders, it is not likely that the
supply will ever be cut off from the Fijians.
Disputes among Europeans have already oc-
curred on the coasts of the largest island in
consequence of parties landing with firearms
to traffic in land or labour, and in some cases
the guns have been forcibly seized and de-
stroyed. The native taste for these weapons
has been so well catered for that very few of
the chiefs can now be put off with a common
musket. They are possessed of all the latest


improvements; and the most expensive
breach-loading rifles and revolvers, with the
proper cartridges, are to be found amongst
them. As a rule, they are not particularly
skilful in their use, but they are daily ac-
quiring more familiarity with these weapons,
and in a few instances Fijimen have been
known to make good rifle practice. The
planters on Viti Levu have not yet suc-
ceeded in getting labour from Vanua Levu,
Tui Thakau, the leading chief there, having
an objection to his men going into the Mbau
kingdom.
There are only a few plantations in Fiji
worked successfully by Fijian labour alone.
The Fijitnan’s services, at best uncertain,
can only be retained for a year, so that just as
he has been broken in, and is becoming a
valuable servant, his period of servitude ex-
pires. The planter therefore rarely feels safe
unless he has a fair proportion of foreign
labourers. Foreign labour is obtained for two,
three, and five years from the New Hebrides,
the Sandwich Islands, the Kingsmill, Ellice,
and Gilbert Groups, and other Line islands.
Three years ago men from these islands were
landed in Fiji at from £2 10s. to £4 10s. per
head passage - money ; but the demand
is now so large, and the difficulty of
getting vessels suitably manned for the
traffic as well as the uncertainty of
engaging men so great, that the rate has risen
to £lO, £l2, and £l4. A suitable boat for the
traffic can be chartered at £l5O a month, and
if the charterer is fortunate enough to get her
filled, he may land his men at £4 a head, or
even less ; but it is quite a lottery, and the
risks are so great that many prefer paying the
passage-money to ship captains. A short time
ago a vessel chartered at £2OO a month re-
turned to the group after two months’ ab-
sence, with only 20 men. These labourers are
paid from £3 to £3 10s. a year wages in trade,
and it costs £1 a head to return them home
at the end of their time.
A cry of “slavery” has been raised against
the planters of Fiji, A more unfounded
accusation was never made. The planters,
taken as a whole, are a highly respectable
body of men. Many of them have held
good positions in the colonies, not a few
of them are gentlemen of education and re-
finement ; and it is manifestly unfair to brand
a community with a charge which has not
the smallest foundation in fact, as far as
the Fiji planters are concerned. The system
is undoubtedly one which is open to great
abuse, and there is reason to bedieve that
more than one unscrupulous sea captain has
been guilty of what can he regarded as little
less than kidnapping. It is to the interest
of the planters that this system should be
settled on a basis which will secure the
native from any kind »f imposition or unjust
treatment. The great demand for these
labourers presents a strong inducement to un-
principled men to engage in an illegal traffic,
and it is necessary that there should be some
check put on their proceedings. The matter
is regulated in Queensland by the Polynesian
Labourers Act, and in Fiji by the Consul; but
neither authority extends to the districts
from which the natives are engaged, and
it is highly desirable that Her Majesty’s
ships of war should keep a sharp look-out for
offenders. Vessels ought not to be permitted
to engage in the traffic until formally licensed
on compliance with strict regulations as
regards proper food, the number of passengers
to be carried, and the employment of com-
petent interpreters. Mr. March, the British
Consul, has exerted himself to the best of
his very limited powers to protect the
native interest, and he has succeeded in
greatly diminishing the facilities for abuse.
Every master of a British vessel carrying
labour is required by the Consul, by virtue of
his power under the Merchant Shipping Act,
to put in at the port of Levuka, where he
parades the natives, and endeavours to ascer-
tain from them by interpreters whether they
have be®n fairly engaged, and the term of
service agreed upon. This having been satis-
factorily settled, an agreement is drawn up,
and the employers are called upon to enter
into two sureties to secure its due fulfilment.
The Consul knows when the men’s time has
expired by reference to the records, and the
employer, if he had not already for his own
interest returned the men, would then be
called upon to do so. American vessels
carrying labour are not interfered with
in any way. It is considered a grievance
to have to call in at Levuka with
labour destined for a totally different
part of the group, but there is a strong dis-
position to support the Consul. In some in-
stances, the Consul has given ships a perruit
to go for labour. In one or two cases labourers
have been kept in the group beyond the speci-
fied time, and when a ship is not obtainable
this cannot possibly be avoided, but it is the
planter’s interest rigidly to adhere to the
terms of his engagement, for the only sure
method of engaging a shipload of labourers is
to take home the batch whose term of service
has expired. In some instances where men
have not been returned at the expiration of


the specified time, they have been paid so
much per week for overtime.
The foreign labourers know when their time
is up by counting the moons and the yam sea-
sons. They are glad to go home to show their
friends the goods they have acquired, though
they will shed tears at parting with the planters’
children. Having disposed of these goods
they often come back to work again for more.
Some now in the islands have been back
twice and three times after spending their
earnings at home. In many cases, there is no
doubt they are better fed on the plantations
than in their own homes, while their work is
light, and they are free from the oppression of
possibly ferocious chiefs. They are allowed
from 4lb. to 71b. of yams per diem each, be-
sides native fruits they gather, and on some
plantations they get pork once or twice a
week. It is the invariable custom to give a
half holiday on Saturday, and frequently
where the men have tasks allotted them they
finish the day’s work by' 2 and 3 o’clock
in the afternoon. When the taskwork
system is not employed, they usually work
from nine to ten hours a day. Many of these
islanders in their own country are very in
sufficiently supplied with food, their homes
sometimes being mere sandbanks, where they
can procure nothing but cocoa nuts and fish.
Under these circumstances, it is not surprising
that they often swim off in numbers to
vessels in quest of labour, and beg to be
taken away. All those I saw on the planta-
tions (and I walked through some forty or
fifty) were plump, and apparently happy and
contented. On the whole, they appear to be
kindly treated by the planters, who hope by
that means to be sure of supplying their
places when their time is up. If cruelty is
practised, it will meet with punishment as
swift as it is deserved, for these islanders are
a vindictive race, and never forgive an injury,
whether imaginary or real, caring very little
if their own lives pay the forfeit so that their
revenge is satisfied.
The mode of engaging foreign labour is
much the same as that adopted with regard
to Fijians, the only difference being as to
the term of service. Vessels of 30 tons and
upwards are chartered for the trade. The
length of the trip varies from five weeks to
five months. A ship taking home labour can
generally secure a fresh supply, but vessels
rading for the first time often come back
almost empty, and there is absolutely no
certainty in the matter. The men are paid
in trade like the Fijians, and usually select a
musket as part of the goods they are entitled
to. They are considered better workmen
than the Fijians, and become much more
useful because of their length of service.
It is estimated that a Fiji labourer will pick
on an average from 251 b. to 301 b. of cotton a
day, and the foreign labourers pick rather
more. The foreign labourers are sometimes
accompanied by women, who also work in the
cotton fields, but they do not come in large
numbers. There are now about 2,000 foreign
labourers and 2,000 Fiji labourers engaged on
plantations in the group, A Fiji labourer
temporarily engaged to pick cotton is paid a
sulu a week, that is, a fathom of cloth to
wear round his waist, and the women look
for pinafores of bright colours. The yams
on which the labourers are principally
fed cost about £3 a thousand. Their
average weight is 31b., each, but they often
grow to a great size, and I saw one from an
island outside the Fiji group sft. long, and as
thick as a man’s thigh.
-the labour trade suffered a temporary
check in the early part of 1869 by the seizure
of the Daphne by 11. M. S. Rosario., The
Daphne was a topsail schooner, with 100 men
on board, having a permit only to carry labour
to Queensland. When seen off the reef at
Levuka, several planters put off to her, and
offered the captain £3 a head cash for his men,
at the same time telling him there was a
man-of-war in the harbour. Knowing that
the labour rate had risen rapidly in
Fiji, the captain determined to stand in,
and before he cast anchor he had been offered
£6 a head. The officers of the man-of-war
boarded her at her anchorage, and finding
she had only authority to take labour for
Queensland, and that the name of an
outlaw of ill fame in the South Seas, was
on the ship’s papers, she was seized and
sent off to Sydney. This is the story of
the gallant capture of a Polynesian slaver, of
which so much was heard at one time. The
men were landed in Fiji to await the result of
the legal proceedings, and the acting consul,
reserving a few for his own plantation, divided
the remainder among two or three other plan,
ters, the understanding being that they were
to be delivered up when sent for. This has
proved a very agreeable arrangement, as the
men have never been sent for. Commander
Palmer, who has since been promoted, did
not get a conviction in Sydney, but he had
good grounds for acting as he did. No man,
having engaged labour for a particular place,
should be allowed to speculate with his living
freight by landing them wherever he may
think the best market is to be found.


The inhabitants of the New Hebrides, which
supply a large proportion of the labour, though
missionaries have been among them for
some time, are sunk in utter barba-
rism, and given over to the worst hea-
then rites. The introduction of these
people to Fiji, where the natives they will
see are advanced in civilisation, cannot but
greatly benefit them. They will acquire
peaceful and industrioushabits, and the return
of these men to their own countries will do
much to raise them from their present de-
graded state. In Fiji they find their own
food and climate, and suffer none of the
hardships necessarily inflicted on those taken
to Queensland. Some of them arriving in
Fiji very young will probably elect to stay
altogether. The regulations with regard to
returning them to their own home should be
very strict, for if they have the misfortune
to be landed on a wrong island, they
are tolerably sure to be eaten. Their
behaviour in Fiji has hitherto been very good,
and, after the first few weeks, the planter
finds little difficulty in managing them. They
are liable, however, like the Fijians, to be
seized with home-sickness, and, if temptation
offers in the shape of a suitable boat, they
will sometimes attempt to regain their
country. It was in this way that the late Mr.
Norman lost his life, some 12 months ago,
taking a large party of Tanna men in an open
boat from Levuka to Yanua Levu. His
men captured the boat, and, having no
provisions, on the 17th day out, killed
and ate him. The late Mr. Harcourt
was killed under entirely different circum-
stances. He had gone for labour in a vessel
of some 30 tons, taking with him one of his
own foreign labourers to act as interpreter,
and induce his friends to fill the ship. This
man, as was well known, had a grudge
against him. He was warned by a planter
at starting, and said he would keep a good
look out; but the native tomahawked him
while he was asleep, three weeks after sail-
ing, and, jumping overboard, was never seen
again. These are the only cases in which
white men have been murdered by imported
labourers.
With the present uncertainty as regards the
obtaining of labour, it will be readily seen that
the plantations cannot be fully supplied if the
white population goes on increasing in the
ratio of the last twelve months. It is said
that the Fijians will presently be compelled
to work to raise the heavy taxes their chiefs
a re beginning to impose on them, but as long
as they can live comfortably without work
they will not, as a body, exert themselves for
the white man. The great hope of Fiji in
this matter seems to lie in coolie labour from
China or India. Negotiations are being made
with a view to the introduction of Chinese, but
a difficulty may be found, inasmuch as in the
absence of any settled government it may be
objected that no very substantial guarantee
of the fulfilment of the conditions can be
given, A Chinaman on a plantation would
be worth two of the men now in use. Eice
grows well in the country, and there is no
need for apprehension as regards the labour
question on the score of abundant and cheap
food.
Next to the labour question the acquisition
of land is the most important subject
for the settler’s consideration. Land can
be purchased from white residents, who ac-
quired it years ago at a very trifling cost, for
from 4s, to £1 per acre. Land will only be
offered for 4s. in very unsettled districts, but
desirable holdings can be obtained at from
Cs. to 10s, per acre. It will be necessary to
proceed very cautiously in this matter, as in
past years land purchases have been made
under a very loose system. Where natives
have sold land in proper form they usually
recognise the sale as binding, but in some
cases, after they have fixed the boundaries, the
white man has enlarged them by naming land
marks in the deed other than those agreed
upon, and when these lands come to be
settled possession will be disputed. In some
instances land has been sold by the chiefs two
or three times over. Some of them have sold
land which never belonged to them, and the
settler can only take possession of such hold
ings by force of arms. Portions of the coast
of Viti Levu are already a terra disputabilis,
and one large landowner, who is said only to
have deeds for a portion of his possessions,
has gone to America with the view of being
naturalised, believing that when the tug
of war comes he will be in a better
position as an American citizen than
as an Englishman. In future years there
must be endless disputes about boun-
daries, and the first act of any constituted
Government taking-'possession of the islands
should be to appoint a commission to in-
quire into the whole subject of land titles,
and settle the matter once for all. When
land is purchased from the natives now,
a deed in proper form is taken to the
Consul, who requires an affidavit from the
person acting as interpreter, declaring
that the vendor thoroughly understood
the nature of his engagement. The deed is


then registered in the Consulate, simply
as a matter of record quantum valeat.
If a settler determines to purchase
land from the natives, he may get
a large tract for £2O or £3O worth of
trade, but they are rapidly learning the value
of money, and it is not so easy a matter as
formerly to get land. In a settled district
much more than that is expected. A chief
recently refused £L an acre for a valuable
piece of land which he dare not deprive his
people of. The land tenure of the Fijians is
peculiar, and this should be thoroughly im-
pressed on those who contemplate buying
land from them. Mr. Pritchard, whose un-
rivalled knowledge of the Polynesian cha-
racter entitles him to rank as a high autho-
rity on the subject, speaks thus: —
“ Every inch of land in Fiji has an owner.
Every parcel or tract of land has a name, and
the boundaries are defined and well-known.
The proprietorship rests in families, the heads
of families being the representatives of the
title. Every member of a family can use the
land attaching to the family. Thus the heads
of families are the nominal owners ; the whole
family are the actual occupiers. The family
land maintains the whole family, and the
members maintain the head of the family. A
chief holds his lands under precisely the same
tenure as head of his family, and bis per-
sonal rights attain only to the land pertain-
ing to his family, in which right every mem-
ber of his family shares so far as to use
any portion of the land. But the chief
is also the head of his tribe, and as such, cer-
tain rights to the whole lands of the tribe
appertain to him. The tribe is the family,
and the chief is the head of the family. The
families of a tribe maintain the chief. In
war they give him their services, and follow
him to the fight. In peace they supply him
with food. In this way the whole tribe at-
tains a certain collective interest in all the
lands held by each family, and every parcel
of land alienated contracts the source from
which the collective tribal support of the
chief is drawn. From this complicated tenure
it is clear that the alienation of land, however
large or small the tract, can be made valid
only by the collective act of the whole tribe in
the persons of the ruling chief and the heads
of families.”
It is therefore very necessary before a pur-
chase is effected to call together all the
owners. A powerful chief, who has always
absolute control over his people, will some-
times sell without consulting them, but it re-
quires no prophet to predict that random and
reckless land transactions will be simply an-
other seizure of Naboth’s vineyard, for which
the price of blood will inevitably have to be
paid. If new arrivals elect to buy from the I
natives, they will lose a great deal of time, for I
nothing in connexion with the Fijians can
be done in a hurry. They will also sometimes
be at the mercy of untrustworthy half-caste
interpreters, and perhaps not succeed after
all. On the whole, it is the better plan to
purchase from the Europeans, after making
every inquiry into the validity of the title.
It will be gathered from the foregoing that
the difficulties in the way of establishing a
cotton plantation, as regard the two great es-
sentials, labour and land, are of no trifling
character. The cost will depend very much
upon the kind of life the settler is content to
lead. A man may settle down with £3OO and
count on making a living ; but, beginning on
this scale, unless he had extraordinary good
luck, he would never be out of debt to the
storekeepers, who of course expect to be paid
for the liberal accommodation they afford.
There are planters now in Fiji who started 10
years ago, but, having suffered severely from
hurricanes and floods, are still in debt. It is
useless to expect to establish anything like a
paying plantation with less than £7OO or £BOO,
unless there are special circumstances in the
settler’s favour, and those who look for a
competency in seven or eight years should
have at least £1,500. There is practically no
employment for persons without means. A
man who becomes useful as overseer on a
plantation gets £6O a year and his rations,
and if he makes himself indispensable,
perhaps £lOO a year. Men of this
stamp would be better off in the
colonies. Fifty men will clear and plant
60 acres of land the first year, if it is
only lightly timbered, and when a planta-
tion has been fairly established one man is
reckoned equal to the management of two
acres and a-half. The food of these men
costs about £3 each per annum. If the plan-
tation is worked on a large scale, there are
heavy expenses in the shape of boats and ma-
chinery, a steam-engine being necessary for
ginning, if the quantity of cotton is large ; and
the planter is liable to heavy losses from
rains, floods, and hurricanes. There is
sometimes an interval of several years
between the last kind of visitations.
They pass over the group in a narrow
strip or band, and never devastate the
whole of the islands at a time. The
severity of these hurricanes has been
sometimes exaggerated, because of their
effect on native houses and cocoanut-trees,
which are easily thrown down. A strongly
built weatherboard house will always stand
against them. Settlers from New Zealand
say they have known the wind to blow as


hard there. Nevertheless, a hurricane will
occasionally destroy .a whole season’s crop,
should it happen to arrive when the trees are
in bearing. It will thus be seen that the
risks are considerable. A planter cannot
rely on getting any return until the end of
the second year ; and when he has reckoned
up all his losses, and the various de-
mands to be met before his cotton
reaches the home market, there is not always
a very large margin left for profits.
From October to April, the wet season, is the
hottest period of the year. The climate is
very equable, the thermometer ranging from
75deg. to 80deg. for months at a time. The
sun is never so powerful as in many parts of
Australia, but the moist heat of the tropics is
entirely different to the heat of Victoria.
Europeans cannot work to advantage in this
climate, as a rule; but I saw white men
ploughing on their own plantations six or
seven hours a day. For a large proportion of
the year the climate is one of the pleasantest
in the world. There are some very oppressive
days, however, when the smallest exertion
causes the most profuse perspiration, and
everyone is inclined to make of life a per-
petual siesta ; or, as an American planter
quaintly expressed it, “You feel like being
called and can’t come.”
Messrs, F. and W. Hennings, who have the j
largest mercantile house in Fiji, are also the
most extensive cotton-planters. On their
island of Mokongai, about 10 miles from Le- |
vuka, there are four plantations managed by
five overseers, containing 300 acres of cotton,
and two coffee plantations, in which there are
about 30,000 trees. The plantations are
worked by 110 foreign labourers, the island
being too close to Viti Levu to employ Fijian
labour to much advantage. The soil is prin-
cipally composed of black vegetable mould,
and, near the sea, coral sand mixed with de-
cayed vegetable matter and washings from
the hills. The island now produces 120 tons
of Sea Island cotton in the seed per annum,
which is worth from Is. 6d. to 3s. 6d. per lb.
Cotton trees planted on this island five years
ago and trimmed once a year, are still flou-
rishing, the only deterioration noticed being
that the staple is a little shorter, while the
cotton has improved in fineness. The cotton,
after being dried, is conveyed to Levuka in bags,
and cleaned at the ginning establishment of
the firm, where there is an eight-horse
power steam-engine and seven gins at work,
turning out a ton a day. Messrs. J. C. Smith
and Co. have also a ginning establishment of
a similar kind in Levuka, an eight-horse
power engine being kept constantly going.
In the windward islands Mr. W. Hennings
has three plantations—one at Lomo Lomo,
one at Katavanga, and one at Yandavathi—
in which about 150 acres of cotton are
planted. From 120 to 130 hands are em-
ployed, and three-fourths of the men are
Fijians. Mr. G. Hennings carries on five
plantations on the Rewa, in conjunction
with other planters, and employs about 150
foreign labourers in the management of about
300 acres of cotton. There is a six-horse
power engine for ginning at the Rewa esta-
blishment, and another is about being erected
at Lomo Lomo.
The best cotton plantation in the group is
that of Ryder Brothers, who purchased Mango
Island some six or seven years ago, and have
confined themselves to the growth of Sea
Island cotton. This enterprising firm have
endeavoured to produce the beat quality of
cotton, while others have sacrificed a little to
quantity, and it is satisfactory to know that
after several years of hard up-hill work their
exertions are meeting with a just reward.
Mango Island is about 120 miles to windward
of Levuka. It is four miles long and three
broad, and is supposed to contain from 7,000
to 10,000 acres. Its formation is peculiar. A
mountain range near the beach encircles
the whole island, and the plantation appears
to be in the crater of an extinct volcano.
The cotton is thus protected from the
winds, while it has the full benefit of the
sea air. The proprietors, from their isolated
position, have always been enabled to em-
ploy Fijian labour without fear of the men
running away or refusing to work; and they
have as yet used no other kind. The
hands are engaged for a term of 12 months,
and there are usually from 100 to 120 of them
kept on the plantation. The Messrs. Ryder
have now 240 acres of cotton under cultiva-
tion. Six M'Carthy roller-knife gins are
kept at work by a six-horse power engine,
which is also made to drive a circular saw.
The gins work about 2001 b. each of clean
cotton per day. The establishment includes a
cotton shed, 60ft. by 30ft., a powerful screw
press for baling, and a 40-ton ketch, which is
indispensable in an island plantation. In
1869 they exported something like £6,000
worth of cotton. The high price ob-
tained for some of the Mango cotton, 4s.
9d. and 4s. lid. a pound, is as much
the result of the extreme care taken
in preparing it for the market, as its fine
quality. Every morning before going to
work each man has to pass the whole of his
c


previous day’s picking through his hands, and
carefully remove every bit of leaf or stick
which may have adhered to it, and also the
little red bug which infests the cotton, so
that when the bales leave the island the cot'
ton is ready to go into the loom without any
further cleaning at Manchester. Some of the
samples sent home have been pronounced
equal to the finest American-grown Sea
Island. The planting distance observed is
7ft. between the rows and 3ft. between the
plants. The seed from this plantation, which
is sold at Bd. per lb., has been extensively
used throughout the group. It has also been
sent down to Samoa, and applications have
been received for it from New Caledonia and
Queensland.
No. IV.
The Polynesia Company, projected at a
meeting held in Melbourne in February, 1868.
was formed with the view of taking up the
offer of the cession of 200,000 acres of land
made by Thakombau to the British Govern-
ment in consideration of payment of the
American debt of £9,000. The original
scheme was as ambitious as that of the East
India Company. The Polynesia Company
were to have the exclusive right of banking
and issuing bank notes in Fiji, entire exemp-
tion from imposts of any kind, the sole right
of levying harbour and wharfage dues, full
powers to make laws for the government of
their settlements, and a pre-emptive right
over all land which Thakombau might here-
after sell, the company undertaking to assist
him in upholding his kingdom, and Tha-
kombau pledging himself on his part to pro-
tect settlers on the company’s lands from
native aggression or molestation of any kind.
The company was also to establish courts of
law, and appoint judges and magistrates to
administer them. The acting British Consul,
however, protested against the company’s
assuming any political powers, and the terms
of the cession were subsequently very much
modified. The company abandoned all poli-
tical privileges, and it was finally agreed that
they should pay £9,030, and allow Thakombau
£2OO, a year, in return for the right of
selecting 200,000 acres of land within
certain blocks then specified, the com-
pany to have the exclusive right of
banking for 21 years, and perpetual freedom
from taxation. A charter in these terms was
signed by Thakombau and six other Mbauan
chiefs on the 24th July, 1868. In a country
ike Fiji, where there are no laws to carry out
Thakombau’s decrees, the value of these ex-
clusive privileges as regards banking monopoly
is not very clear. There is nothing to prevent
any man’s establishing such an institution
provided the public will take his paper, and
at this moment the notes of a merchant at
Levuka are very largely circulated. An ar-
rangement was entered into with the United
States Consul to pay the debt in instalments,
the agreement to be null and void in the
event of Thakombau’s failing to comply with
the terms of the charter. It was also agreed
that the American Consul should render such
moral support to the company as he could for
securing the faithful execution of the charter.
All the instalments of the debt but one have
been met, and Mr. Butters, who left Mel-
bourne in July 1870, to represent the company
in Fiji, had authority to pay the remaining
sum due, £2,300, and receive the deeds of the
lands not previously conveyed. The original
scheme was a grand one, and had only aportion
of it been carried out incalculable benefits
might have been conferred upon Fiji.
Companies for the colonisation of new coun-
tries, however, are rarely successful, and the
present instance is no exception to the
rule. The responsible officers never seemed
to work together, there were always cabals
in the directory, and, finally, sufficient
capital was never raised to float the
company properly. It was intended that the
company should carry on large plantations,
give banking accommodation to its con.
stltuents, provide machinery to gin their cot-
ton, ships to convey it direct to the home
markets, supply them regularly with labour,
and pay half-yearly dividends. Not one of
these promises has been carried out, and,
financially speaking, the company has been a
failure. Nevertheless, the shareholders have
remaining a large quantity of land, which is
daily increasing in value. For a long time it
was believed in Fiji that the whole scheme
had fallen through, and the company is very
unpopular in the country, the settlers being
naturally very much disgusted that these bril-
liant promises of the introduction of capital,
which they were led to regard as the prelude
to a new era of prosperity for them, should
have resulted in nothing. So little has been
effected by the company’s officers, that when
shareholders not long ago went down with
land warrants to settle on the lands
there was not enough surveyed to enable
them all to select, and some had to
seek holdings elsewhere, and spend their
money in improving property in different


parts of the group; while not a single cotton
tree has been planted on the companj’s be
half. In order to raise sufficient money to
meet the whole of the American debt it be-
came necessary to sell Benga, and the Viti
Levu Bay block, which have accordingly
passed from the original shareholders into the
hands of some 40 persons who are known as
“the forty thieves/’ Though the company
has done little for those im mediately interested
in it, its operations have effected some good,
for the immigration now going on is in a great
measure due to the ventilation the subject has
received from the exertions of its agents.
The company is now said to be solvent, and to
have a respectable balance in hand.
The lands originally ceded to the company
comprise the Suva block of 23,000 acres ;
Benga and islands within the reef, computed
at 10,000 acres ; Viti Levu Bay, 80,000 acres ■
and Natawa Bay, 10,000 acres. The company
possesses the deeds of these lands, excepting
those of the Natawa Bay block, which they
have still to receive, together with 80,000 acres
more to be obtained either by extension of the
blocks already given or by separate grants
in the terms of the charter. The lands
given up to “the forty thieves” consist of
Benga and the Viti Levu Bay block, to which
some other portions will be added to make up
the complement of 100,000 acres.
The Suva block is valuable on account of
ihe harbour it includes. This harbour and
Bgaloa Bay, on the south side of Kandavu,
are the best in the group. Suva harbour is
protected by a reef, with passages through
which the largest vessels may enter in
safety. There is good anchorage on a mud
bottom in deep water close into shore, and
plenty of sea room. The harbour commands
the Rewa and Navua districts, and is easily
reached by settlers from any part of
Viti Levu, on which it is situated,
having inside reef communication with
the greater part of that island. The
harbour is divided from Lauthala Bay by
a point of land about three miles wide at the
The company’s land, commencing at
Bami, runs along the coast towards Rewa,
thence to the township of Kalambo, and inland
to the River Wai Manu. The country is
described as being of an undulating character,
lightly timbered, and there is a considerable
extent of well-watered flat lands. There are
two plantations in Suva harbour producing
very fair cotton; but the land is very rich,
and it is generally thought that sugar, as with
the Rewa district, of which it is a continu-
ation, will ultimately be the great staple
article of produce here. Had the company at
the outset established a settlement in this
harbour, there is little doubt that by now Suva
would have been as important a place as
Levuka, That thriving township is so situated
that it can never be extended, and a large
settlement once established in Suva it must
pale its ineffectual fires before
the superior rival, which, from its cen-
position, will naturally be the great
depbt for the future prosperous pro-
vinces of the large island. Colonel Smythe,
in his report to the British Government, in
1861, described this harbour as the best
adapted in the group for a white settlement,
and recommended that the consular offices
should be established there. The land in
Viti Levu Bay, which is a commodious and
safe harbour, is for the most part lightly
timbered, but a great deal of it is broken
country. There are a thousand acres or so of
grass lands round the base of the bay, into
which the plough could be put at once. As it
is followed back, however, the gentle slopes
ri,->e into formidable hills. There is excellent
land in the valleys between, but plantations
could not be worked advantageously on them
at any distance from the sea until roads have
been constructed. A large proportion of the
block on the south side of the bay has no
coast frontage, the rocks rising to a great
height in inaccessible precipices ; but the
general character of the land, where it
is workable, seems to be good, and,
like most parts of Fiji, it is sufficiently
watered. The island of Benga is counted one
of the most fertile in the group. An old
settler claims to have purchased a tract of
land on this island from Maafu, but his title
is likely to be disputed. The Natawa block
is in a fine bay at the north-east end of Vauua
Levu, but I have no information as to the
character of this piece.
It will be seen from the foregoing that the
company possesses some good land, with fine
bays and harbours ; but their possessions are
not what they ought to have been. The price
at which they were bought was considerably
over the market value at the time, and a
shareholder could have done better then with
his money by investing it himself. The
commissioners who arranged the purchase
could not have arrived in the group at a more
fortunate time as regarded the interests of the
company. Thakombau was in extremis ;he
was daily expecting a man-of-war to enforce
the American claim, and, not having- the
money, he was in great fear that he would be
carried off to America, or possibly strung up


at the yardarm of a frigate. In considera-
tion of the great service performed for him by
the company, he could have been induced to
part with better lands than those which were
accepted. His own islands—Nairai, Mbatiki,
and Koro, three of the most fertile in
the group, mortgaged to the American
Government as security for payment of
the debt—should have been looked to
for a large portion of the lands to be ceded ;
but instead of this, the agents, closing the
matter very hurriedly, allowed themselves to
be put off with tracts of country of which
they could know very little, and none of
which were the personal property of the
astute old chief. Thakombau now guards
his three islands like the apple of his eye, and
will not sell at any price. All the company’s
possessions are in the Mbau dominions with
the exception of the Natawa block, of which
Tui Thakau, a relative of Thakombau’s. who
contributed this slice as his “love” in the
emergency, is sovereign.
The natives residing on these lands are
nearly all subject to missionary influence,—
that is to say, they have abandoned cannibal-
ism and heathen worship, most of them have
given up polygamy, they support a native
teacher in each town, have frequent family
prayer, go to church twice a day on Sunday,
and rigidly observe the Sabbath ; but, except
in very rare instances, they have no true
morality of heart. The title to the company’s
land is as good as any other title in Fiji. The
deeds are signed by the leading chiefs of the
districts in which the lands have been given,
and the process of settling them will be the
same as in the case of other purchases made
by private individuals. If a conciliatory
policy be pursued towards the natives,
and they are allowed to move off gradu-
ally, no serious difficulty need be ap-
prehended ; but if they are suddenly
driven from their possessions in large num-
bers, it is extremely probable that they will
give a great deal of trouble. Thakombau
cannot be relied upon to protect settlers,
though he has frequently executed justice on
those of his people who have assaulted Euro-
peans ; and even though he were willing, he
would not always be able, for the desultory
system of Fijian warfare renders him liable to
be beaten by rebellious chiefs as often
as he is the victor. The natives know
very well that their land has been sold. They
do not all, however, as yet understand
the nature of an absolute sale in fee-
simple. They generally live in small
towns a mile or so apart, and the best way to
deal with them would be to give them to un*
derstand that they could retain the use of
certain lands set apart for the purpose on
condition that they supplied a stipulated
amount of labour regularly for the planta-
tions. A chief of Suva whom I met at Mbau,
voluntarily introducing the subject, asked if
I were a company man, or one of those who
opposed the scheme. Answering him am-
biguously that I had no particular desire to
say anything against the company, he
seemed pleased, and added that the com-
pany was very good. He was anxious
to make me understand that though his
lands now belonged to the company, Mr.
Cook, the manager, when in Fiji, had
given him permission to go and reside on
them whenever he chose. He was either
wholly indifferent to or incapable of realising
the fact that he had been robbed of his in*
heritance to pay a fine inflicted for injuries to
Americans’ property to the extent of one’
third of the amount charged, and with the
perpetration of which he had nothing what-
ever to do.
The settlers in Fiji are of opinion that there
is no reason to fear that the native population
will ever rise en masse against the Europeans.
Were they so disposed, they could sweep the
present white population out of the islands
in a day. There is no bond of union between
the Fijians as a race. So little sympathy is
there between the members of different
tribes, that when, on the plantations, there
are Fijian labourers from different kingdoms
they will not sleep under the same roof.
They are devoid of patriotism, and therein
lies the security of the whites. They are also
a thoroughly indolent race, and, unlike the
Maories, have no military genius. Accusr
tomed to treachery from their earliest youth,
they are always suspicious of one another.
Their love of country is only represented by a
tribal feeling. If the Europeans banded to*
gether and demolished one tribe, their next-
door neighbours would often be delighted to
see it; and on certain occasions white men
would have no difficulty in getting the assist-
ance of a native contingent on the system by
which Maafu, who is a foreigner has gained,
his power in the group. When the European
population is large enough towage war against
any of the coast tribes, should necessity arise,
these natives will be placed between two
fires. On the one hand they will have the
white man, whom they cannot withstand for
a moment in open fight; and if they fly to the
hills they are liable to be eaten by the moun-
taineers, who detest the lotu (Chris dainty),


and will only accept it by force of arms.
Should the mountain tribes attempt to
descend on the coast 'inhabitants, they can
only do so in irregular raids. They cannot
act in concert with the coast natives. As
regards the present position of the whites,
the country is perfectly tranquil, but
that in the future there will be occa-
sional ravages of settlements, with the
cutting off of an isolated settler here and
there is likely enough. The prevailing im-
pression is that the Fijians are great cowards.
They rarely attack a man if he is armed with
so much as a stick ; and when their object is
murder, though the victim be unarmed, they
prefer stealing up behind to deliver the death-
dealing blow. When tribal wars break out,
it is common to hear the remark made among
Europeans that there will be more pigs than
men killed; and this is, in fact, generally the
case. The settlers even say that one English-
man with a thick stick will beat oif a score
of !■ ijians. It is a mistake, however, to sup-
pose that the natives cannot fight when it suits
them ; as was shown when the Chal-
lenger’s boat went up the Rewa River.
Neither are they devoid of personal courage,
as an unparalleled deed of heroism once per-
formed by a native teacher, now living on the
Rewa, will testify. This man, Joel by name,
was one day bathing in the river with a young
chief, when be saw an enormous shark
swimming towards them. In great excite-
ment, and knowing there was no chance
for his companion to escape to the shore by
swimming, he plunged towards the fish and
thrust his hand and arm completely down its
throat, intending to pluck its heart out. He
withdrew his arm, which shows to this day
the marks of ,tbe fearful lacerations it then
received ; and the enemy, completely discom-
fited by this novel mode of attack, slowly
made off, as though partially stunned. The
life of this remarkable man has been written
by the Rev. Lorimer Fison, and is now in
course of publication.
In case of a general rising of the hill
tribes, which is not for a moment anticipated,
the chief difficulty would be in reaching them
In their mountain fastnesses. The largest
island, however, can be crossed in a four days’
march, and if constant communication were
kept up by a chain of forts it would not be
difficult to subdue them, with the aid of a
native contingent. Though they might live
for a long time on wild yams and fruits, they
do not like to be away from their well-culti-
vated yam and taro patches, and would only
do it on sore compulsion. In January, 1869,
Thakotnbau endeavoured to raise a force of
European military settlers, for the purpose of
subjugating the cannibal tribes of the interior
of Viti Leva, on the understanding that the
conquered lands would be thrown open to
white settlement, and their occupants made
serviceable on plantations. The authorities in
Sydney, however, issued a proclamation pro-
hibiting British subjects from joining any
such expedition, under the terms of the
Foreign Enlistment Act, and the scheme fell
through.
While the great body of settlers in Fiji hold
the opinions which have been sketched above,
there are not wanting a few who take a much
graver view of the native question. Among
this minority may be counted some of the
missionaries, who, from their intimate ac-
quaintance with the natives, are entitled to
be listened to with respect; though it must
be borne in mind that they have been gene-
rally averse to a white settlement of
the group, because of the demoralising
influence of a mixed European population on
the aborigines. The “alarmists,” as the
planters call these prophets of evil, usually
marshal their arguments on the subject
somewhat as follows —As to the evil days
which may be expected in Fiji, the causes
which have brought mischief to pass in other
lands between our colonists and the savage
inhabitants seem all to be at work here. The
arguments which one hears against this view
are the very same with those formerly so con-
fidently advanced in New Zealand. “ The
natives will never combine.” Nor would the
New Zealanders, but they made mischief
enough without combination. Moreover,
what feuds soever the Fijians have among
themselves, it is an undeniable fact that in
all matters where the Fijians’ interests are
opposed to the white man’s, the Fijian has
the sympathies of all his countrymen on his
side. “ They are cowards. They won’t fight.’’
The same was said of the New Zealanders.
Fijians are fast losing their former supersti-
tious dread of the white man. They are be-
coming tolerably well furnished with firearms,
and are learning to use them with effect. The
officers of the Challenger who were engaged
in the Ndioka boat expedition were unani-
mous in testifying to the steadiness and hardi-
hood shown by the natives under fire ; and
there is little doubt that after but a little expe-
rience of warfare with the white men they will
prove themselves exceedingly troublesome
enemies in their tangled thickets and inac-
cessible mountain fastnesses. Again, the
Fijian can live and get fat on wild roots in


the bush, where a European would starve ;
and, therefore, an expedition into the hills
must always be a very difficult matter, in-
volving commissariat difficulties, as well as
the dangers of Fijian warfare. It will be
al ways easy enough to burn any given town,
but for this a Fijian cares but little. He can
run to the hills, build himself a shelter
in a day, find wild food easily to supply
his wants, and, after tiring out his enemy,
revenge himself by burning the nearest
planter’s homestead. There are many
causes which are now drawing the two races
apart with mutual distrust and hatred in
their hearts, but the land question seems to
be the most dangerous of them all. In not a
few instances the Fijians are asserting their
claims to land which they themselves have
alienated, and are obstinately bent on resist-
ance. The complicated land tenure is a fruit'
ful source of trouble. The circumstances also
under which land is very often sold are such as
to involve future difficulties. Thus-—a chief
sells land which he has conquered in war, the
owners whereof have fled into the hills.
While his power lasts he can secure peaceable
possession; when it fails, the old owners
come back. A powerful chief sells land the
owners of which dare not say him nay ; when
his power declines they assert their claims. A
tribe is fighting a losing battle against one
more powerful than themselves. Finding
themselves going to the wall, they sell their
lands to white men, in order to prevent them
from falling into their enemies’ hands. When
the tide turns again in their favour they re-
pent of their bargain, and want their land
back. One Fijian chief will sell a tract of
land to spite his people who have offended
him ; they will be very savage about it, but
will not dare to oppose him. When he
dies, or loses power, they will reclaim
the land. Mischief is brewing because of
the difficulty of punishing white men who
have committed outrages upon the natives.
The white men go to the Yunivalu with their
complaints when they have anything to com-
plain of; and, indeed, some of them appear
to be unreasonable enough in their expecta-
tions. In not a few cases the Vunivalu has
punished natives who have outraged white
men ; but in cases of wrong done by white men
to natives, there is no power strong enough to
ensure punishment, and he is getting tired.
“Don’t come to me any more with your
complaints,” cried he recently to a planter.
“ I have punished my own people when they
have done you wrong ; and here, when a kai
papalangi shoots down my people, I am told
to wait for a man-o’-war.” It is true that
there is no other course open to the Consul,
but it is equally true that a Fijian can neither
understand nor be satisfied by such delays ;
and even in cases of murder, the law officers
in Sydney have seen such difficulties in the
way of securing a conviction that they have
advised inaction.
A few years will show whether there is much
foundation for these fears. All that can be
said at present is, that the natives are well
affected towards the whites ; and that they
have always been desirous of retaining Euro-
pean settlers among them.
The affair of the Challenger’s men, which
has been mentioned incidentally, took place
about 18 months since. This expedition did
more injury to the prestige of the British
name in the islands than any other cir-
cumstance which has occurred since the
establishment of white settlements in
the group. Some impudent tribes on
the Upper Rewa had repeatedly annoyed
settlers in their neighbourhood, and one of
them had refused to move a native town
built on land purchased by Mr. Pfluger. The
whites held several meetings on the subject,
and eventually determined to petition Com-
modore Rowley Lambert to right their griev-
ances. The commodore sent up his launch,
with 50 or 60 marines and sailors, to protect
the acting-consul in putting Mr. Pfluger in
possession of his land. The commodore did
not believe for a moment that the natives
would fire upon his men, and Captain Brown-
rigg, who commanded the expedition, was
not instructed to attack them, but only to
burn the village in case the Fijians de-
clined to move it peaceably. When it
became known that an expedition of
this nature had been determined upon,
some of the planters told their coloured
neighbours that they would not have to sub-
mit to insolence much longer, as a man-of-
war’s boat would be there to aid them in a
few days. Thus forewarned, the Matailomban
tribe sent away their women and children,
and collected all their fighting men at
Ndioka. On the way up the river the Consul,
who was accompanied by a number of armed
settlers, with the Challenger’s men in boats,
landed at Viria, and explained his object
to the natives. Early on the third day after
leaving the ship, the force reached Ndioka.
Two of the settlers paddled across the river
to invite the chief to come off and speak
with the consul; but he declined. A few
shots and a shell or so were then fired over
the heads of the people in the town as a warn


ing to them to leave, but they took no notice
of this, believing that the men were unable
to hit them. Sixty or seventy natives were
assembled in a large bure or meeting bouse,
and had this been shelled the matter would
have been settled at once. Captain Brown-
rigg, however, was not authorised to make an
onslaught of this nature, so a party was
landed under cover of the guns to burn the
town. When the men reached the place it
was deserted, and in a few minutes most of
the houses were reduced to ashes. When the
shore party were embarking, the natives,
sheltered by the tall reeds on the banks,
swarmed round, and opened a heavy fire
with muskets. The launch was aground for
a short time, and the position of the whole
party was extremely critical. The boats re-
treated, with the balls following thick and
l ast in the water, and had not the natives
been too much interested in the plunder, they
might have followed down the river side and
killed a large number of the party. The
Fijians fired upon Mr. Pfluger’s house while
he was endeavouring to remove some valu-
ables, and one bullet came through the wall
close to his wife’s face, while she was very
coolly taking down a window curtain. The
casualties on the side of the Europeans were
two men badly wounded. Mr. Creelman,
a planter, was hit twice, and died a few days
afterwards, but more from the weak state of
health he was in at the time than from the
injuries he received, which were not of a
necessarily fatal character, A marine, shot
through both lungs, has, contrary to all
expectation, recovered. The settlers in
boats and on the other side of the
river, as well as the military force, re-
turned the fire of the natives, but it was
impossible to hit them in the scrub, and
only one of their number was killed. Be-
fore the boat started on the return journey,
safe conduct was offered to all the planters
who did not feel safe in remaining, and many
availed themselves of the opportunity. The
Fijians remaining masters of the field, took
possession of all Mr. Pfluger’s household
effects, eating his poultry, pigs, and dogs;
they burnt his house, and when he went back
a few weeks afterwards to pick the cotton, they
offered to sell him some of his own articles of
furniture, which he was glad to buy back.
The miserable ending to this expedition put
the settlers in a much worse position than
they occupied before. All those above Ndioka
abandoned their holdings, and settlement in
this district received a severe check, but
some of these planters are just beginning to
return. So inconsistent is the character of
the Fijians that they now allow a relative of
Mr. Pfluger to have peaceable possession of
the ground which they fought for only a short
time back. They openly boast that they beat
the man-of-war, the great bugbear with which
settlers have been accustomed to frighten
them for years past. A few days after
the attack the story was known from end
to end of Viti Levu, and the British
soldier is spoken of in terms of unmeasured
contempt. Encouraged by this failure of
justice, the contumacious natives of Ndronga,
who burnt out a citizen of the United States,
are, it is said, erecting war fences, and say
they will beat the American man-of-war,
which is daily expected in the group to enforce
an award of £IO,OOO. The settlers are waiting
with curious interest to see how Brother Jona-
than will settle this matter. Anxious to guard
against this rumour of defeat, Commodore
Lambert, who was greatly surprised to
hear that his men had been fired upon,
had an interview with Rata Napoleon,
a judge of the Rewa district, and powerful
chief of the Yiria tribe, together with some
other chiefs, to whom he explained the whole
history of the expedition, telling them that his
men had retired from merciful considerations,
and that in the first place they fired over the
Fijians’ heads, never intending to injure
them. The Rev. Mr. Fison interpreted the
commodore’s address to the natives, and at
its conclusion told that officer, that though
an angel from Heaven had said the
same thing to these Fijians they would
not have believed it. They are wholly
incapable of understanding why those
having the power to kill on such an
occasion should neglect to use it, and they
believe to this day that it was fear which
prevented the man-of-war’s men attacking
them on land, and driving them off the field
which they could very easily have done. A
chief, not long ago, learning that there were
Jews in Levuka, asked a settler why the
Christians did not kill them at once, as these
men belonged to the tribe who sacrificed the
founder of the Christian faith. Being
answered to the effect that there were no
feuds among civilised nations when peace
had once been made, he shook his head,
and said he could not understand it
all he knew was, that this was not
vulcu Viti (Fiji fashion). This expedi-
tion was a most unfortunate one in
every respect, and it ought never to have
been despatched unless with the intention of
giving the natives a very severe lesson. The


prompt justice executed by Commander
Wilkes in 1810, when some of bis men were
killed on Malolo, a small island on the west
coast of Yiti Levu, has never been forgotten
by the natives. The murdered party had gone
to the island for water, and so salutary was
the effect of the chastisement inflicted, that
the Fijians to this day voluntarily bring water
to any settlers going into port there, being
apparently under the impression that the vic-
torious Americans had imposed this on them
as a duty. The offending chief, who died very
recently an old m an, was fond of telling the story
of the attack, and always spoke without the
least ill feeling against the powerful enemy
who exacted such signal retribution. Com-
mander Wilkes attributed this massacre in
part to the hastiness of his men, who fired
on a Fijian hostage as he was escaping from
their boat, but the old chief shortly before his
death said that the whole affair had been care-
fully planned three days before the attack.
No. V.
There are two great chiefs in Fiji, Maafu
and Thakombau ; and two of secondary im-
portance, Tui Thakau and Tui Mbua. Maafu
is a Tongan, Ilis mother was among the first
fruits of Christian teaching in his own coun-
try, and he is nearly related to King George
of Tonga (the most enlightened prince in the
Pacific after Kamehameha, of the Sandwich
Islands), whose legitimate successor he is.
Banished from his own country for his turbu-
lence, he settled when a wild young man
some 25 or 30 yearn ago in the eastern part of
Fiji under pretence of protecting the Tongan
interest. It is supposed that for centuries
past there has been frequent communication
between the inhabitants of the eastern part
of the group and the natives of the Tonga or
Friendly Islands, which are situated some 250
miles to the south east. The Tongans having
no suitable timber in their own country, were
dependent on the wood of the Fijians for mak-
ing their large canoes. The prevailing trade
wind blowing direct from Tonga to Fiji also led
to many of their canoes being drifted there,
and the establishment in Eastern Fiji of small
colonies of Tongans, who intermarried with
the Fijians, naturally followed. This mixture of
the lighter-coloured Malayo-Polynesians with
the darker Papuans has occasioned the variety
of shade to be seen in the colour of the Fijians.
Maafu’s sowing of wild oats did not end at
once, and in the lustihood of his youth he
carried desolation into the homes of the
Fijians, who have always had a great dread of
him and his followers. He frequently took
part in the tribal wars of Fiji, and was gene-
rally on the winning side, but his allies had to
pay dearly for his aid. In 1859 he had con-
quered Mathuata and other portions of Vanua
Levu. Bitova, the chief of Mathuata, waa
exiled for some time, and was only restored to-
his dominions on the interference of a British
man-of-war. Invariably fighting in the name
of Wesley anism, Maafu received a moral sup*
port from the Wesleyan missionaries, whose
best native teachers are Tongans, and at this
time he was master of nearly a third of Fiji,
He has always been suspected of having
designs on the whole group, and but for the
European influence in the leeward islands,
and the persistent opposition of the American
authorities, who of necessity supported Tha-
kombau to secure payment of the debt of
45,000d01., King George of Tonga with
Maafu’s help would have added Fiji to his
dominions. There are probably not more
than 300 Tongans altogether in the group,
but they are distinguished by daring, while
they have strong feelings of nationality. The
disorganised Fijians have no chance when op-
posed to their unity and discipline, backed by
a decided mental and physical superiority.
Maafu left his own country without any un-
willingness, probably because there was no
distinguished part for him to play there while
the throne was filled. He possibly also
cherished the secret hope of being one day
King of Tonga and Fiji. It was not in the
interest of the white settlers, however, who
have a very wholesome horror of the Tongan
law concerning the sale of land, that these
people should overrun Fiji, and Thakombau’s
most formidable opponent has thus always been
kept at bay. The law referred to is as follows:
—“lt shall in no wise be lawful for a chief or
people of this kingdom of Tonga to sell a
piece of land to a foreign people—it is verily
verily forbidden for ever and ever; and any-
one breaking this law, he shall work as a con-
vict all the days of his life until he die, and his
progeny shall be expelled from the land.” With
Tongan supremacy, therefore, the white settlers
felt that they would have been compelled to
abandon the country, for, although small por-
tions of land might have been leased, a pros-
perous European settlement would never
have been established under the severe Ton-
gan rule. The Tongans are a haughty, arro-
gant race; they are loth to admit the supe-
riority of the white man, and they would
make the Fijians black their boots if they
wore those useful articles.


Whatever King George’s views may have j
been with regard to territorial acquisitions in
Fiji in times past, he has abandoned them
now. Some two years ago, becoming seriously
alarmed at the complications arising with his
people in Fiji in consequence of the rapid in-
flux of Europeans and the determined opposi-
tion to their intrigues, and fearing that he
might be compromised, he recalled Maafu.
The subject was fully discussed in the Tongan
Parliament, and it was decided that Maafu
and the Tongans should be withdrawn from
Fiji, Some Fijian chiefs, however, fearing
that this would give rise to fresh difficulties,
and believing that Maafu’s presence would
greatly help in preserving order, asked that
he might be allowed to remain. King George
then said he would leave Maafu to decide the
question himself, on the understanding, how-
ever, that if he went back to Fiji he for ever
severed his political connexion with Tonga.
Maafu accepted that position, and undertook
to procure evidence of the bona fides of bis
Fijian friends. He returned to Fiji, held'
meetings in each of the three chiefdoms of
the confederation which had been formed in
1867, and in January, 186 J, went back to
Tonga with documents pledging him the sup-
port of the Fijians in those districts. King
George then made over to Maafu all Tongan
rights in Fiji, and finally freed himself of all
responsibility on account of Tongan proceed-
ings in the group. In the February following
Maafu having returned to Fiji was made Tui
Lau, or King of Lau, the district in which the
Tongans chiefly reside ; and in the following
June he was elected chief of the Lau Confede-
ration. If Maafu has really severed his
political connexion with Tonga, his presence
in Fiji may be very serviceable in keeping
order, as he holds his people in thorough sub-
jection, and his name is a tower of strength
throughout the windward islands - f but it is
possible that when King George dies he will
return to Tonga. In that case he might
retain his hold of Eastern Fiji, and be King
of Tonga also, though no other chief in
Tonga could exercise the same power in Fiji.
Maafu now isees the advantage of having
white settlers around him to swell his re-
venue, and while still adhering to the Tongan
policy of refusing to sell land, he has recently
determined upon leasing it. European settle-
ment is now fast extending to the eastern
group, property being considered much more
secure in the windward islands than in many
parts of Fiji. At Lomo Lomo, on Vanua
Mbalavu, where Maafu lives, considerable
tracts of land have already been taken up on
leasehold at Is. per acre for 50 years, and he
is particularly desirous of having men with
wives and families settled there.
The political divisions of a country which
vary according to the success in war of the
leading chiefs cannot be very accurately de-
fined. The tribal system prevails in Fiji,
and the country is divided into petty
kingdoms, the most important of which
are those belonging to the chiefs already
named. The three largest of these kingdoms
are now united in a confederation with Maafn
as elective president. The Lau Confederation*
as these united chiefdoms are called, includes
the kingdom of Lau, in which Maafu is head
chief, with the title of Tui Lau (King of Lau);
Thakaundrove, the dominions of Tui Thakau;
and Mbua, over which TuiMbuahas sovereign'
sway. The Lau Kingdom includes the whole
of the eastern group of islands from Vatoa
and Matuku in the south to the Nanuku Pas-
sage ; Thakaundrove embraces the south-
eastern coasts of Yanua Levu, Taviuni,
Kamia, Lauthala, Kambi, and the Kinggold
Isles ; and Tui Mbua claims the part of Yanua
Levu to the west of Savu Savu Bay, and the-
Yasawa Group* but portions of this terri-
tory are disputed by Thakombau. Mathuata,.
the north-west coast of Yanua Levu, is held
by Tui Mathuata, who has not joined the
confederation. A reference to the map wilt
show that the confederation embraces fully a-
third of Fiji, leaving the remainder, with the
exception of the Mathuata coast, to the
nominal control of Thakombau, whose king
dom of Mbau includes the whole of Viti Lsvu
(only the coast tribes of which have
made subject to his authority)* Mbau, Ovalak,
Benga, Kandavu, Ngau, Koro, Nairai, Mba-
tiki, Moturiki, and some other less important
islands. Bitova, the chief of Mathuata, is a
very old man, who has only professed the
Christian religion since October, 1869, and it
is probable that his successor will join the
confederation. In times past this chief was
one of the worst cannibals in the group, and
he occasionally points to a heap of 300 human
skulls as the remains of his own horrible
repasts. The principle of the confederation
laid down in a written constitution prepared
by Mr. Swanston, is state sovereignty, and
confederate supremacy ; that is to say, each
chief has absolute power in his own do-
j minions, but his acts are liable to revision by
the confederation, and the right of declaring
war rests entirely with the confederation.
The Lau Parliament meets at Lakemba at
stated periods, and the parliament in which
the three kingdoms are represented is usually


held on Taviuni. Each chief has a European
secretary, to prepare the drafts of laws and
keep records of the enactments of parliament.
Mr. K. S. Swanston is secretary to the Lau
Confederation, Mr. Louis Bizanzole to the
Lau Kingdom, Mr. Wm. Ross for Thakaun-
drove, Mr. David Wilson for Mbua, and Mr.
} . H. Drew is Chief Secretary to the Mbau
Government. The chiefs are, in a great mea-
sure, in the hands of their European secre-
taries, and for this reason, perhaps, native
affairs become sometimes more complicated
than they otherwise would,
Thakornbau, the chief of Mbau, is from the
extent of his territories, which include the
larger portion of the white settlements, the
most powerful ruler in Fiji, and it has been
given to him to exercise a greater influence
m his country than any Fijian chief who
has preceded him. Mbau, though only a
very small island united to the shore of
Vrti Levu, near one of the mouths of the
Rewa, by a reef fordable at low water, has
been peopled by a tribe of chiefs from time
immemorial, and 70 or 80 years ago it was the
most powerful in the Archipelago. Tanoa.
the previous Vunivalu, succeeded to the
chiefdom early in the present century,
and Thakornbau, called Seru in his
youth, was born about the year 1817.
Like his father, Tanoa, he was a ruthless
cannibal, and early gave evidence of the
ambitious and crafty disposition which has
distinguished his maturer years. He had
barely attained his sixth year when his hands
were first stained with the blood of his
countrymen. At that age a lad taken prisoner
in battle was brought before him, and he
clubbed him to death. In 1832, the chiefs of
Mbau rebelling against their king, Tanoa
bad to quit his dominions. The young Seru,
who was left behind, being considered harm-
less on account of his youth, while apparently
wholly engrossed with the pleasures suited to
Ins years, skilfully intrigued against the
usurper, and eventually accomplished the
restoration of his father after an exile of five
years. 1 he success of this well-planned scheme
gained for him the title of Thakornbau (evil to
Mbau) from the rebel party, and he has ever
since been known by that name. The de-
feated party were subjected to the inhuman
punishments which were common in those
days. A prisoner being brought before Tha-
kombau, he ordered his tongue to be cut out,
and ate it raw, before the man’s face, crack-
ing jokes the while. The victim was sub-
sequently, after being submitted to further
tortures, killed and eaten. On a more recent
occasion, when being dunned by a European
for money which he was not in the humour
to pay, this amiable monarch suggestively re-
minded the importunate creditor that the
flesh of the white man was like ripe bananas.
It was the ancient custom to have two rulers
of equal importance, the Roko Tui (sacred
and the Vunivalu (root of war). The
duties of the former pertained to the priest,
hood, and were connected with heathen sacri-
fices, while the latter occupied the position of
prime minister and commander-in-chief. The
rank Tanoa and Thakombau held was that
of Vunivalu, The introduction of Christianity
has destroyed the importance of the Roko
Tui, but the title is still retained. When
Tanoa died in 1852, five of his wives were
strangled. In July of the following year
Thakombau was formally invested with the
rank and dignity of Vunivalu of Mbau. The
event was celebrated by the sacrifice of 18
Fijians, who were ready cooked for eating,
when, through the exertions of a missionary
and Mr. Owen, an Adelaide merchant, trading
in Fiji, who died in Melbourne two years ago,
the bodies were given up to the latter for
burial on his threatening to cease all business
transactions if the cannibal feast took place.
Cannibalism was practised in Mbau until
1854. The Wesleyan missionaries had long
been endeavouring to gain over Thakombau
to their cause, and on the 30th April in that
year, after much vacillation, he took the de-
cisive step, when cannibalism at once ceased.
At 9 o’clock on the morning of that day, the
lali, the fearful drum which had sounded the
announcement of a cannibal feast only
10 days previously, was beaten for an
assemblage to witness the Vunivalu’s public
renunciation of heathenism. He did not
abandon polygamy, however, until three years
later. In January, 1857, his many wives
were dismissed, and he was married to the
favourite, his present wife, according to the
Wesleyan formula. It is the custom of the
missionaries to withhold the rite of baptism
from natives living in polygamy, and this
obstacle being removed, Thakombau and his
wife were publicly baptised on the 11th
January, The remarkable scene which fol-
lowed on this occasion is thus feelingly
described by the Rev. Mr. Waterhouse
“In the afternoon the King was publicly
baptised. In the presence of God he pro-
mised ‘to renounce the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.’
He engaged to believe all the articles of the
Christian faith, and solemnly vowed, in the


name of the Holy Trinity, ‘to keep God’s
holy will and commandments, and to walk in
the same all the days of his life.’ In accord-
ance with my request previously made, the
King then addressed the assembly. It must
have cost him many a struggle to stand up
before his court, his ambassadors, and the
flower of his people, to confess his former
sins. And in time past he had considered
himself a god, and had received honours
almost divine from his people. Now he
humbles himself, and adores his great
Creator and merciful Preserver. And what
a congregation he had. Husbands whose
wives he had dishonoured ! widows whose hus*
bands he had slain ! sisters whose brothers-
had been strangled by his orders ! rela-
tives whose friends he had eaten ! and child-
ren, the descendants of those he had mur-
dered, and who had vowed to revenge the
wrongs inflicted on their fathers ! A thousand
stony hearts heaved with fear and astonish-
ment as Thakombau gave utterance to the
following sentiments :—‘ I have been a bad
man. I disturbed the country. The mis-
sionaries came and invited me to embrace
Christianity ; but I said to them, “ I will con-
tinue to fight.” God has singularly preserved
my life. At one time I thought that I had
myself been the instrument of my own pre-
servation ; but now I know that it was the
Lord’s doing. I desire to acknowledge Him
as the only and the true God. I have
scourged the world.’ He was deeply affected,
and spoke with great diffidence.”
Thakombau selected Ebenezer as bis bap-
tismal name, and his wife that of Lydia. He
has since scrupulously adhered to bis profes-
sions of religion as far as all outward ob-
servances are concerned. The moral laws of
his kingdom are administered with as much
rigour as those for the raising of revenue, and
a good story is told of a white resident who
framed a stringent moral law, which was
afterwards adopted, being made the first to
suffer one of the three penalties due on its
infringement. The missionaries have taken
great pains to instruct their illustrious con.
vert, and he can read the Fijian Bible with tole-
rable ease. The measure of success they have
had with him seems very remarkable when it
is remembered that he had grown old in the
daily practice of heathen enormities, and that
he had passed the meridian of life before he
had abandoned cannibalism. He embraced
Christianity from political motives when he
found that the European support was es-
sential to his supremacy, and among royal
defenders of the faith he may be compared
rather to Constantine than any other. The
firmness with which he has adhered to bis
engagement with the American Government
is very creditable to him. He is in receipt of
a considerable revenue from a poll-tax, and
his means of acquiring money, the advan-
tages of which he fully appreciates, are in-
creasing every day. Two vessels, which he
has recently purchased, the schooner Jennie
Duncan and the yacht Vivid, interest him
very much, and he is endeavouring to equip
them with guns. With the assistance of the
Europeans, there is every probability that if
he lives another 10 years he will have greatly
consolidated his power. It is not easy to see
what will be the result of his death. He has
several sons, and one now 16 years old, born
since his marriage according to the Christian
rite. None of his sons, however, appear to
have any of the capacity of the old
chief, and they have been very much
demoralised by constant association with
a low class of white men. Ratu Ndranibaka,
the Vunivalu’s half brother, is his legitimate
successor according to Fijian law, and there
is no other chief of sufficient rank in the
country to succeed Thakombau. Ndranibaka
is, unfortunately, a hopeless slave of the gin
bottle, a vice which the present chief of
Mbau is entirely free from, and his rule
would be feeble in the extreme, though he
has the reputation of being a good warrior.
Thakombau is understood to be indifferent
on the subject of succession, saying, ‘’After
me the deluge.”
Maafu, though only a savage, is a very
superior man for a Polynesian, and has an
advantage over Thakombau in that he has
been accustomed from his youth up to the
systematic forms of government adopted
in Tonga, while he has always been inti-
mately associated with the Europeans. In
his kingdom printed books are kept for the
official record of sentences inflicted, the
births, deaths, marriages, and divorces, and
also the census, which has, however, been
only irregularly taken. The prestige of his
personal character has always been great,
while Thakombau, whose introduction to
civilised modes of government occurred at
too late a period of his life for him to pro"
perly understand them, bears the reputation
of being a thorough shuffler. Thus, while
the Yunivalu is a finished master in all Fijian
wisdom and statecraft, and possessed of abili-
ties far exceeding those of any predecessor in
his chiefdom, he has always been at a disad-
vantage when personally compared with hia
great rival, who reflects the higher civilisation


of Tonga. Maafu is also desirous of adding
ships to his possessions. He owns the schooner
Caroline, and was recently in treaty for the
purchase of the Xarifa, a crack yacht from
Sydney lately brought into the group.
In 1865 all the great chiefdoms were
united in one confederation. There was to
be an annual assembly, when the chiefs
were to elect a president, and one code
of laws was to serve for the entire group,
the internal government of each state, how-
ever, being left in the hands of its proper
chief. Thakombau was elected president two
consecutive years, when Maafu aspired to the
distinction. The Vunivalu was not willing
to tolerate a rival so near the throne, so the
confederation was dissolved, whereupon
Maafu formed the confederation of which he
is now chief. In the early part of the year
1867, Mr. St. John, an American citizen, then
Thakombau’s secretary, prepared an elaborate
constitution for the Mbau kingdom, based on
the model of that of the Sandwich Islands.
Thakombau was desirous of having this code
of laws adopted, and he sought the assistance
of the whites to suggest improvements pre-
paratory to sanctioning them. He enter-
tained some 60 or 70 white settlers at Mbau
for some days while they were discussing these
laws. A constitution was finally adopted, the
whitespromisingthe Vunivalu that they would
abide by the laws then enacted, and support
him in the administration of them. Long
before this it had been the custom to flatter
Thakombau by styling him King of Fiji, and
the French and American Governments have
treaties with him as king, though he is in
reality only chief of Mbau, It occurred to
the white residents assembled at the inaugu-
ration of the constitution that it would be
desirable to unite with the natives in some
formal recognition of the power of the chief
whose kingdom they wished to support, and
they hit upon the ridiculous expedient of
crowning him. The coronation was accord-
ingly performed on the 2nd May, 1867, with
some melodramatic flummeries which were
intended to be very effective, but, as it turned
out, they were, unfortunately, only amusing.
Somehow or other, in the most serious part
of the ceremonial, an overpowering sense of
the ludicrousness of the scene took posses-
sion of those present—the fatal step from the
sublime to the ridiculous was reached—and
the coronation was a laughable travestie-
The crown, which was described by a native
as looking “like gold,” cost, with velvet,
jewels, and all, the enormous sum of 255. It
was made by a local carpenter, and has not
been paid for yet. Thakombau well knew
how to estimate the demonstration at its true
worth, and so little did he value this tinsel
addition to the Mbau regalia—fit only for “ a
king of shreds and patches”—that he after-
wards threw away the bauble, applying to it a
most contemptuous epithet, which will not
bear translating.
The coronation took place in the native
church at Mbau. A platform covered with
mats had been erected at the end of the
building, and a large piece of ornamental
native cloth was suspended in folds at the
back. The centre of the platform was occu-
pied by an arm chair, draped with the Mbau
flag, the colours of which are red, white, and
blue, with a rising sun on the blue ground,
and a crown in the top corner. This
was meant for the throne. Soon after
the whites assisting in the ceremony had
taken their places, Thakombau, accompanied
by a number of Mbau chiefs, arrived, and
took up his position on the edge of the plat-
form. The proceedings having been opened
with religious services, the resident mis-
sionary preached a sermon from the text
•‘Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a
reproach to a people.” A grave record which
has been kept of what followed—from which
it will be seen that the name of the Deity was
most oddly, if not impiously, mixed up with
all that was put into the mouths of
the chiefs officiating—proceeds as follows :>
Ratu Mark Torotha then stood up and read
the following address to Thakombau :-“We,
as representatives of the chiefs and people of
this kingdom, now, in the sight of Almighty
God, in the name of the people of this realm,
and with their love and prayers, do lay at your
feet this token of the sovereignty of this
country. May God save your Majesty!” RokoTui
Namata, chief of the Namatadistrict, advanc-
ing with the crown in his hands, said, —“Sir,,
from the crown of my head to the soles of my
feet, I affirm all that Ratu Mark has just
said.” He then laid the crown at Thakom-
bau’s feet. Ratu Benjamin Yaku next read
the following “ We, as representatives of
the chiefs and people of this kingdom, now in
the presence of Almighty God, do place in
your hand this blessed book (the Bible). May
the precepts of love—such as the love of our
blessed Saviour Jesus Christ—guide you in
your love to us your people. God save
your Majesty !” Ratu Meli Roko Nangata,
chief of the Nakelo district, placing
in the chief’s hands a copy of the
Fijian Bible, added, “ What Ratu Benjiamin
has read I strongly affirm.” Ratu Mark


Torotha, then again advancing, read as fol-
lows:—“We, as representatives of the chiefs
and people of this kingdom, in the sight of
Almighty God, do lay at your feet this insignia
of justice. We pray that you may be strictly
just in your administration ; that God may be
graciously pleased to guide you, and give you
wisdom. God save your Majesty.!” Toran-
dreketi, the chief of the Tokatoka tribes, then
laid a sword at Thakombau’s feet, saying, “I
affirm, sir, what has just been said.” The
following address was read for the King by
Ratu Benjamin Yaku :—“ My chiefs, my
people, my white friends,—l say friends be-
cause the time has been when I did not look
upon you as such ; but that time is past. I feel
that I this day speak in the presence of Al-
mighty God. I feel that through the instrumen-
tality of His almighty providence my country is
rising out of darkness into the light of civili-
sation. I love my people ; I love my country.
My only wish and prayer is for the happiness
of my people, and the prosperity and advance-
ment of my country. May we become a great
country, and may we so live that hereafter we
may all become subjects of Christ’s blessed
kingdom above J The constitution and laws
I believe are good for you, and will materially
aid in our advancement and prosperity. I
thank our white friends who have so kindly
aided in their framing.” Thakombau affirmed
this in a few words, and then kneeling,
“ The sovereignly of this country, conferred
upon me with the love of my people, I accept,
and I solemnly and sincerely declare, in the
presence of Almighty God, that I will main-
tain the constitution of this kingdom whole
and inviolate, and govern in conformity with
it and the laws.” Whilst kneeling he placed
the crown upon his head, and then rising,
with the sword in his right hand and the
Bible in his left, he ascended the platform
and sat down on his throne, when a salute
of 21 guns was fired and the national flag
hoisted.
The convivialities which followed were of a
memorable kind, and some amusing speeches
were made on the subject of Thakombau the
First’s possible future kinship with some of
the Royal families of Europe. The King’s
secretary and prime minister took an oath of
fidelity to his sovereign, and 307 chiefs sub-
scribed to an oath of allegiance in this form :
—“I most solemnly swear, in the presence of
Almighty God, that I will loyally support the
King, the constitution, and the laws of the
Mbau kingdom.” This number included one
of the chiefs of the Lau Confederation, Tui
Thakau, a scion of the house of Mbau, who
occupies a most important position in Fiji,
inasmuch as he holds the balance of power be-
tween Maafu and Thakombau.
The constitution which Thakombau granted
on being invested with the imperial purple,
or rather tapa, is a very lengthy document,
of which only a brief abstract can be given.
It begins with a declaration of rights regard-
ing safety of life and property, freedom of con.
science and speech, printing, and the right
of petition. His Majesty was graciously
pleased to agree “ that the privilege of writ
of habeas corpus belongs to all men ’’—that
no person should be deprived of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law,” &c.
Among other things it is enacted that the
King shall be commander-in-chief of the
“army and navy, and of all other military
forces,” and that it is his prerogative to re.
ceive ambassadors. The King also pledges
himself not to quarter soldiers on civilians
in time of peace. There are in all 55
clauses, the last of which provides that the
constitution shall be in force for three years
only, from the 2nd May, 1867. Provision was
made for the organisation of an executive,
variously called “The Cabinet,” and “The
King’s Ministers,” and also for the creation of
a judiciary, and the imposition of poll and
land taxes. The white settlers were so will-
ing to have the new code of laws carried out,
that one accepted the office of Secretary of
State, another that of Treasurer and Collec-
tor-General of the Revenue, and a third that
pf Minister of War and Police. Circulars
were sent round to settlers headed in due
form, “Office of the Collector-General of
Revenue,” intimating that the poll and land
tax must be paid into the Treasury, in
the Government-offices at Mbau, by a certain
date. These official communications, how-
ever, were entirely disregarded, and the
King, finding that his Ministers were
a source of expense without bringing him in
any revenue, summarily dismissed them one
fine morning, and never “ sent for” succes-
sors, notwithstanding that the 20th clause
of the constitution declares that his Govern-
ment is that of a constitutional monarchy.
When these, laws were first promulgated, in-
timation was made that every privilege con-
sistent with equity and order would be offered
to all white residents who were willing to
become allieged subjects during the term of
their residence in Fiji, and that native lands,
after reserving sufficient for each town for
planting purposes, would be thrown open to
selection at a minimum price per acre. The
English inhabitants, however, upon ques


tioning the Consul as to whether their alle-
giance to Thakombau would affect their
right to protection from the British Go-
vernment, received so unsatisfactory an
answer that they were deterred from
swearing fealty to the Fijian king, and
as far as the European population are
concerned, the constitution has remained
a dead letter. Among the Fijians, however,
it has been carried out in a rude way. The
poll tax collected from them is a source of
considerable revenue, and every conceivable
offence is punishable by fine, imprisonment, or
the lash. There are supreme courts created
under the constitution in which judges pre-
side, dispensing tolerably impartial justice;
and also inferior courts, presided over by ma-
gistrates, the whites having the privilege—
though it has not been used—of electing one
of their number to sit with the Fijian magis.
trate in cases where the interests of a foreigner
are in question. The laws are rigidly admi-
nistered among the natives, and there are
judges, magistrates, and an active police in
almost every native town subject to Mbau.
A similar system is also carried out in the
Windward Islands, under the constitution of
the Lau Confederation.
The constitution did not provide for any
Legislature, but since its inauguration there
have been several meetings of white dele-
gates at Mbau, to consult with Thakombau
and his chiefs on measures for the good
of the country and laws have been passed
from time to time in this way, though
there is no proper executive to carry them
out. At a meeting of the House of Delegates,
in March, 1869, the Vunivalu delivered a
speech from which the following extract is
taken as a sample of his mode of address on
these occasions :—“ I know that you have
come here to do good, and not evil. You
have come to enlighten our land, and I re-
joice to see you. We are foolish and igno-
rant, but want to improve. We have got
Christianity and rejoice in its benefits, but
now we want law established in the land. It
is good that you should help us. We are like
a sinking canoe, and want help to bale us.
You must remember we are only a little canoe,
and cannot carry much.”
No. VI.
The missionary barque John Wesley, Cap-
tain Mansell, by which I was a passenger,
from Sydney to Fiji, entered the eastern part
of the group on the 25th May 1870. The pas-
sengers, some 12 or 14, nearly all intending
settlers, made their first acquaintance with
the isles of the Pacific at daylight on the
morning of the day named, when we descried
the dim outlines of the peaky hills of Matuku
and Totoya— two of the most southerly islands
of the eastern group. Next day we were
anchored off Lakemba—the most important
island in the Lau Kingdom after Vanua
Mbalavu. This is the island on which the
Wesleyan missionaries first gained a footing
in Fiji, and from which Christianity subse-
quently spread to other portions of the group.
There are no white settlers permanently re-
siding here, but there is a very large native
population, and some of the mission training
institutions are conducted on the island.
Three of the resident missionaries came on
board early in the morning, and the pas-
sengers, suffering from the monotony of an
unusually long voyage of 25 days, were
not sorry to avail themselves of the
opportunity afforded to have a ramble
on shore among the wonderfully luxuriant
tropical growths skirting the beach. Lakemba
has long been famous for its production of
cocoanut oil, exporting at one time 100 tuns
annually. The first object which excited at-
tention was a magnificent belt of cocoa palms,
whose stately shafts, rising far above the
forest trees, revealed their plumes nodding in
the wind. Trading relationships were quickly
established with the natives, and all else was
soon forgotten in the luxury of fresh oranges
and bananas, and young cocoanuts, with the
flesh of the consistency of cream. The natives
ascend the branchless cylindrical stems of the
cocoanut tree with extraordinary agility.
With their hands and feet alternately grip,
ping the smooth bark, and arching the body,
they walk up at a quick step, and testing the
ripeness of the fruit by a few taps, throw
down that which has arrived at the stage
most suitable for eating. Great value is
attached to land on which groves of these
palms grow. The tree is put to an extra-
ordinary variety of uses, and it is as much the
planter’s friend as it is a necessity to the
Fijians. Coir rope and various kinds of
sinnet are made from the fibre; the fruit
yields oil ; the timber various implements ;
the shells of the nut are converted into cups
and bowls; toddy, yeast, vinegar, and sugar
are extracted by tapping the spathes or un ex-
panded flowers ; and, as in the days of the
pious Herbert,
“ The Indian's nut alone
Is clothing, meat and trencher, drink and can.
Boat, cable, sail and needle, all in one.”
When tired of the attractions of a bathing


place which had been found in a running
stream, and shady walks in the richest verdure,
there was a never-failing source of admiration
in the South Sea reef, one of those mighty
fabrics of coral which myriads of tiny archi-
tects, the conquerors of the ocean surge, have
raised as natural breakwaters for all the
islands of the Archipelago. These reefs
usually girdle the islands at a distance of from
half a mile to two miles. Within the barrier
the water is as smooth as a lake, but the
trade winds, which blow for nine months in
the year upon the shore, send the long rollers
of the Pacific against the reef, which varies
from sft. to 30ft. in width. Dashing upon this
impregnable barrier, they rise in columns of
rosy foam to a height of from 10ft. to 20ft.,
and, glittering in the rays of the tropical sun,
fall like obelisks of diamonds. These reefs
do not always encircle the islands whose
shores they protect from the violence of the
sea, but sometimes stretch out in a
direct line from a point for several
miles, and there meeting the ocean billows,
“ make a white wrath of a league of sea.” A
long line of silent ripples is often at first the
only indication of the presence of one of
these spines of coral and volcanic rock ; then
the rollers come against them with a sound
like a thunder clap, and the waters, broken
into milk-white foam, hurry along the side
with wonderful impetuosity, like an immense
jet of vapour, until, meeting with a greater
obstruction, a column is thrown high into the
air, and, forming an aqueous arch, bursts
suddenly into spray. The foam-crests of the
reefs can be seen at a considerable distance
in the day time, and their unceasing sullen
roar gives warning to the mariner of their
unwelcome proximity at night.
The Lau Parliament, which is presided
over by Maafu, a Tongan chief, whose
influence is paramount in the Windward
Islands, was holding its sittings on our
arrival; and his schooner, the Caroline,
a smart little craft of about 40 tons,
flying the flag of the Eastern Confederation,
was anchored inside the reef. On the
way to the mission station, where the
shore party were very kindly entertained
by Mr. < and Mrs. Friend and Mr. and
Mrs. Leggoe, we were introduced to Ratu
David, a judge, and one of the leading
chiefs of Lakemba, and the husband of
Thakombau’s youngest daughter. David,
who is a fine-looking man, was dressed in the
ordinary native costume, wearing a Crimean
shirt and sulu. He received the strangers
Very cordially, and we were invited, with Mr.
and Mrs. Bardwell, to breakfast next day
with a number of leading chiefs of the Lau
kingdom, who were assembled in the island
to attend to Parliamentary duties. Early the
following morning, we caught occasional
glimpses, through the cocoanut palms, of a
gentleman, dressed with scrupulous neatness
and twirling a light silk umbrella with the air
of a Collins-street exquisite, walking up the
avenue of trees to the mission-house. This
proved to be Ratu David, who had donned a
well-fitting black coat, with white trousers
and a waistcoat with gilt buttons, which was
further ornamented by a handsome gold
watch-chain. The object of this visit, we
soon ascertained, was to remind us of the in-
vitation to breakfast at 9 o’clock, and we
accordingly made our way to the chief’s house,
a very substantial native building, in which
the repast, served dla fourchette, was laid A
large party of chiefs, dressed in European
clothes, was seated at a long table, and they
all plied the knife and fork with a facility
which attested they were well accustomed to
the use of those serviceable implements. The
breakfast was of a character which induced
us to form a very favourable opinion of the
modern Fijian cuisine. In addition to pork
yams, taro, and other national dishes, there
was roast turkey, curried fowl, risolles,
fish, English preserved jams, and excel,
lent coffee. The wants of the guests were
attended to by young girls, who waited behind
the chairs, and performed their duties very
dexterously. One of the Tongan chiefs pre-
sent, Ratu James, was evidently no novice in
the matter of the deglutition of European
viands. We were informed that he had the
advantage of most of his neighbours, in that
he had seen something of the world, having
some years ago enjoyed the privilege of a free
passage on board a French man-of-war which
entailed a visit to New Caledonia, at the in-
tercession of some Roman Catholic mission-
aries on Vanua Levu who were no admirers
of the warlike ardour he displayed in his
younger days as a champion of Wesleyani-ni.
The entertainment was altogether a remark-
able instance of the progress which civilisa-
tion has made among the natives of Eastern
Fiji, when it is remembered that only a few
years ago they were utter barbarians ; but
though the behaviour of these chiefs would not
have cast discredit on a European assemblage,
and they were evidently proud that the near
approach they had made to European manners
and customs should be noticed, the probabili-
ties are that they would have preferred a good
feed of yams and pork, served to them in the


native fashion, squatting on mats in their
own homes.
At 10 o’clock the lali or native drum (a por-
tion of the trunk of a tree hollowed out,
which, when beat with two clubs, serves ad-
mirably for a bell) was sounded for the as-
semblage of Parliament. On the way to the
meeting house we were introduced to Maafu,
and exchanged the ordinary native civilities
with him. Maafu is a handsome man, about
48 years of age. He is over six feet in height,
and weighs 20 stone, but his limbs being well
knit, and his body properly proportioned, he
does not give the impression of being nearly so
bulky as that weight implies. He was very
becomingly dressed in a black frock coat,
with white ducks and parent-leather boots,
and wore a cloth cap, with a long peak,
covered by a white pugree. He looks every
inch a chief, and his face expresses kindli-
ness as well as great resoluteness of charac-
ter. On entering the House of Assembly there
were some 50 or 60 chiefs, mostly dressed in
European costume, seated on forms which
extended half-way up the room, and facing
a table at which Maafu, the President, and his
two European secretaries, were seated, while
a few reclined on the mats in the native
fashion. The Rev. Mr. Rooney opened the
proceedings with religious services, at the
close of which the Assembly sang a hymn,
and afterwards repeated the Lord’s Prayer, in
Fijian, audibly. The natives, as a rule, sing
in excellent time, but their voices are a
little harsh, and they almost invari-
ably make the last two bars flat,
a habit they have probably acquired
in singing their own monotonous chants.
The order of proceeding in Parliament
is for the secretary to read drafts of
the laws which have previously been prepared.
Maafu, as President, then explains them,
debate ensues, and the question is put and
passed or negatived by show of hands. Maafu,
who is a fluent speaker, and is considered one
of the best native preachers in the group,
addressed the Assembly on the business of the
day, and expressed a hope that none of them
would hold up their hands for or against a
question without thoroughly understanding
what they were voting for—an error which he
feared had been committed in one or two in-
stances the previous day. In the course of the
morning a law was passed making desertion a
divorceable offence. It was made lawful for
the officers of the Government to enter a
man’s house to arrest him if drunk and
making a disturbance, and all lights were
ordered to be put out and all assemblages to
be dispersed at the sound of the 10 o’clock
drum, under a heavy penalty. These subjects
evoked a good deal of argument, and those
who addressed the House seemed to speak
with considerable native eloquence. The
utmost order and decorum were observed, no
one attempting to speak until the last to
catch the President’s eye had resumed his
seat, and there did not appear to be any ne-
cessity for the attendance of a sergeant-at-
arms—though such an officer, we were in-
formed, was always present to interfere in
case of anything unparliamentary being said.
The discussions were sometimes carried on in
Tonguese and sometimes in Fijian. Most of
the Fijians in the windward islands
understand Tonguese, though they can-
not all speak it, from constant associa-
tion with the people from Tonga, and the
old Tongans, being able to express
themselves with greater facility in their
native tongue, generally prefer it. The
building in which the Assembly was held is a
handsome native structure, some 60ft. in
length by 30ft., and about 35ft. high. The walls
are of reeds, and the roof of the usual native
thatch, but the whole is put together with
more care than is usually bestowed on native
houses. The large supports are of vesi, or In-
dian green heart, a very durable wood. The
centre beams are ornamented with white
cowrie shells, and the sinnet used to tie the
timbers is in some places worked in tasteful
patterns. The building is well ventilated by
different doors with mat screens, and the
floor is entirely covered with native mats.
One of the celebrities present was Tui Niau,
the aged King of Lakemba, who is of such
ancient origin that the oldest native on the
island does not remember to have seen
him a young man. He is very corpulent, and
has not been able to walk for some years past.
When questioned about his age, this antique
Fijian answers somewhat vaguely that Me-
thuselah was an infant to him, and says he
believes Death has forgotten him. During the
debates he satin a corner of the building with
a servant fanning him, and did not seem to
take much heed of what was going on. If he
has not forgotten his younger days, when the
inhabitants of his kingdom were sunk in all
the horrors of savagery, and were abandoned
to heathen rites and human sacrifices in
the most revolting forms they have ever
assumed, the assemblage he was then wit-
ness of must have formed a remark-
able contrast to many other native meetings
he had taken part in before the missionaries
from Tonga set foot on his territories. A


bright-looking youth, 15 or 16 years of age, re-
joicing in an immense head of kinky hair,
towering high in front as thick as a mat and
terminating behind like Dr. Parr’s celebrated
wig, in “boundless convexity of frizz;,” occu-
pied a seat near him. This was Tui Niau’s
youngest son, who appeared to be present
merely as a spectator of the proceedings.
About noon an adjournment was made for
refreshments, when fish, kava, native pud-
dings, &c., brought in by a troop of young
girls, were served on fresh banana leaves-
The discussions were resumed in the after-
noon.
There are more of the outward appearances
of civilisation in Lakemba and Lomo Lomo
(the district of Vanua Mbalavu, where Maafu
resides) and other portions of the eastern
group, where the Tongan chief’s pre-
sence and influence are immediately
felt, than in any other part of Fiji.
Lakemba numbers about 1,600 native in-
habitants, all of whom profess the Christian
religion. They are now compelled by law to
plant 500 cotton trees a year each. Native
police parade the towns in blue uniforms with
red and white facings, with the word “ofisa,”
the native spelling of “ officer, ” in red letters
on their hatbands ; and a native occasionally
lifts his hat to you (these articles were not
known among them a few years ago) with the
easy grace of one long accustomed to that
form of salutation. The native church
in Lakemba is the best in the group.
It is an octagonal wooden building, with
stained glass windows, and capable of hold-
ing 600 persons. It is crowded every
Sunday, when the natives, who associate
morality with English dress and man-
ners, turn out in their best attire. There is
also a training institution for the native min-
istry here. During our stay on the island an
instance was afforded of the unvarying hospi-
tality of the Fijians. A sailor who had been
landing goods from the John Wesley went to
a native hut to ask for a drink of water. It
happened to be a chief’s house, and the owner
immediately brought him out a bottle of
beer.
Some of the women, who are much lighter-
coloured in the windward group than in the
leeward islands, owing to the admixture
received from the Tongans, were very
comely to look upon. The Fijian maid-
ens quite understand the art of making
themselves attractive. Flora is their
jeweller, and they delight to ornament their
ears with the purple blossom of the Chinese
rose. They also frequently decorate their
heads with chaplets of flowers, and wear
curiously carved shell armlets, and long
pendant necklaces made of wild flowers and
vari-coloured seaweed skilfully interwoven.
As regards excellence of physical form, which
their simple dress (when in their own towns
a narrow girdle of native grasses or liku, as
the women’s petticoat is called) displays in all
the simplicity of nature, many of these girls
might be taken for a sculptor’s model. Their
teeth, like those of the men, are of marvel-
lous regularity and whiteness, owing to the
almost uninterrupted vegetable diet of
these people, and when in their gala attire
the effect produced by their natural gaiety
and vivacity, which never seem to flag, is
often of a kind not readily to be effaced.
When visited in their own houses, these coy
damsels press round you with urgent peti
tions for “smoko,” repeating the word with
every possible inflection of the voice, in tones
of the most caressing entreaty, sometimes
throwing their arms round you, and kissing
your hands, until it is absolutely necessary to
free yourselves from these bewildering atten-
tions by making the expected present of
tobacco, which the recipients, with a dried
banana leaf ready at hand for the purpose,
quickly roll up into a cigarette, after which
their sudden affection for the Kai papalangi
will be found to have considerably abated.
The men look on very unconcernedly during
these little scenes, well knowing which side
is going to win. If a Fijian belle is asked
for any favour which she does not choose to
bestow, she at once entrenches,herself behind
the impregnable barrier of (sacred,
or forbidden), and that word shuts out
all hope of success.
After a 24 hours’sojourn, on the island, we
were again under weigh in the “Johnny,”
as the natives call the missionary barque. On
the way back to the ship there was a most
exciting race between the captain’s gig and
the longboat. There were Fijians pulling in
both, and several young ladies of rank in the
party, neatly dressed, with some approach to
European fashion, who were going off to see
the wonders of the ship, or to sarasara, as
they expressed it, cheered on their re-
spective sides with amazing volubility
and animation of gesture, which set off
their lithe and graceful figures to great
advantage. On reaching the vessel, we
found she had been almost taken posses-
sion of by crowds of natives—men, women,
and children— who had put off in their canoes,
under pretence of helping to land the mis-
sionaries’ stores. A babel of tongues arose
D


during the efforts of these people to get
back to their small craft, and a scene of inex-
tricable confusion followed from the inter-
twisting of outriggers, and the occasional fall-
ing of a Fijian into the water. One would
have thought from the shouting and gesticu-
lating that something serious was the matter.
At length all the canoes sheered off, the occu-
pants who had struck up an acquaintance with
a few of the Wesley’s passengers, which had
been cemented by the presentation of one or
two trifling articles of showy exterior, grace-
ully waving their adieux of sa loloma
{my love to you). Then we were under full
sail, with a fresh breeze, for Kandavu, our
tops and stays gaily decorated with immense
bunches of bananas and plantains, and our
decks strewn with cocpanuts and other agree-
.able spoils of the Egyptians.
We entered Tavuki Bay, on the north-west
tside of Kandavu, on the morning of Sunday,
>the 29th May. In the afternoon services were
-conducted in a fine wooden church connected
with the Mission Institute, and the congrega-
tion was swelled to unusual dimensions by
the John Wesley’s passengers. There being
no jetties for landing, the ladies were carried
ashore by natives, in a sort of improvised
palanquin, and the gentlemen who did
not choose to wade through a quarter
of a mile of shallow water, were
carried over it on the shoulders of Fijians.
Riding piek-a-back is of daily occurrence in
'Fiji. There are usually half-a-dozen moun-
tain streams or coral patches to be crossed in
a dqy’s journey, and in the absence of roads
.-and "bridges, it is very necessary to have
at hand. They are wonderfully sure-
footed, jmd will carry heavy burdens over the
shargj;st pointed coral, though they have no
protection for their feet, without the least
danger nf One of the passengers,
, v an elderly gentleman, thinking it the safer
.plan, entrusted himself to the tender mercies
of one of the crew, who rolled over with him
in the water before he had gone many steps.
Strolling into the native church—a substan-
tial building, with white walls of lime and
cement—after our own afternoon service, we
found q, congregation of some 200 sable per-
sonages squatting on the matted floors, and
' fiSjtening with rapt attention to the utter-
anceq of a native minister, who—with one
band, containing a cambric handkerchief,
admonishingly raised, and the other grace-
fully reposing in the folds of tapq, which did
duty for coat tails, after the manner
of Mr, Pickwick in his favourite atti-
tude—was vigorously declaiming, and appa-
rently with much fire and eloquence,
from the pulpit. To do these native
preachers justice, many of them are excellent
men, and reflect infinite credit on the Wes-
leyan missionaries who have taken such pains
to train them. Of the nature of the dis-
course in the present instance we were en-
tirely ignorant, but the effect upon the
feminine portion of the congregation was
great. Some of the women gave way to
violents fits of hysterical weeping, frequently
affirming the truth of what was said by fer-
vent ejaculations of ndina! ndina! (true!
true !), and wailing as if in the very ex-
tremity of penitential woe. This emotional
religion was somewhat unpleasantly suggestive
of a possible future development of some form
of the Hau-hauism of the fanatical Maories. On
the following day we walked through the
native town, followed by a numerous escort
of won dering youthful savages, who were very
anxious to explain everything that seemed
to be of interest to the strangers. In several
houses the women were making tapa. A
very large quantity of this material used to
be produced in the island for articles of
clothing and screens ; but European kinds of
cloth are now rapidly superseding it. This
tapa is made from the bark of the paper mul-
berry. The strips of green bark are first
thoroughly soaked in water. The different
strips of the relaxed and softened fibres, now
in a pulpy mass, are then extended in suc-
cessive layers upon some hard and smooth
surface, and beaten with a wooden mallet
marked with the parallel indentations
which are found imprinted on the cloth
in its finished state. The material is
hammered out in strips to the degtee of
thinness required, and when bleached and
dried in the sun it is beautifully white.
Sometimes it is stained with a vegetable juice
a chocolate brown or bright yellow, and these
coloured pieces are generally used for parti-
tioning screens in the houses, while the white
supplies the sulus in which the christianised
natives take particular pride on Sundays,
when they appear with many fathoms of it
wrapped around their loins. The noise of the
mallets employed in the manufacture can he
heard at a great distance, as the wood is very
hard, and when a number are at work
together, the effect produced is very pe-
culiar.
On the invitation of the Rev. Mr. Carey, I
visited Richmond, a few miles further up the
coast, where the principal training institution
of the mission has been situated for many
years. It is now, however, about to be re*


moved, as the locality is not sufficiently
central. The schoolhouse is a large stone
building, erected by natives, under the super-
intendence of a white tradesman, and like
the superintendent’s house, which occupies
the crest of a hill of considerable elevation,
it can be seen some miles off. There are now
between 40 and 50 natives under training
here. The establishment is on a large scale,
for in addition to the chapel, schoolrooms,
superintendent’s house, and the houses of the
students, there are extensive cultivations
carried on, with a view to making the insti-
tute in part self-supporting. Many of the
students are married, and each family has its
own house. The single men live five or six
together, and they are all provided with lamps
and the necessary appliances for carrying on
their studies privately in the evenings. The
children belonging to the institution are
taught in a model school, and the training
they receive in habits of order and industry
must be of great future benefit to them. After
three years’ instruction at the institute, which
follows a long preliminary course of training,
the students are sent to various parts of the
group as catechists and local preachers ; and
some of the most intelligent and promising,
after a probationary service of several years,
are regularly ordained as ministers, when they
are entitled native assistant missionaries.
The curriculum of the institute includes,
in addition to reading, writing, and a
theological course, history, geography, and
natural history; and a little algebra
is introduced as an exercise for the mind. I
saw some of the notes of lectures taken by
the students, and the handwriting was very
respectable. With all these careful educa-
tional provisions, however, the natives suffer
from the great disadvantage of not being
taught English. This omission completely
shuts them out from the literature of Europe,
as they have only in their own language the
Bible and one or two little moral stories. The
Bible in use is a literal translation, instead of
a paraphrastical one, and by this process the
original has been robbed of all its beauty, and
made generally unintelligible to the Fijians
in the, absence of elaborate explanations in
their own idiom.
The walk along the broken shore from
Tavuki Bay to Richmond affords occasional
glimpses of some of the finest mountain
scenery to be found in Fiji, The hills, clothed
to their summits in a never-changing mantle
of green, rise abruptly from the beach. There
are often towering piles of basalt, heaped in
romantic confusion, from which trees with |
the thickest foliage hang their branches
over startling precipices; the peaks of the
mountains in the background, pierced by
deep and lonely glens, are seen in fantastic
outline, and a little beyond, towering majes-
tically above all to a height of 3,800 ft. from the
sea level, is Mount Washington, its great
spurs bathed in the sunlight, reflecting
golden and purple hues on the varied
landscape beneath. The natives call this
mountain Mbuke Levu, or big yam
mound, from a resemblance it has to the
hillocks they raise for the purpose of growing
yams. Kandavu has a native population of
about 10,000, living in some 160 or 170 towns.
There are seven or eight chiefs, unfortu-
nately of equal power, on the island, and the
jealousies between them prevent anything
like systematic government. The white
population, apart from the missionaries, is
limited to some seven or eight planters, most
of whom live on the south side. Tavuki Bay
is a favourite place of call for South Sea
whalers when provisioning. On the Mon-
day afternoon, we again weighed anchor,
having on board the Rev. Messrs. Rooney
and Leggoe from Lakemba, and the Rev.
Messrs. Carey and Webb from Kandavu,
who, with some native teachers, were on
their way to the annual district meeting at
Rewa. The intending settlers in the ship,
being naturally very anxious for information
concerning the country in which they were
about to make their homes, one of the mis-
sionaries amused his fellow voyagers by tell-
ing thrilling stories of mbuturakaing (bully-
ragging, the Australians insisted on calling it)
and other pleasing adventures which awaited
them. At sundown the following evening we
entered the reef passage opposite Levuka.
Before 8 o’clock, we were snugly moored
within 10 minutes’ pull of the many twinkling
lights of the town, and next morning saw
us safely deposited in the metropolis of the
land of cotton.
No. VII.
Levuka is situated on the eastern side of
Ovalau, an island eight miles in length by
seven in breadth, about fifteen miles from the
eastern shore of Viti Levu, and some twenty
miles from Mbau, It has been the principal
port of Fiji since white settlements were first
formed in the country. Levuka came to be
the most prominent settlement of the group
because of its central position and the un-
varying friendliness shown towards the white
man by the leading chief of the district, Tui


Levuka, who was gathered to his fathers early
in the year 1870. The accidental circum-
stances which led to its selection will ac-
count for the peculiarly unsuitable na-
ture of the site for a town. A spot with more
natural disadvantages could scarcely have
been chosen. The town consists of a double
row of houses, three-quarters of a mile in
length, extending along a narrow strip
of beach, which it now fully occupies.
There is properly only one street, the open
beach, as the buildings at the back have been
jumbled together without any order. The
town is incapable of being extended either
way. At the back, a couple of hundred yards
from the beach, high volcanic mountain
ranges rise abruptly, and it is hemmed in at
either end by two immense spurs of rock.
The extreme ends of the town already reach
these natural boundaries. Levuka is
built on what was not very long since
a dense grove of cocoanut and bread-
fruit trees ; and it was not until
the early part of 1868 that it gave immediate
promise of its present flourishing condition.
It has now a permanent population of 200
whites, with a floating population of about
300 more. There are four or five large
weatherboard hotels, with zinc roofs, and
two of them are two-storied. At the best,
Turner’s Criterion and Perkins’s Hotel, the
charge for lodgers is ss. per day, and the bill
of fare is better than might be expected.
The tables were usually well supplied with
fresh mutton (not always first-class), fowls,
and preserved fish, jams, &c., ad lib.; and
when the bedrooms were not crowded, they
were convenient enough. There are also ex-
cellent billiard-tables, and the Albion Hotel
has a very good bowling alley. The
mercantile part of the town is represented
by four wholesale Louses, and some
half-dozen smaller stores, nearly all built of
weatherboard, with iron roofs. Among
public buildings, there is the Wesleyan
Church, with walls of lime and cement and
roof of iron ; the Roman Catholic Church, a
handsome wooden structure;; and .the Lite-
rary Institute, built on a hill in the centre of
the town, which no one ever thinks of
ascending. The British Consulate, a large
native house, at one time belonging to the
missionaries, is distinguished by a tall flag-
staff ; and the American consul has his
offices in his own house, the handsomest in
the settlement, which is built on the crest of
one of the spurs which embrace the town.
Some of the residents have small villa
residences on the terraces of hills which
form the background, and these bouses as seen
from the harbour rising one above the other,
have a very picturesque appearance. The town
itself, with its prevailing tint of white, looks
very well from the anchorage, but it is one of
the least desirable spots in Fiji for a resi-
dence. There are a few days in the year
when the heat reflected from the rocks is
almost intolerable. The inhabitants are
literally chained to a rook. When business is
over there is nothing to do but to pace up and
down the one street like a sentinel on duty,
for climbing hills in the tropics is too fatigu-
ing a pleasure for every-day indulgence.
Young ladies J ‘ doing the block,” however,
have the advantage of being seen by all
the townspeople without any exception;
and lounging In the verandah of any
of the houses on -Sunday morning, one
may know without further trouble who
goes to church and who does not. Fiji has
its newspaper and printing office. The Fiji
Times is published weekly in Levuka. This
“abstract and brief chronicle of the time,”
small as it is, is of some value, and it may be
expected one day to become an important
organ of public opinion. The harbour is
formed by one of the barrier reefs peculiar to
the South Sea Islands, and has good holding
ground. There are two entrances through the
reef opposite the town. Two rough jetties
have recently been thrown up for landing, and
a third is being built. When the “John
Wesley’’arrived there were 19 vessels of various
sizes in port, and the town had an extremely
busy and prosperous air. There had been
several days of rain and bad weather, which
kept a large number of planters in the town,
which they had visited for business purposes,
longer than they intended staying. All the
hotels and lodging-houses were crowded in
consequence. There were from 60 to 70
lodgers in each of the two principal hotels,
and men were sleeping on tables and sofas
and in the open verandahs. Notwithstand-
ing this large collection of a very mixed
population, in a country where there is neither
an English magistrate nor a policeman, there
was no disorderly conduct, and all lights were
generally out at 10 o’clock. The people, in
fact, seemed too much occupied with their
all-absorbing pursuit of cotton-growing and
engagements for procuring labour to have time
for aught else. There are as yet no banking
facilities in Fiji, as the bank charters do not
permit the establishment of branches in a
country without any recognised form of Go-
vernment. Commercial operations are chiefly
carried on by an excessively inconvenient


system of cheques and drafts on banks in
Sydney. One local merchant has issued £1
notes of his own, which have a large circu-
lation, and the silver and gold in daily use
comprise almost every coin under the sun.
In distant plantations it is the practice to
give orders on Levuka storekeepers for pay-
ment of small debts, and they are sometimes
given without the smallest probability of their
ever being paid,
O valau, though not so well adapted for culti-
vation as many portions of the group, contains
fully as great a variety of tropical productions
as is to be found in any island of the archi-
pelago, The mountains lying to the westward
of Levuka will well reward the labour of the
explorer, by the magnificent scenery they con-
tain. Here may be seen in one 1 view orange
and lemon trees bending under the weight of
their golden spheres, the umbrageous bread
fruit with its scolloped and variegated leaves,
the green tops of the palm, the tapioca, guava,
ginger, turmeric, arrowroot, and croton oil
plants, the luscious pineapple, and banks
covered with the wild chili, brilliant with a
rare combination of colours, and gay with the
fresh verdure of eternal spring. Little rivulets
glide from the base of one hill to the other,
bubbling round grassy knolls, glancing from
beneath low tree-fringed rocks, and singing
in soft tones of the cool green woods through
which they came. Huge cloud-capped hills
rise to a height of 2,000 ft. on either hand
like a vast natural amphitheatre, their sides
often perforated by peaceful valleys radiating
down to the sea, and the crannies and crags
of their summits ringing with the sound of
the wind. Turning to the east, there is the
harbour with the ships at anchor, in the dis-
tance the clear outlines of Mokongai,
Wakaya, and Mbatiki; and, between, the
sapphire rollers of the Pacific, flecked with
their crests of creamy foam, breaking in
magnificent desolation on the reef. The
mountain streams of Fiji, which* often
form very pretty cascades, are always
a charming feature in the landscape. Levuka
is watered by one of these ever-flowing
streams, and the whole male population turn
out soon after daylight to bathe in some one
of the chain of basins through which it finds
its way to the sea. At a distance of two miles
from the town there is a very pretty waterfall,
in a wildly romantic mountain gorge, above
which towers a conical rock of great height.
The approach to it is through tangled masses
of diverse greenery, which almost shut out
the sunlight from this fairy dell. The water i
falls some 20ft. in a triple cascade down into I
a transparent pool formed in a rocky bed, and
the little jets there uniting make two
more similar leaps to add their small volume
to a pebbly brook which flows on to the
coast.
The native population of Ovalau has de-
creased very much of late years. There are
now some 15 native towns on the island, and
a good few half-castes. The women about
Levuka are paid for washing white men’s
clothes, an operation in which they are not
very skilful. The men often earn two or three
shillings in a day by doing odd jobs in the
stores, carrying the luggage of new arrivals,
&c., and they generally spend their money as
soon as it is received, in the bars of the
publichouses. There are a few cotton planta-
tions on the western side of the island, some
of whieh have done well; but the place
seems never to have been remarkably popular
as a cotton-growing district.
On the morning of Friday, the 3rd June, I
took my passage in the Roman Catholic mis-
sionary vessel Pio Nono, a cutter of 20
tons, with the view of visiting the Rewa
district. The living freight, comprising 10
souls, representing almost as many nationali-
ties, was very characteristic of the mixed
population of Fiji, for this number included a
Frenchman (Father Breheret, the captain),
an Englishman, an Irishman, a Scotchman, a
Canadian, a German, a Dutchman, and two
Fijians and one half-caste (the crew). The
captain informed us that he had been 26
years a missionary in Fiji, and had sailed
over some spots where little islands have
since risen. The Pio Nono and several other
boats were built by the Roman Catholic mis-
sionaries, with a little native assistance, and
most of their churches have been constructed
in the same way. We had good proof that
Father Breheret is a careful and accomplished
seaman. He never left the helm during the
two days’ voyage while the vessel was under
sail, and always sat with the sheet in one
hand. The numerous shoals and reefs in the
passage were all steered through without once
touching ground, which is somewhat unusual
in Fiji. Navigation in the group is very in-
tricate, and such is the carelessness common
in boat voyages, that this was the only expe-
dition I made during my travels in thecountry
without getting aground, drifting improperly
near a reef, or suffering some unpleasantness
of the kind. The bill of fare of the “ Pi o
Nono” was limited to weevily biscuits and
tea—rather a startling contrast to the “ cakes
and ale’ of the “ John Wesleyand the pas-
sengers, who had brought extra provisions,


could not prevail upon the good padre to
share with them. Owing to the strong adverse
wind blowing at the time, instead of steering
our course from Levuka direct for the east
coast of Yiti Levu, we had to sail round Ova-
lau, the whole of which was thus passed in
view. In the evening we anchored off Motu-
riki, and were under sail again at sunrise next
morning. At mid-day we made Kemba Point,
on the east coast of the largest island, a few
miles from the mouth of the Rewa, and waited
several hours while the captain went ashore
in the dingy to look for a canoe to take us up
the river; but all the natives had gone fishing t
and the only attention we received was from
a cow which had reached this lonely neigh-
bourhood in some mysterious manner.
After sundry expressive looks towards us, she
waded out to the dingy, anchored 100 yards
from.the shore, and spent some time in vain
attempts to get into it, with a view to renew-
ing her acquaintance with civilisation, by
coming on board the Pio Nono. Some of the
passengers then landed, and walked six miles
down the coast to another native village,
where we were fortunate enough to get a
canoe, and, the remainder following in the
dingy, we entered the Rewa at 7 o’clock, and
reached the principal settlement three hours
later. The Rewa, or Wai Levu (big water),
is the largest river in Fiji. It has four large
mouths within a short distance of Suva har-
bour, and is navigable for small boats some 40
miles inland. About 15 miles from the
coast it receives the Wai Manu, which comes
from the west, its main branch rising in the
Namosi Valley ; and farther on, 27 miles from
Rewa, the Wai Ndina also flows into it. Op-
posite the town of Rewa it is a quarter of a
mile broad, and in no place is it as narrow as
the Yarraat Prince’s-bridge, Melbourne. We
stayed the night at Spiers’ Hotel, or shanty,
as it would be called in Australia. There are
several houses of refreshment in the settle-
ment, some saw-mills, and also one or two
good stores. There are about 30 plantations
on the river, and 60 or 70 settlers. It is
thought that there would have been 200
settlers in the district now but for the unfor-
tunate ending to the Challenger’s boat expedi-
tion. Before that affair the settlement num-
bered 112 residents. The river is famous for
mosquitoes and floods, and in the opinion of
some is too wet for cotton, for “ the rain it
raineth every day,” or nearly so, on the Rewa.
This, though the oldest planting district in
the group, is not the most advanced. It was
originally thought that Sea Island cotton
would not flourish in this locality, and that
it was a necessity to plant it on the coasts,
where there is a sandy soil, impregnated with
saline particles, and wafted by sea breezes.
The best variety is undoubtedly raised under
such circumstances, but the Rewa planta-
tions are said to produce in quantity what
they lack in quality, and some of the planters
have been very successful. The river has
extensive flats on either side of magnificent
black loam, 12 or 18ft. deep, and it will no
doubt some day be famous for its sugar and
root crops.
On the following morning (Sunday) we saw
a lot of 64 foreign labourers just landed from
the wreck of the schooner Maafu, which had
run on a reef close to the port. These
men, with the exception of one in the last
stage of consumption, who died next day,
looked cheerful and in good spirits. They
were to be disposed of at £l2 per head,
passage-money. Had they been landed as
slaves in South America, the former labour
traffic of which has been compared to that of
Fiji, they would have brought from 800dol. to
1,500d01. each. Calling on the Rev. Mr. Fison,
I accompanied him to the native church,
where the women were again hysterically weep-
ing, and afterwards went to the European
Church, where the Rev. Mr. Robson preached
to a highly attentive congregation of
three, exclusive of the resident minister’s
family. The settlers of Fiji, except in
Levuka, it is to be regretted, are almost cut
off from the ordinances of religion, as it is
difficult for those living in outlying districts
to assemble together for public worship, in
the absence of regular means of convey-
ance. In the afternoon I was introduced to
some of the native notabilities, and found
the Rewa King, Rambithi Roko Tui Dreketi
suffering a recovery, his normal condition
when not intoxicated. The chief was seated in
his house surrounded by his courtiers, one of
whom was just preparing a bowl of angona,
or Fiji grog. Kava, as this compound is also
called, is made by chewing the fibres of a
root. The masticated mass is spat out in
pulpy balls into a large wooden bowl, in
which it is squeezed and strained through
fine cocoanut fibres. The juice, being mixed
with water, is ready for immediate use.
A cocoanut cup of the liquor was at
once handed to us. In taste it has
a very strong resemblance to magnesia and
soapsuds. The Fijians drink this angona
in large quantities, and however nauseous it
may be at first to white men, they often be-
come passionately fond of it, and I subse.
quently saw some drinking it in large


bowls. It is more stupefying than intoxi-
cating, relaxing the muscles very much,
and is said to be an excellent purifier
of the blood. The Fiji grog can be
made by grating the root, instead of the
more filthy and popular process ; but con-
noisseurs prefer the native method of prepa-
ration. Maafu employs a number of young
girls for the special purpose of chewing hava.
When the kava bowl is in use, the end of a
long cord attached to it is always thrown to-
wards the person of highest rank in the room,
and when the king or head chief removes the
cup from his lips, the action is followed by a
general clapping of hands, recalling to mind
the musical honours in the play, when
“ the king drinks to Hamlet.” Among
the Fijians present was an officer of affable
manners, who on the direction of a former
king, Mdaku Wanqua, punished a woman
who had brought insufficiently cooked food
into the Royal presence by cutting off her
hand and thrusting it into her mouth, from
whence it was withdrawn and afterwards
cooked and eaten. Some idea may be formed
of the rate at which the native population is
dying out by the following returns of
births and deaths in the four principal
Rewa tribes living within a radius of six
miles t —From November 30 to December 15,
1869, 14 births, 19 deaths ; December 15 to
January 4,1870, 11 births, 42 deaths ; January
4 to March 8, 28 births, 53 deaths ; March 8
to May 17, 28 births, 46 deaths; May 17 to
May 24, 8 births, 13 deaths. The population
of these tribes, according to the last returns,
was—Rewa, 3,717 ; Nakelo, 2,055; Tokotoka,
I, ; and Notho, 3,990; making a total of
11, The Rewa district has been much de-
cimated by wars in times past, having been,
in fact, the cockpit of Fiji, but, as these re-
turns show, the population is still very
large.
To ascend the river it was necessary to en-
gage another boat, with four natives to pull.
This was accordingly done, but we had to
make acquaintance first with the Fijian in-
stitution of malua, and it was late in the
afternoon before we were fairly started. New
arrivals are rarely more than a few hours in
the islands before they become familiar with
the direful import of that word in all
its aggravating significance. The literal
meaning of the expression is by-and-
by, and it is the first word a native
uses when asked to do anything. The word
is thoroughly characteristic of the race. It
has also grown upon the old hands among the
whites ; and it is most distressing to people
accustomed to business promptitude to find
their progress, however important despatch
may be, barred at every step by this frightful
nightmare of malm, which sits on the
country like a national incubus. It rings
in the ears of the new-comer morning,
noon, and night, and he cannot get rid of its
ceaseless iteration in his dreams. It is quite
impossible to induce any one to hurry about
anything, and when a long day’s journey has
been planned the previous evening, it usually
ends in stopping for the night at the first rest-
ing place which presents itself. When war has
broken out between two tribes, and the belli-
gerents are asked when offensive operations
are going to begin, the reply is usually
“ Malua; wait until our yams have been
planted.” When the planting season is fairly
over, it is “ Malua ; wait until our yams are
gathered in and, finally, so long an in-
terval elapses that the original cause of quarrel
is often forgotten before actual hostilities com-
mence. This was the course of procedure,
when Thakombau set about avenging the
murder of the Rev. Mr. Baker, and among
both whites and natives procrastination is
allowed to thieve more time in Fiji than in
any other part of the world. If a man were
drowning, and with his last breath called to
a Fijian for help, he would undoubtedly get
for answer malua. Should Fiji ever choose
a national motto, the claims of malua ought
certainly not to be overlooked.
No. VIII.
Our Fijian helps were unfortunately among
the laziest of that indolent race, and our pro-
gress up the river was slow. They were in
their own district, and feeling their feet upon
their native heath, were disposed, as is their
wont while holding that Macgregor-like ad-
vantage, to take the whole management upon
themselves. Had we not proved our inde-
pendence by taking to the oars ourselves for
some time, and threatening to put them
ashore without pay as useless, we should not
have advanced more than a couple of miles
a day. The first plantation we reached was
Mr. Waterston’s, one of the best on the river.
The house, a native one, was extremely com-
fortable. The owner had lost his dwelling
the previous year by a violent hurricane,
which compelled him and his family to take
refuge in an excavation under the floor.
The cotton looked remarkably well, and one
or two horses and cows, which had not
been many months on the plantation, were
rolling in fat. Mr. Waterston is one of the


fortunate ones, who, beginning in the days of
cheap labour and land with a few hundred
pounds, has succeeded in establishing himself
in a very substantial position. About a year
and a half ago Mr, and Mrs. Waterston were
assaulted by some natives from a neighbour-
ing village, who administered a very mild dose
of mbuturaka in return for a blow with the
fist Mr. Waterston had given one of their
number who had been insolent the previous
day. Complaint was made to Thakombau,
and he transported the ringleaders to another
island for 18 months, but their friends con-
trived to purchase their freedom in less than
half a year by a liberal present of yams and
poultry to the King. They have given no
trouble since, however. Next day we walked
through the several plantations of Mr. Chap-
man, Mr. Chalmers, Captain Morton, and
others, all of which were promising well, and
arrived in the evening at Mr. Jacob Storck’s,
which is very pleasantly situated. There were
120 acres under cultivation altogether, in-
cluding 10 of coffee. In the evening Mrs.
Storck made excellent coffee from the berry
grown on the plantation, and we were further
initiated in the mysteries of the granadilla, a
species of passion fruit, which, mixed with
sugar and new milk, was a very good substi-
tute for strawberries and cream. Mr. Storck,
who accompanied the Government mission in
1860, as assistant to Dr. Seem an, is the oldest
planter on the river, having settled there 10
years ago. Our oarsmen, in accordance with
their usual custom, had gone to the native
town for the night, and they were unusually
late in rejoining us the following morning.
Their appearance at once explained the delay,
by the attention they had been paying to
their toilet. Their bodies were freshly
anointed with cocoanut oil, and their hair
was dressed out of all recognition by the
application of lime paste, which made
them look just as though they had
each put on a barrister’s wig. The
use of this lotion for beautifying the
hair, which nature has supplied abundantly
n the coral, is almost universal with the
Fijians, and it is said to obviate the necessity
of employing small-tooth combs. We were now
some 25 miles from the Rewa town, and we had
the utmost difficulty in persuading our guides
to take us any further up the river, though
liberal payment was offered. They eventually
agreed to go, on the understanding that the
journey down stream should be commenced
on the following day. Passing the Wai Ndina,
a few hours’ rowing brought us to Mr.
Pfluger’s plantation, at Toussa. It was Mr.
Pfluger’s dispute with the natives which led
to the Challenger’s boat expedition to Ndioka,
a few miles further up the river—a locality
which we particularly wished to see ;
but nothing could prevail upon our
men to go any further, every argu-
ment being met with their emphatic
negative of sengai sara, and there was
nothing for it but to return next day. Mr.
Pfluger is not popular with the natives, who
carry on all the trading with his wife, and
carefully avoid the house when he is in it.
They allege as a cause for this dislike the very
insubstantial reason that he has “ angry
eyes,” though other people fail to see any
peculiarity in them. Mrs. Pfluger informed
us that only a few days previously a native
had come to her, and offered in exchange for
a large knife to bring the head of the late
Rev. Mr. Baker, which he said was stuck
upon a tree not many miles off. The knife
was at once promised, but the man seemed
a little nervous about executing his commis-
sion. If it is true that the head of the mur-
dered missionary is thus exposed, some exer-
tion ought to be made to deprive the
cannibals of this ghastly trophy.
Mr. Baker was a Wesleyan missionary sta-
tioned on the Rewa. In July, 1867, he started
on an expedition into the interior, accom-
panied by seven Christian natives, in the
hope of converting some of the cannibal
tribes. He did not communicate his inten-
tion to any of his colleagues, or he would have
been strongly dissuaded from his purpose.
On reaching the heathen tribe of Navosa he,
with a native assistant missionary, repeat-
edly urged the chief of that town, Naka-
takataimoso, to abandon heathenism at
once for Christianity; and the chief is
said to have replied, “No, 1 shall not
htu; but I will show you the road to Vun-
da”—the next town of importance. He is also
said to have remarked that he hated the lotu;
and, pointing to a battle-axe, said, “There is the
thing for that." An account of what followed,
written by a colleague of the deceased mis-
sionary from the statements of the two men
who escaped, and from other reliable sources
of information, proceeds as follows:
“ No food whatever was presented to the
strangers. Early in the evening the mission-
ary and most of his party, being wearied with
their long walk, fell asleep. Mr. Baker was
very tired and footsore. During the night
the N. A. missionary looked out of doors,
and observed that many lights appeared
to be coming towards the town. On the
following morning, Sunday, 21st July, Mr.
Baker and his men were awake pretty early.


Mr. Baber was observed looking from the
door through his telescope, and soon after-
wards said to his people, ‘ Lads, let us be off
at once, or we shall be killed to day.’ Why
be spoke thus is scarcely clear. He probably
saw a number of armed men going on ahead,
and it might have struck him that they were
going to lie in wait for him. It has also
been said that he observed the countenances
of the men of the place to indicate mischief.
About 7 a.m. Mr. Baker went outside, where-
upon the chief came up to him and said,
‘ Come let us be off; let us show you the way
toVunda.’ Mr. Baker then called his men,
and the line was formed at once in the
following order The chief, carrying a short
club in his hand, led the way; Mr. Baker
followed, and next to him came a strong-
looking man of the place carrying a battle-
axe. Then came the N.A. missionary, fol-
lowed by the rest of the party. The last man
but two in the line was carrying on his
shoulder a small iron box. Now the company
moved on, but had not proceeded 100 yards
when the two last men, looking behind them,
saw the chief Buibuita marching steadily up
at the head of an armed company of 25 or 30
men. This frightened the two men, who ran
forward to the middle of the line, thus leaving
the man with the box behind. On coming up
with the party Buibuita struck at the head
of the last man with a club ; the box re-
ceived the full force of the blow, and the man
throwing it down, jumped aside into the long
reed grass that grew on both sides of the
path, and eventually escaped. Mr, Baker,
hearing the noise, turned round out of the
path to see what had happened. The strong
native with the battle-axe went on a little
and then turned round too, thus coming
again behind Mr. Baker. At this moment,
and just as Mr. Baker, with his hand up-
lifted, was saying ‘Don’t, don’t,’the man
struck him with great force across the
back of the neck and he fell dead.”
The N. A. missionary was next killed, and
then the remainder of the party, excepting a
second man, who escaped. The bodies were
dragged back into the town and piled one
upon another, that of Mr. Baker on the top;
and they were afterwards portioned out to
the several villages to be eaten, the chief re-
serving the white man for himself. Two
years previously Captain H. M. Jones, V.C.,
H.B.M. Consul, with Dr. Graeffe, a natu-
ralist, Mr. F. W, Hennings, and Mr. Boyd, in
an expedition in which they went right
through Yiti Levu, from the south coast to
the north—from Ndimbi Creek, not far from
Navua, to a point near Rakr raki—slept in the
same town in which Mr. Baker was murdered,
and were well received by Nakatakataimoso
and Buibuita. These were the first white men
who had ever penetrated to this heathen
tribe, but recently other white men have
visited the locality with impunity, and have
had; dealings with the natives; There*
is little doubt that Mr. Baker was killed
because he was regarded, like all the
Wesleyan missionaries on the island, as
a political emissary of Mbau. The ac-
ceptance of Christianity by the heathen
is a purely political step in the first instance,
however beneficial the moral effects which
sometimes follow may be. The loM means
subjection to Thakombau and payment of
taxes, and some tribes which accepted the
Christian teachings on being subdued by
Thakombau have, on becoming independent
by subsequent successes in war, relapsed into
their former state of heathenism. The mis-
sionaries, therefore, do not consider it safe to
live among newly-converted tribes. When a
people have signified their willingness to lotvf,
a native teacher is sent to reside with them,
and the missionaries make it a rule never to
pass beyond more than one tribe which is
without a native teacher. Mr. Baker, over-
stepping this rule, passed beyond two heathen
tribes, and his imprudent zeal cost him his
life. He is the only missionary who has been
killed in Fiji. The native Christians with
him, who were very much afraid on reaching
the heathen tribes, often implored him to re--
turn. He had unbounded confidence in the
Fijians, however, and told them that if
they would not follow him be would
go alone. It may be remarked that
the most favourable opportunity presented
itself for killing the party when they were
all asleep, but this would not have been in
accordance with native custom. The Fijians-
are incapable of carrying out an impromptu
plan, and, besides, it was necessary first to*
communicate with the chiefs of the surround-
ing villages, to make them accomplices, in
order that they might share the responsibility
of a deed which was sure to be avenged.
When Consul Jones and his party crossed the
island, a night watch was always kept, and
each heathen village was quitted with the
smallest possible delay, the hour of departure
being always kept a secret. The Rev. L.
Fison and the Rev, F. Langham probably
owe their lives to the precautions which their
knowledge of the native character have some-
times induced them to take. Having made
arrangements one night to sleep in a certain
heathen village, they discovered, though
they were being treated with the utmost
courtesy, that preparations were on foot for
killing them. Having no weapons of defence
but an umbrella each, they determined to-
quit the place at once. This they did without
giving the least warning of the sudden change


In their intentions, and the Fijians, not being
able to arrange a new programme for the sac-
rifice with equal rapidity, were checkmated.
The missionaries by this means got off, and
by travelling all night reached a Christian
tribe in the morning. Thakombau, on hear-
ing of the murder of the Rev. Mr. Baker and
his party, at once undertook to avenge it,
promising to bring these insolent moun-
taineers under the heel of his authority in a
few weeks from the date of the com mission of
the crime. The whites assisted him in getting
ammunition, and eventually a force of 2,000
men was organised ; but owing to the usual
dilatoriness of Polynesians, it did not take
the field until April, 1868, or nine months
after the death of Mr, Baker. When the
expedition did start, it marched inland
from three separate points, Thakombau
leading one division in person. The result,
probably owing to over-confidence on the
part of the attacking force, and the luke-
warmness or treachery of allies, was dis-
astrous to Thakombau. He was beaten back
without having taken a single prisoner, and
it is said that 60 of his men taken in ambush
by the enemy were all eaten with the excep-
tion of two, who were liberated after the
feast in order that they might return to tell
the story. A settler who saw the retreating
force on its way back from the hills told me
that all the wounded he noticed were hit in
the back, and the whites who accompanied
the expedition agree that the greatest execu-
tion was done while the men were running
away. The murderers of the Rev. Mr. Baker
therefore remain unpunished, while this
defeat has seriously injured Thakombau’s
prestige, and encouraged the hill tribes in
their insolence and opposition to the
Christian teaching. Thakombau afterwards
talked of arranging a second expedition on a
larger scale, but nothing has been heard of it
for some time past.
On our return trip we took a hurried glance
at the several plantations of Messrs. Reece,
Lee, and Bennett, where there is a large
amount of imported labour employed, and a
considerable extent of land under cotton.
The planters in this district all employ im-
ported labour; but men, women, and chil-
dren in the neighbouring Fijian villages give
occasional help, especially in the picking
season, and also supply yams to feed the
labourers. There are as yet no ploughs or
agricultural implements of any kind, except
knives, on the Rewa. The cotton seed is
planted in a hole scratched with a knife or
pointed stick. The ground is so soft and
luxuriantly productive that this primitive
mode of cultivation seems sufficient. The
cotton trees attain a much greater size here
than on the coasts. The clearing is light, and
when stumps of trees are left in the
earth, which is the general practice, they rot
away in a couple of months. The rich
deltas of the river are well adapted for cattle,
and root crops, which will be of great import-
ance when the natives are no longer able to
supply the population with yams. Lucerne
and native grasses grow abundantly, and it is
said that Indian corn has produced here
three crops a year, of 40 bushels per acre to
the crop. The extensive flats on each side of
the river present a variety of tropical scenery.
They are backed, at a distance of a few miles,
by immense mountain ranges, which are
the abode of the Devil chiefs. On quiet even-
ings the sound of the death lali announcing a
cannibal feast, which is distinguishable from
the beat of the drum for other purposes, is
sometimes heard floating down from these
hills. In May last 20 or 30 men—prisoners
taken in an inter-tribal war—were cooked
and eaten at one dinner party in this
locality.
On the way down the river three out of the
five members of our party left the boat with
the view of walking through Mr Chapman’s
plantation to his house, where they were to
rejoin the others. One of them, straying away
alone, had the misfortune to get lost. The
others went in quest of him, cooeying until
they were hoarse without receiving any reply,
till at length they began to think their friend
had fallen a victim to the sharpened appetite of
some anthropophagistical mountaineer. Some
time after the search had been given up,
however, the wanderer found his way to the
appointed rendezvous. He explained that,
believing himself to be on Mr. Chapman’s
plantation, which we visited on the way up
the river, he made direct for the spot where
the house would have been had he been right
in his surmise, and got fairly entrapped in a
sort of labyrinthine canebrake. The reeds
reached such a height that they shut out
all surrounding objects, so that he
could not tell which way he was
going. In pressing through these tall reeds
they closed upon him from behind like
so many spring doors, preventing the air
from circulating freely, and making the
atmosphere close and sultry beyond expres-
sion. Some 20 minutes of plunging about
over a flooring honeycombed with pit falls co
cealed by undergrowths—frequently sprawlin
i full length over thong-like creepers and to


Arils which it was impossible to break—pro-
duced a syncope of his faculties, and there
came a time when he put forth his arm with-
out producing the smallest impression upon
the stubborn wires of his thick-set cage.
Spending his remaining strength, after a long
rest, in climbing a withered tree 12ft. high,
which only enabled him to discover that he
was not on Mr. Chapman’s plantation at all,
without showing him any end to the laby-
rinth, he again lay down reflecting that it
was impossible to make a way in a
direct line, even though he knew which
way to go, or had vigour enough
remaining to advance at all. Just then he
saw a patch of sky through a little break in
the veithoes, and examining this opening more
attentively suddenly found that he was within
a few feet of the river. With the view of
finding bearings, or hoping to see the boat, he
swam out into the Rewa, regardless of the
sharks, and without stopping to undress ; but
the stream at this point was provokingly
straight. There was nothing in view but low
banks thickly covered with jungle, and no
sign whatever of the rising ground on which
the planter’s house he was in search of
stood. In a short time, however, some
Fijians passed in canoes on the way
to their mountain homes. He explained
the circumstances to these people by the
use of a very limited vocabulary, and after
many jocular remarks on his damp appear-
ance, they obligingly promised to take him to
his destination. He was gaily sailing up
stream instead of down in one of these canoes,
when Mr. Eastgate, a neighbouring planter,
coming across in his boat, and inquiring
where he was going to with the natives, was
informed of the mistake, and with his own
boat returned him to his disconsolate friends.
A drachm of a mixture which is of great
repute in the settlement, administered by
Mr. Chapman, restored the lost one’s cus-
tomary equanimity, and elicited the foregoing
story.
We went some distance up the Wai
Manu to visit Dr. M’Grath’s property.
The Suva block, belonging to the Poly-
nesia Company, extends to this river,
which presents some of the most beautiful
scenery in the world. The banks are
gorgeously arrayed in the chief glories of
the Polynesian forest. They are occasionally
indented by little creeks, completely canopied
by overhanging trees and shrubs; while the
boughs, interlaced with parasitical plants and
flowers of divers hues, are imaged in the
glassy tide. We stayed the night on Mr.
Basch’s plantation. Before leaving this dis*
trict, the services of two members of the party
—Drs. Roche and M’Grath—were called into
requisition, under very interesting circum-
stances, viz., the advent of a young Anglo-
Fijian. The lady in question mentioned
afterwards with just pride that she was the
only person on the Rewa or Wai Manu who
had been fortunate enough to have medical
attendance on such an occasion. On the
way back through the township of Rewa,
we called at Mr. Page’s and also Mr. Morrell’s
stores, both very substantial buildings ; and
on Sunday, June 12, left the Rewa for Levuka
in a small open boat, with two half-caste
sailors. It had been intended originally to
cut across to Suva harbour before returning,
but some of the party having business in
Levuka, which did not admit of any further
delay, this portion of the programme had to
be excised, thanks to the all-powerful
malua, which had kept us nine days doing
what could very easily have been accom-
plished in four or five.
Being favoured with a fine day for the
voyage from Kemba Point to Levuka, we saw
something of the pleasures of life in Fiji; for
chief among these, in favourable weather,
must be counted the frequent sailing excur-
sions about the islands of the archipelago.
There is always a special charm in the
inside reef voyages. The water is usually from
seven to fifteen fathoms in depth. Its crystal
clearness reveals at the bottom subaqueous
gardens of exquisite beauty, composed of
marine plants aud coral trees of divers form,
upon which sport the peculiar kinds of fish
whose habitat is here. There is among these
a canary-coloured fish; another striped with
yellow, green, brown, and black ; and notably
one of a deep ultramarine, which is always
seen lying at the bottom, and is at first taken
for some inanimate object. On the surface
of the waters all the colours of the solar
prism are condensed, and the occasional
shifting of shadows thrown from the clouds
or neighbouring promontories, produces ever-
changing hues, which rival the fleeting shades
of the expiring dolphin. Some of the most
beautiful of these submarine pictures I saw was
travelling in a little canoe, with two natives,
between Vuna Point and Wairiki, off tbe
island of Taviuni, but they are common to all
the reefs. On the present occasion our course
was through what had the appearance of a
clear expanse of open sea, gemmed with
islands and islets, extending from point to
point in a magnificent panorama, and all
sleeping pearly in the soft transparency of a


still Sabbath morning. Above was an almost
cloudless vault of blue, with a thin tracery of
light fleecy clouds skirting the horizon f
below, the water rippled by the gentle breeze
into a thousand tiny wavelets } and beyond,
the sublime spectacle of the South Sea
beating in mad fury against its barrier, the
sound whereof came to us now like a roar, as
f in fiercest anger, now with a measured
dirge-like tone, and anon in melancholy
strains, mellowed by distance, tristfully sur-
gent, like an ASolian harp. There was
no other sound to break the impressive
silence, save the monotonous whisper
and lap of the water, varied by the occa-
sional splash of a silvery shower of flying
fish in returning to their element. Reclining
listlessly in your boat, it is impossible to
avoid yielding to the general languor. You
feel an almost irresistible desire, while gazing
from the side at the kaleidoscopic views you
are riding over, to plunge into the cool depths
beneath, and dwell for ever in that region of
tranquil delights, when the sharp grating of
the keel on a projecting ledge of coral, or a
treacherous shoal which has not been care-
fully watched for, dispels your day dreams by
sudden visions of a probably immediate per-
sonal conflict with sharks—those rapacious
monsters of the deep which are the especial
terror of these waters. Some of the shoals
we passed by were thickly covered with
land crabs, which made their sandy sur-
face crimson, as though they were clothed
with scarlet Sowers. On our approach
these crabs, which have been fatal to
the young cotton plants in one or two
districts on Yanua Levu, disappeared like a
flash, leaving the sand its natural colour. In
going through the Naitasi passage, a most
awkward place at low water, the tide was
Just sufficiently high to allow the boat, a
mere cockle-shell, to pass over the thousand
sharp pointed rocks which centre here, and
round which the sea, like a miniature mael-
strom, was seething and boiling in a way that
was anything but composing to the nerves of
a kai vanua. There was no damage done,
however, beyond the scraping of a little paint
off the boat, and we got into Levuka in time
to see the people going to evening service.
No. IX.
An introduction from Mr, Burt, of Burt
and Son, Levuka, to Ratu Ndranibaka, who
is half brother to Thakombau, and his legiti-
mate successor, secured me a passage in a
large native double canoe 40ft. or 50ft. long.
to Mbau, the political capital of Fiji, There*
were two other European passengers, • the
Messrs. M'Collough, and some IS or 20'
natives. Ratu Ndranibaka is a handsome-
chief, with an imperial carriage, a very bene-
volent countenance, and most courteous
manners. He must originally have been a
very powerful man, but he has met a formid-
able enemy in John Barleycorn, who, as with
many others of his race, is rapidly getting the
upper hand in the contest. The heir ap-
parent to the kingdom of Mbau was very
glad of our company, but when the hour
for starting came, we had some misgivings
as to the safety of this sea voyage
in so ticklish an affair as a native
canoe, having noticed that the chief had
something more than a regal roll in his gait—*
a peculiarity which was very naturally copied'
by some of his followers. However, as it
afterwards appeared, we had very much
underrated his capacity for absorbing gin.
We left Levuka on the afternoon of the 16th
June, and stayed for tea at a native town a
few miles down the coast of Ovalau, where
fish-soup, and a variety of other Fijian
dainties were served—the liquids in cocoa-nut
bowls and the solids on fresh banana leaves.
The repast over, the polite inquiry was made
of each of the Europeans, by a chief proud of
his knowledge of English, “ Your belly full ?”
and a satisfactory answer having been given,
we were carried through the shallow water
to the canoe, and the journey was resumed—
a distance of or 18 miles having still to be
accomplished.
A Fijian canoe is a very wonderful piece of
naval architecture. The single canoes are
composed of two pieces hollowed out of the
trunk of a tree, and joined together in the
centre with marvellous exactness and security
considering the roughness of the Fijians’
tools, and that they have nothing stronger
than sinnet to bind the wood with The small
single canoes, some of which are only 10ft.
or 12ft. long, are propelled by sculling, but
the large ones carry an immense mat sail.
A double canoe is built by placing two large
single canoes side by side, and bridging over
the middle third of the hulk with a deck
twice its own width, and raised on a deep-
plank built edgeways on each gunwale. The
canoe is balanced by a wooden frame or
outrigger on one side, nearly as broad as the
deck. All between the edge of the deck and
the outrigger is open. The projecting ends
of the canoe are boxed up, but the water
washes in in the centre, and it is neces-
sary when at sea to be constantly baling.


In large canoes there is a house built on deck,
with a sloping roof, under which the chief and
'the women of the party seek shelter in bad wea-
ther, The mat sail, which is very large in pro-
portion to the canoe, is shaped something like
a leg of mutton. It is hoisted on a mast by
means of ropes, and when it is taken in the
mast comes down with it, and is laid hori-
zontally on the deck. The mast is stepped
in a chock at one end of the deck, and in
order to ’bout ship it is necessary to unstep it
and carry it to the other end, for the canoes
cannot turn round. This is a very awkward
arrangement, and men are often knocked
■overboard in unstepping the mast and at-
tempting to carry it on their shoulders. On
the return journey the mast suddenly fell
length ways across the deck among a cluster
•of Fijians, but fortunately without striking
any of them. Had it fallen on a man’s head
•it would have been sufficient to kill him.
If the man who has charge of the sheet
does not slack away at once, when a sudden
tgust of wind takes the sail, the thama, or out-
rigger, is raised in the air, and the canoe cap-
rises ; and unless the steersmen are careful to
keep the sail on the'weather side, the canoe
will be swamped by the wind driving the sail
against the mast, and forcing the outrigger
under the water. The canoe is steered by a
long oar, and when the sail is not up it is pro-
pelled by vertical sculling, two men stand-
ing at one end of the deck and two at the
other, throwing the full weight of their bodies
on the sculls in a swinging motion from side
to side. The extreme length of one of these
canoes is about 100 ft, A canoe that length
wouldbave adeck46ft.longand2oft. wide. The
mast would be 62ft. high, the height from the
keel to the house top 14ft, and the draught
of water 2ft. Such a canoe would carry 100
persons and several tons of goods. The best
of these canoes under a stiff breeze will travel
over 10 miles an hour. The construction of
a canoe 60ft, or 70ft. long occupies several
years, and the completion of one is the occa-
sion of great public rejoicings. In the old
heathen days they were launched upon the
bodies of men used as rollers, and at every place
which they visited upon their first voyage, fresh
sacrifices took place, the victims being always
eaten. The canoe builders are an hereditary
caste, called “ king’s carpenters.” These
canoes, from their light draught of water, are
well adapted to insular navigation, but they
are not safe, for if a strong wind or heavy
sea should suddenly arise, they become un-
manageable, and are swamped. The natives
never put to sea in them in bad weather, but
they are of ten overtaken fey it, and when out
of swimming distance of the land, are
drowned. It is said that there is a high point
on Vanua Leva from which, with a good glass,
native canoes may be seen capsized every
day. The little canoes used for inside reef
passages and on the rivers, are extremely
dangerous. The smallest jerk is sufficient to
upset them. They do not sink, however,
when this occurs, and the natives will some-
times, while supporting themselves in the
water, bale a canoe out and right it. Theduties
in connexion with the sailing of a canoe
are not performed in a perfunctory manner.
The sail is raised with a great shout ; every
manoeuvre is executed with an accompaniment
of laughter and singing, varied by playful
addresses to the wind, while the scullers are
also referred to in frequent expressions of
thanks for their labours. Everyone exerts
himself to make the whole affair a pleasure
jaunt, and the labour is very much lightened
by the jocoseness and good humour with
which all the work is done.
The inhabitants of Mbau nearly all belong
to families of rank. There is as much dis-
tinction in Fiji between gentlefolks and the
people who are of no condition as in any
other part of the world. Though the dress
is almost the same, a chief can always be dis-
tinguished by his superiority of form, fea-
tures, and bearing. This has been in a great
measure owing to the practice prevailing in
chiefs’ families of only allowing the strong
and healthy children to live. It is rare to find
a Fijian with any knowledge of English, but
the Mbauans, owing to the frequent visits
they have received from men-of-war, are able
to speak that language a little. The sailor
phrases they have picked up, however, are
not of the most elegant description, and on
the canoe, in the midst of a conversation,
they would suddenly address each other in a
sportive manner, in English phrases which
they could not possibly understand, and
the use of which in Victoria is con-
sidered sufficient to justify a prosecution
under the Town and Country Police Act.
The Mbauans have some pride of caste, and a
due sense of the importance of their little
island. Thus, on the way there, we
were informed, in broken English, that
Levuka was a very miserable place, that the
women were scarcely fit to look at, while at
Mbau they were splendid, and that we were
going to see a fine city, which was, in short,
“Alice same Sydney-Melbourne.” We had
not been long in this aristocratic locality
before we discovered that it resembled the


two last-mentioned cities in some respects
which are anything but creditable to either.
Ratu Ndranibaka had brought on board a
case of square gin, containing 15 bottles.
He and one or two of his immediate friends
drank from this about every 10 minutes.
Each time the cup was filled it was handed
round to us. It was not desirable to
give a flat refusal to our entertainers,
but it became necessary at length to
limit the acceptance of the proffered liquor
to simply raising the cup to our lips. This
mild debauch was continued all the night
through without intermission, except during
a brief interval at 8 o’clock for the evening
service performed throughout the Christian
portion of the Mbau dominions, when a
native teacher offered up prayer, and a hymn
was sung. At the end of the voyage, which
lasted from 3 o’clock in the afternoon until
about 8 o’clock the next morning, there were
only five out of the 15 bottles of gin left, yet
none of the party was at any time in a con-
dition which could fairly be called that of in-
toxication, though the chief must have
drunk at least three bottles as his share.
Ratu Ndranibaka had with him on board the
canoe his wife, a handsome Tonga woman,
his wife’s sister, whose husband was at Mbau,
and his niece, an extremely pretty child
of nine or ten years, endowed with all the
arch vivacity of the Fijian women. The
women did not refuse the gin cup, but they
drank much more sparingly than the men.
The night was passed dozing on mats, some
lying on the deck and others perched on the
top of the deck-house. We got within a few
miles of Mbau about! o’clock in the morning,
but the wind having changed it was impos-
sible to make the port, so after many fruitless
tacks we put into a little islet (known as
Prison Island, I think), which, though unin-
habited, had a strangers’ house. The whole
party were soon assembled in this building,
and a fire having been kindled by the Fijian
fashion of rubbing two sticks together, a
breakfast of hot yams was speedily served.
Shortly after sunrise we re-enibarked, and
after battling against the wind for two or
three hours eventually reached our destina-
tion.
Mbau is a little island only a mile in cir-
cumference, attached by a reef which is dry
at low water to the eastern shore of Viti
Levu, near one of the mouths of the Rewa. It
is situated in a deep bay, well sheltered by
reefs, and dotted with numerous shoals and
coral patches which make navigation to the
anchorage rather intricate. The buildings ,
occupy nearly the whole of the island, leaving
no room for cultivation, and all provisions
have to be brought from other districts. The
houses are larger and more substantial than
in many other parts of Fiji, but they are
crowded together at different angles without
any regard for regularity. The population is
about 1,500. We accompanied Ndranibaka
to his house, and after partaking of some re-
freshment there, set out to visit the King, pro-
mising, however, to return in the evening.
We found Thakombau at home, busily en-
gaged with some European sailors cutting out
sails for his schooner the Jeannie Duncan,
Some of his grandchildren were sporting
around him, and his youngest son, Joseph, a
smart-looking boy, was also there. Mr.
Drew, the King’s secretary, acting as inter-
preter, presented us. His Majesty warmly
shook hands with each member of the party,,
and begged that we would stay to dinner, an
invitation which was cheerfully accepted.
He seemed disposed to be extremely affable
on learning that we had not come to make
any complaint against his subjects, and asked
us to make ourselves quite at home, without
minding him ; but when the attention of the
visitors was diverted fora moment elsewhere,
I noticed that he took in the whole party
with a searching feline glance from out the
corner of his eye, when for an instant the
courteously genial aspect of his face was
changed to an unpleasantly hard and cold ex-
pression, which, though it only lasted a second,
seemed like an index to an entirely different
character, and was quite sufficient to recall
to mind the circumstance that you have only
to scratch these semi-civilised savages to find
the cannibal underneath. Thakombau is a
remarkable-looking man. If placed among a
crowd of Fijians, his head would at once be
singled out as that of a man of no ordinary
character. None of the portraits yet pub-
lished give the smallest idea of the expression
of his face. He is fully six feet high, and
though rather inclined to be stout, has a good
figure, which still bears traces of the great
personal strength which distinguished him in
his youth, when he must have been very
handsome. Though probably nearer 60 than
50 years of age, he walks with a kingly bear-
ing and elastic step. When a heathen his hair
was dressed out in an enormous wig, after the
fashion of the Devil chiefs ; but, like all
Christian natives, he now wears it cut short,
in the European manner. He has a thick
moustache, which, like his hair, is quite grey.
His features have none of the coarseness of
natives of lower rank, and he is not by any


means ill-looking. The ordinary expression
of his face is that of a clever and ex-
tremely crafty and astute person. The house
Thakombau lives in is a large native build-
ing, having no special architectural distinc-
tion. Its dimensions are about 70ft. by 30ft.,
and the height of the ridge-pole from the
floor is about 50ft. The furniture consists of
a few English chairs and tables, a chest of
drawers, and several coloured smudgy prints
of the Royal Family of England, some
of which have been cut out of illustrated
newspapers, and framed. Thakombau is free
from the vice of intoxication, though he
pledged us in old tom, and does not object
to take two or three glasses of spirits
in a day. His active habits have en-
abled him to retain his health better than
most Fijians of his age. He is fond of
open-air exercise, and it is said that he digs
for a short time nearly every morning on some
of the neighbouring native plantations of Viti
Levu, Dinner was served in the European
fashion, under the superintendence of an
African steward, who has been with the King
for 13 years in the capacity of interpreter.
Thakombau did not sit down to dinner, ex-
cusing himself on the ground of ill-health.
He was suffering from an abscess in the thigh,
and preferred lying down, with his head sup-
ported by a native wooden pillow, close to a
small fire near the centre of the room.
In the afternoon we walked through the
town, the heathen abominations of which in
times past have exceeded those of any
other cannibal country. Until the year
1854 the ovens in which human victims were
baked were scarcely ever allowed to get cold.
We visited the great square which was for-
merly the scene of many a savage feast and
many a horrid rite ; sat down upon the great
sacrificial stone upon which the priest immo-
lated the victims in the sight of assembled
multitudes ; counted some of the innume-
rable notches on the trunk and lower branches
of a neighbouring tree, each of which recorded
the violent death of a human being; and
looked into a hollow in the side of a hill,
which is all that remains of the great oven.
It was impossible to altogether repress a feel-
ing of awe while we stood, as it seemed
for a moment, in the presence of the
frightful genius of pagan worship. On
looking around, however, this quickly
gave place to a sense of astonishment
at the remarkable change which has been
brought about in this place in so short a time.
The sacred groves, which played an impor-
tant part in the fantastical religious ritual of
the old times, have been cut down, and the
heathen temples, garnished with wooden idols,
have been razed to the ground. Their place
was supplied—until the last hurricane threw
it down—by the finest church ever con-
structed by the Fijians. Public worship is
now conducted in the mhure, or strangers’
house, a native building of colossal propor-
tions. Thakombau and his people go
church in great state on Sunday, and in
many of the houses, instead of the sound of
cannibal orgies, the peaceful inhabitants
are heard engaged in Christian devo-
tions, while the same drum which has
sounded the death-knell of hundreds of
unoffending human beings, now calls them
to church. No matter in what degree
this seeming morality is heartfelt, there is
cause for great thankfulness in the measure
of good which has been effected. The resi-
dent missionary’s house is built on a bilinear
the site of the great oven, but we did not call
there, knowing that all the missionaries were
engaged in the district meeting at Rewa. On
the other side of the town we saw, embedded
in the earth, a large anchor, which was
strongly suggestive of the old wrecking pro-
pensities of the Fijians.
Returning to Thakombau’s residence we
had tea there, and remained the greater por-
tion of the evening. The King lay on the
mats surrounded by his courtiers, and be-
guiled the time listening to the tales of a
fisherman, his court story-teller, who musthave
been highly skilled in his art, judging from
the attentive hearing he received, and the fre-
quent shouts of laughter and approval which
greeted some parts of his romances. Thak-
ombau did not appear to affect much state,
but all the Fijians who came into the house
entered his presence on their knees. He ex-
cused himself from much conversation with
the visitors, saying he was not well, and the
only remark he addressed to us worthy of
record was this When the white men
first came amongst us, we thought they were
gods, but when we discovered they were not
exempt from death, we saw they were only
human, like ourselves.” A large musical-box
which had been presented to the King was
brought out for our special entertainment.
Thakombau calls it his “ big Jew’s harp” (the
Fijians are familiar with the toy Jew’s harp,
which isan article of trade), and says its music
enables him to think clearly, and brings
ideas into his head—meaning probably that it
dispels heaviness. Thus, when in his darker
moods, Thakombau sends for his “ big Jew’s
harp,” just as we read in the Book of Kings,


4 When the evil spirit was upon Saul, David
took an harp and played, and so Saul was re-
freshed, and the evil spirit departed from
him.” Contrary to our confident expecta-
tion that we were about to be treated to “ The
King of the Cannibal Islands,” the first tune
the musical-box struck up was “Home, Sweet
Home, ” which was surely of all airs the oddest
to hear in such a place. Soon afterwards the
kcuva bowl was introduced, and we had the
high privilege of drinking from the King’s
cup, but experience had taught us to content
ourselves with merely going through the form
of tasting the nauseous mixture. At 9 o’clock
family prayer was conducted by a native
teacher. Thakombau sent for his Bible,
which was carefully tied up in a silk hand-
kerchief, and during the reading of the Scrip-
tures appeared to be following down the
chapter line by line with spectacles on nose.
This would have been edifying, only in the
position in which he eat it was impossible for
him to make out a letter, for the room was
shrouded in a deep gloom, only illumined
at the far side by a little wick guttering in a
pan of cocoanut oil, which served to light the
page for the native teacher, who held his
book close to it. Thakombau also behaved
very devoutly during the prayers, piously ex
claiming ndina, ndina (true, true), at intervals
The King then went to bed in another apart-
ment, bidding us good night in English, and
expressing his regret thatour engagement with
Ndranibaka prevented us from sleeping under
his roof. It is said that he understands what
is said to him in English very well, but he
never will speak it. The Queen, who is de-
scribed as an enormously fat woman of
amiable appearance, was in another house.
We arranged to call upon her in the morning,
but in the hurry and bustle of getting away
in the canoe forgot all about paying our
respects to Mamma, as a lady is called in
Fiji.
After leaving the King’s residence we made
a brief call upon Hatu Timothy, a powerful
chief of Rewa. Timothy is a splendid-look-
ng fellow, about 6ft. Sin. in height, and
weighs 22 stone. If public report is to be
believed, he is a man like Khorsanbad, of
burlesque notoriety, “ the badness of whose
character surpasses all belief.” After stumb-
ling about for some time in the dark, for
Mbau is neither lighted nor kerbed and
channelled, we found the narrow entrance to
Ndranibaka’s dwelling, and arrived in time
for supper. The chief was in a conversa-
tional mood, and with the bad English on his
part and worse Fijian on ours, the discourse
was necessarily amusing. He presently in-
formed us that the annual missionary col-
lection was to be made next day, and that
the affection he already entertained for all
three of us would be very much increased if
we subscribed a dollar a piece. This we
willingly did, delighted to find he took a warm
interest in so good an object, and were
beginning to think we had been rather
hard upon him in our thoughts regarding
his weakness for square gin, when he sud-
denly dashed to the ground all our hopes of
his reformation by making certain proposals
as to the way in which we should pass the
night, and we were obliged to confess that
our kind host, like some of the “ unco guid '*
in more civilised communities, was
•‘A sad good Christian at the heart,
A very heathen in the carnal part.”
Among the canoe party, of which he was
the life and soul, was a chief of Suva, Am-
brose by name, a sprightly young scoundrel
some 15 or 16 years old, of very engaging
manners. He informed us that he had spent a
week on board the American ship of warKear-
sage, and the knowledge of forecastle slang
he had gained in that time was surprisingly
extensive. Boiling over with irrepressible
mirth and devilry, and never so happy as
when engaged in some wickedness, it was
impossible to get angry with him, and Am-
brose quickly ingratiated himself with his
new European acquaintances, on the prin-
ciple to which Talleyrand wittily ascribed the
popularity of his friend—“On ne peut pas
que 1 aimer, il etait si vicieux.” Ambrose was
of the party in the evening, but disappeared
before the visiting Fijians retired to their
homes. After we bad gone to sleep on the
mats, he crept stealthily into the room, and,
gently awakening me, begged in a whisper
that I would go out with him for a spree,
saying that he intended to have glori-
ous fun. I excused myself on the ground
that such midnight assemblages were
against the laws of the Mbau Kingdom,
and reminded him that the carrying out of
some of his proposals would subject us to a
fine of 2dol, He flatly denied the fact, how-
ever. Then, taking higher ground, I urged
that it would be displeasing to the mission-
aries ; but he quickly disposed of that line of
argument, saying it would not matter in the
least, as we should not be found out. Finally,
I had to tell him peremptorily that, however
desirous I might be of seeing the inner life of
Mbau at midnight, having had no rest for 36
hours, it was my intention to sleep, but I did


not get rid of his affectionate importunities
until I hit upon the happy expedient of sug-
gesting that my two companions, sleeping
a few feet off, might be willing to accompany
him. My neighbours, the Messrs. M‘Col-
lough, were accordingly aroused from their
slumbers, and subjected to the same plaguing,
but with a like result, and eventually Master
Ambrose left the room, muttering something
to the effect that we were no good, and were
altogether incomprehensible people. Next
morning he did not fail to remind us of
what he no doubt considered our absurd
pusillanimity, remarking that we had missed
some rare fun. It would be very wrong,
however, to conclude that Ndranibaka and
Ambrose are fair samples of the converted
Fijians. I have been repeatedly told by some
of the more respectable settlers that there are
among the lotued natives many sincere
Christians, whose daily life is an evidence of
their faith, but such are rarely to be found in
districts where the Fijians are continually in
contact with the lowest class of white men.
Ambrose had received some instruction as a
child in the missionary schools, and could
read and write very well, but his close inti-
macy with Ndranibaka, and frequent visits
to Levuka, seemed to have made a regular
mohawk of him.
We had breakfast in the morning with
Ndranibaka, who produced a little crockery
and some knives and forks, and about
10 o’clock we set sail for Levuka in
a smaller canoe than that which car-
ried us to Mbau, Ambrose accompany-
ing us as captain. As soon as we left
the port we were in the midst of quite a
flotilla of canoes, and very picturesque they
looked scudding along before a brisk breeze,
and throwing a strong jet of foam at
the prow. When the w shened the
natives clapped tneir nands with delight,
and, proud of the speed of their craft,
said to us gleefully, imitating the sound
of rushing through the water, “Pis-s-h!
allee-same-steamer!” Presently a canoe, a
coupleof miles off, was seen to capsize, but the
occupants were only about three miles from
land, and this accident scarcely attracted the
notice of our crew. The wind then increased
in violence. The sea came up through the
open planks and across the decks at every
plunge, making it necessary to take a
reef in the sail. This was managed very
awkwardly by means of a rude kind of sprit.
Just after this, the steersman, who was a
cripple, having one leg almost shrivelled up,
fell overboard, carrying his oar with him.
His Fijian friends did not express the least
concern, but after the lapse of five or
six minutes slackened speed by putting
the canoe off her course, so that the
swimmer might have the wind and
waves in his favour. By this time the
man overboard was almost out of sight. He
had an oar to assist him, and swam holding it
by one end, and thrusting the point forward.
By this means he reached the canoe in abou
40 minutes, and resumed his duty as though
nothing had happened—no one making a re-
mark on the subject. When 10 miles from
land we had the curiosity to ask what would
be done in the event of the canoe upsetting,
and were informed that the men would at
once swim ashore —which was very con-
soling, considering that swimming a mile
will completely exhaust most white peopla.
We reached Moturiki at low water, and,
as the channel was not navigable until
8 or 9 p.m., spent the whole of the afternoon
on that extremely fertile island, which be-
longs to Mbau, and has no white residents.
There are some fine groves of cocoanuts here,
and the natives amused us by running up the
smooth stems to obtain the fruit. We stayed
the evening at a chief’s house in the native
town, and at high water prepared to resume
the journey, but the officers of the canoe
explained to us that this voyage by night
would be attended with some risk, which
they were not disposed to run, inasmuch
as Ndranibaka had said when they left
Mbau that he would have them all flogged at
the whipping-post if they upset the white
men. Not wishing either catastrophe to
occur, we stayed all night on Moturiki, and
were very liberally entertained by the native
inhabitants. The voyage was resumed at
daylight, and we got into Levuka by break-
fast time.
No. X.
A few days after leaving Mbau I visited Dr.
Brower’s Island of Wakaya, about 10 miles
east of Levuka. There is not a more charm
ing spot in Fiji for a holiday ramble than this
estate. Wakaya is about eight miles long and
three broad. There is a landing-place at the
north-western point, near which on an emi-
nence are placed a flagstaff and observatory,
from which the white houses on the beach at
Levuka can in fine weather be distinctly seen.
Passing over a broad and yellow sheet of
ribbed tide-sands into a cotton plantation
the homestead, which faces a bay on the
north-eastern side of the island, is seen
E


through the trees on a gentle acclivity. The
dwelling is a substantial weatherboard build-
ing, with iron roof, having a trim garden in
front, and surrounded by grass plats of
freshest green, which extend away to the
forest. The house is shaded by thickly
clustering orange and lemon trees, and the
grounds are further ornamented by the bread-
fruit, cocoanut, and various other trees, yield-
ing fruits peculiar to the tropics. A fine stock
of poultry, of fancy as well as of more useful
kinds, and the frequent presence of cows and
horses seeking the shade of the trees while
browsing, give quite a farmyard appearance to
the homestead. Further on there were 30 or 40
head of cattle ruminating in the magnificent
shade of a forest of ivi trees, which scarcely
allowed a single ray of the sun to pene-
trate. At the back the hills gradually
ascend until an extensive plateau is reached,
on which there were 25 acres of coffee
plants in full bearing; and beyond a high
cliff overhanging the sea, which has a
melancholy interest, for many years ago,
when the island first passed into the hands
of the white man, and Tui Levuka ordered
all the native inhabitants to leave, an aged
chief and his daughter, rather than quit the
land of their forefathers, leaped from this
cliff, and were dashed to pieces on the rocks
some 2Coft. below. The island is a succession
of hills and dales, which contain every variety
of tropical scenery. There is a stone fence
of several miles, which encloses 300 or 400
head of cattle, the increase of a few intro-
duced 10 or 12 years ago, and many of them
are quite wild. The frequent sight of cows
and horses in their leafy retreats gives
an unusual aspect to the Polynesian cha-
racter of the scenery. From the high
elevations several neighbouring islands, with
their encircling reefs, presenting a magnificent
marine spectacle, are in view ; and on the
hill sides are some noble specimens of the
bread-fruit tree, the crowning glory of the
Polynesian forest. The fruit of this tree,
when in season, is the staple article of food of
the Fijians. It reaches a height nearly equal
to that of the elm, and has broad spreading
branches, clothed with leaves fantastically cut
and scolloped, often 12 or 18 inches long, and
of a dark green colour, with a glossy surface,
which during the progress of decay, assumes
all the colours of the rainbow. The fruit is
about the size of a rock-melon, which
it also resembles in shape, and when
ripe is of a rich yellow colour. The
rough rind is not marked with sectional
lines, but is cut into small square
or lozenge-shaped divisions, which rise like
little conical prominences on its surface. The
inside is a white pulp, all of which is eaten
except a slender core containing the seeds,
which extends from the stalk to the crown.
The natives have various modes of dressing
the bread fruit, but white people prefer it
when roasted like a potato in the fire, when
it has a rather sweet taste. It is sometimes
eaten with grated cocoanut, and is capable
of being preserved in the earth for a long
time. Dr. Brower’s cotton plantations have
suffered a good deal from hurricanes. He has
60 or 70 acres of Sea Island, and the cotton
gins are turned by a pair of mules working a
treadmill.
A berth in the missionary schooner Jubilee,
which was about to visit several places of in-
terest in the group, had been very kindly
placed at my disposal by the Rev. F. Lang-
ham, chairman of the Wesleyan district,
on the intercession of the Rev. L. Fison ; but
as this would have involved a delay of about
a fortnight, while certain necessary repairs to
that vessel were being carried out, I was re-
luctantly compelled to avail myself of another
opportunity of seeing the principal planting
districts of Viti Levu. The Polynesia Com-
pany’s schooner Alice, a little vessel of seven
tons, very deep in the water, but having fair
sailing qualities, was about leaving Levuka
for Viti Levu Bay and Nandi, with Dr. Roche
and Messrs. Bardwell and Sager, in charge of
Mr. Glenny, the company’s local manager,
and three half-caste sailors. The party were
principally desirous of examining the block of
land in which they were interested in Viti
Levu Bay, purchased from the company by
the “forty thieves,” and I joined them on the
understanding that we should go right
round the island, which has a circumference
of 250 miles, calling at Viti Levu Bay, the
Raki-raki and Ba coasts, Nandi, Navua, and
the island of Benga, completing the circuit
in Suva harbour. From circumstances over
which some of us had no control, however,
this programme was only partially carried
out. The Alice was heavily loaded with
stores for Nandi, which made it necessary for
more than half the party to sleep on deck,
there being only room for two in the cabin at
the best of times, and the remaining space in.
the hold having been stuffed with yams and;
a few tins of preserved meat, we set sail on
the morning of Wednesday, the 22nd June.
The voyage was inside the reef nearly the
whole way, and we anchored every night,
with one exception, off the land. We
neared Viti Levu Bay from the south-east


side about the middle of the second day
out, and soon after passing Tova Peak
became aware that we were within sight o
the company’s land by the presence of a rock-
bound coast, rising abruptly from the water
in magnificent precipices, which were much
better calculated to charm a tourist in search
of the picturesque than to please the utili-
tarian eye of a planter. We could see in the
distance the houses of the yet unconverted
mountaineers, perched curiously on the apex
of rocky pinnacles, a position singularly secure
from invasion. A strong Fijian planted on
the threshold of one of these huts would be
sufficient to preserve its privacy though at-
tacked by 100 men, for the door is placed just
on the edge of the precipice, and it would
puzzle a chamois-hunter to enter some of
them.
We anchored in Viti Levu Bay, which is
about five miles deep and one broad, in the
afternoon, and took up our quarters in a fine
weatherboard house built by the Polynesia
Company, on the site of the proposed town
of Cookton, at a cost of about £6OO. This
house affords a remarkable instance of the
honesty of the natives. When the white
men left it, upon the idea of starting a com-
pany plantation being abandoned, the chief
of the nearest town was simply told that it
was tanibu, and not to be touched. Six months
had elapsed from that time when we arrived,
yet, though the building contained many
things which the Fijians must have sorely
coveted, not so much as a straw had been
removed, and the natives did not even come
upon the verandah until we were inside,
when their curiosity as to our movements
could no longer be restrained. Most of
them carried muskets and clubs, as
though the proximity of their mountain
neighbours rendered constant preparation for
attack necessary. The coast natives in this
locality have only accepted Christianity
within a comparatively recent date, and are
said to be in the transition stage, oscil-
lating between the lotu and heathenism, the
most dangerous of all conditions with the
Fijians. Walking round the base of the bay
in a north-easterly direction, we came to a
thickly populated town on the crest of a hill,
east of which could be seen another native
village, built on an immense rock. The
natives, who were all clustered together on a
little plateau in front of the town, received
us very nervously, as if unaccustomed to the
visits of white men, and apprehensive
that our arrival boded them no good,
while the children ran away screaming in
abject terror at the first sight of the pal
faces. The old chief did not seem to under-
stand the little Fijian we knew, which was
spoken in the Mbau dialect, and we made
very little progress in conversation. Some of
the men had large open sores two inches deep
on their bodies, in which they allowed
myriads of flies to settle at leisure, and la
belle sauvage of Lakemba seemed to have de-
generated into a very inferior animal. The
town altogether did not present a very attrac-
tive appearance, and, refusing the most
pressing invitations to stay the night, we
went back to our wooden house, the
old chief politely accompanying us within
a few feet of the building. Next day
we walked through the block of land
ceded to the Polynesia Company, some de-
scription of which was given in the fourth
letter of this series. We found alO hours’
walk over a mountainous country in the
tropics a very laborious affair, and were not
sorry when, in the first stage of the journey,
we reached the Ruku Euku, in whose crystal
waters the fish and every pebble at the bot-
tom could be counted, to have the opportu
nity of refreshing ourselves with a bath. In
one mountain gorge we suddenly came upon
a cascade leaping from rock to rock, start-
ling the solitudes with its liquid rush, and
finally disappearing in a dozen different rills.
We sometimes passed under huge buttresses
of stone, above which could be distinctly
seen the mountaineers’ huts, but our
native guides, though well armed, refused
to take us near them, saying that, though
we might visit there with impunity, they
could not. Occasionally clambering up
hill sides by the help of bushes and low hang-
ing boughs, sometimes clinging to the long
grass to avoid a rapid descent, we reached the
ridge of a leading range, and catching the
fresh trade wind from the sea, were re-in-
vigorated after the suffocating heat which
follows alpine climbing in these latitudes. A
little before sundown, having completed the
walk, as we judged, very nearly through the
block, we came within sight of a native town
on the coast (Nasawa, I think), which lay
directly below us at the foot of a moun-
tain with sides like a wall, which we
had to scramble down. This would
have been an impossibility but for the
brambles and patches of thick undergrowth,
which enabled us to swing from one ledge of
rock to another. We could see the people in
the village below startled out of their usual pro-
priety by our sudden appearance, running to
and fro like pigmies.


The town seemed to be built’on a chain of
lakes, but on getting nearer we found that it
was not precisely like Venice “throned on
her hundred isles, ” for these seeming lakes
were a series of horrible swamps and ditches,
into which all the offal of the place was
thrown. This is characteristic of a Fijian
town, and when remonstrated with for letting
such things exist and making no attempt
to improve their houses or mode of life, this
highly conservative people make the stereo-
typed answer that it is vuhu Viti, and having
been good enough for their fathers is good
enough for them. Advancing to the centre
of the town, we sat down on a mound -in
what might be called the court-yard or
square, and were in a few seconds sur-
rounded by the whole of the inhabitants,
from the oldest man to the youngest
child, for a visit from strangers seemed
to be an event in the place. We did a
brisk trade -for some time 4n Ulcus (petti-
coats), clubs, necklaces, &c., but the young
people were extremely shy, and handed these
articles to us by proxy, refusing to come within
reach themselves, though at a safe distance they
made free comments on our appearance, and
mischievously mimicked some little peculiari-
ties they observed in us. The girls went into
fits of laughter when Dr. Roche put on his
spectacles ; but their attention was presently
required elsewhere in the,chasing of a dapper
young cock for the evening meal, and away
they went laughing and shouting in high glee
after the unwilling bird, making a truly
agreeable sight for the hungry travellers. In
the evening a fire was lighted in the open
square, and the village maidens treated us to
a meke,-,meke, or song and dance. Hearing an
unusual commotion, we left the chief’s house,
and found a picturesque band of sylphs, in
the most elaborate Fijian toilet, engaged in
a serenade with a very grotesque accompany-
ment. They were in their gala attire, tricked
out with flowers, variegated iapa and Ulcus
of various designs, and wore curiously-wrought
shell necklaces and armlets. Forming a large
circle with their hands linked together, they
whirled round the fire with an untiring
rapidity of motion, in which every limb, came
into play; for the Fijians dance with their
whole bodies, eyes, and all, singing the while
a monotonous chant, or part-song, with a
regular rise and fall in the intonation, and
generally ending abruptly about half-way
down the scale. The song, which was no doubt
impromptu, seemed to have reference to the
strangers, judging from the frequent glances
cast towards them by the dancers as they
came opposite the -side on which we sat,
and the recreation seemed to afford unmea-
sured delight to those engaged in it. It
would be impossible to describe the varying
gradations of time and measure observed with
wonderful uniformity by the performers in
the midst of these romping, mischievous evo-
lutions. The figures, and many of them had
all the soft roundness of a-Greek model, occa-
sionally thrown into bold relief as they
capered and leaped in the-fire-light, presented
a very weird like scene—the whole party
now swaying together in a gentle undulating
motion, and now animated by a riotous
stamping and gesticulating, far,exceeding in
wild vivacity that archest and most midnight
of Paris dances the, can-can.
Rising early in the morning from unre-
freshing slumbers in a moist and pestilent
atmosphere, which it is to be presumed custom
has made innocuous to the inhabitants of
this ill-drained town, we prepared for the
return journey to the bay, which involved a
walk of seven or eight miles along the beach.
The chiefs of Nasawa did not serve breakfast
with all that attention to cleanliness which is
observed by the more civilised natives of the
Windward Islands. The morning broke
oppressively-close and sultry.
“ The sun’s eye had a sickly glare
and altogether none of us felt very gay until
we got fairly out on to the open shore,
and in presence of the vast Pacific, with its
thousand crests of flying foam, carried
towards us by the refreshing trade wind.
The walk to Viti Levu Bay was over a
beach of sand and coral, strewn with an
extraordinary variety of shells, some of which
were very beautiful, and bounded on the left
by magnificent piles of basalt of fantastic
form, sometimes rising perpendicularly like a
wall to a height of several hundred feet,
when the natives on the top looked like Eili-
putians. We had to run the gauntlet from
end to end of the beach of a party of Fijian
fisherwomen, clad in the summer garbof Eden,
all of whom insisted on making the usual
morning salutation of sa yandra, shaking
hands, and begging for smoko na papalangi •
All our stores of tobacco, however, had been
exhausted in the native town, and it taxed
our powers of invention not a little to con-
trive suitable excuses. Our personal appear-
ance was sometimes severely criticised, and not
without reason. These merry people were
greatly amused at the sight of our “poor
feet” swathed in bandages (boots bad long
been sheer impossibilities), as w e trudged


along tvith a more than Alexandrine limp,
and the hills echoed their wild laughter.
When within a couple of miles of the bay, a
small native canoe, in which we got tho-
roughly soaked with sea water about every
10 minutes, carried us the remaining dis-
tance.
Re-embarking in the Alice we passed the
Ananas on the north coast of the island, on
Sunday morning, and made Raki-raki early
jn the afternoon. We were now on thelee side
of the large island, which presents an entirely
different aspect to that of the windward side.
The windward side, upon which the trade
winds play, is plentifully visited by rains, and
the land here is a succession of hills and dales
covered with a luxuriant herbage and more
or less dense forests. On the lee side the
rainfall is comparatively small, and the clear-
ing is of a very light character, consisting
chiefly of long grass, in which a few screw
pines grow at long distances. The cotton
plant does not grow so luxuriantly here as in
the wet districts, but the dry heat of these
localities enables it to mature on the trees
with little liability to injury from rain, which
in some portions of the group stains a large
percentage of the yield. On the lee side
the country has a brown and comparatively
arid look, presenting little of the picturesque-
ness we are accustomed to associate with
tropical 'scenery. Anchoring off the Raki-
raki coast we went on shore, and visited the
plantations of Mr. St. John, Captain Fuller,
and Colonel Jennings. The last named gen-
tleman was away in quest of labour, and Mr.
Middlemiss showed us over the grounds. The
plantations were all in a flourishing con*
dition, and Mr. St. John had just com-
pleted the erection of a small steam-
engine for ginning, which an imported
darkey, having recovered from his first
terror on hearing it whistle, had learned to
drive. Colonel Jennings’ house is of wea-
therboard, painted white, and has a very
neat appearance. There is quite a little colony
of Americans on this portion of the coast, and
the stars and stripes were gaily floating over
the colonel’s house from a tall flagstaff. What
looked much more ominous was a target 200
yards off for rifle practice, the use of which
the Fijians have no doubt learned by this time,
for those in this neighbourhood have always
been noted for bad behaviour. On Wednes-
day, the 29th June, we passed Malolo, an
island on the west coast of Viti Levu, off
Nandi Bay, which we entered the same after-
noon. Malolo is the island on which Lieut.
Underwood and Midshipman Henry, two
officers of the United States Exploring Expe-
dition, were killed by the natives in 1840.
Their bodies were buried in a sandy islet,
called Henry Island, in the Underwood group,
without any stone to mark the spot, lest the
Fijians should disinter and eat them. Now
that there is a large white population in the
islands, who are daily enjoying the advantages
of the information given to the world by this
expedition, it would only be a graceful act on
their part to erect some memorial in honour
of these brave men, who fell nobly in the
cause of geographical science.
Nandi Bay has a depth of seven or eight
miles. There are eight or ten plantations in
the district, and 15 or 20 European settlers,
who have between 500 and COO acres of
Sea Island cotton under cultivation. The
native labour employed is nearly all im-
ported, the Fijians, who only became Christian
three or four years ago, being of a rather in-
tractable sort. The land consists of a series
of well-grassed plains, extending many miles,
with scarcely a tree to interrupt the view.
There is more flat land here than in any other
one district of Fiji. The clearing is therefore
easily done, but the soil in many parts being
of a hard clayey character, thorough cultiva-
tion is necessary, and ploughs and horses are
used on nearly all the plantations here. On
the Wednesday evening, we reached the plan-
tation of Messrs. Tucker and M‘Kay, who,
having recently been burnt out by the na-
tives, had just erected a mud dwelling, with
iron roof, a species of building quite imper-
vious to fire. On turning into bed inside the
mosquito screens we were reminded of the
unsettled character of the district by finding
loaded rifles at our sides. On making
inquiries on this subject, we learned here and
elsewhere that there was a very strong dispo-
sition among the planters, in the absence of
any protection, to dispense with the unsatis-
factory interference of men-of-war, and unit-
ing together when occasion should require it,
give the natives a lesson which would secure
their good behaviour for some years. Next
day we visited a substantial cotton-ginning
establishment just built by Mr, Thompson,
and passed on to the plantation of Messrs.
Gordon and Hoyle, whose dwellinghouse had
just been burnt down, whether by accident or
design of the natives was not known. In
April, 1869, a tidal wave and hurricane did
considerable damage in Nandi Bay. The
boats and stores of some of the planters were
swept inland several miles. Mr. Dodd, a late
partner of Mr. Hoyle, took refuge at the top
of a cocoanut tree until the waters subsided,


and others fled to the hills. Mr. Hoyle helped
a crippled plantation hand, swimming across
creeks for a considerable distance, but he
eventually had to abandon him to save
himself. Mr. Thomas Muir, who was in an-
other part of the group at the time, was blown
out of a house, and rolled over and over
in his blanket for fifty or sixty yards before
he could stop himself by holding on to the
grass.
A walk of several hours brought us to the
river Nandi, when, tired of clasping oleagi-
nous Fijians round the neck—the customary
mode of crossing creeks in Fiji—we sent our
clothes over the water by the native atten-
dants, and boldly plunging into the current
(it was only five feet deep), swam across,
and made our best bow in purls natu-
ralibus to the Messrs. Muir, whom we
found waiting to receive us on the opposite
bank. The plantation of Muir Brothers was
the best cultivated we had seen in the
country. There were about 50 acres of
splendid-looking cotton, every inch of the
ground having been thoroughly well ploughed,
and 10 acres of maize. Some of the Indian
corn planted on the 23rd April, on being pulled
in our presence on the 30th June, was found
to be lift, high by measurement, having
grown nearly two inches a day from the time
of planting. In the evening the Sandwich
boys working on the plantation assembled
in front of the house, and entertained
us with' one of their meke-mekes, which
is a much wilder and less frolicsome
affair than that of the Fijians. It was
an alternate stamping of the feet, accom-
panied by cries in regular and monotonous
cadence, growing louder and louder with
the vigour and rapidity of motion displayed
until they culminated in a truly unearthly
yell, by which time the dancers were leaping
several feet high like so many frenzied
demons, and the scene could only be com-
pared to that of Pandemonium broke loose.
In the morning we saw that the performers
had been stamping upon sharp pointed rocks,
but their feet, though quite bare, did not
seem to have suffered in the least.
The following day Messrs. Irvine and Camp-
bell’s overseer, in the absence of the proprie-
tors, showed us through their plantation, one
of the largest in Fiji. This is the most
scientifically cultivated plantation in the
group, and great enterprise has been shown
in its management. There were 200 acres of
Sea Island cotton in bearing, and 240 acres
under cultivation. There were horse-hoes,
grubbers, drays, and ploughs at work, and
a labourer from the Kingsmill group
managed a pair of horses attached to
one of the ploughs very skilfully. In the
ginning shed there was a steam-engine,
a large baling press, and portable smiths'
forge, with grindstone, carpenters’ bench, &c.,
for carrying out repairs, and a large paddock
of cotton was enclosed by 160 chains of first-
class wire fencing, with a top rail, which gave
an air of unusual order and neatness to the
plantation. The cotton tree is pruned here the
second year, to get rid of the dead wood, and
that which had undergone this operat ion in the
previous March looked very promising, the
boughs bending under the weight of the yel-
low blossoming pods. It is probable, how-
ever, that if labour were plentiful the planters
would prefer pulling up the trees and planting
afresh annually. Growing among the grass
was a weed called ndrala, which is said to be
fatal to sheep. In one district horses were
supposed to have died from it, but none of
those at Nandi, though constantly feeding
within its reach, had suffered from it.
One or two persons in the settlement
had been afflicted with ague, brought on
by repeatedly bathing after severe exer-
tion in the sun, ■ but this complaint ap-
pears to be extremely rare in the group.
The only climatic diseases of Fiji are
diarrhoea and dysentery, and severe attacks
of this kind usually carry off men whose con-
stitutions have been previously shattered by
drink.
With the view of seeing some of the Devil
chiefs, we visited the heathen town of Na
Koro Tambu, but messieurs the Devils were
unfortunately not at home, being away at a
solevu, or public feast, three miles further in
the hills, where a great junketting was going
on, A few of the women had been left be-
hind, but in the absence of their natural
protectors they were too timid to put in an
appearance. We caught passing glimpses of
one or two, however, about whom, sooth to
say, there was nothing particularly diabolical.
We had seen some of the Devil chiefs the pre-
vious day nearer the coast. They are dis-
tinguishable from the Christianised natives
by a greater scarcity of dress, and by wearing
their hair in an enormous towering mass, like
a guardsman’s busby, sometimes two or
three feet high. The town was built on
the top of an enormous square rock, with
a surface almost as level as a table. The
approach was by a steep ascent on one
side, and the remaining three sides of the
square were perpendicular walls of rock, rising
100 ft. above the valley beneath. The houses


were built with conical roofs, and there were
some carvings of battle-axes, and other war
implements in bas-relief on the level stone
pavement.
On Saturday, July 2, having seen the last of
Nandi at an impromptu concert in Mr.
Thompson’s house, we again sailed in the
Alice, with the intention of going round
the southern coast of the island to Benga
and Suva. The half-caste captain said
he knew the inside reef passage quite
well, but having got us almost inextri-
cably fixed in a labyrinth of rocks and
shoals, he admitted that this was the first time
he had seen that coast. There was no one
on board who had been in the locality before,
but it was determined to pass these obstruc-
tions by a few tacks in the open ocean, with
the intention of getting inside the reef again
when a favourable opportunity offered, before
nightfall. In attempting to re-enter the reef
at a narrow opening, a few minutes before
sunset, the wind suddenly fell. The crew got
out the sweeps, but made no headway, and we
seemed to be drifting slowly but surely into
■the vortex. The passengers became very
much interested in the movements of the
vessel, for, however grand the magnificent
bass of the South Sea reef may be, there are
times when its roar has a remorseless sound
which sends thrills other than those of plea-
sure through the heart ; but just as the situa-
tion was getting exciting a puff of wind came
and carried ns out to sea. By this time, how-
ever, the sun had set. There is no twilight
in the tropics, darkness following almost in-
stantly after the sun’s rim has dipped in the
western horizon, and we were thus shut out
from all hope of getting into smooth water be-
fore morning. Immediately afterwards the wind
freshened, and was soon blowing half a gale,
while the sea presented the inviting appear-
ance it usually does to people in a small boat
on such occasions. It was resolved to con-
tinue the voyage during the night, but there
was neither a lamp nor a ship’s compass on
board. After a hasty reference to a map—on
which it was expressly stated that tbesouthern
shore of Viti Levu had never been accu-
rately surveyed—the vessel was announced to
be on her right course. The wind and waves
increasing in violence, stirred some of the
passengers, who were for heaving-to, into
something like a mutiny. One of them,
stoutly asserting that the Alice was not
headed the right way, came to the rescue
with his pocket compass, illumined by a wax
vesta; but on the whole it was perhaps as
well that we did not take this as a guide, in-
astmich as when morning came it was found
that the needle would point but one way, in
consequence of the pin having slipped from
the card. It was eventually agreed that
the boat should be hove-to, in preference
to travelling 10 miles an hour in what precise
direction no one knew. The stores previously
occupying the hold having been left at
Nandi, we retired to our dens on the stone
ballast and bilge-water, and had abundant
leisure to reflect on the oft-repeated descrip-
tion of the pleasures of life in Fiji, viz. a
happy compromise between a continual pic-
nic and a yachting excursion. A boat of seven
tons in a heavy sea is not the pleasantest place
in the world in which to pass a night, and
the Alice tossed about like a cork on the
waves, sometimes threatening to turn a com-
plete somersault.
Awaking about 3 o’clock in the morning,
and being curious to see how these things
were managed in Fiji, I went on deck,
and found the helm tied up and all the crew
asleep. Instead of the vessel being hove-to,
the jib had been set during the night, and she
was plunging away at the rate of three or four
miles an hour, with no look-out, in spite of
the numerous shoals and sunken rocks which,
for all that is known to the contrary, stud
these seas. Calculating, however, that, accord-
ing to Midshipman Easy’s doctrine of ave-
rages, as only two months had elapsed since
the Alice had knocked her side in against a
reef—an injury which was repaired at a
cost of £Bo—it would be a considerable
time before another mishap of a like
character befel her, I went below again.
When the sun rose we were out of sight of
land and off Ndronga, as it afterwards ap-
peared. With the wind as we had it, we
could have made Benga the same evening ;
but though it had been considered perfectly
safe to travel at night without a steersman, it
was voted dangerous to proceed in such a sea
by daylight; and this illogical ruling holding
good, we put back to get inside the reef, and
retraced our steps to Levuka during a long
weary week of calms, in which we ran out of
provisions, excepting tea and yams. Consi-
dering the number of people who put to sea in
Fiji every day, knowing as little about boating
as a sailor does about the management of a
horse, and the habitual carelessness evinced
on all hands, the occurrence of fatal accidents
is surprisingly infrequent. On the occasion of
another night voyage I made before leaving
the group we had to pass several reefs.
The captain, very much overcome by the
national beverage, insisted on going to


sleep below, and leaving a half-caste sailor in
charge, who, grasping the tiller rope with one
hand and a bottle of square gin with the other,
which he frequently raised to his lips, pre-
tended to be steering by a star, though it was
difficult to conceive how he could distinguish
any particular luminary of the heavens from
the stellar host which must have been re-
volving in his own brain. About 2 o’clock in
the morning, we got within a few yards of a
eef, and should in all probability have been
wrecked upon it bad not a passenger sleeping
on deck discovered the danger, and insisted
on the boat being put about. On the captain
coming on deck, the passengers remonstrated
with him for imperilling their lives, when he
coolly replied that it was not a bad sort of
reef to be on \ he had been on it before, in
fact; and that there was one a few miles
ahead of a much more dangerous character.
I have mentioned these details, insignificant
as they are, because there is no other way of
conveying to people at a distance any idea of
the ordinary everyday life of Fiji.
One of the most flourishing planting dis-
tricts on the south coast of Viti Levu is that
of the Navua River. The coast natives here
have recently lotued, but there is a powerful
heathen tribe in the neighbourhood under
the chiefdom of Matinatamboa, which stoutly
refuses to abandon cannibalism, though Kua-
randuandua, the present chief's father, was a
Christian. Matinatamboa has a deadly hatred
of Mbau, and will not easily be subjugated.
Mr. Daly, a planter who settled on the river
in February, 1868, informed me that he had
recently been at a great feast of the cannibal
chiefs in the hills, where he was treated with
the utmost courtesy. The plantations are
chiefly worked by heathen natives. The over-
seer on Mr. Daly’s plantation is Henry Dan.
ford, an historical personage, better known
under the sobriquet of “ Harry the Jew,” who
has lived in the interior of the island upwards
of 30 years. The oldest white resident in the
group is Mr. David Whippy, of Yanua Levu,
who has been in the islands over 40 years.
The sago palm grows in perfection on the
Navua.
Very little is known to geographers of the
interior of Viti Levu. Consul Jones, Dr.
Graeffe, Mr. F. W. Hennings, and Mr. Boyd,
making an expedition in 1865, were the first
white men who crossed the island. Some
explorations from east to west were made in
subsequent years by Consul Jones and Mr. J.
B. Thurston, H.8.M., late acting-consul.
The interior is described as being very hilly,
but it contains some magnificent tracts of
country. There are no hurricanes there, and
the natives have not even a traditionary re-
membrance of any such visitations.
No. XI.
The principal planting district of the wind-
ward islands is on Taviuni, an island about 2i
miles long and nine wide, lying some 80 miles
to the north-east of Levuka. This island in
point of size ranks fourth in the archipelago.
It is clothed with dense forests, the result of
an unusually large rainfall, and this beautiful
wilderness is called, on account of its luxu-
riant vegetation, the garden of Fiji. With
the view of seeing this favoured locality, I
left Levuka on the morning of Thursday, the
14th July, in the Kate, an old ship’s long-
boat decked over, which had been chartered
by Mr. Holmes for the purpose of conveying
stores to his plantation on Taviuni. The sea
was very rough, and in the afternoon we
anchored off Wakaya for the night, in the
hope that the wind would moderate before
morning. Next day the weather had not im-
proved, but we set out with the intention of
anchoring under the lee of Koro, some 30 or
40 miles off, at nightfall. Our mainsail,
however, came to grief before we had been-
out an hour, and it was necessary to put back
to Wakaya for repairs. The captain, noF
liking the “greasy” look to windward, and
being mindful of the Koro sea, which, like?
the course of true love, never runs smooth,
and has the reputation of being the nastiest
in the group, we remained at this anchorage
for the night. The voyage was resumed in
the morning, and we had again to put back
to mend the mainsail, but eventually got
fairly off. The sea was as high as had been
anticipated, and we passed as much of the
time under the water as above it. A
lady passenger lay on the deck, covered
with mats and shawls, the cabin being quite
uninhabitable. The waves made a clean
breach over her at every plunge of the Kate,
but failed to elicit the smallest complaint.
There were others, however, who were much
worse off. A settler who made the passage
the same night in an open boat at the risk of
his life, informed us a few days later that he
was up to his neck in water all the way, and 1
passed the time alternately baling to prevent the
boat from sinking and hugging a pig in the
stern sheets to keep himself warm. Having
beat against a head wind all day and night,
we made the Koro reef about 2 o’clock in the
morning, and were well pleased to find our-
selves in comparatively smooth water again.


"Summer isles of Eden, floating in dark
purple spheres of sea” are very pleasant to
read about in the poet’s page, but there are
times when they present a very uninviting
and particularly sombre aspect. When within
a few miles of the anchorage we got fast upon
a coral patch, which the Fijian at the mast-
head gave warning of a few seconds too late.
The native sailors immediately jumped over-
board, and uniting their exertions with those of
the passengers, who were bearing upon oars,
got the Kate afloat again in the course of
half an hour. There is no white settlement
on Eoro, which belongs to Thakombau, but
we succeeded in arousing the natives in a
town near the beach, who brought us a canoe,
when we landed about 4 a m., went to the
chief’s house, and fell asleep without stop-
ping to change our wet clothes.
We spent the whole of Sunday on Koro,
the wind blowing from a direction which
made it impracticable to resume the voyage
to Taviuni. It was one of those bright
sunny days of the mild season which impart
to everything a roseate hue, and the recol-
lection of our unpleasant boating experiences
was completely forgotten in the con-
templation of the magnificent scenery
spread around us in this exquisitely beau-
tiful island. Nature has been lavish of
her charms here. The domain recalls the
primitive ages of the world, when the
earth was fresh from the Creator’s hands,
and its face unchanged by the utilitarian
devices of man. The beach was skirted by a
gorgeous fringe of trees, through the centre
of which the natives had made a shady walk
extending several miles. The avenue was
arched by overhanging boughs, which some-
times left a narrow strip of blue sky in view,
while on one side the dense foliage allowed
occasional glimpses of the sea rising on the
reefs and sparkling in the sunlight, or falling
in spray upon the broken shore. Ascending
a thickly-grassed eminence, we gained a
prospect of woods, waters, and mountains
which would have moved the most callous to
admiration. The native inhabitants, as yet
nncontaminated by association with white
men, moved about the peaceful vales of this
Eden, sometimes linked hand in hand, like
our first parents, but apparently wholly un-
conscious of the enchantment of the scene.
Yet a few years, and their happy, lazy life,
rounded with very frequent sleeps, and sup-
ported without enforced exertion in this
genial dime, where eternal spring combining,
with eternal autumn produces simul-
taneously the blossom and the fruit,
will be changed to the laborious lot of the-
white man's plantation hand; for this rich
soil, which has been gathering fertility from
the repose of centuries, will not much longer
be permitted to lavish its strength in magnifi-
cent but useless vegetation. Possession of
their birthright parted with, the aboriginal
owners of the land will see their tufted groves
cut down to make room for the white man’s
dwelling, the brilliant enamel of their
meadows furrowed by the plough, and all
their rich diversity of foliage supplanted by
prosaic rows of cotton trees. No one has yet
been able to induce Thakombau to sell any
portion of Koro. He has, however, rewarded
his faithful servant ‘‘Black Bill,” a South
African, with a goodly slice, and his-
son Ratu Timothy carries on a cotton
plantation on another portion in part-
nership with Mr. Galloway. Ratu Abel,
another son of Thakombau’s, is in partner
ship with Mr. Haynes in a plantation on
Angau. Koro possesses very great natural
advantages, and when the old king dies there
will, no doubt, be a scramble for the island.
It is nine and a half miles long and four wide.-
The soil is a rich alluvial deposit mixed with
vegetable mould, and there is a large extent
of lightly-timbered table land, watered by
many running streams.
The natives of Koro, whose morals are
looked after by Fijian teachers and ministers,
occasionally visited by an English missionary,
hold puritanically Sabbatarian views. No-
thing could induce them to pluck a bunch of
fruit, because it was Singa Tambu. The
clusters of luscious mummy apples and other
dainties of the primeval orchard, however,
would have overcome stronger scruples than
those we had on the subject, and it is to be
feared that the cocoanuts, against which a
tambu mark had been set by the natives, only
escaped because our inferior skill did not allow
of our reaching them. At 11 o’clock some of
us visited the native church, which was well
attended. The congregation, generally speak-
ing, were most devout in their behaviour,
and the service was impressively conducted,
though one or two lazy-looking fellows in the
back row occasionally yawned audibly. Here
I regret to have to record that a member of
our party, overcome by the fatigues of the pre--
vious day and night, so far forgot the example
it was his duty to show these semi-civilised
people as to fall asleep, graceless loon that
be was, in the midst of the service. He awoke
after the last hymn to find half the women
giggling at him, and the deacons, or beadles,
armed with long poles provided for the pur


|?ose of tapping drowsy heads, scowling
ominously, though they had scorned to
awaken th ekai.papalangi. The leading mem-
bers of the congregation, indeed, seemed
much hurt at this reprehensible behaviour,
and brushed roughly past us on quitting the
building. In the afternoon, however, to make
amends, we went to church again, and so
won the minister by the exemplary propriety
of our demeanour and rapt attention to his
discourse, that on leaving the pulpit he came
up and shook hands and invited us to tea.
Lamech—this was the pastor’s baptismal
name—having heard us read a chapter in the
Bible with tolerable accuracy, jumped to the
very erroneous conclusion that we were Fijian
scholars, though the most experienced in the
country among the Europeans then present
had only been in the place six weeks, and
launched out into an elaborate explanation
of the Trinity, but we were quite unable to
follow his theological thesis, and carried away
nothing but his original proposition that the
Trinity is three in one, which we were not for
a moment disposed to dispute. Fijian is a
singularly musical language, having neither
gutturals nor aspirates, and in their houses
the natives speak it with a soft whispering
labial melody which is very pleasing. It is
not at all difficult of acquisition, though the
correct use of the pronouns is at first very
puzzling. European children of 10 years talk
it fluently in a few months. Those who are
born among the natives can only be made to
speak English with the greatest difficulty, as
the Fijian words, nearly all of which have
vowel terminations, are so much easier to pro-
nounce. On going into the house of a Euro-
pean planter who has only been in the country
a year it is a very common occurrence to see
him send for his son or daughter of six years
to interpret between him and the natives.
Some very fine fish—a luxury almost un-
known in white men’s houses in Fiji—caught
in a neighbouring stream, was served for tea,
and Lamech presented us to several native
teachers who arrived in the course of the
evening from neighbouring towns where they
had been preaching. An hour or so later
we rejoined the other members of our party
in the chief’s house. Fifteen or 20 Fijians sat
on the mats on one side of the large room,
and the whites occupied the other side, facing
them. The Kate’s passengers—half a dozen
in all—happened to be strong in musical re-
sources, and after the Fijians had entertained
us with one or two hymns, Mr. Ducker and
other members of the party, to the great
delight of their sable audience, sang several
sacred songs, which elicited frequent approv-
ing calls of melee melee na papalangim vinaka,
The apartment was dimly lighted by a little
wick in a tin of cocoanut oil, and the alter-
nate exertions of the two choirs in wholly
different styles of music had a very curious
effect. Through the open doors were the
woods, the foliage illumined by fireflies
like a thousand dancing stars, and there was
no sound but that of our psalmody to break
the silence which reigned around, save the
gentle rush of some bubbling stream wander-
ing demurely through shady groves to the
sea, or the trickling of a tiny cascade down
its rocky bed in the hill side, whose silvery
fall added a new charm to the moonlit
beauty of this sylvan scene.
At daylight on Monday we were again on
board the Kate. This time the voyage was
prolonged by light winds and calms. At the
close of the second day we were privileged to
see one of those gorgeous sunsets peculiar to
the tropics, which are wholly indescribable.
The sun set in a glory of crimson and gold,
and while his mild departing splendours still
tinged the waves as they danced brightly
around us with the reflected tints of rose and
amber from the clouds, we saw the coast of
Taviuni rising like a long low bar between the
crimson sea and golden sky. When night
fell the moon silvered a sea as smooth as the
Yarra. We made Vuna Point at 10
o’clock, and shouted in vain for a boat to
take off the passengers. It seemed that all
the boats belonging to the settlement were
away, but in the course of an hour a native
arrived with a canoe capable of carrying two
at a time in safety. Unfortunately, however,
three got into it—Mr. and Mrs. Holmes and
Mr. Ducker. They had not gone more than
20 yards from the vessel when this ricketty
affair capsized, and they were all thrown into
the water. Mr. Holmes and Mr. Ducker
being good swimmers, supported Mrs. Holmes
between them until Lui, a native sailor, swam
off with a line, and Mr. and Mrs. Holmes
were hauled on board, having passed some 12
or 15 minutes in the water. Mr, Ducker, in
endeavouring to right the canoe, got entangled
under the outrigger, and was near being
drowned, but eventually swam ashore in
safety. Another canoe was then obtained, and
the two who so much needed a change of clothes
were at once paddled ashore. The passen-
gers who remained on board were amused by
Lui with some magnificent fables about the
sharks he saw, or imagined he saw, while in
the water. In the morning, as if to give some
colouring of truth to his story, we saw one


of these voracious monsters rise to the surface
and gulp down a piece of floating offal on the
precise spot as near as could be guessed where
the canoe upset. Lui’s heroism, however, did
not meet with a just reward, for the same
night he was attacked by a turkeycock, tem-
porarily housed in the forecastle, and being
fairly vanquished in open fight, was driven
from his bunk to the deck, where he had to
sleep under a sail.
The plantations of Vuna Point, the princi-
pal settlement on the island, are thickly clus-
tered together. The community thus formed,
and the immunity from native interference
enjoyed through the presence of Tui Thakau,
the most powerful chief in the group
after Maafu and Thakombau, have made this
a favourite district for settlers with families.
There are over 100 planters on the island, and
13 white ladies. The land is very rich, the
surface being composed almost entirely of
scorife and fine disintegrated rock. It requires
very little cultivation, and none but the most
primitive agricultural implements are in use.
Fijian labour can also be used here, and a
magistrate from Mbau lives on the island for
the purpose of keeping them in order. They
can be fed very cheaply, for the tivoli, or wild
yam, grows in the woods, and one man out of
every ten is sufficient to procure the necessary
daily supply. As a set-off to these advantages,
however, the land is very heavily timbered; a
huge spine of mountains, on the top of
which there is said to be a fine lake, attracts
an undue share of rain, to the occasional in-
jury of the cotton, and the running streams
are for the most part subterranean. Vuna
Point has had direct shipments from and to
Sydney for the last year. A substantial jetty
has been erected by Messrs. Wilson, Hamil-
ton, and Co., and there is also an hotel on the
Point.
Probably the best plantation on the island
is that of Messrs. Moore and Logan. With
an expenditure of not more than £1,500,
Messrs. E. and M. Logan erected a substan-
tial native dwelling, with the necessary out-
houses, and planted 155 acres of cotton in 23
months. They were fortunate, however, in
getting Fijian labour, and have generally had
over 100 men at work, including some from
Tanna and the Sandwich Islands. When I
visited the plantation they were just com-
pleting an iron cotton-house 30ft. by 40ft.,
with 12ft. walls. In the previous season 23
tons of cotton had been picked from 50 acres,
the hands bringing in from 1,7001 b. to 2,0001 b.
a day. They now propose to gin their own
cotton by horse-power. The pickers come in
with their bags twice a day at the sound of a
bell. Each man’s picking is weighed in the
presence of all, and at the end of the week
the one who has picked most is rewarded with
a sulu, while the one who has done least is
made to spend the Saturday half-holiday at
work in the house garden. I saw the pickers
come to scale, and the announcement of the
several weights was received in a way which
showed there was keen competition for the
sulu. The average picking of the foreign
labourers on this plantation was from 351 b. to
401 b. a day, but one boy was said to frequently
pick 501 b. in the same time. There was a
very neat garden in front of the dwelling,
facing the beach. The verandah was covered
with the granadilla, a magnificent creeper,
and the walks marked by Chinese bananas or
Cape mulberries, while the parterres were
ornamented by the brilliant hibiscus, and
some English flowers and balsams. Messrs.
Wilson and Hamilton have also a large cotton
plantation of over 100 acres, with a hand-
some weatherboard dwelling-house, iron
cotton store, and extensive ginning establish-
ment with a steam-engine. On Mr. Holmes’s
plantation of Homeville, which ascends on a
gradual incline from the beach, there were
120 acres of cotton, and some of it ready for
picking. There were from 90 to 100 labourers
on the ground, and a steam-engine to drive
the gins was just being got into order. The
stores and dwelling-house were substantially
built of weatherboard, and the homestead had
a very prosperous air. I also visited the plan-
tations of Messrs. Parsons and Armstrong,
Rouse and Johnston (the latter had some
coffee under cultivation), Premier, M’Connelh
Kidston, M‘Namara and others, all of whom
were successful cotton growers.
On Sunday, July 24,1 started in a little canoe
with Mr, Prender and two Fijians for Wairiki,
eight or ten miles further up the coast. The
canoe, however, was very leaky, and as the
natives said it would presently be swamped if
the load were not lightened, Mr. Prender got
out at the next plantation we came to. There
were high jinks in the native town of Wairiki,
which 1 reached late in the afternoon. The
Parliament of the Lau Confederation was
about to be held there. Maafu and Tui
Thakau had already assembled with their re-
tainers, and Thakombau and Tui Mbua were
daily expected. Thakombau had been in-
vited to attend, with a view to an amicable
settlement of the difficulties which had led to
a war then going on between the kingdoms
of Mbau and Mbua. In the preceding month
Tui Mbua’s cutter Clara had been seized by


Thakom ban’s yacht Vivid, and taken as a
prize of war to Levuka, but the British Consul
ordered her liberation. Maafu had come down
f rom Lome Lomo with a fleet of about 30 canoes,
containing 400'men, and canoes from different
portions of the group were to be seen sailing
in the direction of the appointed rendezvous
every day. Very picturesque they looked with
their immense mat sails, and streamers flying
in the wind. It was expected that there would
be 5,000 Fijians at the solevu when it began.
At the time of my visit the place had the ap-
pearance of a military camp, so great was the
number of temporary huts thrown up for the
accommodation of the visitors. I did not see
Golea (Tui Thakau}, who had gone to Somo
Somo, a few miles further down the coast, the
previous day, but his Queen Eleanor, a hand-
some Tonga worn an, was at home. Tui Thakau
professes himself a Roman Catholic, the re-
ligion of all the Wairiki Fijians, but he has
never been able to make the sacrifice of
abandoning polygamy, and has now 50 or 60
wives. The chief’s house is a handsome
native building, very neatly kept inside, and
among the European furniture was a hand-
some mirror hung at the end where the Queen
sat surrounded by her handmaidens. Tui
Thakau had recently been seized with a desire
to “witch the world with noble horseman,
ship,” so exchanged plantation labour with a
settler for a couple of newly-arrived saddle,
horses which took his fancy. The forthcoming
* Wairiki races” were a standing joke in the
island, but the chief only ventured to mount
the more docile of the two animals, and
would not allow it to go faster than a walk.
There is a good level native road six or seven
miles long from Wairiki to Somo Somo. This
is the only road in Fiji on which a vehicle
could be driven with the exception of one 14
miles long made by Maafu at Lomo Lomo.
The secretary to the Thakaundrove Govern-
ment introduced me to Ratu Quila, Tui
Thakau’s brother, who will probably be his
successor. There have been a great many
murders committed in this family. Tui
Thakau has killed numerous enemies, includ-
ing near relations, with his own hand. It
would appear that the King of Thakaundrove
has no great confidence in his supporters, for
before the Parliament was dissolved, he asked
Maafu to promise, while having a private con»-
versation with him, that in the event of his
being assassinated he would “exterminate
them all.” A large green mound in the centre
of the town was pointed out as the burial
place of 300 women who were killed many
ears ago on the death of a great chief. The '
Parliament-house is a fine native Building
like that at Lakemba. The secretary’s table
was ornamented with a handsome mat'fringed
with long locks of human hair. Thakombau
arrived some days later, and the result of the
interview with the leading chiefs was an,
amicable settlement of the Mbuan difficulty.
Ritova, however, the Tui Mathuata, still
keeps aloof from the Lau confederation, and
Maafu threatens to treat him as a rebel.-
Maafu has intimated that it is his intention
to visit Sjdney and Melbourne before the end
of the year if the state of affairs will allow
of his absence from the country for a time.
There is an hotel at Wairiki—M’Eissock’s-
consisting of a three-roomed weatherboard
building. The house was crowded with
new arrrivals, many of whom had visited
the place to see the Tongans from Lorno
Lomo, and join in the festivities. Walk-
ing through the town in the evening I was
stopped by a light-coloured Fijian girl, who
claimed acquaintance. I did not remember
Marama until she uttered the magic
word smolcoi I then recalled to mind the
cigarette-smoking damsels of Lakemba, and
that she was among those who visited the
John Wesley, and carried away sundry small'
presents. She said STnoko again, this time
more pressingly, and so emptying my pockets
of the last remaining leaf of the fragrant
weed, which I always carried as an article of
trade, I walked on. This was the last inter-’
view I had with a Fijian lady.
The Messrs. M'Eissock have a plantation
at Wairiki containing some 80 or 90 acres of
cotton. At Somo Somo, Messrs. Peterson and
Wall have a plantation of similar extent.
Mr. Peckham has a fine plantation of 150
acres a few miles away, and has planted a
small island opposite with coffee. The planta-
tions on the other side of the island, being of
much more recent origin, are not so large.
Leaving Vuna Point at 9 o’clock on the fob
lowing evening in Captain Henry’s boat of
six tons, one of the smartest little vessels in
the group, I reached Levuka at 10 o’clock
next morning. We had a fair wind the whole
way, and thus accomplished the journey in 13
hours, while the voyage from Levuka to Yuna
Point, though we travelled by the same route*
had altogether occupied six days.
No. XII.
The white population of Fiji is practically
without any governmental protection, laws
for the preservation of social order, or a work-
able political or municipal institution of any
kind. There are certain native laws to which


the foreign residents are presumably subject
like the Fijians, but these are administered in
so inefficient and irregular a manner as to be
virtually inoperative. There is also a British
•Consul, Mr. March, and an American Consul,
Dr. Brower, to appeal to in case of difficulty.
The authority of these officials to deal with
crimes and misdemeanours, however, is
limited to invoking the aid of a man-of-
war, when such a vessel happens to
arrive, and the visits of war ships to Fiji
are so few and far between that they
can scarcely be said to exercise any influence
at all. Nor would matters be much mended
under the present system as regards British
subjects—who compose 90 .per cent, of the
white population—though these visits were
much more frequent. The act of Parliament
which gives the Supreme Court of New South
Wales a certain jurisdiction over this portion
of the South Pacific is to all intents and pur-
poses a dead letter. The technical difficulties
in the way of getting a conviction under it
are so great, even in the clearest case of
•felony, that it-is considered useless to attempt
a prosecution. The British Consul has no
judicial powers. He cannot even exercise the
authority of a magistrate. Thus, the white
residents of Fiji are practically beyond the
control of the law, and amenable to
nothing but public opinion, a tribunal
which can only be supposed to exist
in thickly-populated districts. In July last,
a man who had attempted to stab another
in Levuka was summoned to appear before
the British Consul. He simply denied that
gentleman’s authority to interfere, and there
the matter ended so far as official cognisance
of the crime was concerned. The towns-
people, however, held a public meeting on
the subject, and, in obedience to their man-
date, the culprit apologised, or made some
such amend to the person whose life he
seemed to have attempted. It would natu-
rally be thought that in this lawless condition
of society offences of a flagrant character
would be frequent, and that the absence of
any protection for life and property would re-
peatedly be made manifest. This has not
been the case, however. The settlers of Fiji
are a singularly law-abiding people. In all
the settled districts the sense of security of
property is greater than in many civilised
communities. Cases of housebreaking and
robbery are almost unknown, and it is a com-
mon occurrence for dwellings to be left for
days together with doors and windows un-
fastened. Drunkenness has prevailed to a
large extent among the lower classes, but
crimes committed against life and property
have been extremely rare. This state of
things, however, cannot last much longer.
The recent rapid influx of population has
changed the whole aspect of society in the
country. The old patriarchal times, in which
the object was simply to make an easy living
with little regard for money, have passed away
for ever, while many of the new arrivals are
of a class that could very well be spared by
any community.
The American Consul has magisterial
powers in all that pertains to American resi-
dents, just as consuls have in the Levant.
He can decide a civil suit in which the
amount involved is less than SOOdols., and
by-calling a jury to sit in judgment with him,
he can exercise as much authority as a judge
of the District Court in the United States.
In case of conviction in a criminal case the
offender, if obtainable, would be sent to
America for trial by the first man-of-war
arriving after the investigation. But there
is no lock-up or place for the detention of
prisoners, and in such cases, being entirely
dependent on a man-of-war, the Ameri-
can Consul can exercise in reality no more
authoritylthan the representative of the British
Government, who is more frequently visited
by naval officers than the American representa-
tive. It has repeatedly been urged upon the
Imperial authorities that judicial and magis-
terial powers should be conferred upon the
British Consul, but without effect. The
reason of the distinction between the powers
of the two consuls is, that the British Go-
vernment have no treaty with Fiji, only re-
cognising Thakombau as chief of Mbau,
while the American Government have a
treaty with him, and recognise him as king in
tbe country if not of it. Nine out of every
10 white .people in the group being subjects of
Queen Victoria, there are upwards of 2,000
people who naturally expect all their
grievances to be righted by the Consul. He
is applied to every day to settle numerous
disputes in which he has no legal power to
act. Yet there are matters of almost daily
occurrence with which he feels he must deal,
and he is sometimes compelled to take strong
measures. On such occasions he can only
look to the respectable portion of tbe
community for support, which has gene*
rally been accorded; and his efforts to
preserve peace among the natives re-
cently met with special recognition. The
position is of the most trying character, and
one in which, it is needless to remark, no
man ought to be placed. It was the custom


of former British consuls to assume magis-
terial powers which they did not possess, and
this was one of the causes which led to Mr.
Pritchard’s removal. Mr. March’s instruc-
tions, however, are very explicit, and they
were published in Fiji before his arrival.
When disputes are brought before him all he
can do is to endeavour to induce the parties
to submit to arbitration. It is very desirable
that he should have authority to adjudicate
in suits for the recovery of small debts,
for the American Consul cannot ex-
tend his authority to cases in which
British subjects are concerned unless
there is reciprocity. The British Consul can-
not reciprocate, and the European settlers
have thus no means whatever of enforcing
payment of debts or the fulfilment of com-
mercial engagements. This is a great draw-
back to capitalists, who naturally object to
embarking money in a country in which they
are entirely dependent on the honesty of
their debtors. Any appeal from the consuls
to the ruling chiefs to arrest offenders, or
give other assistance in the investigation of
matters of complaint, has generally met with
a cordial response. There has always been
an impression in the group that redress of
wrongs is more easily obtainable from the
American than the British Government, and
fully a score of Englishmen have applied to
Dr. Brower within the last few years to know
whether he could not issue letters of natu-
ralisation to them.
The white settlers, fully sensible of the
great disadvantages under which they labour
in having no recognised form of govern-
ment, have made repeated exertions to
remedy this evil in a desultory sort of
way, but there has never yet been any
satisfactory outcome. Three great Powers
have been appealed to, either to grant a
protectorate or annex the islands. In the
early part of the present year the American
residents sent home a petition, signed by
about 30 persons, asking the American Go-
vernment to take possession of the islands.
Frequent representations have been made to
the British Government in the same direc-
tion, and in March last a petition signed by
200 British subjects, and all the dominant
chiefs, including Maafu and Thakombau, and
praying that the British Government would
grant a protectorate, was forwarded to the
Imperial authorities. The American resi-
dents, in preparing their requisition, omitted
to consult the native chiefs. Under a recog-
nised form of government this offering of the
country to a foreign power without consulting
the local governing authorities would be
simply an act of rebellion. The United
States government do not appear to have
any desire to extend their possessions in the
South Pacific. The proportion borne by the
Americans to the white population is so small,
that they would gain no profit and little honour
by annexing Fiji, and the settlers would ap-
pear to have very little chance of support
from that quarter. The island of New Cale-
donia already gives to the French a military
station and penal establishment in these seas J
and the small measure of success which has
attended the establishment of French colo-
nies is not likely to lead to the annexa-
tion of Fiji to the dominion of France.
The representations which have been made
on the subject to the Prussian Govern-
ment have also met with a deaf ear, the
only concession as yet gained being a pro-
mise that a Prussian consul should be ap-
pointed. It is every day becoming more
necessary that some strong Government
should give its protection to the islands. If
no other power steps in, serious complica-
tions which are gradually arising will
compel the British Government to take
some decisive action. It cannot be expected
under the existing system, which allows such
facilities for abuse, that the labour traffic will
always be satisfactorily conducted ; nor, with
a rapidly growing population of a very mixed
character, is it likely that relations of an un-
varyingly harmonious character will be main-
tained with the natives. The Fiji Islands,
lying directly in the line between Australia
and California, occupy an important com-
mercial position. Under a satisfactory Go-
vernment, they will in the future be to the
Australian colonies what the West Indies,
were to Europe, and it would be very incon-
venient to have a chain of foreign establish-
ments in this portion of the Pacific, within
easy reach of the track of the homeward-
bound gold ships, which might at any moment
interrupt the Australian traffic with the
western coasts of the American continent,
Fiji is also important as affording an inter-
mediate station for mail steamers connecting
the two continents. Great Britain has no
advanced position in the Pacific Ocean, and
does not hold an islet or rock in the 7,000
miles of sea which separate Vancouver and
Australasia, while in these seas the French
have establishments both in Tahiti and New
Caledonia.
A movement was initiated among the white
residents in February last to make Fiji an
independent power, with a local militia for


mutual protection from native aggression,
and a governing committee and elective pre-
sident, the expenses to be defrayed by a capi-
tation tax of £2 per annum. British sub-
jects, however, cannot thus summarily cast
off their allegiance to the Queen, ignoring
the native authorities, whom the British Go-
vernment have recognised as the only lawful
rulers by the appointment of a consul, and
this scheme was soon abandoned as im-
practicable. A much more sensible pro-
posal was one subsequently made, for
the establishment of a corporation of
Fiji settlers, to promote friendly relations
with the ruling chiefs, with the view
of getting them to act in concert with
the corporation in the passing of measures to
secure justice between the whites and the
natives. It was proposed that the council
of the corporation should consist of a chair-
man, vice-chairman, treasurer, paid secretary,
and representatives from each district in the
following proportions one in 10, two in 30,
3 in 60 and over, and four for Ovalau, to be
elected for 12 months. White magistrates
were to be elected as necessity might require
in each district, their nomination resting
with the white inhabitants, the magistrates
to receive their power by delegation from the
ruling chief of the district, who should be
requested to appoint native judges to act in
concert with them. It was further contem-
plated, that, in case of any serious dis-
turbance between whites and natives, them a.
gistrates should be empowered to call to arms
the whole of the white population within
the limits of their jurisdiction in order to
assist the chief to restore order and suppress
violence. The delegates or representatives
elected for the various districts throughout
the group held their first meeting on the
16th June last. The movement seemed to be
meeting with general support, but according
to the latest advices from Fiji this scheme
had also fallen through, and all was again
confusion. The last thing on the political
tapis was the forming of Levuka into a
municipality. It is probable that some-
thing in the form of Thakombau’s abortive
Constitution, passed in 1867, which has
now expired by effluxion of time, will be again
resorted to. Efforts are being made to re-
model this constitution, and create something
like a constitutional monarchy, in which all
foreigners will have equal political rights
with the natives of the country. It is pro-
posed to provide for a Supreme Court, with
two white judges and one native judge, ap-
pointed by the Crown; also, magisterial
courts, with white magistrates sitting in con-
junction with natives. White men, when
the charges are of a serious nature, it is pro-
posed shall be tried according to the formula
of their own country, and in cases where the
laws are found wanting, the judges or magis-
trates are to be guided by English and
American laws and precedents, and the old-
established customs of the islands, as far as
the same are applicable. The constitution
also provides for a House of Delegates repre-
senting foreign interests alone, and another
House of Chiefs, delegated to represent the
native interest. No public measure is to be-
come law without receiving the assent of both
Houses.
The settlers, in their present unhappy
position, would accept the protectorate of any
power. The natives would prefer the British
flag to that of either America or France. If
the islands were annexed by either of these
powers, and a European form of government
established, it would be necessary to proceed
very cautiously, and it is to be hoped that the
unfortunate mistakes in the native question,
which under the special supervision of the
Imperial authorities have caused irremediable
mischief in New Zealand, will not be repeated
in Fiji, It will be impossible to ignore the
native authorities. Any Government, to be
successful, must (nominally at least) recognise
the power of the ruling chiefs. It is by no
means certain that the erection of Fiji into a
British colony, with a costly military establish-
ment and the ordinary governing parapher-
nalia, would be attended with the best results,
British colonisation under such circumstances
has too often ended in a war of races, for
which there is no necessity here. If fighting
must be done, there are natives enough ready
and willing to undertake it. No difficulty is
likely to arise with the Fijians which could
not be settled by a well-officered native con-
tingent, without engendering any lasting
hatred of races. The form of government
which seems best designed to meet the
necessities of the case is one of a mixed
character, the whites uniting with the
leading chiefs, and governing conjointly.
This government, however, must be recog-
nised by Great Britain, and be sure of the
protection of her flag. With a moderately
patient policy towards the natives, no serious
difficulty need be apprehended; but any direct
attempt to take the power out of the chiefs
hands would at once place them in anta-
gonism with the whites, and bar progress for
the future. When the white population has
multiplied sufficiently to have a large moral


and physical power, a more decided position
can be taken. In the meantime, all that is
needed is a Government which will give secu-
rity to life and property, and freedom to carry
on legitimate commercial operations. To se-
cure this, however, the local Government,
whatever form it may assume, will require all
the moral support possible from the British
Government, and the presence of an English
official with sufficient power to execute prompt
justice upon white residents guilty of trans-
gressions against the natives, and thus
counteract the feeling among the Fijians that
the whites can do as they please with im-
punity. In the absence of interference from
any foreign power, the islands under such a
form of government would gradually pass
into the hands of the white residents, for the
disappearance of the aboriginal population is
merely a question of time. There is no
second Rajah Brooke to gather up the threads
of native policy, and make the Fijians a
united people ; but with a firm Government
it would not be difficult to induce them to
submit to one or more powerful chiefs under
European control as supreme rulers—say
Maafu in the windward, and Tnakombau in
the leeward, islands.
No. XIII.
There are two Missionary bodies in Fiji—
the Wesleyan, which is much the more influ.
ential, and the Roman Catholic, all the mem-
bers of which are French priests. No other
religious denomination is as yet represented
in the country. At the Wesleyan chapel in
Levuka, service is conducted in English by the
Rev. Mr. Nettleton, for the benefit of the
white residents, every Sunday, and some
efforts have recently been made among the
townspeople who are not members of that de-
nomination to secure the services of a clergy-
man of the Church of England. The
Roman Catholic mission church of the
Sacred Heart is a handsome weatherboard
building, 60ft. by 24ft., with a belfry
13ft. square, containing four bells, weighing
respectively, 2cwt., 4cwt,,‘.scwt,, and 7cwt.,
and surmounted by a cross which reaches an
elevation of 80ft. This edifice was built by
Father Louyot himself, with the assistance or
some Fijian natives. This gentleman is also
the builder of the schooner St. Paul, The
church possesses an harmonium by Alexandre
Fils, and the altar and walls are suitably de-
corated. Services have hitherto only been
held in Fijian, but as there is now a consider-
able number of settlers belonging to this
church in the group, weekly services will
j shortly be held in English. The two resident
I Roman Catholic missionaries, Fathers Bre-
heret and Louyot belong to the society of
Marists, whose head college is at Lyons.
There have been Wesleyan missionaries
in the islands for the past 35 years, and
the first Roman Catholic missionary entered
the group 26 years ago. The success of the
former, who have an advantage in the in-
fluence of their families and homes, which
more readily appeal to the native mind, has
been remarkable; while the progress of the
latter, though they are equally earnest workers,
is slow. The Wesleyan mission is in part
self-supporting, the natives being called upon
to contribute oil and other produce. The
Roman Catholic missionaries are supported
by the Soeiete de la Propagation de la Foi, at
an annual cost of from £1,200 to £1,500, and
do not appear to rely upon donations from
their converts. The Fijians, in their own
concise way, distinguish the two faiths by
calling the Wesleyan na lotu wai-wai (the oily
religion), ahd the Roman Catholic na lotu
Fopey (the Pope’s religion). There are 10
Roman Catholic priests in the group. Their
principal stations are Levuka (Ovalau), Rewa
(Viti Levu), Wairiki (Taviuni), and Solevu
(Kingdom of Mbua, Vanua Levu).
The history of the operations of the Wes
leyan mission in Fiji is the history of settle-
ment in the country for the past 35 years.
Christianity was first made known to the
Fijians of the eastern group, by the reports of
the Tongans, from the Friendly Islands,
where the Wesleyans had already a thriving
mission, and this led to the introduction of
Tongan teachers. In 1835, two Wesleyan
missionaries took up their abode in Lakemba.
Early in 1838 other missionaries penetrated
to Rewa. In the following year Taviuni and
Viwa accepted Christian ministers, and in
1847 missionaries were located in Mbua, Vanua
Levu. During all this time an unfortunate
misunderstanding with the chiefs of Mbau,
owing to ignorance of native customs, had
prevented the introduction of Christianity to
that important island, but this difficulty was
at length removed at the close of the year
1853, and the crowning work was accom-
plished in gaining over Thakombau to the
cause in the following year. The support of
the leading chiefs having been obtained, the
acceptance of Christianity became a political
necessity to great numbers, none but the
most powerful tribes daring to refuse. A
printing press was established on Lakemba,
in 1838, and several scriptural and educa-
tional works in Fijian soon issued from it.


In 1847, after the press had been removed to
Viwa, the New Testament was produced in
itsentirety. A translation of the Old Testa-
ment was sent home for publication in 1855.
In 1864 the British and Foreign Bible Society
issued the whole Bible, which is now in the
hands of 104,000 Fijians. It was stated in
the second letter of this series that only one-
third of the native population are nominal
Christians. This is incorrect, however. The
Wesleyan missionaries estimate the whole
native population of the group at 150,000, and
their returns for the year ending April last
show 104,100 lotu people. Thus two-thirds
of the Fijians have abandoned heathenism.
The district returns of native congregations
(excluding Rotuma) for the same period show
—Chapels, 591; other preaching places, 331;
European missionaries, 10,; native mission-
aries, 49; catechists, 852 ; church members,
22,735; on trial for membership, 5,310 ; day
schools, 1,760; day school teachers, 2,220;
Sabbath school teachers, 2,420; local
preachers, 606; local preachers on trial, 450 ;
class leaders, 2,530; day scholars, 47,130 ;
Sabbath, school scholars, 51,800 ; attendants
on public worship, 104,100- The total cost of
the mission in Fiji since its establishment is
something like £150,000, and many valuable
lives have been sacrificed in the work, for it is
only within a comparatively recent date that
the missionaries have been regularly supplied
with proper stores, and havebeenmadeexempt
from the endurance of very great hardships.
Taking the average of 1867-8-9, and exclud-
ing the odd shillings and pence, the yearly
cost is exactly £5,000, but this is exclusive of
sundry expenses incurred on behalf of the
Australasian missions, and of which Fiji should
bear her share, as, for instance, the working
expenses of the John Wesley, allowances to
returned or invalid missionaries, &c. To show
the mode of expenditure, it will be necessary
to give some explanation of the mission
machinery. The Fiji mission belongs to the
Australasian Conference, which includes the
Australian colonies, New Zealand, Tasmania,
Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa. This conference is
divided into districts, of which Fiji is one.
The Fiji district includes all the islands of the
Fiji group, together with Rotuma. It is di
vided into eight circuits, viz., Lakeraba,
Mbua, Ovalau, and Thakaundrove, Yiwa,
Mbau, Rewa, Kandavu, and Rotuma., Each
circuit is under the charge of a missionary,
whose title is the superintendent of the circuit
and where there are more missionaries than
one, the senior man holds the office of super-
intendent. Each circuit is divided into sec-
tions, each of which is under the charge of a
native assistant missionary, A section is
divided into branches, or smaller sections,
each of which is under a senior teacher, A
smaller section includes several towns, and
each town is under the charge of a teacher.
The members of the Wesleyan Society in a
town are divided into classes, each of which ig
under the charge of a class-leader. It is
necessary to observe, however, that not all
the lotu natives are “members of society.”
These bear but a small proportion to the
whole number of lotu natives. Thus in
the Rewa circuit there are about 30,000 lotu
people (that is, natives who have abandoned
heathenism), but only about 3,000 church
members. In addition to the teachers, there
is also a class of men called “local preachers,”
who are not paid in any way. These men
preach occasionally in the various towns. The
duty of a class leader is to meet the members
of his class once a week, to watch over their
conduct, and to report any impropriety to
the teacher. The teacher’s business is to carry
on the school in his town, to preach, and to
see that the mission system is thoroughly
carried out. He is responsible for his town.
The section teacher is responsible for his
section. As to his own town, he has to do
the work of a teacher, and, in addition thereto
he must take general oversight of his section.
The native assistant missionary is respon-
sible for his section. In addition to the or-
dinary preaching work, he is expected to see
that every one of the mission agents in his
section does his duty, and that all parts of
the system are carried out. He presides at a
weekly meeting of all these e agents, whereat
offences are reported, and offending church
members expelled, or punished more
leniently, according to their offences. He
cannot expel an office-bearer, but he may
suspend him until the sitting of a higher
court. He is required to visit every town in
his section once a quarter, to meet all the
classes, to inspect all the schools, and to
give in a faithfu,l report thereof to the mis-
sionary who superintends the circuit in
which his section lies. At the close of
each quarter he presides at a meeting of
all the native agents under him, which
is preparatory to a general meeting of
all the native agents in the circuit, over
which meeting the superintendent presides.
At this, meeting offending office-bearers are
judged, thq stujipns of the teachers appointed,
reports from, tbe=> various sections read and
commented upon, candidates for the work
examined, and received or rejected ; a record
F


of all the proceedings being kept by the su-
perintendent, At the March quarterly meet-
ing the whole work and history of the year
are reviewed, from which the superintendent
prepares his yearly report. This meeting
is preparatory to the annual district meeting.
The annual district meeting is a meeting of
all the missionaries in the district, together
with one native missionary from each circuit,
who is chosen by his brethren at the March
quarterly meeting, to represent them at the
district meeting. At this meeting the cha-
racter of every missionary and every native
missionary is inquired into ; charges are
heard and disposed of, reports from all the
circuits are read and discussed, the work of the
past year is reviewed, financial arrangements
are made, stations of missionaries and native
missionaries appointed, the work for the
ensuing year marked out, obituary notices of
the dead prepared, candidates for the native
ministry examined, and a full report of the
whole forwarded to the general "secretary in
Sydney to be laid before the next Australasian
conference.
There are various grades through which a
Fijian has to pass before he can become a
native missionary. Supposing him to have
become lotu, he applies to the teacher in his
town for admission into church, member-
ship, declaring that lie is earnestly desirous
of leading a new live. If he has been a noto-
rious offender, he is generally kept back for
a few months, and his conduct observed.
The teacher reports his application at the
weekly meeting over which the native mis-
sionary presides, and if there be no opposition
he is received on trial. He remains on trial
for at least a year, during which time he is
not considered,a fully accredited member. If
there be nothing to be complained of in his
conduct, he is tfien admitted as a member of
the church. If the teacher of his town finds
him to be an earnest man suitable for mission
work, he will speak of him to the native mis-
sionary in charge of his section, who will
take him under his charge and give him such
teaching and training as he can. He will
then bring him before his quarterly meeting as
a candidate for the office of local preacher.
If he passes the native missionaries’ quarterly
meeting, he is brought before the general
quarterly meeting, presided over by the su-
perintendent of his circuit, where he is again
examined. If approved, ne is received as a
local preacher, and is supposed to be willing
to go to any part of the circuit to which it
may be thought advisable to send him. If he
be a young man of promise, he will most
likely be appointed to the Circuit Training
Institution, which is conducted by the mis-
sionary, After two or three years training*
if he show himself to be a man of
more than ordinary ability, and if his
character also be good, he will be ap-
pointed to the District Training Institution at
Kandavu, which has a missionary specially
set apart to its management, whence, after
two or three years’ residence, he will return
to his circuit, and be appointed to the work
of a section teacher. If he show himself to
be a true man and an able, he will, after a
further service of some years, be proposed by
the missionary at the March quarterly meet-
ing as a candidate for the native ministry.
If approved by the meeting, he will be
brought before the district meeting, where
he will be again examined, and either re-
ceived or rejected. He is then appointed to
take charge of a section, but has to serve
four years more at least until he is finally re-
ceived as a native missionary. During this
term of probation he is considered to be on
trial.
Of these native agents, the native mission-
aries and the teachers only are paid, all the
rest being unpaid; these are the local
preachers, and the class-leaders before men-
tioned, and the stewards. The office of a
steward (of whom there is one in each town)
is to see that the chapels and teachers’ houses
are kept in repair, that the church members
give food, See., to the teacher to the amount
of one yam or ndalo each every month, and
that the mission canoes are properly taken
care of. It was stated before the Polynesian
Labour Commission which sat in Sydney that
the missionaries tax the natives every quarter.
This is not the case, however. Every church
member is expected to give some article of
Fijian manufacture once a quarter towards
the support of his teacher. These articles are
mats, pots, native cloth, oil, sinnet, whales’
teeth, &c. At the quarterly meeting all these
gifts are portioned out among the teachers, and
woful is the deficit. In addition to this, a
collection for the support of the mission is
made once a year. This is purely voluntary.
Some give from a yam up to a threepenny
piece, and from that up to 20dol. or 30dol
The large givers are a few of the great chiefs.
The average is between Id. and 2d. each for
all the lotu natives per annum. If the mis-
sionaries could thoroughly depend on all their
agents, it is manifest that this system would
shut out all improper persons from the church.
But they cannot so depend upon them, and
they are very often and very cruelly deceived.


Under the missionary teachings the Fijians
have made very little progress—socially and
politically—excepting, of course, in the aban-
donment of the worst outward horrors of
heathenism, as cannibalism, &c. They make
no improvement in their houses, their
canoes, or their system of agriculture.
Their way of living, in the vast majo-
rity of cases, is as filthy as it was
in the heathen times, and it seems
as if, in these matters, they are almost
incapable of improvement. Nor can the mis-
sionaries look forward to the future with
much hope. They see the Fijians becoming
worse, instead of better. Drunkenness is fear-
fully on the increase, and though the foul
diseases of European vice and overcrowding
have not yet appeared in Fiji, yet the natives
are rapidly decreasing. The success of the
mission is to be found in individual instances
of real conversion, satisfactorily proved by the
triumphant deaths of some of the people; so
that it is rather to the graves of the Fijians
than to their present statistics or to their
future prospects that the missionaries point
for the evidences of their success. Some,
however, nay, many, of the native agents,
give proof of zeal, and earnestness, and self-
devotion which would do honour to any race.
There is rarely any difficulty in finding men
to take, a dangerous post, and not a few have
fallen with their faces to the front, sealing
their testimony with their blood.
There has never been more than the present
number of Wesleyan missionaries in the
group, 10, and the work accomplished by so
small a body of men must be regarded as very
great. The instructions of the missionaries
forbid them to interfere in political matters,
or engage in trade. As they are the first
persons, however, to whom the natives appeal
in case of difficulty, it is not very clear how
they can avoid making their influence felt in
every political movement. Some, who had the
wisdom to foresee the future importance of
the country, bought large tracts of land, and
others have been accused of engaging in
trading operations, but there are none now in
the group of whom this can be said. The
machinery of the mission already ex-
plained establishes a system of native
espionage, which is at times very disagreeable
to the settlers, for nothing out of the com-
mon can occur on their plantations without
a report being made. This has sometimes
given rise to ill-feeling, for the missionaries
are desirous of protecting the natives, while
their interference in secular matters is to be
deprecated, and the settlers axe very apt to
forget that but for the small hand of devoted
men who 20 and 30 years ago daily risked their
lives in their endeavour to evangelise this
people, the islands would probably not have
been open to white settlement for a century
later. The days of great personal hardships fo r
the missionaries are past, but it does not follow
that their life is not one of selt-denial. They
have had to rear their families in a country
without any of the blessings of civilisation, and
to a man of cultivated mind unsustained by
any high motive, such an existence must be
a living death. If they have not succeeded in
making more than nominal Christians of the
great bulk of their converts, they have only
failed where ministers of religion in civilised
communities fail.
On the 27,th July, I took my passage in the
barque Koh-i-noor, Captain Bicknell, for
Newcastle, with several cotton-growers who
were going to Sydney to purchase machinery
for the more successful working of their plan-
tations, At 11 o’clock of the same bright
sunny morning we sailed out of Levuka Har
hour with a strong breeze. In a few hours
had seen the last of the spray, curling on the
many circling reefs, and scented tffe last of the
mingled odours of seaweed wreaths and fresh
wet sand from the coral shores of the sur-
rounding islets. The white houses on the
Levuka beach and the hills behind had
long passed out of view, when the
quickly fading outlines of Angau and Koro
were absorbed in night, and there was no-
thing left to me of Fiji but many pleasant
recollections of a beautiful country and its
hospitable On Sunday, the 7th of
August, we saw Norfolk Island, once one of
the most awful abodes of human misery, and
now the peaceful home of the interesting
Pitcairn Islanders. We passed within a mile
of the shore, and could distinctly see the
trim houses of the settlement, and note the
magnificent sweep of beautifully green and
fertile valleys, occasionally dotted with the
grand Norfolk Island pine. There is
no safe anchorage here, and as it was
blowing half a gale of wind at the
time, we did/ - not attempt a landing.
In case any of the Pitcairners should have
been in need of supplies, Captain Bicknell
kept a sharp look-out to see if a boat were
put off. No sign, however, was made from
the shore. This was singular, because we
learned on reaching Newcastle that there was
a shipwrecked crew on the island waiting to
be taken off. Perhaps they were too com-
fortable to care about moving. The Koh-i-
--noor made the passage frt>m Melbourne to


Levuka in 16 days, but to compensate for her
unusual speed on that occasion, she was 29
days getting back to Newcastle. There were
on board a couple of Fiji lads, servants of two
of the passengers, who were extremely anxious
to visit a European city. On seeing the appa-
rently limitlessextent of the New South Wales
coast, so different from their own little
islands, they were lost in wondering expres-
sions of Sa lib ! sa lib I When they were
shown the engine-room of the steamer which
conveyed them from Newcastle to Sydney,
they seemed quite dazed with its incompre-
hensibility. After that they ceased to wonder
at anything; and if, on reaching the capital,
they had seen the citizens walking down
George-street with their heads under their
arms, they would not have been in the least
surprised.
In finally taking leave of the subject, it only
remains to be added that I have endeavoured
to give an impartial account of the condition
and prospects of Fiji as they appeared to me
from personal observation, and the facts
gathered during a two months’ tour through
the islands. Those facts which have been re-
corded with a view to showing the dark as
well as the bright side of the picture, I now
leave to speak for themselves. Whatever dif-
ficulties may intervene, there is no doubt of
the ultimate prosperity of Fiji. There is a
wide field for enterprise in this fertile but
yet uncultivated domain, which requires only
labour and capital to utilise its undeveloped
resources. They who go forth with brave
hearts and willing hands to replenish the
earth and subdue it, have before them thepros-
pect of those rewards which have already
been reaped by the first hardy settlers of
New South Wales and Victoria. Theirs is
the glorious task to redeem to peace and use-
fulness a generous soil, to make the rich flats
teem with sugar-cane, the vacant valleys
laugh with cotton, and the tropic wilderness
to blossom like a garden. With the labour
question once placed on a satisfactory
basis, and a regular and abundant sup-
ply of field hands from China or India
guaranteed, there is nothing to prevent
the Fiji Islands, with their great advantages
of soil and climate, and a geographical posi-
tion which opens to them the markets of
Australasia on one side, and those of the
American Continent on the other, rapidly
becoming the Mauritius of the Pacific. With-
in the past six months the trade of the group
has received a great impetus. Steam com-
munication has been opened between the
ports of Mel bourne, Sydney, and Auckland, and
1 the islands, and in the second week of Septem-
ber last there was colonial shipping to the
amount of 11,000 tons lying in Levuka harbour
at one time. This progress has been made in
spite of the strong disposition shown by the
Imperial authorities to discourage a European
settlement of the group. When a young
community has so far struggled into notice
in this unpropitious way, by the force of
energy and endurance of its settlers, there is
nothing extravagant in the prediction that,
with a settled Government under the
auspices of England, a trade capable of
almost infinite expansion will be permanently
established. When the islands were offered
to the Queen 10 years ago, the American in-
fluence among the white residents was predo-
minant. The circumstances are now entirely
different, and, if such an offer were repeated,
it would be deserving of more serious consi-
deration. Since the proposed cession was de-
clined in 1862 the group has exported produce
of the approximate value of £390,000, of
which £140,000 was derived from cotton ; and
something like 40,000 tons of colonial shipping
have entered the port of Levuka since the same
date. Trade follows the flag, and it is unneces-
sary to enlarge on the advantages which would
accrue to Great Britain by fostering the com-
merce of this stripling community, which
must some day be an important English
possession. But whatever may result from
the present Imperial policy of laissez-faire
and indifference as regards the colonial
question, it must not be forgotten that
these islands belong to Australia. They
are, by their geographical position, the birth-
right of the Australians ; they are being
peopled from our shores, and our hold of
them will be in the close affection which
grows from common names, from kindred
blood, and from equal political privileges.
When the federation of the Australian colo-
nies has been accomplished, and we form one
great nation, Fiji must be included in the
commonwealth. The union will be one of
great mutual advantage and reciprocal
benefit. If, as political economists assert,
population increases more rapidly than the
means of subsistence, the establishment of
colonies by a parent state is a safe specu-
lation. It would be impossible to over-esti
mate the benefits Great Britain has derived
from her colonies ; and the peopling of Fiji
from Australia will not be an injury to the
latter country. In all large commu-
nities there is a leaven of unquiet
spirits, whose removal is no loss. On the
contrary, it is a gain, for in new emigration


fields, where there is greater freedom, and
possibly a life with the charm of a spice of
danger, they develope into producers, and at
the same time become larger consumers of the
goods exported by the country which sent
them forth.
There is something grand in the con-
templation of the progress of the Anglo-
Saxon race in Australasia, and the gradual
advance of the frontier of civilisation
throughout that great island-world of the
Pacific known as Central Polynesia, which
embraces the Fijian, Tonguese, Samoan,
and Tahitian archipelagoes ; the Paumotus,
the Marquesas, the Hervey Islands, and the
smaller groups and islets scattered in the
vicinity of these clusters, the greater portion
of which seem destined to be settled by
the same all-absorbing people, impelled to-
wards the young nations of the south by the
restless spirit of democracy. The future
island homes of the offshoots of the Anglo-
Saxon or Germanic race in these seas afford
a most interesting subject for speculation.
The aborigines of North America, Australia,
and New Zealand, obedient to a mysterious
law, have perished on the first contact with
that race to whom is confided the great
colonising mission; but there has as yet
been no instance of Northern Europeans per-
manently supplanting the Asiatic or the negro
in their own clime. The English in India,
the French in Algeria, the Dutch in Java, and
the Russians in Asia, though ruling conquered
peoples, have never been able to take their
places or maintain their own numbers, except
by continuous emigration. In the salubrious
climate of Fiji, European children thrive,
and the native population is doomed to
the melancholy fate of the aboriginal
inhabitants of those countries where
the sons of Japheth have settled without
having to encounter the heat of the tropics
or the ancient races of the old world.
But what will be the effect of the contem-
plated emigration to Fiji of vast hordes of
Chinese, a people who have already esta-
blished themselves in large numbers in Cali-
fornia and Australia ; or the introduction of
many thousands of coolies, whose birth-place
js in the regions of the palm ? The Poly-
nesians will melt away before the sturdy de-
scendants of the British Isles, but not so the
Asiatic or the Indian, whose presence will be
necessary to fully develope the resources of
these countries.
The colonial empire of Great Britain covers
about one-third of the earth’s surface, and
contains nearly one-fourth of mankind.
Its population is nearly 160,000,000, or
more than five times that of the United
Kingdom. Its area is about 4,750,000 square
miles, or 30 times that of the United King,
dom, and of this area more than 2,500,000
square miles are in Australasia. What-
ever may be the future of the embryo
states of Australasia—whether they unite
in one confederation, whether they be-
come independent nationalities, or con-
tinue their allegiance to the mother
country—their inhabitants will not forget
that they belong to that great Anglo-Saxon
family which has created this splendid
national inheritance, and whose proud
destiny it is to close in its wide embrace the
fairest portions of the globe, increasing with
boundless rapidity, and spreading its influence
in the onward march of civilisation,
“ Till the war-drum throbs no longer, and the battle-
flags are furl’d
In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the
world.”




ALPHABET.
, ‘U-r*
FORM.
NAME.
POWER.
FORM.
NAME.
POWER.
as a in father, alas.
n
na
as n in English.
b
as mb in member, number.
o
0
as o in mote, note,
tha
as th in that, this ; not as in thick.
p
pa
as p in English in introduced words.
d
nda
as nd in end, hand.
4
ngga
as ngg in younger, stronger ; or nk in
as a in fate, hate.
bank.
f
fa
as / in English, used in introduced
r
ra
rather harder than r in English.
words.
s
sa
as s in English.
g
nga
as ng in sing, rang.
t
ta
nearly same as t in English.
1
as e in me, or i in machine.
u
oo
as oo in wood, or u in full.
ja
as j in English, in introduced words.
V
va
as v in English.
k
as k in English.
w
wa
as w in English.
1
la
as I in English.
y
ya
as y when a consonant in English.
m
ma
as m in English.
N.B.
—At Lau they substitute j for t ; as tiko is jiko, &c. At Cakaudrovi they reject k ; as, lato Is la’o, &c.
A GAZETTEER OF FIJI.
This Gazetteer, founded upon authentic and recent authorities, will be found to contain
accurate descriptions of the various islands in the Fijian Archipelago, distinguishing those on
which there are plantations or white settlements. In the nomenclature of the many islands of
the group, there are numerous and perplexing synonyms, owing to the various methods
practised of spelling native names, and the different designations applied by successive naviga-
tors. In consulting the Gazetteer, therefore, if the island looked for is not at once found, it
must not be concluded that it has been omitted, but that it has been placed under a different
letter. Islands beginning with Y on some maps, will be found to have A for their initial
letter on others, and so on. However, where practicable, the various synonyms have
been given under the proper letter, and every island or islet in the group of the smallest
importance is enumerated. Under the letter R, some particulars will be found of the
position and character of many of the most dangerous reefs and shoals in the Archipelago.
In endeavouring to attain the correct pronunciation of native names, it will be useful to
remember that the various letters of the alphabet have in the Fijian orthography, the
following sounds: ,
Information of a valuable kind to navigators, touching some important points in the group
will be found in the subjoined table. These particulars of exact geographical position, &c.,
were ascertained by H. B. M. S. Herald on her exploring voyage under the command of
Captain H. M. Denham, F.R.S., between July and September, 1856; and the compilation
was printed for the Hydrographic office of the British Admiralty, on the 14th March, 1857.


Place.
Site.
Meridian Distances
hrs. min. sec
Degrees, &c.
Place referred to.
Established
Meridian.
Matuku
Tutoya
Vatoa, or Turtle Island
Ditto ditto ..
Ditto ditto ..
Vuata-Vatoa, or Turtle I. rf.
N.W. Peak ..
Saddle Peak
North-Western Bay
0 11 43.0
2'65*46 E
N.W. Peak
Ditto ..
Sob. hse., Levuka
179-44-4 E.
179-53-21W,
178'49 -45 E.
Hummock, N.E. end
Centre
0 55 9.9
13-47-48 E
Norfolk Island ..
167-58-6 E.
178-14-29W.
Ono
Ditto
Vuata-Ono, or Ono reef
Observatory Island*
Peak ..
0 1.59,2
0-29-48 W
Turtle Island ..
178-14-29 W,
Michaelof, or Tuvana-i-ra .
...
Simonof, or Tuvana-i-tholo
Vatu, or Passage Island
Naingani
Peak ..
-
Viti-Levu
Wakaya
Tova Peak
Cliff Peak ..
-
::
Makongai
Sautambu
’Mbatiki
Centre
Peak ..
-
..
Vanua-Levu, (Nandi)
Ditto ditto ..
Observatory Metf..
0 0 10.3 W
0-2-34-5
Sets.-hse., Levuka
178-49-45 E.
Ditto ditto ..
Nai-Suni-Suui peak
Namena, or Direction Island
Summit ..
Vatu-i-ra 1
Ditto
—
Place.
Longitude with
reference to
Greenwich.
Latitude.
Magnetic
Variation
Tides.
Height above
H. W. level,
in feet.
H. W.
E. <&C.
Eise.
Matuku
179-44-27 E.
19- 8-43 8.
10-30 E.
6 h. 18 m
f 3 ft. 0 in,
(5 1
j- 1,262
Tutoya ..
179-49-59 W.
18-50-54 S.
10-54 E.
6 37
J 3 7
} L184
Vatoa, or Turtle Island
X78T4-30 W.
)
(4 4
Ditto ditto ..
Estd. 178-14-29 W.
> 19-49-23 8.
10- 1 E.
6 11
4 0
178-14-26 W.
Ditto ditto ..
178-14- 1 W.
19'49-H 8.
209 1
Awash,
Vuata-Vatoa, or Turtle I. rf.
Ono
178T6-30 W.
178-44-16 W.
19- 8.
20- 8.
10-20 E.
6 ”0
4 ”0
Ditto
Vuata-Ono, or Ono reef
Michaelof, or Tuvana-i-ra ..
178-43-50 W.
178-52-22 W.
178-44-26 W.
20-39-10 8.
20- 8.
21- 0- 9 8.
370
Awash,
Simonof, or Tuvana-i-thoio
178-50-10 W.
21- 1-39 8.
Vatu, or Passage Island ..
178-45-38 E.
17-23- 5 8.
Naingani
178-40-31 B.
17-34-36 8.
130’
Viti-Levu
178-27- 8 E.
17-35-16 8.
Wakaya
Makongai
Sautambu
’Mbatiki
178-59- 6 E.
17-37T1 8.
9-58 E.
6 0
3 to 5
580
87&
178-57-23 E.
178- - 6 E.
179- 8-15 E.
17-27-14 8.
17-49-30 8.
17-46-22 8.
9-58 E.
6 0
3 to 5
Vanua-Levu, (Nandi)
(178-47-11 E.
(178-47-12 E.
1 16-57-53 8.
5
Ditto ditto ..
178-46-21 E.
16-59- 6 8.
885
Ditto ditto ..
179- 0- 0 B.
16-55-58 8.
N emena, or Direction Island
179- 5-36 E.
17- 6 36 8.
Vatu-i-ra
178-27-28 E.
17T9- 0 8.
-
~
-
* Or Undid.
t (Thaokau-rua-rua).
H. M. D ENHAM, Captain.
The islands of the Archipelago, divided into three great divisions, are as follow:
I. The Easteen Gboup of the Fijian Archipel-
ago.
11. Vanua Levu, and its adjacent islands and
groups.
111. Vitx Levu, and its adjacent islands, in-
cluding the south-western islands of Fiji.
I. The Eastern Group consists of—Weilangilala;
Naitamba: Olimbo Islets (3); Molina:—(The Ex-
ploring Isles) Avea, Osombu Islets (4), Vanua Balavu,
Thicombia-i-lau, Mallatta, Susui, and Munia;—(to
the W. of the Exploring Isles) Kanathia; and Ythata •
(further S.) Vatuvara ; Mango; and Mango ehi;
—<to the E. of the Exploring Isles) Katavanga
Vekai; Tabutha; Aroua; Thlthia ; Naiau; Reeds
Isles (3); Bacons Isles, within the, Argo Reef;
Lakemba ; Aiwa Levu ; Aiwa Lailai; Oneata; and
Boa, or Observatory Island, adjoining thereto;
Vanua Vatu; Moala; Tutoya; Matuku; Tabuuasithi;
Ularua ; Koino, and Komo-ndriti; Mothea; Koroni;
Namuka-i-lau; Vuanggava ; Kambara; Moramba;
Vulanga, and its three islets; Yangasa Islands (5),


Ongea-levu, and Ongea-ndriti; Nuku-ongea, or
Nukusohge ; Vatoa, or Turtle Island, so named by
Captain Cook, who visited and described it; and
lastly, Ono-i-lau, the most southerly island of any
size or importance in the whole group. Near this
Ono are the small islands of Doi (Nimanoff or Siman-
off Island, Y) and Davora (Mikaeloft - ?); and to the
S.W. of Ono. the islet of Mana on Bereghis Reef.
■ 11. The islands of the Second Division are—Vanua
Levu; Taviuni; KamiaorNggamea; Lauthala; Goat
Island, or Benau; Nanuka ; Korotuma ; (Ringgold’s
Isles) Nggelevu, Nukumbesanga, Nukumanu, Budd
Island, North Island, Maury Island, De Haven Island,
and Holmes Island; to the N. by itself, Thicombia-
i-ra;—Rambi; Kiao ; Danau; Kavewa; Sau Sau ;
Bekana; Mali; Kia; Muthuata; Nucumbati;
Coooanut Island ; Nivera; Vatoa, or Vatou; Ven-
drala; Tavia; Yanganga ; Galon ; Yandua; Raba
Raba ; Nemena, or Direction Island; Kombelau Is-
lands (3) ; Nutuvu; Natanga ; Rativa; Baino Islet;
and many others.
111. The islands of the Third Division are—(the
S.W. Islands of Fiji) Kandavu and its adjacent is-
lands ; viz., Ono-i-ra, Hudson Island, May Island,
Blunt Island, Elliott Island, Howison Island, Harri-
son Island, Sanford Island, Whittle Island, Colvo-
caressis Island, and Reynolds Island: Vatulele, and
its adjacent islets; viz., Hamersley Island, Blair
Island, Thompson Island, and Clark Island : Benga,
audits adjacent islands ; viz., Stuart’s Island, Storm
Island, Namuka and Bird Island. —(Mainland of
Viti Levu, and other islands round it), Viti Leva ;
Koro; Mokundranga ; Mokungal; Wakaia ; Batiki ;
Nairai; Gau, Liku, or Cocoanut Island; Speiden
Island; Waldron Island; probably the Turtle Is-
land of some maps; (the Underwood Group) Malolo,
Malolo-lailai, Palmer Island, Linthicum Island,
Reynolds Island, Smith Island, Henry Island, Bate-
man Island,- Smith Island, Ogle Island, Vunderford
Island, Vuuda Island, and Vitongo Island ;—Yotia,
or Bushy Island; Tavua, or Tabooa; and Vanua
vou; (the Hudson’s Islands) Perry Island, Alden
Island, Johnson Island, Carr Island, Walker Island,
and Emmons Island :—(the Yasawa Group) Vomo,
Knox Island, Baldwin Island, Totten Island, Davis'
Island, Waia-lailai-thake, Waia lalai, Waia or Waia
levu, White Rock Island, Biva and Lewa Islands,
Sinclair Island, Agate Island, Fox Island, Eld Is-
land, Naviti Island, Yangata or Yangata, Matathoni-
levu, Nanuia, Otovawa, Drola, Ya Asaua or Ya
Asaua-i-rara, Asaua-idau, Kawa-kawa, and three?
other islets, Asaua, Timboor, and lastly Kinsilk
Island, which ends the Yasawa Group to the north-
ward... .Alewa-kalou or Round Isle; Dongaloa;
Raki Raid; Malaki ; Annan Island, Nananu, and
Nananu-gata; Naivara ; Vitimira ; Ovalu, or Pas-
sage Island; Naingani; Nambulambulewa; Nbalevu;
Nukulevu ; Ovalau ; Moturiki; Landoalewa Islets ;
Omene ; Taunava; Thanggalai; Leleuvia; Telleu ;
Yiwa; Bau; Tonga Island, in the Rewa; Tombarua;
Mambualau; Nukalau; Mukalau or Mukaluva; and
many others.
The islands of the group, in alphabetical order, are subjoined
ABOOTOENA, Abootoleina, and Abootu : Three of the
Angasa islands in'the eastern group. Also called
respectively Navutu-i-rai, Navutu-i-loma, and Na-
vutu-i-thaki.
AGATE r One of the Yasawa group, between Fox
L, and Sinclair L, latitude 17T2 S., longitude
177-7 B.
AIWA-LBVU, and Aiwa-lailai : Two uninhabited
islets, 6 miles S.E. £ E. of Lakemba, in the eastern
group. They are very rocky, and surrounded by an
extensive reef, which has however, a large opening
on the N.E. side, affording an anchorage exposed
to the N.E. wind.
- ALDEN; One of the Hudson’s 1 islands, latitude
17‘40 S., longitude 177 B.; lies W.N.W. of Perry I.
ALEWA-KALOU; (Round I. on some charts.) A
rooky islet of a crescent form, twelve miles N. N.E.
of the northen extremity of the Yasawas. It rises
to a height of 600 ft. in the centre, and falls at each
end. Gives its name to the passage into the group
from the W. and N.W. Latitude 16'41 S., longitude
177-45 E.
AMBATIKE : See Batiki.
ANA; (Sometimes called Chain 1., or All Saints.) A
lagoon 1., 207 miles E.N.E. of Tahiti, 12 miles long
and 7j) broad. Latitude 17'23 S., longitude 145'38 W.
ANDRONA: (Ndrona, Drola, or Ndrola.) One of the
Yasawas to the N.W. of Viti Levu. On the east-side
of the island, lies Faliki Harbour, between Paka
and Ita, to the south of a headland called Fao
Point, near which is Kali islet. The entrance to the
harbour is to the S.S.E. of Paka, and S.W. of Ita,
between the reefs in from 10 to 7 fathoms of water.
ANGALA : (or Thanggalai.) An island off Moturiki,
E. of Viti Levu. See Thanggalai.
ANGANGA : (or Yanganga.) An I. 2 miles from the
W. end of Vanua Levu, which forms the W. side of
Monkey Face Passage.
ANGASA TOMBU : (or Nanga, Sautambu, orNasau-
tabu.) Small island at the entrance of the Moturiki
passage, E. coast of Viti Levu, 12 miles from Bau.
ANGASA ." (or Yangasa.) A cluster of five small un-
inhabited islands; Yangasa Levu, Navuta-i-loma
(or Abootoleina), Navutu-i-thaki (or Abootu),
Navutu-i-ra (Abootoena), and Nathawa, 49 miles
S.S.W. from Lakemba, and in a line between
Namuka and Ongea. Distinguished by long arti-
ficial looking ridges of stone.
ANGAU: (Gau or Ngau.) A fruitful island, 27
miles S.E. of Ovalau, 35 miles E. of Bau, 9 miles
S.W. of Nairai, 11 miles S. by E. of Batiki, and due
E. of Viti Levu. Safe anchorage on the southern
side; is 11J miles long, and. 6 broad; subject to
Bau. Its barrier-reef has a circuit of 38 miles,
ranging 34 miles off the western point of the island.
Three closely connected, but intricate ship passages
offer on the N.W. aspect, leading into a sheltered
roadstead of 20 fathoms, spreading over 16 square?
miles. The best of these ship entrances may be made
by bringing the peak of the Island, Dilathoa, 2,345 ft.
high, to bear E. 4N. This harbour is in latitude
17"59'32 S., longitude 17"13'45 E. High water at
6h. 7 m.; tide rising 5 ft. in roadstead, variation
being 8.'42 E. Close to sea reef, 200 fathoms of water.
One of the reef openings on the.E. side is 200 yards
wide, 5 miles S., and 18 miles W. Off the S.E. ex-
tremity of this island lies the Mumbolithe Reef,
which is of coralline structure, 1 j miles long. It
is a wash at low water, and presents an oval rim,
always showing breakers. The centre of the reef
is in latitude 1813-25 S., longitude 179T7 - 34 E.
The Horseshoe Reef, lies N.W. of Nairai, and 11
miles distant.
ANNAN: (or Nananu.) A small island off the most
northerly point of Viti Levu, adjoining another islet,
Ananugata, or Nananugata, or Yananu. Both these
islands are the property of Europeans..
ANUTHA LAILAI; (or Yanutha lailai.) An islet be-
tween Moturiki and Ovalau, E. of Viti Levu.
ANUTHA LEVU : (or Yanutha levu.) An islet close
to Anutha lailai.
ANUTUNGA: An island Jof a mile long, 3 miles
N.E. of Leonidas Island, N.W. extremity of Vanua
Levu.
AROUA: (Aro or Yaro.) A pretty island in the
eastern group, E. of Tavutha, and N.E. by E. £ E. of
Lakemba. Garden Reef is within 7 miles N.E. of
it; Freeman’s Reef lies 2J miles E. J S., and Haw-
kin’s Reef, 2£ miles S. j- E.
ASAUA : (Yasawa-lailai.) An islet at the N.E. end of
Ya Asaua (or Yasawa-i-rara), to the S. of Timboor
lslet. One of the most north-easterly of the Yasawa
Group.
ASAUA-I-LAU: (Yasawa-i-lau, or Eastern Asaua.)
A small island in the Vasawa Group; N.E. of An-
drona, and off the S.W. extremity of Yasawa-i-rara,
or Ya Asaua, on its eastern side. The space between
known as Pulotu Harbour, is occupied by three or


four islets, of which the native names, if any, are
unknown. The bay has a western entrance between
Puaka Point (the most northerly extremity of
Androna Island), and Tomba Point, the most
southerly extremity of Yasawad-rara. Pulotu Har-
bour is sheltered on the B. by Asaua-i-lau, the islets
of Vini and Peka, and the Three Papas Islets. There
is an east channel navigable for ships between Vini
and Asaua-i-lau, and a southern channel between
the Three Papas and Suvaki Point, the N. end of an
island not named on the N. side of Androna. Egg-
shell Islet is near Puaka Point.
SAUA-I-RARA : (Yasawa-i-rara, or Ya Asaua.) The
largest of the Yasawa Group, to which refer.
A.TO ; An island between Matathonilevu and Yangata,
in the Yasawa Group.
A.UTHALA : See Lauthala.
AVEA: (or Avia.) An island 2 miles E. Vanua
Balavu, one of the Exploring Isles, to the N. of the
eastern group.
BACON’S ISLES : Five islets in theßukatatanoa Reef
about 25 miles N.E. from Lakemba, in the eastern
group.
BAINO: An islet outside, and a little to the E. of
Baino Harbour, at the S.E. end of Vanua Levu.
There is a larger island unnamed nearer to the main-
, Black Island, about the size of Baino, lies
still further to the N.W. Baino Islet and Harbour,
are in latitude 16 45 S., longitude 179-51 B.
BALDW!N I. : This island lies due N. of Totten
-o It 9 southerly of the Yasawa Group.
BALI'.yU : (Mbalevu.) An islet near the island of
N ambulambulewa.
BATEMAN I.: An islet S. of Ogle and Smith Islets,
in Underwood Group.
BATIK!: (Mbatiki, Ambatiki, or Vatike.) An is-
® m circumference, 30 miles N.E. of Ban,
oft Viti Levu. Situated in latitude 17'46‘22 S.,
longitude 179 BTS E. Surrounded by a reef with
passages for boats. No anchorage or protection for
vessels. Subject to Ban. The island is in shape
nearly an equilateral triangle. Highest point 750 ft.
of a dome shape.
(Mbau.) The residence of Thakombau, and
political capital of Fiji. An island .2 miles in cir-
cumference, connected by a coral patch, fordable at
iugh water, and bare in some parts at low, with the
E. coast of Viti Levu, lying a little to the north of
the northern entrance of the Rewa River. The
native population, mostly chiefs, numbers from
1000 to 1,500, and every available piece of ground is
occupied by houses. About 20 miles from Levuka,
Island of Ovalau. Bau is situated in latitude 17 57
S., longitude 178’40 E. Its bay is well sheltered by
extensive coral sea reefs. See Letter IX, p. 48.
BAU : An islet off Matuku in the Eastern Group.
BLACOJv L : An islet in Granby Harbour and west-
ward of Whippy Harbour, S. coast of Viti Levu.
BEK AN A : (or Bokana.) An islet on the N.E. coast
of Vanua Levu.
BLNAU ; An islet in the Some Some Straits, to the
E. of Vanua Levu.
BEG A: (Benga, Beqa, or Mbenga.) An island of oval
shape 5 miles long and 3 miles broad, on the S. coast
" ™ Levu, 22 miles S-W. Of Rewa, and 37 miles
b.\\. from Bau. Has two good harbours, Elliott's
on the VV., and Sawau Harbour on the N. side. The
highest peak in the centre of the island, is 1,287 ft.
above the sea level. Sawau Harbour is about
2 miles deep. The entrance to this harbour
facing the N. , is J of a mile wide, but it immediately
opens to a mile In width in from four to ten fathoms
of water. Benga and the small islands within the
reef are subject to Rewa chiefs. It was among
the lands ceded to the Polynesia Company in Feb-
ruary, 1868.
BIRD I.; A small islet N. of Namuka, near Benga
BIVA ; One of the Yasawa Group, N.W. of Waia-levu
and due W. of Agate Island. ’
BLACK I. l An islet near Baino.
BLAIR I.: An island in the Vatulele Reef, between j
Hamersley Island, and Vatulele, which
Viti Levu.
BLUNT 1. : An islet N. of Ono-i -ra, lying N.E. o
Kandavu.
BRAKENRIDGE I.: An island 1J miles long, on the
N.W. side of Vanua Levu, near Nathila Point, at
the S.W. end of Nuvera, and between that island
and Soangi.
B Y, DD *• : one of the Ringgold Isles. Lies due E. of
Bambi, and W. of Natawa Bay, at the eastern end
of Vanua Levu.
BUKALAU: A low islet a mile long, near Undu, at
the N.E. point of Vanua Levu, It forms the
southern part of Tibethe Harbour, and is 8 miles E.
of Drua Island. The passage from the open sea is
called Aramula Passage.
BUKAMA : One of the Yasawa Group to the N.W. of
Viti Levu.
BULIA : An island near Kandavu, S. of Viti Levu.
CARR I. ; One of the Hudson Isles, N.N.W. of
Malolo, near Alden Island, W. coast of Viti Levu.
CARR’S ISLET: An islet in Raritona Harbour,
Yasawa Group. See Ovawa.
CLARK I. : An islet near Vatulele, N.E. of Blair
Island.
CLARK’S I.: An island off the N. coast of Vanua
Levu, 3 miles east of Cumming’s Island
COCOANUT I. : (I.) An islet at the N.W. end of
Vanua Levu. (II.) An islet at the N. entrance to
Carr s Harbour, in the island of Matuku.
COLVOCARBSSIS I.; An islet N.E. of Sandford,
and Whittle Islets, off the N.E. coast of Kandavu,
and N. of Ono.
CRAVEN I. : An islet S. E. of Alden Island.
CUMMINGS I. : An islet 5 miles N. of Neill Island,
off the N. coast of Vanua Levu.
DALOMO : (Ndalomo.) One of the Yasawaa.
DAVIS I. : One of the Yasawas, close to Baldwin Is-
land, on its W. side.
DAVOR A : (Ndavora—Russian name Mikaeloff.) An
islet near Ono-i-lau, one of the most southerly of
the Eastern Group.
DAWHAIDA: Lies with the island of Manaka N W
of Nengo Nengo, in latitude 1810-08 S., longitude
142 06'43 W. Dawhaida is smaller than Manaka
(both are lagoon islands), and consists properly of
four islands within a reef, divided from Manaka by
a deep sea channel, 1 mile in width with no sound-
ing.
DAYS I. : An islet off the N. coast of Vanua Levu,
7 miles east of Mathuata Island, and 1J miles from
Piner’s Island.
DE HAVEN I.: One of the Ringgold Isles, to the S.
of Budd Island.
DIRECTION I. : See Nemena.
DOI: (Ndoi—Russian name Simanoff.) A small island
near Davora.
DOGALOA: (Ndongaloa.) An islet E. of Ba Point
N. coast of Viti Levu.
DRALA: (Ndrala.) A small island near Kemba
Point, B.E. coast of Viti Levu.
DRAVUNI: (Ndravuni.) An island near Kandavu,
8. of Viti Levu.
DROLA : See Androna,
DRUA DRUA: (Ndrua ndrua.) On the N. coast of
Vanua Levu, 2J miles long, and 1 broad. Lies 2i
miles E. of Kavewa, and 16 N.E. of Mali.
EGGSHELL ISLET: A small islet in Pulotu Har-
bour. See Asaua-i-lau.
ELD I.: One of the Yasawa Group, between Naviti
and Fox Islands.
ELIZABETH I. : A small islet within the Benga Reef.
ELLIOTT I.: An islet N.E. of Ono and Kandavu,
between Howison and Hudson Islands.
EMMONS I.: One of the Hudson’s Islands,. NJE. off
Perry Island.
ENKABA : An island, 2 miles long and 1 wide, in tha
Eastern Group. Is 34 miles S. by W. from Lake in ba.
Also called Vuanggava,


EXPLORING ISLES : The most northerly cluster of
the Eastern Group, in latitude 17T5 S., and longi-
tude 179' W. They are seven in number, enclosed
in an extensive reef, something in the shape of a
triangle, whose sides are 24 miles long. Sometimes
called Sir Chas. Middleton’s Islands.
EOX I. : One of the Yasawa Group, between Eld and
Agate Islands.
FULANGA : (Fulaga or Vulanga.) Situated 46 miles
8.8. of Lakemba, in the Eastern Group. It is 8
miles in length. A coral reef, With entrance for
vessels, on the N.B. side surrounds it. There are
three adjoining islets on the N.B. side.
GALOA: (Ngaloa or Naloa.) An island on the N.
coast of Yanua Levu, 2 miles from the mainland.
GIBSON’S I. : An island 1 mile in length, off the N.
coast of Yanua Levu, to the S.E. of Clark s Island-,
GOAT I. : In the straits of Somo Somo, and probably
identical with Benau Island.
GORO : (or Boro.) Probably the finest and most fer-
tile island in the group. It lies 54 miles N .E. of
Bau, and is 32 miles S. from Vuna Point, Taviuni.
It is 9J miles long, and 4 miles across. There is a
numerous native population, subject to Bau. The
island is well watered with running streams, and a
large proportion of the country, consists of table
and gently undulating lands of a very rich char-
acter. There is anchorage on the N.W. side, but ho
harbour. See Letter XI., p. 60.
GREEN I.: An islet at the S.W. side of Moala, in
the Eastern Group. There is another islet not far
from it, but nearer to Moala.
GREEN’S I. : An islet oif the N. coast of Yanua
Levu, half a mile N, of William’s Island, and near
Mbiti.
GUNU: (Ngunu.) One of the Yasawas.
HAMERSLEY X.: An islet at the N. extremity of
Vatulele.
HANBURY I. : An island 1 mile from the N. shore
of Yanua Levu. It is rather smaller than Kavewa,
from which it lies 3 miles to the S.W.
HARRISON I.: An islet lying W. of Howison Island,
N. E. of Kandavu.
HAYCOCK I. : An islet near Undu Point, N.E. ex-
tremity of Yanua Levu.
HENDERSON I. : A small islet to the N. of Yanua
Levu, 8 miles E. of Sau Sau, near Blunt Point, and
3 miles S.W. of Kavewa Island.
HENRY I.: A sandy islet in the Underwood Group,
on which Lieut. Underwood, and Midshipman
Henry, two of Commander Wilkes’s officers, who
were killed on Malolo, in 1840, are buried.
HOLMES I. ; One of the Ringgold Isles, S. of Budd
Island. ,
HOWISON I. : An islet N.B. of Blunt Island, which
lies N. of Ono, at the N.B. end of Kandavu.
HUDSON I. : An islet near Howison Island.
HUDSON ISLES : A group of five or six islands, off
the W. coast of Viti Levu.
/IKA: An inconsiderable islet on the N. side of Yiti
Levu, between the islet of Ragi Ragi (or Raki Rakij
and the mainland.
ITA : An islet off the S.B. end of Androna, in the
Yasawa Group, latitude 6'55T8 S., longitude
177-24-3 E.
•JOHNSON I. : One of the Hudson Islands, N.W.
of Malolo, and W, of Viti Levu, between Carr Is-
land and Alden Island.
jKAIMBO : The name given to two or three islets to
the W. of Ythata, in the Eastern Group.
KALI: An islet near Faliki Harbour, island of An-
drona or Drola.
jKAMBARA : (Kumbaru.) A well wooded island, 37
miles S.W. of Lakemba, in the Eastern Group. Has
a bell-shaped peak on the N.W. side, 300 ft. high.
No anchorage for large vessels.
EKAMIA : (Quamea or Nggamea.) A fertile island, a
few miles E. of Taviuni, and between that island
.and Lauthala.
KANATHIA : A fertile island 8 miles in circumfer-
ence, in the Eastern Group, 7 miles due E. of
Vanua-Balavu, one of the Exploring Isles, and 58
miles N. N.W. from Lakemba. There are two good
cotton plantations on ,this island, which belong to
white men.
KANDAVU : (Kadavu or Kantavu.) The principal
island in the S.W. portion of the Archipelago. It
lies 63 miles S. by W. from Bau, 41 miles from the
nearest point of Viti Levu, and about 26 miles S. of
Benga. The island has a numerous native popula-
tion, and is well wooded and extremely fertile in
parts. It is upwards of 26 miles in length, with an
average breadth of from 4 to 8 miles, and is the
largest island in the Archipelago, after Yiti Levu
and Yanua Levu. It runs principally B. and W,,
and has a narrow isthmus about midway, only half
a mile across. Galoa, or Ngaloa Bay, on the B.E.
side, is after Suva, in Viti Levu, probably the best
harbour in the group. Malatta Bay, on the N.W.
offers a temporary anchorage, and S.W. of Malatta,
is Tavuki Bay, with an anchorage of 15 fathoms in
sandy bottom. There is safe anchorage on the N.E.
side, between Kandavu and Ono. Buke Levu, or
Mount Washington, the highest mountain in Fiji,
rises at the W. extremity to a height of 3,800 ft.
There are one or two cotton plantations at Tavuki,
but more on the other side, where good upland rice
has also been grown.
KANUSIMANU : An island N.E. of Taviuni.
KATAVANGA : An island in the Eastern Group, 20
miles E.S.E. of Yanua Balavu, one of the Exploring
Isles, and 43 miles N.E. of Lakemba. Has no safe
anchorage. This island is the property of white
men, and cotton plantations are being worked on it.
KAVEWA: (or Cabewa.) An island 2 miles in length,
on the N, coast of Yanua Levu, 13 miles N.E. of
Mali, and 3 miles N. of Blunt Point.
KAWA-KAWA : A little island near the S.W. end of
Ya-asaua, in the Yasawa Group. There are three
islets near it
KBSE : One of the Yasawa Group.
KIA : (or Kiai.) An island off Mathuata, 11 miles
from the N. coast of Yanua Levu. Another islet
adjoins it, and it lies due north of Mathuata Island.
KINSILK I. : The most northerly of the Yasawa
Group. Lies N.E. of Asaua, and E. of Timboor.
KIOA : (Keai or Kea.) An island to the eastward of the
S.E. extremity of Yanua Levu, in latitude 16 40 8.,
longitude 179’5 W. .
KNOX I.: One of the Yasawa Group, N. of Baldwin
Island. , , _. .
KOMBELAU I. : Three islets off Kombelau Point,
on the 8. side of Yanua Levu. Their names are :
(I.) Moro, a quarter of a mile long. (II.) Makatu,
less than half a mile E. of Moro, and directly oppo-
site Kombelau Point. (III.) Rawaike, less than a
quarter of a mile S. of Moro, and N. of Moro, is a
small sandy islet. Kombelau Harbour, Res between
the three principal islands.
KOMO : An island about 6 miles in circumference,
23' S.B. Lakemba, in the Eastern Group.
KOMON DRITI: An island W. of Komo, and in the
same reef. Good anchorage, except when wind
from N.E.
KONAIVO : A little islet in a reef E. of the Angasa
Islands.
KORO: See Goto. ~ x , . _ .
KOROISOROVI: A little islet close to Viwa, in the
bay of Bau. .
KOROLEVU : (Korolib.) An islet in the Somo Somo
Straits, between Taviuni and Yanua Levu.
KORONI : An islet a little to the S.E. of Mothe, in
the Eastern Group.
KOROTUMA: An islet in a reef, 25 miles B. of Undu
Point, N.E. extremity of Yanua Levu.
KOVU: See Naikovu. .
KUKU : An islet in the reef S. of Malolo, an island
on the W. cost of Viti Levu.
LAK BA : The largest island in the Eastern Group,
aft Yanua Balavu. The town of Tumboa, is


in latitude 18T4'3 S., and longitude 178 - 45 W.
One of the principal Wesleyan Mission Stations!
iso white cotton planters here at present (July
1870). Distant from Bau, 144 miles E. 4s'
Kende Kende, the highest hill on the island
is 1,714 ft. above the sea level. Lakemha is 5 miles
long, and 3 broad. It is a well wooded and produc-
island, and one of the most valuable possessions
ot the Lau kingdom. The meetings of the Lau Par-
liament are usually held here. The native popula-
tion is about 1,500, and includes many Tongans.
there is anchorage for vessels under 200 tons, in a
little port called Dawa. There is barely room for
one vessel, however, the entrance being only 50 or
b 0 yards wide, and a strong current prevents it being
entered, except with a commanding breeze to the
». of E. Temporary anchorage in fine weather has
been found nearly opposite the Mission Station. The
reef extends 6 miles from the island in an E.N.E.
direction. There are two openings, one on the S.E."
side sufficient for large vessels, but dangerous from
the coral patches which stud it, and one opposite to
the town on the S. or S.W. side. In the latter a
vessel of 100 or 200 tons may enter, but the space is
very confined.
LANDOLEWA; An islet in Moturiki Passage, ad-
joining the islet of Landotangane.
LANDOTANDANE : An islet in the Moturiki Pas-
sage, near Ovalau, adjoining Landolewa.
LATIUBA ; An islet in the reef directly S. of Angau
(Gau or Ngau).
LAUTHALA : (Laucala.) An island 1 mile N. of
Jvamia (Nggamea), and 9 miles B. of Taviuni. There
are cotton plantations carried on by white men here.
LAVOD : An islet at the S.E. entrance of Fawn Har-
bour, Vanua Levu.
LBLEUVIA : (or Lelewia.) An islet near Thanggalai,
W. of the ship passage leading to Moturiki from
Bau, and about 5 miles E. from the coast of Viti
Levu.
r ; : An island i a odle in length, forming
JV.E. boundary of Wailea Bay. Lies near N.W.
extremity of Vanua Levu, to which it is joined by a
low sand bank.
: An islet at the S. or most inland extremity
of Charley Harbour, Island of Moala.
LEVA; An islet at the N. side of Emmons Bay Is-
land of Ta Asaua. Bast of this islet in the bay at a
distance of Jof a mile, is Asaua Island. At the S
entrance of Emmons Bay is another small islet of
which the name is not known. This bay is 2 miles
r . t J? eing much ex Posed, is not a safe harbour,
r i'hh . A I , ie commercial capital. See Ovalau.
LEW A; An islet off the S. W. extremity of Biva, in
the Y asawa Group.
LEWIS I. : A little islet in the Yasawa Group, be-
teen Totten and Davis Islands.
: An islet at the S.W. extremity of Viti Levu.
r le Cocoanut Island of some maps.
LINIHICUM; One of the islets in Underwood’s
Group.
: t, Aji island near Oneata, to the E. of it—one of
the Eastern Group. The Observatory Island of
Wilkes. There is excellent anchorage on the N E
side.
LOTU. A small island on the reef near Nandundu.
Lies on the S. coast of Vanua Levu, W. of Rativa
Island, and E. of Savu Savu Bay.
laroNnii inn Kombelau Islets, which see.
MAKONDRANGA.: (Makodraga or Mokondranga.) A
smaU islaml 12 miles N.N.E, of Ovalau, and due E.
of Viti Levu Bay, on the N.E. coast of Viti Levu.
Lies a little to the N.W. of Makomrai
MAKONGAI: (Mokogai.) An island somewhat larger
than Makondranga which it nearly adjoins. Lies
10 or 12 miles N.N.E. of Ovalau in latitude 17 - 27T4
S., longitude 1,8 57 23 E. Is the property of the
Messrs Hennings, who carry on extensive cotton
plantations. See p. 21.
MAKULUVA: (Makulau.) A small sandy islet on |
the S. side of Kuhnian, which it is close to. Is in
the reef off Rewa Roads, immediately opposite the
mouth of the Rewa and Point Draketi, at the S.E.
of Viti Levu. Refer to Nukttlau.
MALA KI ; An island about four miles in circumfer-
ence, two miles from the N. coast of Viti Levu,
between Viti Levu Bay and Raki-raki. Good land
and very lightly timbered. The island is owned by
Europeans.
MALI: An island 3 miles long, and from 1 to U
broad, lying off the hi. coast of Vanua Levu, 15 miles
E. of Mathuata.
MALIMA : (or Molina.) Two small islands W. by N,
nr at r 1 'h allua Balavu, to the N. of the Eastern Group.
A : ( aLso Namalata.) An islet near Mali, on
the N. coast of Vanua Levu.
MALOLG ; An islet W. of Malaki, on the N. coast of
Viti Levu.
AL<l island 6 miles W. of Nandi Bay, on the
W. coast of Viti Levu. Lieut. Underwood and Mid-
shipman Henry of the United States Exploring
Expedition, were killed here in 1840. Lies near the
ex tremity of the Vasa was, in latitude
I'longitude 177‘01 E. Is the principal island
oi the Underwood Group.
MALOLO LAILAI: A smaller island adjoining the
foregoing on the S.E. side.
MAMANUTHA: One of the Yasawas, W. of Viti
Levu.
MAMBUALAU : A small islet on the reef off Kemba
Point, E. coast of Viti Levu. Lies due E of Tom-
barua and Ban.
MANA: A small island, the southernmost of the
Eastern Group, in Bereghis Reef. Lies S.W. of Ono-
i-lau. See Tavana-i-tholo and Tavana-i-ra.
: (Mago.) An island nearly round. Is 9
miles in circumference, and Res 10 miles S.W. of
Vanua Balavu, and 40 miles N.N.W. from Lakemba.
There is a distinct reef distant from it N. W. by N.
4 miles. This island is the property of Ryder Bros.,
ht aat° S 6 Pl an^a tions are carried on here. See p. 21.
MAKGO CHI; (Magojii.) An islet near the forego-
ing island.
one of the Yasawas N.W. of Viti Levu.
MATANGI; A smaß island N.N.W. of Kami® or
Nggamea, E. of Vanua Levu.
MATATHA-WALEVU ; (or Matathoni-Levu.) One
of the Yasawa Group.
MATHUATA: (or Mathuata-i-wai.) An island If
miles in length, 2 miles from the N. coast of Vanua
Levu.
MATHUATA: An islet also lying on the N. side of
Vanua Levu.
MAIUKU : An island 41 miles long, and from 1 1( to
H miles broad, the most south-westerly of the
Eastern Group. Lies in latitude 19-8‘43 S and
longitude 179-44-27 E., 96 miles S.W. by S. from
Lakemba, 94 S.E. from Bau, and 66 miles S.E by 8
from Angau. The highest point on the island is
1,262 ft from the level of the sea. The island trends
irom JN. to S., and is wholly hounded by a fringe
reef, which comes awash at low water, and projects
le S.E. and N. points of the island
(though not farther than half a mile off the general
coast line), making a circuit reef of 16 miles. Upon
the western aspect of this outer reef with the
central peak bearing E, is a gullet of 30 fathoms
depth, and one eighth of a mile across, clearly
definable from the masthead, and leading into a
basin with swinging room for two or three frigates in
16 fathoms water. This is the Carr’s Harbour of
Wilkes. On the opposite side of the island (the
eastern), there is another opening hi the outer reef
leading to a smaßer anchorage called Colvo Har-
bour.
MAURY I.: One of the Ringgold Isles, which see
M BITI ; An islet half a mRe E. of Mathuata-i-wai off
N. coast of Vanua Levu.
I- : See Exploring Isles.
MIKAELOFF: See Davora.
MOALA : A fine island 8 miles long, and 4 wide. Lies
72 miles W. by 8. from Lakemba, and 76 E.S.E.


from Bail. Moala marts the extreme limit of the
Eastern Group in this direction. It is a high
volcanic island, with an opening through the reef
on the W. side leading to an inferior harbour,
in latitude 18'32'45 S., and longitude 179'57'38 E.
The reef on N. side is a collection of sunken and
detached patches. The reef on the N.B. makes off
to a distance of 2J miles.
MO KOK GAT : See Makongai.
MONCK ROCK : Lies one mile and a half to the
N.N.B. of Drua (Ndrua Ndrua) Island, off the N.
coast of Vanua Levu.
MORAMBO ; A small lofty and well wooded island,
9 miles N.W. of Fulanga, one of the Eastern Group.
MORO : One of the Komhelau Islets.
MOTHE : (Moce.) A picturesque island 2 miles in
diameter E. of Komo, and 25 miles S.E. hy 8. from
Lakemba. Belongs to the Eastern Group. It is
surrounded by an extensive reef with only a boat-
entrance on the N. shore.
MOTURIKI: A fine island 4 miles long, and 1 broad,
2 miles S.W. of Ovalau. Belongs to Bau.
MOYA ROCK ; Lies at the S.E. extremity of Eld
- Island, in the Yasawa Group.
MUKALAU : An islet in Rewa Roads.
MUNGA : An islet between Otovawa and Drola.
MUNIA : (or Munea.) A small island 4 miles E. of
Vanua Balavu, to the N. of the Eastern Group.
Due N. of Lakemba 50 miles. Rocky and steep.
Highest elevation, Ndelanikoro Peak, 1054 ft.
NAEVU : A small island to the E. of Ongea, one of
the Eastern Group.
NAIKOVU : (or Kovu.) A rocky islet in Mothea, or
Eliza Reef, of volcanic origin, S.B.E. of Nairai. It is
inaccessible on three sides.
NAINGANI: A small island of considerable eleva-
tion, 6 miles N.W. from Ovalau, and 22 miles N. i
E. from Bau. Lies in latitude 17’34‘36 8., longitude
178-40'31 B.
NAIRAI: (or Neri.) A fertile island 14 miles east of
Batiki, 48 miles E. by N. from Bau, 8J miles N.E.
of Angau, and 31 miles E.S.B. of Ovalau. Nairai is
4 miles in length, and 3 in breadth, trends K. and S.
and is belted by 33 miles of reef, ranging 5 miles off
the W., and 4 miles off the N. and 8. ends of the
island. There is a ship opening in this reef leading
into a three mile area of from 10 to 15 fathoms,
sheltered anchorage in the hay of Korambamha.
This opening may he gained by bringing up Needle
Peak to hear N.N.E., but a masthead look-out
should be kept for 9 ft. patches. Needle Peak r
which reaches an elevation of 1078 ft., lies in the
■northern part of the island, in latitude 17‘47'33 8.,
and longitude 179’24"3 E. Variation in harbour
8'46 E. ; height of tide 4 ft. .7 in.; flows upon full
and change days to sh. 53 min. The only danger
near this island is a small coral patch lying a mile
E.S.B. from the southern end, and a mile to the N.
of Naikovu Rock. Nairai belongs to Bau.
NAI SAU SAIT: (or Sau Sail.) A small island on
the N. coast of Vanua Levu, 5 miles N.B. of Mali.
NAI SONI SONI: An islet in Savu Savu Bay, 8.
side of Vanua Levu, lying 68 miles N. hy E. from
Bau. Good anchorage to the N.W. of it.
NAITINGILITHA: (Tingilitha or Tilingitha.) An
Islet 15 miles from Undu Point, at the N.B. ex-
tremity of Vanua Levu. Is three quarters of a mile
long, and 3 miles equi-distant from Bukelau Island,
and Tibethe Point.
NAITAMBA: (Naitoumha and Naitaumha.) An
island 5 miles in circumference, lying 11 miles N.W.
by W. from Vanua Balavu to the N. of the Eastern
Group, 35 miles B. by 8. from Taviuni, and 75 miles
to the N. of Lakemba. The island is high, rugged
and circular in form. The reef, which does not ex-
tend above half a mile from the island, has no open-
ings. Owned by Europeans who grow cotton and
manufacture ooperah.
NAIVAKATANGGALISAISAI: A rocky islet like the
hull of a ship near Moturiki.
NAIVARA: An islet off the N. coast of Viti Levu.
NAMALATA : (or Mallatta.) One of the Exploring”
Isles, and lies between Vanua Balavu and Susui.
There is also an islet as near Mali, on the N. coast
of Vanua Levu, called Namalata or Mallatta.
NAMBEKAVU : An islet in the River Tavu, 2 miles
from its mouth. The Tavu is a river on Vanua
Levu, which enters the ocean on the N. side of that
island, about 20 miles W. of Undu Point.
NAMBITI: An island on the N.W. coast of Vanua
Levu, 1 mile E. of Nuvera Island.
NAMBULAMBULEWA; An islet a quarter of a mile
from the N.E. coast of Viti Levu, and 19 miles from
Bau, in a northerly direction.
NAMOTO ; A little islet opposite Ravi Ravi, N.W. of
Vanua Levu.
NAMUKA; (Namuka-i-lau or Muka.) One of the
Eastern Group, 30 miles 8. by E. from Lakemba.
An extensive reef surrounds the island, which offers
no anchorage.
NAMUKA: (Namuka-i-ra, also Yanuca or Yanutha.)
Lies 7 miles W. of Benga (in the same sea reef), at
the S.W. extremity of Viti Levu.
NANANU : See Annan.
NANANUGATA : An islet close to Annan Island,
N. coast of Viti Levu.
NANDRALA; (or Veindrala.) An island N. of Vanua
Levu, near Tavea.
NANDONGO : A small island N. of Vanua Levu.
NANGATA ; An island between Yangata and Nanuia,
or Nanuya, one of the Yasawas.
NANGA-BAUTAMBU : (Angasautomhu or Nasau-
tabu.) An islet at the entrance of the Moturiki
Passage, off the E. coast of Viti Levu, 12 miles from
Bau.
NANUKU : An islet within a very large reef, 12 miles
E.N.B. of Lauthala, to the E. of Vanua Levu.
NANUTHA : See Aautha-Levu.
NANUYA: (Nanuia.) Two small islands in the
Yasawas, N.W, of Viti Levu, lying between Otovawa
and Androna.
NAROKOROKOYARA: One of the Yasawas, near
the large island of Waia.
NARONGAI: A very small island near Lotu, an islet
on the 8. coast of Vanua Levu.
NASAUTABU: See Naugasautambu.
NASOATA : An islet at the mouth of the Wailevu
or Rewa River, 8. E. side of Viti Levu.
NATANGA: (or Natang,) An islet on the 8. coast of
Vanua Levu, between Sau Sau Point and Rativa
Island.
NATHAWA : (or Natewa.) One of the Yasawa
Group.
NATHULA: One of the Yasawas.
NATUVU : An islet in Savu Savu Bay, S. side of
Vanua Levu.
NAVAMBELEVU : Two islands N. of Nukulevu or
Nukulevai, on the B. side of Viti Levu.
NAVATU; A small island near Naisonisoni, in Savu
Savu Bay, S side of Vanua Levu.
NAVITI: The largest island of the Yasawa Group,
N.W. of Viti Levu. Lies between Yangata and Eld
Island, and is 30 miles distant from the Ba coast of
Viti Levu.
NAVIU : A small island near the N.E. extremity of
Vanua Levu.
NAVUTU-I-LOMA: (Navutu-i-Rai, and Navutu-i-
Thaki.) See Angasa Islands.
NAWANDRAU : A sandy islet on the N. side of Vanua
Levu, near Tavia.
NAYaNUYANU : An islet off Some Somo, E. end of
Vanua Levu. Also the name given to the two islets,
Thanggalai and Leleuvia, E. of Viti Levu.
NAIAU : (Nayau or Niau.) An island in the Eastern
Group, 9 miles in circumference and 15 miles N.W.
hy N, of Lakemba. Lofty peaks rise precipitously
from the water’s edge to a height of 275 ft. Has a
reef all round it, and offers no facilities for vessels.
The King of Lakemba, Tui Naiau, takes his title
from this island.
NEILL I. ; An islet 2 miles B. of Green’s Island, off
the N. coast of Vanua Levu.
NBMBNA: (or Direction Island.) An island lying


between Koro and Nandi Bay, on Vanua Levu. Situ-
ated in latitude 17’6'36 8., longitude 179'5'36E. There
is another Nandi Bay on the W. coast of Viti Levu.
There is also an islet on the B. coast of Viti Levu,
between the mainland and Ovalau, called Nemena.
NEZIMPAZIMBA; Two islets off Kemba Point, S.E,
coast of Viti Levu.
NGGAMEA : See Kamia.
NGGBLEVU : (Quelelevu.) An island 40 miles disr
tant from Somo Somo, in a N.E, by N. directum,
and E. of Vanua Levu.
NGGOMO-LAILAI; (Qomo-Lailai.) An islet on the
N.E, side of Viti Levu.
NGGOMO-LEVU : An islet adjoining the foregoing.
NIFO : An islet E. of the islet of Ato, between Nan-
gata and Yangata, in the Yasawa Group.
NIMANOPP : (or Simanoff.) Identical with Doi.
NORTH I. : One of the Ringgold Isles, E. of Vanua
Levu.
NUCUMBATI: (Nuthumbati.) An island about
three quarters of a mile long, and three quarters pf
a mile broad, off the N. coast of Vanua Levu, 3 miles
W. of Mathuata
NUCUMURRY: (Nuthumurri.) An islet at the ex-
tremity of a peninsula forming the E. side of
Nuoumurry Harbour, W. end of Vanua Levu.
NUKU-I-RA; A long sand bank N.E. of Vanua Levu.
NUKULAU : A small sandy island in Rewa Roads,
lying to the 8. of Rewa, 4 miles W, of Nakui (in the
mainland of Viti Levu), and 14 miles S,W. of Bau.
On the E. side there is an extensive coral reef, and
it can be approached on the western side only. It is
in latitude 18’10'23 8., and longitude 178’30‘30 B.
variation 9‘30. This island belonged to the late Mr.
Williams, American Consul, and it was the destruc-
tion of his property here by fire on the 4th July,
1849, which led to the claim of £9OOO enforced by
the American Government, against Thakombau.
One of the first places in which Sea Island cotton
was grown in 1861.
NUKULBVU: (or Nukulevai.) A sandy island between
Nemena and Nambulambulewa, off the E. coast of
Viti Levu, towards Ovalau.
NUKULEVU : (or Nukubalevu.) Properly two is-
lands, in a reef to the B.S.E. of Korotuma, off the
E. extemity of Vanua Levu, opposite to Undu
Point.
NURUMALA: An island on the N, side of Vanua
Levu.
NUKUMANU : An islet a few miles W. of Nukumba-
sanga. One of the Ringgold Isles, Lies to the E. of
the E. extremity of Vanua Levu.
NUKU BALAVU : (Nukumbalavu.) A small island
40 miles N. E. of Tavuini, also called Nukulevu and
Nggelevu.
NUKUBASAGA: (Nukumbasanga.) Two islets in a
large reef, 14 miles 8. of Nukulevu (also called
Nggalevu, Nukumbalavu, <fec). Lies 40 miles N.E.
by E. from the N. end of Taviuni,
NUKUBUCA: (Nukumbutha.) A small islet
miles from the E. end of Anganga, N.W. extremity
of Vanua Levu.
NUKUMOTU : An island in the Rewa. One of the
first places in the group in which cotton was success-
fully grown.
NUKU-ONGEA : (or Nukusonge.) A sandy islet, 3,
miles S.E. of Ongea, one of the southerly islands of
the Eastern Group.
NUKUTOLU : An islet near Yathata, one of the.
Eastern Group.
NUKUVANA ; A sandy islet off the N.E. coast of
Vanua Levu.
NUVBRA: (or Nivera.) A narrow island 6 miles
long, near the N.W. extremity of Vanua Levu, oppo-
site to Nathila Point.
OANDROU : A small island, lying half-way between
Soangi and the mainland of Vanua Levu, and at its
N.W. end,
OBSERVATORY I. : Identical with Loa. Also an
islet in Raritona Harbour, near Ovawa, which see.
OGLE I.: An islet in the Underwood Group.
OLIMBO: Three small islands 7 miles N. of Vanua
Balavu, one of the Exploring Isles.
OLORUA : A small island in the Eastern Group, sur-
rounded by an entensive reef. Is 18 miles S.E. of
Lakemba.
OMBO : An islet in the Pao Reef, a long reef between
the island of Vomo and Totten Island, the most
southerly of the Yasawas. Lies a short distance to
the B. of Totten Island.
OMENE; An islet on the E. coast of Viti Levu, between
Ovalau and the mainland. Sometimes called Ne-
mena.
ONEATA : An Island in the Eastern Group, N. of
Mothe, and 16 miles 8. by S. from Lakemba. Has a
good anchorage. There are two entrances on the
N.E. side, and three on the W. The channel be-
tween Oneata and Mothe is called Oneata Passage.
Oneata is in latitude 18’24 8., longitude 178'32
W.
ONE TREE I.: An islet near Raritona Harbour, in,
the Yasawa Group. See Ovawa,
ONGEA LEVU : One of the most easterly islands in
the, group, except Vatoa, 55 miles B.S.E. from La-,
kemba. Well wooded, but rocky. Three miles to the
8. and E. of this island is a dangerous reef and sand
bank, called Nugu Ongea. There is ap entrance to,
the reef, and a harbour on the N.W. side latitude
19'4 8., longitude 178'30 W.
ONGEA-NDRITI: An island near to the foregoing,,
and in the same reef.
ONO-I-LAU; The most southern island of any size in
the group. Distant from, Lakemba, 140 miles 8. by
E., longitude 178'44’16 W., latitude 20’38'25 8.
ONO-I-RA: A fine island off the N.E. coast of Kan-,
dayu.
080MBU : Pour islets lying together, about 6 miles
E. of Vanua Balavu, to the N. of the Eastern Group.
OTOVAWA: One of the Yasawas, W. of Drola or
Androna.
OVALAU ; A lofty island with steeple shaped peaks,
on the eastern side of Viti Levu, about 7 miles from,
the mainland, and 10 or 12 miles from Bau. L|es in
latitude 17M0A5 8., and longitude 175-49'45 B;
Levuka, on the east side of this island, is the com-,
meroial capital of Fiji, and the principal shipping
port in the group. At the present date (July, 1870),
this town has a permanent white population of 200,
and a floating white population of 500, which is-
increasing rapidly. There, are several large hotels
and stores in the principal street, which is three,
quarters of a mile long. The British and American
Consular Offices are here. Levuka Harbour has,
good holding ground, and is easy of access. The is-
land though mountainous, is exceedingly fertile, and
thpre are several good cotton plantations on it. It)
is 8 miles long from N. to 8., and 7 miles vide from
E. to W. The altitude of Nalin-gondo, one of the
highest peaks, is about 2070 ft. above the sea level.
Moturiki and Ovalau lie within the same reef, and
there is no passage, between these islands, except f o r
small vessels and canoes. See Letter VII. p, 39.
OVALU: (also called Passage Island and Vatu.) A
small islet to the N. of Ovalau and N.E. of Viti Levu
near Makongai Passage. ’
OVAWA : A» islet near Kawa Kawa, at the W. side
of the entrance to Raritona Harbour, in the island
of Ya Asaua, Yasawa Group. Near Ovawa (in the
harbour) is One Tree Islet, and an islet un-
named, lying a little to the E. To the 5.8., close to
the mainland (of Ya Asaua), is Yarani Island which
is high ground. To the 8, of Yarani, still closer to
the side of the bay, is Carr’s Islet, and W of Carr’s
Islet, across the bay, is Observatory Islet, close to the
shore of the mainland.
OVIOVI: An islet near Oviovi Point, at the N E
extremity of Ya, Asaua, one of the Yasawas.
PAKA . An islet off the S.E. side of Androna or Drola,
one of the Yasawas.
PALMER’S I. : A small island N.W. of Malolo, off
the W. coast of Viti Levu.
PBKA I. : An islet 8. of Asaua-i-lau.


PIG X.: A small island inside the reef on the E. side
of Angau.
PINERS I. : An islet 1 mile E. of Neill Island, off the
N. coast of Vanua Levu.
PITO: An islet at the entrance of the Southern
Harbour of Waia-Levu, one of the Yasawa Group.
PRINCE WILLIAMS’ ISLANDS: Name given by-
Tasman to the Fijian Archipelago, on its discovery
by him in 1643.
PULLY I.; An islet 1 mile S.E. of Williams’ Island,
off the N- coast of Vanua Levu.
EABI RABI; (Rambi Rambi.) A little island to the
N. of Cocoanut Point, at the W. extremity of Vanua
Levu, on the W. side of the neck of that prornon-.
tory, on the other side of which is Sualib (or Solevu)
Bay.
RAKI-RAKI; (or Ragi-ragi.) An islet on the N.
coast of Viti Levu, W. of Malaki Island.
EABI: (Rambi.) A well-wooded island, E. of Vanna
Levu, off the S. end of Natawa Bay, 16 miles N. of
Somo Somo.
BATIVA: An islet on the S. coast of Vanua Levu,
between Natanga I. and the Straits of Somo Somo.
EAVI RAVI: An islet off the N. coast of Vanna
Levu, at the W. side of the entrance of N a vatu
harbour.
RAWAIKE; One of the Kombelau islets.
EEED’S ISLES: Three small islets in the eastern
group.
BEEFS: The following js an alphabetical list of the
principal reefs in the Archipelago:—Adolphus Reef,
Argo (or Bukatatanoa) Reef, Astrolabe Reef, Bell’s
Reef, Burn’s Reef, Chick’s Reef, Charybdis Reef,
Chicondua Reef, Dibble’s Reef, Doughty Reef, Duffs
Reef, Dye’s Reef, Fao Reef, Flying Fish Shoal, Free-
man’s Reef, Frost’s (or Frosty) Reef, Gordon Reef,
Great Northern Reef, Hawking’s Reef, Horseshoe
(Thockou-momo or Kaumonu) Reef, Kneas Reef,
Koneivo Reef, Konapota Reef, Leva Reef, Lewis
Reef, Look-out Reef, Malevuvu Reef, Matau Reef,
Morse’s Reef, Mothea (or Eliza) Reef, Mumbolithe
Reef, Nisukisuki Reef, Nugatobe Reef, Nukulevu
Reef, Nukuongea Reef Nukutioombia Reef, Porpoise
Reef Porpoise Shoal, Poukeepsie Reef, Quinn’s Reef,
Reva-Reva beef Robinson’s Reef, Smith Reef, Tavu-
nuka Reef Tekulaka Reef Teteka Reef, Tova (or
Navutu) Reef Vao Reef Vuata-Ono (or Bereghis)
Reef, Vuata-Vatoa Reef Williamson’s Reef and
others.
Bukatatanoa or the Argo Reef, is one of the most
extensive and dangerous in the group. The English
brig Argo, was lost on its southern end in 1806, and
the ship Harriet, of London, was also wrecked here
in 1836. It runs from the N, side of Lakemba, in
the eastern group, 27 miles in an E. and N.E. direc-
tion. The reef contains five islands.
The Astrolabe is a large reef lying to the N. of
Kandavu.
Charybdis Reef awash, is on the N. coast of Viti
Levu.
Duff’s Reef is to the N.W. of Vanua Balavu.
Gordon Reef is 7 miles N.E. of the little island
of Aro, in the eastern group.
Frosty Reef lies 4 miles from Mango, N.W. by N.
Kaumonu (Thockou-momo or Horseshoe) Reef, is
situated between Koro, Nairai, and Vakia. It is one
mile in diameter and very dangerous. There is an
opening on the N. side.
Malevuvu Reef 21 miles long, is distant 7 miles
N. by E. from Katavanga.
Mothea, or Eliza Reef, is on the south side of
Nairai.
Mumbolithe Reef is oval in shape and three
quarters of a mile in length. It lies 14 miles to the
S. of the S.E. point of Angau.
Tova Ree, is equi-distant from Tutoya, Woala,
and Vanua Vatu, at the S. end of the eastern group.
It is a mile in diameter, and nearly circular. At
low water it is quite dry.
Vuata-Ono (Bereghis) Reef, is the native name of
a dangerous oblong reef trending 2£ miles S.W. upon
a width of 2 miles, with no sounding at half a mile
off, awash, and always breaking, Vuata-Ono signi-.
fies the child of Ono, with the six islets, by which it
may be identified, although there is actually a pas-
sage of 5J miles between it and the reef which
encircles them, presenting no soundings in 230
fathoms. As respects, the N. and 8. aspects of Vuata-
Ono, a safe berth will be ensured, so long as the
highest peak of Ono is kept one point, right or left,
of N,E. It must be cleared to the E., however, to
depend upon seeing it, and at night ships must keep
to the S.W. of it. Its elbow most distant from Ono
—the western one—ranges 11 miles upon the bearings,
of S.W., in lat, 20'45 S., and long. 178’53'40 W.
Vuata-Vatoa, is a detached reef, occupying a space
measuring from N. to 8. 2J miles, and 2 miles E. and
W„ with a tidal basin. The passage between Vuata-
Vatoa and Vatpa trends W.N.W. and 8.5. E., per-
fectly clear, with 90 fathoms water, the mid-channel
being nearly 2 miles wide.
Vatu, a dangerous detached reef in the eastern
group, equi-distant from Tutoya, Moala, and Vanua-
Vatu. It is quite dry at low water, and the sea
breaks on it at all times.
REMO : An islet at the N.W. extremity of Viti Levu,
one of the Yasawas, within the reef.
RBWA: An island one mile from the S.E. coast of
Viti Levu, which gives its name to the harbour of
Rewa, or Rewa Roads. It is, about 7 miles long
and 4 miles wide, and lies in lat. 18'6 S„ long.
178-42 E. Rewa is 12 miles B.S.W. from Ban, and
was formerly the second kingdom in Fiji.
REWA ■■ A settlement on Viti Levu, which see.
REYNOLDS’ I,: The most northerly of several islets
lying to the N. of Ono, near Kandavu. One of the
islands of the Underwood group also bears this name.
RICHMOND I.: An islet due E. of Fully islet, off
the N, coast of Vanua Levu.
RINGGOLD ISLES : A group of islands E. of Vanua
Levu, and N. of the eastern group.
ROQK I-: Two islets at the N.W. of Vanua Levu
lying 2J miles E. of Leonidas I.
ROUND I. : See Alewa-Kalou.
ROUND ISLET: An islet on the N.N.E. side of Viti
Levu, opposite Vitimira.
SAIL ROCK: A rocky islet (or more correctly two
rocks) to the N.W. of Kavewa 1., off the N. coast of
Vanua Levu.
SANDALWOOD I,; A name which has been applied
to Vanua Levu.
SAND 1.: A reef islet to the N. of Colvo Harbour,
on the E. side of Matuku eastern group. Also, a
small island half a mile due E. of Rock L, at tiie
N.W. end of Vanua Levu.
SANPQRD I.: An islet N. of Harrison 1., near Kan-
davu.
SAU SAU : (or Nai Saji Sau.) An islet 5 miles N.E,
of Mali, on the N. coast of Vanua Levu.
SAUTAMBU : See Nangasautambu.
SAWAILAU : One of the Yasawas,
SIMANOFF I. : SeeDoi.
SINCLAIR I.; One of the Yasawas, 8. of Agate I.
SMITH I. : An islet in the Underwood group.
SOANGI: An islet between Vatoa and Brakenridge 1.,
N.W. end of Vanua Levu.
SOLITARY I. : An islet near the E. side of the
entrance to Suva harbour, on the S. coast of Viti
Levu.
SONI: A small islet to the N. of Malolo, on the W.
coast of Viti Levu.
SOSOI NAVITI; One of the Yasawa group.
SPEIDEN I. : An islet near Malolo Passage at the
S.W. extremity of Viti Levu.
STORM I. ; An islet in the reef N. of Benga.
STUART I. : An islet within the Benga and Namuka
reef, S.W. of Benga.
SUSUI: A small island S. of Vanua Balavu, in the
eastern group.
SUTHUNI-LAILAI: (Sucuni-Lailai) and
BUTHUNI-LLV U, (Sucuni-Levu.) Twp very small
islands near Nairai.


SUVA: See Viti Levu.,
T ABUA : (or Tavua ) An islet off the N.W. coast of
„ . 1 3 etween Ba Point and Ba Passage.
TABUNASITin : (or Tavunasithi, and Tavunasici.)
An island m the eastern group, 33 miles S.S.W. from
liSiksmbd.
TABUTHA : (Tavutha, or Tavuoa.) An island 6
miles in circumference, 32 miles due N. from La-
kemba one of the eastern group. Has a remarkable
peak at tlie N.W. end. A reef surrounds the island,
but there are two boat entrances, one on the S W
and the other on the N.W. side. Two reefs lie 3
miles to the S.W.
TAKANOVA : A name which has been applied in
some old maps to the island of Vanua Levu
TAKI : An islet in the W. aspect of Biva, one of the
Yasawas.
TAMUSUA : One of the Yasawas, on the N.W of Viti
Levu.
TAUNAVA : An island on the E. side of Viti Levu
close to the mainland.
: A small island off Kandavu.
An islet N.E. by B. of Viti Levu.
lAVAjSA-I-RA : (also called Tuvana-i-Ra, Mikaeloff,
and sometimes Havora.) The more W. of two low
densely-wooded islets, separately girt by inaccessible
reefs, over which the sea breaks heavily, about 21
miles S. by E. from Ono-i-lau. They lie about 160
miles o. by E. from Lakemba, in the eastern group
ot which they form the S.B. extremity, and are dis-
tant from Tongatabu to the W. 180 miles. The reefs
encircling them are extremely dangerous. They are
about it miles asunder ( Tuvana-i-ra standing in
lat. 21-0-9 8 long. 178'44-26 W., and the other,
luvana-i-tholo, or Simonoff, Ac., in lat. 211-39 S.
and long. 178-5010 W. Their position is a matter
of importance, since they can be safely viewed as
finger-posts to the Tonguese or Fijian groups. Ho
soundings near them, and both very low. Should
not be approached after nightfall.
TAVANA-l-THOLO; (or Tuvana-i-colo, also called
Simanoff, and probably the Doi or Ndoi of some
charts.) An islet bearing W. by S. from the pre-
ceding 3 2 miles, upon a distance between each centre
of 5J miles. Neither of them exceed half a mile in
diameter. They are enclosed in annular reefs N
by W. i W. from Tuvana-i-colo lips at the distance
of 16J miles, the insulated reef, called Bereghis on
which there is a sandy islet, sometimes called Mana
See Vuata Ono.
T AVJA: (Tavea, or Tavera.) A small island at the
JN.W. extrenuty of Vanua Levu, one mile from the
mainland.
TAVIUNI; (Tabiuni, or Vuna.) The fourth island in
size and importance in the Archipelago. It is 24
miles long and 9 wide, and lies 5 miles from the S E
extremity of Vanua Levu. Is in the meridian of
long. 180, both E. and W. of Greenwich. The centre
is occupied by a vast mountain range, on the liMiest
part of which there is a lake containing enormous
eels. The height of the highest peak is 2052 feet
ihe principal towns are Wairiki, Somo, Somo, and
Vuna. The land is exceedingly fertile, and Taviuni
is the principal cotton planting district of the win-
ward islands. Vuna Point, on the S. W. side is
thickly populated with planters, and there are now
rm i 18 i?) plantations all round the island. Tui
lhakau, the chief of Thakaundrove, lives at Wairiki
and the Parliament of the Lau Confederation meets
there. There is a substantial jetty at Vuna Point,
and vessels call here direct from the Australian
colonies. There is also a weatherboard hotel at Vuna
an i a^ othera iWairiki. See Letter XI,, p. 60.
: ■ Te^.° r r Teilau -) A very small islet off
°c V 'V L ® vu > U miles N. from Viwa.
TETHI. (ot Teci.) One of the Yasawas,
THAKAUNDROVE-I-RA.; A district at the S.B.
end of \ anua Levu. The name has been erroneously
applied to the whole of that island.
THAEAUNDROVK-I-WAI: A very small islet in the
Btraits of Somo Somo, on which the chief town of
the Thakaundrove kingdom formerly stood. Lies
between the S.B. extremity of Vamia Levu and
Tavium.
THANGGALAI: (or Cigalai.) An islet off Moturiki,
■ u Leyu, called also (with Leleuvia) Nav-
anuyanu. See Leleuvia.
THIKOMBIA-I-LAU : (Ticumbia or Chicomheor.) A
small island, 8 miles E. of Vanua Balavu, one of
the Exploring Isles. Lies 56 miles due N. of
Lakemba.
THIKOMBIA-I-RA; (Thikombia.) An island 16
miles N.E. of Undu Point, the N.E. extremity of
Vanua Levu. The most northerly island of the
group.
' (Theathea, Chiohia, or Ciaoia.) An island
9 miles in circumference ; 35 miles N.W. of Lakemba,
one of the eastern group. A well-wooded island 300
ieet nigh in some parts. A shore reef all round, and
no opening but for canoes.
THOMPSON I. : Near Hamersley’s Island. N. end
of Vatulele, on the 8. coast of Viti Levu.
PAPAS: Three small islets 8. of Peka to
the 8. of Asaua-i-lau in the Yasawa group.
TILING mi A = (or Naitingilitha.) An islet 15 miles
Irom Undu Point at the N.E. extremity of Vanua
Levu. It is about three-quarters of a mile long and
3 miles equi-distant from Bukalau Island, and
Tibethe Point.
TIMBOOR : The most northerly island in the Yasawa
Group except Kinsilk island.
TOMBBRUA : An islet dueß. of Ban, on the reef off
Jvemba Point at the S.B. extremity of Viti Levu.
Also an islet near Ngaloa or Galoa on the N.w!
coast of Vanua Levu.
TONGA: An islet in the Rewa River, S.B. coastof Viti
Levu, between Rewa town and Bau to the western
side.
TOTTEN I. : The most southerly of the Yasawa
Group, W. of Viti Levu.
TUKONEVA: An islet at the W. end of Pawn Har-
bour, S.B. coast of Vanua Levu, nearly a mile from
* on the mainland, and in longitude
179-4: -11 E. Pawn Harbour lies W. of Baino Har-
bour and islet, and also contains an islet to the 8 E
of Tukoneva named Lavod.
TURTLE I: Name given by Captain Cook to Vatoa,
an island lying near the S.B. extreme of the archi-
pelago, on its discovery by the great circumnavigator
on the Ist July, 1774.
TUTOIA: (Tutoya or Totoya.) An island at the 8, end
of the eastern group, 5 miles long, from B. to W., and
3 miles wide, from N. to 8. It lies in latitude
18-56-54 8., longitude 170’49-59 W., 80 miles E. by
8. from Kandavu, 21 miles N.E. by B,from Matuku
and 74 miles B.W. by W. from Lakemba. The island
is of a circular form with a six-mile diameter, and
when viewed from its peak, presents a huge extinct
crater, the bowl of which bears ocean water of 30
fathoms depth over a space of 3 miles diameter,
the tidal and swell action taking place on the
southern aspect, where the rim is, dislocated to low-
water level, while the ridge of peaks which surround
the vast, but to a ship, inaccessible basin, rear their
heads to nearly 1200 feet above the sea. This zone-
like island is surrounded by a, barrier reef of tri-
angular form, and 22 miles circuit, the abrupt
elbows of which range 2 miles off the S.W., the
N.W. and the B. projections of the island. There
js, however, a capacious ship-entrance through the
reef belt in question, upon the W. aspect, and which
may be picked up by bringing the southernmost peak
(elevated. 1159 leet) to bear E. S., when it will
strikingly appear in the gap of the intervening ridge
of Jand. Running thus, the foaming horns of the
passage will indicate the fair way, which having
passed through, a spacious sound of smooth water
presents itself to the southward., occupying a space
of 2 miles long by 1 mile broad, perfectly sheltere
upon good holding ground in 25 fathoms of watei.
The shores of this roadstead, which is the same as
the S. hay of Wilkes, are not adapted to coaling,
watering, or seining. The tide rises 4 ft. 4 in., and


it is high water on full and change days at 6 h. 37 m.
Variation, 10 54 E. The land is high and broken,
and evidently of volcanic origin. Tutoya is woody
and fertile in the valleys, hut is difficult of approach
from the seaward. There is another hay on the N.
side. At a distance of 23 miles N.B. hy B. from
Tutoya lies Tova (or Navatu) an annular coral reef,
3 miles in diameter, encircling a basin of 16 fathoms
of water.
TWIN I: A small island off the E. head of Whippy
Harbour, on the S. coast of Viti Levu.
ULORUA - See Olorua.
UNDERWOOD GROUP: A small group of islands
near Vunda Point, W. coast of Yiti Levu, between
that point of Viti Levu on the E., and Malolo and
the Hudson Isles on the W.
VALOLO ; An islet near Rewa.
VANGATA: See Yangata or Yangeta.
VANUA BALAVU - (or Vanua Valavo.) The chief
island in that portion of the eastern group called
Exploring Isles. It is a long narrow island, like
the letter S, 16 miles in length. It lies 56 miles
N.W. from Lakemba. Lomo-Lomo is its principal
district. Maafu, the chief of the eastern group, and
President of the Lau Confederation, resides here,
and a great many Tongans. A road, 14 miles long,
shaded on each side by bread-fruit and bananas has
been constructed in Lomo-Lomo. Maafu leases land
here, and a considerable number of Europeans, many
having their wives and families with them, have
recently (July, 1870) settled here to grow cotton.
The island is extremely fertile, and it has produced
excellent cotton. A handsome Wesleyan church is
about being erected.
VANUA KULA : (The Scarlet Land.) A little islet
near Rewa, S.E. coast of Viti Levu.
VANUA LEVU : (The Great Land, sometimes errone-
ously called Vuya, Sandalwood Island, Paou Island,
and Takanova, or Thakaundrove.) An island next in
size to Viti Levu, being 115 miles long from E.N.E. to
W.S.W., and on an average of about 25 miles broad.
Navave, the nearest point to Bau, is 57 miles dis-
tant from it. Savu Savu Bay. on the S.E. side, is a
fine sheet of deep water, 10 miles in length from E.
to W., and 5 miles in breadth from N. to S., sur-
rounded in part by very high and broken land. The
entrance to this bay is protected by reefs called
Lesiatheva. The bay may be known by a remark-
able saddle-shaped peak, lying to the N., just behind
it. Some of the neighbouring peaks are 4000 ft.
high. There are five hot springs at the head of this
bay, having a temperature of from 200 to 210 deg.
The natives use these springs to cook food. They oc-
cupy a basin 40 ft. in diameter, and are 9 ft. above
the level of the water. A small brook of fresh water
3 feet wide by two deep passes so close to the basin
that one hand may be put intij a scalding spring and
the other into water of a temperature of 75 deg.
The mouths of the springs are from 18 inches to 2 ft.
in diameter. Vanua Levu is divided into three
kingdoms. The S.E. portion is Thakaundrove,
under the dominion of Golea (Tui Thakau), the
S.W. end is Mbua. under Tui Mbua; and the
Mathuata coast, on the N. side is held by Bitova,
the Tui Mathuata. Tui Thakau and Tui Mbua have
joined the Lau Confederation of which Maafu is
President, but Tui Mathuata remains independent,
though he will probably soon be forced into the Con-
federation. Natawa Bay is a fine harbour of vast
extent at the N.E. extremity of the island. The
Polynesia Company holds a large tract of land in
this bay, given by Tui Thakau. The native popula-
tion is considerable, and there are still some heathen
. tribes in the interior; but the great majority are
Christian. There are now large white settlements
■in Savu Savu Bay, also on the Mathuata coast, and
a large proportion of the coast line has been taken
up by white settlers for the purpose of growing Sea
Island cotton.
VANUA MA8I: Two islets in the eastern group, 21
miles N.E. of Lakemba,
VANUA VATU : (The Stony Land.) An island 0
miles in circumference lying 25 miles W. by S from
Lakemba, in the eastern group. I s surrounded
by a reef, through which there are two entrances for
boats only.
VANUA VOU: An islet off Tavua or Tabooa, N. of
Viti Levu.
VATIA-I-RA: (or Vatia Lewa and Vati-lailai.) An
islet near Tavua, N. of Viti Levu.
VATOA: (also Bitoa or Turtle Island.) The only
island of the group visited by the great Capt. Cook
and named by him Turtle Island. It is the most
easterly, and except Ono-i-lau the most southerly is-
land of the Archipelago. Vatoa has a long reef to the
S.W. of it, on which many vessels have been wrecked.
(See reefs, letter R., Vuata-Vatoa.) Vatoa lies N.N.e".
§ E., 57 miles from the Peak of Ono. It is a narrow
strip of coral structure, densely wooded, rising
gradually to the E.N.E., where its summit barely
attains an elevation of 200 ft. The island is 2 miles
long, and half a mile broad. As, however, it has a
shelf reef extending 1 mile each way upon its N.N.E.
and S.S.W. trend, as well as S.W., though only J
mile off its S.E. face, it may be considered to occupy
a space equal to 4 miles by If miles. Capt. Denham
says: “ The bulk of this island happily affords a
beacon regarding its contiguous detached reef, called
Vuata-Vatoa or Vatoa’s Child, which lies upon the
S.S.W. trend of its own elongated fringe reef, at the
distance of 2 miles from breaker to breaker, but
ranging altogether 5£ miles S.S.W. from the S.W.
extreme of the island. This reef comes awash, and
is sufficiently evident by day. For night precaution
we can merely remind the navigator who may desire
to round Vatoa 8. W., that it behoves him to allow
upon his course 8 miles more southing, and 5 miles
more westing than the position of the island hum-
mock would prescribe in regard to clearing the is-
land itself, which I find is in latitude 19 49T1 S.,
longitude 179T4T W.”
VATOA: (or Vatou.) An islet near Tavia, N.W. of
Vanua Levu.
VATU ; (Ovalu or Passage Island.) An islet between
Ovalau and Buia Point, S.W. extremity of Vanua
Levu. It is 15 miles N. from Ovalau, and 21 S. of
Buia Point. Lies in latitude 17'23'5 S., longitude
178'45'38 E. Vatu is also an islet in Waia Passage,
off Waia Levu, one of the Yasawas.
VATU-I-RA : A rock in the sea near Malaki, N. coast
of Viti Levu. Latitude 17T9'0 S., longitude
178-27-28 B.
VATULELE ; An island off the S. coast of Viti Levu,
16 miles from the mainland. It is 8 miles long, and
2 miles broad. The N. part is about 70 ft. above the
sea level, and is composed of a strata of reddish clay
and sandstone. It gradually descends to a point at
its southern side. There is no more than a narrow
shore reef on its western side, but on the eastern
shore a reef extends off 2 or 3 miles, forming a kind
of how, from the S. to the N. end of the island.
There is no opening in the reef except for boats.
The reef near the N. end encloses several small islets
named after midshipmen in Commander Wilkes’s
expedition.
VATUMA : (Sail Rock.) A rook 15 miles off the W.
end of Vanua Levu, and 7 miles N. of Yandua.
VATUNGILI: A small islet at the N.W. end of Vanua
Levu, lying about 1J miles from the W. end of Vatoa,
between that islet and Nukumbutha.
VATU TURANGA : A rock in Viti Levu Bay, on the
N.B. coast of Viti Levu.
VATU VARA: An islet in the Eastern Group, 28
miles W.S.W. from Vanua Balavu, and 58 miles
N.W. of Lakemba.
VEINDRALA: An islet near Tavia, off the N.W. end
of Vanua Levu.
VEKAI: A low island in the Eastern Group, about 6
miles N. of Tavutha. It has a large reef on the
N.W. side.
VBLERABA : An islet in Duff’s Reef, E. of Weilan
gilala, at the N. end of the Eastern Group.
VBNDUA : See Yandua.


VICUNA : A little island near Undu Point, N.E. ex-
tremity of Vanua Levu, and 4 miles E. in a southerly
direction from Tilingitha. Vicuna is £ a mile long,
and lies at the entrance of Vicuna Harbour, E. of
Vuni-Vasa Point, the W. end of Vicuna Harbour—
Isinglass Point being the eastern.
VINI: An islet in the Pulotu Harbour, Asaua-i-lau,
Yasawa Group.
VISONGGO: An islet near Mathuata N. of Vanua
Levu.
VITI LEVU : (or Naviti Levu, Great Fiji.) The
largest and most populous island in the Archipelago.
It stretches 87 miles in length from E. to W., and 54
miles in breadth from N. to S. There are good har-
bours and rivers on this island. Suva Harbour on
the S. coast which is the best, lies 10 miles W. of
Rewa Roads. It is well sheltered, easy of ingress
and egress, and has excellent holding ground. Lau-
thala Bay is separated from Suva Harbour by a nar-
row point of land. Viti Levu Bay on the N.E. coast,
and Nandi Bay, on the W. coast are also fine har-
bours. There are on the S. side, Ndronga Harbour,
Granby Harbour, Tama Harbour, Whippy Harbour,
and Rewa Roads. The harbour of Rewa is formed
by two small islands, Nukulau and Mukalau with
their attached coral reefs. It has three passages,
and the two southern ones are safe. There
is anchorage about three miles from the mouth of
the river. The principal rivers are the Rewa
(Wai-levu), which has three mouths on the S.E.
coast, and is navigable for boats a distance of 40
miles inland, the Wai Manu, the Wai Ndina (both
tributaries of the Rewa), and the Navua, and the
Singa Toke, all on the 8. coast. There is the Nandi,
a respectable stream on the W. coast, which empties
itself into Nandi Bay; but there are no water courses
of any magnitude on the N. coast. Large tracts of
land in Suva Harbour and Viti Levu Bay, were
ceded to the Polynesia Company, some of whose
shareholders are now (October, 1870) settling upon
Suva Point. The principal white settlements on the
island at present are Rewa, extending 40 miles up
the river, the E. coast between Bau and Tova Peak,
Raki-raki on the N„ Ba on the N.W., Nandi Bay on
the W. coast, and Navua River on the S. There
have also been some fine cotton plantations at
Ndronga, but the unruliness of the natives has
interfered considerably with their successful prosecu-
tion. All the coast natives are Christian, but the
mountaineers of the interior are still heathen, and
frequently at war. Very little is known of the in-
terior. The island has only once been crossed by
white men. Consul Jones, V.C., Dr. Graeffe, Mr. F.
W. Hennings, and Mr. Boyd, crossed from S. to N.
in 1865. Some subsequent explorations were also
made by Consul Jones, and Mr. J. B. Thurston,
H.8.M., late Acting-consul. The country, though
mountainous, is described as containing some magni-
ficient tracts of land. The greater part of the
coast lands have now been purchased by white
people. The longitude of Tova Peak, on the E. coast
with reference to Greenwich, is 178 - 27'8E., and the
latitude 17'35T6 S. The island can be circumnavi-
gated by small boats inside the reef in smooth water.
The reef passage, though dotted with shoals, is also
in great part navigable for ships, but not off Navula
Point, on the S.W. coast. See Letters VII., VIII.,
and X.
VITIMIRI: (or Vitimira.) An islet on the N.N.E.
side of Viti Levu, between Viti Levu, and Buia
Point, on the opposite coast of Vanua Levu.
VITONGO : (or Vitonga.) An islet on the N.W. coast
of Viti Levu, near the Ba Passage.
VIWA: (or Vewa.) A small island of 400 acres, 2
miles N. N.W. from Bau, E. coast of Viti Levu, in
latitude 17 55 S., longitude 178-42 E. This island
lias been an important Wesleyan Mission Station, for
the last 32 years. The New Testament was printed
here by the mission press,_ which was sold in 1869,
for the production of the newspaper now published
in Levuka. An island in the Yasawa Group, is also
called Viwa.
VOMO : An island about midway between the souther-
most of the Yasawa Group, and the mainland of Viti
Levu.
VOMO-LAILAI: An islet W. of the preceding.
VOTIA ; An islet in the Ba Passage, N. of Vitonga.
VUAKI; One of the Yasawa Group.
VUANGGaVA ; (Vuanqava.) See Enkaba.
VUIMBANI : A lofty islet quite close to the N.N.E.
end of Taviuni.
VULANGA: See Fulanga.
VUNDA : An islet in the Underwood Group, W. coast
of Viti Levu. According to native tradition, the
cradle of the Fijian race.
VUNDBRFORD : An islet N.W. of Henry Islet, in
the Underwood Group.
VUNIMOLI: A little islet near Nairai.
VUNITOGALOA: See Galoa.
WAILEA I. : A small island partially joined to the
mainland of Vanua Levu, from the N.W. entrance of
Wailea Bay at the W. end of Vanua Levu.
WAKAYA : (Wakaia.) A fertile island 10 or 12 miles
E. of Levuka, Ovalau. It is about 8 miles long, and
3or 4 broad. In latitude 17'3711 S., longitude
178 - 59 6 E. The property of Dr. Brower, the
American Consul, who has a considerable estate with
cotton and coifee plantations on it. Wakaya and
Makongai are within the same reef. The reefs ex-
tend from these islands with few interruptions up
to the S. shore of Vauua Levu.
WALDRON I. : An islet near Speiden Island, S.W.
extremity of Viti Levu.
WALKER I. : One of the most northerly of the Hud-
son Isles, N.N.W of Malolo, off W. coast of Viti
Levu.
WAYA-LAILAI; (Waia-lailai.) An islet adjoining
Waia-levu, one of the Yasawas.
WAYA-LEVU: (Waia-levu.) One of the Yasawa
Group, 12 miles in circumference, and about 24 miles
N.W. of Viti Levu.
WAYA-LAILAI THAKI: (Waia-lailai caki.) An is-
land near the preceding.
WEILANGILALA: A small island in the Eastern
Group, about 20 miles N.W. of Vanua Balavu, and
31 miles distant from Lauthala.
WHITE ROCK : A small rocky islet E. of Waia-lailai
in the Yasawa Group.
WHITTLE I. : An islet E. of Sanford Island, near
Kandavu.
WILLIAM’S ISLET: An islet off the N. coast of
Vanua Levu, 2 miles E of Mbiti.
YANDAVATHI: An island in the Eastern Group,
near Vanua Balavu. Cotton plantations are carried
on upon it by Mr. W. Hennings.
YANDUA : (Yedua or Yendua.) A fertile island W.
of Naithombothombo Point, W. extremity of Vanua
Levu, from which it is distant 10 miles. It is
broken in two, as if by an earthquake, and a boat
can pass between.
TAMBA: A hilly island on the S.W.
side of Yandua, to the S. of Point Emmons. It is
three quarters of a mile long from N. to S., and
forms the W. side of Porpoise Harbour.
YANGABA : See Angasa.
YANGGANGA: (Anganga or Yagaga.) An island 2
miles from the western extremity of Vanua Levu,
forming the N. side of Monkey Face Passage.
YANG AT A: (Vangata or Yangeta.) One of the
Yasawas.
YANUTHA-I-LAU: Six islets N.E. of Taviuni, about
20 miles from Somo Somo.
YANUTHA-I-RA: Identical with Stuart’s Island or
Namuka, two islets in the Benga Reef.
YANUTHA-LAILAI: See Anutha-Lailai.
YANUTHA LEVU: See Anutha Levu.
YANU YANU LALA: A well-wooded little island,
near Kandavu.
YANU YANU YAWA: An islet adjoining the pre-
ceding.
YARANI; An islet in Raritona Harbour, Ya Asaua,
Yasawa group.
YARO : See Aro, or Aroua.


YASAWA GROUP: A long straight range of islands
occupying the most north-westerly position in the
Archipelago. The group is about 30 miles from
the mainland of Viti Levu, and extends 70 miles
N.E. and S.W.
YASAWA-I-LAU: Identical with Asaua-i-lau.
YASAWA-I-RARA : (or Yassawa, or Ya Asaua.) Lies
at the N. end of the Yasawa Group, of which it is
the largest. Its principal harbour, Raritona Har-
bour, is described in connection with the island of
Ovawa. The other harbours are Emmon’s Bay and
Pulotu Harbour. Emmon’s Bay is described under
the head of Leva Island, which lies N, of it ; and
Pulotu Harbour, under the head of Asaua-i-lau
between which island and Yasawa, Pulotu Harbour
is situated.
YATHATA : (Yacata.) A little island in the eastern
group, 9 miles N. of Vatu Vara.
YATHIWA : An islet near Angau, E. of Viti Levu.
YAUKUVE LEVU ; A small island near Kandavu.
YAUKUVE LEW A : An islet near the preceding.
YANANU: See Annan.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.




