









FIJI FOR TOURISTS






MIOWERA AND WARRIMOO.


FIJI
... FOR ...
TOURISTS.
BY
BASIL THOMSON,
AUTHOR OF
‘THE DIVERSIONS OF A PRIME MINISTER,’ ‘SOUTH SEA YARNS,’
ETC.
London:
PUBLISHED BY
THE CANADIAN-AUSTRALIAN ROYAL MAIL
STEAMSHIP LINE.
(1897)




Canadian=Australian
ROYAL MAIL STEAMSHIP LINE.
Under Contracts with the Governments of the Dominion
of Canada, New South Wales , New Zealand ’
and Fiji , to carry Her Majesty s Mails.
A GENTS.
ADELAIDE, South Australia ... ... D. & J. Fowler.
AUCKLAND, N.Z. ... ... ... L. D. Nathan & Co.
BALLARAT, Victoria ... ... Huddart, Parker & Co., Ltd.
BRISBANE, Queensland ... ... ... Burns, Phiep & Co., Ltd.
DUNEDIN, N.Z. ... ... ... ... Neiee & Co., Ltd.
GEELONG, Victoria ... ... Huddart, Parker & Co., Ltd.
HOBART, Tasmania ... ... Huddart, Parker & Co., Ltd.
HONOLULU, Hawaiian Is. ... ... Theo. H. Davies & Co., Ltd.
HONG KONG ... D, E. Brown, General A vent,
C.P.R.
LAUNCESTON, Tasmania ... ... Tasmanian Wooe Growers’
Agency Co., Ltd.
LYTTELTON, N.Z Kinsey, Barns & Co.
LIVERPOOL, 7, James Street ... Baker, European
LONDON, 67 & 68, King 1 William Street / Traffic Agent for C.P.R.
MELBOURNE ... ... ... Huddart,Parker & Co.,Ltd.
MONTREAL, New York, and all points \ Canadian Pacific Raieway
in Canada and U.S.A. ... ... / Co.
ROCKHAMPTON ... ... ... ... Waeter Reid & Co., Ltd.
SUVA, Fiji ... ... ... ... Brown & Joske.
SYDNEY... ... ... ... ... Huddart, Parker & Co., Ltd.
TOWNSVILLE, North Queensland ... Burns, Phiep & Co., Ltd.
VANCOUVER ... Canadian Pacific Raieway
Co.
WELLINGTON, N.Z .. Huddart, Parker & Co., Ltd.
Aee Branches of Thos. Cook & Sons.
LONDON ... ... Archer Baker, General
European Agent for Cana-
dian Pacific Railway Co.
LONDON HEAD OFFICE, 22, Billiter St., j JAMES HUDDART,
E.C. ... ... ... ... j ‘ Manager.


Can adian=A ustralian
ROYAL MAIL STEAMSHIP LINE
TO
AUSTRALIA, HONOLULU, FIJI, NEW ZEALAND.
New Swift Passenger Route by Swiftest Atlantic Steamers (any line) to Montreal or
New York, thence vi&
CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY AND VANCOUVER,
Taking in the Grand Scenery of the ‘ Rockies.’
Only Actual Trans-Continental Line running Through Trains
under one Management —
ATLANTIC TO PACIFIC.
Many Optional Routes, including
&c CHICAGO.
Break of Journey Alloived.
These Steamships are the Largest, Swiftest, and Finest Running from American
Continent to Australasia, and leave Vancouver every month for the above
ports, calling at
VICTORIA, B.C., HONOLULU, FIJI, NEW ZEALAND and SYDNEY.
Electric Light. Hot and Cold Baths.
GOOD CUISINE.
EXCEPTIONALLY LARGE CABINS.
For Descriptive Pamphlets, Tickets, and Berths, apply to
PASSENGER DEPARTMENT, CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY,
67, King William Street, London, E.C.,
OR TO
JAMES HUBBABT, 22, Billiter Street, London, E.C.


FIJI.
To the average mind the name of Fiji calls up visions of
coral reefs, palm-trees, savages and cannibals. The name
itself is a symbol for inaccessibility, and, indeed, reckoned
from England, it is geographically the remotest corner of
the earth. But steam has dethroned geography, and we
now calculate distance by days instead of by degrees of
longitude. A hundred years ago it took Captain Edwards,
of the Pandora , twelve months to reach the neighbourhood
of Fiji; fifty years ago it took a traveller eight months; ten
years ago, if one had the good fortune to hit off a con-
necting steamer at Sydney, one might set foot in Suva six
weeks after leaving Gravesend ; it remained for the
Canadian-Australian line, in November, 1893, to-cut the
distance down to its lowest minimum, and make it possible
to reach Fiji on the twenty-eighth day after leaving London.
In these days of globe-trotting, all the world has become
hackneyed. The grand tour two generations ago meant
the circle of Europe : now almost everyone we meet has
made the greater orbit of the globe. Even Central Africa
is overdone, and we know so much of China and Japan
from books that the keenness of our curiosity is blunted.
But the Pacific Islands are still a mere name to many of us,
and there has not been time to realize that they are now
easier of access even than Australia. Thanks to the twin-
ships Miowera and Warrimoo , those who have to make
periodical business journeys to Australia, or who are
ordered to travel in search of health, need no longer
struggle on the landing-stage at Naples, toil through the
hot canal, be cheated by the jewellers and silk merchants
of Colombo, and struggle with their feelings in the long roll
off Cape Leeuwin. They may instead, for about the same
expenditure, embark at Liverpool in an Atlantic liner, see
New York and Montreal, cross the continent by the
1


Canadian Pacific Railway, enjoying the wonderful scenery
of the Rockies, and re-embark at Vancouver in one of the
splendid steamers of the Canadian-Australian line for the
voyage across the Pacific. The popularity of this line,
established by the energy and enterprise of Mr. James
Huddart, has so much increased during its three years of
life that it is now proposed to put on a third steamer. For
the first time travellers may see the islands of the South Seas
in an English steamer furnished with the luxury of a well-
appointed hotel. Canada and Hawaii have been fully de-
scribed by others ; but Fiji, the most beautiful of all the
island groups, has remained till now an undiscovered country
for the great majority of travellers. In Fiji the traveller, if he
is a naturalist, will find himself in a splendid hunting-ground
for the entomologist and botanist. He may study the for-
mation of corals and marine life under the most favourable
circumstances; he may try to solve the problem of the won-
derful mbalolo , the marine worm that makes his appearance
only twice in the year, keeping both solar and lunar time,
and never mistakes the day. If he is an artist or a photo-
grapher, he may bring back with him studies of native
types without end, and of the most beautiful scenery in the
world ; if an anthropologist, he may see native life as yet
unspoilt by contact with civilization; and, lastly, if he is a
tourist, he may enjoy a very pleasant holiday among new
surroundings at a very moderate cost.
For the yachtsman no more perfect holiday ground can
be imagined. Cutters of from three to twenty-five tons
can be chartered and victualled for a cruise either on the
spot or in Australia. With a half-caste skipper and a
native crew, one can take his choice between smooth water
inside the reefs and the tumble of the safer water outside,
sailing from island to island, anchoring for the night in
little reef-locked harbours a stone’s-throw from the palm-
fringed sand ; camping in clean, cool native huts or accept-
ing the hospitality of his own kind, making his inclination
control the course and time of sailing, exploring the out-
lying and little-known islets of the group, inhabited only by
turtles in the breeding season and the great robber crab, or
making friends with the natives of the larger islands, to
leave them long before one’s welcome is worn out —in this
kind of idling lies the real glamour of the South Seas. He
who has once tried such a cruise some time between April
and October will dream of the South Seas and their
mysterious romance for uhe rest of his life.
2
FIJI


SUVA.
When travellers round the world put into a port for a
few hours, they do not want to know the statistics of its
population, its expenditure and revenue, and its form of
government, so much as the ways of its people, what to see
and how to see it. The Government of Fiji has from time
to time issued admirable little handbooks containing all the
statistical information required by a capitalist intending to
invest in the colony ; but when the anchor of the big liner
splashes into the blue water of Suva Harbour, and the purser
posts a notice to sail in six hours, the tourist, before going
on shore, cares nothing about labour or markets, and only
asks to know how he can best spend his time.
After leaving Hawaii, the steamer crosses the invisible
frontier of a new world. A great gulf has always been
fixed between the eastern and western Pacific. There has
been less communication between Hawaii and Fiji than
between Fiji and England, because, until the splendid
steamers of the Canadian-Australian line first connected
them, the vessels that have sailed from the one group to the
other might be counted on the fingers. In Honolulu every-
thing is American. From the days when the port was
filled with American sailors, all the civilization adopted by
the natives has reached them from the United States. The
missionaries were American, the settlers and capitalists
were Yankees, and so were the first advisers of the native
Government. But in the Western Pacific the influence has
been English, or Australian, which is the same thing. In
Honolulu a traveller never sees native life as it was,
except through the medium of sketches and photographs :
the Kanaka of to-day is a degenerate, uninteresting person
as compared with his forefathers of two generations ago.
But in the Western Pacific most things among the natives
remain unchanged except their religion.
After seven days of open sea, broken, perhaps, by a
glimpse of the lonely atolls of the Phoenix Group and
Futuna, which is the westernmost settlement of the Malayo-
Polynesians, the steamer glides in between the dangerous
reefs of Nanuku and Wailangilala, where the Govern-
ment has lately erected a lighthouse. To starboard lies
Taveuni, the most beautiful island in the group. From the
deck one may see the wooded slopes of volcanic soil rising
3,000 feet to an extinct crater, now filled with a marshy
fresh-water lake. This was one of the earliest settlements
3
FIJI


both of the missionaries and of European planters, many
of whom still work the cocoanut plantations made when
they or their fathers first came to the islands. Passing
Koro, an island so fertile that kava planted there is ripe for
drinking in twelve months, Mbatiki and Ovalau, on the
other side of which stands Levuka, the old capital of the
colony, the steamer opens the gloomy mountain ranges of
Vitilevu, the largest island in the group, half the size of
Wales, yet possessing, in the Rewa, a river larger than any
in the Principality. The low-lying flats along which you
are steaming are formed by the alluvium brought down by
the floods of the river Rewa. It is a miniature delta,
having five mouths, opening opposite to breaches in the
barrier reef. In half an hour the steamer is abreast of
Nukulau and Makoluva, now a Government quarantine
station, but in 1849 the residence of Consul Williams, who,
having set his house on fire in the elation proper to Inde-
pendence Day, claimed compensation from King Tha-
kombau, and so brought about indirectly the cession of
Fiji to England. A range of wooded hills are now showing
up straight ahead : the steamer passes a point of grass-
covered land, and Suva Harbour lies before her. The great
ship is now steered straight for the reef, keeping in line
two little white wooden lighthouses on the hills opposite.
In a moment she plunges through the narrow opening, with
the sea boiling and churning on the coral reef a biscuit’s-
throw on either side of her. It looks very dangerous, as
if a hair’s-breadth variation from the course must certainly
bring destruction on her, but in reality it is perfectly safe,
for the passages between these reefs are of great depth,
and unencumbered with rocks. The largest steamers go in
and out of this harbour at night, steering by the two lights
on the hills opposite. Slowly the ship glides to her anchor-
age, and now that she lies under the lee of the land, the air
seems suddenly to become hotter. Only three cable-lengths
away lies Suva, the capital of the colony, at first sight
a mere collection of white-painted wooden houses with
corrugated iron roofs, scattered over the hillside as if a
giant hand had flung them broadcast on the promontory.
In the gaps between them grow coarse grass, reeds and
feathery bamboo. To the left of the town begins a native
forest of a uniform dull dark green, reaching clear up to
the hill-tops, and making the outline of the ranges, bleared
and fuzzy. From among these hills projects a conspicuous
limestone peak popularly known as the Devil’s Thumb,
4
FIJI


but variously christened by the wits of the colony. A few
years ago there was a landslip on one of its precipitous
sides, and the forest has never since regained its foothold
on the naked rock. There is a tradition that this peak was
once scaled by an English sailor, whose nickname, the Devil,
was transferred to the rock. If it is raining the prospect
is not inviting, for the low clouds cling about these
trees, and scarcely ever seem to leave them. The good
people of Levuka, who have never forgiven the Suvans for
deserting the old capital, slanderously affirm that the sun
is never seen in Suva. In point of fact, the rainfall is about
the same in both towns, but in Suva there is more steady
rain and fewer violent showers. While you are looking
shorewards, the police and Customs boats row off to the
ship, manned by Fijians, the first you have seen —
splendid brown-skinned fellows, crowned with a mat of
reddish hair, which is black by nature, but reddened by an
application of lime every Saturday afternoon, in preparation
for the glories of Sunday. These are the police. They are
fair specimens of the race, not picked for their physique,
but drafted from different districts of the colony, and well
fed and disciplined. Their uniform, a striped blue jersey
and a sulu , or a calico kilt, which leaves the legs bare and
the movements free, well sets off their proportions. In the
stern of the boat are the Customs officer, the port medical
officer, and the postmaster, and unless you are unlucky
enough to have left measles or small-pox behind you in
Honolulu, the formalities are soon over, and you are free
to go ashore. In Fiji they have had to be particular about
quarantine. In 1875, just after the annexation of the
colony, H.M.S. Dido brought the measles from Sydney in
the persons of two of King Thakombau’s sons. The natives
from all parts of the group had assembled to welcome their
chiefs’ return, and when they dispersed to their homes they
carried with them the seeds of the disease. The result
was appalling. Measles, which we look on as an infantile
malady, proved with them to be a devastating plague.
Heated with fever, the wretched natives tried to cool their
burning skins in the cold water of the streams or the damp
grass. The measles was followed by dysentery, and the
people of the villages became too weak to go out in search of
food. Then came starvation, the sick died, and the dead
lay huddled together in the houses, until in some villages
no one was left alive. Eye-witnesses of these horrors say
that they found the bodies torn and rent by the pigs, the
5
FIJI


only living creatures in the place. In three months 40,000
souls out of 150,000 had perished. The people never having
had small-pox, the Government is naturally determined at
all costs to keep new epidemics out of the colony. In 1893,
when the measles was raging in Samoa, Tonga, New
Zealand and Australia, and Fiji was, as it were, beleaguered,
a rigorous system of quarantine was successful in keeping
out infection, and this will encourage the adoption of the
same methods in any future emergency.
If the traveller cannot make up his mind to ‘stop over’
to the next steamer, his time here will be very short. The
banana boats lying over there at anchor have only to hand
in their cargoes, and the steamer will be ready for sea. He
must not, therefore, waste time in seeing what may be seen
anywhere. Let him take the first boat and land on the
wharf. It is crowded with men of every island race —
Fijians, Solomon Islanders, New Hebrides men, Tongans,
Samoans, and a crowd of innominate Melanesians, besides
a sprinkling of Indian coolies. Any one of these will carry
a bag or a camera for sixpence, though he will inevitably
demand two shillings at the end of his journey.
The town depends for its interest on the extreme beauty
of its tropical vegetation and the picturesqueness of its
heterogeneous population. The main street, facing the
sea, contains all the shops. Further from the wharf, up
the hill, lie the private houses of the Europeans, and in
the best site of all is the Fiji Club, of which a traveller,
with proper introductions, can become an honorary mem-
ber during his stay. The best hotel is a two-storied
building, called the Club Hotel, where a good tahle-
d'Jwte luncheon and dinner can be had at a small price.
Here, also, may be seen the best collection of curiosities
—weapons and shields —in the group. Following the
beach road for a mile, one reaches the Government
House domain, which is not open to visitors who have not
taken the precaution of asking leave at the Government
offices. In these grounds is a beautiful collection of
tropical and sub-tropical trees and plants, brought in many
cases from Kew Gardens. Attached to Government
House are the barracks of the armed native constabulary,
the only armed force in the colony. The men are levied
from different provinces, and serve for three years. They
are worth seeing on parade, for a more active, soldier-
like little body of men it would be difficult to find any-
where. They use the English system of drill, with
6
FIJI


English words of command ; but all explanations are given
them in Fijian. They parade at 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. every
week-day, and play cricket in the barrack-square on most
fine afternoons.
Suva has had a past, but there are few memorials of it
left. The native stronghold stood among the old ivi
trees in the garden of Government House —then a net-
work of moats and earthworks. When the lawn was
levelled a few years ago, some of the mounds were found
to be full of human bones. It was here that the English-
man Jackson, fifty years ago, saw a sick man buried alive
by his relations at his own urgent entreaty. The story, as
told by Commodore Erskine, leaves no doubt that these
burials of the living were done at the importunity of the
victims themselves. In 1843 a portent —a tailed star —
appeared in the heavens, presaging evil. Each tribe ap-
plied the warning to itself, and the elders of Suva read in
it the doom of their high chiefs. But it proved to be worse
than this. War had broken out between Rewa and Bau,
and Suva, as an ally of Bau, but cut off from her suzerain
by the enemy, daily expected an attack. On three points
of vantage they threw up alarm-posts hai vulavula , or
white forts—where the garrison posted watchmen day and
night, on high platforms, provided with alarm-drums.
One of these outposts stood on the present site of the
Melanesian church, behind the club. At last the Rewa
fleet of war-canoes was seen running down Lauthala Bay
before the wind. An hour later the first fort was attacked
and set on fire, and the other garrisons, seeing what force
they had to contend against, left their posts and ran to
Suva to rescue their wives and children. They were only
just in time. As they climbed the Waimanu road, they
saw behind them the smoke of their burning houses, and
heard the shouts of their pursuers. A mile further on—
where now stands the residence of the manager of the
Bank of New Zealand —they encountered a body of the
Vuna people, allies of Rewa, too evidently posted to inter-
cept them. To them they humbly tendered whales' teeth
in token of submission ; but the offering was refused, and
they knew that they were doomed. Then the butchery
began. Men, women, and children were struck down with
the club together. They could not flee, for behind and
before them were the enemy, and on either side a precipice.
Yet a few succeeded in rolling into the long grass, to lie
hid there until nightfall. Never had there been such
7
FIJI


slaughter. The bodies, laid side by side in the pathway,
reached nearly half a mile along the road, say the survivors.
Small wonder, then, that the Fijians declare the place to be
haunted.
Years afterwards, when Rewa had fallen, the survivors re-
built their village; but meanwhile Thakombau had sold most
of their land to a company, and the present site of Suva was a
sugar plantation. When the sugar failed, the land lay fallow
till the Government took it over in 1881, In order to acquire
the whole promontory for the capital, the rights of the Suva
people were bought out for an annual rent of £2OO a year,
and they are now settled on land across the bay.
Terrible damage was done to Suva by the hurricane in
January, 1895. Cyclones had, it is true, swept over some
parts of the colony every few years, but until 1895 Suva
had always escaped being in the middle and most violent
part of the disturbance. The last ‘blow’ made up for the
leniency of its predecessors. The gardens were swept bare
of shrubs, churches were unroofed, and houses blown dowm.
Fortunately, storms of so severe a character are of rare
occurrence.
Travellers who want to carry away curiosities as a me-
mento of their visit must be prepared to pay for them in
Fiji. There are several shops : Waters the photographer,
and Lazarus the storekeeper, on either side of the hotel,
and Bailey the shoemaker, near the end of the wharf. The
former is probably the best and cheapest, but they are all
expensive. A good club will cost from 10s. to 155.; a
kava bowl, £1 ; Fijian mats from 4s. to 65.; tapa or gnatu,
the narrow, black, hand-painted pieces, from 3s. to ss. each,
and the large screens in black diamond pattern, from 10s.
to 12s. Besides Fijian curiosities, these dealers sell a large
number from the Line and Melanesian Islands, which are
generally more elaborate and better made than Fijian
products, and are therefore more worth buying for those
who do not hold to acquiring the actual manufactures of
the country they have visited. Fijian weapons are, more-
over, nowadays generally forgeries. The country was
drained of the genuine arms long ago, and a lively trade
is now carried on by the mountaineers in sham ones
cleverly dyed. A year or two ago, a Government official,
passing through a remote and primitive village at high
noon when all the inhabitants were away in their planta-
tions, peeped into a house, and saw rows upon rows of
clubs and spears suspended from the roof. For the
8
FIJI


moment he thought he had discovered a secret plot against
the Government, but an aged crone who sat blinking in a
doorway enlightened him. They had been made the week
before, and had just been dug up from the black mud of
the marsh, where they were dyeing for the white tourists
in Suva. The commonest forgery of all is the cannibal
fork. It is the one distinctive Fijian product which every-
body wants to have. All the genuine forks must have left
Fiji years ago, but a spirited trade is still carried on in very
fair imitations, which the vendor will swear have been
stained with the cooked remains of a dozen warriors.
Parenthetically, it may be observed that the traders in
Suva, as a rule, know next to nothing of the native customs
and history. But there is one sure way of testing cannibal
forks, and that is, to look between the prongs. If the
finish is clean and there are no splinters, the fork is either
genuine or too good a forgery to be worth disputing;
otherwise, it will deceive no one who knows a fork when
he sees it. Lastly, beware of the native on the wharf who
beckons you mysteriously aside, and with furtive glances
over his shoulder produces from a dirty newspaper the
only genuine cannibal fork in the group, for which he
wants only 30s. He is an old offender, and on inquiry he
will generally be found to be a chief of royal lineage.
If a visit to Thakombau’s monument and the native
market be added to this programme, Suva may be con-
sidered ‘done/ The concrete obelisk and the market-
house were built from a subscription of sixpence a head
among all the natives of the colony in the Jubilee year.
Of the former, it may be said that, if Suva were suddenly
deserted, the monument and the crusher of an old sugar-
mill would in twenty years be the only things left to mark
the spot of human habitation, for all the rest is perishable
wood and iron. The market, though only opened in 1892,
is rapidly gaining in the favour of the natives, numbers of
whom come from the neighbouring provinces to earn an
honest shilling by the sale of fruit and vegetables. All
the fruits of the country may be tasted here. Oranges,
ripe, in spite of their green skin, pineapples of a flavour
unknown in the Covent Garden specimens, bananas, plan-
tains, cocoanuts, custard apples, mangoes, and grenadillas,
perhaps the most delicious of all tropical fruits, besides
water-melons, limes, and lemons. The canoes that brought
these wares down the rivers may be seen drawn up along
the beach opposite the market-house.
9
FIJI


Those who do not wish to be burdened with their pur-
chases of native wares (and the pottery is very cumbrous
and brittle) may apply to Messrs. Brown and Joske, the
agents of the steamer, or any of the chief mercantile houses
in the place, to pack and forward their purchases to
England, paying for the transport and insurance on the
spot, and having no more trouble or anxiety about the things.
Suva is as much cut off from the interior by land as if it
were an island. The colony has never been rich enough
to undertake the great engineering work of making a road
along the face of the ranges opposite, where streams and
rivers would have to be bridged every few yards. A road,
excellent for its first three miles, runs to the banks of the
Rewa, but few there be who are bold enough to attempt to
penetrate further. Yet it is well worth following for the
first two miles for the sake of the splendid view from the
hill above the town. On one side lies Lauthala Bay and
the delta of the Rewa River, and on the other the great
Pacific, thundering and tumbling on the barrier reef, which
can be traced for miles in a wavy line of fleecy foam. Car-
riages can be hired at the livery stables both for this
expedition and for the drive along the Victoria Parade,
from the prison to the extreme point, a distance of nearly
six miles. The rain-trees planted on the beach-front throw
a chequer-work of shadow on the white coral road. All
excursions must be made by boat, which is, after all, on a
fine day, the pleasantest mode of travelling. If there be
still time and the tide favours, it is well worth while hiring
a boat from the watermen to see the Tamavua or Lami
River on the other side of the bay; for as soon as one
enters the river mouth, he is in a new world. A tropical
forest arches over the stream, almost shutting out the sky.
From the branches hang festoons of creepers; feathery
bamboos rustle and whisper in the faint air ; no sound is
heard but the deep melodious whistle of the Tiri thrush, an
insignificant little brown bird, with as sweet a note as the
nightingale. For a few hundred yards the banks are
swampy with mangrove and ndongo. From each green
branch of mangrove hang the long suckers, five-fingered at
the end, feeling their way to the brackish water for susten-
ance to the bough above. Higher up the banks change to
drier land covered with clumps of green reeds and coarse
grass, dotted in the shady valleys with tree-ferns, the most
graceful of all tropical trees, while here among the trees
are found lilies and violet orchids. Then, just as one has
10
FIJI


forgotten that civilization ever existed, the boat turns a
corner, and you see before you iron pipes. It is the water-
supply of Suva, brought from an ice-cold spring six miles
away. In the Lami River the vegetation is less beautiful ;
but one may see native life in the form of a very damp and
dirty village—the despair of the native department, but to
a traveller picturesque in its decay, unhealthiness, and dirt.
Above the village the water becomes fresh, and there is a
perfect bathing-place. Such are Suva and its immediate
surroundings.
TOURS FROM SUVA.
Let us suppose, however, that the traveller has the time
and the inclination to ‘ stop over.’ He will not regret it, for
in Fiji alone, of all the South Sea Islands, may be lived
that ideal life of the South Seas of which one reads so
much and sees so little. Samoa, Hawaii, Tahiti, and even
Tonga, have all been spoilt. The semi-civilization of the
natives has sophisticated them without improving them.
Men and women, their one idea is to make as much out of
the passing vavalangi as is possible in the time. There
was a youth once who travelled in Tonga and Fiji on his
way round the world, and wrote two books about them.
In Vavau, the northernmost of the Tongan Group, he said
he had found a paradise, where the natives, especially the
girls, were as simple as they were beautiful. In Fiji, he
said, they had already heated the ovens to cook him, when,
with marvellous presence of mind, he ran away and escaped.
There was as much truth in the one description as the
other. The girls in Vavau, now grown into staid matrons,
still remember with regret the young foreigner who was so
profitable to them, and the old men in a certain mountain
village still chuckle when they recall the morning of the
missionary meeting, when they beat the big drum for
church, and the mad foreigner jumped into the river and
ran for his life. The book he wrote was called ‘ Camping
among Cannibals,’ and the London papers reviewed it
seriously and applauded his intrepid spirit. This shows
what imagination will do to alleviate the monotony of
travel. But there is another moral to the story : it is that
there are some wicked people in Suva and Levuka who
palter with the sacred truth when professing to put
travellers in possession of useful information. The real
truth is that one may travel from end to end of Fiji with
equal safety to life and property as in a journey from end
11
FIJI


to end of England. Everywhere the houses of the natives
will be thrown open to the traveller, and he may sleep in
perfect security. Although there are no locks on the doors,
none of his property will be stolen, if he takes the
commonest precautions. But he must pay his way, as in
other countries, although no pay may be actually demanded.
A safe tariff to adopt is the following :
For every carrier or guide, is. 6d. to 2s. a day.
For a night’s lodging for the traveller and carriers, 2s. to
35., according to the entertainment given.
For a mid-day meal for the carriers, 2s.
Dances or other entertainments are best paid for by
buying a tin of biscuits or a bolt of calico at the nearest
store, and giving it to be divided out among the performers.
Curiosities bought from the natives in the country may
be paid for at a considerably lower rate than in Suva. No
scale can be given, but each buyer should make his own
bargain on the spot.
It should be remembered that any traveller who gives
more than the above rates is acting unfairly to those who
come after him, for Fijians, having once had their pay
raised, would rather go supperless for a week than have it
lowered again.
Never be tempted to give a native liquor even for
medicinal purposes. In Fiji it is a criminal offence punish-
able with a fine of £SO for the first offence, and ,£IOO for a
second, with the alternative of imprisonment; and the
informer gets half the penalty as an inducement to tell
tales. This law is rigidly enforced.
Determined to ‘ stop over,’ the traveller should lose no
time in making arrangements for his tour through the
group. If he wants to see plantations and European life
only, his best plan is to take a return ticket by the next
interinsular steamer, for which he will require nothing but
an ordinary change of tropical clothes. But in this case he
will see nothing that cannot be seen in any other tropical
colony. European life in Fiji differs far less from life in
England than that of India and the East generally ; but
convention in the matter of dress is less exacting, and cloth
suits and leather boots are better left behind. Every
necessary for travel can be bought in Suva at a single shop,
a sort of South Sea Whiteley’s, opposite the Fiji Times
office. The ordinary trips for the interinsular steamer are:
(1) Levuka, Ba, Lambasa, Rambi, Vuna (in Taveuni),
Savusavu Bay, Levuka, and home ; and
12
FIJI


(2) Levuka, Vuna, Mango, Levuka, and home.
These trips are taken alternately, and occupy from four
to five days each, and those who only want to see island
scenery, and to hear plantation gossip, may spend their
time pleasantly enough if the weather is fine, but they will
see nothing of the natives.
The steamer is about 160 tons register, and is as comfort-
able as so small a craft can be made in a tropical climate.
On either of her trips she will stop at any part of the coast
to take up or set down passengers. Besides the interinsular
boat the larger steamers of the Union Company run to Ba,
Lambasa, Navua, Penang, and Mango, at irregular intervals
from May to October, to pick up sugar or deliver coal.
To see native life, different preparations must be made.
If you have introductions, it will be easy to get help in
choosing your route and your companions, but you can do
equally well without this. Ladies have travelled alone
through the group, but they will find it more convenient to
have a man of the party for dealing with the natives en
route , and for keeping their curiosity within the necessary
bounds. The first travelling necessity is an interpreter,
and for this an intelligent half-caste is the best. Messrs.
Brown and Joske may be asked to recommend a man, or,
if they cannot help, inquiries can be made at Draimba, a
row of native houses facing the sea, just beyond the gates
of Government House. There are always in Suva a
number of sharp half-caste lads who speak Fijian like
natives, and understand sufficient English for ordinary
conversation. Then let the interpreter find a carrier or
two, you reserving to yourself the right of rejecting anyone
whose looks you do not like.
TO REWA, MBAU AND NAUSORT.
Having your staff complete, it remains to choose your
route. This expedition will take four days to do comfort-
ably. Failing a boat, take a passage in one of the little
paddle steamers, Roko or No. i, to Rewa village. In
two hours you will be set down at the landing-place of the
Catholic Mission. Ask there the way to the house of the
Roko tui, the native magistrate, or the Turanga-ni-koro.
Deposit your baggage and walk through the village. It is
an old site, as antiquity goes in Fiji. The chief families
settled here five generations ago at the request of the
owners of the soil. A century or two before this, no doubt,
they had moved down from higher up the river, for they
13
FIJI


trace their descent from the ancestor gods who came and
settled in the sacred mountain of Nakauvandra, on the
northern coast of the island, and at the head-waters of the
Rewa River. All the land here has been reclaimed by the
river itself, for a few feet below the surface one may still
find the roots of the mangrove forest, and below them,
again, the flat coral reef. Part of the delta below Rewa has
been made by the floods within the memory of man, and
reclamation is continually going on, both by human agency
and the work of a curious little burrowing crayfish, the
inand , which does for Fiji what the earth-worm does for
England. Settled here, the chiefs became a centre of a
federation. Part of the straggling village is inhabited by
Tongan carpenters, who drifted here generations ago, but
who still show in gesture and physiognomy their alien
ancestry. Others are the chiefs’ fishermen, a clan by them-
selves, who own no land of their own, but receive food in
exchange for fish. Across the water is the tribe of heathen
priests whose occupation is gone, but who even now have a
sharp, cunning expression that distinguishes them from
their neighbours. Then there are the tribes which were
the warriors of Rewa, and owe no service to the chief: these
are now landlords in their own right. And lastly there
are the villeins or kitchen men, who pay rent for their lands
in the form of manual service to the chiefs. Further
towards the coast is the powerful tribe of Notho, whose
ancestress was carried from the island of Nayau in the
belly of a shark, and cast up on the coast to become the
wife of the chief. These people live on land raised above
high-water mark by their own exertions, so intersected by
canals and ditches that travelling dryshod is impossible.
The history of Rewa is full of tragic episodes. The Queen
of Rewa at the beginning of the century, a Princess of
Mbau, saved the kingdom for her son by a stratagem
worthy of Greek tragedy. Her husband was clubbed one
night by his own son, and she, knowing that if his death
became public everyone would join the usurper, carried the
body behind the screen in her house, and gave out that it
was still living. For four days she maintained the fraud,
herself eating all the food brought for the supposed
invalid, mimicking his weak voice in giving orders for the
capture and execution of the murderer. When at last the
decay of the body had made itself apparent, vengeance had
already been wreaked upon the murderer, and the suc-
cession of her son was assured. This, too, was the scene
14
FIJI


of the great siege in 1844, when Rewa, betrayed by some
of her own defenders, fell before the Mbau army, and was
burned to the ground. Two hundred yards from the village
is Naselai, where most of the Fijian pottery is made. The
manufacture is very primitive, for the pots are fired by an
open fire of reeds and glazed with vegetable gum, and the
art has been debased by attempts to imitate the European
patterns in Suva. In Rewa a canoe or a boat should be
hired for the journey to Mbau. There is only one comfort-
able way of sitting in a canoe without a chair, and that is
to take off one’s boots and sit on the deck facing the stem,
with one’s feet dangling in the trough of the hull. You will
soon find out why it is necessary to sit bare-footed. For
the first three miles the course lies up the wide reaches of
the main river. Then you turn off into a sort of blind creek,
on the left bank, called the Wai-ni-mbokase. This is
another of the delta mouths. Twisting and turning between
the narrow banks, you are paddled on past the native villages
of Nakelo, the scene of the second of Savage’s exploits,
unconquered by Mbau, until he attacked the place with his
arrow'-proof sedan chair. When Nakelo fell about 1809,
one of the conditions of peace was that a canal should be
dug between the Wai-ni-mbokase and the Navuloa River
mouth, which here approach within a quarter of a mile,
in order to enable canoes to go between Mbau and Rewa,
carrying supplies to the Mbau Princess who was then
Queen of Rewa. Through this canal your canoe passes,
but let it not be supposed that the Fijians, armed only with
digging sticks, dug this wide and deep stream. They made
a trench, awash at high-water, and the tide, tearing through
the breach, did the rest. Passing through the canal, if the
tide favours, you will go swiftly to Navuloa, the Wesleyan
missionary training-station, and the haunt of the largest
and fiercest mosquitos in Fiji, out into the open whence
Mbau is first discernible against the dark sombre line of the
coast. In front of you lies Ovalau, whereon stands Levuka.
The seven miles to Mbau can be sailed in an hour, the
wind being fair. At first sight the island does not look so
full of historical associations as it is. It is mean and small,
and the crowded houses are dirty and in ill repair.
Hundreds of pigs roaming and wallowing between the
houses add to the general filth. But a moment’s thought
will show you how well placed Mbau was to become the
political centre of the group. No ships of large burden
could safely approach it through the network of reefs. No
15
FIJI


native enemy from the shore could attack without warning.
In a semicircle round it lie the lands of Mbau’s vassals, each
of whom must be worsted before the island could be attacked
from the shore. Eastwards the view from the top of the
island is uninterrupted, and native canoes are cumbrous
things to handle in a siege. Mbau was besides a mari-
time power, and her fleet was formidable enough to worst
Rewa, whose people were all sailors by birth and profession.
The actual naval engagements of the Fijians were generally
of the same kind. They ranged up to windward of the
enemy, and severed his halliards with an axe. Down fell the
mast and sail covering the entire crew, and then all the victors
had to do was to club the heads as they bobbed up under
the sail. At sea, therefore, every captain strove to take the
wind of his enemy, and this was why to come to wind-
ward of a chief’s canoe was a deadly insult. When Mbau
was at the zenith of her power, no canoe was even allowed
to pass near it without lowering the sail and paddling.
Mbau is the residence of the Chairman of the Wesleyan
Mission, and of Ratu Epeli, the eldest son of Thakombau,
and the Roko tui of the largest province. On the top of
the island is the tomb of King Thakombau. You may see
here the foundation of the war-god temple, before which
captives were murdered and baked in the oven. The stone
against which their heads were dashed is now in the church,
though some philistine has succeeded In cracking it in half.
If you take away the church and the other iron-roofed
buildings, you have Mbau as it has been for the last cen-
tury. The Roko will assign you lodgings in the strangers’
house, and after a night’s rest you must prepare for the
land journey to Nausori. After breakfast you will be
ferried across in a canoe to Namata, the mhati , or fighting
borderers of Mbau. The relations were always strained
between the chiefs and their fighting borderers, owing to
the unfortunate habit on the part of the latter of going
over to the enemy unless all their demands were satisfied.
The quarrel has been maintained to the present day, in a
difference about the boundaries of their planting lands.
From Namata the road has to cross a steep ridge of hill.
From the top of this ridge runs an unbroken path, clear to
the sacred mountain Nakauvandra, the Olympus of Fiji.
Wherever there was a break in the ridge, it has been
bridged over in remote times by banks of earth, because it
is said that the spirits of the dead could not find their way
to Nakauvandra, and stayed about the villages to annoy
16
FIJI


the living. This artificial road was found accidentally in
1893 by a surveyor, and the sagas connected with the
passage of the soul have now been collected. They formed
the Fijian Book of the Dead, and perhaps the most striking
feature in them is their similarity in two instances to Greek
mythology. The spirit must cross a river which lies below
you on your left hand, and is ferried across by a surly
ferryman called Themba. Further on it stops to drink at
the water of solace, and straightway forgets the sorrows of
its life, and immediately its friends weeping in its old home
dry their tears, and forget their sorrow too. It is an in-
genious way of accounting for the national characteristic of
inconstancy. At length, the basin of the Rewa River is in
sight, with its miles of light-green sugar-cane and its hideous
iron mills. You will soon be on the tramway, which affords
three miles of easy walking. The mill is worth seeing,
dirty and crowded though it is. for it is one of the largest
sugar-mills in the world, and the company who own it and
a dozen others in Fiji and Queensland, besides a number
of refineries, is probably the largest sugar company in
existence. Sugar production is here brought to a pitch of
economic perfection. Account is kept of every penny
expended directly or indirectly upon every acre of these
great fields. Hundreds of Indian coolies work here under
indenture. They are engaged in India, and bound to work
for five years at a fixed wage of is. a day for men and gd.
for women. For a further period of five years they are
obliged to stay in the colony, free to work for themselves as
they like; and at the end of this time they are given a
free passage to India, if they care to avail themselves of it.
Many stay, and as storekeepers and dairymen in the country
are gradually ousting the Europeans not possessed of
capital. Among people recruited from the lowest strata
of society in India (for Hindoos, of course, lose caste by
crossing the water), it is natural that the criminal statistics
of the colony have risen enormously since their introduc-
tion. For a wide radius round plantations where they are
employed the Fijians are becoming demoralized, and
burglaries, larcenies, and crimes of violence are far more
common, even among Fijians, than they were. The Fijians
dislike the coolies, saying they have no manners, and that
their legs are thin. The coolies retaliate by classing all
Fijians as jungli (bushmen), unworthy of further notice.
But the coolie, with all his faults, has been the saving of the
colony. The Fijians are landowners, and have no object
17
FIJI


in becoming day-labourers on plantations, and a great
industry like sugar-planting could never be carried on
without a standby of regular labourers to fall back upon.
Every year more Fijians are engaged for a year’s work,
and they are found better than the coolie for loading punts,
hauling logs, or any work demanding concerted brute force.
They love the water in any form, and the coolie hates it
for anything but internal application. But the supply can
never be as certain and regular as the supply of coolies.
This company has, besides the Nausori mill, large mills at
Ba and Lambasa, both of them situated in the dry districts
of the colony. Fiji has this peculiarity, that in the short
space of eighty miles there are two distinct climates, a wet
and a dry. The heavily-wooded slopes of the eastern side
of the island intercept the rain-clouds brought by the trade
winds, and on the western slopes, for five or six months in
the year, the ground is parched and the vegetation burnt
up. It was thought at first that sugar would not thrive
there, but experience has now shown that, with a dry climate
overhead and irrigation beneath, cane yielding juice of much
greater density can be grown than upon land where the
ground is always sodden with moisture. It is said that in
some years Nausori would barely pay its expenses, were it
not for the great distillery which converts the waste molasses
into raw spirit, to be exported to England as the base for
whisky, brandy, gin, or rum, according to the flavouring
used. From Nausori a passage to Suva can be had in one
of the steam-launches already mentioned.
SUVA TO BENGA.
Benga is the beautiful little island which is the chief
feature of the view from Suva. Being out of the track of
trading vessels, it is quite unspoilt as regards primitive
native life, and it has the advantage of being easily acces-
sible. The sixteen miles can be covered either in a cutter,
going outside the reef direct, or by first visiting Navua,
whither cutters sail every day, and there hiring a boat to
take one across the narrow strait. There is little to see in
Navua itself, beyond the ruins of a bankrupt sugar-mill,
and the sugar estate of the Fiji Sugar Company, which is in
full work. But the trolling at the mouth of the river, and
the fly-fishing in its upper reaches, are quite excellent. The
ascent of the Navua River into the province of Namosi is
for a fisherman a more attractive expedition than the
18
FIJI


journey up the Rewa. The people of Benga are a branch
of the great mountain clan of the Davutukia. Their
characteristics are Melanesian: frizzy hair, short stature, and
rather sooty skin. The soil is remarkably fertile in the
narrow valleys at the base of the hills. Benga is the home
of the fireproof clan, Na Ivilangata, who once a year, when
the ti root is ripe, heat a great oven and, tricked out in
finery, walk barefoot across the red-hot stones without
receiving any hurt. Their ancestor, they say, succeeded in
capturing a god, and received this boon of immunity from
fire in return for sparing the god’s life. There is probably
some trick, but though many have seen it, no one has yet
offered a satisfactory explanation. The same custom is
practised in Raiatea, in the Society Islands, and also, with
certain modifications, in Hungary and in India. The trip
to Benga will take the better part of two days.
THE UPPER REWA, WAINIMBUKA, RAKIRAKI AND BA.
This expedition will take about a fortnight, allowing for
all delays from bad weather or want of communication.
The traveller, besides seeing a great deal of the interior of
this wild and beautiful island, will pass through the districts
that were heathen and cannibal as late as 1876, and see
the natives entirely unaffected by civilization except in the
matter of religion. He will, moreover, pass through the
neighbourhood of Nakauvandra, the sacred mountain, every
rood of which has its proper myth and folk legend. He
who likes ease should go by boat to Nausori, hire a canoe
from the native village opposite to take him to Viria, and
then hire canoes for each stage of the journey, sleeping in
native villages. If he hires a canoe for the entire journey,
it is not a bad plan to have a temporary pent roof built over
it, under which he can lie and enjoy the most peaceful
travelling in the world. The canoe is propelled by four
punt poles worked by two men at either end, and the swish
of the poles, and the tinkling of the gravel as they strike
the bottom, have so soothing an influence that it is hard to
keep awake. When tired of the river, he may at any stage
take to the road, for there is now a good foot or bridle path
with easy gradients the whole way. From the head of the
Wainimbuka, after seven or eight miles’ rather rough walk-
ing across the dividing range at its lowest point, the sea
on the north of the island will burst upon him. To his
right are the haunted cliffs of Nakauvandra, and below him
19
FIJI


the coast lands of the Rakiraki people. From Rakiraki it
is but half a day’s journey to Ba, the second largest sugar
district, whence vessels sail at frequent intervals for Levuka
and Suva. But it the tourist wants more walking, he will
find a very fair road following the coast towards Bau. The
more energetic may walk the whole of this tour by starting
at a point on the other side of Suva Bay, whence the road
has been cut across the intervening ranges of mountains to
the Wainimala branch of the Rewa River. If the weather
is fine, the wild scenery will well repay the exertion of
climbing.
NANDRONGA, FORT CARNARVON, BA, AND YASAWA.
As this expedition passes through what is known as the
‘ disturbed district/ a permit from the Colonial Secretary's
office must first be obtained.
This trip will take ten or eleven days without hurrying.
The first stage of seventy miles must be done in a cutter,
or if none be found about to sail for Thuvu, the chief town
of Nandronga, a cutter or a boat may be taken to
Somosomo Bay, a little west of Serua, whence there is a
good road to Vatukarasa, the point for striking inland.
From Thuvu horses may be hired from the natives for
the first stage to Rew r anka. Just before reaching Rewanka
the river Singatoka must be crossed by a ford five feet deep.
If the horses are to go no further, a raft of banana stumps
must be made for the baggage and clothes. He who
cannot swim must grasp a banana stump as a life-buoy,
and two natives can then ferry him across. Though small
sharks have been seen higher up the river than this point,
yet they have never been known to attack people crossing
the ford or bathing. You are now in the disturbed dis-
trict, among the tribes who, the year after annexation,
renounced Christianity, and broke out in open rebellion
against the Government. The proximate cause, no doubt,
was the visitation of measles, which seemed to them a
penalty for leaving their old gods. But besides this,
they had never really taken part in the cession of their
country to a foreign power, and they resented the claims
of the Government. Expeditions were sent against them
from the north, the west, and the south, simultaneously.
The southern expedition, undisciplined native allies,
following the road you are now on, attacked without
orders the great rock-fortress of Matanavatu, and took
20
FIJI


it. Impregnable as it looks, there is a secret way going
up through the heart of the rock from behind, and the
attacking forces coming unexpectedly upon the summit,
clubbed and flung headlong thirty-four of the defenders.
From the cleft in the base proceeds an ice-cold spring, in
which the natives say a gigantic eel lies hidden. The
fugitives from Matanavatu fled northward, and at last,
driven from point to point, took refuge in some cave
strongholds on the head-waters of the Singatoka River.
It is characteristic of the Fijians that this stronghold
capitulated, like Jericho, to the blowing of a trumpet. After
days of guerilla fighting, the besiegers took to shouting at
the defenders all the dreadful things they intended to do,
and spent one entire night in blowing a conch shell. This
conduct was so dispiriting that before morning the garrison
came out, and there was peace. There were a number of
executions, most of which took place in Singatoka, the
village at the mouth of the river through which you passed
after leaving Thuvu. It is a long day from Rewanka to
Fort Carnarvon, but it is worth the push to avoid passing
the night in Bemana, a village built on swampy land
infested with mosquitos. The new road leaves this
village on the right, and it is scarcely worth a visit for its
own sake. The old road used to pass between the roots of
an enormous banyan-tree, through which a coach might have
been driven.
Fort Carnarvon was built by the Government as a military
post to keep the mountaineers loyal after the war. It is
very picturesquely situated, an entrenched camp of native
houses perched on a little hill 100 feet above the river.
The road leads through the plantations where the garri-
son provisions are raised, for the camp, as it is called,
is entirely self-supporting. The station includes a force of
twenty-five armed constabulary, and a gaol containing from
forty to fifty native convicts, besides a Government school
for native scribes. Fort Carnarvon is the head-quarters of
the Governor’s Resident Commissioner; but the office is
now held by the magistrate at Ba, and his assistant only
lives here. Below the fort is a beautiful garden filled with
crotons and flowering shrubs, gardenias and frangipani, and
over all wave enormous clumps of the China bamboo.
But the garden has been much damaged by the floods.
The river here is a clear cold stream, full of rapids, and,
but for the occasional inconsistency of a palm-tree in the
landscape, it might very well pass for a salmon river in the
21
FIJI


highlands of Scotland. In the camp itself the incongruity
of English military routine in the heart of the mountains
in Fiji strikes one at every moment in the day. The
parade at seven ; the orderly-room at nine, when defaulters
are dealt with and the sick convicts come to be dosed ; the
fatigue-party ; the afternoon cricket ; the night meke , with
the setting of grass huts, a brawling river, and the wild
figures of the men, leave a curiously unreal impression on
the mind. The life of the European stationed here is very
lonely. All his stores are carried by prisoners a two days’
journey over the mountains from Ba, and he seldom hears
of the outside world oftener than once a week.
After a night or two at Fort Carnarvon the road must be
resumed northward. The Mongondro mountain is scaled
by a zigzag ascent, not too steep for horses, and the party
can lunch comfortably at Bukuya, the chief town of
Mongondro. These people used to be the terror of the
country. Both men and women are above the ordinary
stature, and in the old days it was said they could put a
thousand fighting men into the field. But they were much
broken in the wars with King Thakombau’s Government ;
the measles decimated them, and they were outlawed
during the war in 1876. A story is told of a late chief of
Mongondro, that when the missionary Baker had been mur-
dered his body was divided among the various chiefs of the
country. The legs, encased in high boots, were apportioned
to Tui Mongondro. They were baked, and he made a
valiant attempt to eat them, but when he came to tackle
the boots, which he took to be part of the body, his courage
failed him, and his respect for the European broke out in
involuntary admiration, not untinged with disappointment.
From Mongondro the path follows a razor-like ridge, and
plunges down to a stream which is one of the head-waters of
the Ba River. Thence there is a heartbreaking climb of
nearly 2,000 feet to cross the Naloto Range. Near the
top is Nandronga village, where it is convenient to sleep,
for food and water can here be obtained for the men ; but
the nights on the pass are apt to be unpleasantly cold
without a blanket. The warmest substitute for a blanket
is native masi , or bark cloth, which may be found in broad
strips, white and beautifully clean, in almost every house in
the mountains. On the following morning three hundred
more feet have to be climbed before the summit is reached.
As one runs down the steep incline on the north side, the
path turns suddenly, and a glorious view bursts upon the
22
FIJI


traveller. Behind towers the castellated mountain range, that
now looks like a dismantled and ruined battlement, while
in the early morning you look down upon a sea of mist, out
of which stand the hill-tops like islands. But on the other
side the sun is pouring down upon a beautiful fertile and
cultivated plain. Almost as far as the eye can reach is the
light green of the sugar-cane, overflowing into every little
valley at the base of the mountains, and almost mixing with
the mangrove swamps on the coast. Wherever the soil will
grow a stick of sugar-cane, there cane is planted. Eastward
lies a hazy chain of islands, the Yasawa, the western-
most islands of Fiji. Further down there is a purling stream
of ice-cold water —too cold to be inviting for a bathe so
early in the day. The road still trends down to the river,
a branch of the Ba, and then runs over the flat country
straight to the magistrate’s station of Namosau. Lodgings
can be got in the native town a mile and a half further on,
where lives the Roko tui, the head of the province, and no
difficulty will be found in taking passage from Ba to Suva
either by way of Levuka or direct.
It often happens that a native cutter is leaving Nailanga
for the Yasawa Islands, and a visit to Yasawa-i-lau is well
worth the few hours’ passage. In the Yasawas the natives
see few Europeans, and are uncontaminated by contact
with Indian coolies, as at Ba. Their little islands being
subject to droughts, many of the young men leave home
every year to earn money on the plantations of the main-
land, and return home more sophisticated, but not less
hospitable, than the mountaineers. About Yasawa-i-lau
clusters a number of myths. The island is a limestone
crag, 600 feet high, and honeycombed with caves, Into
the great central cave the tide penetrates by a subterranean
channel, forming a clear pool 20 feet deep, from which
shoot up sheer walls of limestone, to the broken dome over-
head. Here you undress and plunge into the warm water,
already alive with swimmers. Head after head disappears
beneath the surface, until the guide announces that your
turn has come to dive. You approach the limestone wall
with a quaking heart. Your guide dives, and, drawing a
deep breath, you plunge head foremost at the wall, reassured
by the pink soles of your leader’s feet kicking out a few
inches from your face. The water darkens : you are in the
tunnel, and thenceforward you swim furiously until a hand
clutches your arm and drags you breathless to the surface.
For the moment you are stunned. You are floating in a
23
FIJI


lofty narrow cavern, lighted only by the rays that penetrate
the water, dyeing every object a deep blue. The echo is
so terrific that every splash booms like thunder, and your
companions are a company of blue fiends, who only open
their lips to deafen you with their shrieks. There is one
narrow ledge on which to recover your breath for the return
dive, and, looking up, you find that the cavern is ventilated
by a tiny shaft 100 feet above. This cave comes nearer
to the description in Byron’s ‘ Island ’ than Mariner’s Cave,
in Vavau, from which the poem was taken; and it has
the advantage of being within the power of a moderate
swimmer. Lieutenant Ayling, who entered the Vavau
cave in 1853, was seriously injured by the stalactites in the
tunnel, against which the ocean swell drove his body as he
came out.
There are some good general rules to be observed in
travelling in Fiji. The people, wherever they are unspoilt,
are kind and hospitable in their own way. They are cere-
monious and polite, and it is the worst of bad form, both
in their eyes and in ours, to fail to treat them with the
respect and courtesy due to them as hosts. They are,
moreover, extremely observant of breaches of manners,
and, though generally tolerant, inclined to resent any
conduct they believe to be intentionally slighting.
LTnlike the civilians in India, the Government officers in
Fiji have always shown their readiness to meet the native
chiefs on level ground, sleeping in their houses and accept-
ing their hospitalities. As a consequence, the chiefs are
always comparing the manners of their visitors with a
certain standard of their own ; and they are prone to
underrate the importance of anyone who seems to them
to be lacking in courtesy. They are particular about their
mats, therefore never go into a house with dirty boots
without carefully*wiping them. To go uncovered is a
mark of respect, therefore never wear your hat in their
houses. They are not children, like the Melanesians or
the negroes of Africa, therefore do not try to amuse them
by showing them your knife or your or anything
you have about you. Moreover, if you give a man a thing
to look at, he will suppose you mean him to keep it. It is
bad manners in Fiji to reach up above another’s head. If
a man has to do so in a house, you will see him apologize
afterwards by crouching and clapping his hands. It is bad
taste to offer to buy the things you see in your host’s house.
If you want to buy curiosities, get your interpreter to do it
privately before you leave.
24
FIJI


CLIMATE.
It is safe to say that Fiji is one of the most healthy of
the tropical countries in the world. For some unexplained
reason it is free from malarial fever and ague, though in
other islands of the Pacific of the same latitude Europeans
rarely escape the attacks of this disease. From May to the
end of September the climate is little hotter than an
English summer. The thermometer ranges from yo J to Bo°
at mid-day, but there is always a cool breeze from the
south-east, and the nights are often cold enough for
blankets. During the rest of the year the climate is hotter,
and from January to March, on days when the trade wind
does not blow, it is undoubtedly relaxing. It was probably
during these months that the Fijian climate was summed
up by the private in the Roj'al Engineers, in a sentence
which has since become classical. ‘ It’s a rum climate, this,
Bill; I eats well, and I sleeps well, but whenever I begins
to work I feels sick.’ It is said that the Engineers had not
a high reputation in the colony for outdoor industry, but
there was some sound truth in our friend’s remark. During
the wet season outdoor labour is exhausting; during the dry
it is at least fatiguing. Nevertheless, lawn-tennis is played
in Suva on every dry afternoon throughout the year, and
the standard of play is necessarily high. Newcomers,
especially those past middle life, must be careful of chills
that lead to dysentery. For the first few weeks of their
stay they should wear cholera belts, and avoid getting wet.
Once acclimatized, one may wear what he likes, and wet
feet do not seem to matter. The highest testimony to the
healthiness of the climate lies in the number of Europeans
who have lived to a great age. Men and women of between
seventy and eighty can be found in almost every district of
the colony.
THE NATIVES.
Fiji was the meeting-ground for the Polynesian and
Melanesian races, and there are traditions in Hawaii and
the Marquesas of a temporary sojourn in Fiji of the remote
ancestors of the Polynesians ; but these have left but little
trace behind them, for we find, generally, that the western
and inland districts are inhabited by Melanesians, and that
the eastern and coastal provinces are peopled by the tall,
light-skinned, wavy-haired race met with throughout the
25
FIJI


groups to the eastward. These, no doubt, are a backwave
of Polynesian immigration, the descendants of exiles or of
castaway travellers, swept westward by the trade winds.
To see Fijians, therefore, in their most primitive state one
must go inland to the interior of Vitilevu, an expedition as
interesting as it is inexpensive in everything but time.
The most remarkable, and in some respects the most
encouraging, characteristic of the Fijians is their unreason-
ing conservatism. While they have been quite as deeply
impressed by the teachings of the missionaries as the
natives of other islands in the Pacific, they alone have
refused to ape European manners, and have a sufficient
sense of humour to keep them from the grotesque folly of
European clothes.
In new communities, when men are losing money, the
blame of commercial depression is generally put down to
the Government. Where representative institutions exist,
the Government perforce goes out, but in a colony like Fiji
representative institutions are, for obvious reasons, as yet
impossible. The natives are to the Europeans in the pro-
portion of 50 to 1. They own more than ten times the
land belonging to the Europeans, and to grant foreigners
an electoral vote, and deny it to the natives, would be as
unjust as it would be illogical. To give them a vote on the
same footing as Europeans would be at once to plunge the
colony into anarchy. So Fiji is a ‘Crown colony/ ruled
by a Governor and a nominated Council answerable to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies. Against this rock of
immutable autocracy, the waves of popular indignation beat
unceasingly. In times of comparative prosperity, like the
present, they are reduced to a mere ripple on the surface,
but as soon as industries begin to fail, the mutterings of
storm are at once heard on the horizon. The natives have
a distinct form of government for themselves. In theory
the Governor is the supreme chief. The colony is divided
into sixteen provinces, each ruled over by a native Lieutenant-
Governor, the Roko tui, usually the hereditary chief of the
district, under whom are Bulis, chiefs of small districts, and
answerable to them are the Turanga-ni-koro, or mayors of
the villages. Once a month the headmen of the district
meet in council and pass resolutions. These are forwarded
to the Roko, who affirms or disallows them. Twice a year
the Bulis and Mayors meet in provincial council, forwarding
their resolutions to the Governor, and there is, besides, an
annual council of chiefs, to which gather all the heads of
26
FIJI


provinces and districts to pass resolutions, but not to make
laws. These resolutions are forwarded to England, and
embodied in a native regulation whenever possible. The
system is a mere development of the ancient system of
native government, as, indeed, are most of the laws under
which the natives are now controlled. Besides the ordinary
law of the colony, there is a body of regulations to which
natives are amenable, and by which they are placed under
the direct control of their hereditary chiefs. For breaches
of these they are tried by native magistrates, or mixed
courts presided over by Europeans and natives.
They are taxed in produce, which is sold by the Govern-
ment to the highest bidder, and if there is any balance, it is
returned in coin to the producers. The real reason for the
maintenance of this somewhat primitive system, which is
so bitterly reviled by the European colonists, is because by
its agency the natives are induced to cultivate large areas
of sugar-cane and maize which they would not otherwise do,
and also because if they were assessed in money they would
crowd to the towns, where money is more easily earned,
leaving their wives and families unprovided for, and their
lands untilled. Under the present system, on the contrary,
their tax in produce must be raised on their own lands,
and they have no excuse for leaving them. The tax costs,
moreover, a small sum for collection. No traveller can
spend a day in the colony without hearing the native
taxation system and the lala abused ad nauseam. There
is no doubt that the former is not free from abuses, but so
long as the natives must be taxed to make a revenue, it is
probably the least harmful way of raising the amount
required. The natives, who own so much land, and
who number 102,000, contribute, little more than a
year to the revenue in indirect taxation, and from this
point of view a direct tax of £ 18,000 does not seem to be
excessive.
The lala is very imperfectly understood even by old
residents in the colony. Lala is the right of the chief to
exact service from his tenants without payment otherwise
than in cooked food. There are, in fact, two kinds of lala.
The first is in the nature of local rates, which are naturally
paid by Europeans without any sense of injustice. When
work is to be done for the community, such as road-
making, repairing of buildings, or fishing for the enter-
tainment of strangers, the chief gives the order in the form
oi lala, and the work is done. Sometimes, no doubt, chiefs
27
FIJI


abuse this right, and have expensive buildings put up which
are a severe tax upon the people; but lala of this kind
cannot be abolished except for the commutation of a money
rate, which no native could pay. The other kind of lala
is personal service rendered to the chief himself, and it has
generally escaped notice that this service is rent. The
chief is, in fact, in most parts of Fiji a lord of copyhold.
How he came by his rights scarcely concerns us more than
an inquiry into the origin of the rights of the Duke of
Bedford over Covent Garden, or any other landlord in
England over his lands. It is enough that when the chiefs
ceded Fiji to England they possessed these vested rights,
and that the English Government is in honour bound to
respect them. The rent is paid usually in produce, but
sometimes in services, or the produce is used to pay others
for services. The amount is not fixed, any more than
the fine payable by copyholders used to be fixed in England ;
but there is a well-defined line in the native mind at which
excessive rent becomes tyranny. The only way to abolish
lala is by compensation, and though this is provided for by
law, the natives have not yet in a single instance cared to
buy out the rights of their manorial lord. But the limits
of legitimate lala are sometimes strained, and chiefs
nominated by the Government claim to exact lala from
people who are not and never were their tenants. This it
is certainly the duty of the Government to restrain with a
strong hand. Among the Melanesian tribes in the interior
of Vitilevu the ancient constitution was virtually a republic
with a hereditary president. The lands are held com-
munally, and personal lala is almost unknown.
RELIGION.
All the Fijians are now nominally Christians; that is to say,
they have family prayers twice a day, and go to church on
Sundays. As in other Christian countries, their professed
Christianity does not much affect their private life ; indeed,
in some particulars it has even changed it for the worse.
The Fijians had formerly a very fair working religion and
moral code of their own. True, it allowed the practice of
such abominations as cannibalism; but, on the other hand, it
was infinitely more strict about morality and the cleanliness
which is next to godliness, than is the Christian code of
the Fijian of the present day. In seeing how admirably
adapted many of the old superstitions and tabus were for
28
FIJI


securing cleanliness, moral and physical, one wonders
whether they were a survival of a code of law brought by
their ancestors from the land of their origin, or merely a
gradual evolution from experience coloured by superstition.
The fear of witchcraft made the people destroy or bury all
scraps or offal, for fear an enemy might use them as instru-
ments of witchcraft. But Christianity threatens no imme-
diate physical punishment to the dirty, and so the towns
are no longer swept clean. In heathen times the un-
married men all slept together in a sort of club-house, and
lapses from virtue were severely punished; but with
Christianity came the idea of family life, and the young
men devote to the prosecution of intrigues the energy they
used to give to war. Having no artificial food for infants,
Fijian mothers used to suckle their children for three years,
when they were old enough to thrive on solid vegetable
food, and the parents remained apart until the weaning ;
now the same idea of family life causes another child to
appear within a year of the first, which sickens for want of
proper food, and not unfrequently dies.
The real difference between the past and the present is
that, whereas a breach of their old tabus meant immediate
death or severe illness, they are now only threatened for
disobeying the Christian code with punishment in the life
hereafter, which is too remote a penalty to have much
weight with them.
The early conversion of the natives was usually a political
move. The chief embraced Christianity, and his people
followed him en masse. One of these conversions was thus
described by an eye-witness :
‘ The missionary took his seat with the chief and people.
A feast was brought and presented by the heathen priest
to the ancestor gods in this way : “ O ye our ancestors,
deign to accept this wretched feast, which we, your de-
generate descendants, have brought to you. We ask for
forgiveness. This is the last time that we shall bring you
feasts, for it is our mind, for a time, to worship the god of
the foreigners. Be not angry, nor visit us with your wrath,
for we still know and respect you, only for a time we shall
not worship you any more.” Then the ancestor gods no
doubt ate the spiritual part of the feast, and the mis-
sionary consumed its grosser material, and enjoyed it very
much.’
This probably gives a very fair notion of the depth of
the first conversions. It will take a generation or two to
29
FIJI


teach the people that the ancestor gods not only need not
be worshipped, but do not exist.
One may be easily deceived by the pious atmosphere of
a native village at prayer-time. A few years ago four men
were tried for violently assaulting and robbing a white
storekeeper. They were found guilty, and invited to make
a statement. Their spokesman addressed the court as
follows :
‘ Epeli, sir, was the root of this matter. He came into
our house, and said, “ Let us have prayers.” And we
prayed. Then he said, “ How will it be to rob the white
man s store ?” and we said, “It is well.” So we went to-
gether, and when we were come near, Epeli said, “ How
will it be to set the store on fire, and then the white man
will come out ?” So we set the store on fire, and presently
the white man did come out, and we trampled on him.
Then Epeli took his box of money, and we ran to the
river ; but, seeing that the box was too heavy, we dropped
it into the water, and came home. That is all.’
The Judge: ‘ What did you do then ?’
Prisoner: 4 We had prayers.’
At present there is great rivalry between the Wesleyan
and the Roman Catholic Missions, and their strife is having
a bad effect upon the natives. There have been occasional
lapses into heathenism, generally in remote mountain
villages. In 1887 a prophet arose in the neighbourhood
of Nakauvandra called Dungumoi (or Na-vosa-vakandua).
Gathering a band of disciples, he marched through the
country, announcing a millennium for the natives, when
their ancestors would come back, and their ancient rights
be restored to them. He gave consecrated water to his
followers, which he said would give them immortality ; and
he very cleverly combined a creed of the ancient myths
and the teachings of the Bible, saying that the missionaries
told the truth according to their light, but that they did
not know the whole truth, for Jesus and Jehovah were, in
fact, both the sons of Ndengei, who had left Fiji at the
time of the Fijian deluge, and were about to return. The
prophet was a public danger, and he is now banished to
the remote island of Rotuma, where he is less likely to be
honoured than in his own country.
In 1894 a remote village on the Mathuata coast reverted
to their old gods, built a war fence, defied the Govern-
ment, and even went so far as to eat the bodies of two men
whom they killed in a night attack on a neighbouring
30
FIJI


village. The riot was put down by the Government, and
the ringleaders killed in the assault upon the stronghold.
From time to time these reversions to heathenism will
recur, and for the safety of the European population they
will have to be put down with a strong hand.
VITAL STATISTICS.
The Fijians are decreasing, and the reason is not diffi-
cult to find. The birth-rate is high, but nearly half the
children born are swept away by whooping-cough and
other European diseases before they are a year old.
The death-rate among adults is low; and if only the
mothers could be imbued with the maternal instinct shown
by Indian women, or, indeed, the females of all vigorous
races, the population would increase rapidly. Little by
little the people would become inured to the foreign
diseases that are now so destructive to them, and increasing
education and prosperity would rouse them from the in-
difference and apathy they now display towards their sick.
Probably, like the Maoris, they will sink to a total of forty
or fifty thousand, and then begin to recover. But their
progress in the path of civilization should be restrained
rather than accelerated. As Sir Henry Maine said of the
native policy of the Government of India, the Europeans
of Fiji are ‘ like men bound to make their watches keep
true time in two longitudes at once. Nevertheless, the
paradoxical position must be accepted. If they are too
slow, there will be no improvement. If they are too fast,
there will be no security.’
LANGUAGE.
The sound of the Fijian language is decidedly pleasant,
unless the voice be hoarse or harsh. Every word terminates
in a vowel, but the effect is somewhat spoilt by reduplica-
tions that deprive the language of all dignity and give it a
puerile sound. Its syntax is Melanesian, but there is a
large admixture of Polynesian words introduced by the
lighter-skinned immigrants from the East.
In reducing the language to writing, the missionaries
represented every consonant sound by a single letter, and
used the Italian vowels, so that the language can be cor-
rectly pronounced by articulating every written letter.
They took the superfluous consonants to denote the com-
31
FIJI


posite consonants, th being written c ; ng—g; mb—b ; nd~
d >' n gg —A Thus, Thakombau appears as Cakobau , Tonga
as Toga , Wangga as Waqa. While this is doubtless very
convenient in teaching the natives to write their own
language, it is very confusing to the uninitiated in a map
or in a book, and throughout this pamphlet the ordinary
English spelling is employed. Now, of course, with in-
creasing civilization a number of English words have been
Fijianized, and the effect is often very funny. Nearly all
the natives have Scriptural names rendered into Fijian, such
as Sekove for Jacob, Eroni for Aaron, Melikisiteki for
Melchisedech. Fijian has become the lingua franca of the
Pacific, owing to the number of Melanesian labourers who
have served their time in Fiji, and returned to their own
islands. Throughout the New Hebrides and Solomons
pidgin P'ijian will take one anywhere, for the Fijian of the
foreign labourers is as different from the classical language
as is the English of the Chinaman in Hong Kong from
classical English. Most of the Europeans speak a little
Fijian, but unless they are missionaries, Government offi-
cials, or natives of the country, they seldom speak or write
it correctly.
HISTORY.
The true history of the intercourse between Fijians and
Europeans will probably never now be written. The
group was first seen on March 5, 1643, by Tasman, during
the famous voyage in which he discovered New Zealand,
Toi)ga, and the colony that bears his name, but he never
set foot on the land. Sailing westward from Tonga, he
became entangled among the island and reefs lying to the
north of Taveuni, and after a day and night of imminent
peril he cleared the group to the north-west, thanking
Providence for his escape. One hundred and thirty years
later Captain Cook lay to for one night off Vatoa, to the
extreme southward of the group. It is strange that, with
so accurate an account of the place as he had from the
Tongans, he should have made no further search for it. In
1797, Captain Wilson, in the mission ship Duff\ sighted
Vanuambalavu, and on the same night struck on one of the
outlying reefs of Nukumbasanga, visible from the deck of
the Canadian-Australian steamers as they enter the group.
In May, 1789, Lieutenant Bligh passed through the islands
in the Bounty's launch five days after the celebrated mutiny.
As he was leaving the group to the north of the Yasawas,
32
FIJI


he was pursued by two canoes, but he outdistanced them,
and had no intercourse with the shore. The first recorded
instance of actual intercourse between Fijians and Europeans
was on April 26, 1794, when the Snow Arthur touched at
Yasawa Island, and was attacked by the natives. But it is
probable that long before this date ships from the East
Indies visited the group to trade in sandalwood—even if
there be no foundation for a popular tradition that Fiji was
the haunt of Spanish pirates. These chance visits of
Europeans were not without their effect upon the natives.
As has been so often the case when two races meet for the
first time, a terrible epidemic broke out among the weaker,
and the present century opened luridly for the Fijians.
Nor was it without the portents that are usually found to
precede great changes among primitive races. On a night
at the end of the last or the beginning of this century, there
was a great storm from the eastward. When morning
broke, and the people of Oneata looked towards the east,
they saw on the islet of Loa, which stands on the great Argo
reef, red streamers waving in the wind. Strange beings, too,
were moving on the islet. Taking them for spirits, the
natives launched a light canoe, and paddled cautiously
towards Loa. They paused, resting on their paddles, and
saw spirits that resembled men, having their ears bound
up with scarlet, and burning wood between their teeth.
After much discussion, they launched a larger canoe to
approach the islet, and carried the spirits to Oneata. But
one of them proved to be as mortal as themselves, for he
was buried on Loa, whether of violence or disease will
never now be known. Here the traditions become con-
fused. There were muskets and ammunition in the
wrecked ship, but the men of Oneata knew nothing of their
uses, else had the history of Fiji been different. They took
the casks of powder to be pigment for the face, and the
ramrods to be ornaments for the hair. One of them, says
the tradition, smeared the wet pigment over hair and all ;
and when it would not dry as charcoal did, but lay cold
and heavy on the head, he made a great fire in the house,
and stooped his head to the blaze to dry the matted locks.
None knew what happened. There was a sudden flash,
very bright and hot, a tongue of flame leapt from the
head and licked the wall, and the chief sprang into the
rara with a great cry, for his hair was gone, and his skull
more naked than when he was born. They called it the
work of spirits, and used the black powder no more.
3
33
FIJI


The strangers had scarce landed, when a great pestilence
broke out. This was the Lila mbalavu , or wasting sickness,
that swept from island to island until it had devastated the
whole group. £ From that time,’ says a saga of the day,
‘ our villages began to be empty of men ; but in the time
before the coming of the sickness every village was so
crowded that there was no space to see the ground between
the men, so numerous were they.’ From this pestilence
dated the custom of strangling those sick of a lingering ill-
ness, lest in the malignity of misery they should spit upon
the food or lie upon the mats of the healthy, and thus make
them companions in suffering. No wasting sickness was
like the great Lila , for men and women lay till the bark-
cloth rotted from their bodies, and their heads seemed in
comparison to be larger than food baskets, and they were
so feeble that they lacked the strength to pull down a sugar-
cane to moisten their parched throats, unless four crawled
out to lend their strength to the task. There is pathos in
the fragmentary saga of the time which has been handed
down to us :
‘ The great sickness sits aloft,
Their voices sound hoarsely,
They fall and lie helpless and pitiable,
Our God Dengei is put to shame,
Our own sicknesses have been thrust aside.
The strangling cord is a noble thing,
They fall prone ; they fall with the sap still in them.
* * * * *
A lethargy has seized upon the chiefs,
How terrible is the sickness !
We do not live ; we do not die ;
Our bodies ache ; our heads ache:
Many die, a few live on,
The strangling cord brings death to many ;
The malo round their bellies rots away,
Our women groan in their despair ;
The liku knotted round them they do not loose.
Hark to the creak of the strangling-cords !
The spirits flow away like running water — ra tau el
It was a year of terror. Flere is the fragment of another
poem of the same time :
‘ Sleeping in the night I suddenly awake,
The voice of the pestilence is borne to me, uetau.
I go out and wander abroad, uetau.
It is near the breaking of the dawn, uetau.
Behold a forked star, uetau.
We whistle with astonishment as we gaze on it, uetau.
What can it portend ? uetau.
Does it presage the doom of the chief? — e el
34
FIJI


From contemporary traditions we learn that this comet
had three tails, the middle tail coloured and the two outer
white; that it rose just before daybreak, and that it was
visible for thirty-seven nights in succession. Here, as in all
ages and countries, the comet was believed to be an omen
of coming evil —not the ravages of the unknown plague, but
the death of some great chief. In like manner the comet
of 1843 presaged the fall of Suva, and that of 1881 the
death of King Thakombau.
Ten or twelve years later there came another sickness.
The children that had escaped the Lila were growing into
manhood, when they were struck down by epidemic
dysentery, a disease till then unknown in Fiji. In the Lila
there had been a famine, because of the expenditure of food
in funeral feasts for those who died earliest, but in the
dysentery no one thought of funeral feasts. They left their
plague-stricken villages and fled, leaving the sick to take
care of themselves. Tradition says that this sickness was
stayed by a great flood, following a hurricane, greater than
any that has been seen before or since. Whole villages
were swept out to sea, and the mangrove swamps on the
Rewa were buried deep in silt. Much of the low-lying land
at the mouth of the Rewa and in Bua is said to have been
formed by this flood.
The traditions of the coast tribes of Vitilevu show that
about the middle of the eighteenth century there was a
mysterious upheaval of the inland tribes, and a stream of
emigration poured down towards the coast, seeking asylum
as fugitives. At the beginning of the present century Fiji
was split up into a number of small tribal federations,
scarcely larger than joint families, ruled over by chiefs who
represented the purest blood of the ancestor. The chief
did not govern alone. All important steps were taken by
the consent of a council of elders. Each tribe was in a
chronic state of war with such of its neighbours as were not
allied to it by marriage or common blood. The great
plagues scarcely altered the balance of power, since they
struck all equally. The political changes were wrought by
chance. On the east coast of Vitilevu, a small tribe lately
descended from the mountains was making its influence
felt. As it rose in power, it gathered adherents as a snow-
ball gathers snow. Broken tribes came to live under its
protection. Conquered tribes brought it tribute from their
lands. But in 1800 its whole sphere of influence barely
exceeded ten square miles. Such was Mbau, a tribe that
35
FIJI


brought about the cession of Fiji to England. Late in the
last century, a fishing tribe that lived on the tiny island of Bau,
and owed allegiance to the Bau chief, became insolent, and
was banished from the place. The island seemed so suit-
able for purposes of defence that the chiefs determined
to settle there. With the aid of their dependents they
scarped away the side of the cliff, and reclaimed land from
the shallow sea, facing it with slabs of stone, and built
houses and settled there, changing the old name of the
island, Butoni, to Mbau. From this stronghold they made
continual incursions into the mainland, cementing their
influence by plots when they felt too weak to trust to arms.
The pestilence put an end to their schemes, for, as the saga
tells us: ‘ Then did war cease, for the strong warriors were
stricken and withered like the Dainga that droops in the
evening : they were as men bereft of sense, for those who
had strength launched the canoes and sailed away, and the
sick died more quickly when there were none left to bring
them food. Their bodies rotted in the house or were
devoured by the hogs. Yet the living could not escape by
flight, for the pestilence, borne on the wind that filled their
sails, overtook them, even in the place whither they fled.
None can tell the terror and the pity of that time.’ From
Mbau, however, they made no attempt to escape, for the
sickness was raging on the mainland opposite, and beyond
the mountains were none but enemies. So they stayed and
sickened and died, and the last to die was Banuve, sur-
named First-fruits, their chief and Vunivalu. Hence-
forth he was not Banuve, but Bale-i-Vavalangi (victim
of the foreign pestilence). His eldest son, Matenikutu
(the lice-slayer), succeeded naturally to his rank, but the
rights of investiture could not be performed until the
arrival of the men from Levuka, in Lakemba, whose
peculiar privilege it is to conduct the ceremony. They
brought with them a tent —the first of the foreign posses-
sions seen by the Mbauans—part of the loot from the
wreck on the Argo Reef. On the day of the rite there was
another portent. At high noon, in a cloudless sky, the
sun suddenly paled and turned to the colour of blood ; the
air grew dark ; the birds settled on the trees to roost, and
the stars came out. There was silence among the people
sitting before the temple of Vatanitawaki—the silence of a
great fear. Then the god entered into one of the priests,
and he screamed prophecies in the red darkness, foretelling
war, and the greatness of Matenikutu, the son of Banuve,
36
FIJI


and crying that the face of the sun was red with the blood
that he should shed. In that year were other strange omens
foretelling the change of the old order. The sky rained
lumps of ice that broke down the yam vines and the stalks
of the taro, and the people, touching them, said that burning
stones had fallen from heaven. Then followed the great
hurricane, the same that stayed the sickness and changed
the face of the country. This eclipse was probably that
which took place on September 7, 1802.
The first years of Matenikutu's reign were filled with an
incessant struggle with Verata, to the northward, and Dravo
and Nakelo in the south, the tribes which his father had
never been able to subdue. Chance or fate put into his
hands the means of conquering them.
In 1808 the American brig Eliza , from the River Plate,
was wrecked on the reef of Nairai Island. The crew were
allowed to live, and some of them made their way in the
ship’s boats to another American vessel that chanced to be
lying in Mbua Bay, ninety miles distant. Five others, two
of them being Chinamen, were carried by the natives to
Verata, while Charles Savage, a Swede, made his way
alone to Mbau in a canoe which chanced to be sailing
thither. These were the first Europeans who settled among
the natives, for the story of the escaped convicts landing in
1804, as told by Thomas Williams, is simply a perverted
account of this shipwreck. The hull of the Eliza was
looted by the natives, who used the silver dollars —she
carried 40,000 of them—as playthings to be skimmed along
shallow water, or buried with the posts of anew house.
They called them lavo , from their resemblance to a bean of
that name, and lavo was thenceforth the Fijian name for
money. Eighty years have passed : many sailors have
deserted their ships in order to enrich themselves with
these lost dollars ; beach-combers and traders have hunted
for them ; and yet these records of the wreck are still
occasionally found in Nairai.
As soon as Savage reached Mbau, he besought the chief
to send him back to Nairai to search for something left in
the wreck, promising that with it he would give to Mbau the
dominion over all her enemies. The thing they were to
look for was like a nkata club, but heavier, and they must
also find a black powder such as men use to paint their
faces for war. When at last the messengers found the
object of their quest built into the roof of a yam-shed, and
brought it to Mbau, Savage summoned all the people to the
37
FIJI


rara, and set up the deck plank of a canoe as a target.
Then he raised the strange weapon, took aim, and fired,
piercing the canoe plank, and cried that just so he would
slay the enemies of Mbau. The first expedition was to be
against Verata, but Savage insisted on first sending a
message to the castaway sailors who were in the enemy’s
village. When they had fled to him at Mbau, the war canoes
were launched, and in the first went Savage with his musket.
The warriors in the village ran up and down behind the
moat, shouting taunts and shooting arrows at the canoe.
Then Savage stood up and began firing. When the first
man fell, his comrades ran to tend him, holding up mats to
shelter themselves, and received ball after ball as they
stooped over him. Panic-stricken, the survivors took refuge
behind the war fence, but the bullets tore through the
banana stumps that arrows could not pierce, and wounded
the men who stood behind. There was a panic : the
warriors of Bau, led by Savage, scaled the fence, and
clubbed or bound all they found within it; but as Savage
leapt down into the enclosure, he was stabbed in the side
with a spear. They set sail for Mbau, with all the loot they
could save from the burning houses, and a number of
prisoners to be slaughtered and eaten. Mbau fought no
more till Savage was recovered of his wound. None dared
touch his musket, for he had told them that there was
magic in it, and the other Europeans knew that, if they
dared to touch it, he would require their deaths at the
hands of the chief. When his wound was healed, they
conferred on him the Fijian order of knighthood, making
him koroi under the name of Koroi-na-vunivalu. They
stripped him, painted his body, festooned him with garlands,
and led him to the temple, dancing the death dance before
him, and then tried to shut him up for four days, forbidding
him to bathe or eat food with his hands under a solemn
tabu. But he scoffed at the priests, and broke the tabu ,
leaving the temple and going to his own home. From this
time he became second only to the Vunivalu himself. He
was adopted into the tribe, and two chief women of the
highest rank were given him to wife. The next expedition
was against Nakelo. For this, Savage had a sort of sedan-
chair built of sinnet cord, impervious to arrows, with a
loophole in it for his musket. He made them practise
drilling with it: taking his seat with his musket, he made
them pick up the miniature fort, and run with him till he
was within range of the war fence, and carry him out of
38
FIJI


danger again at word of command. When they were
perfect, the expedition started for the Rewa delta. Savage
was carried within range of the wall in his sedan-chair,
and he stayed there firing at the enemy until not a man
dared to stay within the entrenchment. The Mbau warriors
followed, and Nakelo was burned to ashes. In this way all
the strongholds within reach of Mbau were reduced. As
Mbau gained power they advanced in cruelty. The people
had been cannibals, probably, for generations, but not all
the prisoners of war were killed, and not all of those killed
were eaten. Under Matenikutu prisoners were taken alive
with but one object. Before the war-god’s temple was a
rough volcanic stone which may now be seen in the
Wesleyan church at Mbau. The wretched prisoners were
flung, bound hand and foot, from the canoes on to the
beach, while the warriors danced the thimbi , or death
dance, with couched spears towards the temple. Then
men seized a prisoner by each of his arms and dragged him
towards the stone at a run, gathering speed, so as to bring
his head against the sharp corner with a crash. Even with
the life still in him he was dismembered, and the pieces of
the body wrapped in leaves, and laid on the hot stones of
an earth oven. When cooked, it was divided out among
the different chiefs and eaten. In the case of prisoners
against whom the tribe bore special malice, there were
additional horrors. The wretched man had sometimes to
prepare his own oven, or to see one of his members cooked
and eaten before his face. It is not to be supposed that,
except in very rare instances, Fijians were cannibals from
a liking for human flesh. Man-eating was rather a rite, an
act of triumph over a fallen foe, and the custom was so far
surrounded with awe that human flesh was seldom eaten in
public, but rather in the seclusion of an almost dark house.
Nor was it allowed to touch the fingers or the lips. A
special wooden fork was used, each individual fork having
a name of its own, as if it were a person.
Under Savage’s leadership the fame of Mbau rose rapidly.
Broken tribes, fleeing from enemies in the mountains, came
to Matenikutu, asking leave to settle on his waste lands in
return for the tribute they would pay him for protection.
Other fugitives—mere individuals expelled from their tribe
—became his serfs, and Mbau found herself in three years,
instead of an isolated tribe, the centre of a powerful fede-
ration. There were additions to the European colony in
Mbau—two discharged seamen and some ne’er-do-weel
39
FIJI


loafers from Sydney. These men had no part in the
political affairs of the tribe. They lived together in a
house in the fishermen’s quarter, practising every native
vice except cannibalism, and far surpassing the natives in
license. When a ship put in for a cargo of sandalwood,
they hired themselves out to pull the boats, at a wage of
£ 4 a month—to be paid in knives, tools, and beads, which
clothed them with a brief importance among the natives of
Mbau when they returned. But for the rest, they ate, drank,
and slept like the beasts they were. Without tobacco or
liquor they were probably not happy, and the very weari-
ness of life may have led them to the folly which brought
about their death. On a day when Savage was absent
with the army, they became angry that no share of the
feast had been apportioned them, and two of them ran
into the rara and slashed at a heap of yams, trampling
the food under foot. Fijians will bear any insult before this,
and when the tidings reached the town, every man caught
up his weapon and ran towards Soso. The white men
fought like rats in a trap, until one of the natives fired the
house. When they could bear the heat no longer, they
made a dash for the sea. Three were struck down, but
Graham and another succeeded in plunging into the sea,
and were spared—the first to perish more miserably at
Wailea, and the other to be the indirect means of discover-
ing the fate of De la Perouse.
In May, 1813, the Europeans sailed for Wailea, led by
Savage, to load sandalwood for the East India ship
Hunter , lying in Wailea Bay. The second mate of this
ship was Peter Dillon, the lively Irishman who was after-
wards made Chevalier of the Legion d’Honneur for his
services in finding the remains of De la Perouse’s expe-
dition. The captain had entered into an unholy alliance
with the chief of Wailea —that, in return for a cargo of
sandalwood, he would help him against his enemies. A
joint expedition took and burned a number of villages,
and brought back the bodies of the slain to be eaten by
the victors. But four months passed away without the
fulfilment of the chiefs promises, and the captain resolved
to punish his old allies. He attacked a fleet of their canoes,
and captured fourteen of them. At this juncture the
brothers of the Vunivalu arrived from Mbau, with a force
of 200 men, ostensibly to escort the white men back, but
also, no doubt, to load their canoes with plunder. On the
way they readily offered their services to Captain Robson,
40
FIJI


and on September 6, 1813, they landed in force. They
were led inland in pursuit of a few warriors, technically
known to Fijians as the ‘ bait for the net,’ and they had
hardly set the village on fire, when the ambush closed in
upon them. Dillon, Savage, and four others, succeeded
in reaching a little hill alive, but most of the rest were
clubbed. Then followed a heroic combat, which has
become a classic in Polynesian literature. From the hill
the doomed men saw the bodies of their comrades cut up
and roasted, after being insulted with unnameable indigni-
ties. The natives made repeated rushes, but the defenders
kept up a steady fire, and scarcely ever missed. At last
Savage prevailed on Dillon to allow him to try his powers
of persuasion on the natives, and walked down the hill to
where the chief was sitting. A Chinaman followed his
example. Suddenly Savage was seized by the legs and
thrown down, with his head in a pool of water, where he
was held by six men as long as life remained, and at the
same moment the Chinaman was clubbed. Both bodies
were cut up, wrapped in leaves and put into ovens. Dillon
and his two remaining comrades succeeded at last, by a
clever ruse, in making their escape. They induced the
priest to come up the hill to parley with them, and then,
holding loaded muskets to his head, forced him to give
them a safe conduct to the boats.
Savage’s death was no real loss to Mbau, for muskets
could be purchased from passing ships, and the natives
had learned how to use them. The European colony in
the group gradually increased. It was composed, for the
most part, of the offscourings of society—men attracted
thither to escape the law or the restrictions of civilized
society, and runaway sailors who wanted to lead an idle
life. Mariner, who touched at the group in 1810, says
that the natives themselves were afraid of associating with
the Europeans. Besides the sandalwood districts in Vanu-
alevu and Mbau, the headquarters of the Europeans was
Rewa, the most powerful and the best-organized federation
in this part of the colony. It comprised all the tribes in-
habiting the delta of the big river, as far westward as the
promontory of Suva. As Savage was to Matenikutu,
so was Connor to the chief of Rewa. Paddy Connor was
an Irishman of the very worst type. Savage was a warrior
and a politician first, and a scoundrel afterwards: Paddy
Connor had no redeeming traits. With his musket he
helped Rewa to subdue the eastern end of Kandavu, which
41
FIJI


had hitherto resisted all attempts made upon it. When
at last Connor’s patron died, he was obliged to flee from
Rewa to save his own life. The other Europeans would
have nothing to do with him, and he lived to an unde-
servedly peaceful old age in Kandavu, and died the father
of fifty children, several of whom still survive.
Mbau and Rewa were now the great rivals, and war be-
tween the two was inevitable.
From 1835 to 1843 was a period of incessant struggle
between the two states, culminating in the fall of Rewa,
and Mbau was left supreme. In 1835 the first missionaries
landed in the eastern islands, and. aided by the influence
of the Tongans, who were in the white heat of their con-
version, they had a rapid success. Mbau long resisted their
efforts. Matenikutu died in 1829. His brother Tanoa
reigned from 1829 to 1845, and then Thakombau, who
was already king in all but name, was installed as Vunivalu.
A rebellion against him at once broke out, led by Mara, his
half-brother; and he was so hemmed in by enemies with-
out and traitors within his own town that he would in-
evitably have fallen but for the timely arrival of King
George of Tonga with a fleet of canoes, nominally to take
back the Rarnarama , promised him by Thakombau—the
largest canoe ever made —but in reality, no doubt, to in-
crease the prestige of Tonga in Fiji. Aided by the Tongan
forces, Thakombau completely suppressed the rebellion,
and executed Mara, the ringleader. Meanwhile, the centre
of European population had been fixed at Levuka, in the
island of Ovalau. From 1835 to 1840 the tiny settlement,
under the protection of Tui Levuka, the firm friend of
Europeans, rapidly increased. The settlers had become a
different class from the scoundrelly Europeans who had
first come among the natives. They traded in cocoanut
oil, beche-de-mer, pearl-shell and native produce. Some
of them settled down as carpenters, boat-builders, and
blacksmiths, and their general good conduct so impressed
Captain Wilkes, of the United States exploring expedition,
that he declared them to be the best-disposed of any
Europeans he had met during his voyage. The white
men had given their sympathies, if not their aid, to the
rebel Mara, and with his fall they felt their lives to be no
longer safe at Levuka. Taking their wives and families
with them, they sailed in a body for Solevu Bay in Vanu-
alevu, and there they built temporary shelters until Tha-
kombau guaranteed them their safety. With the conversion
42
FIJI


of the chief, all the people owning his allegiance at once
nominally embraced Christianity. Indeed, most of the
so-called conversions in Fiji were no less political in their
motives.
The gold rush of California in 1851 did not leave Fiji
unaffected. Diggers from Sydney and Melbourne put into
the islands on their way, and when they could no longer
make a living at the mines, returned to the place that had
so attracted them by its freedom from all restraint. Before
this accession of colonists, the United States Government
had, on Captain Wilkes" recommendation, appointed a
Consul to watch over the interests of the numerous
American citizens settled in the islands. Many of these
settlers had obtained grants of land from the native chiefs,
generally of small extent, but sufficient for their immediate
needs. As they acquired property, it was natural that the
cupidity of the natives led to thefts that were inadequately
punished. The American Consul, Williams, had settled
on the little island of Nukulau, the present quarantine
station. On July 4, 1849, as has been already related,
during the celebration of his national anniversary with
fireworks and other convivial aids, his house took fire, and
was burnt to the ground. By a peculiar process of deduc-
tion, he laid the blame at Thakombau’s door, and for-
warded a claim, together with all the complaints of other
American citizens, against the natives, to the United
States. In 1855 the American Government sent Com-
mander Boutwell to Fiji to hold a preliminary inquiry.
This officer, conceiving himself to be only charged with
upholding the national dignity, accepted all the ex parte
statements of the American settlers, and awarded them
compensation of to be paid by Thakombau. The
chief tried in vain to raise the money. His people were
ready enough to bring him food and to build his house, as
custom required, but flatly declined to fish beche-de-mer
for profit; and not knowing where to turn for help, Tha-
kombau offered the sovereignty of Fiji to the Queen, on
condition that he should be allowed to retain the title of
King of Fiji, and that, in return for 200,000 acres of land,
the English Government should pay the American claims.
The deed of cession, signed by Thakombau and the leading
chiefs, was taken to England in the early part of the year
1859. It was the eve of the American Civil War, and
cotton was rising steadily in price. As it was now certain
that Fiji was a cotton-growing country, great efforts were
43
FIJI


made in Australia to induce the British Government to
accept Thakombau’s offer. In iB6O Colonel Smyth, R.A.,
was despatched to report upon the proposal. He found
that the offer emanated from chiefs who could not claim
authority throughout the islands, and that England could
not assume sovereignty without a strong probability of a
native war. The Imperial authorities, having quite enough
to do with the Maori war, on June 25, 1862, declined the
offer. The European settlers now made a praiseworthy
attempt to establish a Government of their own. But in
every case the jealousy of the chiefs defeated their object.
In the early part of 1871 a more ambitious effort was
made. Thakombau, with the assistance of Messrs. Woods,
Sagar, Burt, and Hennings, tried to form a Government
for the whole group. Delegates of the Europeans and
natives were invited to meet and frame a constitution.
Having performed their functions, they appointed return-
ing officers, and writs were issued for the election of
members for the assembly of Fiji. The first Fijian Par-
liament met in 1871, under the Speakership of Mr. Butters.
There was the usual complicated machinery of representa-
tive government, a King and Ministry, a Privy Council, and
a House of Representatives, a Supreme Court with a Chief
Justice and two associate judges, one of whom was to be a
native. The kingdom was divided into provinces under
native Governors. The House of Representatives numbered
forty, all of whom were Europeans. The qualifications of
an elector were payment of taxes and six months’residence.
The constitution sounded very well on paper, but in prac-
tice it never worked from the beginning. The natives,
who formed ninety-nine-hundredths of the population, were
not to be allowed any political power at all, and even
the Europeans did not agree among themselves. A large
number of them in outlying districts refused to take part
in the elections, to pay taxes, or to have anything whatever
to do with the new Government. Moreover, the Assembly
and the Ministry could not agree. The first half of each
session of the Assembly was taken up by the efforts of
the leaders of the Opposition to change places with the
Ministers of the Crown. The settlers argued that the
franchise was confined to the whites only, and the Ministers
refused to fall in with this view. Then there was a crisis.
The King refused to accept the resignation of his Ministers,
who had been defeated constitutionally, and in 1873 the
Assembly was dissolved. There were, of course, financial
44
FIJI


difficulties. A large body of the settlers had never paid
their taxes, and could not be made to. Natives who failed
to pay their poll-tax were condemned to work it out in the
service of planters. There were two or three native wars
on the hands of the Government, and the Treasury were
paying in paper. The attempt was doomed to failure, but
it was nevertheless a praiseworthy effort in the direction of
law and order, when, with the increase in property, law and
order had become indispensable. During the sixties the
European population had quadrupled itself. For two
years, owing to the cotton rush, the profits realized from
cotton were enormous ; but with the end of the American
Civil War prices fell, and a large number of settlers, many
of them gentlemen from England, were thrown upon their
own resources. Meanwhile, the pressure put upon the
imperial authorities led to the appointment of Commodore
Goodenough and Consul Layard in 1873 as a Commission
of Inquiry into a fresh proposal to cede Fiji to England.
The Commissioners collected a mass of information, which
was laid before Parliament, and they attended a meeting
of the chiefs held to discuss the proposal of session. The
chiefs at first decided unanimously against the proposal; but
pressure was put upon Thakombau by his Ministry, and
on March 20, 1874, a formal offer of cession was made,
qualified by a number of unacceptable conditions. Sir
Hercules Robinson, Governor of New South Wales, was
then deputed to visit Fiji, and inform the chiefs that, if
they wished for cession, the offer must be unconditional.
Reassured by his manner, the chiefs then formally ten-
dered the sovereignty of the islands, trusting implicitly
to the honour and justice of the Queen’s Government. A
Provisional Government was formed, until the arrival of
Sir Arthur Gordon, on June 24, 1875.
While cession to England was being mooted, the longer-
sighted of the Europeans were preparing for the future by
buying land wholesale from the natives, in the hope that
their titles would be recognised by the English Govern-
ment. The position was further confused by the fact that
many of the original purchasers had got into debt, and
transferred their interests to their creditors, who in their
turn had sold the so-called title-deeds for value. The first
act of the Colonial Government was the appointment of a
Lands Commission, presided over by Mr. Victor Williamson.
This Commission caused the direst consternation among
the claimants to land. It was found that, if the claims
45
FIJI


were recognised, many of the islands would be handed over
bodily to the Europeans, and the natives would have to be
evicted. In some places five or six claims overlapped one
another, and even extended for miles into the sea. Nearly
all the titles had been granted by chiefs, who in very few
instances had, according to the native customary law. any
right of alienation without the consent of the people.
Generally speaking, the chiefs rights over land correspond
to the rights of the lord of the manor over copyholds.
He is entitled to villein service or rent produce, but he has
no right of eviction or alienation. The general test applied by
the Commission was occupation as a proof of bona fides, but
in many of the claims that were disallowed, on the grounds
of want of consideration or absence of title in the grantor
an ex-gratid grant was made. Nevertheless, the disap
pointment among the settlers was so keen that it was the
chief cause of Sir Arthur Gordon’s unpopularity. The
colonists, who were passing through a period of commercial
depression, were hoping that in some vague way annexation
would bring about a millennium. Prices were to rise, credit
was to be re-established, and life generally was to be made
easier. They thought that the difficulties of procuring labour
for their plantations would be got over by putting at their
disposal the services of the Fijians who lived near them, and
the second disappointment was the native taxation scheme
which is now in force. Since the date of cession the colony
has had fluctuations in prosperity. In 1882, when the sugar
industry was at its height of development, the revenue rose
to £110,950. During the succeeding years it fell as low
as .£63,722, and the colony was obliged to retrench. Since
1890 it has had a small annual balance, and it is slowly,
but surely, recovering its prosperity. The effect of the
commercial depression, and the low prices ruling for
tropical products, has been to kill out the small planters,
and to substitute for them the great sugar companies, with
enormous capital and the latest machinery; for while the
sugar bounties prevail in Europe, only sugar produced by
the most economical process can pay its waj\ The small
planters have been pursued by extraordinary ill fortune.
The price of cotton fell so much that with the heavy cost of
transport it barely paid its expenses. Coffee-planting, at
one time a promising industry, was destroyed early in its
career by the coffee-leaf disease. Tea, cultivable only on
the highlands, could not undersell the Indian and Ceylon
teas, owing to the difficulties of procuring extra labour at
46
FIJI


the time of the flushes. Cinchona was no sooner planted
than the price fell. Bananas, which for a few years saved
the small planters from bankruptcy, have now been attacked
simultaneously by the mysterious banana disease and by
the competition of Queensland. In the Australian market,
copra and coir fibre are subject to fluctuations. In good
years they are profitable, but in bad they barely pay
expenses. At present the hope of the small planters seems
to lie in growing sugar-cane for the large mills, in culti-
vating bananas in districts not yet affected by the disease,
and in growing tobacco. But, although Fiji cannot yet
hope for the remarkable prosperity of the temperate colonies
of Australia, it is certain that a colony so richly endowed
will continue to advance in importance. The returning
financial prosperity of Australia cannot leave Fiji unaf-
fected, and the trade opened with Canada by the enterprise
of Mr. Huddart is an additional guarantee of future de-
velopment. But whatever be the fate of the islands as a
colony, nothing can rob them of their romance or of the
haunting beauty of mountain, river, glen and coral beach,
the loveliness of ‘summer isles of Eden.’
THE END.
BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.
47
FIJI














