





FIJI TO-DAY
M.A.T.E.
“ Prosperity reposes on the sacredness of contract
and the stability of private property : the first,
the implement; and the last, the reward of
success in the universal competition.”— Popular
Government, by Sir Henry Maine.
Geo. Robertson & Co., 361 George Street,


DEDICATED BY PERMISSION
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND,
K.C.8., F.R.G.S.


(SONJPBNIPS
V
Preface...
Fiji, before and after Annexation
Native Chiefs
Native Taxation Scheme
The Lala
Native Population
Villages and Native Plantations
General Characteristics of Soil
Religion and Missionaries
Native Schools
Levuka...
Reasons for Removal of Capital
Recruiting Polynesian Labour
Recruiting Fijian Labour
Land Claims
Sugar Industry
The Future of the Sugar Industry...
Coffee, Past and Present
Tea Growing
Copra Cultivation
Cotton ...
The Banana Traffic


Embrace
“ There are two sets of motives and two only by which the
great bulk of the materials of human subsistence and comfort
have hitherto been produced and reproduced.
One has led to the cultivation of the territory of the
Northern States of the American Union from the Atlantic to the
Pacific.
The other had a considerable share in bringing about the
industrial and agricultural progress of the Southern States, and
in old days it produced the wonderful prosperity of Peru under
the Incas.
One system is economical competition, the other consists in
the daily task, perhaps fairly and kindly allotted, but enforced by
the prison or the scourge.
So far as we have any experience to teach us, we are driven
to the conclusion that every Society of men must adopt one sys-
tem or the other, or it will pass through penury to starvation.”
—“ Popular Government ,” by Sir Henry Maine.
The above extract, conveying a serious warning against
tampering with the laws of human society, may be said to have a
special interest just now in connection with Fiji.
In that country may be seen exemplified the ruin that may
be wrought in a single decade by the ruler who neglects the
lessons of experience for the promptings of self-interest.
Sir Henry Maine has laid it down as an axiom, that there
are but two systems by which communities can avoid dissolution,
one system is “ economical competition” in which all stand equal,
the other “ the daily task enforced by the prison and the scourge.”
If Sir Arthur Gordon were asked to which of these two
systems his Fijian policy belonged he would scarcely care to
affirm that it consisted in the “ daily task enforced by the prison
and the scourge there remains then but the other of “economi-
cal competition,”
Let us hear what Sir Henry Maine has to say about one of
the factors in “economical competition.”
“ Prosperity ” he declares, “ reposes on the sacredncss of
contract and the stability of private property : the first the
implement, and the last the reward of success in the universal
competition.”


Has Sir Arthur Gordon respected the “ sacredness of con-
tract,” or fostered the “ stability of private property ” among the
whites and natives of Fiji 1 Let these papers, which are an
attempt to throw some light on the present state of affairs in the
Group, answer the question.
If, on the other hand, the policy introduced into Fiji by its
first Governor belongs to neither of the two systems, the
inhabitants will have at any rate the melancholy satisfaction of
knowing on the best authority that in “ passing through penury
to starvation ” they are but testifying to the truth of an inexor-
able law.


FIJI TO-DAY
FIJI.
For many years previous to 1870 the two rival Chiefs of Fiji
were Cakobau and Maafu.
The former, by his skill in war and the support of the
Wesleyan mission from the time of his conversion, had acquired
far greater influence in the Leeward part of the group than any
other Chief. Maafu, who had never proved so pliable in the
hands of mission held undisputed sway in the Windward Islands.
In 1871 for various reasons, the chief of which was to force
the hands of the Imperial Government—who had hitherto refused
to entertain the idea of annexation, —there was a more or less
general agreement among the whites to establish some sort of
fixed government over the whole group.
By that time the number of white residents had greatly in-
creased ; capital was coming into the country, and more was
ready to come, but capitalists wanted security, and that could
alone be provided by making the only security the planter had to
offer, viz., his land—British soil. Inter-tribal wars had not yet
died out, and though the lives and property of white men were
not much endangered thereby, the mere possibility of such out-
breaks was sufficient to keep would-be investors at a distance.
In short, it was generally felt that in the interests of all, the
time had arrived for some more stable form of Government. The
great question was ; which of the two great Chiefs should be
forced to give way to the other.
Cakobau was not only more under control, butwas backed by
the mission, which support was of considerable importance, and
he was moreover the Chief with whom most of the whites were
best acquainted, Ovalau Island, the great centre of European
population, forming part of his kingdom.
Maafu, on the other hand, though most friendly to the
whites, and popular among them, was likely to prove most
stubborn in yielding his consent to any change that would lessen
his authority, and in opposition could be a most dangerous enemy.
It was therefore not without some uneasiness on account of
his old enemy, with whose prowess he was well acquainted, that
Cakobau allowed himself to be put forward as the nominal head
of the government about to be formed.
Early in 1871, Delegates, as representatives of each district,
assembled in Levuka to frame a Constitution, which was accord-
ingly fixed to provide for a king (Cakobau) and Ministry—
Privy Council of native chiefs (Rokos), from the 12 districts


into which the group was to be divided ; and Legislative Assembly
of Europeans elected by white men. There was also a Supreme
Court consisting of a Chief Justice and twoassistant judges (one a
native.) For Revenue purposes, a tariff was proclaimed, and a
Poll-tax levied on all native adults at the rate of £1 per man,
and 4s per woman. Each of the twelve Rokos was Governor
and Chief Magistrate of his district, assisted by a resident white
Secretary.
However, it was one thing to frame a Constitution, but to
make it work smoothly was another affair. Had the amateur
Ministry, consisting partly of newcomers, shown itself more
anxious for the welfare of the country than its own interests,
this mongrel kind of Government might have satisfied both black
and white, and there would have been no Crown colony of Fiji
to-day. A fixed authority of some sort was such a relief that
men would not have scanned too closely the working of it : for
eighteen months a government might be said to exist, not without
however, constant bickerings between the Assembly and the
Ministry. At last the crisis came—greedy of power and reckless
of expenditure, the Ministry finding a large adverse majority in
the House, refused to resign, dissolved it through Cakobau Rex,
and began acting without an Assembly at all. The Opposition
seceded in a body, and, after holding secret meetings, resolved
to expel the Ministry by force if necessary.
Matters became serious. Law and order were at an end:
the treasury was not only empty, but a large debt, amounting to
£BO,OOO, had been contracted : and Maafu, who had but sullenly
acquiesced in the prominence of his rival, was thinking the time
not unfavourable for taking his revenge. At this juncture, two
Commissioners, Commodore Goodenough and Consul Layard,
arrived on the scene, having been sent from England to report
on the desirability of annexation.
The prospect of British rule at once allayed all hostility;
and, with the exception of a few malcontents, all the influential
Europeans agreed to urge Cakobau and Maafu to cede their
country to England. There was another consideration, other
than the prospect of salaries and undiminished authority over
their subjects, which had its undoubted influence in causing them
to yield to their white advisers. In Cakobau’s consideration
there was, in the event of his refusal to cede, the improbability
of Maafu remaining longer quiescent, backed as he would now be
by those of the whites whom his Government had disgusted. To
Maafu it was now clear that his whilom supporters were in favour
of cession ; and should he be found the sole obstruction to a
peaceable annexation, he might find his ancient enemy in alliance
with the British power against him.


Cakobau’s hesitation arose in reality from the objection of
his people ; for he had many reasons on his part for accepting
the offers made. He -was an old and broken man, who no longer
thirsted for war; his supreme position was to be recognised, and
without any more fighting on his part; a pension of £l5OO was
not without its charms, and the promised possession of a thousand
pound yacht dangled before his eyes. Last, but not least, annex-
ation would mean a final suppression of the rival whom he hated
and feared. Thus, partly by their own fears of one another, and
partly by coaxing, the consent of both chiefs was gained; and
the Commissioners were enabled to announce to the Home
Government the successful issue of their mission. Sir Hercules
Robinson, then Governor of New South Wales, arrived, and
formally took over the islands on the 30th September, 1874; and
after appointing a provisional Government on much the same
lines as the defunct one, with Mr. Thurston as Colonial Secretary
returned to his own Colony.
With the arrival of the first Governor of the Crown Colony
of Fiji, began a new order of things, whether to the future
advantage of the country and its inhabitants remains to be seen.
The first Governor, Sir Arthur Gordon, arrived in June
following (1875), and further changes in the administration were
made. Instead of elected representatives, a council, consisting
half of official members and half of nominees of the Crown,
sat as an advising body to the Governor, who presided.
Unfortunately, as it has turned out for Fiji, their functions
ended with their advice. The officials naturally voted with
the autocrat who could make or unmake them, and they were
never left in doubt as to their Chief’s views. If the unofficial
members made an effort and came long distances to be present on
any important occasion, their vote en bloc was met by the solid
vote of the officials assisted by the casting vote of the President.
The Poll Tax was abolished, and in its stead was passed, by the
aid of the so-called council, the pet scheme of Sir Arthur
Gordon’s, which, under the name of Native Taxation Ordinance,
was to be the means of conserving and elevating the Fijian race.
To this ill-advised scheme, vexatious to natives and planters
alike, much of the disaster and ruin, which has fallen on Fiji, is
due. It injured the planter by depriving him of the cheap labour
at his door ; for a labourer who is liable at any time to be called
away to collect produce for Government is hardly worth the
trouble of engaging. Upon the native this ordinance pressed
more hardly by compelling him to fritter away his time in collect-
ing with difficulty the amount of his quota.
The results of this method of levying a tax was illustrated
in 1882, when the nett proceeds of the labour of 110,000 people
amounted to £12,0C0, being less than 2s. 6d. per head. This was


a reform indeed which threatens to presently reform the Fijian
off the face of the earth, to judge by the present rate of decrease.
In the old days the Poll Tax of £1 per man and 4s. per
woman was easily obtained from the planters by a month’s work
or sale of such produce as each district was suited for. It was
cheerfully paid and easily collected under the old system by the
aid of the White Secretary of each district, who was appointed
to act under the Chief,
Sir Arthur Gordon, having thus struck the first blow at the
employment of Fijian labourers by white men, then proceeded
with similar intentions to check the supply of Polynesian labour,
by lowering to an unnecessary extent the per tonnage number of
recruits lawful to be carried by any one ship, by compelling
owners to incur a needlessly large expenditure in the fitting up
of vessels engaged in recruiting, by the appointment to every
ship (at its charges) of Government agents of inferior class who,
infected by the tone unfortunately adopted by Sir Arthur
Gordon, were apt to regard the interests of the Government as
hostile to those of the owners.
On their own islands these Polynesians are satisfied with a
grass hut and a yam or banana ; once they are indentured to the
planter, the latter is compelled to lodge them in expensive
houses, built on Government design, and to find them in meat
and other extras, which many of the white residents in Fiji had
dispensed with for years; add departmental charges, vexatious
delays in the signing of the indenture papers, and we have some
of the chief means whereby the cost of the introduction of
labourers was raised to the planter.
Whereas in 1879 the cost per three years indenture of
Polynesian labor amounted to £45, in 1885 it had risen to double
that amount, partly owing to the still stricter regulations issued,
and partly to the refusal of Captains and owners to charter,
except at an extremely high rate. This burden on the planters
did not cease on the expiration of the indentures, the cost of
returning the islanders to their homes at the close of their
engagement, having slowly risen from £3 to £lO per head
It has been whispered that this crusade against Polynesian
labour is in some measure due to the instigation of a well-
known Bishop, as well as to the whim of the Governor, who
wished to introduce Coolie labor. The first shipment of six
hundred Coolies arrived here in 1879, but failed to find employ-
ment among the planters. A year elapsed before the last man
was out of the Government hands, during which time they had
been allowed to thoroughly deteriorate by working for Govern-
ment under the demoralizing superintendence of incapable and
ignorant overseers ; it was to facilitate the working off' of these
men on to the planter’s hands, and to secure work for other


shipments, that the screw was given another turn, and the
Polynesian and Fijian regulations were made more stringent than
ever : thus driving the planter to employ the Coolie or none.
It was popularly supposed that it was Sir Arthur Gordon’s
determination to restrict the employment of Fijian labor as much
as possible, although his reasons for such a course he has never
given us beyond declaring on several occasions that Fiji was “not
a white man’s country.” We can only therefore come to the
conclusion that it was not his intention to further the planting
interests, or to open up Fiji to the outside world, bub rather to
keep the Colony as a sort of private “ Utopia ” for the native,
where the white man should cease from troubling, and the black
man should be at rest. In other words, his actions went far to
prove that he looked upon Fiji as a vilum corpus on which to try
his ’prentice hand, and shew the world how a black race, under
white rule, could still continue to exist, and be raised morally
and physically without that deterioration which seems to have
fallen upon all other dark races similarly situated. Finally, if,
in his anxiety to pose before Exeter Hall and his home supporters
as the defender of black against white, he has been unfairly
credited with keeping an eye on his own interests at the expense
of the country which in an unlucky moment he was sent to rule,
it is much to be regretted that he has done so little during his
term of service to dispel the illusion.
NATIVE CHIEFS.
Prior to the first Fiji Government in 1871, although Oakobarv
and Maafu divided between them the allegiance of Fiji: there
existed in the various districts many petty hereditary Chiefs who
exercised as great a power in their own districts as the former
(levying war upon their neighbours without asking leave of any
one) and they were seldom called upon to recognise any authority
above them.
These petty chiefdoms were swept away under the first Fiji
Government, the whole of Fiji was divided into nine Provinces
under Cakobau at the head. The title of each of these nine pro-
vincial heads was Roko Tui, with the name of his province
added. Each province was subdivided into districts, at the head
of which was a Buli, and at the head of each village a Turaga-
ni-Koro. In addition to this, to every province was appointed a
European as well as a native Magistrate, who, while sitting to-
gether in mixed cases, had each his own court for cases in which
his countrymen alone were concerned. Each Turaga-ni-Koro
furnished a monthly report of his village to his Buli, who in his
turn forwarded them to the Roko, by whom they were despatched
to the Government.


Sir Arthur Gordon, while taking credit to himself for con-
verting chaos into order, merely continued this admirable system
which he found already established. One of the equivocal re-
forms introduced by him was a meeting of the provincial Chiefs,
who were summoned to meet annually in each province by turn
to report progress and consult with the Governor on the business
of the coming year.
The instruction of the Chiefs in the art of Constitutional
Government, to give Sir Arthur his due, may have been his
intention, but these meetings have never yielded any practical
results as they became from the commencement mere pageants
in which each Roko out-vied his brother Rokos in display and
dissipation.
According to Fiji custom the visited Chief prepared presents
for the visitors—a custom which, while making boundless extrava-
ganceapointof honour—resulted innothing butthe impoverishment
of the district visited. For months before hand food of all sorts
was forbidden to the common people, who had to contribute their
all or nearly their all to the common stock in order to do honour
to their Chief. All the men, women, and children of the province
were engaged for weeks in preparation, clearing roads, building
houses, collecting turtle, making pots, mats, tappa, and digging
and carrying food from their gardens, to make such a show of
property as should shed a lustre on their Chief and land.
The chiefs assembled on the appointed day. The Governor
appeared and read an address of general congratulation; pointed
out what reforms he wished to have initiated, or rather gave his
commands, and then gracefully retired back to the seat of
Government.
The following three weeks were spent by the Chiefs eating
and drinking their hosts out of house and home, and in a more
or less desultory talk about the above mentioned reforms, which
were agreed to, as a matter of course. The Governor then re-
appeared to make a speech, in which, after thanking them for
the consideration they had shown to his wishes, declared the
meeting closed. As each Chief brought with him from fifty to
one hundred retainers, amongst whom were women selected for
their beauty to soothe the dull hours of Chiefs and followers ;
the departure of such guests left that province which had acted
as host, as bare of all food as if a famine had passed over the land.
NATIVE TAXATION SCHEME.
After the “ Veibose ” or yearly meeting of the Rokos,
there are two other meetings, the one held by the Roko in each
province, at which all his Bulls assemble and arrange (among
other matters) the contribution which each Buli has to provide
as his share of the tax. The Buli, on his part, holds a subsequent


meeting of the Turaga-ni-koros or village headmen by whom the
kind of produce and the share due by each village is determined.
Those villages on the sea coast as a rule provide Copra ; the
inland towns provide Maize, Candle-nuts, or Yams; these, after
collection, are brought and stored in the Buli’s village or in any
convenient spot for loading into the vessels which the Govern-
ment from time to time send round for the purpose.
It often happens, however, that through remissness or
carelessness in despatching these vessels, such a time is allowed
to elapse between the storing and the loading, that the produce
rots in the store before it can be delivered ; in which case, the
unfortunate natives have to make good a loss for which they are
in'no way responsible.
This produce then, collected at great trouble and expense, is
sold by the Government by tender and the amount realised,
placed to the credit of each province. Should any district fall
short of the required amount, a further contribution to make up the
deficiency is demanded, although in many cases, owing to drought
or bad season, the people have not the wherewithal to furnish it.
Cases have been known in which the defaulting village has
been compelled to go, money in hand, and buy from the neigh-
bouring planter or store keeper the amount of produce deficient.
In the rare case of an excess over the quantum, the surplus is
placed to the credit of the province. It has occasionally
happened that the amount to be divided has reached the mag-
nificent sum of 3s. 6d. (three shillings and sixpence) per head,
that is, supposing it had been equally divided among chiefs and
commoners ; but as it is paid over to the Roko, the usual result
in these few cases where there is anything to divide, is, that
most of it sticks to the Roko’s fingers, and the Buli’s are lucky
if they get £1 or £2 apiece ; as for the common herd, the man
who can boast of having received anything in the shape of a
surplus remains to be discovered.
THE “ LALA.”
There is one native institution which, from its important
effect upon the whites and natives, is worthy of a few remarks.
Although the rule is that property shall be held in common, the
chiefs naturally claim the greater share of the concession, of
which this “ Lala ” in process of time is the outcome.
“ Lala ” is the right of all chiefs in a greater or less degree
to confiscate any property belonging to their commoners. In
olden times, and up to the time of annexation, this chiefly
right was freely acquiesced in by the people within certain
limits. Should a chief exceed the limit marked by custom and
common usage, the remedy was a simple one—the rude justice of
the club, and the election of a successor.


It was Sir Arthur Gordon’s boast that he interfered as little
as possible with native customs, but here we have a case in
point in which he interfered either too little or too much.
Had he left the “ Lala ” with its natural check of abuse
untouched, the balance of might and right would have fairly
adjusted itself; but unfortunately he touched the matter with
unwise timidity.
He saw and fully recognised the allegiance of the men to
their chiefs, and not unnaturally, though perhaps without due
consideration of its ultimate effect, determined on ruling the
people through those chiefs. Had Sir Arthur Gordon been a
man, cast in a stronger mould and less wedded to his own con-
ceits, he would perhaps have better consulted his reputation as
an administrator by boldly laying the train by which both Lala
and Club law together would before long have become things of
the past. But he was not of the stuff of which successful
governors are made; he shrank from dealing out justice to the
oppressor and the oppressed alike, and thereby offending both
parties—the chiefs and the commoners.
He satisfied his interests and his conscience alike, by
resorting to that refuge of those, destitute of spirit and ability—
a middle course—and sided with that,'which he considered the
more powerful party. He was content to bar by law the natural
outlet of the people’s sense of justice, while, by leaving the
chiefly right of Lala in full vigour, the door was kept open to
every kind of abuse.
The chiefs’ exactions thus came to be regarded by their men
as supported by British law, and if the people thus doubly
enslaved is gradually, as enlightenment spreads amongst them,
learning to transfer the blame for their helpless condition from
their chiefs to their white rulers, the latter have their own short
sighted policy alone to thank for it.
As long as a man’s labour or its proceeds, cannot be called
his own to keep or to use as he thinks fit, it is hopeless to expect
improvement in any human race : it will be in vain to send
Fijians to school, to learn trades, while the results of their labour
are filched from them at the nod of a chief under his all-embracing
right of “ Lala.” The leading motive of mankind to work is,
that he may enjoy the fruits thereof, let that powerful and only
inducement be withdrawn, and we are all, black and white alike,
savages once more.
Yet this piece of scandalous injustice is one of the vaunted
reforms which, —as their author told his hearers at home—were
to preserve the natives uncorrupted by the pernicious white man,
and cause the name of their benefactor to be held up to future
generations as the saviour of the Fijian race. These and the like
self-applied adulations would hardly deserve notice from those


acquainted with Fiji, were it not for unmistakeable evidences of
a growing detestation among the native population, of the policy
which has deprived a people of its freedom without one counter-
balancing advantage.
POPULATION.
At the time of annexation the population of Fiji was roughly
estimated at 150,000.
At the latter end of 1874, in an unfortunate moment, the
king Cakobau, at the invitation of Sir Hercules Robinson, paid a
visit to Sydney, and on his return brought with him the measles,
—a word now of terrible import to the Fijian, as by it 40,000
were swept away, and the population reduced to 110,000, at
which point it still stands.
The chief cause of the stationary population is to be found
in the growing dislike of the Fiji maiden to marriage and its
attendant pains and penalties.
Polygamy was quite common under their old laws; but
when the missionaries put an end to its open practice, the natural
instincts of polygamy remained and were gratified, but with this
difference: that, whereas before women bore children to their
lovers and were not ashamed, they now, through abortion, bear
none ; for to have a child out of wedlock has ever been considered
the deadliest of crimes in the eyes of the missionary, and is
punished accordingly by fines and imprisonment.
Another reason is the gradual change in the habits of the
people,—the greater amount of work induced by the taxation
scheme and the needs of the planters; the use of cloth and
blankets, which render them less hardy, and more liable to chest
and stomach complaints, the two fatal diseases of savage life.
Their life also has slowly changed to a more exciting one—the
natural effect of contact with Europeans. Thus the births are
fewer and the number of deaths greater, than under their old lazy
savage life.
VILLAGES AND NATIVE PLANTATIONS.
The largest native town in Fiji is that of Bau, which contains
1,000 inhabitants : but the generality of so-called native towns
contain nothing like this number. The ordinary village consists
of from twenty to thirty houses, with seldom more than one
hundred inhabitants, and often less. The inland settlements are
few and far between : the majority of the towns are dotted along
the coast at varying intervals, usually among a little grove of
cocoa-nuts and bananas. A few gardens there may be near the
village, but the food plantations of yams, sweet potatoes, and
corn are, as a rule, four or five miles away; partly on account of
the better soil, and partly lest their too great proximity to the
village should tempt the chief to levy on them.


These villages are, for the most part, surrounded by filth and
garbage of all sorts, among which a few mangy pigs and long-legged
hens, interspersed with a few children, are always rummaging.
Stagnant water often on all sides : immediately beyond the
houses, which are scattered around without order and at no
regular intervals, lies the bush, swarming with mosquitoes and flies.
The interior of the houses, unless those of a chief, is usually
squalid and full of smoke ; the earthen floor covered with dry
grass, over which are spread a few mats. In these houses, any
day, may be seen lusty men lolling about, passing a cigarette
from hand to hand ; while the women make mats of rushes, or
cook the primitive food. Once a year, on the occasion of the
expected visit of the magistrate, perhaps the order comes from
the Buli to clear the roads of grass and weed the spaces round
the houses; that done, no further cleaning up is to be looked for
until the next order arrives. So amid this filth and squalor they
spend their time, when not engaged in collecting produce for
government taxes, planting their gardens, or working for their
chief.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SOIL.
By far the greater number of villages are situated on the
sea shore, for the sake of the fishing and the cocoa-nuts, which
latter do not thrive any distance inland. Beyond the fringe of
huts in which these maritime villages are placed, there is, as a
rule, but little flat land, the hilly country commencing almost
immediately. The soil of this strip is usually good black loam,
but on ascending the hills, which except in certain districts are
almost invariably thickly clothed with timber, it changes to a
reddish clay, in which are to be found trees, some of considerable
size, yielding excellent timber for house and boat building. Here
and there over the interior, scattered, and connected by rough
tracks, are the inland villages, either perched on the top of a hill
or nestling in some fertile little valley. Where there are rivers
of any size, their banks are usually the sites chosen.
The soil of Fiji, though excellent in places, is by no means
universally good. A large portion of Yiti-Levu consists of open
grassy downs, where, however, the grass is tough and wiry, and
makes but poor feed for cattle. Where the bush is thick there
is absolutely no pasture, although when felled and cultivated it
produces excellent sorts of grass ; but the expense of felling and
clearing for purposes of raising cattle has hitherto prevented any
attempt in this direction.
The few colonists who possess cattle have been content with
the open grass lands above mentioned. Sheep do not thrive well,
partly owing to the unsuitable grasses, but chieflv to the excessive
dampness producing rot.


RELIGION AND MISSIONARIES.
Of the 110,000 natives of Fiji, 100,000 are nominally
Wesleyans and the remainder Roman Catholics.
To Messrs. Calvert and Williams is due, for the most part,
the credit of introducing the change from savagery to Christianity,
though it be a change but in name. Without wishing to
depreciate the efforts of these earnest men, it would be a grievous
error to suppose that Fijians, more than any other savages, were
led to embrace the creed of the Wesleyans from a firm conviction
of its superiority to their own. No man acquainted with
primitive races could conscientiously believe any savage capable
of deliberately comparing the relative merits of the religion in
which he was brought up and a new one.
It is perfectly evident to those who can read between the
lines in “Fiji and the Fijians,” by Calvert and Williams, that
their great success in changing the outward and visible religion
of the country was due to many causes other than those popularly
supposed. As we trace the course of the pioneer missionaries,
we constantly see that their endeavours were directed in the first
place to the conversion of chiefs ; that accomplished, the common
people followed suit as a matter of course.
The natives easily perceived (or at any rate the more
cunning among them) the superiority in many points of the white
man, whose wealth appeared boundless, especially in those
articles coveted by all savages ; and the missionaries in those
their first days, till they came to know better the utter greed and
unscrupulousness of their black friends, were by no means
niggardly of them. The white strangers possessed guns, boats,
and built houses superior to anything seen before in the islands.
What wonder then, that in his own mind the savage connected
the wealth he coveted with the religion of its possessor. To his
shallow reasoning cause and effect seemed clear: if a mere
change of Gods could work such satisfactory results, why should
he refuse such advantages to be gained at so cheap a price. The
missionaries, on their part, were quick to take advantage of any
circumstance that would further the object they had in view.
They patched up quarrels between the chiefs ; they advised
in difficult negotiations ; they pleaded the cause of the minor
chiefs against the greater ; above all, they desired no advantage
for themselves beyond the one thing; “ Accept our religion ” was
their constant cry ; thus they came to be looked upon as a power
in council whom the chiefs were unwilling to lose; and as the
only price they asked for their good services and gifts was an
outward conformation to certain formulas, conversion soon became
a mere matter of good policy with such chiefs as, being in
difficulties, were glad to retain at so moderate a price services of
so much value. Of course the priests of the old religion were


the bitterest opponents of the intruders on their domain, and
where those wielded supreme power the propagation of the new
religion was slow, difficult and dangerous ; but where, as was the
case in many parts of the country, the chiefs stood in no fear of
their priests, the work of converting was comparatively easy.
A notorious instance of this occurred when Tanoa, the
father of Cakobau, having outraged the whites then living on
Ovalau, by driving them all off the island, and having alienated
many of his followers by his arbitrary acts, stood in deadly peril
of losing both his chiefdom and his life through the alliance
against him of the white exiles and his former adherents. The
whites and their Fijian allies were thoroughly determined to
make an end at once and for ever of so cruel an enemy. So
powerful was the combination against him that there could be no
doubt of the result.
Tanoa was aware of the imminent peril in which he stood.
The Revd. Mr. Calvert saw his opportunity and seized it: he
volunteered to mediate between this once powerful chief and his
justly incensed enemies ; —he succeeded. The whites returned to
Ovalau, and the Fijian insurgents, alarmed at the withdrawal of
their white allies, (who with their fii?e-arms were a host in them-
selves), came to terms with their former chief.
The chief was still trembling at his late danger, he was fully
aware of the good services he had received from the Missionary,
—the long-expected time had come in which to strike the great
blow !—“ Our God has saved you,” he told Tanoa, “ become a
Christian,” The chief hesitated, he knew well the influence of
his priests, but his name as a warrior and a skilful general stands
first in the annals of Fiji, and he knew how to be supreme in his
own kingdom. Another point was in Mr. Calvert’s favor. Had
he bargained beforehand for this change of religion in return for
his good services, he would have met with an indignant refusal,
or, until the danger was passed, a conciliatory falsehood. But
Mr. Calvert knew the man with whom he had to deal; Tanoa’s
honor as a chief was now at stake. A service, a great service,
had been freely rendered; by all chiefly etiquette it must be as
freely returned. After due hesitation, and doubtless well weigh-
ing the prospective advantages, Tanoa gave the word, and the
large and important town of Bau, where lived Tanoa and his
petty chiefs, outwardly threw off the old religion and accepted
the new. The day of this great victory over barbarianism, Mr.
Calvert himself j ustly marks with a white stone. It was his crown-
ing triumph: the march of the new gospel was now with the
strongest battalions; as Tanoa grew in power, the missionaries
under his protection and by his influence easily spread their
creed. From that date the conversion of the whole of Fiji was
but a question of time.


The organization of the Wesleyan Mission is good ; the
printing press and a school for training teacheis have long been
established—the former for translating the Bible into Fijian, and
the latter to provide for every village of importance, teachers,
who hold services every Sunday in Fijian houses set apart for
the purpose. Lessons in reading and writing are given, and
morning and evening prayers read daily. These are usually well
attended. Absentees without sufficient cause from these Sunday
services are punished ; but punishments are not common, as the
services (at which the men and women appear in their best
clothes) and singing of hymns, are usually welcomed as a cheerful
break in the monotony of their lives.
As with their sisters of a different colour, the desire to see
and to be seen is not wholly absent among the Fijian ladies.
These causes easily account for the good attendance to which the
Missionaries justly point with pride. An amelioration of
manners, tidiness of dress, and a greater or less acquaintance
with tlxeir Bibles are no light improvements on their former
savage life ; but if it be enquired —“ how far has 'the spirit of
Christianity and its virtues succeeded in raising the moral tone
of these savages 1” the question is onfe which cannot be answered
in so satisfactory a manner.
It must be reluctantly confessed that the improvement is,
when all is said, but skin deep.
Fijians go to church regularly, they contribute their quarterly
shilling to the mission fund cheerfully, and learn to read eagerly,
but their moral nature remains the same. The average Fijian
breaks the Decalogue with as easy a conscience as in his primit-
ive state, but he has learnt to conceal from his white pastors at
least, the evidence of the breach. It is a singular commentary
upon the complacent reports of the mission, that a large per
centage of its native teachers are yearly dismissed for offences in
connection with women.
That the mission has done good work in opening up the
country to white influence and rendering smoother the way of
the planters who came after them, there is no desire to deny
they have deservedly worked their way to power and influence
among the natives, often in former times at the peril of their
lives.
Without their help the establishment of any form of
European Government would have been tardy and difficult.
They prepared the way for the first attempt at Constitutional
Government; they gave their loyal assistance to the first
Governor, who made use of their services with a very in-
adequate return. But when the successors of Calvert and
Williams contend that they have changed the nature of their
savage converts, and implanted in them a love of virtue and


Christian graces, they lay claim to too much. Scratch a Fijian,
and you find him very much the savage he was, before the intro-
duction of Christianity,
The Catholics planted their standard in the group very soon
after the advent of the Wesleyans, to whom this rival religion
was by no means welcome. In the early days disputes and re-
criminations were not unfrequent, much to the scandal of the
keener intellects among the natives, who scarcely were sufficiently
versed in Theology to appreciate the highly important dis-
tinctions between the rival creeds, Even to this day the
chief differences visible to the eyes of a Fijian, are the worship
of a woman instead of a man, and the wearing of a cross round
the necks of the Catholics.
Gradually the more powerful and better equipped mission
outstripped the other, and at the present time and for some years
past, all rivalry has ceased, and each attends its flock without
interference from the other.
It has often been asked why the most obvious means of
educating the native in the Pacific, viz., the teaching of English
—has been so pointedly neglected by the missionaries 1
To this question it is difficult to give a reply satisfactory to lay-
men. The mere fact of the existence of innumerable languages and
dialects, varying on every island, would, one would have thought
have been a sufficient reason for giving up all idea from the com-
mencement of attempting to perpetuate them ; and, to suppose
that these races can ever defy the natural laws of extinction be-
fore the advance of the white man, is to fly in the face of facts,
and to deny the teachings of experience.
The persistent refusal to teach these savages a superior
language (without the knowledge of which they must remain
merely nominal Christians) can only serve to retard and make more
difficult the advance of the white man, who is destined eventually
to take their place and inherit their lands : moreover, it would
seem to an unprejudiced observer that the time wasted in acquir-
ing and perpetuating jargons, destined ere long to perish, would
have been better spent in spreading our own language.
The Missionaries have never, so far as is known, given
their reasons for setting their faces against the acquirement of
our language by native races, but those who know the Pacific
have not far to go to discover the leading motive for this
apparent waste of energy. At present all those who have
dealings in the Islands, have either to acquire the languages
which, to a Captain who trades among many groups, would be
obviously impracticable, or, he has to resort to the use of poorly
skilled interpreters.
Between the traders and the Missionaries there has never
been any love lost, for it is not to be gainsaid that the behaviour


of the ordinary “mean white” does not tend to raise the white man
in the eyes of the native ; it has always been a difficult matter
for the white teacher to separate himself in the minds of his
flock from these other whites who presumably belong to his own
Church.
As long as the Missionary had the island to himself, it was
easy to pose before the simple native as a very superior person
indeed, but the advent of the detested traders, who brought gifts
of muskets, beads, gin, and other material comforts, caused his
superiority to be no longer so obvious, and made the task of
restraining the little flock more hard, in spite of his having the
better of them in understanding the peoples’ language.
But this knowledge was a considerable point in his favour ;
to forego this advantage and place the traders on an equal footing
by facilitating communication between them and his new con-
verts would be too much to expect even of Christian charity.
Besides, to open up to these unreasoning children of the Pacific
the varied views contained in English books, might possibly
prove such a letting in of waters as might sweep away both
teacher and pupils.
In this course that they have pursued in these islands, the
Missionaries resemble, more than they suspect, the Churches of
all ages, in that they are fully convinced that to keep their
scholars pious and submissive, there is nothing like a little
judicious ignorance.
To reduce the matter to an absurdity, we have the painful
instance of a Missionary, residing on a small island off the coast
of New Caledonia, the inhabitants of which number five hun-
dred souls, acquiring laboriously and with months of toil, a
language peculiar to themselves, and, Heaven help him! printing it.
Should that Minister live his appointed time, it is not
improbable that he may find himself the survivor of his flock.
NATIVE SCHOOLS.
In 1880, towards the close of Sir Arthur Gordon’s term as
Governor, it occurred to him, though rather late in the day, that
it was time some practical steps were taken to start the native on
his road to moral elevation; for hitherto, strange to say, the
Government had been too intent on tax-collecting and providing
posts for its friends to spare any time for those reforms, the
introduction of which was the avowed object of the Governor’s
acceptation of office. A sum of money was placed on the estimates
to provide for establishing an agricultural training school in which
some of the primitive handicrafts might be taught, viz.; boat and
house building, carpentering, and smithwork, besides some elemen-
tary book work.


The first difficulty was the choice of site. A commission was
appointed, who, without much deliberation, selected a piece of
land which was probably the worst they could have chosen.
It was situated on the banks of a sluggish river : not only
was the soil barren and of the poorest description, but it was low,
damp, and unhealthy. To account for this apparent oversight
on the part of the Commission, it is necessary to mention that,
although by the Deed of Cession all unoccupied land was vested
in the Crown, this undoubted right has never been acted upon,
owing to Sir Arthur’s extraordinary misinterpretation of the
instructions he received from Lord Carnarvon, who was at the
head of the Colonial Office at the time of his appointment. Thus
self-debarred from selecting such a site as should be worthy of
the importance of the undertaking, it became necessary for the
Governor to discover a piece of land which, by some process of
ingenious juggling, might be considered to belong fairly to the
Crown. The land decided upon was found to satisfy this condition,
for the inexplicable reason that it formed a portion of a land
claim which had been disallowed. Among other advantages it
overlapped the boundaries of two provinces, which prevented
jealousy on the parr of the neighbouring Rokos who had to
provide the buildings; and last, but not least it was not easily
accessible, and sufficiently removed from any white settlement.
The chiefs of Yanua Levu, in the centre of which was the
site, were then called upon to provide men and material to build
native houses for the future students. For three months,
upwards of one thousand men were engaged at this work, A
Superintendent was then appointed ; and nearly one hundred
students, mostly sons of chiefs, were collected from all parts of
the group and settled down to their work. Their indoor studies
were conducted by native teachers under the supervision of the
head ; and a boat-builder was engaged to teach his trade. The
land around was cleared and planted for the supply of food, and
the Chiefs of the island undertook to supply the necessary food
for the support of the boys until the first crop was ripe. The
Superintendent proved an able man ; good order was preserved,
and fair progress was made in the indoor work ; but their success
with the boats, of which a few were built, was but indifferent.
These latter it was the intention of the Government to dispose of
to Chiefs who might desire to purchase; and although a few
have been sold in this way, it has been found by no means easy
to persuade Fijians to have any confidence in such novel articles
of native manufacture.
But worse was yet to come. The Yam plantations, which
were principally relied upon for food supplies, turned out a
failure ; even Bananas, stunted in the barren soil, produced but
a poor crop.


The result, to the school, of this misfortune, was a state of
chronic starvation, which necessitated calling upon the chiefs
again for food to make up the deficiency. But by this time, the
novelty and excitement of the whole affair had worn off, and it
was not without grumbling and outspoken discontent that a
meagre and irregular supply of food was provided, A few
choice milch cows were imported at considerable expense and
placed on the land, with the intention that the pupils should
learn the handling of cattle and become acquainted with the
uses of milk, an article held hitherto in abhorrence by Fijians.
The chief Medical Officer who was on the Native School
Commission had been struck by the excessive infant mortality
owing to want of proper nourishment, and to his suggestion,
was due this attempt to make milk an article of diet among the
natives.
But the site proved too unhealthy even for the cattle,
causing a loss of more than half. Thus the Agricultural College
has continued from the commencement on the verge of a famine
and the consideration of its removal to a more favorable spot
has now become urgent. With regard to the benefits likely
to accrue to the natives generally through this attempt to instruct
them in something of the useful arts, there is good cause to doubt
whether the Fijian carpenter or boat-builder, on his return to
his village, will ever seriously pursue the trade that has been
taught him at such expense to the Colony.
Those who know the Fijian best, assert, and not without
reason, that freed from the restraints of the school, he will
become a mere unpaid employee of his chief. To build even the
smallest boat requires an amount of organization, forethought
and industry which his school career can never teach him.
We shall have to look beyond the rising generation for
those business virtues, which, instinctive with us, are as foreign
to all savages as the Christian graces ; and when we look around
on this race fading slowly but inevitably before our eyes, as the
annual excess of deaths over births testifies, it is to be feared
that the acquisition of the very virtues that can alone sustain a
nation in the struggle for existence will be coterminous with the
extinction of the race.
LEYUKA.
The town of Levuka is situated on a narrow strip of beach,
from which the back-bone of Ovalau rises precipitately to a
height of 2,500 feet, and falls in a similar manner on the other
side.
There is but one main street, about a mile in length, which
runs along the beach from the old Government House at Nasova
(now used as a police court) to the native village at the other.


Immediately on leaving the beach the ground ascends rapidly,
with here and there an ordinary weather-board villa of the
period, perched on the lower spurs of the mountains wherever
space is available.
The stores and hotels face the water, and are mostly well
built wood and iron structures.
The public school may be considered the finest building in
the town, being a substantial two-storied building of wood with a
handsome bell tower, broad verandah, and iron roof.
The largest building, the Mechanics’ School of Arts,
occupies a fine site on a portion of the shore reclaimed from the
sea, and, till the removal to Suva, it was used as the Supreme
Court House. It has a good ball-room and small stage, where
occasional performances by amateurs are given.
The Union of Australia and the New Zealand Banks have
branches in the town and also in Suva.
There are two papers, The Fiji Times and the Polynesian
Gazette.
Reasons fok Removal of Seat of Capital to Suva.
The announcement of the removal of the seat of Govern-
ment to Suva came upon the inhabitants of Levuka with
somewhat of a shock, as the reasons publicly given for such a
change seemed scarcely adequate. It was declared :
I. That the available ground in and about Levuka, owing
to its hilly character, was unsuitable for the extension of the town.
11. That the harbour was small, and approached only by
one narrow passage through the reef.
111. That being situated on a small island, it was not
suitable for a capital.
IV. That Suva, on the other hand, had not only a very
much larger harbour, but had much greater convenience of
entrance and better shelter, and that it was situated on the
largest island, which, for obvious reasons, was entitled to the
distinction, and that the change must have come eventually.
That these reasons were good and valid cannot be denied;
but in popular opinion the step appeared premature, and the
expense hardly suited to the state of the finances. It is
generally believed that the immediate cause of the removal of
the capital was the refusal of the Wesleyan Mission, who owned
a considerable part of Levuka, to part with their land at anything
less than what they considered a fair price, added to the fact that
a large Melbourne firm, who owned nearly the whole of the
present site of Suva, was prepared to hand over a considerable
slice of it on the condition of Suva being made the capital.
The soil of Suva is of the poorest description for miles
around, consisting chiefly of soapstone, and with no permanent
water supply.


Levuka on the other hand, has always possessed two
unfailing streams, from which with a little cost, the town could
always be supplied.
Until now the inhabitants of Suva have had to depend upon
their tanks, but there is on foot a scheme for bringing water from
a distance of six miles.
RECRUITING POLYNESIANS.
Before annexation, the usual method of recruiting Polynesian
labourers was as follows :
A captain, having laid in a stock of trade, proceeded to any
islands of the Pacific where he thought it most likely that he
would procure labour.
There was no fixed limit to the number he carried : he sailed
about from group to group, and returned to Fiji as a rule with as
many on board as he could comfortably carry.
On arrival at Levuka, they were disposed of to planters or
their agents at prices ranging from £5 to £lB, the latter being
the extreme limit, according as the demand was great or small,
The term of indenture was, as it is now, three years, at the
termination of which period a further sum of £3 per head was
paid to return them to their homes. This is the method now in
force in New Caledonia.
Under the new Polynesian Labor Ordinance, before embarking
in this traffic, the captain, owner, or agent is required to enter
into a bond for £SOO for the due observance of the regulations.
The vessel is also required to be fitted up under Government
supervision, with bunks, mosquito nets, and bedding (blankets).
The accommodation is limited to one per ton, exclusive of the
crew. As this fitting up of the ship costs a considerable sum,
and utterly unfits her for any other trade, necessitating the
gutting or removing of the whole of the interior fittings, the
price to be charged to the cost of labour is, as may be imagined,
much enhanced. Every ship «arries a Government Agent nomi-
nated by Government but paid by the ship, at a salary of £l2 per
month, whose duty it is to pass every intending emigrant and to
see that the Government regulations are not infringed.
Had these agents been men of a superior class, much friction
between them and the captains and owners might have been
avoided ; but as this poorly-paid post of Government Agent was
notoriously the last resource of a man out of employment, the
men who accepted it were not of the class likely to make matters
work smoothly.
Tho task was an unpleasant and invidious one ; unpleasant,
because the agent was forced to live for three months, and some-
times six, in a vessel of small tonnage, subject to all the discomforts
of stormy weather or prolonged calms, his only companions the


captain and crew, by whom he was regarded as their natural foe.
Invidious, becauce he was required perpetually to maintain a
balance between the planter on the one hand, whose existence
depended on the supply of labour, and the Government on the
other, whose object it was to keep down that very traffic.
It would naturally have been expected that the first care of
the Government would have been to select men of tact and ability,
and to pay them accordingly.
Thus equipped, the vessel starts for the islands; but the
captain is not allowed to call at any islands he may choose, as in
his license special places at which he is allowed to recruit labour
are mentioned. The rule by which these islands are selected has
always remained a mystery: presumably it is on account of the
dangerous character of the natives inhabiting the excluded ones.
On calling at one of the islands mentioned in his license, the ship
having castanchorasnearaspossible, twoboatsare sent away, the one
to stand in as close as may be, and the other for covering purposes.
Both boats are armed, as has been and probably will always
be necessary.
The Interpreter which each ship carries, in the leading boat,
which also carries the Government A proceeds to make over-
tures to any natives who may by that time be assembled on the
shore. Trade of different kinds is displayed, and all friendly
signs shown; should, as often happens, all attempts at negotiation
prove futile, either through hostility shewn or disinclination to
engage, the vessel stands away for another village further on, but
should the natives prove amicable, the party go ashore to inter-
view the Chief, in whose house and by whose consent the men are
recruited.
The terms offered as stipulated by Government are £3 a
year, food, accommodation, clothing, and tobacco; the Government
Agent through the Interpreter, being satisfied that the intending
emigrants fully understand the terms of the bargain; the names
of the men, perhaps ten to twenty in number, are entered in a
printed form supplied by the Government to the Agent. After
leaving behind a present for the chief, the boats return, and the ship
hauls off to another village where the same process is gone through.
Under favourable circumstances, should all have gone well,
that is to say if the Captain, Government Agent, and Interpreter
have known their business and worked well together, in six
weeks time, after calling at twenty or thirty places in two or
three islands, the full complement may, perhaps, be secured and the
vessel beats back against the prevailing winds.
The passage to port usually occupies a month, on the other
hand it happens not unfrequently that a ship is away six months
on a single trip, and then only succeeds in recruiting half or even,
a quarter of her complement.


It must be borne in mind that the Government Agent has
entire authority over the vessel as regards recruiting ; and as the
number of dialects in the islands is very considerable, varying
almost from village to village, the matter of interpreting is a
difficult one, and it is quite within the powers of the Government
Agent to refuse to ratify any engagement on the most trivial
grounds. Owing to this difficulty of the languages, communica-
tion has often to be carried on partly by a few words of common
tongue, and partly by signs. It is an easy matter therefore for
a Government Agent to cause a trip to be unsuccessful : and it
has generally been believed that the chief causes of an unsuccess-
ful trip have been due, either to the overstraining on the part of
the Government Agent, or to the difficulty of procuring a com-
petent Interpreter. ♦
On the arrival of the vessel in Fiji, the Government Agent
hands in his report, the diary of the voyage being part of his
duties. The men are landed at the depot, and again questioned
by the Agent-General of Immigration, as to whether they have
thoroughly understood their part of the contract. On this proving
satisfactory, the Agent-General allots the men to the different
planters, in the order in which the various applications appear on
his books. The planter, either in person or by his agent takes
charge of his allotted number, and they are despatched to the
plantation on the first opportunity that offers.
From the date of allotment, to their removal from the
depot—the cost of keeping these men is defrayed by the planter
at a fixed rate per head. Before receiving the men, the planter
is required to produce a certificate signed by an inspector of
labour, or a magistrate to the effect that the accommodation
intended for the labour is of a good and sufficient quality,
according to Government regulations. The arrangement by
which the payment of wages is provided for, is that the planter
or his agent should, every six months pay the wages due for that
period to the Government, by whom, on the expiration of his
indenture, the total sum due is handed over to the immigrant :
the interest accruing therefrom becoming a part of the Immigra-
tion Fund, which goes towards defraying of Depot and Hospital
expenses. Should any immigrant be sick on his arrival, or fall
sick before being handed over to the planter, he is kept in the
Native Hospital at the Government charges : but, immediately
the indentures are signed, any sickness from that date is treated
at the expense of the planter, and should he die—his funeral
expenses likewise.
RECRUITING FIJIANS.
Before annexation and under the first European Government
in Fiji, the Fijian could travel when and where he pleased and


sell his labour to whom ever he chose and at whatever price, on
one sole condition, viz., that he paid his Poll Tax of £l.
By the introduction of the Native Taxation scheme, the
inalienable right of British subjects to dispose of their services
without let or hindrance was denied to the Fijian—and thus the
already sufficiently autocratic power of the chiefs was increased
at the expense of the wretched commoner.
By various ordinances passed by a subservient council at
their President’s nod, the ordinary Fijian became a mere chattel
at the beck and call of his Turaga-ni-koro, his Buli, and his
Roko: and, if they had no reasonable call for his services, there
was always the Government Tax collection to fall back upon, as
a pretext for calling him away from any work he might have
dared to undertake without consulting them. It was well under-
stood among the chiefs, that the Government would regard with
disfavour any chief who too freely allowed his men to engage
themselves to the white man : in spite, however, of these pre-
cautions on the part of the Government, up to within the last five
years, men were sufficiently easy to obtain. The temptation of
earning money for themselves and being free of the arbitrary
demands for gratuitous services of their was too great: to
earn money was their desire, and that desire would be gratified.
At this juncture, observing, with alarm, that its repressive
measures were insufficient to restrain these instinctive yearnings
after freedom, Government did not hesitate to pass a fresh
ordinance by which the whole of Fiji was divided into districts
called Home districts, to go to work beyond which was an offence
for which both employer and employed are liable to heavy
fines and imprisonment. Recruiting then became more
difficult.
On obtaining a license under the new ordinance, a planter
was at liberty to recruit men in certain districts named in his
license, but not in excess of the number mentioned therein. If
he should be so fortunate as to be successful in persuading the
ehief that it was more to his interest to assist than to hinder, the
chief, though not unwilling himself to let go such men as were
anxious to be employed, had still to be persuaded out of his fear
of the private displeasure of the Government.
With this difficulty in securing even mere neutrality on the
part of the chief, and with a magistrate on the spot ever ready
to find any irregularities as a pretext for interfering in his pro-
cedure, the planter requires to use the utmost diplomacy and
caution. On arriving at the town where he proposes to recruit,
license in hand he proceeds to the chief’s house, and after con-
siderable talk is perhaps able to induce the Chief to notify to the
people that a white man in the town wishes to engage men. So
far, so good.


He sits down, it may be for a week, and awaits the result r
should the chief be too fearful of giving offence to the Govern-
ment, or should his palm not be greased sufficiently to secure his
neutrality, after a week’s delay the planter is blandly informed
with the utmost politeness, either that the men are not willing
to engage (but so palpable a subterfuge is seldom employed) or
that the men are engaged in collecting Government taxes.
It has occasionally happened that a chief more outspoken
than the rest has straightforwardly declared that he has been
given to understand that he must let no more men go.
In this case the planter has no resource left but to travel on
and try again in some other district named in his license ; should
he be successful in obtaining the number he wishes, a paper con-
taining the names of the men wishing to go to work, and signed
by the Buli and Turaga-ni-koro, is then prepared, and with it
the planter proceeds to the magistrate’s residence, accompanied
by his men. The magistrate may be out of his district, he may
be at the other end of the province—fifty miles away—but,
dragging his men along with him, the planter has to find him.
& The magistrate found, the planter presents the paper with
the names of the men, to whom the magistrate proceeds to put a
series of cross-questions, tending to convince them of their
extreme folly and rashness in leaving home to work. Should they
pass this ordeal of brow-beating, and still persist in their deter-
mination to engage, the sum of thirty shillings per head is paid
by the planter to the magistrate, being a poll tax of £l, and 10s
engagement money ; besides this the planter engages to pay them
,£6 and sometimes £lO per annum in addition to rations accord-
ing to Government scale : —cloth, soap, tobacco, etc.
This weary negotiation at an end, he returns to his vessel
and proceeds to his plantation, where once a quarter an Inspector
of Labour comes to enquire if there be any complaints; he does
not ask for complaints of the men, his only apparent object is to
receive complaints against the planter from the men. It needs
but little acquaintance with the native character to guess that he
is generally successful in his object; should the inspector, as is
often the case, be also a magistrate, he next proceeds to ajudicate
upon the case he has himself got up. With every motive urging
him to make complaints and none to restrain him ; with every-
thing to gain and nothing to lose, it would be strange indeed if a
Fijian labourer could refrain from so pleasant a sport. He thoroughly
enjoys the game of badgering his employers and has all his rights
at his finger-ends; he may get the white man fined £5 for
omission to provide him last week with two ounces of soap
which a paternal Government allows him in order that he may
present it to his sweet-heart (having no use for it himself) in the
neighbouring village; he may suborn half-a-dozen of his comrades


to swear to some infringement of his rights, and if he fails in
substantiating the charge, he knows that prosecution for perjury
is far too expensive a luxury for his victim that any fear of
detection need cost him a moments uneasiness.
At the termination of their year the men must be paid off
before a magistrate, and returned to their homes within a fort-
night ; should a complaint against one of the men be established
by the planter and the man condemned to a month’s imprison-
ment no deduction from wages for that month spent in gaol is
allowed ; the planter has, therefore, the choice of putting up
with a month’s loss of labor, or making no complaint—is it a
wonder that he prefers the latter ? But the rarity of charges by
planters against laborers is quoted by the Government as a proof
of the satisfactory working of the Native Labor Ordinance.
LAND CLAIMS.
The burning question since annexation for all interested in
the Islands, have been and still is the Land Claims. The Deed
of Cession provided that the Imperial Authorities should take
over all land, except that in the use and occupation of the natives
and that genuinely alienated prior to' the annexation by the
natives to foreigners.
The first Proclamation issued by Sir Hercules Robinson on
taking possession, was the prohibition of all further sales of land
by natives.
Commissioners were appointed to go round the different
districts, examine witnesses, both white and native, and send in
their report to the Governor. As with all savage nations—land,
like any other property, was held in common —and until the
white man came, the idea of disposing of land as a valuable
property never occurred to them. But, by degrees it gradually
became admitted that the chief had power to dispose of land of
his own accord, and this principle—until the question of exped-
iency was imported into the matter by Sir Arthur —was recog-
nised by the first Land Commission, and the earlier land claims
settled without much difficulty. To have come to any other con-
clusion would have vitiated the Deed of Cession by which the chiefs
made over the whole group to England. The Governor, alarmed
at the rapidity with which the Commission was getting through
its work a Commission, which, till then, had given every
satisfaction both to whites and blacks—suddenly discovered that
this principle was wrong, and thus gave the first indication of
the long course of obstruction which has marked his policy during
the whole period of his disastrous rule of the colony.
VV ith the help of his advisers he laid down the new principle,
that the chiefs could not alienate land without the consent of
their people, and on this basis all further land claims were dealt


with. Here the door was opened to endless delay in a matter of
vital importance to the planter. The first step was to get rid of
the Land Commissioners who had shown themselves too impartial
and hardly sufficiently impressed with the force of the gubernat-
orial axiom that all (Fiji white) men are liars, and all natives the
reverse. By one mode or another, by treating them as mere
clerks, by giving decisions in direct contradiction to the weight of
evidence in their reports, the Governor succeeded in disgusting the
Lest men and filled their places with men of more convenient
principles. An Advocate was appointed by the Government ta
dispute the claims on behalf of the natives, who were not slow to
perceive that the Authorities were desirous of curtailing the
number of grants.
It would be a hard thing if, in a village or a district whero
white men had bought land, there were not to be discovered some
natives Avho had more or less well founded cause of complaint
against their chief. They had but to declare that they had been
no parties to the sale, to enlist in their favour the sympathy of
the Governor, who, relying in many such cases upon no other
evidence than that which chimed in so well with his prejudices,
declared the sale to be invalid. In many cases the claim was dis-
allowed altogether, and in cases where a man claimed, say 1,000
acres, the Governor would decide, for some inscrutable reason
that the plaintiff was entitled to an ex yratia grant of 100 acres
only. The plaintiff would naturally declare that he was entitled
either to the whole or none, whereupon he was offered the choice
of accepting the verdict or appealing, (with the prospect held
over him in terrorem of losing even the ex gratia grant) to the
Lands Appeal Court, at the head of which sat the Governor him-
self, who then proceeded to try his own decision in the lower
Court. In some cases on appeal the decision of the lower Court
was confirmed, and the appellant lost even his ex gratia grant.
Of 1,800 land claims only 1,200 had been settled on Sir
Arthur’s departure, and crown grants issued for the same. Five
years’ later—ten years in all from annexation —the last land
claim had not been disposed of.
The German land claimants, amongst whom appeared the
German Vice-Consul in Sydney, after agitating for some time, and
appealing to the Local Courts without redress, referred the matter
to their own Government. On Prince Bismarck pressing the
case upon the Home Authorities, and after some acrimonious
correspondence between Count Von Munster and Lord Derby,
the latter agreed to a mixed commission to sit in London, and
adjudicate on the claims. The Colonial Secretary of Fiji was
summoned to London to attend the commission, the finding of
which was that £9,000 be awarded as compensation to the Vice-
Consul, and £1,500 to one other claimant. The other claimants-


were awarded nothing: a most unsatisfactory result after ten
years spent in appeals in vain to British justice.
SUGAR INDUSTRY.
When the Colonial Secretary returned to Fiji in 1880,
accompanied by the representative of the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company, it was confidently believed that a new era
of prosperity had arrived for Fiji. The Rewa river, where the
Government had promised certain concessions of land was chosen
for the site of their operations, and when their representative
informed a meeting of planters on that river, that the Company
were prepared to spend upwards of half-a-million in their enter-
prize, it appeared as if the golden age was to come again. Land
sprang up almost in a single night to four times its former value,
and most of those who owned property on the river, eagerly
signed agreements to supply the Company with cane for ten
years.
Prior to this, there were but two small mills at work in the
district, but the low price paid tor the cane by these monopolists
had left but little margin for profit to the grower.
When, therefore, the company offered" an advance in price of
50 % (50 per cent.) it was calculated that the profits would equal
that amount.
But in this, as after events showed, they calculated without
their host. The land was bought and the Company commenced
operations ; the neighbouring land was at a premium and there
was a rush by intending planters to secure it.
All went merrily until the first crop was cut and delivered,
when planters suddenly discovered that their expenses were
much beyond their estimates.
This was owing to the higher price of labour, which was
increased by the present eager competition and by new and more
stringent labour regulations.
In fact, the result of the first yeai’s crop, not only yielded
no profit at all—which was scarcely to be expected, —but it
increased their liabilities to such an extent that general alarm
was created. But they were too deeply involved to draw back
now; advances were procured, either from the banks or the
Company, and so the game went on, each year’s crop leaving a
debit balance, until up to the end of 1885 there was not a
planter on the river who could say that he had realized a profit.
The chief causes of this sudden collapse of their hopes may
be attributed to :
(1.) The planters had no very accurate notion of the cost
of their plantations, though they had been growing cane for
three or four years for the two small Companies. Labor was
cheap, and as long as their expenses were covered not much


attention was paid to the way in which the sums were expended.
They had worked as economically as they knew how ; the cane
had been got in somehow in a slovenly fashion with a minimum
of labour and money.
At this prospect of an advance in the price of cane, their
ideas expanded ; their expenses were increased ; the good times
■coming were to pay for all. Hitherto the Rewa had been but a
Sleepy Hollow, where amusement was rare and outlets for
expenditure few and far between. But with the advent of the
Company came a large floating population of white men, employed
at high rates of wages whose wants had to be supplied. Hotels
and stores were opened ; luxuries hitherto unattainable became
common, and the scale of living began to rise. In the wave of
seeming prosperity that was taking people off their feet, they felt
themselves justified in opening out on a larger scale. More labor
was procured ; larger houses were built with better accommoda-
tion ; areas too large for their means were opened up and planted
in the vague expectation that somehow the yield would repay them.
In the midst of these miscalculations on all sides, the price of
labor was slowly rising.
Whereas, formerly the supply of yams and sweet potatoes,
the food specially required by Ordinance to be given to the
labourers, was plentiful and cheap; the immense increase
in the number of labourers on the river soon caused a
scarcity of this kind of food and consequent rise in value;
but Government demanded that it should be supplied at
whatever cost under heavy penalties. Yams especially were
difficult, at times impossible, to obtain in sufficient quantity. The
Company, with all their resources, were in the same straits in
the matter; an offer on their part to supply their labourers with
any other food which Government might choose in lieu of yams
was met with a stern refusal and a reference to the Ordinance.
(2.) Some planters proceeded to fell and clear more land
than they could actually work in the first year, with the intention
of procuring a larger number of men in the following year.
The time came to plant and cultivate it, but, on application
to the Immigration Department, they discovered that, either the
additional labourers applied for could be supplied them only at
double the former rate, owing to the stricter recruiting regula-
tions, or that the demand having been greater than the supply,
none were obtainable. The money thus spent in opening out the
larger area remained in many cases a dead loss.
(3.) Extravagant estimates were made of the yield; an
average of sixty tons of cane to the acre was made the basis on
which to calculate, instead of a possible thirty tons. Thus every-
thing tended to lull the planter into a false sense of security, from
which he was only to be aroused at the end of a year or two to


find himself in a worse position than when he began. Ignorance
too, was a factor in the failure. Few, if any, had had any
practical experience beyond that which they had hammered out
for themselves in the happy-go-lucky days of the small mills.
Ground was planted, which proved unsuitable, either by
reason of its inaccessability or steepness, which rendered
transport of the cane expensive. Superior plant canes being
difficult to get, inferior ones were used ; the Company stipulated
in their agreement to pay only for well cultivated cane, and high
cultivation means additional expense to the planter. No man
knew what his plantation was costing him per acre. As long as
he had monej 7 he paid it away, and when his purse was empty he
borrowed in the hopes of overtaking his arrears with the
proceeds of the next crop, only, however, to plunge deeper into
debt.
Thus, in many cases, the only resource left him was to
become an employee of the Company on the land that was once
his own.
THE FUTURE OF THE SUGAR INDUSTRY".
Fijians have long been acquainted “with the sugar cane,
and though, like most non-indigenous plants, it is difficult to
trace to its source of introduction, it was, to judge from the
cane, probably introduced from the Malayan Archipelago some-
time in the seventeenth century. It is a thin, close jointed, liver
coloured cane of hardy growth, but possessed of an exceedingly
hard skin, and, on that account, is not best suited for profitable
sugar making.
It by no means grows wild, but is cultivated in little patches
here and there all over the group. Some years previous to
annexation, several mills on a small scale were introduced into
Fiji, which produced fair brown sugars, but want of special
knowledge in the manufacture, and of the soils suitable for its
growth, added to insufficient capital in starting, soon brought
these primitive attempts to grief.
It was not until about the time of annexation that two mills
established on the Rewa river, succeeded in making the industry
profitable. The situation was favourable, soil good, and water
carriage easy, better kinds of cane were imported, and there
appeared nothing to prevent an unlimited extension of sugar
making. With the cheap land and labour of those days, and
with the high prices realised for the produce, it seems unaccount-
able that more capital did not flow in this direction. But Fiji,
like the proverbial dog, had a bad name. People, even those so
well informed as a celebrated lady traveller, were, as she naively
confesses, in her charming work “At home in Fiji,” so little ac-
quainted with the true state of affairs in Fiji as to imagine it a


land peopled with blood-thirsty cannibals; the romantic authoress
above-mentioned had so hugged to her soul the delightful notion of
her boldness in setting foot in such a land ; the idea of playing the
part of martyr under the safe protection of his Excellency and his
bodyguard of Royal Engineers, proved too fascinating to be lightly
thrown aside, even when she had discovered that the only basis
for her fears lay in the hysterical imagination of herself and the
Government party ; it is with evident reluctance that she lets
her leaders know that she was entirely mistaken, and that the
white man was and had been for some years previously as safe in
Fiji as in her own Aberdeen. That on discovering her delusion
she should rush to the other extreme, was only to be expected
from one of her sex, but the boldness with which she mixed with
native men and women as detailed in her interesting diary, was
it must be confessed less surprising than distressing to her friends.
This modern Arthur had none of the gifts of his famous proto-
type. After the proclamation of his policy of “Fiji for the Fijians,”
which he proceeded to carry out to the bitter end, by means of
vexatious labour ordinances and other hindrances to the opening
up of the country ; the capital which was ready to flow into Fiji
from England and Australia was diverted into other channels.
There is little reason to doubt that the Governor congratulated
himself upon this state of affairs, and struck his master blow
when he succeeded, under the flimsy pretext of dealing strict
justice to whites and blacks alike, in dragging the settlement of
the land claims over a weary term of ten years.
The Governor knew enough of business to be aware that
without a clear title, no fresh capital could or would be intro-
duced. He feared a rush of white men, which would put his
poor administrative abilities to the test and bring Fiji into
too prominent notice, both in the the colonies and at home.
Men of weight and capital, having invested their money, would
not, he knew, stand idly by, while he sacrificed their interests to
his own over-weening vanity—it was safer to shut them out.
These two mills then remained masters of the situation, and it
was not until Sir Arthur Gordon’s Governorship was drawing to
a close, that the Colonial Secretary was able to induce the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company to extend its operations to Fiji.
The advent of this Company was the signal for the putting
forth of many similar ventures on a somewhat smaller scale ; of
these, in addition to the Colonial Sugar Company, seven were
started within three years, viz.—five on Yiti Levu, one on
Taviuni, and one on Mango.
The Revenue sprang suddenly up from £BO,OOO to £llO,OOO
owing to the introduction of the necessary machinery and mill
requisites. But this fictitious prosperity was not destined to last
long.


When the mills had settled down to work, necessitating but few
additional imports, the revenue dropped back to its old condition;
expenses had increased with the income, and the end of the
financial year 1884 left the Treasury short by £14,000. There
were many causes to account for this deficit. The amount raised
from Native Taxation fell short by some thousands of pounds ;
the large fall in the price of sugar and the increased cost of
labor forced all the mills to retrench their expenditure.
Whether retrenchment will eventually enable these mills, on
which one-and-a-quarter millions have been spent, to keep their
heads above water in the face of a falling market for their pro-
duce and the present price of labor, or whether they will suffer
the usual fate of pioneers in a new industry, remains the burning
question at this moment; and with its satisfactory settlement is
bound up the future prosperity of Fiji.
Should the Government still continue to turn a deaf ear to
the remonstrances of the planters, and refuse to assist in every
lawful way the only industry for which the country appears suited
the doom of Fiji is sealed.
This, at least, may with certainty be foretold, —the powers
that be must seriously take up this question and make it their
business to lighten, instead of to inci*Base the difficulties of
the planter in this direction, by simplifying their Labor Ordinances
and rendering redress as between the white man and his black
servants more prompt and efficacious, or the pressing competition
of German beetroot sugar will compel the withdrawal of further
efforts of capitalists from a country in which the Government
have so plainly shown by its acts that it desires neither their
presence nor their participation. Should the Government fail to
see their way to carry out these reforms which are so urgently
called for by the present state of an industry which promised
so well, the late failure of a large Company in the early part of
this year (1885) will be but the beginning of the end.
COFFEE.
Prior to annexation, coffee, like sugar, had been planted
here and there upon a small scale; but, beyond shewing that the
plant would grow and produce fruit, these experiments had done
little towards settling definitely the question, whether or not, of
its profitable production on a larger scale. When Fiji became a
part of the British Crown, Sir Arthur Gordon, acting on Lord
Carnarvon’s instructions, gave it to be known that Crown waste
lands were for sale at an upset price of one pound per acre.
Drs. Horne and Von Muller, from a superficial view of the
country, and with only theory to guide them (as far as Fiji was
concerned), proclaimed to the world in their books that the
country was a suitable one for coffee growing. The opinions of
these experts, combined with the aforesaid offer of land by the


Government at such a low price, attracted a few planters from
Ceylon, who came prepared with capital and experience to take
advantage of such an opportunity. When the intending planters
waited on the Governor to purchase the land so offered for sale,
they were somewhat more astonished than they might have been
(had they known better with whom they had to deal) to discover
that he had changed his mind, or, in other words, that (as he put
it) “ there were no Crown Lands ” To have travelled 5000
miles, only to find such gross want of good faith in the Queen’s
representative —to learn that His Excellency had but deluded
them with idle expectations—was sufficiently disheartening to have
determined most men to leave the country (a contingency possibly
not altogether outside His Excellency’s calculations).
In an evil moment, however, they determined to persevere.
It was urged upon His Excellency that he was bound in honour
to abide by his proclamation—that they had come confiding in
the truth of his own words. With a bad grace he at last yielded
so far as to consent that land should be found for them ; but—
and here the noble knight fired his Parthian shot—the price
would be £3 per acre.
Further remonstrance was in vain. This monstrous price
was agreed to with reluctance by one or two planters only, for
the bush land, where alone it was intended to plant coffee, was
worth less than £1 in the open market.
Operations were commenced. The heavily timbered land
was cleared and planted with every care that experience could
dictate. But, before any definite results could be obtained, the
discovery was made that the leaf disease (which made such havoc
in Ceylon) had appeared on a coffee estate that had been started
in the previous year.
The Chief Medical Officer, on its being reported to him,
guided rather by enthusiasm than by practical knowledge,
determined on taking summary steps and win name and fame by
stamping out a pest, which had hitherto baffled the efforts of
planters and botanists.
The estate on which it had first appeared was singled out as
the best place wherein the doctor’s theories might be reduced to
practice. At the same time orders were given that all coffee
plants elsewhere that shewed the disease should be cut down and
burnt. Before entering on these experiments, the Government
deemed it necessary to apply for the owner’s consent, which being
obtained, and the conditions reduced to writing, the worthy
doctor commenced his experiments—the latter to extend over a year.
The chief conditions of this slightly one-sided agreement
were :—Should the disease be stamped out, the proprietor was to
pay the whole of the expenses ; in the event of non-success the
expenses were to be shared between the two parties. A Ceylon
planter of ample experience was put in charge, and additional


labourers were sent on to the plantation, which was kept in a
state of more or less strict quarantine.
The experiment had aroused considerable interest, as the
discoverer, (if a successful remedy for the disease, which brings
enormous loss wherever the plant is grown), might look for no
ordinary reward in fame and fortune. But, when it was found
that the medical enthusiast had succeeded in evolving from his
inner consciousness nothing more novel or effective than the
obsolete remedies —Sulphur fumigation and lime dressing, which
had been tried without success a thousand times in Ceylon ; when
it was found that this was the sole contribution to pathology
which medical science had to offer, failure became a foregone con-
clusion. At the close of the year, and after considerable expense,
although a slight improvement was visible, it was evident that no
permanent cure was possible.
It only remained to call upon the owner to take back his
estate and pay his moiety of the cost incurred. He refused to do
either and brought forward a counter claim for damages for
negligence. The case was heard in the Supreme Court, where
damages were recovered amounting to something less than the
sum in which he was indebted to Government for his share of
the cost of this famous experiment.
The estate soon afterwards becoming bankrupt was left un-
worked, and is now fast returning to its primitive state.
The real causes of the disease and failure of crops were shewn
to be undoubtedly the poor soil, and an excess of moisture which
the nature of the sub-soil did not permit to easily drain away,
and so far they were beyond control.
The fact is, this so-called leaf disease—a kind of fungoid
growth showing itself chiefly on the leaves, is like oidium of the
vine and potatoe blight, a symptom merely of weakness en-
gendered in the plant by the soil and climate in which it stands :
and to devote attention to curing the fungoid spores were as if a
doctor were to apply dressings to the pustules of small pox under
the mistaken impression that he was thereby attacking the
disease.
This disease, or rather symptom of a disease is to be found
wherever the Coffee plant is grown; it remains, however, endemic,
doing little or no damage as long as certain bounds of insalubrity
are not exceeded. Increase the unhealthy conditions beyond
that point and the plants will perish.
The results of this affair were naturally not very encouraging
to those who had started in the same business, but each flattered
himself that in his choice of land, he at least had avoided the
errors of those who had preceded him.
Thus matters progressed for two or three years. By that
time some half-dozen coffee estates were sufficiently advanced to
bear their first crop. The results were a disappointment r and


when two or more seasons had come and gone without the
appearance of crops in anything approaching the quantity neces-
sary for profitable cultivation, all hopes of any better results had
reluctantly to be abandoned.
The complaints from all the estates, at varying elevations
and in different parts of the group, were similar : the plant grew
sufficiently well; but it fruited but slightly, and in quantities by
no means sufficient to repay the cost of production. One after
the other, having expended several thousands of pounds each,
owners are abandoning any further efforts, and are either turning
their attention to other products or leaving the country.
On one point all are agreed, that after so many trials in
different parts of the group without success, the soil and climate
suitable for coffee in Fiji has yet to be discovered. The required
conditions, including a colder season, less rainfall, and a greater
depth of good soil, may possibly in the future be found at higher
altitudes in the mountain ranges of Yiti Levu than those hitherto
tried ; but the want of roads and the distance from base of supplies
are likely for some years to come to prove an insuperable bar to
any further attempts at coffee growing in Fiji.
TEA GROWING.
On the failure of coffee, the attention of planters was directed
to discovering some other plant more suited to the climate and
soil. This, it is at present believed, will be found to be the tea
plant; and although as yet no great area has been planted,
(consisting in fact of only three estates), the small quantity of the
produce that has been placed on the market has met with a very
favourable report and a demand for local consumption
But like many other promising ventures, it remains to be
seen whether, with the present price of labour, it will be possible
to compete with India and China.
With the price of raw products so low all over the world, it
would be a matter of surprise if tea should hold its own.
COPRA CULTIVATION.
As the production of Copra (or the dried kernel of the
Cocoa-nut, which by pressure yields the cocoa-nut oil) was the
first to attract planters, so it seems likely to remain the only one
which can stand the vicissitudes of Trade.
Its value has varied considerably. The introduction of
Kerosene was a blow from which Copra has never recovered, but as
long as the human family continues to use soap, or until some
substitute for Cocoa-nut oil is discovered in the course of time, it
is not likely to fall below its present average value.
In spite of these favourable conditions however, it would be
a mistake to imagine that its present price would repay the
opening up of fresh plantations in Fiji.


It must be remembered that it will not flourish in every
situation. Inland, away from the sea it will not fruit. The
leeward sides of Islands are unfavourable to it, and last but not
least, it is a plant of slow growth, and requires eight years to
come to its prime.
There is a considerable area cultivated by whites, which yields
a fair return, but with one or two exceptions the individual planta-
tions are small, nearly every one having been planted in the days
of cheap Labor, which alone can render it a profitable investment.
The cultivation of the Cocoa-nut has this great advantage
over that of other products, that when once in full bearing it
can be worked with comparatively few laborers. The fruit ripens
all the year round, and unlike Tea or Coffee it can be gathered
(within certain limits) at the planter’s convenience. The
appliances for drying the kernel (the only preparation necessary
for the market) are of the simplest kind, and every Fijian knows
the work. Thus, with its stability of value, and its adaptability
to the work of Fijians, who at present, though by no means the
best, are still the cheapest labor to bo obtained, the fortunate
possessors of land planted with nuts before the Government had
stepped in between the laborer and his employer, will be the only
men who are likely to weather the storm now breaking over the
planting interests of Fiji. The manufacture of the outside husk
of the Cocoa-nut into coir-fibre, has never occupied much atten-
tion. Its bulk is so great and its price so low as to make the
charges on its carriage too heavy to admit of much profit.
Doubtless its manufacture into ropes and mats on the spot
would render these charges proportionately less heavy, but here
again the price of labor stops the way, and the small amount of
coir fibre produced (at the two only establishments for its pro-
duction) in the Islands, finds its way to England and the colonies,
where costly machinery enables it to be profitably dealt with.
COTTON.
The exciting times of the rush to Fiji in 1870 for the
purpose of planting,—of high prices for cotton and large profits,
have long since passed away. The number of cotton plantations
being worked at the present time may be counted on the fingers,
and those are occupied by men who have continued planting the
crop for want of any more profitable substitute.
They manage, perhaps to pay their expenses, and that is as
much as can be said.
As regards the suitability of Fiji for cotton, there has never
been a doubt since Sea Island cotton took the first place in the
European market.
But the present cost of maintaining a staff of labourers suffici-
ent to deal with acrop so easily injured by over ripeness or unfavour-
able weather, has rendered any extension of its very limited cultiva-
tion, in the face of the low prices ruling, too hazardous a venture.


BANANAS.
The banana traffic between Fiji and the colonies has certainly
increased of late years, but whether it has enriched the growers
is a more questionable matter. To produce bananas of a
sufficient size and quality is not so easy as it appears at first
sight.
While the first cost of planting the banana is no greater
than that of any other crop, its great bulk and the care necessary
in handling the fruit, make carriage more expensive.
The grower usually sells to the shipper, who engages boats
to go round the coast collecting the fruit and bring to Levuka or
Suva, where the mail steamers call; as the bananas ripen ex-
ceedingly quickly in the hold of an iron vessel, it is of the
utmost importance, in order that they may be landed in good
condition in Melbourne or Sydney, that they should be shipped
neither too ripe nor too green. To sell to the best advantage in
the colonial market they should arrive before the whole bunch is
fully ripe, which allows the fruit dealers to dispose of them by
degrees as they ripen. If put on board too far advanced towards
ripeness, before the voyage is half over they become too soft to
stand the motion of the vessel, and, piled as the bunches
are on the top of one another, soon collapse into shapeless masses
of rotten pulp. If shipped too immature, bananas rot without
ripening. Thus to secure a profit on his fruit, the shipper must
not only buy at the right time, but must get his cargo on board
the steamer as soon as it is gathered.
But before this can be done there are many contingencies to
be calculated for; his boats may be wind-bound and unable to
arrive before the departure of the steamer, or they may arrive
punctually enough to time to find the steamer late or delayed in
port through quarantine —in all of which cases the fruit is certain
to be a dead loss. A fortnight from plantation to market is the
outside time which it is wise to allow. The voyage to Sydney
occupies ten days, thus leaving four in which to collect and ship ;
if there is any chance of this fortnight being exceeded it is better
to put up with the first loss than to pay freight on what may
never reach its destination.
In addition to these drawbacks it must be remembered that
bananas are only taken on board after all the other cargo is
stowed; there is thus a great rush at the last moment, and it has
occasionally happened that fruit is shut out for want of stowage
room. These great and frequent losses thus greatly effect the
prices received by growers, as shippers cannot afford to run any
great risk by contracting before hand with planters, who are thus
discouraged for want of a reliable market. The whole trade has
indeed become a lottery in which the prizes are few and the
blanks many.
Geo. Robertson Si Co., 361 George Street, Sydney.




