



.. "...
wl '
*;; p /
y/
£
P
I I






PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL.
To he regarded as though in Manuscript
FIJI




CONTENTS
CHAPTER XIX
PAGE
Samoan Affairs ...... 1
CHAPTER XX
Work as High Commissioner, Governor, and Consul-General
—Visit to Tonga ...... 59
CHAPTER XXI
Leave of Absence at Home .165
CHAPTER XXII
Fiji and the South Pacific during my Absence on Leave . 346
APPENDIX 565




ERRATA
Page. Line.
133, 32, after “me” omit “to.”
133, 33, for “and” read “as.”
156, 20, for “letters” read “settlers.”
157, 17, for “colonies” read “colonists.”
158, 4, after “in,” for “the” read “their.”
176, 10 from bottom, for “the Rev. A. Webb’’read “Sir A. Gordon.'
187, 8, after “Phillimore” insert “as.”
191, 9 from bottom, for “write” read “wrote.”
193, 8, for “pressing” read “precise.”
199, 11 from bottom, after “and” insert “be.”
234, 5, after “connait” insert “que ceux.”
235, 13, after “dedain, s’il ” insert “en.”
259, 11, after “ought” insert “not.”
276, 6 from bottom, for “of” read “on.”
300, 25, after “This” insert “it.”
305, 30, for “did” read “do.”
321, 7, after “instructions” insert comma, and omit comma after “ago.’
340, 3, after “appointment of” insert “the.”
340, 5, for “should” read “would.”
371, 31, for “qua” read “qua.”
397, 35, for “ Stark ” read “ Storck,” and for “ Naciline ” read “ Nacilevu. ”
401, 2 from bottom, for “ A.N.C.” read “Armed Native Constabulary.”
405, 7 from bottom, for “as” read “against,” and for “debtor” read
“debtors.”
414, 7 from bottom, for “Levu” read “Serna.”
415, 28, for “ Narokorokowa” read “ Narokorokoyawa.”
423, 3, for “Nilom” read “Wilson.”
438, 28, for “ Nolenakolom” read “ Qalinakalou.”
438, 29, for “Savaiyski” read “Saveiyaki.”
439, 4, for “ Wainunnu ” read “Wainunu.”
439, 7 from bottom, for “an” read “no.”
447, 5 from bottom, for “Trevor” read “Moore.”
vii


Page. Line.
465, 8 from bottom, for “Reimkau” read “Reimkan.”
466, 3, for “Reimkau” read “Reimkan.”
467, 25, for “Nasooa” read “Nasova.”
468, 28, for “as” read “in.”
481, 14, for “ Mulinua” read “ Mulinuu.”
483, 4, for “Fronde” read “Trood.”
514, 3 from bottom, after “not” insert “live."
514, bottom line, for “pupalagi” read “papalagi.”
524. 30, after “ Wilkinson ” insert “to Mr. Des Yceux.”
524, 4 from bottom, omit “Lomaiviti.”
527, 13 from bottom, for “Monk” read “Cocks.”
527, 12 from bottom, for “Draibe” read “Draieba.”
VIII
FIJI


FIJI
1875-1880
CHAPTER XIX
SAMOAN AFFAIRS
The reception of a deputation of Samoan chiefs, charged with a
mission to solicit the protection of Great Britain, and the return
of that deputation to their own country, are described in Chapter
XV. of the previous volume of these Records. With the con-
clusion of that chapter, all, or almost all, mention of Samoan
affairs in that volume ceases. 1 have purposely omitted from it
all letters relating to the Navigators’ Islands, in order that they
might appear consecutively as an introduction to the account of
my visit to that group in the early part of 1878. But in fact,
during the whole of the last six months of 1877, Samoan affairs
continued to occupy a considerable share of my thoughts and
time. The events which occurred during that period were in
themselves interesting, and were made all the more so by the
touches of comedy by which they were frequently relieved.
The following despatch relates what took place in Samoa
during the absence of the chiefs in Fiji, and immediately after
their return.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, July 12, 1877.—My Lord—ln my despatch of the 22nd
May I had the honour to enclose, for your Lordship’s information, copy of
the reply which I had returned to the Address of the Samoan delegates.
2. On the day following the delivery of that reply, the Samoan chiefs
left Levuka. Some of them went in company with Mr, Woods in the
American barque Menschikoff, and the remainder in Cakobau’s yacht Lurline ,
accompanied by Ratu Timoci and one of my “Mata ni Yanua.”
3. It was arranged that the two vessels should rendezvous at Tutuila, and
proceed together to Apia ; instead of doing this, the Menschikoff sailed direct
for Samoa, arriving several days before the Lurline, , which, according to
agreement, waited at Tutuila to be joined there by the Menschikoff.
in B


4. On the arrival of the Menschikoff at Apia it was generally reported
that the petition for protection from Great Britain had been altogether
rejected by me, and that it was requisite to look to other Powers for assistance.
An unfortunate attempt which had, during the absence of the greater part
of the Taimua and Faipule in Fiji, been made to institute a “ Samoan Govern-
ment,” consisting of Mr. G. A. Woods, Mr. Hetherington (a Fijian barrister),
and Mr. Colmesnil (the American Consul), and which, it is said, was proposed to
the Samoan chiefs by Mr. Consul gave some credit to the further report
that, on the arrival of the Lurline, it was intended to take forcible possession
of the islands in the name of Her Majesty.
5. Swayed by these rumours, those of the Taimua and Faipule who were
on the spot consented to the proposal of the United States Consul to hoist
the American flag and place themselves under the protection of the United
States. The flag was hoisted and a petition to the Government of the United
States to assume the Protectorate of Samoa signed the same evening that
the Menschikoff cast anchor at Apia. When, on the arrival of the Lurline a
few days later, the Samoan chiefs found that their petition had been sent to
England for consideration, they expressed much regret for their precipitate
action, which they felt to be wholly inconsistent with what was due to Her
Majesty’s Government pending its decision on their application.
6. It is, I think, almost certain that before the end of the year Samoa will
have passed into the hands of some foreign Power. Her chiefs feel their own
helplessness and the certainty that, without external aid, they must drift
into anarchy, and expose themselves to the unscrupulous encroachments of
white settlers, and to punishment by foreign nations for acts of individuals
whom they are unable to control. They would prefer to maintain their
independence under a protectorate, but if they find that impossible, they will
offer themselves either to England or the United States rather than to
Germany; but that, in the last extremity, if refused by England and the
United States, they will meet their fate half way and request annexation by
Germany before many months are over, I have little doubt.
7. The Lurline returned here on the 20th ultimo, and brought me the
letter from the Taimua and Faipule, of which I enclose a copy and transla-
tion. I have also the honour to enclose the translation of a very intelligent
and interesting report from Ratu Timoci of what he had observed during his
stay in Samoa. His impression is that the Samoans are not sincere in any
of their offers, but wish to shield themselves from absorption by one Power
by opposing a demand for protection from another.—l have, etc.
From Ratu Timoci Tayanayanua, Roko Tui Lomai Yiti
Draiba, July 5, 1877. Sir—l now, according to your commands, Sir,
submit a report of my late visit to Samoa.
We sailed for Samoa in company with its chiefs. When we arrived in
port, and shortly after anchoring, a boat was sent to convey us to the Seat of
Government. When we had landed, we were told to go and occupy a house
formerly belonging to Malietoa, which was set apart as our “bure.” The
house had a boarded floor, and plaited thatched roof.
I observed the manners and customs of the people, and found them in
many respects very different from those of Fiji. They appear to be all chiefs.
2
FIJI
CHAP.


No one has authority over another. Their houses resemble in shape those of
Tonga, but many of them have no walls—only a roof supported on posts. From
this they let down mats which make walls at night. Their way of cooking
also is peculiar. They do not boil any of their food, but bake everything,
and that which is left from the first day is eaten on the next, and so on till
it is finished. They do not remove the entrails from their fish, or take the
scales off before cooking them.
The people made magiti ( i.e . offered food) for us on several occasions, but
not every day; some days we had none, and on those days we would visit
the chief of Apia, who is called Sunneanutafa, He treated us very well
indeed, and gave us plenty of food. Some of the other chiefs are not to be
compared with him in liberality.
After we had remained a short time, a feast, according to the Samoan
custom, was prepared for us at a place where there was a flag-staff, on which
was hoisted the flag of America and that of Sitavibaka. While we were
there, and just as the feast was about to commence, the British Consul came
to me and requested me to leave, and not to remain under the American flag.
He said, “ If it were the Samoan flag only that was flying, I would not ask you
to leave, but you will observe that the American flag is hoisted above that of
Samoa. This would only be proper if Samoa was annexed to America. As a
British subject you ought not to stay here. It will be well for us both to go ;
if you remain you will act foolishly.” This was what the British Consul said
to me, and many of the Samoan Chiefs were of the same opinion, and I took
his advice in the matter, because I considered that what he said was true.
The Samoan Chiefs concurred in it.
Another thing about the American flag: it was hoisted on our account
only who came from Fiji. Previous to the visit of the Samoan Chiefs to Fiji,
the American flag had not been hoisted in Samoa.
It was intended when we came here that we and the large vessel should
meet together at Tutuila. We waited there six days, and then sailed for
Upolu and anchored at a point. We then heard that the large vessel was at
Apia, having gone straight there, as .1 think, to turn men’s minds ; and that
when the Chiefs on shore had asked them where were those coming from Fiji,
they were told that they were following in a vessel of the Fijian Government,
a vessel of war. The Chiefs then assembled in the evening and consulted
together, and resolved to hoist the American flag the next day, lest the British
flag should be hoisted ; they thought it would be well to have the American
flag flying before the vessel from Fiji arrived, for they said if we fly the Samoan
flag only it will be easy taken down, but that cannot be done with the American
flag. When we anchored and saw the American flag, the Samoan Chiefs who
came with us from Fiji were very much astonished.
In the morning I went to ask the chief of Apia about it, and he said it
was on account of the Chiefs and white men who had returned from Fiji in
the large vessel that the American flag was hoisted. By this I knew that
they were not sincere in their coming to Fiji. One day I sent David to the
Chief of the Government to tell them that the time was approaching when we
must return to Fiji, as it was agreed upon when we left that we should only
stay ten days, and only two days of that time still remained. In answer the
Chief begged me to be of good mind and stay a little longer as nothing had
as yet been made plain in their country. When Tevita had told me this it
3
xrx
FIJI


was apparent to me that their conduct was not chief-like (having no chief).
I then ordered David to go back to the Chiefs and tell them that we would
sail in two days; when he had communicated my pleasure to them to this
effect, two old Chiefs came to me and begged me to stay, to which I then
consented.
After this we waited many days. We then went to Malietoa to have a
conversation before our departure. What was said, Sir, I will tell you. We
were a long time delayed and much inconvenienced. I then decided to leave,
and we left.
This, Sir, concludes the report of my visit to Samoa, which I have written.
If you, Sir, wish a spoken report, send for me, Sir.
TIMOCI TAVANAVANUA.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, July 17, 1877.—My Lord—The Imperial German corvette
Augusta, Captain Hassenpflug, arrived here on Sunday from Samoa, and
proceeds to Sidney to-piorrow, chiefly, I believe, for the purpose of enabling
her commander to communicate by telegraph with the Imperial German
Government.
2. Captain Hassenpflug informs me that the contending parties in Samoa
were, when he left, just about to commence hostilities, and that, in con-
junction with the Imperial German Consul, he had exacted from both sides
an engagement to respect the neutrality of Apia, and a considerable district
of the island of Upolu, together with all German land and property wherever
situated. In the event of this understanding being broken in his absence,
which he regards as probable, it is his intention to intervene forcibly in the
contest between the two parties ; inflict a very severe punishment on both,
should both have entered on neutral territory ; and to occupy the neighbour-
hood of Apia.
3. Captain Hassenpflug further informs me that he has not been instructed
to take this course by his Government, which, I am inclined to believe, from
various incidental remarks which dropped from him, is not desirous of taking
possession of the Samoan Group, but he appeared to have no doubt as to the
approval of his proceedings.
4. The tone of Captain Hassenpflug’s language with regard to the line of
conduct to be observed towards the native population, and his avowed
anxiety to find an excuse for active hostility against it, or (to use his own
words) for “making his great guns speak,” has caused me much pain and
no little apprehension as to the future in store for the people of Samoa.
I have, etc.
About this time, I wrote to Mr. Liardet: —
I agree with you in thinking that the possession of Samoa by a foreign
power would be prejudicial to Fiji, and I have written a letter to the Samoan
Government (if there is such a thing in existence), which I will ask you to
deliver, and of which I send you a copy. It is in answer to a letter which
the Taimua and Faipule have written to me, and I have taken the
opportunity to point out to them that, pending the Queen s answer to their
petition to her, any action on their part inconsistent with it would be dis-
courteous and improper.
4
CHAP.
FIJI


I do not quite understand why you have sent me Mr. Conborough’s affidavit.
Mr. Colmesnil is not a British subject and consequently not under British
jurisdiction with regard to his acts in Samoa. No action can be taken on the
matter here beyond sending the papers home as a foundation for a complaint
to the United States Government against their Vice-Consul, and this I suppose
you have already done through the Foreign Office. In the despatches which
you send under flying seal I see no allusion to the action which in the
accompanying memorandum is said to have been taken by you. Is it wholly
a canard ? I suppose so. I should add that it is not from Dr. Turner that I
have received this memorandum, and that there is hardly an English resident
in Samoa who has not at one time or another thought proper to write letters
to me on “ political ” subjects.
lam a little alarmed by your saying that you ‘ ‘ will do what you can to
have an offer of cession ready ” for my arrival. Of course any such interference
on your part would be misconstrued, nor could any such offer be even taken
into consideration unless it were clearly and unmistakably a free and
voluntary one on the part of the Samoans generally. I can fully appreciate
and sympathise with the difficulties of your position in such a state of society
as that of Samoa, full of petty intrigues and selfishness.
Out of deference to Mr. Liardet’s susceptibilities, which are set
forth at page 248 of vol. ii., I had discontinued my correspondence
with Dr. Turner ; but of course nearly every white man in Samoa
who had complaints or recommendations to make, wrote to me
to make them, and, equally of course, every one who came down
to Fiji from Samoa appeared at Nasova, eager to state his own
views of the position of affairs. I therefore was not without
abundant information, though little of it was trustworthy or
accurate. Dr. Turner also still occasionally wrote, and was the
only person from whom I received any clear account of what
went on. Liardet’s own despatches and private letters were
always incoherent, and often unintelligible ; and though he could
not wholly ignore his instructions to send his despatches under fly-
ing seal through me, he did his best to do so, and habitually sent
off despatches and telegrams to the Secretary of State without
informing me of their contents, either before or after their
despatch. It appeared, however, that he had recommended the
formation of a Samoan Government, in which the lawyer he had
taken down with him from Fiji, Mr. Hetherington, Mr. Woods, the
notorious ex-Premier of Fiji, and the ex-American Consul, Mr.
Colmesnil, were to take the leading parts. This arrangement,
as might have been expected, proved abortive: the members
of the triumvirate soon proceeded to quarrel with one another,
and with the Consul, who found himself distrusted and shunned
on all hands.
Two cases of questionable action on his part were specially
brought to my notice by aggrieved British subjects. In the
5
FIJI
XIX


first it appeared that a disreputable beach-comber of the name
of Chambers had indulged in abuse (probably entirely ground-
less) of Mr. Liardet, which had greatly angered the latter.
This was natural, but his anger so ran away with him that he
was indiscreet enough to send for the man and threaten him
with two years’ imprisonment for maligning him. Chambers,
delighted to see that his attack had told, replied by an impertinent
and offensive letter, which upset what remained of prudence in
the Consul, who forthwith appointed Mr. Hetherington (with
whom he had not then quarrelled) “ Proconsul,” and appeared
before him to prosecute Chambers, whom Mr. Hetherington, as
Proconsul, tried, and sentenced to be sent as a prisoner on board
H.M.S. Beagle to be tried for libel in Fiji. Another man, a half-caste,
who had given evidence at the “trial” before Mr. Hetherington,
was also put in confinement on a charge of perjury ; but after a
week’s reflection Mr. Liardet probably discovered that he had
outstepped his powers, and both men were released.
The other case was that of the master of a ship who was
suspected by the Consul of having run away with the vessel in
which he had come down from New Zealand. He accordingly
held a Naval Court, fined the unfortunate captain £55, and ordered
him to be conveyed as a prisoner to Auckland. A few days later
the arrival of the owner of the vessel showed that no offence
whatever had been committed or intended.
My interference was of course clamorously invoked, but in the
absence of the Commissions promised me as Consul-General and
High Commissioner I was in a somewhat false position. Every
one knew that I was to be the chief British authority in the South
Pacific, but, till the Commissions as High Commissioner and Consul-
General were in my hands, I had no legal authority. Mr, Liardet
had shown no disposition to act under my advice, and I therefore
determined not to thrust it upon him, but rigidly to abstain from
all interference, and allow him to prove his fitness or the reverse
for dealing with the complicated questions before him and the
difficult situation in which he was placed.
It would be tedious and unprofitable to attempt to unravel
the tangled skein of sordid intrigues woven at Apia, or to print
the mass of letters received or written by me, relating to them.
But these intrigues had, of course, to be watched and noted,
and were not, in a sense, unamusing. Broadly speaking, the
situation was this:—The Samoans themselves were divided into
two parties, partly caused by the local jealousies and local
alliances of different districts, and partly by the discord existing
between the two “Royal” families of Malietoa and Tupua. Of
foreign interests three had to be considered, the English, German,
6
CHAP.
FIJI


and American. Of these the relative position was as follows: —
The Germans had the largest land claims, the largest plantations,
and the largest share of commerce. Their pretensions, moreover,
were vigorously pushed and strongly supported by the German
Government. The English came next, and with this advantage,
that though the larger part of the commercial business was in
German hands, it was in great part carried on by English
Agents, and entirely in the English language. On the other
hand, English interests received no support from the English
Government —indeed, any attempt to promote them was distinctly
discouraged. The Americans were fewer in number and had
smaller landed and commercial interests than either the English
or Germans, but they made up in audacity and bluster for what
they wanted in strength. The French had no commercial
interests in Samoa; but the Roman Catholic natives, who were
numerous, were ruled by French priests, and these, from hatred
of Germany and hereditary antipathy to England, warmly
espoused the side of the American faction. The members of
each nationality desired to see its own Government in posses-
sion of Samoa, thinking thereby to secure their own ends, and so
far as they worked for any public object at all they worked for
this result. But with few exceptions, the agitators and intriguers
were swayed by the meanest and most selfish motives. They
changed sides and friends with marvellous rapidity and equal
frequency. All were eager for bribes and swift to betray the
cause they were bribed to serve.
Early in July, the war between the different factions, which
had been so long impending, actually broke out. This was
reported to me by Dr. Turner, from whose letter I extract the
following passage:—
For a few days so-called efforts at a mediation were carried on by the
Tuamasaga. Ultimately the Puletua sent about 100 stand of arms and their
flag as a token of submission. The Government would not accept them and
told the Tuamasaga to tell the Puletua, if they wanted peace they must give
up all their guns including their breech-loaders (of which they had a great
many), and give themselves up unconditionally. The Puletua replied that
they would give up all their guns, and go and submit to the Government,
provided their lives would be guaranteed. The reply was : “No, you must
come and submit, and the blood of some of your Chiefs must be spilt before
us, else we cannot let you off.” This may not have been said in so many
words, but every one understood it. In fact, one of the Government Chiefs said
to me on Sunday the Bth that they resolved to put the principal Chiefs to
death, in order utterly to crush rebellion for the future; and many others
reported that it had been resolved to shoot seven of the principal Chiefs in
each of the two rebellious districts. Of course this made the Puletua resolved
to fight at all hazards. Baron von Hiigel took down a copy of the letter
7
XIX
FIJI


from Weber and Hassenpflug to the Taimua, with conditions and threats of
what they would do in case they fought, and you will remember that one of
them was that this district was to be neutral, including Mulinuu, and that
if they fought they were to remove their flag from that place. Subsequently
I am led to understand that they accepted this condition. Consequently
about 10 a.m. of the 11th inst. a deputation from the Taimua came up to
tell Mr. Weber and Colmesnil that they were going to fight that day, and they
pulled down both flags. However, no fight took place then; and on the morning
of the following day, the 12th inst., we heard that the Taimua and Faipule
were going to make another effort to settle matters without fighting. By
that time the Government forces had crept round the Puletua fort.
During the forenoon the Taimua and Faipule, or a deputation of them, came
to where Manono were, and entered into negotiations with the Puletua. It
was arranged that Malietoa (Laupepa) was to go and “ ifo ” (bow down) to
the Government, and go through a ceremony called “ seu malo,” and all
would be made up. Just as Malietoa had started to do this, Atua, on the south
side of the fort, made an attack, and fighting soon became general all round.
Atua have always been most bitter against the Puletua, and whether the
immediate cause of attack was their anger, or whether it was a pre-arranged
system of treachery, is not clear to me. However, the Puletua were taken
unawares, and many of them were caught at once and beheaded. They held
out till nightfall. Fighting began about 4 p.m., and during the night a private
arrangement was made between the Puletua and the Tuamasaga for the latter to
draw off a little and for them to allow the Puletua to escape to the neutral
district. This was done, and all through the night, but especially in the
morning between 5 and 7 a.m., the fugitives of the Puletua were pouring in
here. Fortunately for us the Government troops did not pursue them, but
respected the neutrality. They made application to the Consuls, and Messrs.
Weber and Colmesnil agreed with the Government that all fugitives should
go as prisoners to Mulinuu, but under protection of the Consuls. This was
carried out about 9 a.m., and all were soon in custody there, except five or six
of the highest Chiefs of the Puletua and some of their followers, who had taken
refuge in the British Consulate. Mr. Liardet had declined to act with the
other Consuls, and up till the present has refused to give up the Chiefs who
sought refuge under his flag. Those who were taken as prisoners to Mulinuu
several hundreds —have been divided out as slaves round the different
districts ; the Chiefs, including those at Mr. Liardet’s, being left meantime
till it is seen what is to be their fate. Some advocate capital punishment,
some banishment, etc. But your Excellency will say, “What were the
Germans and their ship-of-war doing all this time?” The Augusta left for
Sydney about half past 10 a.m. on the 11th, just after the flags at Mulinuu
had been pulled down—the signal that war was to commence ! The osten-
sible reason for her going was that she was short of provisions, but I have
the very best of reasons for believing that such an excuse would not bear
investigation.
Mr. Liardet wrote no despatches on the subject, either to
me or to Lord Derby; but I received from him two private
letters, the second of which he requested me to forward to the
Foreign Office, and from which the following are extracts
8
CHAP.
FIJI


The state of things here is very alarming—so much so, that I do not
believe the lives of those in this Consulate to be safe. Hostilities broke out
here on the 13th inst., and there are various rumours which are so conflicting
that one cannot form at present an opinion on the real cause of the fighting,
which only lasted twenty-four hours; the result was the flight of the Puletua
party, many of whom fled to this Consulate for protection under the British
flag. Many of these have entered this Consulate, although I used every effort
in my power to keep them out. The lives of some of these, I am sure, were in
danger outside of this Consulate, and consequently I did not feel justified in
turning them away. The Taimua and Faipule demanded them of me, and
offered to give their written guarantees that their lives would not be taken ;
but from the fact of their being unable to control the armed natives who had
been fighting on their side, it was no assurance to me that their goodwill
would be carried out; therefore I refused to entertain their proposals on these
grounds, but I informed them that as soon as I saw that they were able to
control their people and gave evidence that life and property were secure, I
would do so ; that in the meantime I would hold them under the protection
of the flag under which they sought their refuge, until your Excellency
arrived here, when I would leave the matter for you to decide; that in the
event of a man-of-war coming here, on her arrival I would send them on
board, to seek the same protection as long as their lives were in danger.
Since their arrival here, the Taimua and Faipule have caused a large number
of armed natives to surround this Consulate. On the night of the 17th this
was done, and the excuse they gave afterwards for doing so was that as the
Memchikoff was about to leave for Fiji, an attempt would be made by the
refugees to escape in her. This, I need hardly inform your Excellency, was
never contemplated by me, nor was it their intention. On the evening of
the 16th, the United States Vice-Consul called upon me, and on learning
that I had a Chief named Lauaki as a refugee, demanded him as his prisoner.
This of course I did not entertain, and informed him to that effect. Last
night he had natives armed with rifles on his premises, which adjoined mine,
and who were threatening this Consulate. To-night he has again armed men
watching this Consulate, which is surrounded by them, the plea to-night
being, I understand, to stop any food coming to them ; of course I will not
allow the refugees to suffer from the want of it. The matter is most alarming.
I am employing three or four unarmed British subjects to keep out those who
run in here for refuge. To-day those people who have sought refuge under
the British flag have been outlawed, and looked upon in that light, and
would undoubtedly have been shot down if they overstepped the boundaries
of the land on which the Consulate is built. Your Excellency cannot
possibly understand the difficulties and dangers which surround us ; for the
last three nights, owing to the threatening appearance of affairs, I have been
obliged to be constantly on the alert. My wife and mother-in-law, who
reside in this Consulate, have been unable to obtain any rest. The constant
attendance I have to give to matters connected with the state of affairs, in
order to conciliate the Chiefs of both parties, has occupied my time through-
out the day. I have had no time, therefore, to write despatches home, and
therefore I beg your Excellency will do me the favour and kindness to
represent this and the state of affairs by the first opportunity. I have not
even leisure to obtain copies of this letter which I send you, and which is
9
FIJI
xix


being dictated by me to others, as I have to be outside my office door to
watch what is going on round the Consulate by the armed party. On
account ot the action taken with regard to stopping the food, and also on
account of the daily expense I am put to both for interpreters and those I
employ to assist me in watching, I have been obliged to overdraw bills on the
Treasury. I trust that your Excellency will do me the favour to notify Her
Majesty’s Government that until you can yourself look into this expenditure
they will not dishonour my drafts. I have been the greater part of to-day
consulting with the most influential and respectable British subjects, and the
result is that I have formed the opinion that I have no alternative in the
cause of humanity and justice than to take upon myself the responsibility of
sending down the John Wesley to Fiji, to enable your Excellency to have the
earliest information of these troubles, and to ask you earnestly to come here
with the least possible delay—if possible in a man-of-war, as the fear of your
arrival in one may help to deter the Taimua and Faipule, and also the
unscrupulous white residents, from committing violence. This decision I
have come to was not formed until after 10 o’clock p.m., when I arranged
that if the John Wesley would go, she would sail at daylight. The place
being surrounded with armed natives prevents me from writing this myself.
The Menschikoff is about to leave (ostensibly for Fiji) with Capt. Stewart,
who has informed me that he is desirous of seeking advice about the business
of the firm, and of cutting his connection with Colmesnil, Woods, Hethering-
ton, and others ; but I really cannot say whether this is true. In the
meantime I take the liberty of suggesting to your Excellency (in the most
confidential way) the necessity of exercising the utmost caution with respect
to Mr. J. B. Thurston j 1 also be cautious of the firm of J.C. Smith and Company.
I trust your Excellency will forgive me for taking the liberty of warning you
about these people.
His official report of these occurrences, sent at a later date,
was as follows. After describing the manner in which the
Puletua were entrapped, the surrender of young Malietoa, and
the hopelessness of the Puletua position, he continues:
They commenced to defend their position, and held their fort during
the remainder of the day and the greater part of the night. At midnight
they consulted, and determined on fleeing to the British flag for protection.
Before daybreak on the morning of the 13th they broke out of their fort by
the rear, which had been guarded by the people of a district called Tuamasaga ;
these people, it appears, would have been neutral in the war, but ultimately
joined the Taimua and Faipule through fear. A great number of them had
strong sympathies with the Puletua, and these allowed them to escape, other-
wise they would all have been slaughtered.
The Puletua now fled to the neutral ground, which in former Samoan
wars had always been respected, but now many were shot down on it, two or
three being killed only a few hundred yards from this Consulate. Before
daylight, crowds of them flocked in to all parts of Apia, running into the
1 My Colonial Secretary ! —and this from a man who had placed his trust
in Mr. Woods !
10
CHAP.
FIJI


Residents’ houses to seek refuge, but they were disarmed and made prisoners
on the premises of Mr. Colmesnil, the U.S.Y.C., which adjoins that of this
Consulate ; this was done with his full knowledge.
On hearing the firing on the 12th, I employed a British subject to keep
out all natives of either party, but with the greatest vigilance I could not
prevent them breaking into the house on the morning of the 13th, and they
claimed protection under “Britannia’s flag,” many of the High Chiefs running
in and kneeling round the flag-staff in front of this Consulate. As there was
great excitement, and the lives of the people were in danger although they
were on neutral ground, I took them in as refugees. The following day, the
14th, there was much excitement and drunkenness, armed mobs, who were
quite uncontrollable, patrolling the streets and behaving in a very threatening
and insulting way at this Consulate, I had consequently to employ more
watchmen, but I did not allow any firearms on the premises. That night,
this Consulate was surrounded by armed men who were pointing their rifles
at this Consulate and making threatening signs ; this was also being done
from Mr. Colmesnil’s grounds at a distance of some twenty feet from us.
The day and the night of the 15th passed by in a similar manner.
At this time the propriety of breaking into this house and forcibly taking
out the refugees was being debated at Mulinuu, and we therefore felt in a
very alarming position. I was however, ray Lord, determined to be firm, and
rely only on that protection which the British flag always gives ; I therefore
determined to send down to Fiji for Sir Arthur Gordon to come here as soon
as he possibly could, and if he could do so, to come in a vessel of war.
I also received a sensible summary of the situation from the
Rev. George Brown, a name afterwards celebrated :
From the Rev. George Brown
Apia, July 17, 1877. —Your Excellency—On Friday last when we arrived
here we found that the Puletua party had been entrapped the day before and
were quite conquered by the Government. The present state of affairs is as
follows:
1. The Puletua party have laid down their arms, and made submission to
the Government. They are all prisoners at Mulinuu, with the exception of a
number of the principal chiefs, who have taken refuge in the British Consulate.
At a meeting held to-day it was decided to apportion out the prisoners to the
different districts in Samoa, and not at present to allow them to return to
their own lands. This is done to prevent them from uniting again against the
Government, and also to secure payment of an indemnity for the war.
2. The principal chiefs of the defeated party are in the British Consulate,
and Mr. Liardet refuses to give them up unless a promise is given that their
lives will be spared. The rulers are very angry at this, and wish to have them
surrendered for trial without any conditions being made. The Consul’s action
in this instance is, I think, heartily approved by the great majority of the
foreign residents. From what I heard to-day I fear that the Chiefs would
have little mercy extended to them in the present excited state of affairs.
3. There will, I believe, be no more fighting at present. The people are
all disbanding, and by to-morrow or next day the great bulk of them will
have returned to their homes.
11
XIX
FIJI


4. I have seen some of the principal Chiefs and have talked freely of the
state of affairs here. I think they have now very little faith in Steinherger,
and in my opinion most of them feel now that their only hope is in the
establishment of British rule here, but I shall he able to speak more positively
on this matter to-morrow, as several of them are coming to have a quiet talk
on board the ship.
5. I would most respectfully urge that Your Excellency should, if possible,
visit Samoa as soon as you can conveniently do so. lam certain that such a
visit at this time, whether it resulted in the cession and acceptance of the
group or not, would he of immense use to these poor people, and would save
them from many dangers to which they are at present exposed. I still believe
that they can never form a stable Government from amongst themselves, and
in this opinion all the Chiefs I have spoken to concur. If left to themselves
they are likely to become the prey of men who only seek to advance their
own interests, and fresh complications between the foreign residents and the
natives, as well as among the natives themselves, are certain to occur. My
sincere desire is that the Samoans should place themselves under British rule,
as I firmly believe that it would result in much good to both races, and I feel
certain that there is no other way to prevent further war and bloodshed. The
Samoans are a quiet tractable race, and would readily be amenable to any laws
established by those who possessed their confidence. —I remain, etc.
To Consul Liardet
Nasova, August 17, 1877. —My dear Sir—l have to thank you for your
various letters up to the 19th ult. Ido not know whether you will care to
learn my opinion on the subject, but at least it cannot displease you to hear
that I think you did perfectly right, not only in giving a shelter to fugitives
in danger of their life, but in refusing to give them up without satisfactory
proof that your doing so would not lead to their being killed. At the same
time, the state of matters which you describe is one which it is desirable not
to prolong a moment longer than is absolutely necessary, and perhaps the
letter I enclose to-day for the Samoan Government may afford you an oppor-
tunity of extricating yourself from a delicate and embarrassing position.
I think the moment seems hardly come for my appearance on the scene.
It would never do for me to come down apparently to asJc the Samoans to
solicit protection or annexation, or to press it on them. When the answer
to the petition arrives it will be a good occasion for coming in person to give it.
Messrs. Stewart and Woods are fighting before the Courts. It is no
business of mine, but it seems a pity that you did not by agreement with
the American Consul make some arrangement either to close the store as
requested or to appoint a receiver until matters in dispute were settled.
You must have had an anxious and troublesome time lately, and I feel
much concerned at the alarm and discomfort to which Mrs. Liardet must
have been exposed.—l remain, etc.
Poor Mr. Liardet’s position had now become a very embar-
rassing one. He could not give up the refugees without disgrace.
He could not keep them encamped in the narrow precincts of
his garden without the gravest risk and inconvenience. Nor
12
CHAP.
FIJI


could he, after the imprudent part he had taken in the quarrels
which broke out between white residents of various classes in
Samoa, regain his position among them; while, to make matters
worse, he at this juncture further compromised himself, somewhat
deeply and quite unnecessarily, by a squabble with the United
States Consul. The nature of the dispute was not unfairly
summarised by the German Consul, Mr. Weber, as follows: —
M. Weber to M. de Bulow
Apia, September 15, 1877. —The persons interested in the American -
English firm of Stewart and Woods, which is engaged in land speculations,
lately got quarrelling among themselves, and for the settlement of the dispute
the two principals went to Levuka. Whilst Stewart was kept there on account
of alleged conflicts with the Courts, Woods returned to Apia on the 30th
August, and with the aid of the American Consul Griffin (whose return to
Samoa is only ascribed to the press of business at Washington at the time of
the change of President), got possession of the said firm’s place of business
on the Ist September, expelling the agents and housekeepers left behind by
Stewart. The American Consul put the house under his official seal for a
time, and appointed two Englishmen as watchers, one of whom, Martin by
name, was a prisoner of the English Consulate, only at large on parole.
The expelled persons then got a warrant from the British Consul for the
arrest of Martin, and with the help of other Englishmen they made use of
this opportunity to drive the American Consul’s watchers out of the house in
the night, to handcuff them, as well as a lawyer named Hetherington (formerly
a friend of the now a companion of Woods’), and to put them
on board the English schooner Canterbury as prisoners. The British Consul
then placed his official seal on Stewart’s house, and put armed men from an
English schooner into it as a guard. The American Consul demanded a
hundred armed natives from the Taimua Government to put him in possession
again. Fortunately the Taimua forbore to meddle in the matter in any way,
guided in this respect partly by its own judgment, and partly by my advice,
for I considered it my duty to do my best to prevent bloodshed and further
complications. No Germans have been mixed up in this affair.
The American Consul now declares the violation of his official seal, etc.,
to be a national insult by the English Consul, and demands pecuniary com-
pensation and salutation of the American flag ; the English Consul demands
the same for himself and his flag, on account of the seizure first made of an
English house.
It is difficult to say which is right. Stewart is a naturalised American,
his partners are Englishmen, and formerly the English flag waved over the
place of business. On the other hand, Woods asserts that he had full power
from all the partners and creditors concerned to take possession, and that he
applied to the American Consul on behalf of the American creditors, co-
represented by him, as the English Consul had declared himself incompetent
to aid him in getting possession.
A curious aspect of farce was thrown over the whole business
by its absurd complications. The men employed by the United
13
XIX
FIJI


States Consul as his “Marshal” and “Deputy Marshal” were
British subjects, which their British assailants for the most part
were not.
Almost all the parties concerned addressed their complaints
to me. The American Consul complained of the action of Mr.
Liardet in breaking his seals. Mr. Liardet retorted by complaints
of the American Consul’s action in affixing them. Mr. Woods,
Mr. Hetherington, Mr. Harding, and Mr. Martin complained of
the violence done them. The adventures of these gentlemen are
rather graphically told in their respective narratives, from which
I extract a few passages.
Mr. Woods’s Story
Between 3 and 4 o’clock on Saturday, Sept. Ist, the American Consul
proceeded to the store and demanded payment from Messrs. Colmesnil and
Foster the sum of SIOOO on the first of the dishonoured bills of exchange.
These gentlemen, whom the U.S. Consul found in possession, said that there
were no funds, and the U.S. Consul then attached the property in the name
of the U.S., placing the seals of his Consulate upon the building, and appoint-
ing Messrs. Harding and Martin the Marshals in charge. On Mr. Conborough,
the storeman, resisting, he was pushed on one side. The Marshals received
instructions to make an inventory of the property, and while doing so they
found among other things in the office desk certain documents proving the
correctness of my suspicions as to the goods having been made away with
£llO in cash and goods being shown to have gone that morning.
About 8 p.m. we received notice from the Marshal that he had heard an
attempt was to be made by Hunt and others to obtain possession of the store.
This was communicated to the U.S. Consul, who proceeded to the spot at
once to ascertain if there were any grounds for such a report. Mr.
Hetherington, the solicitor, and I accompanied him; but' finding all quiet,
after stopping for some three-quarters of an hour, we returned to our
residence. We had been back hardly more than an hour when we were
informed that the place was surrounded and being attacked by a body of
armed men, whites and half-castes. I went off at once to the assistance of
Messrs. Martin and Harding ; but being met half-way by one of my own men,
who reported that the place had been broken open and taken possession of by
order of the British Consul, I returned, feeling that this was now a matter to
be settled by the Consulates, and reported what had been done to the American
Consul, who decided that he would do nothing till the’morning, when he would
be in possession of full particulars from his officers, the Marshals. Hearing
nothing of these gentlemen, whom we were expecting every minute, after an
hour’s delay Mr. Hetherington went off to obtain information, and in the
course of half an hour a native came running down reporting that Messrs.
Martin and Harding had been ironed and taken on board a schooner ; that
when Mr. Hetherington had reached the store the mob had treated him in
the same way, and that they were then coming to do so to myself. lat once
secured the front door, and, while endeavouring to persuade Mrs. Hetherington
who had left the house, to return inside, the mob of some dozen whites and
half-castes made their appearance, and, going up to the house, knocked once
14
CHAP
FIJI


or twice. Receiving no reply, they broke the front door open, and entered,
calling loudly for me. Finding no one, and being informed by a half-caste
that I was by the side of the house, they rushed round, and I stepped back
with Mrs, Hetherington into the native house adjoining. This they sur-
rounded, and called upon me to give myself up. Presently this demand was
repeated in the name of the Queen, whereupon I stepped forward and asked,
“ Who calls me in the Queen’s name ?” They made a rush upon me at once,
saying “We do this by order of the British Consul,” They seized my person,
and one of the ringleaders, W. J. Hunt, called out, “ Constables, cover him,”
and then, “Put the handcuffs on him.” One Mair, a person employed by
Mr. Liardet, and the other armed men then presented their firearms at my
head, and Hunt, levelling his pistol within a foot of my forehead, swore by
God to shoot me if I did not allow the “constables ”to iron me. Frefused,
demanding their authority for the outrage, when with frightful oaths and
cries of “ British Consul,” and threats to shoot, they closed in on me. I seized
Hunt by the throat, knocking his pistol up, and called upon the others to
desist from this outrage on an unarmed man. I demanded that if they had
authority they should produce it, and if not, to accompany me to the Con-
sulate for the verbal authority which their leaders pretended to have. Two
of the men, Williams and Dunlop, then said I should not be touched any
more, and I insisted on going to the British Consulate ; -whereupon a quarrel
took place among themselves. I went off towards Mr. Liardet’s house
with Williams and Dunlop, the remainder following with a large crowd of
natives.
Messrs. Harding and Martin’s Story
On the Ist inst. Mr. Griffin, United States Consul, having appointed us
Mkrshals of his Court, proceeded to the store of George L. Smith and Co., at
Matautu. He demanded the sum of 1000 dollars upon one of the dishonoured
bills of exchange, and that not being met, he directed us to attach the property
and place it under the seal of the U.S. Mr. Conborough resisted our entrance
from the office into the store, and so was pushed on one side. The doors and
windows were then closed and sealed, and we proceeded to take a rough inven-
tory of the property.
At about 11.15 p.m. we were aroused from sleep by a number of loud voices
and the rattle of firearms, followed by heavy blows upon the front door of the
store, and the demand, “ Open in the Queen’s name.” We refused, and repeat-
edly warned those outside to desist, as they were breaking the American
Consular seals. They threatened to fire through it if we did not open ; and
despite our repeated warnings as to the United States seals, they battered in
the sealed door and rushed inside.
As the outrage was committed by an armed mob claiming British authority,
we decided to offer no violent resistance, but each of us had several firearms
levelled at us, under cover of which we were placed in irons. We protested
without effect, and demanded by what authority they were acting ?
The answer made to Martin by a man named Mair, who appeared to be one of
the leaders, was a pistol levelled within a few inches of his face and the speech
“This is authority enough for you ; if you move I’ll blow your brains out.”
To Harding some one said, “By the authority of the British Consul.” After being
handcuffed, we demanded to be shown the warrant for our arrest. This was
refused, and we were ordered to go down to a boat. We were forced off the
15
XIX
FIJI


premises, declining to go otherwise, and down to a boat, Martin being carried.
We were then, under an armed guard, taken off to the schooner Canterbury.
The attacking party appeared well armed with rifles and revolvers, and several
shots were fired by them. One man, Hunt, fired when inside the store, and
wounded one of his own companions in the foot. Hunt and Mair seemed to
be in command. On reaching the schooner Canterbury we were ordered to
go on board, and on refusal, were forced. Martin was ordered to go below, and
on objecting, was knocked down and dragged, still in irons, along the deck
and thrown head first down the cabin stairs, so that his hips, arms, and head
were severely bruised, and his sleeping clothes, in which he had been taken off,
were saturated with blood. About an hour later Mr. Hetherington, solicitor,
was brought on board in irons, having been seized in the street and evidently
much knocked about. During the night we all protested several times against
our detention, and particularly against being kept in irons. We demanded
to be shown the authority, and were told by Hunt and Mair that we should
only see it at their convenience. The Master, W. A. Wilson, on the same
demand being addressed to him, said that he acted under the authority of the
British Consul. We said, “ Then take us before the British Consul.” At 1.45
on the 2nd hist, he repeated that he held us “ in irons ” by order of the British
Consul.
At 4.20 p.m. Mr. Liardet, the British Consul, came on board. We were
on deck in irons, and asked very respectfully if we had been seized, ironed,
and confined on board the vessel by his authority? He said, “Only Mr.
Martin was arrested by my direction, but when I was informed of your arrest,
Messrs. Hetherington and Harding, I heard something which caused me to
endorse that action.” We demanded to see the warrant under which we were
arrested, but were not shown it. We then formally demanded our release, but
were refused. We then asked that the irons might be removed and our
parole taken, more especially as we were some distance from the shore, and
we were not likely to risk the danger from sharks. The Consul also refused
this, saying that he should not consider us in safe custody without irons on.
Mr. Harding’s Story
After the above events the Consul sent for him and Mr. Hetherington.
There was absolutely no offence charged against Harding except that of
having taken service as Marshal to the American Consul, which by some
peculiar process of reasoning Mr. Liardet considered to be a breach of the
Foreign Enlistment Act, if done without his permission. But he was pleased
to consider that Mr. Harding “had suffered sufficiently for the offence he
had committed,” and ordered his release after two days’ imprisonment, thirty-
five hours of which had been passed in irons.
Mr. Martin’s Story
After Mr. Harding and Mr. Hetherington had been taken ashore, Mr.
Martin was still detained in irons on board the Canterbury. For twelve days
his irons were never taken off but once for a few minutes, and on the 12th
September he was removed, still in irons, to the Behring , in which Mr.
Liardet and others were going to Fiji. As soon as they were fairly at sea the
Captain of the Behring had his irons struck off, not acknowledging any
16
CHAP
FIJI


authority on the Consul’s part when once out of Samoa. He sums up his
complaint by saying: “I, while acting as an officer of the United States
Consulate, have been seized at midnight, my life threatened, and myself
brutally assaulted by a gang of armed ruffians acting under authority of the
British Consul, by whose orders, without any trial, without any crime or
offence being laid to my charge so far as I can learn, and without being able
to get any copy of the warrant under which I was seized, I have been kept
for twelve days and sixteen hours a close prisoner in irons on board a small
vessel, deprived even of the commonest decency of life in the way of personal
cleanliness, and am now forcibly deported to a distant Colony, to my great
inconvenience and possible pecuniary loss.”
Seeing all his schemes foiled, and his efforts thwarted, Liardet
lost his head entirely. After issuing an absurd notification to
the Samoan Government that he “ held ” the islands for Great
Britain, until certain fines which he proceeded to impose, and which
amounted in all to £12,000, were paid, he ran away from his
post, sailing down to Levuka to seek my “ advice and protection.”
He brought down with him his “ prisoner,” who, to his no small
disgust, became a free man on landing in Fiji. Liardet of course
came at once to see me on arriving in Levuka. His statements
were confused and incoherent, and I asked him to address me in
writing. This he did, and the nature of his letter may be gathered
from my reply and from my despatch to Lord Carnarvon.
To Consul Liardet
Nasova, Oct. o, 1877.—Sir— I had the honour to receive last night your
letter of the 2nd instant, written in consequence of the request made by me
to you at our interview on the 18th ultimo, that you would communicate to
me in writing the reasons which led you to desire my presence in Samoa.
2. These reasons, as I gather from your letter, are : —(1) “ That occurrences
have taken place which your limited experience does not enable you to cope
with, and there is no experienced person to refer to in dealing with the
number of serious cases continually occurring.”
(2) “That serious disturbances have arisen, and are likely to arise, between
British subjects.”
(3) “ That an otherwise probable civil war in Samoa would be ‘ averted ’ by
my presence.”
(4) “ That both the foreign residents and Samoans are daily looking for
and expecting me as the only means of the country being saved.”
3. The first two reasons do not appear to me sufficient to justify my
quitting my duties here at present in order to visit the Navigators’ Islands.
I am, of course, ready and anxious at all times to give you whatever
assistance by advice, information, or co-operation which it may be in my
power to give, but I cannot, even at your own request, relieve you of your
functions, or take upon myself the discharge of the duties assigned to you.
This is, however, practically what you ask me to do, and I need scarcely point
out that to undertake to deal with the occurrences to which you refer, or to
111 C
17
XIX
FIJI


tender advice on the spot with respect to constantly recurring disputes
between British subjects, would require my permanent residence in Apia, or
at all events a very much longer absence from Fiji than is in my case
practicable.
4. It is true that before leaving England it was intimated to me that I
was to be appointed Her Majesty’s High Commissioner in Polynesia, and that
my attention was especially directed to the condition of the Navigators’
Islands ; but Her Majesty has since been pleased to appoint you her Consul
in that group, and so long as you hold that office it would be improper for me
to assume the discharge of functions for which you were selected, and for the
proper performance of which you are responsible.
5. The third reason assigned by you is a stronger one; and could I
suppose with you that my presence in Samoa would prevent the outbreak of a
civil war, I should not be indisposed to assent to your request. You assign,
however, no grounds for this belief; and although a visit from me might
possibly cause an outbreak to be deferred until after the few days that I
should be able to remain in Samoa had elapsed, I find it hard to imagine
that it could produce any such lasting result as you contemplate.
6. So again, if I thought that my presence in Samoa afforded “the only
means of the country being saved,” I would not hesitate to incur the
responsibility of at once proceeding there. But I confess lam wholly at a
loss to see what object I could set before myself for attainment or reasonably
hope to effect.
7. Samoa will be the first place visited by me when I receive the
Commission which it has been intimated to me that it is Her Majesty s
gracious intention to issue; but until then my doing so would be open to
misconstructions which I should greatly deprecate.
8. There are, however, two contingencies under which I would not object
to visit Samoa at an earlier period. The first is that which I have already
mentioned, of your being in personal danger. The second is that of the reply
to the petition to the Queen forwarded by me to England being received here
before my Commission arrives. This would afford a natural occasion of
visiting Samoa, in order personally to communicate to the Chiefs Her Majesty s
reply, and I will avail myself of the opportunity, should you at the time still
wish that I should do so, and should I find it practicable, consistently with
my other duties, to absent myself from Fiji. —I have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasoya, Fiji, October 4, 1877.— My Lord—ln my despatch of the Ist
August I communicated to your Lordship the latest intelligence which I
had then received from Samoa.
2. By the first opportunity of communicating with Apia, I made known
to Mr. Liardet the reasons which rendered me unwilling to comply with his
request that I would proceed to Samoa, and told him that I should not do
so until I had received my appointment as Her Majesty’s Commissioner in
Polynesia, unless I previously learnt that he were himself placed in a
position of personal danger from which I could assist to extricate him (a
contingency which did-not seem likely to arise), or unless some reason of
equal urgency were shown for ray taking a step of so unusual a nature.
18
CHAP.
FIJI


In order more clearly to explain the position assumed by me, I enclose
a copy of this letter, although not an official one.
3. I heard nothing more from Samoa until Monday the 17th ultimo, on
the morning of which day I was informed that the barque Behring had
arrived from Apia, having on board Mr. Consul Liardet, Mr, G. A. Woods,
and “some prisoners.”
A few hours afterwards, I received from Mr, G. A. Woods the two letters
of which I have the honour to enclose copies. In the first of these letters
he charges Mr. Liardet with aiding a fraudulent debtor in defeating the
claims of his creditors, and with having arrested and kept in irons several
British subjects named by him. In the second, he encloses adetter from a
Mr. Colmesnil, charging Mr. Liardet with an attempt to bribe him, and
with having stated that he was authorised by me to expend money for the
purpose of bribery.
4. I caused Mr. Woods to be informed in reply, that as regards the matters
referred to in his first letter I had no jurisdiction, and that the allegation con-
tained in the second would be transmitted to Mr. Liardet for his observations.
I enclose copies of these letters, as well as of that which I addressed to
Mr. Liardet, forwarding to him these documents.
5. I subsequently received letters from Mr. R, Hetherington, and from
Mr. Drury, United States Commercial Agent in Fiji, of both of which I
enclose copies.
The former protests against the imprisonment of the writer by Mr.
Liardet; the latter encloses the copy of a letter from the United States
Consul in Samoa, complaining that property of an American citizen, placed
under the seal of his Consulate for protection of the creditors of the firm,
had been forcibly taken possession of and the seals broken by Mr. Liardet’s
directions.
To these letters I directed a similar answer to be returned to that which
had been given to Mr. Woods.
6. On the following day, Mr. Liardet called on me. So far as I could
gather from the remarks made by him, he had come to urge me to visit
Samoa, but I did not succeed in eliciting from him what it was he wished
me to do when there. He had also come, he said, to ask my advice and
opinion as to his conduct in the case of the breaking open of the Stewart’s
store, and the arrest of Messrs. Hetherington, Harding, and Martin, and
generally, as he expressed it, “to put himself in my hands.”
7. I asked him if it were true, as I had heard, that he had imposed a fine
of $60,000 on the Samoans, and had on leaving issued a notice to the effect
that he had assumed possession of the Islands until it was paid. He said it
was quite true that he had imposed a fine of SIO,OOO dollars on account of
the collision with the crew of the Barracouta in 1876 ; one of SIO,OOO for
insult oflered to the Consulate; one of SIO,OOO for insult to the name of
Commodore Hoskins ; and one of $30,000 for injuries done to British property
during the recent troubles.
8. I expressed some surprise at his having levied a fine on account of the
Barracouta affray, as I had understood that orders had been given from
home to defer until the receipt of further instructions any action in that
matter, and I asked him if he had held any inquiry before imposing the fine.
He said he had not held any inquiry or given any previous warning to
19
XIX
FIJI


the Samoan authorities in any of these cases; that he had not received any
instructions to defer proceeding in the case of the Barracouta, and that it was
quite true that he had issued a notification that he “held” the Islands.
9. I told him that I could not of course say what view the Foreign Office
might, on receiving his explanations, take of these transactions ; but that,
judging from the general sentiments expressed by Her Majesty’s Government,
I thought it improbable that the steps he had taken would meet with un-
qualified approval.
10. On the question of the arrest of Messrs. Harding, Martin, and
Hetherington, I told him that, until the Court of the High Commissioner
was constituted, I had no jurisdiction, and could express no official judgment;
but that, if he wished my private opinion, I thought it would require grave
cause to justify the detention of these men in irons, and that I much regretted
that, in taking forcible possession of Stewart’s store, he had acted without
previous communication with the United States Consul, and in such a manner
as to give that officer legitimate ground for offence.
I recommended him to write three despatches to the Earl of Derby, one
stating the causes which had led him to impose so heavy a fine on the
Samoans, another to explain the proceedings taken against Messrs.
Hetherington, Harding, and Martin, and the third giving the reasons which
had induced him to leave his post for the purpose of consulting me. I also
asked him to communicate to me in writing the motives of his request that I
should proceed to Samoa, and the reasons which made him anticipate any
beneficial result from my presence there.
I further suggested that he should reply to Mr. Colmesnil’s accusation that
he had used my name as his authority for the tender of a bribe, adding that
the charge was incredible, but that, having been made so distinctly and by a
man lately holding the position of United States Consul, I thought it better
that it should be formally noticed and answered.
11. Mr. Liardet’s attention was also called by me to certain serious
complaints of the post-office here, with respect to his treatment of mails, with
which, however, I will not now trouble your Lordship.
12. As regards Mr. Woods’ and Mr. Hetherington’s complaints to me,
which I had communicated to him, I told him that I called for no answer, as
the matter was not one with respect to which I had any jurisdiction.
13. I have not yet received from Mr. Liardet any reply to these letters, or
any despatches from him for transmission to the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs.
14. Mr. Liardet has been indisposed since his arrival, but, as I am
informed by the Chief Medical Officer, not so seriously as to preclude his
furnishing a reply to these communications.
15. I have not by this mail received any letter from Dr. Turner, and am
consequently without any clear or unprejudiced account of recent events in
Samoa. That given by Mr. Woods and those with him is highly coloured by
passion, and that which I have gathered from Mr, Liardet is fragmentary and
obscure. Of the main facts, however, there can, I think, be no doubt. They
may be thus briefly summed up :
Mr. Liardet retains in his house a large number of the Samoan Chiefs
defeated on the 12th July last, and who are claimed by the ruling power as
prisoners of war.
20
CHAP.
FIJI


He has imposed fines to the amount of $60,000 on the Samoan
Government. He has directed the arrest and detention in irons of three or
four British subjects, and the forcible removal of one of them to Fiji; and he
has come here to request me to visit Samoa, in order to afford him assistance
in the discharge of his duties.
16. Mr. Liardet may have had sufficient reason for taking these steps, but
they certainly require some explanation. That explanation lam not able to
afford on his behalf, nor has he yet furnished it himself.—l have, etc.
P.S. —Mr. Martin, the individual longest detained in irons, and who was
brought down here against his will in the Behring, has commenced an action
for damages in the Courts here against Mr. Liardet.
To Consul Liardet
Nasova, October 5, 1877.—My dear Sir I have received and will
forward the despatches sent up by you for transmission, but I should wish
to point out that your despatches to Lord Derby contain no mention of the
heavy fines imposed by you on the Samoan Government, or of the notice
given by you before leaving Apia, with respect to which it is most desirable
that H.M, Government should be informed as early as possible.
Nor do you give any explanation of the arrest, detention in irons, and
transportation here of Mr. Martin, the complaints with regard to which
must go home by the Ly-ee-Moon.
I should strongly advise you not to defer sending your own statement at
the same time.
Let me also point out that in your letters to me you have taken no
notice of Mr. Colmesnil’s allegation as to your statement with respect to my
authorisation of the expenditure of money for corrupt purposes.
Liardet, having once come down to Fiji, could with difficulty
be induced to return to his Consulate. His wife and child had
remained in Samoa, and he professed to think their situation
dangerous, but he still clung to Levuka. He had arrived there
on the 17th September, and it was not till the 12th December
that he was again shipped off for Samoa. The British subjects
who had been imprisoned, ironed, and deported by him, and
brought prisoners against their will to Fiji, naturally commenced
actions against him in the Supreme Court. These were tried by
Chief-Justice dome, who, in a long and able judgment, decided
against Liardet, whilst at the same time he gravely censured the
other parties to the suit.
The success of these proceedings naturally led Dunlop, the
master of the cutter which Liardet had seized and detained, to
attempt to follow the same course. And here comes in a touch
of comedy, as shown in the following extract from a letter from
Mr. Thurston in Levuka to me at Kewa;—
I find the man Dunlop, master of the cutter from Samoa, is in pursuit
of Liardet for unlawful arrest, the seizure of his ship, and all damages,
21
XIX
FIJI


consequential and otherwise, therefrom arising. The lawyers, however,
won’t take up his case. They say he (Dunlop) has no money, and that
Liardet is in the same condition. Dunlop now wants a written opinion (for
which he can find the usual fee), as to whether he 4 4 mightn’t take it out of
him.” Liardet is walking about flanked by Messrs. Sullivan and Clay, both
eager for a little healthy excitement. A large and ill-tempered yellow dog
formed the rearguard when I met them. It will be a good thing for Liardet
when he is out of Fiji. It has been said that the Foreign Office has returned
some of the paper ; that the Bank received it by 44 Wentworth.” The state-
ment, lam told, came from Butt; but whether the bill or bills were on private
account, as for salary, or on public account, as for charters or other extra-
ordinary expenses, I could not learn.
The reports of these proceedings caused the Foreign Office
—somewhat too late in the day—to take alarm at the doings of
their nominee, and the authorities there began dimly to perceive
that a mistake had been made in opposing the issue of the High
Commission, and in appointing a Consul free from my super-
vision and control. Liardet was recalled, and abundant
telegrams from both Colonial Office and Foreign Office were sent
me, begging me to go at once to Samoa, to appoint a Consul of
my own selection, and generally to put straight all that had
become crooked. Two years before, there would have been little
difficulty in effecting a judicious settlement of Samoan affairs;
only a year earlier, a small amount of tact, patience, and common
sense would have sufficed to put matters on a satisfactory foot-
ing; but, by the end of 1877, things were so entangled and
embroiled as to render all action difficult, and I determined that
I would attempt nothing till I had the full powers of the High
Commission in my hands.
Meanwhile, matters went from bad to worse in Samoa.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
Nasova, Fiji, November 30, 1877. — My Lord — The cutter Vincent
arrived yesterday from Samoa.
2. She brings intelligence of the murder by a drunken American sailor
named Cochrane of another American of the name of Fox.
3. The United States Consul held an investigation into the circumstances
attending the murder, and committed Cochrane for trial in America, as by
the laws of the United States he has a right to do.
4. Cochrane was accordingly placed in custody on board an American
vessel, the Ada May , for transport to the United States.
5. The same evening, however, a public meeting of white residents at
Apia was held, over which Mr. George Prichard, an Englishman, and the
brother of the former British Consul, presided. In obedience to resolutions
passed at this meeting, some thirty men boarded the Ala May, took out of
her the prisoner Cochrane, and hanged him in the town of Apia.
22
CHAP.
FIJI


6. I enclose a copy of the Samoa Times of the 10th inst., which contains
a more detailed account of the events above narrated.
lam informed by the master of the Vincent that Dr. Turner and some
other of the more respectable English residents protested against these violent
proceedings; but as the Vincent has brought no mail, I have received no
letter from Dr. Turner or any other account of the trial and execution of
Cochrane than that contained in the enclosed newspaper.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
December 1, 1877.—My Lord—l have this moment received, after the
gun has fired announcing the approaching departure of the mail, Mr. Liardet’s
despatch, under flying seal, to the Earl of Derby.
I regret that I did not receive this despatch at an earlier date, as I should
have wished to forward at the same time a report from Chief-Justice Gorrie with
respect to the allegations therein contained concerning his conduct of the trial
Martin v. Liardet.
I do not concur in the course of action which Mr. Liardet proposes to take
after his return to Samoa. Captain Digby, of H.M.S. Sappho, is a discreet
and judicious officer, and by no means likely to be tempted into the adoption
of any measures of an objectionable character ; but I shall write a few lines to
him privately in the same sense as the instructions which I know he has
already received from the Commodore. I shall take an opportunity, before
Mr. Liardet leaves, of pressing on him the absolute necessity for the exercise
of caution and forbearance.
To Consul Liardet
Nasova, December 1, 1877.—Sir—I understand that you are about to
return to Samoa in a few days’ time, and it may, perhaps, be as well that I
should commit to writing the substance of the conversation I have lately had
with you.
You are not at present in any way responsible to me for your actions, nor
is it yet within my province to express approval or disapproval of them. I
cannot, however, but regret the prolonged absence from your post which has
resulted from your having felt it your duty to visit Fiji at the present time,
in order personally to urge upon me the expediency of my visiting Samoa,
which, as I have explained to you, it is impossible for me to do, except under
pressure of the most urgent necessity, until I have received Her Majesty’s
Commission as High Commissioner for Polynesia.
I have no authority to pretend to give you instructions, but as you have
asked my opinion and advice, you will, I am sure, forgive me if I venture
to offer you my counsel on one very important point, previous to your again
engaging in the business of your Consulate.
I should strongly recommend you not to take any step of serious import
without previous consultation and agreement with your colleagues, the
German and American Consuls. What affects British subjects resident in
Samoa must also affect those of other nationalities, and it is on every account
most desirable that any step taken, whether to protect the interests of foreign
residents from molestation by the natives, to preserve law and order among
the foreign residents themselves, or to establish a responsible and powerful
23
XIX
FIJI


native Government, should be taken in unison with the representatives of
other Powers.
I have received information that my Commission has been sent to the
Queen for signature, and its arrival here cannot, therefore, be much longer
delayed. I shall lose no time in visiting Samoa after I have received it, and
meanwhile you may confidently rely on my disposition and intention, so far
as I can do so, to afford you what support and assistance it may be in my
power to give.—l have, etc.
To Commander Digby, R.N.
Bureta, December 2, 1877.—My dear Sir—l know that you have received
from the Commodore very positive instructions not to interfere in Samoan
politics if you can possibly avoid doing so. I know also that your judgment
and discretion are not likely to be at fault in carrying out those instructions.
It may therefore appear not only superfluous, but perhaps impertinent, that
I should say anything to you on the same subject.
But I have been somewhat alarmed by Mr. Liardet’s expressed intention,
under certain circumstances, of calling on you for aid, and so I am desirous
that there should be no misapprehension as to my views on the subject. I
hope you will therefore excuse my writing to say how thoroughly I concur
in the opinion that you should abstain from any decided action that you can
possibly avoid.
Of course I do not mean to say that there are no conceivable circumstances
under which it might be your duty to act vigorously, but I am sure that it
is only under pressure of very extreme necessity that you should do so, and I
am most anxious that everything should remain, as far as possible, in its
present state until my arrival as High Commissioner, which cannot now be
long delayed.
Pray pardon this letter not being written in my own hand. The original
has been written in pencil on a scrap of paper from a native hut in the bush,
and is not fit to send you, and I have therefore directed my Private Secretary
in Levuka to transcribe it.—l am, etc.
To the Chiefs now engaged in Hostile Operations at Samoa
Nasoya, Fiji, December 12, 1877.— Arthur Gordon— My Friends—l am
about to visit Samoa with a message from the Queen of England to the chiefs
of Samoa.
The Queen does not feel kindness for one party or one set of people only
in Samoa.
It is to all Samoa that she sends her message. It is for all Samoa that
she has equal regard.
It is therefore my desire to meet you, and (if it may be so) to meet you at
the same time as I meet the Taimua and Faipule, so that we may arrange
together for the future peace and good government of Samoa.
It is the Queen’s desire that you should live at peace, and that you should
have an independent native Government of your own, strong enough to keep
order among yourselves and to command respect from the strangers living
among you. When we meet we will consider by what means this much-to-
be desired result may be accomplished.
24
CHAP.
FIJI


I have proposed to the Taimua and Faipule to meet me at the beginning
of the month of February, and now I ask you (though not as one having
authority over you) to meet me at the same time, that we may consider the
suggestions which may mutually be made.—By his Excellency’s command,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
To the Taimua and Faipule of Samoa
Nasova, Fiji, December 12,1877.— Arthur Gordon— My good Friends—
A long time has passed since I wrote to thank you for your letters, and to tell
you that I proposed shortly to return the visit you had paid to me by myself
coming to see you in Samoa. Many things have happened to keep me here,
but now (if God will) it is my intention without fail to leave this place on my
visit to you towards the end of next month, January 1878. I will then bring
you the reply of the Queen to your petition, and I will give you counsel on
such points as you may desire it.
And this is what I now ask, that you would make arrangements for a
meeting with me and with all Samoa in the early part of the month of February.
I have heard with grief that you are fighting among yourselves. The
Queen does not feel kindness for one party only in Samoa, or for one set of
people only. It is to all Samoa that she feels regard. It is to all Samoa that
her word is spoken, and it should be heard by all.
I do not say this as though I had any authority among you. I ask you
to meet me because this is the first time the Queen has sent her representa-
tive among you, and it will be well that you should hear his communication.
The Queen has but one mind and one desire towards you. It is that
Samoa should be at peace, and that you should have an independent
Government of your own, strong enough to keep order among yourselves, and
to command respect from the strangers living among you. When we meet
we will consider by what means this much-to-be-desired result may be
accomplished.
I have desired the Consul to deliver you this letter ; the complaints that
you have made of him I will hear and examine into when I arrive.—By his
Excellency’s command,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
To Consul Liardet
Nasova, Fiji, December 12, 1877.—Sir—I have the honour to inform
you that I have received a telegram from the Secretary of State for the
Colonies authorising me, on his own behalf and that of the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, to proceed to Samoa when I find it convenient to do so.
It is impossible for me to leave Fiji until after the Estimates for 1878
have been framed and adopted ; and even were this not so, I should be inclined
to defer my visit for a short time.
It is desirable that, as far as is practicable, representatives from all Samoa
should meet me whilst I am in the group, and such a meeting would probably
take some time to arrange.
I have therefore addressed the enclosed letter to the Taimua and Faipule
requesting that such a meeting may be convoked for the beginning of the
month of February next.
25
XIX
FIJI


This letter is sent under flying seal for your perusal, and I have to request
that, after having read, you will enclose and deliver it on my behalf to the
Taimua and Faipule.
I also enclose a letter of a similar character for the leaders of the party in
arms against the Taimua.
You will have the'goodness to use much discretion both with regard to
the mode of making this communication, and the persons to whom it should
be made. On this point you will do well to consult not only your colleagues,
the Consuls of Germany and the United States, but also residents of experience
and respectability.
I have to request that you will inform the German and American Consuls
that you have been desired by me to communicate to them my intention to
visit Samoa at the close of the month of January, and that I shall have
some suggestions to offer to the Samoans for the restoration of peace, and the
establishment of a stable and independent native Government, which I
propose in the first instance to communicate to them, and which I hope I may
be fortunate enough to secure their concurrence in recommending to the chiefs
of Samoa for adoption.
I am not aware that there are any other regular Consuls in Samoa ;if
there are, you will, of course, make a similar communication to them. Ido
not include under this designation unpaid consular agents.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
December 28, 1877. —My Lord—H.M.S. Sappho returned here on the 26th
after a very brief stay at Samoa. Captain Digby informed me that from the
conversation of Captain Hassenpflug of the Imperial German corvette, and
Mr. Weber, the German Consul, he had formed an impression that it was their
intention to impose and demand immediate payment of ruinous fines on the
Samoans, in order to compel the Samoans to cede their islands to Germany
before my arrival at Apia.
2. This idea receives some confirmation from the enclosed letter, which I
have just received from Dr. Turner, and which was written two or three
days after the Sappho left Apia.
3. Although under certain circumstances I think the acceptance of the
cession of Samoa by Great Britain would be beneficial to this colony, it is by
no means of serious importance to it. Fiji will not suffer from the existence
of an independent Samoa, But the case would be widely different were
the Navigators’ Islands taken possession of by the German Empire. A blow
would be thus dealt at the rising prosperity of Fiji, from which it would
not, I fear, recover. All the German houses now established here would
undoubtedly transfer their headquarters to Apia, and as, if the German
Government accepts the cession, it will certainly bestow adventitious aid
in rendering its new possession of importance, it is probable that the
Navigators’ Islands would at once become what Fiji can only be after many
years of gradual progress.
4. I trust, therefore, that some steps may be taken to discourage the
accomplishment of this purpose.
5. If your Lordship will turn to a collection of papers, relative to the
26
CHAP.
FIJI


affairs of the Sandwich Islands, printed for the use of the Cabinet about
1844 or 1845, and which it doubtless preserved in the Foreign Office, you will
perceive that in 1843 Great Britain, France, and the United States entered
into a mutual agreement not to annex these islands ; the parties who signed
the agreement being, if I remember right, the English Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, the French Ambassador, and the American Minister. If it
could be suggested to the German Government to enter now into some such
agreement with that of England, I believe it would effect all that we are
entitled to ask, and would at the same time prevent the occurrence of evils
to this colony which the British Government is fully entitled, and which
it is indeed its duty, to deprecate.
6. I am as yet ignorant of the instructions I may receive, but, subject to
their contents, my present impression is to urge the Samoans to place them-
selves under the direction of a species of committee in which each nationality
interested in the maintenance of peace and good order in the Navigators’
Group should be equally represented.—l have, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
January 9, 1878.—My Lord—l have the honour to forward by this oppor-
tunity two despatches under flying seal to the Earl of Derby from H.B.M.
Consul at Apia —the one relating to Mr. Woods’ mission here in the month of
April last, and the other explaining his neglect to furnish me with copies of
his correspondence with the Foreign Office.
2. As regards the first, it appears hardly necessary at this distance of time
to make any remarks, although were the matter one of sufficient importance,
I should be able to point out what appear to me to be some mistakes in Mr.
Liardet’s explanation.
3. As regards the second, it is, however, right that I should observe: —
(1) That Mr. Liardet is in error in stating that he has received a com
munication from me expressing myself satisfied with his explanations, nor
can he produce any such communication. I have accepted his apologies on
the subject, which appeared to me of no great practical importance, and
which I did not wish to become a topic of prolonged discussion between us,
but I have never expressed any opinion as to the sufficiency of the excuses
offered. (2) That it is not the case that Mr. Liardet has since furnished me
with copies of all his correspondence, or that he has ceased the practice of
which complaint was made, as will appear from the copies of Mr. Liardet’s
despatch to me of the 19th ult., and my reply herewith enclosed.—l
have, etc.
From the Rev. Dr. Turner
Apia, Samoa, February 5, 1878. —So far as we are concerned your
Excellency’s non-appearance here has done no actual harm yet. Although
it gives occasion for talk to many enemies of England, there is no other harm
accruing from it. The Taimua did not call the chiefs together to meet your
Excellency, and no general meeting has yet been held. About three weeks
ago Manga, the Chief of Pagopago, was entrapped into surrendering himself.
He was assured that if he and his men would go over and have a friendly
27
XIX
FIJI


meeting with his enemies (the Government party), he would be received on
equal terms and all would be well. He did so, and was arrested with all his
followers, and their cannon and guns taken from them, and they are all now
down on this island as prisoners. The Government party having obtained
this victory are now returning from Tutuila, and purpose holding a meeting
of “all Samoa” next week for the purpose, as we hear, of consolidating the
Government and formally installing as king, Tamesese, one of the Tupua
family. While the Government forces have been on Tutuila, however, the
Malietoa adherents have not been inactive, and common report says that the
installation of Tamasese as king will be the signal of instant union and active
opposition on the part of all the Malietoa supporters against the present
Government. Any one who knows Samoa will confess that the Malietoa party
will never quietly allow a Tupua to be crowned. The fight in July was a
mere bagatelle and quite premature. Samoans will have their own time
to go about things and do them in their own way. But now it would appear
things approach a climax. More than one chief of the Malietoa has told me
that they hope you will not come till they have had a chance of showing that
the Malietoa party is still the dominant power in Samoa. Your Excellency
will have noticed that though the Malietoa party was nominally crushed last
July, up to this date the other party have not dared to attempt putting in
the king of their choice. We trust that you will still arrive before the crisis
comes, and be the means of welding together the two contending factions
under the British flag ! There is no use of arguing the matter. Samoa will
never be settled until they are under some foreign Power.
About the beginning of January, Captain Hassenpflug of the German war-
ship Augusta got telegraphic orders to leave this for Yokohama. He left
about the 10th January. He told me that he “ first thought his orders were
owing to European war complications, but subsequently believed that he has
been ordered there owing to one of the vessels on the China station having
been sent to the east coast of South America to avenge some outrage on a
German consul there.”
I trust that England will still be able to keep out of the Russo-Turkish
trouble, and that we may yet have the pleasure of soon seeing your Excellency
among us.—Believe me, very faithfully yours.
P, S. —The answer of our mission to the affidavits of the captain and
Government agent of Government ketch Patience I retain here till we hear
more definitely from your Excellency.
P'S. — 9 p.m. February 6, 1878.—Mr. Liardet has been ill (not very
seriously, I hope, though since yesterday more serious symptoms have set in).
Yesterday, I heard that while he was unable to be in the Consulate, Messis.
Sullivan and Hetherington (lawyers both known to your Excellency) were in
the Consulate alone, writing —what we know not. To-day, myself and two
other British subjects called on L. in a friendly way, and tried to point out
to him that while he was ill it would be better to lock the Consulate rathei
than have the archives open to men of that character, in whom the
British residents had no confidence. We got no satisfaction from him, and
we left and were on the point of preparing an official protest to be signed by
all the British subjects we could against having the Consulate open to these
men, when a friend of Liardet’s went and remonstrated with him and got him
28
CHAP,
FIJI


to agree to have the Consulate locked while he is ill, rather than have any
official 'public protest recorded. So we have dropped the matter for the time,
still trusting to see your Excellency soon.
Surely British interests are not safe with men like Sullivan and
Hetherington sole occupiers of H.B.M. Consulate. Your Excellency will please
excuse this hurried P.S. When we went along this morning Sullivan was in
sole possession.
At length my Commissions reached me, and at the beginning
of February 1878 I set out for Samoa in H.M.S. Sapphire,
taking with me Knollys and Arthur, and accompanied by the
Chief Judicial Commissioner (Chief-Justice Gorrie) and his legal
tail, as well as by Horne, who was to make such botanical
research in Samoa as our short stay permitted.
On my way, I arranged my plans of action in Samoa.
Liardet’s recall made what would otherwise have been a most
difficult and troublesome situation comparatively easy. His
retreat from the scene would render it unnecessary to enquire
minutely into the charges against him, and would relieve me from
the embarrassment of his presence. The High Commission Court,
Corcoran’s lynching, and the claims questions, it was Gorrie’s
business to look after. It was therefore almost wholly of my
dealings with the Samoan Government, and the Foreign Consuls,
that I had to think. It was clear to me that the time was not
propitious for any immediate annexation, and that whatever was
done must, to be done effectively, be brought about by the joint
efforts of the three Consuls. If they concurred in pressing it,
I thought it possible that we might in concert exercise some real
influence, and that we might set up an effective municipal
government of Apia. I made up my mind also to recognise the
Taimua and Faipule as a sufficiently established power with
which to treat. Several reasons led me to adopt this course.
In the first place they are de facto rulers. Next, their anxiety
for recognition as a Government will probably make them more
ready to agree to my proposals than a less feeble authority
would be ; and thirdly no other Government could be in a moment
constituted. And it was right that the Government which had
incurred the Barracouta fine should be that which was forced
to pay it.
Wednesday , February 6. —After a tedious delay, the Black Swan
came in this morning, bringing Cocks and Joni Moala from Lau,
and letters from Wilkinson. As there was nothing more to wait
for, I went on board the Sapphire immediately with Arthur and
Knollys, and we sailed at once. Our passage, which was a tedious
one, lasted four days. Nothing occurred to break its monotony,
29
XIX
FIJI


except a sight of Niuafoo, an uninviting volcanic island, along the
coast of which we passed very closely. It is of no great height,
and is in great part covered with a thick growth of coco-nuts,
bamboos, and casuarinas, with here and there a banyan, or a few
dilo trees, scattered among them. But large tracts everywhere
are bare and black, broad streams of lava, seamed and scored
with fissures, which form traces of the great eruption in 1846.
The pebbly shingle on the beach, the sand along the shore, and
the low rocky coast itself, are all black, fading sometimes into
slaty grey. There is no great elevation in the island, and the
main crater in the centre of it is said to be now a lake. We
saw no good landing-place at any point.
At daylight on Sunday , February 11, we were off the island
of Savaii. It reminded me of Bourbon and Mauritius. The
low cliffs of black lava are perforated by innumerable souffleurs
through which great jets of foam leapt high into the air every
few minutes. Above the cliffs the land slopes upwards in long,
regular sweeps, pimpled with craters. Apolima, the little island
between Upolu and Savaii, is very pretty —an extinct crater, the
inside of its walls clothed with rich vegetation, the outside almost
bare and going abruptly down into the sea. The only landing-
place is where the lip of the crater has been worn down to the
sea-level, and there a village nestles among the palm-trees,
by the side of a narrow channel of water leading to a land-
locked lagoon. Passed along Upolu, which from the sea is not
particularly pretty. The foliage which covers the hills in one
almost unbroken sheet is too dingy and of too uniform a green
in colour for beauty, and the forms of the mountains are
ungraceful. But there is much rich, flat, and sloping land, and
apparently a fine table-land at a great elevation. Noticed one
and only one bright red tree like an Erythrina.
10 A.M. —Church. Stupid sermon from Edwardes.
1 p.m. —Steamed into Apia harbour. Noticed as we came in
that all the flags were half-mast high, and learnt on anchoring
that Liardet died this morning! Dr. Turner came on board.
I did not land. German ship gone to Japan.
4 p.m. —Liardet’s funeral. Arthur went to represent me,
and we sent a firing party from the ship.
Monday, February 11. — 7 A.M. —Went ashore incog, with
Knollys, and bathed at a clear, cold, pretty pool in a stream
about half a mile behind the town.
8.30 A.M. —Dr. Turner came to breakfast.
11 a.m. The Taimua and Faipule came off to see me, with
the Judge Finau. Very polite, and probably equally insincere.
30
FIJI
CHAP.


1 p.m. —Landed under salute, and with manned yards, etc.
English and other foreign residents presented an address at the
door of the house I had taken : a large wooden two-storied house,
with a broad verandah round both stories. In reply to their
address I told them that if my visit resulted in any advantage
to them I should be more than repaid for my trouble in coming
down, but I entirely declined to make any speech.
3 P.M. —Went down to the Consulate. Saw Mrs. Bell and
went into the Consular office with Arthur. Papers in much
disorder. Their contents confirmed many of the reports we
had heard as to Liardet’s strange doings.
4to 7 p.m. —Saw a few people and rested. Dinner at 7.30
—Chief-Justice and Horne.
Tuesday , February 12.—We three again had an early bathe
at the cascade pool, which was enjoyable enough,—the only
enjoyable part of the day. After this followed some hours of
writing, seeing business visitors, and making preparations for
going to meet the Taimua and Faipule at Mulinuu. At 1 p.m.
the German Consul, Weber, came to call, and we had half an
hour’s talk. I decidedly like him, and whatever schemes he
may have in his head for advancing the interests of his own
Government, I am sure that he will go heart and soul with us in
resisting all undue American interference. I went by water to
Mulinuu, and on the beach was met by Captain Murray and the
officers of the Sapphire (I was in uniform myself), and was
escorted by them to the place of meeting. This turned out to
be a rather crazy one-room wooden house, —weather-board, —
where the Taimua and Faipule were assembled, looking perplexed
and dismal. They seemed to be by no means happy or successful
in their game of playing at being a Government. After formal
greetings, I addressed them, telling them that I had come to
give the Queen’s answer to their petition.
I come here to give you the answer of Her Majesty the Queen to the
petition you last year addressed to her to take these islands under her gracious
protection. The Queen is gratified to learn that in times of danger and
difficulty you look to her for help, and she is on her part desirous to promote
your welfare. But the vague proposal you have made is not such an one as
she could seriously consider. It would be impossible for Her Majesty to accept
the onerous responsibilities of protection without a corresponding right to
direct the action and policy of those protected. Such a right it is manifestly
not your intention or wish to confer, and under these conditions Her Majesty
(were she otherwise disposed to do so) would not act honestly by you in
assuming a protectorate which must necessarily lead to an interference in
your domestic affairs—if not an absolute direction of them—such as you do
not desire or contemplate. Such a protectorate could only be accepted for
31
XIX
FIJI


selfish purposes and with a full knowledge of the fact (which you do not
perceive) that it must tend to the entire and permanent transfer of the
Government and destinies of Samoa to foreigners of the protecting nation.
The Queen therefore declines to accept your offer, but I am directed to express
her grateful appreciation of the feelings which prompted it; and to assure
you of her solicitude for the stability and prosperity of the Samoan State.
It is the Queen’s desire that you should possess a strong and efficient Govern-
ment, one strong enough to keep order and maintain the authority of law
among both native Samoans and the foreigners settled among you ; and
one of such a nature as may he respected by Foreign States. Before I leave
Samoa, I shall make you some suggestions towards effecting this object.
Meanwhile, it will be well to take this opportunity to settle several pending
questions. The late Consul of England has imposed on the Government of
the Samoan State several fines, and has intimated to you that, pending their
payment, the islands themselves are pledged to Great Britain. It will be for
you to show me whether any of these fines ought to be either wholly or in
part remitted, and for us mutually to arrange for the prompt discharge of
the remainder. A number of Samoans of the party defeated in the late
hostilities in this island have, as you are aware, been permitted to encamp
in the English Consul’s garden. I see no reason why so unusual a protection
should be prolonged, and I shall be ready to put an end to it, so soon as you
have given me proof that the lives of the refugees will not thereby be en-
dangered, that they will not be exposed to greater molestation or inconvenience
than those who have obtained the intervention of the German Consulate, and
that you possess power to enforce obedience and restrain violence. It has
been reported to me that a murder has been committed by Samoans on the
person of a labourer employed by a British subject in Savaii. I have to request
that this allegation may at once be investigated, and that if it be found true,
merited punishment may be inflicted. Her Majesty the Queen has made
provisions which I will communicate to you, for the better government of
her own subjects in the Pacific, and for the establishment of Courts having
jurisdiction over them. The arrangements for this purpose may be made
more effective by an agreement with the Samoan State, into which I have no
doubt I shall find you willing to enter. It will also be requisite to make
some arrangements which shall guarantee the security of life and property to
foreign residents, and the maintenance of order and tranquillity throughout
the land. As the Taimua and Faipule are too numerous a body to negotiate
with as a whole, I have to request that you will select some four or five of
your number, and empower them to discuss these matters with me, and enter
into an agreement with respect to them. In conclusion, I beg to express my
hearty satisfaction at being thus enabled to return your visit to me in Fiji,
and to assure you of my earnest desire to aid and assist you in the difficult task
you have here to perform.
The Taimua and Faipule at once assented to my proposal to
choose commissioners to negotiate with me on the subjects I had
mentioned, and amid some confusion proceeded to name them.
We appointed a meeting for twelve to-morrow. We walked back
from Mulinuu round the bay, and went afterwards for ahother
bathe at our usual pool. The town of Apia consists of houses
32
CHAP.
FIJI


dotted irregularly along the beach for about a mile, some very
good two-storied houses, others mere shanties, but each standing
apart in its own garden or compound. Beyond this to the east
is the native town, and beyond that again on the horn of the bay
stand Dr. Turner’s house, the chapel of the London Missionary
Society, and a few other houses. On the west of the town is
the long promontory of Mulinuu, on which, separated from the
town by a large thick wood, is another native village, the
“capital” of Samoa, where stand the public offices, such as they
are, the houses of the Tairaua and Faipule, etc. etc. The native
houses resemble in shape those of Lau and Tonga, but for the
most part have no side walls, only a thick roof of thatch
supported on posts. Mats are let down from the roof at night,
forming temporary walls or screens. Each house stands on a
patch of fine white sand kept beautifully neat and clean. The
men dress much as in Fiji, in shirt and sulu, or sulu without the
shirt, but the dress of the women is peculiar, and new to me. The
upper garment, answering to the Fijian pinafoa but here called
a ti'puta , is shaped like a chasuble, hanging down before and
behind, but open at the sides. The prevailing fashion is to
have this of patchwork of bright colours. The effect is peculiar
and somewhat Harlequin-like, but bright and pleasing.
Wednesday , February 13.—After breakfast this morning, I
received a visit from the U.S. Consul, Griffin, who is manifestly,
to my thinking, both a knave and a fool. He talked largely
about his non-interference in politics, whilst at the same time
he boasted of his influence. He professed, but with a profession
which did not in the least deceive, that he was very friendly
to us, while taking little pains to conceal his rabid hatred of
“ Britain.” He declared he entirely approved of the Municipality
plan, and regretted that his instructions prevented his taking
part in the proposed Convention. Ido not believe he has any
such instructions. He was formerly U.S. Consul at Copenhagen,
and I should think must have done something very bad to get
translated from a civilised European capital to Samoa.
At twelve, the Samoan negotiators made their appearance.
The discussion was very satisfactory, and we agreed on the four
first articles of the Treaty, as follows :
Article, I
There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the subjects of
Her Britannic Majesty and those of the Samoan States.
Article 11
The subjects of Her Britannic Majesty shall always enjoy in Samoa
whatever privileges may be accorded to those of the most favoured nation,
111 D
33
XIX
FIJI


and no rights shall be granted to any other Foreign State which shall not be
equally enjoyed by Great Britain,
Article 111
It is agreed that subjects of Her Britannic Majesty resident in Samoa
shall be liable to trial only by the Court of Her Britannic Majesty’s High
Commissioner, and that any summons or warrant to appear before such
Court as a witness, issued under the provisions of Her Britannic Majesty’s
Order in Council of the 13th August 1877, shall be obeyed by Samoan
subjects, and may be enforced in like manner as if such summons or warrant
had been issued by a Samoan Court, or had been directed to a British subject
by the Court of the High Commissioner.
Article IV
The High Commissioner engages to make Regulations under the 24th
and 25th Articles of Her Majesty’s Order in Council of the 13th August 1877,
to enforce the observance by British subjects of such of the existing municipal
laws and police regulations of Samoa as may be hereafter agreed upon by
treaty or convention between Her Majesty and the Samoan State. And
meanwhile the said High Commissioner undertakes at once to issue Regula-
tions for the due observance of quarantine by British subjects, and for the
prohibition of the supply of spirituous liquors by British subjects to Samoans
or other Polynesians resident in Samoa.
Thursday , February 14. —This morning, the Samoan Com-
missioners, instead of turning up at 10.30, as they had promised
to do, sent up the red-haired foxy-faced French priest, Father
Broyet, with a message that they were “not coming,” tout court.
Not trusting his reverence, who I greatly suspect was the
prompter of the message, I sent a messenger of my own back
with him to explain that this would be a great affront, that
they had undertaken to meet me for further discussion, and
that their promise made to me must be kept; that I and Mr.
Weber were waiting for them, and that we should wait till they
came. This had the effect of bringing them, but we did not
get to business till about 1 o’clock. It was not so good a
meeting as that of yesterday, but we made some progress with
the Articles, and the disposition of the Samoans seems acquiescent.
Weber augurs well from our progress so far. We sat about
two hours. After the meeting, I went to make my formal call
on Weber. He received me in a small hot office, with the
windows shut, where the closeness and stuffiness was something
awful. But the house itself is a charming one, admirably suited
to the climate —a one-storied bungalow surrounding two courts,
in the centre of which palm-trees of various kinds are growing;
a broad verandah on each side of all the buildings. The
German influence here is a fact. Whatever might have been
34
CHAP.
FIJI


the case two or three years ago, it is now too strong to upset,
especially since July last, when a Treaty (which he showed me)
was made by Weber, which gives Germany rights, that she will
not willingly surrender. The best course then for us now is to
work with Germany, the more cordially the better; but had it
not been for the departmental jealousies and delays which have
retarded by nearly three ye,ars the issue of the High Commission,
annexation to Fiji might have been effected early in 1877 with
the greatest ease.
Friday , February 15. —We agreed to have no meeting of the
negotiators to-day, so it was devoted to writing, visiting, and
making excursions into the neighbourhood. I went early to
the Consulate, and whilst Arthur worked away at the chaos of
poor Liardet’s papers, I called on Mrs. Bell, and was admitted to
see poor Mrs. Liardet, who was in bed and looking very pretty.
Poor woman, I felt great compassion for her, and her poor little
baby, so forlorn and friendless, and I fear penniless, in such rough,
wild surroundings. It was an immense relief to me to know
that Liardet’s illness, though short, had been real , for the exact
coincidence of his death and my arrival had given me fears
that the apprehension of what might follow my inevitable
discovery of his misdoings might have driven him to suicide,
and though it would not have been my doing, I should in a way
have felt guilty of his death. All round the house, in the
narrow space between it and the white palings which enclose
the Consulate ground, are the huts and tents of the refugees,
packed as tightly as possible from the walls of the house to the
very edge of the palings. They must be got rid of somehow,
and an arrangement with the Samoans as to their security is
indispensable. They cannot remain where they are, but we
must have guarantees —solid guarantees —for their safety before
we turn them adrift. Were not so many lives at stake the
impasse would be somewhat ludicrous. I afterwards called on
the priests and on Dr. Turner, who has a good house, but not
by any means so good a one as Weber’s. At Turner’s I saw an
old blind servant, who spoke to me in the royal language, which
is in many ways different from ordinary Samoan. Afterwards,
Knollys and I took a walk in the bush, which resembles Fijian
forest but is richer and more luxuriant in its vegetation. Had
a distant view of a very beautiful waterfall. Had another bathe,
of course, and at night Gorrie came to dine with us.
Saturday , February 16.—0 n returning from our bathe this
morning we met Weber, arriving in much heat and haste to
complain of the dilatoriness and perverseness of our Samoan
35
xrx
FIJI


friends, and full of anger at the crooked ways of the French
priests and the American Consul, to which he (I have no doubt
correctly) attributed the hesitation now displayed, and which is
very different from the readiness at first shown to meet our
wishes. Having cooled him down a little, and had some
breakfast, we met the negotiators, but did not do very much
with them. I subjoin the protocol of our morning’s work. We
had a similar protocol on each day of our meeting.
Minutes of a Meeting between Her Britannic Majesty’s High
Commissioner for the Western Pacific and the Representa-
tives of the Taimua and Faipule of Samoa.
February 16, 1878.
Present
His Excellency the Hon. Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon, Her Britannic
Majesty’s High Commissioner.
Theodore Weber, Esq., His Imperial German Majesty’s Consul for Samoa.
Apela —Taimua of Samoa.
Meafaifua —Taimua of Samoa.
Tuatagaloa—Faipule of Samoa.
Leiatana Sausau —Faipule of Samoa.
Interpreters
The Rev. G. A. Turner, M.D.
The Rev. Father Broyet of the R. C. Mission.
The Minutes of the last meeting were read and initialled.
The chiefs stated that their written observations with regard to the fines
levied by Mr. Consul Liardet were not yet prepared, but would be ready on
Monday.
The High Commissioner informed the chiefs that although, tor the
reasons stated at the last meeting, he objected to frequent changes in the
representatives of the Taimua and Faipule, he had no objection to one or
two others being added to their number if it was desired, and it was agreed
that the number should be increased to six.
The High Commissioner also requested the chiefs to inform the Taimua
and Faipule that he had received their letter announcing the nomination of
Leituala as the Samoan Commissioner to investigate the claims preferred by
British subjects against the Samoan Government, and that he had appointed
the Judicial Commissioner, Chief-Justice Gorrie, to be the British Commis-
sioner for that purpose. . A .. ,
His Excellency further stated that he had communicated the Articles
already proposed to the Imperial German Consul, and that he was anxious
to enter into a similar engagement with the Taimua and Faipule.
The Imperial German Consul confirmed this statement.
Articles Y., YL, and VII. of the proposed Convention were then read
as follows :
Article V
Full liberty for the free pursuit of trade, commerce, and agriculture is
guaranteed to British subjects, as well as the peaceable possession of all lands
36
FIJI
CHAP.


heretofore purchased by them from Samoans in a customary and regular
manner. All British subjects resident in Samoa shall be exempt from war
contributions, military requisitions, and the occupation of their houses and
lands by war parties.
Article VI
The members of the Puletua party now at the British Consulate shall be
surrendered to the Samoan Government, and the Taimua and Faipule engage
that their lives shall be spared, and that they shall not be exposed to any
greater molestation in person or property than those other members of the
Puletua who have already surrendered to the Government within the neutral
ground of Apia, or have obtained the intervention of any other Consulate.
Article VII
All British claims against the Samoan State shall be in the first instance
enquired into by a Commission consisting of H.B.M. Acting Consul and a
Samoan officer, and their settlement and mode of payment shall form the
subject of a future Convention.
After a short discussion on these Articles the meeting was adjourned till
Monday the 18th inst., at 10 a.m.
Minutes „, . Q
February 18.
The Minutes of the last meeting were read and initialled.
The chiefs handed in the observations of the Taimua and Faipule on the
fines imposed by Mr. Liardet.
The eighth Article was then read, and some slight discussion ensued as to
the route, etc., of the proposed steamer.
Article VIII
In the event of a steam mail-service being established between Fiji and
Samoa, the Government of the Samoan State engages to pay a subsidy of
per month towards the maintenance of such service on condition of the
like sum being paid by the Government of Fiji, provided always that such
subsidy shall in no case exceed the sum of £SOO in any one year.
The High Commissioner observed with regard to the remaining Articles
that they stood on quite a different footing from those preceding them, and
were to be looked on rather as suggestions, the adoption of which was likely
to benefit the Samoan State, than as of direct interest to foreigners, although
foreign states had a right to require, if they were to recognise a Samoan State,
that it should afford greater security than could be now given by the Taimua
and Faipule. It was finally agreed that the Articles should be taken to the
Taimua and Faipule for consideration, and that another meeting should be
held on Thursday morning the 21st at 10 o’clock, when the observations of
the Samoan Government as to the different Articles should be put in and
considered, and explanations mutually given.
The articles thus withdrawn were those relating to the
formation of a municipality at Apia and to the ultimate govern-
37
XIX
FIJI


ment of Samoa, which there was no chance of pressing success-
fully at present. They were never reduced to strict form, but
the sketch of their bearing, as intended and agreed on by
Mr. Weber and myself, was as follows :
The town of Apia shall be constituted a municipality, having the power
to make and enforce its own bye-laws, and such municipality shall consist of
the Foreign Consuls and representatives of every nation having a Consul
resident in Samoa.
The British representatives in the municipality shall not exceed three in
number, and shall be named by the High Commissioner.
The German representatives shall not exceed six in number, and shall be
named by the Imperial German Consul.
The United States representatives shall not exceed three in number, and
shall be named by the United States Consul.
If, at any subsequent time, Consuls of other foreign nations are appointed,
representatives of such nations shall be admitted to the municipality in such
proportions as may be hereafter agreed. The Senior Consul shall be President
of the municipality.
The permanent form of Government shall be settled at a general meeting
of Samoans to be hereafter held ; but in order to allow the evil effects of recent
commotions to subside, the settlement shall be postponed for six years, and
meanwhile a Provisional Council shall be constituted for the temporary ad-
ministration of the affairs of the country, consisting of the Taimua and
Faipule and other High Chiefs of Samoa.
The laws made by the Council so composed shall have force and effect
throughout Samoa, and the High Commissioner engages to cause them to be
[ British 'j
respected by British subjects, but no law in any respect affecting-! German J-
I American J
{High Commissioner^
German Consul V resident
American Consul j
in Samoa shall dissent. In any such case the law shall be suspended.
The Executive power shall consist of such High Chiefs of Samoa as may
be determined by the above Council, who shall be assisted by a Board of
Advisers consisting of the Consuls of England, Germany, and the United
States, and those of any other power which may hereafter conclude a similar
Convention with Samoa.
In the event of the temporary absence of any member of such Executive
Committee he may name his substitute.
All offices shall be filled by native Samoans except those connected with
the administration of justice and finance, in which foreigners may be em-
ployed in any case where the Executive Power and Board of Advice think it
expedient.
After the conference, I walked down with Knolljs to the
Consulate and Court House. At the latter place I found Gorrie
in full swing as Judicial Commissioner, engaged in the prelimi-
naries of Hunt’s trial. After returning, I wrote official notes to
38
CHAP.
FIJI


the two Consuls and went to visit the priests and the Convent.
The establishment is, on the whole, rather squalid, but the nuns
have a fairly good school, and the singing of the girls was really
pretty. The Samoans are both in voice and ear greatly ahead
of the Fijians. Thence we walked up with Father Broyet to the
College, the E. C. boys’ school. It is very well situated on a
hill, and commands a lovely view in all directions. It is a better
and less squalid establishment than the Convent, but very far
from equal to Navuloa. Two kinds of trees were specially pre-
valent near the college —one not unlike a balata, with a rough
whitish bark and pine-like head, the other the drala. The
resident priest at the college is a better lot than the one at the
beach. The senior students at the college made kava for us,
which struck me as decidedly odd. Gorrie dined with us as
usual.
Sunday , February 17.—After hearing an early mass at the
E.C. chapel, and a very dull service and sermon at Mr. Turner’s
chapel, I wrote a long letter to Weber, and walked down with
Arthur to Mulinuu to pay my formal call on the U.S. Consul
Griffin. He is living in a small wooden house, or rather hut,
which is also the office of the Taimua and Faipule. Their clerks
wait on him as servants, all their official papers are littered on
his table, and everything is quite openly submitted to his criti-
cism and revision. And yet he has the impudence to pretend
that he keeps entirely aloof from Samoan politics, and knows
nothing of what is going on, or the course of our negotiations.
He cannot think he takes me in, and I am disposed to imagine
that he wants me to argue the point with him, and so have a
pretence for being “ insulted.” If so, he will be disappointed,
for I take his assurances as, of course, absolutely conclusive, and
ignore the evidence of my eyes, which show me the Samoan
clerks submitting papers for his approval under my very nose,
while sitting talking with him. His conversation was highly
absurd. He professed great admiration for English literature,
and especially for Bulwer, and his “famous play of Childe
Harold ” !
I afterwards walked with Gorrie and Knollys to the top of a
hill behind the college. ‘ On our way we saw a very pretty bird,
with a bill like a honeysucker, black wings and tail, and a red
head and body. Ido not know its name. It was very tame,
and allowed us to approach within a few feet of it. Horne,
who has been making a cruise into the interior, returned this
afternoon. He has not discovered much that is new in the way
of plants, but gives a very good report of the country from the
39
XIX
FIJI


agricultural point of view. He had been to a lake, which he
described as being not unlike the Trou aux Cerfs in Mauritius,
and, like it, of volcanic origin—an extinct crater, in fact, filled
with water. Land-leeches abounded in its neighbourhood.
Horne as well as Gorrie dined with us to-night.
Monday , Feh'uary 18.—Conference at 10, which was neither
very satisfactory nor very much the reverse. Two new Samoan
Commissioners attended —both obstructives. Griffin unmasks,
and goes into open opposition, writing me an impertinent note
warning me against any negotiation with Samoa, “which is
under the protection of the United States, to the Government of
which any wishes of Britain should be addressed.” Walked in
the woods with Horne, and bathed on the way home. Arthur
dined on board the Sapphire , and Horne took his place at dinner
with Gorrie, Knollys, and myself.
Tuesday , February 19. —After breakfast went down to the
German Consulate, and had a long talk with Weber. He showed
me the despatches he had written to his Government complaining
of Griffin’s interference, and giving a very clear account of our
proceedings thus far. To-day was devoted to festivities, so
there was no conference. The High Commissioner, the Consuls,
and the officers of the Sapphire were invited to a solemn recep-
tion—kava-drinking and speech-making at Mulinuu by the Taimua
and Faipule. It was in the main very like a Fijian ceremony
of the same kind. The most notable differences were the official
orators, who spoke for the chiefs, leaning on a staff, and with a
sort of broom of coir-fibre, like an exaggerated fly-whisk, hitched
on the shoulder when speaking. The kava also was made and
distributed with less careful formality than in Fiji. Two men
among those present wore very fine head-dresses, with coronets
of burnished shells like moonstones. The long fluffy mat petti-
coats of the women were peculiar and very effective. Some of
the mats were beautiful—as soft and glossy as silk. They are
very highly prized, and some of great antiquity. We were
given a native dinner, the most remarkable dish at which was
one of the large white caterpillars that bore into the palm-trees.
They were really not at all bad—like marrow. Tarotop soup
is excellent. I think you have tasted it. In the afternoon
there were boat races and canoe races, sometimes pretty, and
for the most part tedious. The Samoans are handsomer and
fairer than the Fijians, but there is a want of the good manners
and good breeding which distinguish the Fijian chiefs. And in
the evening we had dances, which were certainly very ugly, and
which I was told were indecent. There was no open indecency
40
CHAP.
FIJI


that I saw, but I was told they were suggestive. To a nice (or
nasty) imagination perhaps they were so. They suggested
nothing to me except that they were ugly and boisterous. But
after being used to Fijian mekes, which are never “mixed”
ones, the sight of men and women dancing together is in itself
distasteful. Though the dancing was ugly, the singing was very
pretty indeed.
Wednesday , February 20.—We had another conference this
morning, which was highly unsatisfactory. The majority of the
Samoan Commissioners are now averse to any progress in the
negotiation. It is clearly manifest that, since the beginning
of the discussion, external influences have been brought to bear
on the negotiators, who at the commencement had discussed all
questions with freedom, and accepted reasonable propositions
with readiness, but who now come primed with a form of words
they were taught to repeat like parrots, and beyond which they
dared not go.
I have said that the men dress much as in Fiji, but there is
one difference, in the much greater use of mats as an article of
dress. In Fiji, as you know, mats are only worn as a sign of
mourning; here the sulu is as often made of mat as of cloth.
But these mats are much finer and softer than anything we have
in Fiji, and are often of wonderful fineness and softness.
Thursday , February 21.—This morning matters were brought
to a crisis. The two friendly Commissioners did not appear,
and the others presented us with a letter from the Taimua,
stating that they declined to enter into any agreement on any
subject, or hold any further discussion with either his Excellency
or the Imperial German Consul until they had received from
Washington a reply to their application for the protectorate of
the United States which they had sent there by their secretary,
Mamea.
Upon this, I and Mr. Weber very solemnly requested the
whole of the Taimua and Faipule to meet us on the following day.
In the afternoon Griffin called on me, no doubt to find out
what tone I was going to take, and how I had taken the action
of the Taimua. He did not get much out of me. When he
began to speak on the subject, I reminded him that he had told
me that he had strict instructions to refrain from taking any part
in Samoan politics or discussing them with me, and it was there-
fore impossible for me to discuss them with him, and I insisted
on talking about English literature and personal gossip all the
time he stayed.
Friday , February 22.—1 n compliance with our summons, the
41
XIX
FIJI


whole of the Taimua and Faipule came to my house this morning.
I received them courteously hut very gravely, and told them that
although in sending, as they now informed me they have done, a
petition for protection from the United States, before they had
received an answer to that which they had addressed the Queen,
they had shown some discourtesy to Her Majesty, and had
distinctly broken faith with the Emperor of Germany, neither I
nor Mr. Weber meant to dwell on the fact, and were anxious to
meet their wishes as far as possible. We therefore assented to
their, in the circumstances, natural desire that the consideration
of all propositions for the reform of the Samoan Government, or
for the construction of a municipality of Apia, should be post-
poned till after the return of Mamea. But we must point out
that if this was the wish and determination of the Taimua, it
should have been at once stated when the High Commissioner
and German Consul first made their proposals, and so many days
should not have been idly and unprofitably wasted in unreal
discussion. There were, however, some other matters which
were not and could not be in any way affected by the relations
of Samoa with America, whatever those might be, and which
urgently called for settlement, such as the question of the
refugees at the Consulate, the indemnity for the BdTTCicouta
affray, and the immunity of British subjects and property from
molestation in time of civil war. The Taimua desired that the
Puletua chiefs now at the British Consulate should be given up
to them; they desired that the claims against their Government
should be as far as possible remitted; and they desired that
British subjects resident in Samoa should be made to respect
their laws and officers. But none of those things could be done
without some species of convention or written agreement, and
if therefore they persisted in refusing to sign anything, they
must forego these advantages, and not only that, but must
expect matters the settlement of which, like that of the refugees
and the indemnity, could not be deferred, to be settled by us
without their concurrence. As regarded the Barracouta indemnity,
I reminded them that Lord Derby’s letter, to which they had
referred, distinctly showed that Her Majesty’s Government had
no doubt whatever that the first shot was fired by Samoans. In
such circumstances an indemnity is usually demanded. The
sum named by Mr. Liardet ($10,000) appeared to me excessive,
and had been reduced by me to S6OOO, the sum originally
recommended by Commodore Hoskins. So long as the claim
was admitted, there would be no harshness shown in exacting it.
Plenty of time to pay it in small instalments should be granted,
and this should be provided for in the agreement, whilst probably
42
CHAP.
FIJI


a further remission of part of the amount claimed would be
made. But if, on the other hand, they obstinately declined to
enter into any agreement whatever on the subject, I should,
however reluctantly, be compelled at once to take measures to
ensure the payment of the sum demanded. So again with
regard to the Puletua refugees. If they would give a written
pledge for their safety similar to that given in the case of the
hostages taken on board the Sapphire in 1876, the refugees
should be at once placed in their hands; but if they refused all
agreement, I should be obliged myself to take precautions to
ensure their safety. I ended by saying, “I trust we may agree
on such a compromise as I have suggested. But it must be
done now. If you leave this house to-day without our having come to
a mutual understanding, it will he too late .”
The Chiefs in reply readily admitted that they had done
wrong in sending to America for a protectorate before they
had received an answer from Great Britain; and also that they
had broken faith with Germany, for which they asked Mr.
Weber’s pardon. They also agreed that they ought not to have
entered into negotiation intending to conclude nothing, but said
that at first their minds were not so made up. Now they were
so, and moreover they had “ promised ” to agree to nothing
which might be proposed to them, however unobjectionable it
might be. The first Article proposed was read to them, and
they were asked what possible reason they could have against
such an agreement, even if they were to obtain American
protection ? They admitted there was none, but repeated that
they had promised not to agree.
For more than five hours we urged the Chiefs to assent to
reasonable terms of accommodation with respect to the refugees
and the indemnity. At one moment there seemed some chance
of their yielding, but their hesitation was of short duration.
They would have liked to have stretched a point in order to get
the Puletua into their hands, but finally came to the conclusion
that they would not give the written pledge required,—they had
“ promised ” not to sign anything, they said. It was in vain
pointed out to them that arrangements with respect to the pay-
ment of an indemnity and the giving up of the Puletua refugees
could in no way affect their relations with America, even if an
American protectorate were established. I repeatedly informed
them that as regarded the indemnity, I was prepared to be
satisfied by a mere agreement to appoint a Commission to
consider the various claims; but they persisted in refusing even
this preliminary concession, and repudiated all liability whatever
for the indemnity on account of the Barracouta affray, although
43
XIX
FIJI


assured by me that whilst ready to grant the easiest terms of
payment, and recommend a partial remission in the event of their
compliance, I should, if they obstinately refused to admit any
liability, take measures myself to enforce the fine. They
repeated that they “ could not,” and the protracted conference
was at last—reluctantly on my part—brought to its close.
The Taimua and Faipule, or at least most of them, when
they left me, quietly proceeded on their way up to the
river to bathe, little dreaming that anything would come of their
refusal but more talkee talkee. But I had concerted my measures
beforehand with Captain Murray, and as soon as the Samoans
were gone, Knollys stepped out on the verandah and waved his
handkerchief, the signal that negotiations were at an end.
Immediately Atkinson, First Lieutenant of the Sapphire, with
two boats carrying armed crews, pulled off from the Sapphire to
the Samoan Government schooner Elizabeth , jumped on board her,
hauled down her flag, took possession, and carried her crew on
shore. When this news was brought to the Taimua, peacefully
bathing, they hurried back as fast as they could go to Mulinuu
and the American Consul. To do so they had to pass my house,
and it was comic to see how they sneaked past it, stooping and
crouching, as if they expected us to fire on them from the
verandah. I wrote to the Taimua and Faipule to tell them that
I had seized the Elizabeth as a guarantee ; that if within twenty-
four hours they would pay the fine —not at once paying it, but
simply agree to pay it by instalments, —I would release her ; but
that if not, I should take her away and sell her as part pay-
ment of the fine, and should subsequently exact by force the
remainder.
Saturday , February 23.—The Taimua and Faipule returned no
answer to my letter, but the morning opened with a thundering
protest from Mr. Griffin.
All this while, Gorrie had been busy trying cases in the High
Commission Court, chiefly small civil and criminal cases, the
only important being that of Hunt for the lynching of Corcoran.
This trial was finished this morning, and Hunt sentenced to
imprisonment in Fiji. I was not without apprehension that
the Samoans might make, or be instigated to make, an attempt
to recover their schooner. It could not have been successful;
but it might have involved loss of life, and led to undesirable
complications. It seemed also probable that it would be
necessary to use force to obtain the rest of the fine and
guarantees for the safety of the refugees at the Consulate, and
if the Sapphire had to fire on the town I did not wish to be
44
CHAP,
FIJI


on board her at the time. On the whole, therefore, I thought it
best to return to Fiji at once, with the captured prize, and Judge
Gorrie’s prisoner, and to send back the Sapphire without me to
enforce the indemnity and the guarantees. We accordingly
weighed anchor just before dark, towing the Elizabeth out of the
harbour, and steamed back to Fiji, which we reached on
Wednesday 27th. We towed the Elizabeth the whole way,
hardly to the benefit, I should think, of her timbers and frame-
work.
My stay in Samoa has not been a pleasant one. Politically
my visit has been almost wholly a failure, though I think it has
1 aid the foundation for future success. I have been so much
occupied that I have seen little of the country —nothing, indeed,
that is not within a few miles of Apia; and the weather has
been disagreeable—gray and damp and dark, close and steamy,
with constant showers. But it would be a very pleasant place
to roam about in at one’s leisure and in fine weather. The
vegetation is far more luxuriant than that of Fiji. Our life was
full of vexation and worry, and I was kept confined to the house
by business almost the whole day. Well-nigh the only
enjoyable part of our sojourn in Apia was our early morning—and
sometimes evening—bathes at a delightful pool, about a mile out
of the town, at the foot of a small cascade. The rocks below
the fall were picturesque, and they and the bushes around were
covered with long tangles of the Ipomea bona nox, which, early
in the morning though it was when we repaired there, were
already hanging limp in the young sunshine, and looked as if
there had been an extensive wash and that heaps of pocket-
handkerchiefs were spread out on the rocks and bushes to dry.
Before leaving, I wrote, and left with Weber, for delivery,
a letter to the expected U.S. Commissioner, who it is supposed
will return with Mamea.
To the U.S. Consul or Commissioner
Apia, February 13, 1878. —Sir—I think it not impossible that some
Commissioner from the United States may be sent here with Le Mamea on
his return, or that he may be sent back here in an American ship of war.
In either case it is probable that the care of American interests and the
direction of American policy will be committed to a gentleman of ability,
free from local influences and vulgar prejudices or prepossessions.
In this belief, I venture to address a few lines to you, although I am
wholly unknown to you, to ask you to take time for consideration and
inquiry before you take any hasty or irrevocable step on the faith of the
representations which will probably be, in the first instance, made to you.
We understand that Le Mamea was the bearer to Washington of a
request from the Taimua and Faipule of Samoa for the protection of the
45
XIX
FIJI


United States. Such a request was also a short time since made to Great
Britain, and declined.
In point of fact, the interests of all nations having subjects resident in
Samoa are identical. Of the foreigners resident in Samoa the Germans have
by far the largest amount of property. The English are the most numerous,
and the Americans are neither so many in number nor possess anything like
the same amount of land as those of either of the other two nationalities.
What is required for the protection of one is required for that of all.
Neither of the two nations which possess the largest amount of wealth and
the greatest number of subjects in Samoa desires for them exclusive privi-
leges, and it is hardly to be supposed that they are more urgently needed
by the handful of American subjects.
But if it be contemplated to erect an American protectorate, I should
wish to call your attention to certain facts which have materially influenced
the British Government in declining the offer of protection made to it.
In the first place, the Taimua and Faipule are not a body from which
such an offer could be safely accepted. They are no doubt at present de
facto rulers, but their tenure of power is precarious, and the legality of
their authority is not recognised by a large minority (to say the least) in
Samoa. One of the first acts of a protectorate would have to be the forcible
suppression of this large party, which would undoubtedly rebel against
any authority which imposed on them the rule of the present Taimua and
Faipule.
Secondly, those who ask for the protection are manifestly wholly
unaware of what it is they ask for. This was abundantly clear to the
British Government. In requesting protection they expected the protec-
tion of their party , and also an obligation to defend them from the just
claims of other nations. (Protection against German claims was what
was expected of us. Protection against English claims is expected from
America.) But that there would be any reciprocal obligation to follow the
advice of the protecting power evidently never entered into their heads,
and to have accepted the offer in such case would have been to have done
so under false pretences.
Thirdly, there was much reason in our case, and I suspect there is equal
reason in yours, to doubt the bona fides of the transaction, the agents in
which were corrupt and unprincipled men, seeking simply and almost
avowedly a selfish object, which they had bribed or deluded the natives
into supporting.
That the natives of Samoa generally desire the establishment of a pro-
tectorate by any Power I gravely doubt ; nor do I think it could be estab-
lished without bloodshed and confusion.
I regret to be obliged to confess that the late English Consul appears to
have been engaged in many foolish intrigues for the furtherance of an
imaginary English interest. These were carefully concealed from his own
Government and from me, and have for the most part only come to my
knowledge, since my arrival here, from the papers in the Consulate. I need
not say his conduct is highly disapproved by me, and undoubtedly would
be so by Her Majesty’s Government.
Whether the U.S. Consul has been able to keep himself free from
entanglement in similar transactions it will be for you to determine.
46
CHAP.
FIJI


All that I am desirous or required by British interests to bring before
you is the fact that there are features in the present circumstances of Samoa
which demand attentive consideration, and which may not have been pro-
minently brought under your notice by those who are only anxious to
hasten the assumption of authority over this group by the United States of
America.
You will also hear something of insults offered to the U.S. Consul by
British subjects. For these I have officially expressed my deep regret; and
where a legal offence has been committed, every facility has been given for
its prosecution before the Court lately established by Her Majesty for the
trial of British subjects in the Pacific. From any further molestation by
British subjects, or I believe those of any other nation, or from the natives,
Mr. Griffin is, I am certain, perfectly safe, and his native guard wholly
unnecessary.
On first arriving here, I, in conjunction with the Imperial German
Consul, proposed to the Samoan Government some agreement with regard
to the establishment of a municipality for Apia, and for the better regula-
tion of their own affairs. But these proposals were readily postponed, on
the avowal of the Taimua and Faipule (not before made to us) of the purport
of Mamea’s mission to Washington. Certain other points relating exclu-
sively to English claims and interests I felt bound, however, to press, and
on their absolute refusal to enter into an agreement to appoint a member of
a mixed Commission to consider English claims, I was compelled to seize
the schooner Elizabeth as security for the indemnity claimed from Samoa,
on account of the death of the men of H.M.S. Barracouta killed at Mulinuu
in March 1876. I mention this, not because it in any way concerns
American interests, or can relate to your mission, but because it is certain
to be misrepresented by some of the busybodies of Apia, and also by the
Taimua and Faipule. Mr. Weber is in possession of all the details of the
transaction.
I regret much that I have not been able to await your arrival here, for
conversation would have been preferable to a letter, and it would have
given me much pleasure to have co-operated with you in any efforts for the
improvement of this government, and in procuring guarantees for the benefit
of the subjects of our respective nations.
As it is, I trust you will excuse the liberty which as a stranger I take in
writing to you, and also in the request which I make that you will confer
freely with the new acting British Consul, who will in a few days arrive
here from Fiji. You will find him a man of ability and moderation, and
perfectly free from all local influences.—l remain, Sir, your obedient humble
servant.
From Consul Weber
Apia, February 23, 1878. —Your Excellency’s letter I had the honour to
receive with enclosures, and shall attend to the letter, if needed, intended for
any U.S. Commissioner that might arrive here. If, what I think unlikely, Mr.
Colmesnil should be sent as Commissioner, or Mr. Griffin be appointed, I
would not consider it in accordance with your Excellency’s intention to let
them have the letter, as it would be useless. On Monday (I had no time
to-day) I intend to ask an explanation from the Taimua and from the U.S.
Consul for hoisting the American flag.
47
XIX
FIJI


I am equally glad as your Excellency of having had the honour of making
your Excellency’s acquaintance, and I may assure your Excellency that I
for my part am quite satisfied about the frivolity and falsehoods spread about
your Excellency’s intentions regarding Island politics and especially regarding
Samoa. Since you have allowed me to write you occasionally I shall have
a chance of informing your Excellency of anything which might in future
transpire in that respect, and thus prevent the good understanding now
established to be impaired. Ido not mean, though, to trouble your Excellency
with gossip or silly talk.
I would certainly have given myself the honour to call on your Excellency
again, but I have not found the time, being very much pressed by the Mail
we have to send in consequence of the sudden departure of H.M.S. Sapphire.
So, if I should not succeed in calling, I would ask your Excellency kindly to
pardon me.
May I ask your Excellency also to accept of my sincerest wishes and my
highest respect. —I have, etc.
To the Earl of Derby
Apia, Samoa, Feoruary 22, 1878,—My Lord—lt is a painful task to
have to write anything which may appear to reflect on the conduct of one who
is no longer able to defend himself ; but it is, I fear, my duty to report to your
Lordship that the documents found by me in the Consulate here, confirmed
by abundant other testimony, clearly show that the late Mr. Consul
Liardet either totally misunderstood or wilfully disobeyed your Lordship’s
instructions, and that for many months past he has in the most rash and
injudicious manner interfered in the local politics of Samoa.
2. Nor is this all ; for he appears to have freely used the names of your
Lordship and myself as giving him authority for the course he was pursuing,
and to have thus excited by no means unnatural suspicions on the part of his
German and American colleagues, which have contributed largely to render
the state of matters in Samoa as unsatisfactory as it now is.
3. At no long period after his arrival Mr. Liardet began to occupy him-
self in the internal politics of Samoa. He proposed to the Taimua and
Faipule that no part of the revenue of the Islands should be pledged or disposed
of without his consent, and that a Mr. Hetherington, a lawyer of not very
high repute, whom he had brought with him from Fiji, should be appointed
to draft a Constitution for them, and conduct all their legal business.
On the refusal of the Taimua and Faipule to agree to this proposal, Mr.
Liardet formally broke off all official relations with them, and commenced
intriguing on the part of the Puletua.
4. No report, either of the proposals he had made, or of the fact that he
had broken off relations with the Samoan Government, was contained in the
despatches addressed to your Lordship by Mr. Liardet, and sent under flying
seal through me; and although the proposed guarantee is mentioned in a letter
to me of the sth June last, forwarded by me to Lord Carnarvon, in my despatch
of the 12th July, its real character is by no means indicated. •
5. When in Fiji, Mr. Liardet treated the report contained in the Memor-
andum enclosed in my despatch No. 103 of the 12th July as a canard , and it
was therefore with great regret that on my arrival here I came across papers
48
CHAP.
FIJI


in the Consulate clearly showing that Mr. Liardet did ask for a guarantee as
to the disposal of the Samoan revenue, did recommend with great urgency
the employment of Mr. Hetherington, and did break off all communication
with the Taimua and Faipule in consequence of their refusal to act on
this advice.
6. The intimation contained in your Lordship’s telegraphic despatch (to
the effect that Her Majesty’s Government was quite unprepared to assume
the protectorate of Samoa, but that a formal expression of their decision was
delayed pending the receipt of despatches from Sir A. Gordon) of the
June, forwarded by me to Mr. Liardet on the , was never com-
municated by him to the Taimua and Faipule.
7. From his own despatches your Lordship will have perceived that Mr.
Liardet took a more active part than was desired in the internal politics of
Samoa, but they are far from conveying an adequate idea of the lengths to
which he appears to have gone.
8. I enclose the copy of an extract from the books of the Taimua, which
professes to relate a conversation with Mr. Liardet. With respect to this
paper it must be concluded, either that it is genuine, or that it is a fabrication
intended to serve the ends of the American intriguers, by whom it has been
sent to Washington in support of the demand for protection manufactured
by them.
Although the evidence in favour of the genuineness of this paper is strong,
I should have no hesitation in attributing it to the latter origin, had it
not been that Mr, Liardet’s extraordinary indiscretion in other particulars
renders it impossible to speak with such confidence as might be desired on
this head.
9. It must, however, be borne in mind that for some months past Mr.
Liardet has been suffering from disease of the brain, which, in the opinion of
Dr. Turner, rendered him in a great degree irresponsible for his actions,
and that he must therefore be supposed, if the conversation be authentic,
to have been the victim of hallucinations, and not the author of deliberate
untruths.
10. I do not know that I should have felt myself obliged to notice this
painful subject, had I not reason to suppose that Mr. Liardet’s action has
been put prominently forward at Washington by the Samoan representatives
as a reason for the acceptance by the United States of the protection of the
Navigators’ Islands, and is one of the main causes of the irritation and
unfriendliness towards England which undoubtedly exists among the Taimua
and Faipule.—l have, etc.
[Enclosure]
Substance of a conversation between Lemaua, a Taimua , and the British
Consuly E. A. Liardet, in the month of August 1877 :
Q. Has your Government deliberated ?— A. Yes. They have deliberated
on matter relative to our Government.
Q. Have you not heard any news from the Governor in Fiji ?— A. We
have heard the news by the Chiefs that were in Fiji; they say he is coming
to Samoa.
Q. The Governor is very angry indeed with you, and I have one thing
HI E
49
xrx
FIJI


to say to you: On arrival of the Governor here you must do something to
repress his anger.— A. What can we do in order that His Excellency’s will
may be pleasant towards us ?
Q. The Taimua and Faipule must go and deliver over all rule to the
Government of Great Britain and Victoria; this is the only thing that will
please His Excellency’s will. — A. Very good ; I will now go, but one thing
I will inform you, that our Government will never agree to anything of that
nature, because we do not understand why we should give our rule away
without cause to the Government of Great Britain.
Q. The cause is this : That you have petitioned to Victoria for protection
of your Government; you have trampled upon and hoisted the flag, and you
have done many bad things which Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain
must examine into. — A. We have done nothing without cause, and it rests
with us to make explanation for all we have done.
Q. Will you be afraid if the Governor comes ? — A. We will be afraid if
he comes with anger to us, but if he comes with a pleasant will towards us
we shall be delighted to see him.
Q. His Excellency will not be angry with you provided you deliver over
the rule to Great Britain, and then the Government will be firm, and each
Chief will be paid 100 dollars a year. — A. I will go, and if the Government
desire money I will inform them of the same.
To the Earl of Derby
Nasova, Fiji, March 4, 1878. — My Lord — Having on the 21st January
received my commission as High Commissioner and Consul-General for the
Western Pacific, I on the 6th ultimo proceeded to Samoa in Her Majesty’s
ship Sapphire, in compliance with the frequently reiterated request of Her
Britannic Majesty’s Consul, Mr. Liardet, and the wish expressed in Lord
Carnarvon’s telegram of the Ist November last.
2. The objects of my visit were—to hold the High Commissioner’s Court
under Her Majesty’s Order in Council; to return a formal reply to the
demand for protection made by the Samoan Government; to re-establish
good relations between Mr. Liardet and the German and United States
Consuls ; to investigate the complaints made by the Taimua and Faipule of
Samoa as to Mr. Liardet’s conduct, and the complaints of the United States
Consul as to the acts of both the Consul and other British subjects in Samoa; to
endeavour to obtain from the Samoan Government an agreement to afford to
Englishmen in Samoa rights equal to those granted to subjects of any other
nation, and to effect a settlement of the pending questions relating to the
Barracouta indemnity and the refugees at the British Consulate, as well as
to assist the Taimua and Faipule in the establishment of a Government
which might be able to put an end to the anarchy and misrule at present
prevalent in the Navigators’ Islands.
3. The proceedings of the High Commissioner’s Court I have reported to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
4. Mr. Liardet’s death rendered it unnecessary to take up the questions in
which he was personally concerned, and the conduct of other British subjects
complained of by the United States Consul forms the subject of another
communication.
50
CHAP.
FIJI


5. The present despatch I intend to devote exclusively to my negotiations
with the Samoan Government—negotiations which, although invited by them-
selves, have, I regret to say, proved wholly abortive.
6. On the 11th ultimo, and before I had landed from Her Majesty’s ship
Sapphire , a deputation from the Taimua and Faipule waited on me to welcome
me to Samoa. They expressed anxiety to receive, and willingness to adopt,
such advice as I might give them, and the following day was appointed for
my official visit to them at Mulinuu, the native village in the vicinity of
Apia, where the Government offices, if they can be so called, are situated.
7. On Tuesday the 12th I accordingly waited on them at Mulinuu, and
delivered the speech of which I enclose a copy. They replied through their
orator that they were quite ready to enter into such an agreement as I had
suggested, and would appoint some of their number to negotiate with me as
to its terms.
8. My first care after arrival had been to communicate with the German
and American Consuls, and to ask their assistance and advice. This was
readily promised by the German Consul, on whose suggestion I made some
slight alterations in the speech above referred to. The United States
Consul, for reasons which I have explained in another despatch, declined at
that time to enter into communication with any British official.
9. Agreeably to their promise, the Taimua and Faipule appointed five of
their number to discuss with me the terms of the proposed agreement. We
met the next day, when the four Articles which I have the honour to enclose
were discussed and agreed to. The discussion was free and unreserved, and
the agreement apparently cordial.
10. These four Articles being agreed upon, I communicated them to the
Imperial German Consul and the United States Consul, and requested their
co-operation in procuring the assent of the Taimua and Faipule to the
establishment of a municipality for Apia, and in pressing upon them the
adoption of measures calculated to ensure greater stability in the local
Government, and afford some guarantee for the security of life and property
to the foreign residents.
Such assistance was at once most cordially and effectively given by
M. Weber, the Imperial German Consul, who immediately proposed to the
Taimua and Faipule an agreement similar, mutatis mutandis , to that
proposed by me, and met their Commissioners with me'the following morning.
The United States Consul, who had by this time overcome his objection to
communicate with British officials, replied that he had received instructions
from his Government not to take part with the representatives of any
other nation, and to abstain from interference in the internal affairs of
Samoa.
11. I have said that the agreement with regard to the first four Articles
appeared to be cordial. At the next meeting, however, there was a change
both in the persons and the tone of the Taimua Commissioners. The two
members of the Commission who had taken the largest share in the discussion
on the first day did not return, and were replaced by others, who only offered
objections, and received every proposal made by M. Weber or myself simply
as one for reference to their Government.
The meetings were continued for several days, but M. Weber and I soon
began to suspect that the negotiation had been entered into solely with a view
51
XIX
FIJI


to a more overt recognition of the Taimua and Faipnle as the Government of
Samoa, and without any serious intention of arriving at an agreement.
12. This suspicion was confirmed when, on the 22nd ultimo, the Samoan
Commissioners handed in a letter from the Taimua and Faipule, in which they
stated that they had sent their Secretary, Le Maraea, to the United States to
ask for an establishment of a protectorate, and that until his return they
would not enter into any agreement whatever with England or Germany.
13. Upon this we requested the whole of the Taimua and Faipule to meet
us on the following day, which they did.
14. M. Weber and I then addressed them. We informed them that
although in sending, as they now informed us they had done, a petition for
protection from the United States before they had received an answer to that
which they had addressed to the Queen, they had shown some discourtesy to
Her Majesty, and had distinctly broken faith with the Emperor of Germany,
neither I nor M. Weber meant to dwell on those facts, and were anxious to
meet their wishes as far as possible. We therefore assented to their, in the
circumstances, natural desire that the consideration of all propositions for
the reform of the Samoan Government, or for the construction of a
Municipality of Apia, should be postponed till after the return of Mamea.
But we at the same time pointed out that if this was the wish and determina-
tion of the Taimua, it should have been at once stated when we first made
our proposals, and so many days should not have been idly and unprofitably
wasted in unreal discussion.
15. We further observed that there were some other matters which were
not and could not be in any way affected by the relations of Samoa with
America, whatever those might be, and which urgently called for settlement,
such as the question of the refugees at the British Consulate, the indemnity
for the Barracouta affray, and the immunity of British subjects and property
from molestation in time of civil war.
16. We knew, we said, that it was the desire of the Taimua that the
Puletua Chiefs taking refuge at the British Consulate should be given up to
them ; that the claims against their Government should be, as far as possible,
remitted ; and that British subjects resident in Samoa should be made to
respect their laws and officers. We explained to them that none of these
things could be done without some species of convention or written agree-
ment ; and that if, therefore, they persisted in refusing to sign anything, they
must not only forego the attainment of the objects they desired, but must
anticipate that matters the settlement of which (like that of the refugees and
the indemnity) admitted of no protracted delay, would necessarily be settled
without their further concurrence.
17. As regarded the Barracouta indemnity, I reminded them that your Lord-
ship’s letter of the 20th December 1876, to which they had referred, distinctly
showed that Her Majesty’s Government had no doubt whatever as to the first
shot in the affray having been fired by Samoans, and that in such circumstances
an indemnity is usually demanded. I added that the sum named by Mr.
Liardet (10,000 dollars) appeared to me excessive, and had been reduced by
me to 6000 dollars, the sum originally recommended by Commodore Hoskins
So long as the claim was admitted, I assured them that no harshness would
be shown in exacting it; that plenty of time to pay it in small instalments
should be granted, and that this should be provided for in the agreement ;
52
CHAP,
FIJI


whilst probably a further remission of part of the amount claimed would
be made on my recommendation ; but that if, on the other hand, they
obstinately declined to enter into any agreement whatever on the subject, I
pointed out that I should, however reluctantly, be compelled at once to take
means to ensure the ultimate payment of the sum demanded.
So again, with regard to the Puletua refugees, I informed them that if
they would give a written pledge for their safety, similar to that given in the
case of the hostages taken on board the Sapphire in 1878, the refugees should
be at once placed in their hands ; but that if they refused all agreement, I
should be obliged to take precautions myself to ensure their safety. In
conclusion both I and M. Weber recommended to their acceptance the agree-
ment of which I have the honour to enclose a copy.
18. The Chiefs in reply readily admitted that they had done wrong in send-
ing to America for a protectorate before they had received an answer from Great
Britain, and also that they had broken faith with Germany, for which they
asked M. Weber’s pardon. They also agreed that they ought not to have
entered into negotiation intending to conclude nothing ; but said that at first
their minds were not made up ; that now they were so, and that, moreover,
they had “ promised ” to agree to nothing whatever which might be proposed
to them, however unobjectionable.
Although it was not definitely stated to be the case, it was understood
that this promise had been made to the United States Consul.
19. The first Article proposed was then again read to them, and they were
asked what possible reason they could have against such an agreement, even
if they were to obtain American protection. They admitted there was none,
but repeated that they had promised not to agree.
20. For more than five hours M. Weber and I urged the Chiefs to assent
to reasonable terms of accommodation with respect to the refugees and the
indemnity. At one moment there seemed some chance of their yielding, but
their hesitation was of short duration. They would, no doubt, have liked to
have stretched a point, in order to get the Puletua into their hands ; but
finally came to the conclusion that they would not give the written pledge
required. It was in vain pointed out to them that arrangements with respect
to the payment of an indemnity and the giving up of the Puletua refugees
could in no way affect their relations with America, even if an American
protectorate were established.
I repeatedly told them that, as regarded the indemnity, I was prepared to
be satisfied by a mere agreement to appoint a commission to consider the
various claims; but they persisted in refusing even this’preliminary concession,
and repudiated all liability whatever for indemnity on account of the Barra-
couta affray, although again assured by me that, whilst ready to grant the
easiest terms of payment, and to recommend a partial remission in the event
of their compliance, I should be compelled, if they obstinately refused to
admit any liability, to take measures myself to enforce the fine. They re-
peated that they “could not,” and the protracted conference was at last
reluctantly brought to a close.
21. Immediately on the unfavourable termination of the conference being
notified to Captain Murray of Her Majesty’s ship Sapphire , the Samoan
Government schooner Elizabeth was, as had been previously arranged, seized by
the boats of the Sapphire as part security for the payment of the Barracouta fine.
53
XIX
FIJI


22. I thought it on many accounts essential that this question should be
settled during ray visit to Samoa, and I regret, in the circumstances, it was
impossible to act with that generosity which I should otherwise have been
glad to display.
I concurred with Commodore Hoskins as to the propriety of the imposition
of the fine and as to its amount. I followed your Lordship’s instructions as
to the allowance of ample time to the Taimua to urge reasons against its
imposition, and I should have been glad, after the liability had been acknow-
ledged, to have remitted the greater part of the fine, or indeed the whole of
it, with the exception of a moderate compensation to the wounded and the
families of those killed in the affray of the 13th March 1876. This was,
however, impossible, and I perceived clearly that our forbearance had been,
and was, altogether misconstrued.
23. Having seized the schooner, I thought that the sooner she was re-
moved the better, in order to avoid further correspondence, and a possible
attempt to retake the vessel, which, though of course certain to be unsuccess-
ful, would have probably involved loss of life, on the part at all events of the
natives, if not on our own.
I consequently intimated to the Taimua that if they were disposed to re-
open negotiations for an agreement on the subject of the fine and its payment
before 4 o’clock the following afternoon, the schooner should be restored, but
that if not she should be taken to Fiji.
No intimation of a willingness to treat being made by the Taimua, and
the business of the High Commissioner’s Court having been closed by mid-day
on Saturday the 23rd, I embarked that afternoon, and left Samoa at 5 p.m.
On leaving, I informed the Taimua and Faipule that I should detain the
Elizabeth at Levuka for a month, and that at the end of that time she would,
if nothing further was heard from them, be sold, and the proceeds applied as
Her Majesty’s Government might direct.
24. As regards the disposal of the Puletua Chiefs I have felt some em-
barrassment.
It is impossible that they should remain encamped in the garden of the
Consulate for a further indefinite period, and, on the other hand, it would
inflict on us indelible disgrace were we to hand them over to their opponents
without any guarantee against their massacre. I am inclined to think that
the best solution of the difficulty will be to return them to their districts and
homes when the Sapphire next visits Samoa, leaving their future treatment
to depend upon their future conduct.
25. Although my efforts to obtain for English subjects equal rights with
those of other nations have failed, my visit to Samoa has not, I think, been
wholly useless. A cordial good understanding has been established with the
Imperial German Consul, which will, I venture to hope, be productive of the
best results.
M. Weber admitted to me that he had not hesitated to attribute to Her
Majesty’s Government and myself, views totally contrary to those really
entertained ; whilst for my own part I had certainly suspected him of designs
which Ido not now believe that he entertains. The good understanding thus
established will not be easily disturbed.
The strange language and conduct of Mr. Liardet had given M. Weber
reasonable cause for suspicion, as he would hardly believe that Her Majesty s
54
FIJI
CHAP.


Consul was acting in contravention of your Lordship’s orders and my advice.
I therefore thought it expedient to show him privately the instructions given
by your Lordship to Mr. Liardet, and also my own official letters to that
gentleman ; a mark of confidence of which I trust your Lordship will not
disapprove, and which M. Weber returned by placing in my hands com-
munications which passed between himself and his own Government. —I
have, etc.
To the Earl of Derby
Nasoya, Fiji, April 2, 1878. —My Lord—My despatches will have given
you a narrative of transactions in Samoa up to the present date, and I now
proceed to offer a few general remarks respecting them.
2. I have already in my despatch No. 7 of the 4th ultimo enumerated the
objects of my visit to Samoa, and observed that the death of Mr. Liardet had
rendered my intervention on many points on which it had been solicited
altogether unnecessary.
3. Of those which remained as subjects for discussion with the Samoan
Government, but two, the disposal of the Puletua Chiefs and payment of the
fine imposed on account of the affray at Mulinuu Point in 1876, have been
arranged, and these only after a recourse to serious pressure.
4. The Puletua Chiefs have been removed from the Consulate, where they
had taken refuge, and an end thus put to a state of affairs which was both
embarrassing and in some degree ridiculous, and to which no satisfactory
issue was apparent. At the same time, although lam glad that this is the
case, it appears to me that the pledge required from the Government of
Samoa as to the treatment of these persons should not, if refused, have
been forcibly extorted, and it was an error in judgment on the part of
Mr. Maudslay to couple his demand with that for the payment of the
fine imposed by Commodore Hoskins, which stood upon a totally different
footing.
5. The question of the Barracouta indemnity has caused me more
thought and vexation than any other incident connected with these very
disagreeable negotiations.
6. My first interviews with the Taimua and Faipule led me to entertain no
doubt that the Samoan Government would agree to the appointment of a
Commission for the consideration of all British claims, including this; but
when it became evident that neither would they do so, nor enter into any
separate arrangement with regard to the Barracouta claim, nor admit any
liability with respect to it, I had to consider whether any of the claims in
question should be pressed, or whether their consideration could conveniently
be deferred. I came to the conclusion that the fines hastily imposed by Mr.
Liardet might be practically abandoned; that the consideration of the claims of
British subjects against the Samoan Government, some of which, on a cursory
examination, appeared to me well founded, but of which the majority were
clearly untenable, might very properly be deferred, but that the Barracouta
claim must be at once pressed, and if necessary enforced.
7. To have deferred a settlement of this question, which has been nearly
two years pending, would have been practically wholly to abandon it, and
this I did not think I could or ought to do. It seemed, moreover, desirable
that it should be settled and disposed of before the assumption by the
55
XIX
FIJI


United States of any authority in the group, the question of apology and
atonement for an attack upon the crew of an English ship-of-war not being' 1
one in the settlement of which the intervention of a foreign Power would in
any circumstances be desirable, whilst to the minds of the Polynesians it
would convey the idea of distinct military superiority on the part of the
Power intervening, which in the present case made it impossible for such
intervention to be with propriety admitted.
It appeared to me, therefore, that I must at once determine to abandon or
to enforce the claim, and as to my option in this respect I scarcely felt
myself a free agent. The imposition of a fine had been indicated to Taimua
and Faipule by Commodore Hoskins, and more distinctly notified to them by
Captain Digby of Her Majesty’s ship Sappho, and in abandoning the claim to
it without good cause shown, I should have appeared to cast a reflection on
the action of the Commodore which the circumstances did not warrant.
Whatever might be said as to the expediency of imposing such a fine in
the first instance, nothing could be urged against its justice, and, agreeing
entirely in the estimate of the facts formed by the Commodore, I felt bound
to carry out his views.
Every opportunity was afforded to the Taimua and Faipule to adduce
arguments against the enforcement of the fine, but they persisted in refusing
to acknowledge any liability on account of it, or to make any arrangement,
however easy, for its payment.
I was, however, most unwilling to proceed to extremities, and I repeatedly
offered that if they would consent to a general reference of claims to such a
Commission as I had suggested, to consider the Barracouta claim as included
among them ; but I intimated that failing any such agreement or the
production of new evidence as to the affray at Mulinuu, I must take measures
td secure what we deemed we had a right to demand. Acting under bad
advice, they not only declined to come to any terms, but, in the teeth of the
most positive and conclusive evidence to the contrary, asserted that the
marines of the Barracouta first fired on and attacked them, and that they
intended to ask an indemnity from the British Government for this attack,
which they had no doubt the Government of the United States would enforce
for them. It is perfectly clear that this threat did not originate in the brain
of a Samoan Chief.
9. I felt, therefore, that I had no alternative but to carry out the intentions
of the Commodore, and that it was best to do so without delay, so as to
anticipate any complication which might arise from subsequent American
intervention in the affairs of Samoa.
10. The proposals made by M. Weber and myself for the erection of a
Municipality of Apia, and the suggestions offered by us, at the invitation
of the Taimua, for the improvement and increased stability of the Samoan
Government, were of course abandoned on the intimation (not given until
after a week’s discussion on their merits of the Articles proposed) that a
Samoan plenipotentiary was engaged at Washington in negotiating a treaty
with which they might be inconsistent. This fact did not necessarily affect
the points at issue between ourselves and the Samoan Chiefs. All other
propositions, however, even those accepted on the first day of meeting by
the Samoan Government, were equally rejected. No security has been
obtained for the exemption of British subjects from military contributions or
56
CHAP.
FIJI


the maintenance of troops on the march. No permission has been accorded
to the High Commissioner’s Court to summon native witnesses, and no
arrangements have been entered into for the establishment of steam com-
munication with Fiji.
11. I now regret extremely that I ever entered into any negotiations at all
with Taimua and Faipule except on the two points of the Barracouta
indemnity and the Puletua refugees. Both I and M. Weber were led, if not
purposely entrapped, into doing so by the apparent willingness of the Chiefs,
and the manner in which our advice and aid were solicited.
Whether the Taimua and Faipule were from the first acting with duplicity,
or whether when they came to me on board the Sapphire, met me at Mulinuu,
and held the first meeting for discussion at my house, their professions were
sincere, lam unable to say, nor is it of great importance to determine. lam
willing to give them the benefit of the doubt, and the change of Commissioners
after the first meeting would appear to indicate a change of policy at that
time ; but, on the other hand, there can, I think, be no question that they
acted very nearly, if not quite, from the first, under the dictation of Mr.
Griffin ; that he was anxious to obtain from M. Weber and myself an acknow-
ledgment of the Taimua and Faipule as the de facto Government of Samoa
(which was practically given when we entered into conference with them),
and to entangle us in a negotiation for the purpose of representing us to have
made inadmissible proposals, and expose us to mortification by refusal ;
nor can we doubt that he encouraged the Chiefs to resist all demands, both in
order to show to them his power to protect them, and to obtain an exclusive
field for the American adventurers who may now be expected to pour rapidly
into the country.
12. The conduct of the American Consul was throughout marked by a
want of frankness and plain dealing which it is impossible not to regret.
Had he, in reply to my intimation and that of M. Weber, that we had
entered into negotiation with the Taimua and Faipule and requested his
support, informed us that negotiations were at that moment going on in
America which were inconsistent with those we had undertaken, I should at
once have withdrawn from the negotiation, and I have no doubt that M.
Weber—with a protest against the breach of the obligation entered into by
the Taimua and Faipule, to confer no greater favours on any other nation
than were extended to Germany —would have done the same.
Instead of this, Mr. Griffin, as I have already informed your Lordship,
wrote both to M. Weber and myself, that he “ had received instructions from
his Government, not to take part with the representatives of any other
nation, and to abstain from interference in the internal affairs of Samoa,”
and informed me at our first meeting, that my arrival was £ ‘ a grand day for
Samoa ; that the Taimua and Faipule had never before been so openly
recognised as the Government of the country ; that my address to them had
done much to consolidate their power, and that he was confident I should
find them anxious to make easy the settlement with me of any matters in
dispute.
13. He visited me again on the day on which the Samoans first informed
M. Weber and myself of the nature of Mamea’s mission, and then still
assured me of his inability, under his instructions, to interfere in Samoan
politics, but that he fully anticipated instructions would shortly arrive from
57
XIX
FIJI


Washington to act in concert with M. Weber and myself, adding (quite gratui-
tously, and upon his word of honour) that, though he lived among the Samoans
for safety from the English “roughs” (from whom he chose, without the
slightest foundation, to suppose himself in danger), he had no knowledge of the
Samoan Government’s transactions —an assurance which I received politely
and without dissent, but to which he can hardly have anticipated my entire
credence, as I had myself called on him a few days previously in the Samoan
hut he occupied, and where I found him surrounded by the books, papers,
and clerks of the Taimua and Faipule.
14. I had not intended to trouble your Lordship with trivial particulars of
this nature, nor had I thought it worth while to write to your Lordship
respecting the miserable petty misunderstandings which had existed between
the American and British Consulate, and which I was able, on my arrival, at
once satisfactorily to arrange. lam consequently unable to forward by this
mail the correspondence which took place between us, as it is in Samoa,
having been sent by me to Mr. Maudslay ; but as I understand from
M. Weber that Mr. Griffin makes serious complaints to his own Government
of “ the action of the British and German authorities in Samoa,” I deem it
right to put your Lordship in possession of all that has passed between us, and
will forward copies of these communications as soon as I can receive them
from Samoa. —I have, etc.
58
CHAP, XIX
FIJI


CHAPTER XX
WORK AS HIGH COMMISSIONER, GOVERNOR, AND CONSUL-
GENERAL-VISIT TO TONGA
On my return I of course found many letters awaiting me.
Among them the following from Le Hunte in Colo ;
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, February 10, 1878.—My dear Sir—Thank you for
your letter. I was in a bad way yesterday when I got here and found it,
and I don’t know where I put it, I cannot yet find it. I fear it has been
thrown away by one of the boys. I think, however, I remember what was in it.
First, the Devil-raising. Carew’s treatment and mine are not at all
alike, whichever may be right. I have spoken quietly to the Chiefs about
it (I have not seen Colaiwase), and told them that they had better look to
it—that if it was merely a vakatevoro 1 affair, and not a political one, I
should not meddle, but that if either any row appeared or any man’s
person or property was directly or indirectly injured by it, I should come
down smartly on the offenders, and thus I left it, and have heard nothing
more about it.
Second, Scott of Nadi is such a well-known drunkard, and when drunk
such a tremendous liar, that I don’t think it is any good moving much in
the matter. As to what he said about myself, I don’t care whether it is
true or not —so long as I have anything to do with the coast district —(I do
so hope to be relieved of it) —they must lump me if they don’t like me. As
to the opposition to the Government, I don’t think Mr. Scott would do
much harm. Nevertheless, if I hear of any meetings having taken place, I
will make enquiries.
Mr. Scott gravely stated to me and several others that you had promised
him 500 acres of land as a bonus for starting mining nickel-silver in
Nadroga, and that when he said he only wanted 200, you replied that you
could not think of allotting him less than 500 ; also, that if you attempted
to stop him mining, he would charter all the steamers he could lay hands
on, and fill them with miners who would not be put down like the whites
1 Heathen.
59


now in Fiji. Of course he was still drunk when he said this (it was the
morning after his conversation with Wright), but that will show you what
his yarns are worth. He is undeniably a bad lot, and would be no loss to
the country.
I started a fortnight ago to Nadroga, being then rather bad from the
effects of a severe boil at the end of my spine, where Darwin affixes his
link with the ape, and on the way down got afflicted with one of those
hard Fijian swellings on the inside of my leg, just above the knee. I got a
canoe at Naduri (Navalili), and went to Yunavatu, and walked from there
on the tip of my toes, or rather on my toes, as I could not straighten my
leg. I was unable to walk all the time I was at Nadroga. I went in a
boat to see Grayburn and Lejeune. Mrs. Grayburn must have been nice,
poor woman. She looks as if she had suffered great trials. She has a large
family of young children—one set of twins. Mrs. Lejeune is very unin-
teresting in every way, but she is quiet, and a good hostess. I had a row r
with your friend Montagu C. Johnstone. First of all, amongst other matters,
I blew him up for writing to one magistrate and abusing his predecessor to
him. To this he replied—that on one occasion, when he had visited you,
you had told him that you very much disliked hearing any complaints against
any of your magistrates ; but that as he knew all official letters of every
kind to magistrates found their way into your hands, he had written to
Knollys officially about Taylor in view that you might hear of it. Secondly,
I rated him for making false statements against native officials, in official
letters to their superiors. To this he replied, that though morally certain of
the truth, he had carefully expressed in his letter that he had been so in-
formed by other parties. Thirdly, he put a sort of general case (respecting a
native) bearing on a particular point, and got an opinion out of me as to
what a Court would be likely to do in it. Next day I found that the very
identical case w r as coming before me [it did not, but will next Court], I sent
for him and told him, before the Roko and Mackay, what a scoundrelly trick
he had played me, and with reference to a remark which he had made to me,
the day before, viz.,, that it was in every white’s mouth that they could get
no justice in the Court against natives—that if he put his nose inside my
house or any house I might be occupying, I should order my men to chuck
him outside (the soldiers were also present during this interview) —whereon
we parted, i.e. he left.
With regard to the above remark—if they said that they never got a
conviction against a native for injury, they are right. They always charge
the man with a far greater crime than he has committed, and then wonder
when the charge is dismissed. I told the whole mob of them in Court that
it was a scandalous thing to see the trivial offences on which natives were
brought to Court, and charged with commission of felonies —that if they
expected that English criminal law allowed itself to be distorted and twisted
to meet cases which were not legally within its grasp, they would find it
difficult to procure a magistrate who would let himself be made the medium.
The Nadroga whites certainly would have none of me if they could. I don’t
think I ever saw, out of a felon’s dock, a worse-looking set of blackguards
than were in Court that day —M‘Donald, Taylor, Johnson, Rennie, and a
couple of others. Lejeune’s overseer, Anderson, and his wife, are a nice
decent old Scotch couple. The man who speared Lejeune’s horse got a month
60
CHAP.
FIJI


—the long-standing provocation and his age being taken into consideration
(maximum penalty, three months). I had a long talk with the Roko,
Everybody and everything are in Rennie and Johnson’s hands—even the
whites recognise Rennie as the Roko’s agent, and write to him when re-
quiring business with the Roko. Nothing but bad will come of it, and how
to stop it while they are so deep in debt to the store, I don’t see. If you
only could get a good man to go and station himself there I mean as
Stipendiary Magistrate.
There has been a great row with the Vatulele people ; as probably Knollys
told you, the Roko wrote to me asking for soldiers, which I refused—his
officers arrested three men and brought them over. Buli Vatulele and others
came too. When I arrived the Roko told me he was not going to bring
them to court, and I arranged that we should talk it over with them. I
could not get down to the Roko’s, but he came and saw me. Just previous
to his coming I got a letter from one of the men arrested, asking why he
had been arrested, and accusing the Roko of having debauched their
women. I gave the Roko a quiet and rather long lecture on the folly of
meddling with other people’s women now that he was married, and living
in these times. He waited till I had done, and then quietly informed me
that this had happened before he went to New Zealand (about six years ago),
and that he had been punished for it. Whereon I was wroth, and next day
sent for Buli Vatulele and the writer of the letter, and gave the latter a
piece of my mind for raking up old quarrels against his Chief, etc.
The real facts are, I believe, these : (1) The Vatulele people are angry
with the Roko because they gave help to the Nadrogans in the last two
wars in which the Nadrogans have been engaged, and no payment has
ever been made for the arms and ammunition which they sent to Nadroga.
(2) Because the Roko told the Veibose at Rewa that the Vatulele people
had cheated the Government by selling their copra. Thereupon they raked
up the old affair of the women and said they would have him tried, and
other “ via-via-levu” 1 things of a similar nature. This they admitted.
The old Buli was all along on the Roko’s side ; the agitator is one Ratu
Josaia Nacika, who wrote the letter to me. They have all gone back to
Vatulele now. I managed to walk back to Vunavatu in great pain, and
got thoroughly knocked up. Next day I went in a canoe as far as Raiwaqa ;
next day canoe to Toga ; next day on a litter to Beimana ; and yesterday
to here. The last two days were rain ; the carrying on uneven ground was
awful. Here lamon my back and perfectly unable to get about. I hope
iodine will set me all right, but the pain is a bore, and it has gone on so
long that one feels rather pulled down.
Poor Knollys and the Fitzgerald cases ! I did not expect myself to hear
this ending. I don’t think I have anything else to say, and I don’t feel
very well up to writing, and alack, I have a lot to write. —Yours, etc.
P.S. —The church opening at Nadroga was very good. The church is a
very fine one—sinnet work very good. There were two enormous poles of
bananas outside, 60 feet high, and running from about fathoms round at
the base to at the top —eye measurement. You could see nothing but
1 Swagger.
61
XX
FIJI


bananas—no sticks. Twenty set melees, rather too much alike ; the soldiers’
one, the same that you saw here, carried the day.
P.P.S. —This is an extract of a letter from one Alexander Anderson of
Glasgow, who writes to you as Consul-General, and whose letter awaits
Maudslay ; it is too good not to send you.
“ Regarding this land (300 acres of land in Sandwich, supposed to belong
to the deceased brother of the writer), Mr. Layard has not been able to hear
anything, but possibly you may be able to find out from the Chief of the
island if you are able to dispose of the ground to any one. I shall feel
obliged if you will take the trouble to do so—something might be got
for it.
*‘l am sorry to give you trouble, but your attention will confer a favour
on,” etc., etc.
From Mr, Le Hunte
February 11, 1878. —My dear Sir —I am afraid I shall trespass too far on
your patience by asking the following question, but it puzzles me, and not
unnaturally. Why is the Commissionership of Wai-ni-Mala, etc., worth a
hundred a year more than this one ? Don’t, please, think I am jealous of
Carew personally ; as far as any individual is concerned I don’t care the
least what he gets, but I don’t quite see, when the two districts and their
coasts are compared, why there should be so great a difference in the pay.
Of course, last year it was different, or rather, I should say, the year before,
for there was only one Resident Commissioner for the whole of Colo.
If it is that Carew himself is worth £IOO a year more, I haven’t a word
to say further, for 1 am sure he is worth anything when he is at work that
suits him, and I don’t grudge him a penny of it; but, if it’s not personal, I
put forth the right of every Englishman—a growl. I asked Carew about it,
and he told me he got £4OO for his district and £SO for travelling expenses,
and he expressed much surprise when I told him that Nasova was £IOO
less.
Please excuse this, but the spirit of the present time urges me to ask the
question. —Yours, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
March 1, 1878. —My Lord—-I have just been reminded that I have never,
as I ought to have done, complied with your Lordship’s directions to furnish
further particulars as to the mode in which the labour recruiter Evans had
been dealt with for the irregularities reported in my Despatch No. 44 of
12th March 1877. I beg to apologise for the omission, and, although the
immediate interest of the case has passed away, will now make my report
upon the proceedings in question.
2. Evans was tried before the Police Court in Levuka on the charge of
having, by false pretences, induced natives of Kadavu to engage themselves
as labourers for plantations in Taviuni.
3. The evidence was, as a whole, overwhelmingly strong against Evans,
but it contained some discrepancies, and the charge being a criminal one,
the magistrates considered that they were bound to give the accused the
62
CHAT.
FIJI


benefit of the doubt, and dismissed the case. In doing so, however, they
cautioned Evans not to offend again in a similar manner, thereby conferring
on their judgment a considerable similarity to a certain well-known Irish
verdict.
4. It was felt so strongly by the magistrate who originally reported
Evans’ offence, that justice had been evaded, and that the determination to
‘‘give the benefit of the doubt” to Evans conferred anything but benefit on
those who had been refused release from the engagements into which they
had unwittingly entered, that he supplied means to enable the labourers
to bring their case into the Supreme Court, in the shape of a suit for the
cancellation of their contract.
5. Of the proceedings and judgment in that case I have now the honour
to enclose the Chief-Justice’s notes.
6. The decision of the Chief-Justice produced great irritation on the
part of some individuals among the settlers, and the advertisement of
which I enclose a copy, was inserted in the Fiji Times . The subscription
was not, however, I understand, collected, nor have its authors received
much support or sympathy from the planters generally.
7. Since the judgment of the Supreme Court, Evans has of course
been refused a renewal of his license as a recruiter, but I fear this refusal
is rendered practically nugatory by some planters, who engage a merely
nominal recruiter, and despatch him on a labour quest, accompanied by Evans
as an interpreter. Evans’ name is thus kept out of all official connection
with the transaction, and it is almost impossible to prove that the prohibition
respecting his employment as a recruiter has been evaded.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
March 2, 1878.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose the copy of a
letter which I have received from a Mr. Hunter, alleging that gross cruelty
has been shown to the Polynesian labourers on the estate of an English
proprietor in Samoa, and that labour has been improperly introduced for
that estate from the islands.
2. Into these allegations I shall, of course, cause inquiries to be made ;
but I now forward the letter in order to call your Lordship’s attention to
an apparent omission in the provisions either of the Polynesians Protection
Acts, 1872 and 1875, or in the Order in Council of 1877, and to recommend
that means should be taken to remedy it.
3. Your Lordship will perceive that under the provisions of the Poly-
nesian Acts there is no limitation either of the tonnage of vessels to be
employed in the labour trade, or of the proportion of souls per ton that may
be conveyed in such vessels. The conveyance of forty immigrants in a
20-ton cutter, therefore, though clearly excessive, is not illegal, and cannot
be punished.
4. Again, although the overseer referred to might be punished by the
High Commissioner’s Court for assault, there is no law that will touch the
proprietor of the estate on which such treatment is permitted, or which
renders any provision for the security of the labourer, the payment of his
wages, etc., obligatory on the employer.
5. The Pacific Islanders Protection Amendment Act provides in its sixth
63
XX
FIJI


section that it shall be lawful for Her Majesty “to create and constitute
, . . breach of such regulations.”
By H.M. Order in Council of the 13th August 1877, however, this
power of the High Commissioner to make Regulations is limited to offences
against treaties.
The same section of the Pacific Islanders Protection Amendment Act
1875 further provides that “it shall be also lawful . . . cession or con-
quest.”
6. I would, therefore, recommend either that Her Majesty be moved
to grant the High Commissioner power to make Regulations respecting the
treatment of imported labourers by British subjects owning estates in the
Western Pacific Islands (as by the Act She may do), or that advantage be
taken of the further provisions of the same section of the Act, and an Order
in Council passed upon the subject.
7. A Royal Order in Council, as having more authority, would be pre-
ferable ; but I fear there would be great difficulty in making one suitable to
all places alike, and that it would necessarily be either so vague and general
in its wording as to be virtually useless, or contain details which it would
be practically impossible to enforce.
8. If hesitation be felt as to intrusting the power of making Regulations
under section 6 of the Pacific Islanders Protection Amendment Act to the
High Commissioner alone, it might be provided that they should not take
effect until they had been approved by Her Majesty, or the High Commis-
sioner might be instructed to act conjointly with the Chief-Justice in framing
them. It may also be observed that, although technically a power to make
new laws, it would practically be only that of adapting laws already existing
in the Australian Colonies and Fiji to the circumstances of the settlers in
more remote islands.
9. As the law at present stands, it is kidnapping alone which is aimed
at. It was evidently the impression of the draftsman (and in most cases it
would be a correct impression), that the labourers, when once engaged, would
be under the protection of the municipal laws of some colony or civilised
power, and their employment by British subjects in such places as the
New Hebrides or Samoa was never contemplated.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Nasova, Fiji, March 1 to 4.— The mail arrived to-day—
a fortnight behind time, owing to a change in the San
Francisco steamer’s dates, so we have been six weeks without
letters. It does seem such an age, and 1 have all this time not
written a line. I often sat down and began, but “nothing
came,” except a letter to you, which I afterwards tore up in
disgust! I get so excited on mail days that often I can t
sleep, and now I have got up in the night to begin a letter!
The English news looks bad and very warlike, alas ! There
is one great piece of news for us, viz., that the Colonial Office
have for once done exactly what Arthur wished, and sent to
64
CHAP.
FIJI


Mr. Des Voeux (Governor of St. Lucia) to come out here and
relieve him. He will be here in May, so we shall now leave
at the end of May, and may get home in August. We are to
have six months’ leave, with extension of course. Whether we
shall ever come back “ who can tell ? ” But if Arthur does, I
come with him—that I have quite decided; so we have only
three months more. I should have preferred staying on two
or three months longer, so as to come home in a cooler season.
I don’t like to think of the Red Sea in July. There will be
a great deal to do. I quite dread the packing—l know I shall
get so knocked up, for I am not good for much here, though
I am quite well. The children are also as well as possible.
The heat has been most intense lately; I never felt anything
like it these last two days. We are all streaming. I change
everything three or four times a day; but it’s no good, for one
is as hot again in five minutes. However, it can’t last, and
must turn to rain or a hurricane. Two days ago Arthur
returned from Samoa in H.M.S. Sapphire. It was much hotter
there, and the trip seems to have been an uncomfortable one,
and did him no good. It took five days to get there, and they
were exactly three weeks away. They took a house and lived
on shore, and were very uncomfortable and badly fed, and
excessively hard-worked, besides which he had a small abscess
in his ear, which gave him a good deal of pain; and he looked
quite ill when he came back. However, he is all right now.
When he arrived there, he found the flags half-mast high.
The British Consul, Mr. Liardet, had died that morning. On
his return here he saw the flags in Levuka harbour were also
half-mast high, which for a short time gave him a terrible fright.
It was the wife of the captain of our steamer who had died.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, March 6, 1878.—My dear Sir —I hear you have been
at Samoa—in fact, are there now, I believe. I hope you all have had a very
pleasant time of it. I envied those with you much.
Things are all right. I had all the Bulis here the other day. Buli
Nadrau was represented by Na Cola-uli. Some of them were late, so we
finished one lot one day, and the rest the next.
The ls 2 day there were—Nadrau, Namosirum, Korolevu (coast), Koroi-
nasau, Beimana, and the Chiefs of towns near here.
2nd day —Nuyakoro, Navola, etc.
We talked very little, but to the purpose. Reports all satisfactory.
Tokolau malady. —Only a case here and there ; in the Serua district it is
by report bad.
Taxes. —Each man to give one basket of candlenuts. Masi —none to be
111 F
65
XX
FIJI


got this year on account of the drought, but to be planted this year in
quantities. Coast towns to plant cotton, besides the candlenut gathering. I
don’t think we can do more than that this year. If the cotton succeeds on
the coast, we might plant it here next year.
Roads— Difficulty about the Nadroga road. Conua people have not done
any of their share yet. (Yakayavanuku had a bad leg, and could not come.
lam going to write strongly to him.) Koroinasau and Beimana at sixes and
sevens about their portions. They want to leave out a bit for Navola to do.
The latter was not here the first day, and on the second day (when they were
not here) he used bad language towards the two former tribes, and said he
was not going out of his own district to make roads for them. After I had
talked to him he said he would go and talk it over with them.
Ba Road. —All portions of it settled all right.
We-talked over a few other subjects. Mason and Gordon came up in the
middle of it. They bored me excessively for two days, only I will say they
kept out of the way when told I had business. Mason got twenty-six young
men from Sabeto for a year. Most of them were school children with elder
brothers. The teacher wrote to me to stop them, but what could I do ? In
these cases one has to have good authority for one’s actions. They were all
accompanied by “natural guardians,” and so the Ordinance passed them.
This is a case where the Buli must be told to interfere. If he had objected, I
would not have hesitated about refusing to pass the children. These sort of
cases are those where the Roko and Buli should interfere, and let the white
Stipendiary Magistrate back them up. I shall write and tell the Roko what
I think about it. One little boy I sent back, because he had no “ natural
guardian ” with him ;he was dreadfully disappointed at not going. I expect
Mason will be up again with some more before he goes away. He wanted to
recruit men from the towns about here, and I flatly told him that ‘ c I would
not let them go,” which no doubt will find its way into the papers, etc., at
the next agricultural meeting. I gave him my reasons, and nothing further
was said about it. It is no use trying to put these men off with anything
short of a straight statement of what one will or will not do in these cases.
I am able to walk about now, but my leg is still hard, and I cannot walk
farther than about the inside of the camp. I hope to be able to go down to
Nadi and Ba some time soon ; they are wanting courts held there badly. I
see no chance until I can get on a horse.
Logan's Gold Mine.—l have heard of it. He, of course, has not told any
one where he has found it. It is not anywhere in the ‘ ‘ interior of Yiti Levu. ”
It must be on the Ba side of the boundary line of hills, but whether up by
Nakotawa or towards Navatu, I have not yet heard—probably the latter, from
what Langton tells me.
Mackay , to my great surprise, is to be Clerk of the Peace at Loma Loma.
He won’t be up to the work in the least, unless he has some one behind him.
The coast natives here are very sorry to lose him. I send you a letter from
Tripp re Loma Loma.
Please don’t forget that you promised that Mackay should be replaced by
some one able to do Clerk of the Peace work. A white constable, I suppose,
will go. If I have no one there to do the official detail work of the coast, I
really cannot manage that part of the district. At any rate, I ought not
fairly to be made responsible for the numerous things which the office of
66
FIJI
CHAP.


Stipendiary Magistrate involves being carried out properly. With any
ordinary man who can do clerk’s work, I can scrape along as I have done, but
I can’t do more. If a white constable does the extra work of Clerk of the
Peace, he should have something extra allowed him, for I generally can find
plenty for him to do.
I am eager to hear whether you found you could do your work in Samoa
as you wanted ; if so, I hope the lamentable work of self-extirpation at which
they have been employed will stop.
P.S. —You should not have been wroth at my not writing to you or
Knollys by the mail that took my letter to Cocks. 1 thought you had gone
to Samoa and Knollys to Sydney. I wrote the next mail, and I suppose my
letters are waiting for you at home.
Ratu Nemani will get your sandalwood. How many pieces do you want,
and of what length ? I suppose they will be paid for. I told him so, at any
rate. He says that Scott can’t talk Fijian, and ridicules the story of the
meetings. I also send a letter from a copra trader in Lau (Bachelor). I have
not answered it, as I am not now Stipendiary Magistrate for Lau.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
March 2.—We had a dinner-party last night, I quite
dreaded it, as I knew my dress would be done for (drenched);
but we had a happy thought. Four of our boat’s crew in their
picturesque uniform were stationed round the table to wave four
large war fans behind us. This kept us quite cool, besides look-
ing so nice. We had Captain Murray, two Sapphire officers, the
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Lake, R.E., and two planters—a party
of twelve—all men but me—really a very pleasant and agree-
able set. We always go into the opposite extreme from you,
and never have ladies enough. We have only once ever had
the same number of ladies and men. On Monday we have
another dinner—four ladies and fourteen gentlemen! Our
dinners go off very well now. I know nothing about them,
never even see the bill of fare or table! Captain Knollys
brings me a paper with the order in which we are to sit written
out. When he is away I arrange that. He doesn’t like any
interference with his duties. It is his weak point, but he is a
very nice fellow, and we (he and I) get on extremely well.
And after all it is much better to leave the responsibility to
him; but it’s rather like being a guest in one’s own house.
Always before I have overlooked the books (accounts); now I
find it best to leave that to him, and I know he keeps a very
sharp look-out. I don’t know how other Governors’ wives
manage; but I believe Lady Robinson looks to every penny
herself, and the A.D.C. is a mere cypher. Now, it’s no use
keeping a dog and barking one’s self. Now the Sapphire is here
67
XX
FIJI


we have some of the officers up every day to play lawn-tennis.
I don’t see them often, for they get much too hot to show, and
they much prefer “ brandies and sodas ” to tea. There is
always that sort of thing to be had at Abbey’s office. Some-
times we mount two or three of them and they go for a ride,
and I lend them “ Chubby.” We are going to sell all our
horses, except Chubby, whom I shall lend to the Colonial Secre-
tary (Mr. Thurston).
The Thurstons are our nearest neighbours. They have a
very pretty little place alongside of this, but up a hill, not
much farther than from the house to the cottage (Ascot). He
is a most agreeable and clever man, though no one knows what
his antecedents have been. She is rather clever too, and can
be agreeable, but unfortunately she drinks, and one never can
be sure of her.
During the three weeks Arthur was away Mr. and Mrs.
Seed and Dr. Macgregor came to stay with me, and we got on
very well together. Mrs. Seed rode Abbey’s pony, and Mr.
Seed had his own horse, so we were quite a cavalcade. They
are now making a good road round the coast, which will make
a very great difference to me. It is a great pity it was not
done when we first came; but then it was always Suva—Suva
—and not a shilling was to be spent here that could be avoided.
Now I believe we are as far off from Suva as we were at first.
Nevil is very good, and so clever that Dr. Macgregor, who is
very fond of her, is always impressing upon me that she ought
not to be taught, and that she reads too much to herself as
it is.
Mr. Maudslay returned from the mountains (where he had
been on a Lands Commission) yesterday. He is going to be
sent off as Acting Consul to Samoa (for a month) in a few
days, so that I shall see very little of him, which lam sorry
for. I like him so much. Though nine years younger than
Captain Knollys and A. J. Gordon, he always seems much
older, and he is so companionable and pleasant in the house,
and never bored, as the other two are rather easily, much as I
like them both !
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Nasova, Fiji, March 16.— 1 tis nearly a fortnight since the
mail left, and time to be beginning again for the next. But
when I look back on this fortnight, I can find nothing to write
about, for nothing whatever has happened. We have begun to
pack up in a quiet way. We have packed various cases of
68
CHAP.
FIJI


pottery and curios, and all Eka’s things (four immense cases),
but I try to think as little as I can about the going away, for
there are still two and a half months, and it is a pity to be
unsettled for so long. Nobody here knows it as yet, except
Mr. Thurston, the Colonial Secretary; and as His Excellency
wishes it to be kept secret as long as possible, we can’t do much
in the way of selling things. Two of the horses, however, have
been disposed of. I have decided to keep “ Chubby,” and lend
him to Mr. Thurston, for I should never get one again so
perfectly suited to me. “Tom Thumb” is to' go back to
Sydney and be sold there, for no one would buy him here,
as he is quite useless! He is a perfect little beauty, but so
wicked and unmanageable that even Abbey can’t train him,
though he is quite strong enough for him to ride. Jack gets
on very well by letting him do what he likes, and keeping a
long way behind the others. The four others will have to be
sold. There are also two boats to be sold, and various odds and
ends. All the arrangements will be most difficult to make.
Inventories will have to be made of all our property here, some
things left packed (such as plate and linen) in case we come
back, and I know we shall have a houseful of people up to the
very last moment. Happily Abbey is always equal to the
occasion! Nevil is extremely sorry to be going away. I
believe it is chiefly because she doesn’t like leaving her pony,
whom she adores; riding is, lam sure, perfect happiness to her
now. I am quite surprised how well she has got on; she
really sits beautifully, and is quite at home in her saddle—she
used to be dreadfully nervous at first—and it keeps her well,
I have no doubt. I don’t think she has ever been better in her
life, though she looks pale. She seems to have got over her
delicacy. Jack also is quite well.
Our rainy season has begun at last. There have been two
complete rainy days, so dull and depressing ! To-day it was
fine again, and I went out for a ride with Nevil and Jack. We
always do the same thing. We take a few canters up and
down the Kara, and then ride to Totonga (part of Levuka),
about half a mile on the town side, and have a little talk with
Mrs. Seed (whom we find in her veranda) without getting off.
The Seeds have a very nice native house in “ Totonga Square,”
i.e. a large reed-thatched building, excessively rude, divided
into three good-sized rooms by slight half-partitions of reeds.
All round the square, formed by the moat of an old
native town, are the police barracks. Mr. Seed is the
Superintendent of Police here. We then turn back, and ride
to Driemba, a nice large native village, half a mile on the other
69
XX
FIJI


side of Nasova, along the sea; there you come to a cocoa-nut
log-bridge over a creek, which cuts our ride short, as lam
afraid to cross it on horseback. However, it is going to be
properly bridged over, and a good road made for two or three
miles on beyond, which, if finished in our time, will make all
the difference to me. Driemba has been much improved and
enlarged lately (it used to be a horrid dirty village). There
are some very fine large native houses in it, and Ratu Timothy,
who is the Governor of this district, now lives there. He has
got a fine new house, and is building another beside it for his
wife Yani (they never live with their wives!). Ido wish you
could see a good native house ; the charm of them is inde-
scribable. Well, we rode as usual to Driemba, and there
found Ratu Timothy, standing about, with two or three other
Chiefs, and his beautiful little girl, Andi Thakombau, in the
arms of one of her numerous nurses. His house being on the
other side of the creek, and the tide being high, I couldn’t get
across, so, after a little talk with him, I asked him to send
word to Andi Kuila (who I knew had come over from Bau) that
I was there, and she came over and shook hands. She looked
very fat, and had on a long sulu of black tappa (which is very
Chief-like), put on very high up, just under the arms, and
reaching to her feet. She had no pinafoa. I told her she
must come to Nasova and see me (she understands English
perfectly, though she won’t speak it). She said she was going
back to Bau in two days. We then rode home, the two children
trotting on before, and had tea, and Arthur read Kenilworth to
Nevil till she went to bed. After dinner, A. J. G., Captain K.,
and I sauntered on to the Rara; it was a beautiful moonlight
night, and quite cool. The soldiers of the guard (armed con-
stabulary) were drawn up, about sixty in number, for the roll-
call and evening prayers, which Captain Knollys, who is their
commandant, always attends. We all stood near, and heard
the chaplain say his prayer in Fijian, of which the only words
I understood were —“ Kovana ” (Governor), “ Turanga ni Yalu
(chief of war, i.e. Captain Knollys), “Roko Tui,” persons he prayed
for ! They were then dismissed, and went back to their barracks,
two large Fijian houses on the other side of the Rara, from which
we very soon heard the sounds of singing and clapping of a
yangona melee. We went in and sat in the veranda in the beau-
tiful moonlight, listening to the roar of the sea on the coral
reef, till bedtime, and here I am in my room.
April I.—l began this letter a fortnight ago, and now the
mail leaves to-morrow. I have no letter from you this time ;my
70
CHAP.
FJJI


last was December 18. There are letters from the others up
to January 30. I have had my box sent over at last; it was
waiting for me at Sydney for two months. The black silk is
most lovely, much too good for here. It would have been
exactly the thing at Sydney and Melbourne, which was what I
wanted it for. I have been for so long at cross purposes as to
dress, and never have what I really want at the moment; and
my Sydney woman has become so bad that I am always in
trouble, for I can’t get a thing done without a maid. If I had
not for years had good maids, I might be able to do things for
myself a little as I used, but I can’t now. The grenadine is
also extremely pretty and nice ! I wore it last night. If I come
out again, I shall arrange to have everything sent from home, it
would be more economical in the end; still, when one has to
pay about £lO freight, and ss. duty on a box, it is very serious.
All the things are so nice. It is such a treat to get a box
from home.
The children are delighted with your presents. They are so
nice, and it is so kind of you to send them. Nevil threw her-
self on the mat and began to devour her book, which she says is
most interesting; and the steam-engine is charming —every one
wants to play with it. A. J. G. wishes there were several!
Jack built a house for it directly. Thank you so much for the
music. If we had been staying, I should have a piano now, for I
should have brought one back from Sydney; but being always so
uncertain, it has not seemed worth while buying one, and Arthur
has always been against the expense till lately, when we have
not felt so poor. We can live within our income now, but we
cannot refund the enormous outlay of the beginning. I know
Nevil ought to learn music. Teddy Abbey plays very nicely,
and can read easy things. I think he has a decided turn for it.
I shall have Nevil taught directly I get home. She is very
quick at other things, and can do a compound addition sum
without a fault. Jack can now write quite as well as she does,
and is also very quick at sums. Your music looks so nice. I
have also some which Mrs. Rate sent me. I have not been
troubling myself much about packing lately; still it is rather
unsettling.
Mrs. Abbey was very much gratified with the book for Teddy.
She says he is delighted. He is very fond of reading. We are
all very well now, except Arthur, who looks careworn and much
older. lam sure the climate and anxiety are telling upon him,
and he wants change much more than any one. For three years
it has been incessant hard work and great anxiety, and in that
respect I think it gets worse. He never gets any relaxation,
7 1
XX
FIJI


and there is no one here he can talk to, and there always seems
to be something or other to worry him. That I suppose one
must expect wherever one may be. You can’t think how I long
sometimes for some one to talk to. Letters are such a moment-
ary pleasure. In ten minutes it is all over, after longing for
them for weeks. However, since I have taken to riding I have
felt so much better, and in such much better spirits that I have
been much happier here. It just breaks the long, wearisome,
solitary afternoons, and cheers one up!
It is possible still that we may not leave till the end of June
—three months —but that seems nothing. That would bring us
home in September. I shall perhaps be able to tell you next
time. I think we shall go home by the Orient line, direct from
Sydney to London through the Canal. I don’t feel much afraid
of the Red Sea after all. Must stop.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, March 13, 1878. —My dear Gome—l send you tbe draft of your
Native Transactions Ordinance as you requested. The only serious alteration
I have made is the making all transactions under £5 necessarily cash trans-
actions, or credit at the creditor’s own risk.
How about your Companies Ordinance ? Of course we should stop till
you are able to be present if any one raises objection to any clause, but do
you want to make any alterations yourself ? for, if not, we might, I think, read
and pass the undisputed clauses in your absence.
I hear good reports of your progress.—Yours, etc.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, March 17, 1878. —My dear Sir —I am so glad to hear
that you have got back all right from Samoa, and I am very sorry that your
work there was spoilt by the “snake.” 1 What you have gained to your side
of the “ antipathy ” question by showing to me that froggies 1 are not always
bad, I have certainly not lost in supporting my view that “snakes” are
always pretty considerably nasty. I was much amused by the bit in your
enclosure which referred to the trying position of that “snake,” who had
hardened his heart to the prayers for advice from those in whose bosom he
had located himself.
All well here. I have had to give Tui Conua (Yakayavanuku) a bit of my
mind for not helping in the Nadroga road. I think he will now, but he has
not yet answered my letter.
As to your inquiries :— Klinesmith. Still at Naloka, which is almost the
same as Nabuto. He seems to be very hard at work. He says something
about going soon to the other side.
1 In Mr. Le Hunte’s vocabulary all foreigners were “froggies” and
Americans “snakes.”
72
CHAP.
FIJI


Garden. —My crotons, etc., are well. Three died out of about thirty
cuttings. I want a case from Nasova —you owe me one. I will plant the
mango seeds (there were two instead of three in the letter). I cannot persuade
either you or Knollys that I take a greater interest in plants than to allow goats
to do damage where they are planted. The goats are banished for good and
all to the other side, which I have rented from the Tawaleka people. I never
did come across such an intolerant individual in some respects as your
A.D.C., my commanding officer; he will never allow that there can be a
medium in anything, good or bad. He always goes in for the superlative
degree. I always go in for the comparative.
The tavola tree sprung twice into splendid foliage, and was twice instantly
shorn of its glories by the “caterpillars.” It looks as if it did not contem-
plate a third attempt. Horne must prescribe for it when he comes. The
caterpillars are a perfect scourge here, and they have devoured the beans
which we were relying on from the coast. Hence I have a great deal of
anxiety about our food. Sometimes we have none for two or three days
brought in. The taukeis are very badly off themselves just now. We shall
be all right very soon.
Sandalwood. —l sent off at once to Ratu Nemani about getting it sent by
the Black Swan , and I made an especial point that the owners would be paid
for their sandalwood.
I am sorry to lose Mr. Langton. He seems a good fellow and not a snob—
and he is English. He would like to stay, but says that he does not see his
way to anything more lucrative if he does so.
I don’t think the Colo cotton plantations in the coast towns will do
without a plantation overseer. Grayburn has just been discharged from his
appointment. Nadroga may do under its Roko, but those different tribes
from Serua to Vatukarasa owning no superior guidance, except the quasi-feudal
homage to this place, will not, I think, make much use of their tax-gardens
without supervision. I think that, in dismissing the plantation inspector
from Nadroga district, the coast of Colo will suffer unless it has one of its
own. Probably Mr, Wilkinson forgot the enormous difference between the
two portions of Grayburn’s district.
My leg is very much better, in fact nearly well, but lam not yet up to a
long walk. It was most extraordinary. At one time I thought it was going
to come to a regular large boil, but it went away, leaving the muscles just
like a network of whipcord, or rather hard sinnet, and there they are still.
Ratu Rovo and the daughter of Roko Tui Ba are “ a-courting ” ! The
lady sent a message to him, in fact a proposal, with the direction to be sure
and ask me if I had any objection. Ratu Rovo, supported by two sergeants,
broke the news to me in the middle of the night, and his acceptance was
conveyed to the fair one next day. They are going (if it comes off—we have
not yet heard what “Papa” has to say in the matter) to live up here.
Ooray ! Ooroar ! I will let you know directly it is really settled. Ratu
Rovo has no wife in Macuata. I asked him particularly.
Your lali. —l have just told the Chief of Nasaucoko that his fire-burners
are to take it to Toga en route for Cuvu at last.
I was much surprised to learn that Mackay was ordered to Lau. I don’t
think he will be up to his work without some one at his back. I had ex-
pected to have seen him before he left, and could have told him some things
73
XX
FIJI


that would have been of benefit to him, but the Receiver-General could not
wait, so he went without my seeing him. The coast work must go to sleep
till some one replaces him.
Tui Conua’s answer to my letter has just arrived. My stormy one reached
him while he was doing the very work I was blaming him for neglecting, so
he had a good answer to give.
Buli Nadrau has been disturbed by Roko Tui Ba offering a tabua to the
Qali-yala-tini people (who have several towns between Ba and Nadrau, and
who are under Nadrau) to come over to him. The talma was, I believe,
refused, but Buli Nadrau at once wrote off to me for protection. I have
not heard yet what the Roko’s account of the matter is.
The effect of Mr. Woodruff’s freshness will be that I shall not be able
to leave the camp until he is able to get along a little by himself. Some-
body must go soon to Nadi and Ba. The Court business is heavy at both
places, and people are grumbling at the delay, but my being ill prevented
my going. If I can get there next month I will.
To Mr, Le Hunte
Nasova, March 19, 1878.—My dear Le Hunte—l was very sorry not to
get a better account of you in your last letters. You will have to come down
here to recruit.
As to Mackay.—l am as usual at my wits’ end. What am Ito do when
H.M. Government will not allow any Clerks of the Peace, and strikes out
their salaries from the establishment ? What, too, am Ito do about another
magistrate ? It is all I can do to keep the number I have got, for at the
Colonial Office they are instant in their urgency that I should diminish
the Magisterial Staff to four! I would, however, chance this, and send a
magistrate to reside at Nadroga if I could find him, but where is he ? Will
you recommend me a fit man ? Cocks is the only one who occurs to me, and
he cannot be spared from hence.
I send you up Heffernan, of whom you may make whatever use you please.
I cannot even find any one as Magistrate forLau, Maudslay having gone to
Samoa. But I will try and send you a man—a decent white constable would
do at Yuda, but where is the decent white constable ? Seed picked what he
thought the best to send to Lau, afad now I hear he has been swearing at
Maafu and generally showing himself via via Uvu. 1 If I cannot get half a
dozen men of all sorts, high and low, magistrates and police, from England,
I shall have to throw up the whole concern in disgust and failure.
Mr. Walter Hunter has applied for a pass to go to Nadrau to look for
labour there, and in Colo generally. I have refused him.
I have had to sanction a tabu on the sale of food at Ba and Nadi. Ihe
people had sold all this year’s crop and pledged next year’s, and the Roko says
that though there had been more food planted last year than usual, there is
now hardly anything left to eat or plant. He adds that he had looked for
things going wrong somewhere, knowing the people’s foolishness, but that
this form of difficulty, scarcity of food, had not occurred to him
1 High and mighty.
74
CHAP.
FIJI


as probable when he saw last year’s supply. Of course the traders are wroth.
So is Blachford.
I have your letter about the children recruited. I think I know how I
can get it stopped, and will try, but I must first get my debt ordinance passed,
of which I enclose a draft, and which is not easy to put through.
You will hear from Knollys of Wright’s resignation.
I send you a letter of Rooney’s for your opinion and comments.
And now I come to a great piece of news which you will, I know, be sorry
to hear, and which, although as yet a secret, I write of, because Ido not wish
you to hear it from any one but myself.—l have applied for and received leave
of absence for six months, which will probably, I suppose, extend itself to
nine. My deputy will be Mr. Des Yceux, a friend of mine, who will loyally
carry out my views and plans during my absence.
We propose to go at the end of May or June, and of course you will come
down and stay with us before we leave, if you do not go with us home. How
about this ? You know I promised that you should have leave to go as soon
as I could manage it, and I flatter myself that you would prefer being away
whilst I am. But unfortunately you can probably be even less easily spared
when I am absent than when I am here.
I mean next month to go up the Rewa, and hope to come on to you. If
so, we can settle this. My idea is that you should remain here some little
time after us, and come home to England before we come out again. I know
there are other difficulties, as well as those arising from Fijian politics, in
the way of your going home, but they are not, I hope and think, insuperable.
Heffernan knows nothing of this move, so don’t discuss it with him.
You will, I think, like Des Yceux, and he will like and appreciate you.
The Suva is in sight. It is a terrible suspense to know whether the news
she brings will be those of peace or war.
The Suva is in, and has only one day’s later news. Nothing yet decided.
I believe my going home is more likely to do something effectual for Fiji
than anything else.—Yours ever,
A. H. G.
P-S. —l have made Heffernan a J.P., so that you may utilise him as an
assistant by sending him to Nadroga, Serua, Yuda, etc.
Burness is giving more trouble, and I shall probably have to send a com-
mission to enquire whether there are not primd facie grounds for his deporta-
tion. Meanwhile it would be well to have notes quietly taken as to his
sayings and doings.
From Mr. Carew
Nakorovatu, Colo, March 19, 1878.—My dear Sir—l left Levuka on
Friday morning, arriving at Bau same day, stayed there all night, and went
on to Navuso next day, and was at Navuso all Sunday, arriving here late
last night.
Before leaving Draiba, I spoke to Adi Kuila about the reports of the
whites, that the lands were going to be confiscated, and told her that such
would not be the case. She assured me that the whites had told her posi-
tively that lands would be taken from them and sold. I told the Yunivalu
the same story. He made an excited sweeping assertion that all whites were
tricksters and cheats. We were not to be believed, and he said, “Look at
75
XX
FIJI


Mokogai and Wakaya ! ” Also that your Excellency’s work would be upset
by the next Governor.
I assured him that it would be a most difficult matter for one Governor
to upset the laws and general legislation and regulations of a predecessor ;
that such could only be done after mature consultation and reference to the
Queen, and upon its being clearly felt that it was desirable and necessary to
do so. He did not, I fear, believe what I told him about the lands. I also
asked the Buli to explain to the people of Naitasiri how matters stood, and he
said he would on Court day next (to-day). I have also explained matters to
Buli Matailobau and the people here, and I find that everywhere the same
story has been most industriously circulated. I take the liberty of impress-
ing upon your Excellency that considerable excitement and dismay prevails
in the minds of the natives at this time in the matter of their lands. It is
very necessary indeed that some clear understanding be at once arrived at in
the matter, and without further delay. And that then a circular be sent to
every native official, including the Bulis, in the whole colony. This might
be easily and speedily done with the papyrograph in the office of Mr. Wilkin-
son. I answer with this the long letter of Mr. Scott. I was prepared for
him throughout, and kept a journal ready for him ; and the contents of my
letter in reply are extracted from it. The one in the matter of Thompson
and Renwick’s claim, I fear, I have left at Draiba on Mr. Eyre’s table, and I
now write for it. However, my answer now will include the answer in
Thompson and Renwick’s claim. I have seen Witherow and find that Mr. Parr
has a lien over his houses and plant and boat for £6O, advanced to the
lawyers, Thomas and Solomon, who are for Witherow. Also that he cannot get
his cane crushed at the mill, which can only take a part load here and there
for each of the planters, there being so much cane, and only this mill, and a
smaller one, to do it. I have promised to assist him with a loan of money,
although I fear I may lay myself open to a charge of bolstering him up to
oppose Thomas. And I was on the Commission also, although I had nothing
to do with the report. lam now trying to get a man here to try and get him
some money on his cane crop. He appears incapable of business matters, or
of helping himself much in his trouble. I feel more convinced than ever of
his innocence. There is a very respectable and intelligent teacher at Bau
Ratu Esaia, and Frank has been to see him, and he remembers that the vessel
left after New Year’s Day. But what he will remember on the trial may be
a different thing altogether. lam very busy just now with reports and
general business.—l am, etc.
From the Rev. F. Langham
Bau, March 13, 1878. —Your Excellency—l have just received the
following from one of my colleagues: “ The Native Magistrate was in-
structed at the late Bose to inquire into all the marriages performed by me.
Where everything was clear and correct he was to give a license. If any
marriages were tawa macala 1 he was to report to Levuka.” Another writes :
“The Native Magistrate decided to fine some of the people that had been
married by me. It seems, from what I can hear, that Mr. Wilkinson ordered
1 Not clear.
76
CHAP.
FIJI


that all natives that did not observe the Marriage Act should be fined.”
These cases are additional to those which were prosecuted in Mr. Fison’s
Circuits and in mine, and to which we asked your Excellency’s attention.
Your Excellency will remember that you distinctly authorised all the English
ministers —some of us several times —to celebrate marriages where difficulties
occurred in getting a license. We have not to the present moment been
notified that this permission has been withdrawn. And yet, as it seems to
me, your Excellency gives instructions that the parties married by us, with
your Excellency’s approval, shall be prosecuted. For I take it that your
Excellency’s Commissioner, who was aware of the permission given to us,
would not have directed, on his own authority, prosecutions for acts which
you had sanctioned.
What makes this action all the more marked is the fact—that is, if the
members of the Rewa Bose report correctly—that while the native magistrates
were there instructed to institute these prosecutions, they were on the same
occasion directed that they might violate the Act (they had previously done
this, and their conduct had been approved) ; and they have since done so, in
some cases, by giving licenses on the first application, and by giving licenses
to applicants from another province.
Your Excellency will remember that I called attention to the incon-
venience and hardships imposed by the strict enforcement of these two
clauses. In passing, may I venture to ask whether very much weight is to
be attached to the statement, published as the Ist Resolution of the Rewa
Bose, to the effect that the Marriage Act worked satisfactorily, and that the
objections urged against it were groundless, when two of its chief objection-
able clauses are practically admitted and eliminated ?
The fact that prosecutions have been instituted against persons married
by us for alleged violations of the Act, whilst Government officials are
authorised to violate the Act, and while others have done so most glaringly
without being authorised, andyet have not been prosecuted, gives the impression
that the action has been aimed at us. This is certainly the impression made
upon the natives and others. Ido not think, however, that our influence
with them has been, or indeed that it will be, in the slightest degree affected
thereby. They see some of the well-disposed of the people subjected to
prosecution, whilst officials are tolerated, though guilty of incest, seduction,
adultery, drunkenness, if not of more serious crimes. A Government
official who is applying for a divorce (and he says it will be given), because
his wife left him some time ago, on account of his seducing a marama, told
me himself that he visits the sister of another Government official. If he finds
she is from home he fires a gun, which is left for the purpose, to notify her
of his visit. On her return to the house, the two remain alone for some
time. Immorality is unquestionably greatly on the increase.
From a letter received by last mail from the General Secretary of Missions,
I learn that the remarks made at the Rewa Bose anent Government officials
and lay preachers have occasioned surprise and deep regret to the Board of
Missions and Conference. I shall be in Levuka shortly to meet the Rev. Dr.
Smith, the Deputation from the British Western Conference to the Australian
Conference, and who purposes visiting our mission here. I should like to
have the pleasure of introducing him to your Excellency. I wrote you last
on January 29, but have not heard whether my note reached Nasova.
77
XX
FIJI


To the Rev. F. Langham
Nasoya, March 20, 1878.—My dear Mr. Langham I only yesterday
received your letter of the 13th. I shall, of course, have great pleasure in
meeting Dr. Smith ; and as you say that you will shortly be in Levuka, I
will postpone until then any discussion on the subject of your letter.
Nothing can be more agreeable or satisfactory than our personal inter-
course ; but I know not how it is that, whenever you get a pen into your
hand (though lam sure you do not mean to be more bellicose than in
speech), you assume an air of pugnacity, which, were Ito allow it to do so,
might tempt me into a tone of controversy much better avoided.
Meanwhile, I will only say that the permission referred to has never been
withdrawn, but that the issue of licenses subsequently is necessary to regu-
larise, if not indeed to legalise , the marriages performed under it. A formal
breach of the law has in every such case been committed. This is noticed
and regularised, but lam not aware that any party has been punished for
such breach of the law. If they have been so, it was a mistake and should
be corrected.
You ought to tell me the name of the “Government officer” to whose
misconduct you refer. lam sure that if I had written in a similar way of
one of your officers, the teachers, you would have asked, and very rightly
asked, that I should give you his name.
I duly received your letter of January 29. lam sorry I failed to acknow-
ledge it, but as it was in answer to one from me, and contained nothing
needing a reply, I suppose I omitted to do so.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, 21.3.1878.—My dear Gorrie— l propose, if it is not disagreeable
to you, to hold an Executive Council at your house at 3 p.m. to-morrow.
Please look at my memo on Yakabalea before the meeting.
I omitted to mention, when I was with you the other day, that during
my absence you , and not the Administrator, will act as High Commissioner.
—Yours ever,
A. H. G.
To the Chief-Justice
21.3.1878.—My dear Gorrie— Tout au contraire , there are some very
important claims for to-morrow’s Council. It is odd you have not got the
reports. I especially wish you to look at Vdkabalea. There is, too, the
matter of the delay in the surveys, which I am specially desirous of your
aid in treating. So, if you object not, we will visit you to-morrow.
It is inexcusable you should not have had a print of the Native Debt
Bill. I send you my copy. I thought you had one in your hand when we
talked of it. I sent all the MS. which could be found.
Just look at the fire laws of an old respectable colony like South
Australia. They go a good deal beyond our proposals.—Yours ever,
A. H. G.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, March 23, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have only time
just to thank you very sincerely for your kind letter. It is indeed a very
78
CHAP.
FIJI


great “ trouble ” that you are going away, even for a short time. Much as
I should like, for very many reasons, to go to England, I am determined
not to go if, while you are so short of men, it would be inconvenient either
to you or to your representative. We can talk it over when we meet.
All well here, including your most obedient servant.
lam very glad that Heffernan has been sent up here. I hope he is not
too high and mighty now to be “ made use of ” by me.
Rooney's letter. —l have only had time to glance through it hurriedly.
I fear my old friend Mali is a bit of a humbug in the way of making his
story fit the audience for the time being. I am pretty certain that his
story at the ecclesiastical trial is not a sound one. It will be a severe rap
for Wilkinson if it is.
I gave the “incest case” three years. No Colo news. Everything
quiet.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
March 23, 1878. —My Lord—l have the honour to submit to your Lord-
ship proposals for a slight alteration in the present constitution of the
Legislative Council of this colony, the expediency of which will, I trust,
be seriously considered by Her Majesty’s Government.
2. Your Lordship is aware that the number of unofficial members in this
Council is, by the Royal Instructions now in force, limited to four. The
islands of the group are so scattered, and the distances between them so
great, that practically these four members are never all present together,
and very frequently but one attends the meetings of the Board.
3. It would not, I think, be expedient in the present condition of the
colony that the unofficial members of the Board should outnumber those
possessing seats in virtue of their offices ; but, on the other hand, I am
afraid that the Council will lose character and influence if matters are
allowed to remain on their present footing, and the unofficial element con-
tinues to be virtually unrepresented at the Board.
4. There are three modes in which it seems to me that the inconvenience
arising from the non-attendance of unofficial members might be overcome
without incurring the risks involved in such an increase of their numbers
as would enable them on all occasions practically to control the decisions
of the Council.
First; each unofficial member might have a recognised substitute,
authorised to take his place during his absence from the island of Ovalau.
At present the Governor can only appoint a substitute when a member is
absent from the Colony.
Second ; the number of the unofficial members might be increased to
eight, of whom the five senior members actually present at any meeting of
the Council might be entitled to sit and vote ; or :
Third ; a certain number of “ extraordinary ” members of Council might
be appointed, any of whom might sit and vote in the absence of an equal
number of the ordinary members of the Board.
5. The first of these devices would only be a partial remedy for the evil,
as it might well happen that the member and his substitute might be both
absent from Levuka at the same time. The third would probably create
confusion, it being impossible always to know beforehand how many of the
79
XX
FIJI


ordinary members of Council are likely to be absent from any particular
sitting.
6. I am consequently disposed to give the preference to the second pro-
position, which would enable members living in remote parts of the group
to enter into mutual arrangements as to the period at which they should
respectively visit Levuka.
7. I would therefore venture to suggest a modification of the Royal
Instructions in this sense, or that I may receive authority to depart from
them, either in the way now proposed or in such other manner as may
appear to your Lordship most likely to attain the desired object.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
February 1, 1878.—My Lord—l have the honour to transmit for Her
Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation an Ordinance “to regulate the
acquisition of land by the Crown for public purposes.”
2. The different provisions of the Ordinance are minutely and carefully
explained in the accompanying report of the Attorney-General.
3. The main objects of the enactment are to enable the Crown readily
to enter upon land required for public purposes, and to provide for the
decision by arbitrators, acting under the direction of the Supreme Court, of
questions as to amount of compensation to be awarded on behalf of the
Crown to the registered proprietor of the land, or others whose interests
may be affected.
4. The only clause to which I would call your Lordship’s special atten-
tion is that (§ xii.) which provides that, for the first five years of the
existence of the colony, the value of land, when required by the Crown for
public purposes, shall be estimated at that which it possessed upon the day of
cession, with the addition of the value of any improvements subsequently
effected on it. The object of this clause is to prevent a fictitious value
being attached to lands in certain localities.
5. I do not concur in the Attorney - General’s strictures upon the
thirteenth clause, as it appears to me that improvements effected before the
Ist of January in any year are included in the value of the land at that
date. If, however, the Attorney-General is right in supposing them to be
excluded from the calculation of such valuation, an amendment should be
introduced in what would certainly be an inequitable provision of the law.
To the Rev. J. Rooney
Nasova, March 30, 1878.—Dear Sir—Your letter of the 22nd February
was only received by me on my return here on the 24th inst. Had it
reached me sooner, I need hardly say it should have had an earlier reply.
So long as no law is broken, the rights of duly constituted authority
respected, and no action taken affecting persons outside of their society, the
proceedings of a voluntary association with regard to breaches of its own
regulations concern only the members of that association; nor, unless com-
pelled officially to do so, am I called on to express an opinion whether these
limitations have or have not been in any particular case exceeded. You
must therefore excuse me if I decline to discuss the subject-matter of your
letter.
80
CHAP,
FIJI


I think it only just to Mafi, however, to inform you that no such state-
ment as that attributed to him in your letter was ever made by him to me,
or, so far as lam aware, to any other person at Rewa. I, and all those who
spoke with me on the subject, were perfectly alive to the fact that he had not
then been as yet expelled from the Church, but only from the office of teacher.
I was also quite aware that the offence imputed was that of moral
misconduct in connection with Joeli’s trial, and not the fact of the sentence
itself. What was said, if I remember rightly, was that the inquiry was on
account of the trial, and that this was in fact the case, and that the merits of
the decision given by the Magistrate were substantially the question in dis-
pute, is indisputably shown by the paper transmitted by you to Mr. Thurston.
I am sorry that I had not the pleasure of seeing you on the occasion of
my recent visit to Loma Loma, where I had naturally anticipated meeting
you. I trust it was not illness which prevented your calling on me. Shall we
see you in Levuka on your way to Rewa ?
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, 30.3.1878.—My dear Gorrie —You will recollect that at the last
meeting of Council we disallowed a claim of Hennings to land on the south
coast of Yiti Levu.
He has been here to-day in a great rage, and announces that, as the claim
is disallowed, he intends to take out a writ against the vendors for non-
fulfilment of contract. Surely he can’t do this ? If he can, there is no great
use in disallowing any claim.
Parr and Co. are busy doing mischief up the Rewa. I send an extract from
a letter of Carew’s. And in an official letter he advises that no sales of land
should take place till the excitement has subsided.
From the Chief-Justice
March 30, 1878.—1 don’t recollect particularly of any claim of Hennings
which was refused. I only recollect several which were granted. When
these gentlemen come blowing and fuming, the best way is for the official
they come to, to ask them to retire until they are cool. Of course if the
Ordinance of 1875 means anything, it excludes the course of action you
mention —and this would be a very good case to try it on. I hope, there-
fore, the writ will be taken out —which the Government could defend.
But it won’t!
As to the other and much more serious matter mentioned, Carew says
that Adi Kuila assured him that she had been told most positively that
the lands would be taken from them and sold. Now if Adi Kuila was
told that, she will no doubt tell you by whom she was so told. I would,
indeed, make her tell, or stop her pension. When this has been done, you
can take steps to stop it. In a general way this offence is sedition ; but if
we require a short and emphatic Ordinance like that in the native laws
about what the old Scotch Acts call “leasing making,” let us make it, and
enforce it. There is no use in making strong laws unless they are to be
enforced ; and strong laws require strong men, who are rather at a discount
everywhere. I quite expect there will be excitement among the natives at
111 G
81
XX
FIJI


your leaving. Every scoundrel in the colony will say you are not coming
back, or probably recalled, as they said in Mauritius. But this will pass
when they see no change. I should be sorry indeed to think that the old
king was discontented. But I can’t imagine what grievance he can extract
out of Mokogai and Wakaya, which for so many years have been in white
occupation—Wakaya, indeed, bought by a Wesleyan saint in the most approved
manner, and the people turned off just as they would have been by Cakobau
himself up the Rewa.
But I suppose he has been moved by the false reports. I would deprecate
very much any public intimation that the Queen did not intend to take
their lands, because, by the time this reached the mountains and the out-
districts, it would be transformed into —that the Queen did intend to take
their lands. You will require perhaps to hold an informal “bose” of the
Rokos to give them your counsels before you go, and then you can explain.
As to these little “ blethers ” and hitches stopping the progress of the country
by refraining to sell lands not in the occupancy of the chiefs and tribes, etc.,
that will never do. It is the only way to prevent squatting, and to provide
a revenue sufficient to permit the country to be governed at all. Any
disposition on the part of the natives to resent reasonable and proper
settlement must be put down just as firmly as sedition among the whites.
Thanks for the Samoan papers, which I shall read with much interest.
From Consul Weber
Apia, March 16, 1878.—Your Excellency’s esteemed letter of sth inst.
I had the honour to receive, and had much pleasure in making Mr. Maudslay’s
acquaintance. I shall be glad to be of service to him.
I have sent Mr. Griffin the letter after your departure, stating that his
actions were not in accordance or cannot be reconciled with what he says his
instructions are. I destroyed the other letter, the simple acknowledgment
of receipt of his letter. I returned to Mr. Maudslay your Excellency’s letter
left with me for an U.S. Commissioner that might arrive.
Enclosed I beg to hand your Excellency copies of my correspondence
with Mr. Griffin regarding my protest against hoisting the U.S. flag at
Mulinuu. You will find some rich sentiments expressed therein by Mr.
Griffin, who, I verily believe, is periodically insane. I blotted out a few words
in the copy of one of Mr. Griffin’s letters, as I do not wish to be the means of
acquainting you with rather “ unparliamentary ” remarks regarding yourself.
As to the treaty with the U.S,, I do not think it amounts to much in
reality ;it is certainly no protection to Samoa. The only bad thing I see
about it are the “good offices” agreed by the U.S. Government to exercise
in case of disputes between Samoa and other nations —in so far as it may turn
out to be a “good thing” for adventurers and carpet-baggers. I believe,
as soon as the Samoans are cleared up about the real meaning of the treaty,
they will be rather disgusted. As to Germany, I have heard nothing ; and I
must say I do not credit the rumours ; still I am anxiously waiting for news
and instructions from my Government. So far I have heard nothing.
I am sorry to see the Taimua will not give in yet, even after all these
concessions have been made by your Excellency and Mr. Maudslay now
82
CHAP.
FIJI


again. It is of course only Mr. Griffin’s foul play and intrigue ;he is coming
out plainer every day, and it is surely time a stop is put to this work.
Mrs. Liardet and Mrs. Bell go by the Peter Godeffroy to Loma Loma at
the representation of Dr. Turner to me, who says that Mrs. Liardet fears
the expense as well at Loma Loma as also to get on to Levuka may be too
much for her. I have instructed Mr, Hennings to take care of all that at
Loma Loma, and to present the bill to your Excellency, not only for the
passage to Loma Loma, but also for the rest. Strictly speaking, I have no
right to ask your Excellency for any more than the passage to Loma Loma,
but I consider the spirit of your Excellency’s remarks such as not to object
for the other expenses either.
I hope my next letter about matters in Samoa to your Excellency will be
more satisfactory, and have the honour to remain, etc.
To the Earl of Carnarvon
My Lord—My attention was not long since attracted by a report in the
Times newspaper of a speech made to his constituents by Sir Charles Dilke,
n the course of which he severely censured the system of Native Taxation
in force in this colony, of the nature and operation of which, however, if his
speech is correctly reported, he would appear to be but very imperfectly
informed. It is not improbable that during the present session of Parliament
Sir Charles Dilke may repeat in the House of Commons what he has said out
of it, and this possibility affords me a natural occasion for making some
further remarks upon the system and its working.
2. The Native Taxes Ordinance, 1876, had both a social and financial
object. That it has been financially successful may easily be demonstrated,
nor will it, I think, be more difficult to prove that it has equally succeeded
as a social experiment.
3. Of course the productiveness of a tax is no guarantee that it may not
at the same time be theoretically objectionable and practically oppressive.
But it is nevertheless of some importance to show that a measure intended,
among other things, to augment the revenue of the colony, has not in this
respect been the failure which was by some confidently predicted. The
accompanying minute enters so fully into this branch of the subject that it
seems unnecessary for me to say more here than that the receipts from the
native taxes, which in 1875, under the old system of collection, amounted
to £3499 :2: 5, reached in 1876 the sum of £9342:16 :3 ; in 1877
£15,149:14:8; and that the estimated receipts for 1878 (£20,000) appear
to me likely to be realised.
4. What then has been the social influence of the new law ?
To answer this question the machinery of its working must be first
described.
5. The amount of the tax to be paid by each province is annually assessed
by the Legislative Council, the assessment being based as regards each
province on mixed considerations—of the amount of the population, the nature
and productiveness of the soil, and the degree of civilisation which the
province has attained. There are twelve such provinces, not including the
two highland districts of Yiti Levu. I enclose as a specimen the assessment
for the present year.
83
XX
FIJI


6. Tenders are called for, in the form enclosed, for the purchase of the
articles of produce in which the tax may be paid. The highest of these is
accepted in the case of each article.
The amount of the assessment thus fixed, and the prices offered for various
articles of produce by the successful tenderer or tenderers, are intimated to
the Roko Tui, or native governor of the province. The apportionment of
the shares to be borne by each district in the province, and the selection of
the article or articles of produce to be contributed, are then made, nominally,
and according to law, by a Board appointed under the Ordinance, but practi-
cally by the Bose vaka Yasana, or Provincial Council, which consists of Chiefs
of Districts styled “ Bulls,” under the presidency of the Roko Tui, frequently,
though not always, aided by the presence of the Governor’s Commissioner,
7. The next stage is the apportionment of the tax of each District by the
Bose ni Tikina, or District Council, consisting of the town Chiefs of the
District under the presidency of the Bull. By this body the share of each
several township in the district is determined.
8. Lastly, the individual shave of produce to be contributed or work done
by each man in each village is settled by the town Chief aided by the Elders
of the township. I enclose the assessment of two provinces as specimens.
9. The adoption of this machinery effects two objects. It is a return to
the primitive community system on which all political and social institutions
in Fiji are based, and which even in the matter of taxation had been but
very recently abandoned. It is consequently familiar to the natives and
thoroughly understood by them; a fact which causes the pressure of the impost
to be more lightly felt than it would be if demanded directly from the in-
dividual by the government; it, moreover, renders the natives themselves to
a very large extent active and responsible agents in the collection of revenue.
Both of these are, I need hardly say, points of very considerable importance.
10. But these were not the only results which the system was aimed to
effect, nor are they the only objects which have been attained by its adop-
tion, As was anticipated by the framers of the Ordinance, the cultivation of
articles of export by the natives has been largely promoted. Fijians are by
no means habitually indolent, as by many careless observers they are supposed
to be, and they are passionately fond of agriculture ; but their cultivation,
though very neat and careful, is chiefly that of food plantations and articles
for domestic use. Sugar, tobacco, and masi, are and long have been almost
universally grown, in addition to the root crops, but they are not, as a rule,
grown with a view to exportation, although cocoa-nuts and yams in large
quantities have long been sold, or rather bartered, to the white traders.
Under the new system the area of native cultivation is rapidly increasing,
and the lesson which it was desired to inculcate has been already partially
learnt.
11. Another consequence of the adoption of this law has been that of
giving to the people a juster idea of the value of the produce which they
raise. When a money tax was insisted on, it was necessary that at certain
fixed periods every man should make a payment in cash to the tax collector.
Very few natives (except perhaps in the province of Lau) hoard or possess
coin. Their wealth consists in the accumulation of masses of property, not in
money ; and as the day on which the coin had to be produced came round,
an unscrupulous itinerant trader (and few such traders are remarkable for a
84
CHAP.
FIJI


high tone of commercial morality) could obtain almost anything, and almost
any amount of anything in the possession or under the control of natives, in
exchange for the coveted and indispensable piece of coin necessary to pay the
tax. That coin the trader sold as an article of barter on his own terms, and
they were usually hard ones. Even at the best of times, when this pressure
did not exist, the native only received for his produce about half the price
which the very same traders are now ready to give to the Government for a
similar amount of produce, with the knowledge they still will obtain a hand-
some profit by their purchase.
This has opened the eyes of the natives, and in their private trading
transactions they now, in many cases, ask and obtain prices more nearly resem-
bling the true market value of the article, whilst for the surplus produce
raised by them of those articles in which the tax is paid, beyond what is
required to meet it, the Government practically obtains for them a price
equal to that which it receives itself from the contractor for the tax produce,
and that too paid in cash, and not, as had previously been the case, in goods
which the trader valued at his own discretion.
12. It may seem strange, when thus speaking of apparently large trans-
actions between the natives and white traders, that there should have been
any difficulty on the part of the former in finding money to pay a money
tax ; but in point of fact hardly any money was received by them. Objection-
able as it seems to be thought by some to receive produce instead of money
from the natives, these same parties see no objection to forcing on the natives,
as payment for their produce, imported goods estimated at a wholly fictitious
value.
The action of the Government affords a most valuable protection to the
native producer by ensuring him a market where he will receive cash for his
produce at a fair rate, and, paradoxical as it may seem, the reception by the
Government of produce in payment of taxes has been an important step
towards the introduction of cash transactions in the dealings between the
traders and the natives.
A native makes and wishes to dispose of copra, which he offers to the white
trader who “works” that district. Say he has got half a ton ; this, according
to present prices paid to the Government, would be worth £6 :10s. The trader
probably offers about £3 (certainly not more—probably less), and this he pays
in cloth, knives, etc., of which he estimates the value at double the proper
amount, so that he obtains £6 :10s. worth of produce from the native for goods
worth £1 :10s. The native was often aware that he was imposed on, but until
the new system of taxation was introduced, he had no alternative but to take
what was offered or leave his produce unsold. He can now sell at the prices
which have been publicly tendered.
This system of making an unduly large profit on transactions with natives
is so regularly recognized that in most of the shops at Levuka itself there is a
“ native price” on articles, which is usually double the amount which would
be asked of an European.
13. Another evil which the new system of taxation was designed to check,
anddn respect to which its operation has been most salutary, is nearly con-
nected with that indicated in the preceding paragraph. I refer to the en-
tanglement of the natives in debt to traders. It is the policy of many of these
traders to encourage the chiefs and people to become involved in debt to them,
85
XX
FIJI


on account of the indirect advantages they are able to exact through the con-
trol they thus exercise. The results of this are most pernicious, both politically
and socially. Politically it is mischievous, inasmuch as it tends to render the
great chiefs holding office under the Government far less servants of the Crown
than servants of the trader to whom they are in debt. The Crown can but
dismiss them. The trader could both ruin and imprison them,—and they
naturally fear and obey him most who has the greatest power to injure
them. The threat of being “brought to court” if the trader’s wishes or
caprices were not complied with, has, I have no doubt, led not only to great
neglect of orders from the Government but to much active oppression.
Socially, the indebtedness of the common people, throwing them completely
under the control of the trader, has produced and still produces great evils,
reducing them sometimes to a condition which really does bear some
analogy to slavery. I know one village at this time, the whole population of
which, under the burden of old debt to a trader, is compelled to work for him
gratuitously whenever and as he chooses, with an entire disregard of their own
interests or convenience ; and who, to avoid legal proceedings against them, are
ready to take any steps and make any compliance directed by the creditor.
This is an evil which is of course but partially abated by the new system of
taxation, but its effects in diminishing it have been not inconsiderable.
14. It may therefore, I think, be said that this measure has been successful,
not only in raising a considerable revenue, but in stimulating production and
in securing a fair price for his produce to the native producer ; whilst it has
replaced a mode of taxation perfectly odious to the native by one as little
distasteful to him as any system of taxation can be, and has done much to
substitute a system of cash transactions for barter, and to free the native
population from the incubus of debt, thereby removing very serious obstacles in
the way of all exertions on the part of the Government for their benefit.
15. The objections which will be urged by Sir Charles Dilke against the
scheme will probably in the main be those urged by Mr. de Ricci two years
ago, and which, together with the answers to them, will be found in the
papers presented to Parliament in 1876. H.C. 1624, of 1876. Indeed, Sir
C. Dilke expressly adopts Mr. de Ricci’s language and arguments, and whilst
I regret that they should appear to him convincing, I cannot but derive
satisfaction from the fact that some of the most distinguished statesmen and
lawyers in either house of Parliament, who have had an opportunity of
examining them, have arrived at a very different conclusion.
16. I will not here repeat the arguments of a discussion so readily access-
ible, nor can I bring myself to treat seriously Sir Charles Dilke s accusation
that the Ordinance in question has legalised a system of slavery. No doubt
the word “slavery” is often rhetorically employed with great laxity of
meaning. A people living under civil, military, or social institutions of which
the speaker disapproves is often said by an excited orator to be “enslaved ;
and there may be some who, in this vague sense, hold with Ancient Pistol that
“ base is the slave who pays ” taxes at all. But unless Sir Charles is prepared
to maintain that the people of those States of the American Union, and of
those British Colonies, where statute labour is enforced, are, without their
knowing it, slaves, and that the institution of slavery flourishes in Scotland
because & old women there pay the rent of their crofts in hens and bolls of meal,
he cannot gravely assert that the system of native taxation in Fiji has
86
CHAP.
FIJI


reduced the people to a condition of slavery, or that it possesses any one of
the peculiarly distinctive features of that odious state of servitude.
17. In any renewed attack upon the Native Taxes Ordinance, however, it
is likely that some fresh objections will be added to those brought forward in
1876, and these I will now shortly notice.
18. It is certain to be urged that the system resembles that which, though
lately modified, is still in force in the Island of Java.
There are those who have carefully studied the Dutch Culture system, and
whose judgment cannot rightly be disregarded, who are of opinion that it is
open to objection rather on account of practical abuses in its working than
from any inherent fault of principle, and that, defective though it is, it has
on the whole acted beneficially as a protection to the native population.
It is, however, useless to discuss the merits or demerits of Javanese
taxation, for, excepting on one point, where there is a certain superficial
resemblance, the systems are essentially opposed in principle and in practice.
The point of resemblance is that in both there is a payment in kind, but
there the resemblance ends. The essential principle of the Dutch System is
that the whole produce of certain kinds of culture is considered the property
of the Government, and a small remuneration, according to its amount, paid
to the producers, the Government taking all the profits of the subsequent
sale of the produce.
The essential principle of the Fiji scheme is that the produce raised
remains the property of him who raised it, that out of it he pays his portion
of the tax assessed on his province or town, and that he then disposes of the
remainder exactly as he pleases.
If a Fijian and a Javanese had each raised say 10 bags of maize at a time
when the price of maize was 10 shillings a bag, and the share of the provincial
tax falling to the Fijian was 10 shillings ; he would pay one bag to the
Government and have 9 bags left to dispose of, which at 10s. per bag
would equal £4 :10s.
The Javanese, on the other hand, would have to give up the whole of his
ten bags to the Government, which would only return to him a small money
payment, say, 3 shillings for each bag —equal to £l:10s., reserving to
itself the remainder of the sale price, equal to £3 :10s.
The two principles are utterly distinct. In the one system the cultivator
is simply a paid agent who raises produce for the proprietor—the State—
which takes and uses such produce, paying the cultivator scanty wages for
his trouble in producing it. In the other system, the cultivator possesses
and disposes of his produce at will, but pays from it to the Government a
moderate tax or tythe.
Such modes of payment are, I need not say, known in countries of far
more advanced civilisation them Fiji; and were, at the beginning of the
century, common throughout Europe.
Rents are still paid in oatmeal and fowls in some places in Scotland, and
the mere payment of a tax in money’s worth, instead of cash, in no way
resembles the Government proprietorship of the Java system.
19. That the system is disliked by the European traders will also no doubt
be said. This is true, so far at least as the petty traders are concerned, for it
has put a serious check on their opportunities of making illegitimate profits
out of the ignorance and necessities of the native, to which I have before
87
XX
FIJI


referred. The native is no longer wholly unacquainted with the value of the
commodities he produces, neither is he under the pressure of an obligation to
produce a certain number of shillings on a given day, to obtain which he was
ready to make the most rash and inconsiderate bargains with those, who
knew he was at their mercy, and that they could exact what terms they
pleased. I believe, however, that the system is very differently regarded by
the few larger traders in the group, and I enclose an article from one of the
local newspapers written in answer to the complaint of a petty storekeeper on
the subject, and showing a by no means unjust appreciation of the working of
the Ordinance.
20. It may be said too that the operation of the law interferes with the
supply of labour to the planters. It is not true that it does so directly. In-
directly, it may do so in two ways. (1) The native is now more comfortable
at home than was previously the case, and prefers to work for himself and
family to working for very small wages in a distant island. (2) It is also true
that the poll-tax in money existing before 1875 drove men to engage as
labourers in order to procure coin, and that this indirect aid to the planter has
been withdrawn ; but though I have no doubt that many of those who object
to the present system of native taxes are more or less consciously under an
impression that, were it abolished, the old poll-tax system would be restored,
they are, on that point, I think, altogether mistaken, nor without its
restoration would the abolition of the present system of itself materially affect
the labour market.
21. That the natives themselves dislike the system may perhaps also be
asserted, but this, lam sure, is untrue. It is, however, almost a wonder that
it should be so, for no pains have been spared to prejudice the people against it
and against the Government; but for the most part this has been attempted
vainly. As a general rule they are quite aware of the advantage to them
of the present system ; and that they have, at all events, thriven under it,
not half an eye is required to perceive. Everywhere the increased areas
of cultivation—the enlarged towns, the good new houses, the well-kept
roads, the cheerful and healthy-looking population, present the strongest
possible contrast to the aspect of the country in 1875.
This was fully admitted to me not long ago by a leading planter, who said
that nobody who had eyes in his head could deny that the natives were very
much better off than they were three years ago, “but then,” he added
(and there was much significance in the admission), “we don’t want them
to be well off. If they were starving they would be much more ready to go
over to labour for us in other islands.”
22. If the justice of the two principles on which the Fiji Taxation Scheme
is founded be admitted—the taxation of communities instead of individuals,
and the receipt of money’s worth instead of cash, —no serious complaint can
be made of its working, although, of course, I am not prepared to say that its
details are perfect or that it is not open to amendment.
23. Your Lordship may have observed that several suggestions for this
purpose are contained in the resolutions of the annual meeting of the chiefs
at Rewa, copies of which were forwarded in my despatch No. 23 of the 25th
January last, and of which I send printed copies in another despatch of this
day’s date.
It was there proposed that many of the duties assigned by the Ordinance
88
CHAP.
FIJI


to the local board and inspectors, should be legally, as they have been
practically, transferred to the Provincial Council, —that the amount of cotton
grown should be diminished. . . . [Conclusion missing.]
From a Stipendiary Magistrate
March 14, 1878. —Sir—Your Excellency’s letter “Private and Con-
fidential ” reached me but yesterday, tho’ written as early as the 6th inst.
I should at once go over to Levuka did not the weather look so threaten-
ing,—l fear to leave my family alone with the bare possibility of a hurricane
such as we have before passed through.
I scarcely know what to think or say in reference to the fearful scandal
revealed in that statement; and had your Excellency not so graciously
assured me of your utter disbelief in it, I should have been confounded. I
have been aware that my actions have made many enemies, and while
knowing you were pleased to place confidence in me, I had sometimes feared
your Excellency could not be aware of the intense feeling in the minds of
some persons against me, as also others of your Excellency’s Magistrates.
Our position compels an outward show of respect; but I have long felt that to
be faithful to my duties and your Excellency meant utter alienation from most
men in Fiji ; but I had hoped that such attempts as the present one had long
ended. I know that many tales had gone abroad that my days had ended,
etc. etc., but treated them with the indifference they deserved.
Your Excellency has not required me to make any remarks on the state-
ment of the woman “Julia,” which is spiced with some statements of truth,
and on which she has founded—or some one for her—her tale. For instance,
she did accompany Mrs. —— and family to Rewa, and we stayed one night
at Toka Toka on the way.
The unfortunate creature was constantly complaining of pains and sick-
ness, and I certainly often gave her medicine, chiefly chlorodyne, and that
sometimes in spirit. I remember some month or two before she left here,
she complained of pains in her stomach and head, for which I prescribed
several times.
Your Excellency’s suggestion that it may be the work of a Recruiter may
be correct; but may it not also be a planter, or even part of a plot such as
Mr. Friend alludes to in the letter which I now enclose, and which I received
from him when last at Bau ? or it may be that during my absence from home,
while some of the labour-seekers were waiting at for me, the girl
got into mischief (we had to watch her closely), and quite possible the
medicines and spirit did have such an effect on her, and she has now met with
the man again, and thus the tale has been evolved—with the object you
suggest. Certainly a more hideous charge could not have been concocted, and
must have suggested itself in consequence of the known antipathy I have to
such unequal connections.
I must leave the question of prosecuting the woman entirely for your
Excellency’s decision—my first impulse was to do so, and were I a single man
should say yes ; but many painful thoughts suggest themselves when I
contemplate such a slander coming to the knowledge of my wife and children
—the idea unnerves me ; and while admitting that the woman deserves punish-
ment, I fear the more deserving person would escape ; and if there be any
89
XX
FIJI


foundation for the idea that plotting against magistrates is going on, would
not such a prosecution put the principals on their guard, whereas it is only a
matter of time to catch them tripping.
If your Excellency desires me to take any steps in the matter, I will at
once proceed to Levuka for your instructions.
I beg your Excellency will pardon me if somewhat verbose—the subject
is a painful one ; and allow me to assure you, Sir, that while I have the
honour to serve under one who treats me with such unquestioning confidence
and kindness, no effort shall be wanting to deserve such.
All these letters relate to Fiji, but I was now also Consul-
General, and we must turn for a time to events in Samoa after
my departure on the 23rd February ;
From the Rev. Dr. Turner
Apia, Samoa, March 19 th, 1878.—Your Excellency—Your note of 6th
inst. introducing Mr. Maudslay, I duly received. I have seen a good deal of
Mr. M. during the past week, and only wish we could retain him, at all
events for a few months, as Consul here. He tells me his stay will probably
be short. I need not say I will do all in my power to assist him while here.
Oh ! that we had had Mr. Maudslay instead of Mr. Liardet last year, when
things were in such an easy position for settlement.
I trust that the ultimate appointment will fall on one whom we can
respect and work heartily along with.
I was able to assist Mr. M. till Saturday night last, when I had to go to
Malua, as Mrs. Turner was ill. She went down to Malua for a change of air
immediately after you left, and my father sent for me last week. I returned
this a.m. to find the Taimua and Faipule had given in at the eleventh hour.
The U.S. flags still fly at Mulinuu and in the various districts ! A good
many of the foreign residents assisted, I believe, in paying the fine, but Griffin
would not put in a cent.
Your Excellency will receive copies from Mr. Weber and Mr. Maudslay of
their correspondence with him. Truly, Samoan politics are extraordinarily
interesting !
Allow me to thank your Excellency for your generous present of £SO
which Mr. Maudslay tells me he has for me.
You will doubtless hear from Mr, M. and Captain Murray all other news.
Believe me, ever faithfully yours.
From Acting Consul Maudslay
Apia, March 19, 1878.—Sir— I have the honour to report that on Tuesday,
the 12th inst., I arrived at Apia in Her Majesty’s ship Sapphire.
2. On landing, the keys of the Consulate were handed to me by Mr. F.
Cornwall.
3. In compliance with my request the Taimua and Faipule appointed
3 o’clock on Wednesday afternoon to meet me.
Captain Murray was present at this meeting, which took place at
Mulinuu Point. On the flag-staff, close to the house where we met, the
American flag was flying over the Samoan flag ; but, bearing in mind your
90
CHAP.
FIJI


correspondence with Mr. Griffin, which you showed me at Nasova, I did not
think the matter worthy of any further notice.
4. I enclose a copy of the minutes of the proceedings at this meeting, at
which none of the Faipule were present.
I delivered to the Taimua your Excellency’s letter, and the letter from
Lord Derby; then after the usual civilities had passed, I read a paragraph
from your last letter to them, and explained to them that if the terms of
Agreement you had offered to the Taimua and Faipule were accepted, the
schooner Elizabeth would be returned to them ; and I asked if they were pre-
pared to sign that Agreement. I received in reply nothing but long speeches
full of excuses. I therefore requested them to reconsider the matter and to
meet me at the Consulate the next day with a definite answer. At the same
time I expressed myself most willing to furnish them with any further
information or explanation they might desire. They did not, however,
appear decided whether they would meet me at the Consulate on Thursday,
or send an answer in writing.
5. I must now explain to your Excellency that on the day of this meeting
the schooner Ada May arrived at Apia from San Francisco. This is the vessel
in which Le Mamea was expected to return from America. Mamea, however,
was not on board, and it was only by referring to American newspapers,
extracts from which I enclose, that I was able to gain any information about
his proceedings in America, and the negotiation of a Treaty between Samoa
and the United States.
Even after the American papers had been read by most persons in Apia,
reports were industriously circulated that America had offered a protectorate
to Samoa.
6. On Thursday morning I received a letter from the Taimua and Faipule,
saying that they would meet me at the Consulate at 3 o’clock, and at that
hour about ten members of the Government arrived. Captain Murray was, at
my request, present at the meeting. Attempts were again made on the part
of the natives to evade any settlement of the matters in dispute. Each
clause of the Agreement was again explained to them, and clause by clause
they had no objection to offer ; indeed, concerning the Puletua, they were
most anxious to come to terms, but they obstinately refused to sign the Agree-
ment as a whole. Then, as some scruple was expressed about signing the
Agreement whilst negotiations were being carried on with America, 1 offered
to withdraw the “favoured nation” clause for the present, and then sub-
mitted the remaining four clauses, with, however, the same result.
7. I then read the letter of which I enclose a copy, giving them twenty-four
hours to come to terms, and stating that if during that time no agreement
were come to, I should then hand over the matter to Captain Murray.
The translation of this letter was not finished until 10 o’clock at night,
and I then wrote on the letter the time at which it was despatched, so as to
give twenty-four hours in full for consideration of the terms offered.
8. At the same time I thought it only courteous to inform the other
foreign Consuls, resident in Apia, of the steps I had taken.
M. Weber, the Imperial German Consul, had already called on me and
expressed the most friendly sentiments. Up to this time I had not been
in communication with the United States Consul, but this letter led to a
correspondence, a copy of which is attached to my letter, No. 2 of this day’s
91
XX
FIJI


date. I refused to accept a communication from the Taimua and Faipule,
made through Mr. Griffin, and I wrote a letter to them, stating that I was
not able to receive communications from them either through the United
States Consul or any other third party.
9. When twenty-four hours had elapsed, I sent to Captain Murray a letter,
of which I enclose a copy. My reasons for not following out the course of
action you indicated to me with regard to the Puletua are given in my letter
to Captain Murray.
In some conversations I had held with the leaders of the Puletua now at
the Consulate, they had expressed great unwillingness to being returned to
their homes without some guarantee being given for their safety, and stated
that it would be some days before they could collect round them any of tbeir
own followers, as the Taimua and Faipule had destroyed their houses and
scattered their people over the islands ; and they also expressed great fear
that the American flags, which they had heard were now flying over their
lands, would prevent any assistance being rendered to them. I have since
ascertained that it is quite true that United States flags have been distributed,
and hoisted all over the country.
As also there was never the slightest objection raised by the Taimua and
Faipule to the clause of the Agreement dealing with the Puletua, and that clause
alone they were always ready to sign, I did not see any objection to including it
in my request to Captain Murray. I had kept Captain Murray fully informed
of all my proceedings, and had taken no step without first obtaining his
assent, and he had already told me that he had no objection to adding the
protection of the Puletua to his demands.
10. On Saturday morning Captain Murray wrote to the Taimua and Faipule
demanding the payment of 1000 dollars as the remainder of the Barracouta
fine, and a written pledge for the safety of the Puletua, in the words of your
proposed Agreement, and added that if the matter were not settled by 1 p.m. on
Monday the 18th March, he would first of all destroy all Government property
at Mulinuu, and, if no settlement were then effected, would proceed to destroy
other villages and to increase his demands.
11. On Sunday night Captain Murray received a letter from the Govern-
ment, asking for a meeting on Monday morning, as they were prepared to do
what he had demanded. At this meeting I was present. Captain Murray
allowed them until 1 p.m. on Tuesday to collect the fine, and offered to take
its equivalent in mats, guns, or other property, if money could not be procured.
I was informed, however, on very good authority, that there would not be the
slightest difficulty in raising the money amongst themselves. Nevertheless
the Taimua and Faipule spent the afternoon in going from house to house
begging contributions from the white residents.
12. This morning the Chiefs went off to the Sapphire , paid up the 1000
dollars, and signed the Agreement regarding the Puletua. I have, therefore,
now marched the Puletua Chiefs out of the Consular garden.
13. I have found it extremely difficult to obtain trustworthy information
in Apia. The wildest reports are in circulation on the beach ; the only point
on which opinion is unanimous, is that the Taimua and Faipule are entirely
under the influence of the United States Consul resident with them at Mulinuu,
and that it was owing to that influence that no more satisfactory Agreement
has been come to. —I have, etc.
92
CHAP,
FIJI


From Mr. Maudslay
British Consulate, Apia, March 19, 1878. —Dear Sir—The Sapphire is
just off, and I hardly have a minute to write a line. My official letters give
account of proceedings. I think things are really better than they appear.
Collecting the fine has had a good effect upon the Griffin party—they are
beginning to distrust him, as he cannot do what he says about saving them
from fines, etc. I did not think I could well leave with an American man-
of-war expected, and I am hopeful that with time enough before me I can
break up the American party and upset the treaty.
I got on very well with Captain Murray up to the last day, when we did
not quarrel, but I was put out at his refusing to let me speak to the chiefs when
assembled on board the Sapphire to pay the fine. I enclose what I had
scribbled down whilst the money was being counted, which is what I intended
to say, and I think it would have had some effect if said there ; but of course
they won’t care so much about it if only written from the Consulate. I don’t
care for the place much, but I should like to stay and see this difficulty out if
possible. I will write again by the Peter Godeffroy leaving soon for Loma
Loma. —In very great haste, etc. I meant to say :
That if they had signed the agreement offered to them I should now be
sending a message to ask for the return of the schooner to be sent back to
them, and they would not now be paying the $lOOO. And the whole affair
would have been inquired into by us acting together.
By their foolish act they have lost $6OOO. Now that the Sapphire is
leaving, I send a full report of what has been done to Sir A. Gordon.
Now I must remind them that there are many claims against them now
lodged in the Consulate, and as they have refused to help me to inquire into
claims, I shall inquire into them by myself and settle what must be paid, and
shall have them ready soon and demand payment. If this is refused, I shall
have to enforce it in the same manner that this payment has been enforced
and I have written to Sir A. Gordon to say what I am doing, and he will give
me any assistance I require.
I must impress upon them that I shall inquire carefully into all complaints
against natives made by British subjects, and if they are fair and just I shall
expect them to punish the offenders according to their misdeeds ; for if they
wish me to look on them as a Government, they must be prepared to enforce
their own laws. In cases where they cannot or will not enforce their laws,
I shall impose fines, and they may be sure I shall impose no fines that I do
not intend to enforce.
I also point out to them that I shall see that the conditions regarding the
Puletua are properly carried out.
I sincerely hope I shall not have to impose any fines at all—that we
shall be able to live in peace and friendship.
And they must remember that although I am here to see that British
subjects and their property are well treated, I am also prepared to offer
them any friendly advice and assistance in my power, and I shall always be
pleased to see them and to talk over any matters with them that are not quite
clear to their minds.
93
XX
FIJI


From Mr. Maudslay
British Consulate, Apia, March 23, 1878.—My dear Sir —Since the
Sapphire's departure Apia has become quiet again. I don’t think there are
even any wild beach rumours.
Did Captain Murray tell you the story in circulation amongst the natives
when we first arrived ?—that you had been carried off in the Sapphire , to be
tried at Fiji for stealing their schooner ! I have had my time taken up with
getting the office set to rights. What you said about the ignorance of white
people here about natives and native affairs is certainly quite true. It is
really wonderful. There seem to be hardly any white men who are good Samoan
scholars, or who even have a good conversational knowledge of the language.
Mr. Cornwall still continues his services, and works well in the office every day.
I wanted to make some agreement to keep him on as a clerk, but he says that
he has too much business to do, and that when some ships that are expected
from New Zealand arrive, he must go away for some length of time trading
round the islands. In the meantime he works away without asking for any
payment, and he is very useful indeed ; but he is too much of an interested
party to use as interpreter when claims are inquired into, and I don’t know
whom I can employ. Dr. Turner is always very busy, but has never refused
his assistance when asked for it.
The British claims must be very much reduced before they can be enforced.
I am now going over them, and shall report on all the cases to you, so that if
they will not pay up what is fair, a man-of-war can enforce them under
orders from you without further investigation, supposing, of course, that you
approve of my reports.
Complaints now sent in to me I shall at once forward to the Native
Government, if I think them really worth consideration, and allow them a
certain time to inquire into and settle the matter. If no attention is paid to
my request, I shall then inquire into the matter for myself, and hold the
Government responsible for the fine imposed, reporting the matter to you for
confirmation. I hope this course will meet your views. I cannot see any
other that is practicable. If left to themselves to inquire into cases with no
time mentioned by which the case must be concluded, or at least fairly entered
on, the Government seem to invent endless objections and reasons for delay,
and the consequence is that there are claims ten years old still lying in the
Consulate, about which it would be, of course, quite impossible to collect any
evidence.
The Chief-Justice put aside all claims over two years old, and even of
the more recent I have already rejected a good many as absurd. I had no
further communication with the Government until yesterday, when I sent to
ask if some of them will come to the Consulate on Monday next and hear
about some late complaints, including the murder case, and settle about the
payment of one or two awards already agreed to. They, of course, sent asking
for postponement, saying that they are very busy settling about the Puletua ;
but I told them that the matter was most urgent and I could agree to no
delay, so I think that they will now come.
The American man-of-war has not yet arrived, and it is impossible to say
what the next political move will be.
94
CHAP.
FIJI


The American treaty (as far as it can be learnt from the American papers)
is translated into Samoan in to-day’s local paper, I will send a copy. I
hope to get a walk down the coast until Monday morning if the Peter
Godeffroy does not sail; but if she does I must move into the Consulate at
once, as I have no one to look after the place when the Liardets go.
It is a hastily formed opinion, but from what I have seen I doubt very
much if a Native Government would be possible. I don’t think the people
are really bad, but they have been so long misgoverned, or rather not governed
at all, that they have become unmanageable by their own Chiefs ; and the
Chiefs themselves, from contact with rascally whites, have lost their sense of
honour, and have become so distrustful of one another that only a common
danger could make them pull together, if even that would do it, which I
rather doubt. Unfortunately it is not a few districts or a few Chiefs who are
thus affected, and there is not the bulk of the people to fall back upon as was
the case in Fiji. Samoa being so small, according to all the information I can
get, the distrustfulness seems to have affected the whole country. The stories
that none of them work and that they live by stealing from white planters, I
should like to prove for myself; we heard such stories in Fiji at one time.
A Government with the aid of foreign Consuls, according to your suggestion, is
the only form under which a Native Government could exist, and I don’t
think that would last long, as it would be purely a commercial Government,
and each Consul would be urging further concessions from the natives. No
import duties would be imposed, as it would be supposed to hinder trade; and
no revenue would be raised which could be devoted to the improvement of
the native race. It would be different, of course, if all the Consuls were non-
commercial men, but this is hardly likely to be the case. Anyhow, I shall
strongly urge a trial of the scheme, if an opportunity offers when the Yankee
ship-of-war arrives.
I was told by a native this morning that your scheme of a Municipality
of Apia was disliked, because they said, “He wants a lot of foreigners to rule
in Apia ; it is only a beginning for them to rule the whole country. ” I hope
that this letter will meet you at Loma Loma on your way to Tonga. When I
shall next be able to write I don’t know, but I hope it will be soon. I very
much fear this place is destined to become the prey of Yankee adventurers
again, but I will do my very best to stop it. German annexation would be
preferable.—Very sincerely yours.
From Mr. Maudslay
British Consulate, Apia, Samoa, April 2, 1878.—My dear Sir—l hope
you will excuse this paper, should this letter ever reach you. A schooner
starts to-morrow for Tonga, and I don’t like to miss the chance of sending
you a few lines, although there is really no news.
I have been prevented from doing much good work by the number of
petty little complaints, etc., that come in to me, and of course every one
thinks it right to come and tell his tale of woe to a new Consul.
I am, however, getting on with the claims, which decrease in amount as
the inquiry proceeds, and I hope much to be able to take a run into the
country at the end of this week. Hitherto I have been living at the hotel,
but now that the Liardets have gone I have moved to the Consulate—a very
95
XX
FIJI


great improvement, as I do not lose half the time in going backwards and
forwards.
My house-keeping is done in rather a primitive fashion. I had to buy
just enough furniture to get along with—chairs, tables, etc. Liardet’s effects
do not nearly cover his debts, and everything was left in the most fearful
muddle. The house was horribly dirty. I have constantly meetings with
deputations of the Taimua and Faipule about small claims, etc., but they do
not seem to do anything in the waj*- of governing; in fact, they are just
hanging on, waiting the coming of the American man-of-war and the return
of Mamea. It is almost impossible to find out what is really going on
amongst them. The Puletua have been fined $lO each man ($25 Chiefs)
and sent back to their homes, fine to be paid in one year.
Samoans do indeed appear to be the greatest thieves in existence ; even the
missionaries do not escape. They rob all the plantations indiscriminately
and sweep them quite clean. It appears to be impossible to keep a taro patch
or yam garden from them, and keeping poultry is out of the question.
I should like a line from you from Tonga if possible.—Very sincerely
yours.
From Mr. Maudslay
Apia, April 11, 1878. —Sir —I have the honour to report to you that on
Friday last, the sth inst., I started on a trip to the westward, and visited
the islands of Manono and Apolima, returning along the north coast of
Upolu. I arrived in Apia on the afternoon of Tuesday, the 10th inst.
2. My object in taking this trip was merely to gain some knowledge of
the country and the people, and to visit the plantations of the European
settlers on the coast. I would gladly have extended my trip to Savaii, where
there are several matters requiring investigation ; but I should much regret
being absent from Apia during the visit of the long-expected American man-
of-war, so did not venture further than Apolima. I was accompanied by
Piliopo, the Taimua of Manono ; and my native servant, who has a slight
knowledge of English, acted as interpreter.
3. Manono is a place of the greatest political importance in Samoa, and
occupies somewhat the same position as Bau, in Fiji, and there is a further
resemblance in that Manono is a small island, not more than a mile across,
lying about two and a half miles from the land, inside the barrier reef which
surrounds the west end of Upolu. From the white sandy beach the land rises
gradually towards the centre of the island, and the surface of the soil is
everywhere covered with loose black volcanic rocks, from between which,
however, there is a luxuriant growth of cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, bananas, and
dracaenas, giving the whole island the appearance of one large plantation.
There are houses all round the sea-coast, and the inhabitants must number
quite 800. The greatest drawback to the place is the want of fresh water ;
during the rainy weather there is usually a limited supply, but owing to the
dryness of the present season all the drinking-water has, even in this month,
to be brought from the coast of Upolu.
4. On Saturday morning I rowed over to Apolima, another small island
about three and a half miles distant, lying outside the reef, and of a totally
different appearance to Manono. This island is merely the top of an extinct
volcano, presenting precipitous black cliffs to the sea, rising to the height of
9 6
OHA’P.
FIJI


1000 feet. The bottom of the crater is only a few feet above the sea-level,
and where the cliff is lowest, a small break in the rim of the crater affords a
very narrow and difficult passage for boats into a small but secure basin.
This island is perfectly impregnable in war, and has always been of import-
ance on that account. The only means of defence the inhabitants required
was a strong rope, which was passed across the narrow entrance and fastened
into the cliff on one side, and lowered into the water just inside the passage.
As a hostile canoe passed through, the rope was tightened, and the canoe
upset. The sea rolls into this passage with such force that it is only during
fine weather at high tide that it is safe for a boat to pass in and out. The
land inside the crater is very rich, and, like Manono, appears to be one large
garden of cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit trees. Here, however, there is always a
sufficient supply of drinking-water, and generally enough water to irrigate a
few acres on which to grow taro. The village, which is close to the landing-
place, consists of about twenty good-sized houses. I was hospitably received
by the Chief, Sausau, a man of considerable rank, but he clearly let me see
that he was not equally pleased at the visit of Piliopo.
5. I returned to Manono the same evening, and remained there during
Sunday. On Sunday afternoon I called on Father Rondel, a Roman Catholic
missionary, and the only white man resident on the island. He strongly
advised me to see the other leading Chiefs of the island before leaving, and
explained that it was probably the fact of my coming in company with
Piliopo that had prevented their calling on me. I expressed my willingness
to see them, and accordingly a meeting was arranged at the Mission-house
for the same afternoon.
6. I found the Chiefs all staunch adherents of Malietoa, who holds high
rank in this island, although by birth belonging to Savaii; and consequently
very much dissatisfied with the present Government, and Piliopo, although
one of the highest in rank on the island, is most unpopular on account of his
connection with it. They did not appear to have much hope of the formation
of a strong Government in Samoa, and looked for assistance from some foreign
Power, preferring that the Power should be England ; as a native, who spoke
a little English, said to me : “We are for Malietoa and Great Britain.” The
whole of Savaii, and the provinces of Tuamasanga and Manono, and a great
part of Aana, are said to be of this way of thinking.
7. The Chiefs apologised for not receiving me with more ceremony, and 1
learned that they were holding a meeting with the members of the Puletua,
who were on their way back to their homes in Savaii, and other high Chiefs.
I therefore declined their offer of entertainment on Monday, as I did not wish
to be in any way connected with this meeting.
8. When the Chiefs had left, the French priest who had interpreted our
conversation, and who has passed many years in the country, expressed most
strongly his wish that England would take charge of Samoa, as he considered
a strong native Government quite an impossibility.
9. On Monday I was landed at daybreak at Saluvi, the extreme west end
of Upolu, and walked along the coast as far as Fasitoobai, calling on my way
at the large plantation of Mulifauna, owned by Messrs. Godetfroy. There
are nearly 2000 acres under cultivation. The land is planted with kidney
cotton and cocoa-nuts at the same or nearly the same time. New land is
continually being cleared and brought under cultivation, and the next crop
111 H
97
XX
FIJI


off this estate is expected to exceed 1,000,000 lbs. As the cocoa-nuts come into
bearing, the cotton cultivation is abandoned. There are a large number of
the islanders employed as labourers on this plantation. Messrs. Godeffroy
claim land in this neighbourhood to the extent of 9000 acres.
10. Between this plantation and Fasitoobai the destruction to the houses
and property of the Puletua after the last war is painfully evident; charred
stumps, rotting logs, and old foundations of houses are to be seen all along
the road. Some of the old cocoa-nut trees escaped, as it necessitated too
much hard work to destroy them.
11. At Fasitoobai I stayed at the home of Mr. F. Cornwall, who has about
160 acres of land under cotton and cocoa-nut cultivation a mile distant from
his house. Mr. Cornwall pointed out to me the stumps of the cocoa-nut and
bread-fruit trees which had been destroyed on his land during the last war.
12. In the evening I dined with Moipau, the Governor of the province,
and Alipata, the Chief Judge. The dinner was served at a table in European
fashion, and was altogether very well arranged.
13. On my return to Mr. Cornwall, I received a visit from Saga and some
other Puletua Chiefs, who had been amongst the refugees at the Consulate,
and who have now returned to their homes under the conditions stated to
you in another letter. They are at present living in a wretched hut close to
the sites of their old houses, which they are about to rebuild. Ido not think,
however, that they feel so sure of peace as to induce them to take much
trouble about erecting good houses, or even planting more food than is
absolutely necessary.
14. On Tuesday morning I walked as far as Malua, where Dr. Turner
showed me over the college and grounds belonging to the London Missionary
Society ; but the necessity of catching a tide made my stay a short one, and
in the afternoon I returned to Apia. —I have, etc.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, April 1, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have been writing so
long at my three official monthly mails that I am about u finished.
I reserved Mr. Rooney’s letter for a Sunday task, and the best way in
which I can answer your letter asking me to make observations on his letter
is to send you my answer to him. But if you think that there is anything
in my letter which you think I had better leave out or modify, please mark
it and send it me back. I could not resist the opportunity he gave me by
writing to me.
Heffernan arrived here safely : he has gone to Ba and Raki Raki. He will
be very useful to me, if lam allowed to do as I have this time sent him to
hold a Provincial Court with the native Stipendiary Magistrate. In the
present state of being expected to take care of itself, the Court must be
allowed, I think, to be subjected to little irregularities in native business.
.Where a Stipendiary Magistrate is supposed to be requisite, I hope I may do
it with a Justice of Peace.
I intend to go to Nadi when he returns here.
There is a row on the tapis concerning the Qaliyalatini people. Buli
Nadrau believes he is going to lose them. Roko Tui Ba says that it was settled
98
CHAP.
FIJI


at Waikava, and subsequently at his last provincial meeting, that they were
to have a separate Buli, and that Buli is to be Korotoga. He writes to me
to say that this has been confirmed by you, and he adds, “if it is settled
that they are to be ruled from Colo, all right; if they are to be ruled from
the Coast, all right.” I think in this last sentence he shows his hand. I
know Wilkinson will back him up, and I shall not make myself more a
party to the squabble than to see that Buli Nadrau’s voice in the matter
finds its way to you. When Heffernan comes back I will send a full
report.
I heard to-day that the Nuyamalo people who used to be at Nasue and
Nabuto have taken a place near Yasu, where they have built a new town
without asking Buli Nuyakoro or telling me. I will send and have this looked
into. Ido not wish that the Waini Mala lot should have a new footing in
Navosa, it will only lead to mischief. The Nuyakoro people of Nasue are
going to rebuild their town close to where Nasue is now, but in a drier spot.
We are starving absolutely. The wild food is not ripe, and I have no corn
or beans for “my children.” The taukeis have none to sell just at this time.
On the coast it is worse. I have kept my men from begging in the towns
here, and have sent several to their homes, which Heffernan (and he says
Roko Tui Ba) calls “sending them begging food all over the country.” Ido
not wonder that facts become marvellously distorted by our opponents when
I see how they can be so by even the more sensible of our friends.
The Colo towns certainly cannot say that we have “ lavaka’d ” a yam from
them.
I expect corn and beans every day, but meanwhile how am I to feed my
children ?
I have no more news. The Nuyalevu people are at last setting to work to
cut the posts for our new church. I have had a capital house built by
Mutawaki at Bukuia, paid £2.—Yours sincerely.
I send Mr. Rooney’s letter to me
To the Earl of Carnarvon
April 2, 1878.—My Lord—l have the honour to enclose a return of the
Revenue and Expenditure of the Colony for 1877, and also one of its Assets
and Liabilities.
The Revenue and Expenditure Return is on the whole satisfactory, for
though the Revenue did *iot quite equal the estimate, whilst the Expenditure
somewhat exceeded it, the deficiency in the one case, and the excess in the
other, was not considerable.
The Revenue had been estimated at £49,050, and the amount actually
received was only £46,688 :9: 7, thus showing a deficiency of £2361 :10 :5,
a result wholly due to the unexpected and temporary failure in the supply of
immigrant labour.
The Expenditure, which had been estimated at £59,613 :55., amounted
to £64,099 : 6 :1, or an excess of £4486 :1 :1.
But it must be remembered that in the Estimates for 1877 no provision
was made for the addition of £2OOO to the Governor’s salary, so that the real
excess on the items of estimated expenditure is only £2486 : 1 : 1.
99
XX
FIJI


The difference between the Revenue and Expenditure, £17,410 :16 :6, was
defrayed from the grant of the Imperial Parliament. In the present year it
is anticipated that the Revenue will cover the Expenditure.
Revenue, Ist Quarter 1875 .... £3031 15 7
„ „ 1876 .... 5873 0 6
„ ~ 1877 .... 6685 10 6
~ ~ 1878 .... 10,760 2 4
Customs Revenue, Ist Quarter 1875 . . . . £1554 010
„ ~ 1876 .... 2118 5 2
~ ~ 1877 .... 3821 5 10
„ ~ 1878 .... 4104 17 3
The returns for the first quarter of 1878 are not yet fully prepared, but I
am able to give the gross amount of Revenue and also the amount of Customs
duties. A comparative table of these for the first quarter in each of the last
four years will, I think, be interesting to your Lordship, and is certainly very
satisfactory.
It must be remembered that no native taxes are received in the first
quarter of the year, which accounts for the total receipts not amounting to
one-fourth of the estimated receipts of the year.
April 1878. —My stay in Tonga has been of a very different
character from that in Samoa: much more successful in its
results, accompanied by much finer weather, and in more agree-
able surroundings.
The most interesting and most important feature of my visit
has been my long nocturnal conversations with the King. At
these, his son David Uga was always present, sometimes Maafu
and Tugi, and, once, some of the other high Chiefs. The King’s
relations with Baker are very curious, and reminded me of those
between Louis XIII. and Richelieu. He writhes under his
tyranny, but cannot and will not shake it off. That he has no
love for him is plain enough; but he is bound to him partly by
fear, and partly by feelings of gratitude and honour. His fear
is twofold. He dreads the debacle Baker’s removal might cause,
and in this he is very likely right; for at present, unless Tugi
is strong enough to fill the place (which I doubt), the sudden
release from Baker’s rule would probably mean anarchy, and,
after all, any Government is better than none. But his appre-
hensions are also personal; for Baker, who is his doctor as well
as his chaplain, prime minister, and banker, has instilled into
him the belief that he will certainly die if Baker be not at hand
to prescribe for him. He feels also, and it is true, that Baker
has served him zealously, if not well, and has strong claims on
his forbearance and support. But that he abhors the Bakerian
system he made very plain to us, and he says he has long seen
100
CHAP.
FIJI


that it was ruining the country, but he feared there was no
remedy. Now he sees some light; and as he said to Maafu
after I had left the room: “I thought Tonga would die : that
when I died all would end. Now I see Tonga may live—yes,
Tonga may live—Tonga will live.” In the presence of Maafu
and Tugi, and with David Uga’s full agreement, he promised
that in the forthcoming Parliament the ridiculous and oppressive
laws now in force should be either wholly repealed or materially
altered. Both Tugi and Maafu tell me that the King’s promise,
thus made, may be absolutely relied on. Moreover, Tugi, as
President of the Parliament, will see to its being fulfilled.
Without exactly giving Baker away, the King let me know
that every effort had been made to prejudice him against me
and against England. We had been represented to him as bent
on swallowing up Tonga, and his only hope of escape was said
to lie in German aid and protection. He saw now that our
wish was that they should live, and that nothing so convinced
him of this as my desire to restrain their own follies.
“ Tubou ” is a very shrewd old man, and with a much broader
view and more foresight than most natives. He has much grave
dignity, and speaks low and slowly. But he is dreadfully afraid
of Baker ! I expressed regret at his absence, as I should have
liked to have discussed matters with him au fond. The King
said I ought to be glad he was absent, — he was, —for Baker had
his spies everywhere, and had he been in Tonga, would certainly
have found some means, though he did not know what—class
meetings, religious services, audiences on his own part —to pre-
vent these evening meetings with me, which I may note were
always conducted with a certain air of mystery. But too many
were aware of them for them to be really kept private. They
were most interesting, and sometimes lasted till very late hours.
Tongatabu, speaking generally, is not beautiful; it is almost
a dead flat, the villages are ugly, and the jungle is almost en-
tirely rastrajo, as we used to call it in South America, i.e. not
native forest, but wood that has been repeatedly destroyed and
grown up again. But the broad green roads, like a drive in an
English cover, are pleasant, and here and there is a solitary fine
tree, generally a baka. The little islands, moreover, in front of
the town, shaded with cocoa-nuts and girdled with white sand,
are very pretty —most inviting places for picnics. The Mua,
too, is picturesque. The town of Nukualofa has a distinct look
of an American backwoods “ city.”
Of the people I met, only four have made any real impres-
sion on me—the King himself, his son David Uga, his grandson
Wellington Gu, and Tugi. Uga is a dignified and silent person,
101
FIJI
XX


nervously cautious, as one who knows that, though “ heir
apparent ” according to missionary ideas, it is quite within his
father’s power to nominate any other member of the royal
house as his successor, and that such nomination would be
unanimously accepted by the people, whatever might be said to
the contrary. But he seemed sensible and right-thinking, and
did me essential service. Wellington is a mountain of fat,
though quite young. He is good-natured, talkative, and a fool.
But he speaks English perfectly , though he has never left Tonga.
It is funny to hear his little semi-expletives; “By George’
being his favourite utterance. William Tugi is a very different
sort of man—the head of the rival house of the Tuitogas; a
strong man, mentally and physically, with the loudest and
heartiest laugh I ever heard from a native; a strong conserva-
tive, and the head of the Yaka-Tonga, as opposed to the Yaka-
Papalagi party ; plenty of common sense, and a frankly insolent
aristocratic manner, not unattractive.
Journal of Visit to Tonga
April 3, 12.30 p.m.— Went on board the Sapphire. Took
with me Knollys, Wilkinson, and Batu Abel. Sailed at once.
4.30. —Anchored off Gau. Went on shore at Sawayake. A
lovely evening. Walked up the valley a mile or two with the
Captain, and much admired the extent of cultivation, chiefly
dalo. Lights very pretty. Went off again to dinner.
April 4, 9 A.M. — Went ashore after breakfast. Saw the
school—eighty-five pupils—forty-seven could read, and read
well. A large number (I did not count them) write good hands,
and some simple sums in arithmetic were decently done. Then
I confirmed a decision arrived at by the people as to a certain
land dispute, and then judged the Baki Baki plotters. Sent
some to their own province to live with the Boko and be
lectured by him —some to Cakaudrove, some to Ban, two to
Kadavu, and the three chief leaders to Lau. These were
Tawakece, Bavula, and the Kalou Bere priest. These last
three we took on board with us. I saw them in a fine new
bure , well-built and spacious, with a dais on three sides of it.
Complimented the Sawayake folks on their planting and
promised them a reward. Walked across the hill with Knollys
to Waikama —a pretty and pleasant walk. Plenty of cultivation
on the Waikama side also. The hot springs bubble up in their
artificial stone basin as they did two years ago ; but there is a new
church, and the town ditches are more than ever filled with dalo.
102
CHAP.
FIJI


2 p.m. —Went on board again. Steamed up to the pass and
picked up the cutter with Epeli, Wilkinson, and prisoners by
the way. I brought on board with me some maps which the
teacher at Waikama had drawn. They were very like mediaeval
maps of the world, and in their way curious, as showing that
he had evidently retained some recollection of the real maps he
had seen. They were four in number: one of the British
Islands (with London as a separate province); one of Australia
and Tasmania; one of Europe, Asia, and Africa —very like a
mediaeval map —and one of America —North and South —and the
Solomon Islands.
April 5, 11.30.—Reached Loma Loma. Found Maafu still
there. Had yaqona. Went to the Botanic Garden, which is
much improved. Called on Mrs. Liardet, who was at that
miserable hole, Grant’s Hotel. Looked into the Court House.
Talked to Mr. Tripp. Came back again to Maafu’s. Country
looks dry.
2 P.M. —Sailed again, taking Maafu with us. Under sail
all the evening and night.
April 6, 8 A.M. — Off Lakeba. Maafu and Wilkinson went
on shore and brought off Taniela.
2 p.m. —Passed out through Oneata passage between Oneata
and Moce. Oneata seems rather a nice island.
April 7.—Rough night and morning. Church service between
decks, where it was hot from the engines and noisy from the
clamour of the pumps. Calmer in afternoon and evening.
Monday , April 8, 7 a.m. —ln sight of Tongatabu. Very
flat and very reef-bound, but the island of Eoa, hard by, is high
and picturesque.
11 A.M. —Steamed into the harbour and heard that the King
had gone to Hapaii. I consequently did not land.
1.30 P.M. —Maafu and the rest went ashore.
3 P.M. —Captain Murray and I went to a lagoon to look for
ducks. These were conspicuous by their absence; but we had
a pleasant walk, landing at an old burial-ground and going
through much cultivation to a village in the bush, behind
which we were to look for pigeons. There was some nice bush
with good trees, but the pigeons, though audible, were invisible.
We fell in with some native sportsmen —one apparently rather
a swell, a youth in shooting-jacket and trousers, with shoulder-
belt and bag, but whose civilised appearance was rather marred
by his hair being stuck quite full of pigeons’ feathers. On return-
ing to the village he invited us into his house, asked us to sit
103
XX
FIJI


down, and gave us a water-melon. The houses are not as good
as those in Fiji, and the village was very silent and very bare.
6 p.m.— Came on board again. The town looks rather well
from the sea.
Tuesday , April 9, 11 A.M. — Went in the gig up the great
lagoon to Mua. When first, as a boy, I read of this place and
looked at the plan of it in the old missionary book in the ante-
room at Argyll House, I little thought I ever should be here.
At Mua found the RC. mission station. Here, in front of RC.
Church, are some very fine and picturesque haka trees, under
which Captain Cook was feasted. Mua a very large village.
The people here, as elsewhere, have been prohibited making tappa.
It was all ordered to be burnt this year! The consequence is,
they wear filthy ragged trousers, and a wisp of flannel round
their necks for a shirt. It seems never to have entered the
missionary mind that the tappa dresses made by the people
themselves in the village could be constantly renewed, and were
consequently cleaner as well as cheaper than the European cloth
suit, which they could not afford to renew, and is consequently
worn till it falls to pieces. The French missionaries are less
narrow, and would let their flocks wear native dress if they
dared. But it is Mr. Baker who makes the laws, and those
insisting on the adoption of European clothes are enforced by
heavy penalties. About half the population seems to be in
prison for trifling offences. All amusements are put down. The
old priest at Mua has been nearly forty years in the island
without ever leaving it. Were very hospitably received. One
of the priests showed us Tui Tonga’s tomb, which is striking—a
square enclosure on the top of a presumably artificial mound
about thirty feet high, terraced like a Mexican teocalli. On its
sides are some venerable noko-noko trees, and the enclosure
consists of a double row of very large slabs of stone, each about
eight feet long. The space of ground enclosed is about 120
feet each way —rather more than less. Then we walked on
towards the great stones, being overtaken, after we had gone
about four miles, by the younger priest in a trap, who picked
us up and drove us on to this Tongan Stonehenge, which is
curious. Each of the three stones about fifteen feet in length,
eight in breadth, and five in thickness. The two uprights have
a deep, well-cut channel at the top, into which the transverse
stone has been dropped. This upper stone is the best cut of
the three, but its position also has protected it better from the
weather. It would be interesting to see if there is any circle
in the surrounding bush. The roads are broad, green, and
104
CHAP.
FIJI


shadeless, the bush being mostly rubbish, with here and there
a fine tree towering above it. Cultivation extensive, but ill kept.
Villages few in number, but very large—untidy and squalid;
none have a ram ; houses bad—very bad. Board floors coming
in, the consequence of which is that all sorts of rubbish and filth
drop through the chinks in the ill-fitted planks, and rot below
the house. People very few. Drove back and waited at the
landing-place till dusk without seeing any signs of the boat.
Whilst waiting we fell in with a man who spoke Fijian. He
was very loud in his complaints against the taxes, and in his wish
to return to Fiji. Then, with much difficulty, got a canoe and
paddled off. After about half-an-hour we fell in with the gig
and the Captain, but did not get back to the ship till 10 P.M.
Wednesday , April 10. —The King had not appeared this
morning.
. 12 noon. —A schooner, supposed to be the King’s, in sight.
2 p.m. —David Uga came to see me —dressed as a European,
and not ill dressed. The magistrate who came with him was in
the seediest rig imaginable—a brownish-greenish coat and trousers,
once black. He pronounced the schooner to be the King’s.
3 P.M. —Landed with Knollys, and walked through a flat,
uninteresting country, along straight green roads traversing thick
low bush. Here and there a fine baka.
5 p.m. —Came on board again. The King stopped at the
point and sent a messenger for his carriage.
Thursday , April 11.—The King arrived, apparently about 10
last night, and at 10 A.M. William Tugi came off to ask me on
shore.
11 A.M. —I landed officially under salute and went to my
lodgings in what was the Bank, —a very piggish place. Dressed
in full dress, was joined by the Captain and officers, and went at
1 P.M. to the King. His palace is like a railway inn in Vermont,
but he is himself very dignified and noble-looking, in spite of
his European clothes. David Uga also surmounts his black coat
and pants, but the rest are awful guys. Scarlet A.D.C.’s within
the palace, and scarlet sentries in huge black shoes outside. We
were received in a small parlour, wainscotted with noko-noko
and another native wood. Three throne-like arm-chairs on a
dais, a marble-tipped table with cut flowers in china vases of
atrocious taste, some chairs, and squabs, formed the furniture. I
made a short speech, gave the King a copy of the Order in Council,
presented Captain Murray, and then we went out for the native
reception—a kava circle on the grass in front of the palace.
The dragging of the kava on a sledge by lots of men chanting
105
XX
FIJI


harmoniously was striking in itself, but spoiled by the dresses of
the people, all of whom (except those who carried “ bilos,” who
are still allowed native costume) were clothed in (apparently)
cast-off European garments, generally without shoes, and as a
rule much out at elbows, whether the elbows were covered by
a coat or only a dirty shirt. High chiefs, who in native
dress would have been dignified, looked like mud-larks. The
ceremony lasted about an hour, after which we returned to our
piggish lodgings.
4 p.m. —Had dinner—waited on by Mrs. Principal of the
college, who is of high rank and very pretty ; but her tight, high,
purple merino dress and cameo brooch made her look like a
housemaid on a Sunday outing.
5 p.m. —Walked up to the church and round the town.
Baker’s house is a very good two-storied one, by far the best in
the place.
7 p.m. —Went to see the King privately. David Uga with
him. A very fairly satisfactory interview. Champagne all
round on leaving.
Friday , April 12. —Received English folk all the morning.
Complaints—most of which were frivolous. One is worth investi-
gation—that of Messrs. Parker and Reilly, who complain of inter-
ference with their cattle and land on the neighbouring island of
Eoa. One Payn complains of having been ordered out of a
native court for not putting his coat on when desired to do so,
. when sitting on the bench. The most frivolous complaint of all
was that of one Buchan. He and another share a tank. His
neighbour’s wife, a native woman, quarrelled about its use with
his own wife, an English woman. For this he wanted com-
pensation from the Government.
A. G. —“ Oh! a case of assault, I suppose. You should
take it to the Police Court!
B. —“Well, the Police Court would not perhaps consider it
exactly assault. She splashed my wife’s face with water, and the
Government ought to be called to account for it.”
A. G. —“If it is too trivial a matter for the Police Court, it
is certainly too trivial for an international complaint.
11 A.M. — The King went on board; was duly saluted, etc.
2 p.m.— l went to see the college. The principal, a native
very elaborately got up in clerical and academical costume,
mortar-board and all, received us. His English is imperfect, and
he reminded me generally of the Rev. Bhose in Trinidad. The
boys, very bright and sharp at Euclid and mental arithmetic.
Some with really most handsome faces and figures, the beauty of
106
CHAP.
FIJI


which could not be destroyed by their ungainly costume of seedy
black, and shoes a mile too wide for them. We walked through
the college grounds, a long straight walk with houses on each
side, on the Navuloa plan—only the houses are not so good as
at Navuloa : each has a plot of neatly kept garden in front of it,
bordering the walk. A little farther is a huge unfinished build-
ing, with three towers, built round a quadrangle, as a college for
girls. Enormously expensive. Taniela says, “ The people sigh
as they pass by it.” Then we went to the school—a very nice
room filled with bright-looking children—the girls absurdly got
up in European style —the boys, happily, still allowed to wear
sulus. Some of the girls had beautiful Grecian faces. Pro-
ficiency good, but not remarkable. Native schoolmaster pounded
on the floor with a mace in the most vigorous and absurd fashion
during the singing.
4.30 p.m.— Walked out to the French priests’ establishment,
a mile or two out of town. They are building a huge church,
ugly, but with some semi-redeeming points. Walked back by
the shore.
6 p.m.— Dinner.
8 p.m. —Went again to the King. Talked of Customs duties,
of Maudslay’s appointment, and other things. Some high chiefs
there, including Maafu and Tugi. Champagne as before.
Saturday , April 13.—Saw one or two folks.
12.—A solevu. Three or four long processions with various
offerings—mostly rubbish—but from the King came a bull and
some sheep. It was rather pretty, notwithstanding the absurd
European dresses of the people. Our men looked well after-
wards, loaded with garlands over their clear brown skins. (>ne
garland, a pretty texture of light and dark brown leaves, I had
never seen before.
2 P.M. —Saw French priest, who seemed to have suspicions,
which I did my best to dispel.
3 p.m. —Went out in David Uga’s carriage to Bea—not a
particularly interesting drive—but saw a piece of fresh water,
which is a rarity here.
6 P.M. —Dinner. We have now got a second room to
sleep in.
7.30 p.m,— Went to the King, and discussed the dangers
of small states. Up till late. Very interesting.
Sunday , April 14, 9 A.M. —Went to church at the big church
on the hill, which, however, though large, is not imposing. It is
simply a large Tongan oval house with a squat wooden tower.
King and Queen there. King walks up the hill preceding his
107
XX
FIJI


scarlet sentries, who leave their posts and boxes for the purpose
of following him. She goes in a bath-chair. Congregation large.
The ladies very resplendent in purple satin, etc. Was agreeably
surprised to find that our prayer-book was translated into
Tongan, and was used by the Wesleyans here. Sermon preached
from a very high pulpit by a native parson in a very black coat.
Went home and wrote. After luncheon walked round the
town. Called on the King before dinner.
Monday , April 15, 6 a.m. —Went to the King’s levee of
yaqona , to which sulus were admitted for the first time for long
past. Then, at eleven, went officially to take leave, and went
on board and sailed, though without much wind. At 10 P.M.
passing Tofua and Keoa.
Bakeriana. —Mr. Baker or his agent takes a bag of money,
obtained from Godeffroy, to a village, sits in the church or rara y
sounds the conch shell, and summons the people to attend.
They come, and he offers them money for the missionary collec-
tion, to be paid for in copra at the rate of 25 lbs. for a shilling.
A list is prepared in three columns—name, amount of money
given, amount of copra to be repaid. If they do not borrow
what he thinks enough, he tells them to take more; e.gj. Mrs.
Moss heard him say to a Chief who asked for five shillings,
“ Why, So-and-so has given that, you ought to give ten at least
—there it is,” and the man took it. The October collection of
1877 was made in a simpler way —by an assessment on the
towns, which they had much difficulty in paying, and gave
horses, cows, and houses.
Extract from Wilkinson’s Journal. “The reports from all
quarters of the fearful poverty of the people are confirmed, and
that the oppression of the present time is all but intolerable —
sources, the Church, Government tax —enforcement of laws at
once ridiculous and harsh. Then the amusing and most extra-
ordinary accounts of how church collections are raised. In
some places the whole community turn out and celebrate the
occasion more in the style of a fair than anything else. Some
riding on horseback, carrying flags, give first all their money,
and then their horses; others, using kerosene tins for drums,
parade around and through the church, and as they pass the
receiver of the money, drop their sixpence or threepence, re-
ceiving praise from time to time from the bystanders. Some-
times a fixed sum is assessed on a town or district, nineteen
carts going for Baker’s copra at one time. The real evil of this
is that the people are kept in debt the whole year. The state-
ment is that many have not yet got rid of their liabilities for
108
CHAP.
FIJI


1875. All sorts of stratagems are resorted to to excite emula-
tion, and people are often kept employed getting ready for
these events, and then afterwards suffer from poverty. I heard
to-day that Mr. Baker at no distant date imported 300 suits
of black coats and trousers. They were at first said to be for
native ministers, but were ultimately disposed of on credit to
Chiefs and others.” Thus far Wilkinson.
Semesi, Magistrate at Vavau, says: “Prosperity and happi-
ness have left Tonga. We Tongans have now but one ambition
—to get black clothes and.wooden houses. The idea seems
to be that such things are indicative of riches. Fines and
imprisonments occupy more than half of the people’s time. No
wonder that we are starving. People are obliged to neglect
their planting and their ordinary work. Native industry and
forethought seem dead. The women do nothing, now that
“ masi ’’-making is forbidden. To get money for the missionary
collections is the great object of everybody. The women’s
object is to vie with their friends and neighbours in showy
European dress. We all see we are mistaken. What the
future will be Ido not know. Personally, I long for the liberty
and tranquillity of Fiji.”
To revert to copra. Of course one shilling for 25 lbs. is less
than half the proper value. It would be equal to about £5 per
ton instead of £l3, Of course Baker makes a large profit, even
deducting the interest on the money advanced by Godeffroy.
The manager of the Bank told me they started with a
nominal capital of $50,000, of which the Government had half
the shares, and the public the other half. But all the shares
for the public were taken by Mr. Baker, who also is supposed to
have advanced part of the Government deposit. The Bank lent
money at 10 per cent, and took 2J per cent commission on bills.
Almost the only business of the Bank was advancing money
to the Government and cashing bills for it, but they also
received the Church account, and advanced money on copra for
house-building. At the end of the first year, a dividend of
10 per cent was declared on the nominal capital. 1 So the case
for Mr. Baker stood thus. He must have received (having
nominally 25,000 of the 50,000 dollars) $2500 for a year’s use
of the amount deposited by him. Not a bad profit.
Tuesday , April 16. —Flopped about all day in a light, un-
favourable wind. Passed close to the Wesley volcano, which
in 1854 did not exist. Was passed by Wilkinson in 1860
when it was only 12 feet high. Has now grown to the height
1 A mistake.
109
XX
FIJI


of 111 feet, which we were able to manage to take correctly
as we passed just at noon, and is over a mile long. Its white
cliffs are covered with sulphur, which looks like yellow lichen
tipping the rocks, and the whole place smokes, or rather steams,
at many apertures.
Keoa is a fine mountain, the most perfect cone, I think,
I have ever seen. The chart calls its height 5000. I should
hardly have thought it quite so much. The great volcano of
Latte in sight all day. Bare and desolate, and at present
inactive, but its last eruption was a tremendous one.
Wednesday , April 17. —Oft‘ Vavau at daylight. Ran up the
very pretty entrance into the beautiful harbour under steam,
and anchored in 27 fathoms at about eleven. Went on shore
and saw Wellington Gu, the Governor. Rather like an educated
Hindoo of not high rank. Good house.
1 P.M. — Went down with a lot of officers in the cutter to
Mariner’s Cave. The island it is in is of coral limestone, and
all along its face the sea has worn away the rock until it over-
hangs, with a smooth, even surface, as at Point d’Esnay and He
aux Aigrettes. Above this line the rock is covered with brush
and trees, and mounts at a steep incline for some 70 or 80 feet.
At hardly any place is it possible to find access from the water.
The situation of the cave is marked by two sticks, which are
laid as if casually on a rock, and which would attract no notice
from strangers. Here it is possible to land by springing from
a boat on to a projection of the ledge, and below this ledge
is the entrance, a dark hole clearly perceptible through the
transparent water. The length of the passage is about 30 feet,
but the difficulty of entrance is that its roof is a V-like wedge
of this shape [sketch], so that most of those entering knocked
their heads or barked their backs against the ridge. A number
of the villagers from the town from which the guide fetched his
assistants grouped themselves picturesquely on the rocks above
the opening; and the group was made odder by the addition
of several of our sailors, stark naked, who had jumped into the
sea and climbed up to the ledge to take a dive from it. A consider-
able swell on the sea in front of the cave increases the difficulty
of getting in or out. Eleven of us stripped and dived, of whom
seven got into the cave, including Knollys. I did not. It is a
queer place. In returning we went into another very striking
cave, the entrance above water, the picturesqueness of which was
much added to by two canoes, or rather a canoe and a boat,
coming in at the same time. A very fine domical chamber, with
several fathoms’ depth of water. Did not get back to the ship
110
CHAP.
FIJI


till near seven. Captain returned from shooting full of the
beauty of the lagoon. As he does not generally admire scenery,
it must be good.
7 p.m.— Wellington dined with us. He speaks English
well, and at least affects to be very national and anti-too-fast-
movement-ish.
Thursday , April 18, 6 a.m. —Went ashore and walked with
Wellington Gu towards the top of the hill, which, however, we
did not reach. Before returning, bathed at the same beach as
we did yesterday. The town of Neiafu is very pretty, the
houses all surrounded with masses of orange trees. The foliage
here is luxuriant, and looks undisturbed by hurricanes.
9 A.M. —Received aggrieved British subjects. Most of their
grievances very trifling. Parsons, not a bad fellow; Davids,
a Jew from Samoa. One Galloway has something more like
a grievance, viz. an unfulfilled promise to give him a lease.
10 A.M. —Went in cutter down to Parsons’ place, very nicely
situated among pretty trees, which he has had the good taste
not to cut down. Walked with him across the low ridge to
the borders of a brackish lagoon, along which we walked under
good trees for half a mile or so, and then embarked in two
canoes, in which we cruised about the lagoon for a time, and
landed on the opposite shore. Walked back a different road.
Parsons says Baker is to return to the group, but to go to
Hapaii; that Wellington is really pro-German, anti-English,
and intensely for the new movement. Wellington himself
declares he is not. Which is the truth? Parsons says the
shirt fine is carried out most strictly. Did not get back till
near one, so had no time to go up the hill as I had intended.
Wrote to the King, and then at 3 p.m. went on shore to a solevu
at Wellington Gu’s. On the triumphal arch put up for the
King’s visit there was a new display of flags, and a motto in
red letters on a white ground, “God Save Queen Victoria.”
We took our seats in the verandah, and the long procession
came up —first men, then women, then about 150 men dragging
a huge pig on a sled, and chaunting a very melodious chant as
they came. Almost all the men were in sulus; the women
attired in costumes of every degree of incongruity, but the
effect of the mass of bright colouring as they sat in a great
circle on the grass, was very good. Then followed “kava,” in
the midst of which a speech from an orator, leaning on a stick,
to which Taniela, also leaning on a stick, replied, the crowd
applauding at intervals. After the kava came the distribution,
which was hurried over amid some confusion, and the great
111
XX
FIJI


pig left behind after all. Hurried on board, and got there at
5.30. The ship already under weigh. Could not wait for the
pig. Steamed out of the entrance just as the last red light of
the sun disappeared. Then knocked off steaming, and went on
under sail before a good breeze.
Friday , April 19. —Sailing all day, without any event except
going to church, it being Good Friday. The last Good Friday
I was at sea was just ten years ago, between Margarita and
Cumand, in that beastly old tub the Regos Ferrios.
Easter Eve , Saturday , April 20, 3 p.m. —Anchored off Loma
Loma, having come in under sail. Alacrity not there.
4 P.M. —Landed. Went to Botanic Garden, and walked
about the town for a while.
8.30 p.m. —Went on shore to yagona with Maafu.
9.30 P.M. —Came on board again.
Easter Day , April 21, 7 a.m. —Bathed at the island.
10 A.M. —Church, but, to my disappointment, no Holy
Communion. At luncheon Captain talked what, I believe, is
the common feeling about natives. To get the land out of their
hands and “work them out.” Didn’t believe in “justice to
natives,”
8 p.m. —Choir in cabin singing hyms. Bain all day.
Easter Monday , April 22.—Rain in morning. Bathed.
Stayed on board writing all the morning. It grew fair by noon.
1.30 P.M. —Landed. Found a meke going on in front of
Maafu’s house in honour of Abel. “ Likus ”of black and yellow
“ vau ” —very pretty. Here and there mixed with red. The
dance, one of those in which much action and movement.
2.15. —Went with Mr. Edwards to visit the schools. Not
so good as last year. Then to Maafu’s house again, and sat
through two more mekes whilst Knollys and Wilkinson held a
Court. It was pleasant enough sitting in front of Maafu’s door
in the shade when all were gone—the neat enclosure, the short
grass, the “ noko-noko,” sandalwood and other trees, the pretty
view of the bay, and the sweet evening sunlight.
Did not finish coaling till late.
Tuesday , April 23.—Had a meeting on shore, and sailed
about 11.30.
Wednesday , April 24.—Arrived at Levuka about nine.
Landed under salute and manned yards. English mail come in.
News alarmingly warlike. Poor Knollys heard of his mother’s
death.
112
CHAK
FIJI


To the Earl of Derby
April 26, 1878.—My Lord—l have the honour to report for your Lord-
ship’s information that I have lately visited the Friendly Islands. My
reception there formed a marked and most agreeable contrast to that which I
met with in Samoa.
2. I arrived at Nukualofa, the capital, on the Bth inst., in H.M.S.
Sapphire, but found the King absent from Tongatabu. I had accordingly to
await his return, which took place on the 10th inst., and on the following
day I was formally received by him. During the remainder of my stay I
had daily interviews with His Majesty, and have every reason to be satisfied
of the sincerity of his professions of goodwill and deference, as well as
gratified by their extreme cordiality.
3. I left Tongatabu on the 15th inst., and arrived at Vavau on the 17th
inst. There I stayed only little more than one whole day, and leaving on the
night of the 18th, reached Loma Loma in Fiji on the 20th inst.
To the Earl of Derby
April 29, 1878.—My Lord —The present condition of the Friendly
Islands affords a curious study.
2. I was by no means prepared to find that such a rapid advance, in at
all events the externals of civilisation, had been made, or that the example
of Hawaii had been so closely followed as is in fact the case, nor do I imagine
that it is by any means generally known beyond the group.
3. Ever since the year 1862, Tonga has possessed a species of Constitution,
and an Assembly called a parliament, by which laws were, or were supposed
to be, passed. Between two and three years ago, a much more elaborate
Constitution, on the Hawaian model, was promulgated, the old feudal
tenures of land and hereditary privileges of Chiefs abolished, and a numerous
body of laws framed and passed. These laws, although containing not a few
good and judicious provisions, are in many respects singularly harsh and
impolitic, and are throughout tainted by the following capital errors: (1)
Pecuniary penalties appear to be regarded rather as a source of revenue than
as an instrument to deter from the commission of offences, and accordingly
multitudes of acts, perfectly innocent and indifferent in themselves, are made
illegal, with a view to the collection of fines from those who break the regula-
tions by which they are prohibited. (2) It is considered possible and
expedient to regulate, by minute sumptuary laws, matters of dress, habits,
etc., which should be left to individual choice, modified only by the influence
of education and public opinion. (3) The wealth and prosperity of a country
are apparently thought to consist in the amount, not of its products, but its
imports, and every means is taken to encourage the introduction of foreign
goods, and to discourage, if not proscribe, by vexatious legislation, the pro-
secution of any native industry. (4) There is also a desire to go too fast,
and to imitate European habits, laws, and modes of administration before
they are understood. It is not understood that the adoption of a statute
is insufficient to ensure its successful working, if it be one which those
brought under its operation do not understand, and are unprepared to receive.
11l I
113
XX
FIJI


Legislation, therefore, no doubt intended to benefit the body of the people,
has in many cases produced an exactly opposite result, and works in a
manner which is felt to be and really is intolerably irksome and oppressive.
4. Taxation is high, and its collection to the full amount assessed very
roughly exacted.
5. The financial position of the Government I found it impossible to
ascertain with accuracy, not from any unwillingness on the part of the
Government to afford me information, but from their own evident inability
to speak with precision as to the amount of their liabilities, and my own
want of time carefully to examine the books and accounts, which they
readily placed at my disposal. The belief of the King and his Ministers is
that they are only indebted to the extent of a few thousand pounds, but
my own impression is that they have, almost without their own knowledge,
entered into obligations to a much more considerable amount. On this
subject it is my intention to request Mr. Maudslay to make full inquiry,
and prepare a careful report.
6. The chief and indeed only European adviser of the King, the Rev.
Mr. Baker, has for the last six months been absent in New Zealand, and
was absent at the time of my visit. It certainly speaks highly for the
capacity of the Tongans, and for the hold they have taken of the customs
they have adopted, that during this time the business of the different
public offices has been conducted without interruption, and on the whole
satisfactorily, by themselves, without external aid. Only one white man,
a sort of clerk to the King’s son, David Uga, is now employed by the
Tongan Government, He is not regarded as a Minister, and occupies, in
fact as well as in rank, a completely subordinate position. The King,
however, expressed to me a strong wish to place the financial department in
the hands of a competent and trustworthy European. He would prefer an
Englishman ; but if an Englishman be unattainable, it is probable that some-
one will be supplied by the German Consul or from the firm of Godeffroy,
the latter arrangement being one which would not, I apprehend, tend to the
pecuniary advantage of the Tongan Government.
7. The chief complaint made by the white residents against the native
management of affairs related to the administration of justice ; but I am
bound to say that I found this less defective than I had anticipated.
Taking into consideration every instance of the alleged incompetency and
unfairness of the Courts brought to my knowledge, I found that these
charges, even if free from exaggeration, —which is improbable,—only went to
show that, as might have been expected, there was on the part of the
Tongan Judges and Magistrates some deficiency in their knowledge of legal
principles, and that in the attempt to decide equitably, errors of judgment
were not unfrequently made. But the faults committed were those arising
from ignorance, not from corruption ; and there appeared to be an anxious
desire to act rightly, and, on the whole, in most cases, a real satisfaction of
substantial justice. The Tongan Courts are unquestionably defective Courts,
but they contrast not unfavourably with those of some of the South
American Republics, and indeed with those of some other states of higher
pretensions.
8. Much has been done to Europeanise Tonga in external appearance.
Nukualofa, the capital, somewhat resembles a small Colonial or American
114
CHAf.
FIJI


watering-place. The King’s palace, the Government offices, the Bank, the
Courts of Justice, and the houses of some of the great Chiefs, are handsome
and substantial buildings, standing at considerable distances from each
other on the margin of a broad esplanade, which separates them from the
sea. The college, the Wesleyan Church, and the High School stand farther
inland. The population wear chiefly European clothes, and ape more or
less European manners. Horses and carriages are' in common use. The
college is presided over by a native clergyman, aided solely by native
assistants. In it some eighty youths are educated. I heard theta
examined in Euclid and algebra, in English and geography, in all which
subjects they acquitted themselves well. In other parts of the island of
Tongatabu, and, I believe, in the remainder of the group, though I can
only speak from personal knowledge as regards Yavau, the same desire to
imitate European civilisation exists, though, of course, it has not been
carried to the same extent as at Nukualofa.
9. These great changes, though including many improvements, have
not on the whole been, I think, to the advantage of the people. Even if
advisable in themselves, which may in some cases be questioned, the adoption
of new habits has been pressed with inconsiderate haste and enforced with
inconsiderate vigour. I am informed that nearly ninety per cent of the
population were last year fined or imprisoned for breaches of the sumptuary
laws as to clothing, smoking, playing at games, etc., to which I have
referred. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that the aspect of the
people should be sullen and dejected, or that a general listlessness and
apathy should everywhere appear to prevail among the lower orders of the
population.
10. The King and leading Chiefs are, however, I think, now aware that
they have been over-hasty, and in the Parliament about to be held, some of
the more obnoxious and oppressive laws will be, I trust, repealed.
To the Earl of Derby
April 27, 1878.—My Lord—l have in another despatch mentioned that
during my stay in Tonga I had daily interviews with the King. At these
interviews some of his ministers were always present, and took part in the
conversation, but the King was himself on all occasions the chief speaker,
and discussed all matters with the utmost cordiality and unreserve.
2. He is anxious that the Government of Tonga should be recognised by
England in the same manner that it has been by Germany, and with this
wish —a very natural one on his part—it would, I think, be well to comply.
Tonga has made advances in civilisation, and has established systems of govern-
ment and legal administration which fairly entitle her to such recognition.
Moreover, without some formal engagement of the nature of a Treaty with
the Tongan Government it will be impossible for the High Commissioner’s
Court, lately established by H.M. in Council, to obtain permission for the
attendance of native witnesses, or indeed for the Court to enter into the
exercise of its functions at all, without dispute, and possibly resistance, on the
part of the Tongan judicial authorities and Government. The King is, how-
ever, perfectly ready to agree to an article conferring on the High Com-
missioner’s Court the same powers as to summoning native witnesses,
115
XX
FIJI


committing them for contempt, etc., as are enjoyed by the Supreme Court of
Tonga.
3. The Tongan Government is also desirous to obtain an extradition
treaty with Fiji, it being a very common occurrence for persons accused or
convicted of crime in Tonga to steal a boat and sail over to one of the islands
of the Fiji group, where they are, of course, safe from the pursuit of Tongan
officers of justice.
I explained that it would be probably impossible to enter into such an
arrangement with regard to Fiji only, and that any agreement for extradi-
tion between England and Tonga would have to bear an international
character, although it might be understood to be limited in its practical
operation to Fiji and the other Australian colonies. Although Tonga would
be the greatest gainer by such a convention, it would not be on the other
hand useless to us, for Tonga affords refuge to not a few fugitives from justice
from home, and possibly from other colonies.
On this subject I shall, however, be able to receive your Lordship’s in-
structions on the occasion of my approaching visit to England.
4. I should wish to take advantage of the negotiation of any Convention
with Tonga to obtain from that Government the promise of a subsidy of
moderate amount, for a certain fixed period, toward the maintenance of
steam communication between Tonga and Fiji. Such a subsidy the King
informs me he is quite prepared to recommend to the Tongan Legislature,
the session of which body is held only every second year, but which is now
about to meet. As another meeting will not take place before 1880, the
King will at once propose that a vote should be taken authorising him to
incur the contemplated expenditure in the event of a Convention or Treaty
being hereafter agreed to.
5. The Tongan Government has lately appointed as “ Consul ” at Sydney
a German gentleman, Mr. C. L. Sahl, who is the manager of Messrs. Godef-
froy’s establishments in this part of the world, and is also Imperial German
Consul-General in Australasia. 1 would venture to suggest that until the
Tongan Government has been more formally recognised than has yet been
the case, its so-called consuls should not receive any exequatur or other
official acknowledgment of their position from H.M. Government.
To THE Marquess of Salisbury
April 27, 1878.—My Lord—During my recent stay in Tonga I saw
various British subjects who had, or thought they had, causes of complaint
against the Tonguese Government.
2. Most of these grievances were of a ludicrously trivial character. How
trivial, indeed, it must be almost impossible for your Lordship to imagine.
I must, however, do those who put these claims forward the justice to say
that they took in very good part my refusal to press them on the Tongan
Government.
3. In some other cases, where there was really some ground for complaint,
I found no difficulty in at once obtaining from the Tongan Government a
satisfactory arrangement of the questions at issue.
4. The only really grave matter brought to my notice was the death,
under what were deemed suspicious circumstances, of a British resident in
116
CHAP.
FIJI


Hapaii, who perished in a fire by which his house and all its contents were
destroyed. Some of the Europeans resident in Hapaii entertained a belief
that the house had been intentionally set on fire with a view to conceal the
murder of its occupant. I failed, however, to elicit a particle of evidence in
support of such a supposition. On the contrary, all the facts proved were
not only quite compatible with the accidental origin of the fire, but tended
to confirm the presumption that it was due to such a source. I have no
doubt in my own mind with respect to the matter, which had been already
investigated, and as it seemed to me very fully and fairly investigated, by
the Tongan Minister of Police, but for the more complete satisfaction of the
foreign residents I have directed Mr. Maudslay to hold a further inquiry
after his arrival in Tonga.
From the Earl of Carnarvon
Highclere Castle, Newbury, February 3, 1878. —Dear Gordon
Before this reaches you, you will have heard by telegraph to New South
Wales of my resignation. I have surrendered the seals of the Colonial Office
to my successor, and am fundus officio; but I cannot leave the department
where I have now presided for so long a time without a few words of very
friendly farewell to you. Amongst some causes of regret I have a great deal
of pleasant retrospect, and not the least pleasant part of that consists in
believing that through your energy, courage, and administrative skill the
annexation of the Fiji Islands has been already to a great extent justified by
its success. lam very much obliged to you for all the zealous co-operation
which you have given me, and for the good work that you have done.
In leaving office I have made one request, and it was that the Queen
would be pleased to mark her sense of your public services by the Grand
Cross, which I now send to you with this note. It is my last official act,
and I trust that it will be as agreeable to you as it is to me.
That is not an unpleasant letter to receive.
From Mr. G. S. Lefevre
Ascotwood Cottage, February 1, 1877. —My dear Arthur—l had
intended writing to you by the last mail but unfortunately missed the day.
I was glad to hear by your last letter that you approved my sending your
account of the campaign against the Cannibals to The Times. I think it had
an excellent effect here. It put a stop to all questions as to the expediency'
of carrying out the decision as to the cannibal chiefs which might otherwise
have been raised by some friend of the aborigines.
I don’t suppose, however, you get so much credit for putting down the
rebellion as you would have done had you made a great affair of it. If you
had sent for troops from India, entered upon a regular campaign, and spent
two millions of money, you would probably have gained great kvßos. You
would have been made a G.C.B. The officer in command would have been
made a Baronet at least. Decorations of all kinds would have been showered
about. The finances of the Islands would have been improved by the
expenditure of so much money in feeding the troops and in supporting the
1 17
XX
FIJI


war. The interest of the country would have centred in Fiji for some weeks,
and no one would have suggested that the whole thing could have been done
without employing the Imperial forces at all. As it is, you have done a
much more really important service. You have not only put down a rebellion
for a nominal cost, but you have shown how two or three Englishmen of pluck
and nerve can organise a native force to beat natives with their own weapons
and on their own ground. It is my strong impression that all the petty wars
we have with natives, in our various dependencies, ought to be dealt with in
the same way ; and that the authorities at the Cape and elsewhere should be
made to understand that they are not to expect the aid of Imperial force and
Imperial funds. I cannot also but think that both the Abyssinian and the
Ashantee wars might have been dealt with by sending a small staff of
Englishmen—of such men as Colonel Gordon and A. J. Gordon—with in-
structions to make the best of the material they could find on the spot, and
organise a force of natives against the natives.
Constance and I have spent a very quiet autumn and winter here at
Ascot, varied only by two visits to Sarsden and Tortworth. We have, I think,
much improved the cottage garden by cutting out paths in the heath, and by
felling some trees which shut out the views. We are also thinking of adding
a room at the back of the house which will be a servants’ hall. As it is, the
room which was your children’s room, on the ground-floor, serves us for this
purpose ; and I have to write in the dining-room, which I have found very
uncomfortable.
My father and mother have been wonderfully well through the winter,
perhaps on account of the very mild character of the weather. I think my
father is decidedly better than he has been at any time since his illness of
three years ago. He is very deaf, but is otherwise perfectly well. He was
eighty a few days ago. Lord Eversley, who is eighty-four, is still stronger
and more active. He wrote me word not long ago that he had been out
shooting and had killed ninety-three pheasants to his own gun. He was
always the beau ideal of an English gentleman in the opinion of poor
Charles Kingsley, whose memoirs have just come out, and which would interest
you much. Those of Commodore Goodenough are not so good as I expected.
His letters are dull, but I doubt not you would like the book on the whole.
I have been occupying myself a good deal in writing—first an address
which I delivered when presiding over the Social Science (Economic Branch)
at Liverpool, which gave me a good deal of trouble, but which I think
rewarded me for it, as it has been much approved of by the press. I have
also published an article in the Fortnightly Review on the English land system,
which appeared last month, and an article for Macmillan's Magazine of this
month, on our ships of war as compared with those of other countries.
I also delivered a long address to my constituents on the Eastern question,
which Gladstone very much approved of and requested me to publish. I did
not, however, do so, as I thought of later making another speech in continuation,
when I might publish both together. Society, as you may suppose, is most
violently Turkish in feeling. One hears of nothing but abuse of Gladstone.
Even when the Government adopted his policy (or rather when Lord
Salisbury did so at Constantinople) the abuse only became stronger. The
strange thing is that men like John Walter, who substantially differ from
Gladstone but little in views, and who think the Turks should be driven
118
CHAP.
FIJI


from Europe, are still most indignant against Gladstone. Wkat they
cannot bear is an appeal to the popular sympathy. And yet, but for
Gladstone’s appeal to the country, the Government would certainly have gone
on in the old groove, would have supported Turkey through thick and thin,
and probably have brought us to war with Russia.
I hear that the Salisburys are coming back from Constantinople with a
very strong anti-Turkish feeling, and a fixed belief that the Ottoman rule
cannot last there. They—especially Lady Salisbury—share almost equally
with Gladstone the abuse of society and of the Tory press.
lam very sorry to hear of the financial state of your colony. I don t see
what future there is for it. You must feel very much the loss of the mail
service. Ido hope you will not remain there much longer. I don t think
you are at all under obligation to do so, and I am sure the Colonial office
do not expect it. They ought to have offered you either Ceylon or Jamaica,
and I think it very hard upon you that they have given these colonies to
those so inferior to you in service and capacity.
To Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, April 30, 1878.—My dear Le Hunte—l. I entirely approve
your letter to Mr. Rooney, and have sent it on to him.
2. Don’t let Buli Nadrau be choused, if he has “ rights.”
3. I quite agree with you about the Wai ni Malans, who ought to move
out of their new town unless they obtain permission from Buli Nuyakoro.
4. Yes, I suppose you must utilize your J.P. for native courts, but I am
a good deal displeased with Heffernan, who as usual is taking ells for inches.
He wants a very tight hand always steadily kept on him.
5. We mean to leave on the 25th June. You can come down when you
like, and when you think it safe. I suppose Ratu Rovo may be left in charge
for a short time without risk ? You had best, I think, bring Heffernan down
with you—in fact I have written to him to say so.
6. Our visit to Tonga has been a very pleasant and successful one.
7. Come down as soon as you think you can, for I want to see really some-
thing of you before going.
8. Poor Knollys has lost his mother.—Yours ever.
From Mr. Carew
Natutuniba, April 17, 1878.—My Dear Sir—Your Excellency’s note of
the 3rd was duly received by me, but left unanswered until now, as you
were about leaving the group at the time. I have not had any opportunity
of seeing Adi Kuila, to ask her for the author of the report about confiscation
or sales of native lands, since I got your note on the subject. I noticed,
however, at Ban that she appeared rather cool, as though out of sorts with
me about something. She was evidently annoyed with me. I should not
like to undertake the task of writing out a draft of a circular to the natives
on the subject, for the simplest of all reasons I should not know what
to say. It is a subject requiring the gravest consideration, as any regulation
on the subject should not be altogether absolute. There would be something
absurd in not taking advantage of cases where owners have died out, or
119
XX
FIJI


nearly so. I know of cases where a few natives are claiming very large blocks
of territory in instances where they have been very numerous and powerful in
former days, but have dwindled away to next to nothing. One is the
“ Kai Narakavu’’ between Naveivatuloa and Suva, or rather Lami. Their
lands go back to the Waidina, and they themselves are only a few, a very
few, living on the coast. I don’t think other tribes should be allowed to
“tuguta” 1 lands not their own. Namosi has done so, and is now doing it
to a considerable extent. Mr. Langham is a friend of mine, but he is
injudicious,—but still, I think, a friend to your Excellency’s policy. He
merely grumbles a little, I fancy, because it is his way, and he got into it
in former times under Cakobau’s government. As you rightly surmise, lam
indeed sorry for every reason, personal and general, that you are about to
leave the colony for a while. I had, however, looked forward to such an
event as probable, but not for another year. The natives cannot go from
one chief to another, and it will cause much gloom and secret discontent in
their minds. I heard from Vaughan, who heard from Thomas Morton, that
Mr. Burness had told Ratu Isikeli that the next Governor was a half-
caste, and the Roko was asked if he intended to “tama” 2 to him. All this
is very trivial, but it shows how the chiefs are tormented by a certain class
of whites. The fact alone of the foreign appearance of the name of your
Excellency’s successor and locum tenens has given rise first to the belief that
he is a foreigner, or at least a Creole, and from that to half-caste is a natural
transition. I have read a good deal of Mr. Des Yoeux in a book brought to
the Rewa here some years ago from Natal and Mauritius by a Mr. Clarence.
It contained a history of the events prior to and during the sitting of the
Royal Commission in British Guiana. Mr. Scott is here as agent for a
number of claimants, but his manner has quite changed for the better. He
is now quiet and unassuming to a degree, and gives no trouble, but, on the
contrary, appears desirous of being as conciliatory as possible. We have
heard a considerable number of claims, but have about a dozen more to do
before leaving here, and the day after to-morrow the holidays begin. I have
afterwards to go to Ban to hear the mission claims there, but Mr. Eyre will
on leaving here go straight to Ovalau, where his services must be much
required. I cannot possibly finish this sitting of the Commission before
Saturday week. There will then be about sixty claims done. Some of them
are most troublesome ones indeed.
The natives have given their evidence in some cases very badly. One at
Verata I had to commit to Namena for a fortnight, and it has had a good
effect, and I believe but for that I could never have got on. Buli Namena
conducted himself disgracefully, committed barefaced perjury over and over
again in “ Delai Kaba,” but he came to his senses at last. I have finished
Ndbuna, the great disputed claim of Gardner’s which has given so much
trouble hitherto. There was a great deal of excitement amongst the natives
about it, and even an attempt on the part of Buli Damasanu to frighten, if
not positively to bully me in the matter. Many of the claims, perhaps
one-third, have not been surveyed, doubtless through the stubbornness of
the natives, and the difficulty Mr, Moore may have had in getting them to
show boundaries of claims of absentees.
1 Grab.
2 A form of respect.
120
CHAT.
FIJI


I have some bad claims of Gardner’s to hear to-morrow, and am very
much put out at the idea of having to stay here during the holidays doing
nothing, but will work on Saturday first, taking it as evidence from
claimants that they have no objections and are willing to abide. I am, etc.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
April 26, 1878.—Sir —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your Despatch No. 12 of the 25th February, transmitting copies of corre-
spondence between the Colonial Office and Mr. C. Mitchell on the subject of
the introduction of coolies into this colony, and I have the honour to express
my thanks for the prompt action on the part of Her Majesty’s Government
in this matter.
2, I fully recognise the understanding on which the proposal of Mr.
Mitchell has been sanctioned, and beg to assure you that not only will the
necessary protection Ordinances be passed, but also that the public Revenue
of the colony will not be called upon to bear more than one-third of the
cost of the immigration, including the back passages of the immigrants,
the remaining two-thirds being borne by the planting interest.
From Me. Lowther
February 4, 1878.—Dear Sir Arthur—l am much obliged for your letter of
December Ist calling my attention to a newspaper report of a debate in
which I took part in the House of Commons in August last relating to Fiji.
You are quite correct in your assumption that the report in question is
full of blunders throughout. The discussion took place at the end of the
session, when time (and space in the newspapers) was precious, which may
account for the more than ordinary inaccuracy displayed. Nobody, how-
ever, I imagine, takes much notice of these small details relating to an
obscure dependency of which so little is known or thought in this country,
so that I trust no harm will have resulted.
With reference to my alleged estimate of the expenses of the local war, I
observe in Hansard's Debates that my remarks are given as follows: ‘ ‘ the
item under which these expenses were included amounted to over £13,000.”
This is, of course, a very different thing from what the newspaper
represents me to have said, and is moreover perfectly accurate according to
the accounts, furnished to me by the Department, which I ought to add
has experienced no little difficulty in obtaining detailed financial information
respecting the colony of Fiji.
I must remark with reference to an observation you make to the effect
that you had hoped to have seen yourself complimented respecting the ex-
pedition in question, that while I defended the course you adopted (as a matter
of official duty as the representative of the Colonial Office in the House of
Commons), I could not have gone beyond that and expressed approval of the
selection of a civilian to take the command of warlike operations.
As you invite me to state my own view of this matter, I feel bound to say
that I looked upon it as a very dangerous course, and one which if any
disaster had occurred would have produced very great dissatisfaction, and is
moreover to my mind a precedent fraught with considerable danger. Nor
121
XX
FIJI


could I consistently have gone out of my way to pass any eulogy upon the
general administration of affairs in the colony, from which numerous com-
plaints continually reach me respecting the difficulties thrown in the way of
employers in their endeavours to obtain labour, and other details into which
I do not desire to enter now.
I write very frankly, as I am anxious not to be misunderstood, and I feel
sure you will like me to explain my views as clearly as I can.
With many thanks for your kindness in drawing my attention to these
erroneous reports, and giving me the opportunity of explaining them,
believe me, dear Sir Arthur, yours very faithfully,
JAMES LOWTHER.
To Mr. Lowther
Nasova, April 29, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have received with regret
your letter of the 4th February.
It would not be difficult to show that the whole of the different votes
borne on the supplementary estimates for the year, added together, cannot
correctly be termed an “item”; that the cost of the suppression of the
Colo disturbances had been more than once distinctly stated in my de-
spatches ; that it was the cheapness, and not the conduct, of the operations
in question for which I said I had anticipated commendation ; and that the
command of those operations was entrusted by me not to a civilian, but to
an officer of the regular array, who has been promoted and decorated for his
conduct of them. But I have no inclination to enter into a discussion,
which is unnecessary. In pointing out the error into which you had fallen,
and giving you an opportunity of correcting it, or expressing regret for a mis-
take injurious to me, I have, it seems to me, done all that is required of me.
There is, however, one sentence in your letter of which I must, I fear,
ask some further explanation. You inform me that “complaints continually
reach you concerning the difficulties thrown in the way of employers in
their endeavours to obtain labour, and other details,” and that you were
consequently unable to express approval of my general administration of the
affairs of the colony.
This, coming from an Under-Secretary of State, is a very grave statement,
and one which I venture to think distinctly entitles me to more definite
information as to the nature of the complaints which have produced so
serious an effect on your mind.
I ask for the breach of no confidence. I desire no information as to the
names of your informants, or other personal details. But I do request to
be informed as to the nature of the charges to which you refer, and to which
you have given at least such a measure of credence as to allow them to
influence your public conduct as a Minister charged with the defence of a
servant of the Crown engaged in the performance of difficult and peculiar
duties at a great distance from home.
One of these charges you have stated to be, generally, that I have “thrown
difficulties ”—(beyond, I suppose you mean, those imposed by law)—in the
way of employers seeking to obtain labour. I beg to ask, therefore, in
what manner, and in what circumstances, I am supposed to have done so ?
I know the charge to be false, and that when it is examined, it will be
found to be virtually an expression of impatience at the imposition of
122
CHAP.
FIJI


any restraints upon the practices formerly employed to obtain labour ;
practices, I may add, which you could not approve, and which you would
not defend.
I should also wish to inquire the nature of the “details” to which you
refer, and which, communicated without my knowledge to the department
in which I have the honour to serve, have contributed to leave there the
unfavourable impression indicated by your letter.
To Mr. R. S. Swanston
Nasova, May 1, 1878.—Sir —In requesting you to undertake charge of
the British Consulate at Apia until H. M. pleasure be known, I have to
convey to you the following instructions.
2. You will of course take as the general guide for your conduct the
directions contained in Lord Derby’s despatch to Mr. Liardet, No. 5 of
1876.
3. You will on all occasions endeavour to act in cordial concert with your
German and American colleagues. As regards the former of these gentlemen,
no difficulty is at all likely to arise. The interests of Germany and England
in Samoa are identical. Both desire that a stable and satisfactory government
should be established in the group. Both desire to enjoy the advantages
enjoyed by the most favoured nation, and both deprecate the assumption,
either by themselves or any other power, of exclusive privileges in or control over
the Navigators’ Islands. The experience of the past year gives reason to fear
that it may be more difficult to maintain cordial relations with the present
Consul of the United States, but no effort should be spared to accomplish this
end, or if that be unfortunately impossible, to take care no occasion can be
given to call in question your own good temper and calmness under provoca-
tion, or your fairness. You will do well, as far as possible, to avoid contro-
versy, and should it be sought to lead you into argument or to commence a
quarrel, you will, if the nature of the case possibly allows it, reply that you
have submitted the matter for ray consideration, and must meanwhile refrain
from discussion with respect to it.
4. It would be superfluous for me to give to any one so well acquainted with
the habits and character of the Samoans any detailed instructions as to the
mode in which your intercourse with the Taimua and Faipule should be
carried on. You will on all occasions treat them with courtesy and deference
as de facto rulers, so long as they remain so ; but you must at the same time
remember England—(owing to the refusal of Taimua and Faipule to entertain
any propositions for such an agreement) —has not entered into any treaty
relations with Samoa, has not formally recognised the Samoan State, and does
not admit any jurisdiction whatever on the part of the so-called Government
or Courts of Samoa over British subjects resident in the Navigators’ Islands.
5. Should the agents of any foreign power, with or without the consent of
the Taimua and Faipule, or should the Taimua and Faipule themselves,
proclaim the establishment in Samoa of a foreign protectorate or control over
the acts of the Samoan Government, or the territory of the Samoan State, you
will suspend your relations with the Government, or rather will decline to
enter into relations with the new Government thus constituted, and will at
once apply to me for further instructions.
123
XX
FIJI


6. It may be that without the establishment of a formal protectorate,
material changes may take place in the nature and formation of the local
Government. In such a case, you must exercise your own discretion as to the
continuance or discontinuance of your intercourse with the Samoan Govern-
ment, according to the nature of the changes made, nor do I think you
should suspend your relations with it in such a case, except for very serious
causes, and in concert with your German colleague.
7. Should a civil war unfortunately break out, you will concert with your
colleagues as to the measures to be taken to secure the neutrality of Apia,
and you will do your best to reconcile the two contending factions without
making yourself the partisan of either.
8. A report has reached me from San Francisco, of an intention on the part
of the Samoan authorities, or their irresponsible advisers, to impose very heavy
duties on all British or German imports, but at the same time to admit all
American goods duty free. Should this report appear to be well founded,
you will protest in very strongest manner against a measure so unjust in its
operation. In so doing, you will, I have no doubt, receive the warmest
support from the German Consul. If possible, I should wish your remon-
strances and his to be couched in identically the same language, agreed upon
after mutual conference, but in any case you will take care to make it fully
understood by the Taimua and Faipule, that any attempt on their part to
advance so inadmissible a pretension may be attended with the gravest
consequences.
9. You will find that numerous claims preferred by British subjects
against the Samoan Government have been examined and probably reported
on by Mr. Maudslay. Should any still remain, you will deal with them in
accordance with the principles laid down in a memorandum by Chief-Justice
Gorrie, which you will find in the archives of the Consulate, and will adopt
the same rules *by which Mr. Maudslay’s decisions have been guided.
Before making any demand on the Samoan Government with respect to
these claims, you will submit your report on them to me for confirma-
tion.
10. I have to request your special attention to the subject of Immigrant
Labour.
Under the provisions of the Polynesian Protection Acts 1872 and 1875, you
are authorised to issue licences to British subjects to recruit and convey
Polynesian labour. But it is evident that the framers of the Act did not
contemplate the case of the Polynesians so recruited being employed
in places where, whilst employed, they would not be under the protection
of local legislation ; and your powers are consequently extremely limited as
regards ill-usage of labourers by an employer, of breach of contract with them
on his part. It is consequently doubly necessary that you should exercise
the most careful vigilance with regard to the issue of licences in the first
instance.
11. Should I, in the present despatch, have failed to notice any point with
respect to which you desire instructions from me, it can be hardly necessary
for me to say, that I shall at all times be ready to reply to the best of my
ability to any question put by you, and to offer my advice on any subject
with respect to which you may desire it.
124
CHAP.
FIJI


To Mr. Heffernan
Nasova, May 1, 1878.—My dear Heffernan—l have to thank you for
your inquiries into the Burness business. I think Filimoni’s evidence is
tolerably conclusive, but it may be doubtful whether he would repeat it
before a more formal tribunal.
But whilst I am much obliged to you for the efficient manner in which
you have performed the duty I entrusted to you, I cannot say that I
am by any means pleased with the remainder of your letter. I gave you no
instructions to revise the proceedings of the Commission I had appointed to
investigate the state of matters in Raki Raki; and if you have expressed in
the province the opinions you have expressed to me, or have allowed them
to be perceived—and I know you too well to think that you can have
altogether concealed them, —you will, I fear, have done much to unsettle the
minds of the people of the district, and increase the existing uncertainty as
to who really does speak the mind of the Government.
Moreover, I think you appear a little to mistake the position you occupy.
I am, of course, very glad to receive private letters from you on any subject
and at any time, but your appointment is that of assistant to the Chief
Interpreter and Commissioner, and your official reports should be addressed
to the head of your department, and reach me through him.
As you are already aware, I have a very good opinion of your abilities,
and a strong personal liking for yourself. The manner in which you
perform any service entrusted to you has always been such as to deserve my
thanks. It is, therefore, with the more vexation that I perceive your
inclination to put your finger into pies of other folks’ making, which
constantly prevents me from employing you as I should otherwise like
to do.
Don’t, however, misunderstand this. It is quite right that you should
state your opinions freely and frankly to the head of your department, and,
if necessary, to me. What I object to is action in any matter with respect
to which you have not been directed to act, and the communication to me
of views different from those on which the Government has been acting,
without a similar communication to your immediate chief.
I have asked Le Hunte to come down here to see me before I leave, and
I shall be glad if you will accompany him. I wish to say a few words to all
the public officers I can assemble before I go.
P.S. —I was quite aware that men had been sent for to protect the Roko
Tui and Wilkinson, and quite approved of it.
From Mr. Carew
Navuso, April 30, 1878.—My dear Sir—l arrived here from Bau late on
Saturday night. Yesterday I went out into the bush with local natives to
endeavour to fix Parr’s boundary, the “head or source of the Wai Manu.” I
shall send a report in immediately upon my arrival at Nakorovatu, and I
leave for there immediately. Messrs. Scott and Hutter for the Bank of New
Zealand, and Mr. Parr respectively were present this morning at the taking of
evidence in the matter, and also accompanied us into the bush. I have had
125
XX
FIJI


a deal of trouble and delay during this sitting of the Commission, as about
twenty claims were totally unsurveyed, but I shall endeavour to send in clear
reports as soon as I can spare time to do so. The weather has been bad for
some time, and the river flooded and roads very muddy.
Adi Kuila has informed me that the person who told her the lands were
going to be taken from the natives and handed over to the whites was Mr.
Gottlieb Storck, an overseer on Parr’s plantation, who pointed out in con-
firmation that Mr. Parr had already purchased lands from the Government.
Also, Adi Kuila was near Gardner’s place whilst the last Commission was
sitting at Natutuniba. She visited Gardner’s in company with Sarah, the
half-caste wife of a Mr. Stoltz, when Mrs. G. told her her husband had lately
returned from “ Yavalagi,” and had heard all that was going to be done.
The natives were to be gradually driven back into the mountains, and put on
reserves. She also showed me your letter at Bau, after keeping it a secret for
a long time. Trusting you have enjoyed your late journey to Tonga, I am, etc.
Friday , May 3.—Got Swanston off this morning. He was
hardly out of the harbour before letters arrived from Samoa
from Maudslay, begging he might not be sent! It was too
late now to do anything in that line, but I wrote a hasty letter,
and sent it by Swanston, catching up the schooner with
Wilkinson’s boat. In afternoon went down to a big “ tiqa ”
match at Voma, which was particularly picturesque and pretty.
From Mr. Maudslay
British Consulate, Apia, Samoa, April 16, 1878.— My dear Sir— l
have chartered a vessel on her way to Auckland to stop at Fiji and deliver my
letters ; and before I go any further 1 must explain to you that I have done
so at my own expense, and shall not ask for any repayment without you tell
me that such a step is advisable.
The real reason for doing so is that I have received letters from Sydney
by the Mahattan (which arrived here to-day), dated the 14th March, which
tell me that Swanston has accepted the offer you made him of this Consulate,
and I am in hopes that this letter will reach you before he has left Fiji for
Samoa, for if any other arrangement can be made with Swanston, lam going
to ask you to let me stay here at least for some months ; and I will now tell
you all I can of the why I don’t wish to leave. To begin with, I think you
arrived here at a time and under such circumstances that you were led to take
too unfavourable a view of our position and influence with the natives, and it
it is not very easy to explain to you why I take a more favourable view of
matters.
The present Government are not strong, and their influence is decreasing.
They have, no doubt, members from every district in Samoa, but they do not
in the least represent the feelings of the people, and many of them are clinging
to office because they are persons of no rank and know that should the Govern-
ment break up they will sink into obscurity again ; and they hang on to their
promise from America as their last hope. No man-of-war has arrived, and
I am very doubtful whether Griffin had any real information that one was
126
CHAP.
FIJI


coming. In the meantime the treaty, as given in the American papers, has
been published here (both in English and Samoan), and does not give much
satisfaction to the natives. And lam inclined to think that the Government
are beginning to feel that they have incurred a useless expenditure in sending
Mamea to America, and will have some difficulty in raising the money, as
the mission is not generally approved of. And the people have also w r oken up
to the fact that they refused a sound and sensible treaty from you in favour
of a one-sided convention with America. Woods, Hetherington, and Co.
have no doubt hopes of forming a Government; but they have to count upon
two events—one, the continued support and co-operation of Clay, the repre-
sentative of the Polynesia Land Company ; and the other, the consent of the
natives, or at least the support of the present Government.
Clay’s land claims, on account of which the whole affair is being worked, are
very extensive and very vague : they amount to some four hundred thousand
acres of land!! The only good titles he possesses (to some few thousand acres)
are in the hands of the London Missionary Society, and will not be given up
until the money advanced to Colley, Stewart, and Co., for which they are held
as security, is repaid. Most of the remaining claims are merely vague promises,
and even the documents on which they are founded are not in Clay’s hands.
Where they are I don’t exactly know, but they can only be got at through
Foster, the late U.S. Consul, and Weber, who is working hard against the
Company, has taken good care to have Foster shipped off to Borneo or some such
place (at which Woods is furious). And Coe, on whom they depend much as
interpreter and general go-between, is both in Weber’s debt and pay, and,
Weber tells me, is also likely to take a trip to foreign parts ifjhe is at all
troublesome. In fact, Weber has the whip hand of them, and is undoubtedly
the real power in the place.
I have a strong suspicion that the Company’s land documents are in his
safe. In addition to all this, I believe that Clay is only playing with Woods.
He ingeniously left him here to make surveys, etc., under the impression
that he was to draw £SO a month from Parker the storekeeper, as salary.
Woods soon found out his mistake ; no funds were forthcoming. On the other
point, I hear from Houston, who is living with him, that Woods is very much
disheartened himself about his influence with the Government, and this is
confirmed from other information. Prichard, who is a scatter-brained fellow,
but who knows the natives, tells me that a paper is already drawn out by the
Government asking me to have Woods and Hetherington removed from
Samoa, the charges being their misrepresentations of your designs when here,
abuse, false statements, etc. These charges may not be strong, as they would
no doubt count more on your personal feeling in the matter than your sense of
justice, but they show which way the wind is blowing.
Steinburger might come back, but could hardly do so with any support
from the American Government, and although he would have a certain
following amongst the natives, the whites would be dead against him.
Griffin is most anxious to get away. He is a man of no strength, and
is merely a tool in the hands of others ; he has no money, and is living on
subscriptions from the natives, and is heartily sick of the place—l know this
for certain. Griffin’s failure to prevent the enforcement of the Barracouta
fine, and his continual calls on the Government for money, have lost him all
the influence he ever possessed. Weber is the real power in the place ; but
127
XX
FIJI


although the natives feel this and respect him, he is not popular amongst them,
and they have no love for Germany. Weber is of course adverse to any foreign
annexation, as Godeffroys are doing a good business, and every year annexation
is deferred gives them a better title to their lands ; and in the meantime they are
well able to take care of themselves. And if annexation again cropped up, I
have no doubt he would try and stop it;. but I notice he is taking great pains to
settle his disputes with natives about land titles and to survey his purchases.
The matter upon which all native political action really depends is the
“ King question.” All the whites whose opinion is worth having agree about
this ; and the present Government are as much divided about it as the rest
of the country, but the Malietoa party is by far the stronger. All the Puletua
are for him, half the present Government, and the greater part of the people ;
and the Malietoa party is strongly British. The strength of the Tupua party
is in Atua (south-east end of Upolu). The Tupua family is divided in itself,
there being three or four claimants to the chieftainship. The R.C. Mission
back the Tupuas, but they cannot hope to succeed, and would, I think, accept
a compromise, if they were sure that Malietoa would reign over the provinces
which now adhere to him. I say advisedly reign, and not govern, because
they do not seem to care much about his fitness for kingship, and only seem
to want the Malietoa family to be the acknowledged head. The Puletua have
been sent back to their homes, and a fine imposed on them. The Chiefs paid
the fine at once, so as to ensure freedom of action ; but I don’t believe the
people have any intention of paying, and are merely biding their time to turn
upon the present Government. One would think that the Government would
try and conciliate, and at least leave the King question alone ; but all the best
authorities tell me it is sure to turn up soon ; that they cannot leave the matter
alone ; and that directly the Malietoa party get the upper hand, as they seem
bound to do, proposals of annexation will be offered. But the Samoans are
much slower in taking action than the Fijians, and it may be some months
before anything is done. The Puletua and their Malietoa friends, however,
are hard at work talking it over. My reception by the natives has been quiet,
but very friendly, and very much will depend on the way in which they are
handled.
Now there is the other side of the question to look at. The country is
in a most miserable, lawless state. My few attempts to get justice done by
inducing the native judges to try native offenders (against whites) have been
most miserable failures. In one case, the judge begged the accused, out of
friendship to himself, to accept a judgment and pay a fine, and the accused
walked out of court saying he would sooner die first, and has never paid a
penny. In another case, the judge asked the accused if he had ever been told
by the elders of his town that what he did was wrong; this the accused
admitted, and the judge replied, ‘‘ Then I forgive you.” I have full reports of
these cases, made by the natives themselves. The favourite mode of trial is
ordeal by oath: they swear the whole of a neighbourhood to find out the
perpetrator of a theft —that is when one can wake them up to seeing about
an offence at all. That there will be a disgraceful disturbance here some day
soon if the white landowners and planters do not get some protection against
native thieves, I am quite sure. The Germans, who, as I say, have large
estates and a number of foreign labourers to protect them, generally take the
law into their own hands and flog or paint with coal-tar any natives they
128
CHAP.
FIJI


catch stealing. I have not been able to do much towards investigating
British claims, and I own I feel very great difficulty in coming to any decision.
Planters must of course take the risk of losing property when they settle in
uncivilised countries, and cannot expect to have everything they lose made
good to them; but the Government here will neither punish offenders nor grant
compensation to the sufferers, and when they appeal to me I can do nothing
but tell the Government that I hold them responsible in the matter, and must
demand an indemnity if justice is not done to the Englishman.
The affair may be very small indeed, only the stealing of a few nuts, and
it would be absurd merely to charge the Government with their value, and
they deserve to be fined because they have refused to investigate the case.
On the other hand, it may be the robbery of all the produce of a plantation,
and it seems scarcely fair to hold them responsible for the whole of the damage,
which may have been done by a few unruly youths. The fault of the Govern-
ment is equal in either case —their refusal or inability to investigate and
punish when any charge is made before them. And the effect upon natives
and whites is equally bad. The natives, finding they can rob with impunity,
are becoming daily more troublesome. And the whites, knowing that the
only punishment we can inflict on natives is to fine them, don’t take half
trouble enough about securing their property, trusting that on the advent of
a man-of-war they will be paid the value of the crop or other property stolen
and receive some additional compensation, which will be levied as a punish-
ment to the natives. This state of affairs cannot continue for ever and must
induce foreign interference, and the game of playing one power against another
must be nearly played out. No foreign nation can accept the responsibility
of settling foreign indemnities without some security that the laws they
recommend will be properly carried out. In the American treaty there is no
appearance of accepting such a responsibility ; they know England won’t do
it; and there is no fear of them asking Germany to protect them. Weber
always talks about the natives requiring the whip and the sword for some
years, and I am sure his rule would be a very severe one if he got the chance
of ruling them, and this in spite of his being really a very kind-hearted man ;
but there is a want of sympathy between him and the natives, of which the
latter appear very conscious.
I hope I have said enough to show that American influence is not much
to be feared at present; but it would revive considerably if Mamea returns in
an American man-of-war with plenty of money to back him, and a Captain
who is not afraid of making promises, and the treaty would be signed by the
Government without any consideration of the wishes or opinions of the people
—but, thank goodness, six months’ notice ends the treaty, and I don’t think
the American revival would last long. If Mamea arrives in a trading vessel,
the treaty is doomed. With the members of the Government themselves I
have little personal acquaintance, and it is only through whites that I can
find out what they are up to. The English-speaking Government officials
are so thoroughly untrustworthy that I dare not believe anything they tell
me, and if I speak to any of the others through an interpreter, it excites
general attention. I therefore leave them alone, and with some satisfaction, as
I feel that no efforts of mine in that direction could improve on the turn
matters are taking without my interference.
And now about Swanston —I have written this because I believe you offered
111 K
129
XX
FIJI


liim the appointment, not out of any particular regard for his good qualities,
but because you considered him well fitted to fight most likely a losing battle
against a lot of unprincipled adventurers.
I have not liked to ask questions about Swanston’s previous position here,
but I consider these the chief objections to his appointment. He is looked on
with great distrust by the London Missionary Society, and they would never
work with him satisfactorily ; his native connections would tell against him
even with the natives ; he would never be able to smoke his pipe and drink
his gin-and-water alone ; and there is hardly a respectable man in the place
for him to associate with—at least (from what I know of him) that he would
care to associate with. I can’t help thinking the place would be full of
temptations to him, bad white society and any quantity of drink ; and, in
addition, he has land claims,
I do not wish to stay here out of any liking for Apia, for I find the place
uninteresting, and my life, apart from my work, a very dull one. Living, too,
is very expensive, everything is much dearer than in Fiji, and I cannot get
boatmen to pull under a dollar a day apiece, their food, and liquor. It is very
seldom that a native at Apia can be got to do any work at half-a-dollar a day,
a dollar a day is the usual wage, and, with expensive house and living, one’s
salary would soon disappear. The house, too, is in a bad situation, and I have
to send a mile for good drinking-water. It is true that I have not seen much
of either people or country outside Apia, but I am sure that in neither is there
the variety that interests one in Fiji. In the matter of salary I would gladly
accept any terms you propose, should it be necessary to give Swanston more
than you otherwise would, in order to get him to go to Tonga or elsewhere ;
and I feel sure you will not think I write this because I wish to vaunt my own
abilities, for if it were merely the ordinary duties of Consul and Deputy Com-
missioner that were to be fulfilled, I am well aware that Swanston has much
more experience and would do the work probably much better than I should ;
but I do not think that I attach more importance than you do to what I
suppose I may call the political part of the work, and for this I think Swanston
is peculiarly unqualified, considering the present state of affairs. Le Hunte
would be the best man for the place if he could be spared, and he would have
the advantage which I myself feel tells so much both with natives and whites,
—that of coming from England and being in your confidence, and connected
with you in the Government of Fiji. I can’t tell you what an advantage this
is when every moment comparisons are being made between affairs here and
the new state of affairs in Fiji. Dr. Turner, I find, seepas to have been
stupidly shy of giving you his opinion of native affairs when you were here ;
so, finding how very decided his opinion is, I have asked him to write fully to
you in continuation of his former correspondence. As you told me, I find
him a very disappointing man, but we are on very good terms ; and his ardour
for annexation, which was damped by Liardet’s failures, seems to have fired
up again, and he certainly understands native politics well. The vessel in
which I had hoped to send this letter would not call at Fiji under £2OO ! so
I had to give up the idea.
From Mr. Maudslay
Saleailua, Sayaii, April 1878 (Easter Monday). — l have now come
on here to the west end of Savaii, in order to catch the Active, which leaves
130
CHAP.
FIJI


here in a few days for Auckland with copra. And at the same time I intend
to investigate Cornwall’s case—l mean the charge against him of ill-treating
his labourers, I fear it is a very disgraceful affair altogether, and unfor-
tunately the overseer, who appears to be a fiend, is not a British subject, so
I cannot deal with him as Deputy Commissioner, and Griffin is not likely to
move in the matter ; but I will send you a full account before the vessel leaves,
if possible. I hope to induce the captain of the Active to go vid Fiji.
The navigation of this part of the coast of Savaii is very dangerous in
open boats. For thirty miles there is an iron-bound coast with only two
places where it is possible to run a boat in, and these passages are so bad
that my crew refused to attempt them ; so, as the weather looked bad, I left
my boat at Satapailea and walked here. The road is level, but awfully rough
walking—loose, sharp volcanic rock crossed by roots of trees and overgrown
with ferns. At the end of yesterday’s walk, about twenty miles, my shoes,
which were new, were cut to pieces. In thirty miles I only crossed one river,
and that a little larger than the Bureta river. There was not another
stream all along the coast. I don’t see how much can be made of this part of
the land, as the ground is covered with rocks, and wells would have to be
sunk a great depth to get good water. lam altogether disappointed with
the capabilities of the country, the land is everywhere so rocky, and water
is so scarce. There are very few places I have as yet seen where it would
be possible to grow sugar, but coco-nuts and cotton do very well, and I have
no doubt that coffee or any other plant which does not require continually
replanting would succeed, for when once a plant gets hold of the ground
the growth seems to be rapid. The towns here are large, but there is very
little native cultivation ; coco-nuts and bread-fruit, however, are plentiful, and
the natives are good fishermen. Since writing the above I have had some
talk with a Frenchman who lives here and trades for Godeffroy, by name De
Yere ; he speaks English very well indeed, and I heard a good character given
him by Mr. Austin the Wesleyan missionary. He confirms the complaints
made by others about the harsh treatment Cornwall’s labourers experience.
Of course, he is a rival trader, and likely to make the worst of it; but he seems
to me to be far above the average of traders, and I am inclined to trust him.
I was in the middle of taking the statement of a native teacher here, when
Cornwall, who arrived here last night, came in. I had some conversation
with him, and he says that there is no truth in the accusation, and asks for
the fullest investigation ; so I have arranged to hold an inquiry at Lata, his
plantation, about four miles distant, to-morrow morning. And I want to
point out to you how very difficult my position is in these matters. To
begin with, there is a land dispute, which is at the bottom of much of the
trouble on this plantation. I feel sure that it would take me some weeks to
settle it satisfactorily.
Most of the difficulties here arise through land sales, and when people
come to me with complaints of having their coco-nuts and bread-fruit stolen,
I always have a suspicion that the land was not fairly acquired ; and if I am
to go into the land question first, the work before me would be more than
any one man could do. Then in the matter of foreign labourers, the Poly-
nesian Act is most particular about recruiting, but gives no power whatever
to deal with labourers and their masters when once they are landed ; and even
if Cornwall’s estate is in the worst conceivable condition, I cannot move a
131
XX
FIJI


single labourer off it, and should have some difficulty in preventing him
getting any more, as he could employ foreign vessels to bring them.
If the Government were more stable, I should like to start a sort of Com-
mission with their assistance finally to settle the English land claims ; but
I much doubt if it could be arranged just at present, and I should want
a Vice-Consul to stay at Apia to attend to the shipping during my
absence.
I forgot to tell you that on Friday, the day I left Apia, I heard from Houston
that Woods had induced Griffin to call a meeting of the Taimua and Faipule
for Saturday, to demand the payment of the American claims, and also the
payment of the money advanced for Mamea’s expenses and other sums
advanced to them, in which Woods was interested. In fact, Woods is getting
frightened that he will never see his money again, and I suppose is hard up.
Nothing could happen better for English influence ; I only hope he presses
his claims. I had hoped to have got back as far as Taaga to-morrow after
the inquiry at Lata, but the Active is still rolling about outside the reef with
no wind to get to her anchorage, so I must return here to-morrow. I had a
walk this afternoon through the prettiest bit of forest I have yet seen. The
coast along here seems to be very thickly peopled, and the villages are much
more picturesque than any I have seen here before.
April 24.—1 had a hard day’s work yesterday at Lata. Three men, 7 children,
and 11 women have died since November. No doubt they were in a very bad
state when they arrived, but 21 out of about 130 is fearful. I will write you a
full report as soon as I have my papers, etc., in order. I have given Cornwall
verbally some directions, and intend to write him a letter as soon as possible,
insisting on certain improvements being made. lam afraid the result of my
interference has been to make him hostile to English influence in Samoa, and
he told me he now understood how it was that the planters were ruined in Fiji,
and some more nonsense of that sort. But I think he is sensible enough to
see, when he comes down, that annexation does not mean freedom to disregard
the welfare of his labourers.
I have fifteen miles’ walk before me this afternoon, so I cannot write any
more. Only one thing I want to put clearly to you, that I only wish to stay
here if I may try and bring about annexation, —or rather, if I am not to
throw cold water upon any wish of the Samoans to become British, for it
is no use to try and force annexation ; but with very little encouragement it
will, I think, be offered without any pressure on my part. I only want per-
mission not to discourage it. I have written a line to Lady Gordon and
asked her to see about the postage of some letters I send with this. I shall
be delighted when I get a letter from you.
From the Rev. Dr. Turner
Apia, Samoa, April 18, 1878.— Your Excellency—Mr. Maudslay has
informed me that he is going to try to get the Active to call at Fiji on her
way to Auckland, so this gives me a chance of writing a few lines. Samoan
affairs are pretty much in statu quo , except that the Puletua are all being
taken home. All the males have been fined |lO each, but whether they will
ever pay is a question. They have till next March for all to be paid up.
The U.S. warship has not arrived yet, and many begin to think that she is
132
CHAP.
FIJI


not likely to come at all. The contract with America has been printed in
Samoa and circulated.
The Chiefs are very anxious to get copies, and many of them begin to think
that the whole affair is a swindle, and to regret their refusing to accept the
treaty you proposed. The King question has not been again raised, but I
have recently seen both of the Malietoas, and they both believe that it will not
be long before they are again in power. Old Malietoa was again reminding
me that their family had all along been in favour of union with Britain, and
he said that when they again get the upper hand all will be well. Mr.
Maudslay is respected and well-liked by all. lam sure he will soon have a
great deal of influence with the Chiefs.
Many a time do I wish that w T e had had him here last year instead of
Liardet. If he had been here all would have been plain sailing, and you
would have received a very different petition and reception w r hen you came
here. I trust you will be able to make his stay extend over some months at
least. He is the very man that is wanted for Samoa at the present time.
The German ship-of-war has not yet arrived, but Mr. Weber scarcely expects
her before May. I need not add more, as Mr. Maudslay will have given
your Excellency all particulars.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Fort Carnarvon, May 2, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have nothing to tell
you. I am “kilt” after writing up all my three mails, and making out
coast returns of all sorts. The number of books kept in the Yuda office
would please the most exacting inspector of official documents, but they
are a prodigious bore to have to keep when one wants the time for other
things. I flatter myself my coast office will match any other Stipendiary
Magistrate’s in point of registers.
Nakarasa is spending a jovial evening here. All my news is in the
official letters. I “floored” the Kennedys, senior and junior; the old one
began to stand on his dignity, but a cross-examination respecting certain
illegal matters brought him down to a very low level, and finally he “ caved
in.” (This slang is the effect of sending me to a Yankee storekeeper
and messmate ! He is a good man, but cannot spell his own name, so to
speak.) —Yours sincerely, G. Kuthyen Le Hunte.
There are about 100 logs of sandalwood (so Langton computed)—l
don’t think there are more than forty, but all good ones—at Nawaka,
awaiting your order. When I heard that you had left for Tonga, I stopped
the shipment until further orders from you. If the Government buy it,
they would save freight by the steamer by sending round a vessel for
it whenever one may happen to be near enough to Nadi to make it worth
while.
The new road to Ba is a failure. We must get a new track. Horses
could not last long on it. The new house at Bukuia is very nice, and the
view from it lovely.
One more Avord about the sandalwood. The Government ought to buy
it, or else, if given away by the “taukeis” 1 to people “ kerekere ” 2 -ing it,
1 Landowners. 2 Begging.
133
XX
FIJI


two evils will arise—first, they will think themselves “ done” in the matter,
and second, it will open the door to a ceaseless flood of “kerekere.”
The Government should actually buy it, and hand the price to the
“taukeis” (not to the Nadi people, but to Eatu Nemani’s towns of Nasolo
and Korokula). I don’t think they quite understand the “placing to the
credit of the district taxes ” as well as we do !
My letter is like a young lady’s in one respect—all the news is in the
postscript.
The Roko gave me an enormous turtle at Ba. It got up here and was
cooked to-day. I wish you had been here to give me the pleasure of giving
you a new “ sevu ” 1 of Colo.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, May 7, 1878.’—My dear Gorrie —I have had a good laugh over
your idea of Burness being “a friend of the natives.” The story is a very
long one, and I did not think it necessary to inflict it upon you, my only
object in sending the paper being to show you the style of his language.
Briefly, however, I may say that Nakorowaiwai was a town destroyed by
the Government in 1872. I fully considered the matter brought before me last
year as to whether this town should be rebuilt, as I had ordered some others
to be, and decided that it was not to be so rebuilt, and gave orders to the
Roko accordingly. Tom Burness then told the people that he would re-
place them, rebuild Korowaiwai, and give it a chief. This he proceeded to
begin to do. I ordered the houses to be pulled down, which they were.
Burness went through the farce of buying the materials on the ground
from the housebuilders, and then ordered them to be put up again, saying
they were now his houses, which no one would dare to touch. In this he
found he was mistaken ; and then helped to get up the agitation (which led
to results which might have been very dangerous) against the provincial
authorities.
His land claims are quite another affair, though somewhat “mixed” in
these statements.
The labour matter is no new affair, but Eastgate read the Ordinance in
the most extraordinary way imaginable, completely misunderstanding the
exemptions of section 8.
Of course Blyth dismissed the crab-stealing cases.—Yours ever.
To the Chief-Justice
Nasova, May 7, 1878.—My dear Gorrie—One word more as to Burness.
His main reason for trying to rebuild Nakorowaiwai was because I had
forbidden it. His speech as to Nasova was all bounce, if ever made at all.
His secondary reason was that Nabolewaye, the Chief of Nakorowaiwai, is
his principal decoy duck for labour and in his pay, and a town under him
promised to be very convenient for many uses.
I am afraid you have not got rid of the old radical superstition, that a
man who is cheeky to “ aristocrats,”—chiefs and such like,—is necessarily a
patriot and a philanthropist.
Shall I send the boat for you to-morrow I—Yours ever.
1 First-fruits.
134
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Le Hunte
Colo, May 7, 1878.—My dear Sir—Your letter of the Ist reached me
via Wai-ni-Mala last night.
I hope to be with you the end of next week. I shall leave for Nadi next
Wednesday week to catch the steamer which should be due on the Thursday
(to make sure, I will write to Nadi).
2. I am so glad you approved of my letter to Rooney.
3. Wai-ni-Mala people—l shall leave the matter alone till I have time
to work it properly.
4. Heffeman— I am, I believe, more to blame than he, in the matter of
ells and inches. At the same time, I am very thankful for your caution
respecting him. I enclose a letter from him, which no doubt is true. I
was just about going to Nadroga when your letter came. I shall not now
go, for there is not anything besides the enclosed on hand of any import-
ance. I should not get another good chance of going soon to you (two of
the boats from Ba are not running now), and if I went this week I should
only get two days to settle Woodruff and Ratu Rovo at work, and to do
some district matters which have to be attended to. This would hurry
things into leaving them half-cooked, which is not desirable. I think
besides that Heffeman could, if not wanted elsewhere, be very properly
employed by the Provincial Department in holding an inquiry (such as he
held at Raki Raki) into this Vatulele affair. If he went to Yatulele, people
would tell him probably more truth than they tell me ; besides, I cannot
extract information from them as he can. It would also place both the
Roko and myself in a rather awkward position. If he has lied, which is
not impossible, it will be disagreeable for both of us, and if not, I shall
appear to him as continually hunting up grievances, which is not my line,
though Heffeman rather likes it, I believe. Besides, the Provincial Depart-
ment should do their own dirty work. When the case comes into the form
of a complaint I shall hear it in Court in the usual way. I think Heffeman
could manage it very well. If he is to be here while I am away, I shall
leave the A. N. Constabulary to Ratu Rovo and Woodruff.
Sandalwood —will be shipped and brought by the steamer. lam afraid
of its not being in time for you otherwise. You will like to take some of
it away perhaps ; if I only ship part, the rest will go to “ kerekere.”
I am so glad that your visit to Tonga was a success.
My father writes in absolute horror that Mr. Malcolm of Colonial Office
reputation has dyed his hair a “deep purply black” (they are old friends).
Saturday , May 11.—Legislative Council at 10. Read a
good deal of the Immigration Ordinance. At 11.45 went
down to Cawaci and saw native athletic sports. Had never
before seen native wrestling, which was rather good. The
whole scene pretty and lively. The (Lorries, Seeds, and Webb
there. Hurdle race. On our way home we were thirty-eight
in the barge, including crew. On arriving, dressed, resumed
Council, finished the Immigration Ordinance, and went to dinner
(the Council dined here). After dinner held Executive Council
on Land Claims, which lasted till 2 A.M.
135
XX
FIJI


To Mr. Cave
Nasova, May 15, 1878.—My dear Sir—Since you were here this morn-
ing I have looked for, and found, the note in which you inform me, in reply
to my inquiry whether you would accept a seat in the Legislative Council,
that you have “pleasure in placing your services at my disposition.” This
note is, I perceive, dated April 25th, 1877.
I have never received any intimation that you had withdrawn this offer
of your services, and in the absence of any such notice I naturally con-
sidered that you were pledged to accept the seat in Council, which lon my
part felt myself pledged, by an honourable understanding, at a fit and
proper time to offer.
I regret that I should not sooner have received intelligence of the change
in your wishes on this subject, and whilst I am glad to learn from you that
your business has so increased as to make it difficult for you to find time for
legislative duties, I cannot but also regret that you, and those in your
position, should hesitate to sacrifice a few hours occasionally to the transac-
tion of the affairs of the colony.
From Mr. Carew
Nakorovatu, Colo, May 13, 1878. —My dear Sir—l have received your
note of the 4th inst., and am pleased at your reception by the Tongans. I
did not think much of the Samoans when they were at Navuso—one spoke
English, but entirely like a Yankee —using the word Sir very often, and did
not convey a nice impression. We shall be ready for your Excellency’s visit
any time during June, but I should like to have notice beforehand, as it will
take three or four days to get word to the tribes and have them here to meet
you upon your arrival. With reference to the Suva report, I never dreamt
that anything in the way of history was wanted ; I supposed the whole affair
was settled, but that lands would be granted to lona fide occupiers. I know
that was ray impression, and I hurried through them as much as I could. I
now send a batch of Tailevu reports—thirty-nine in all—to date. There are
four or five left which require more evidence ; they are chiefly mission claims.
I have now in hand ten claims which have either been returned to me or
which require more evidence. I shall endeavour to get them done as soon
possible. I see by the newspaper that your Excellency has been advanced in
the Order of St. Michael and St. George, and I beg to offer my earnest and
sincere congratulations. —I am, etc.
From Mr. Carew
Nakorovatu, May 15, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have just received your
note of the 10th inst. Your previous one I answered upon receipt, and you
will doubtless have mine in return by this time. I have watched Mr. Parr
and the planting from its first inception. I quite saw for the past six months
or more that he was working for an excuse for not putting up a large mill, or
perhaps any at all. lam very much afraid that the coffee will not do. Mr.
Shave has lately commenced telling people that he would not have chosen
such a site, too close to the sea, etc. The holes are dug in clay, and filled up
136
CHAP.
FIJI


by scraping the thin covering of soil or vegetable mould into them. The coffee
is thus planted in clay pots, as it were. lam afraid we shall have a second
edition of the Suva Mill and plantation affair, which will do the colony an
immense deal of injury. I shall await your note when to meet you at Navuso.
The flat Joske has applied for I have often wnndered has escaped so long.
It is a large “ vuci,” 1 which it has been said could not be drained ; but I knew
better, and always held my tongue about it. Young Joske has been to look
at Davis’s land, and thus seen it.
I am very sorry you should think it proper to send these applications
for land to me. I quite dread them, and the thought alone causes me to
feel quite nervous. lam so afraid of the effect on the mind of the natives.
Unless they get the money (and even then) they will say, “Here is an
insidious beginning of stripping us of our lands.”
They will believe every word they hear of being put on reserves. They
are so averse to selling lands, even where they receive the money consideration.
I hardly know what to think of it. They have a great amount of land
more than they require. The population is but two-thirds of that ten
years ago.
Some understanding should be got at with the natives as soon as possible.
But I know this ; —if one shilling of the purchase is kept back, no matter
on what grounds, they will say they have been robbed, —whether called
“survey fees,” or “costs of grant,” or by any other name.
To Lord Selborne
Nasova, May 16, 1878. —My dear Selborne—lf all is well, we hope to
be in England before the end of August. I have obtained leave of absence,
partly for the sake of taking my family home, and partly to arrive at more
definite understanding than seems obtainable through correspondence, as to
the policy by which the Colonial Office desires the administration of affairs
here to be governed.
Two conflicting views are held by those in Downing Street. One —which
is that of Lord Carnarvon, and, less strongly, of Herbert—is that the interests
of the natives ought always to be considered, and their rights, under all
circumstances, respected. The other, which seems to be held by Lowther,
Malcolm, Meade, and others, is that natives have no rights, and that, though
their interests should be regarded, yet if any —even the most important —
interest of the natives is opposed to any —even the slightest—interest of the
settlers—(“tends in any way to retard progress,” is the favourite phrase),—
it must necessarily be set aside.
Either view is maintainable by argument, and might fairly be adopted by
the Government, but it should be clearly understood which it is that is to
prevail.
Of the results of the former policy I,have no doubts whatever, and I think
I may point to what has been done during the last three years, notwithstand-
ing the great difficulties caused by the want of proper men to carry out the
work, and the want of money to procure them, as affording some ground for
my confidence in its success.
1 Marsh land.
137
XX
FIJI


Of the results of the opposite policy I entertain as little doubt. It must
inevitably lead to the infliction, under legal forms, of much unmerited hard-
ship, and the commission of much substantial injustice. It will as certainly
cause the entire sweeping off of the native race here as they have been swept
off elsewhere; a result not otherwise in my opinion the least necessarily
involved in the assumption of sovereignty by us, and due in a very great
degree, in many of the cases where it has happened, not to “ manifest destiny,”
or any intention to be unjust, but to blundering legislation and administration,
the mistakes of which were due chiefly to want of imagination, and an in-
capacity to realise the existing social condition of the people. Though not
equally certain, it is in a very high degree probable, that another result of
the policy I have indicated would be a native war, which would undoubtedly
be tedious and costly, and the justice of which would be very questionable.
Nor would it be quite so light and easy an affair as might perhaps be imagined ;
New Zealand is so very much larger than Fiji, that few people realise the fact
—even if they have ever heard it —that the native population of Fiji is, even
now since the measles, just three times as numerous as that of New Zealand.
Had Lord Carnarvon remained in office, I should have no doubt as to the
opinion which would prevail. I know nothing of his successor ; and until Ido
so, lam not without apprehensions. What do you hear or know of him ?
You will, I think, be pleased by Lord Carnarvon’s farewell letter, of which I
enclose a copy.
I have written all this about my own affairs, and not said a word as to the
state of things in Europe. It is not from want of interest in it. I cannot
describe the fear and pain—almost amounting to physical pain—with which
I look at the probable future. For I have quite lost heart; and bearing in
mind the far greater ease with which a Prime Minister, who wishes to make
war, can make it, than a Prime Minister, who wishes to keep peace, can keep
it, I think it too likely that Lord Beaconsfield will accomplish his heart’s
desire. My only hope now is founded on Salisbury’s acceptance of the
Foreign Office, for surely he cannot be willing to aid the Turks ! And yet
my recollections of Robert Cecil tell me that, if Lord Salisbury be the same
man that he was, it would not be wise to build on this foundation. We are
here still in suspense —a suspense which with you is over, and which will also,
I suppose, be over for us on the arrival of the next mail.
There seems to be a lull in the Ecclesiastical storm. Whether this is the
result of a general compliance with the Privy Council judgment, or an
unwillingness to institute prosecutions under it, I have not heard. It would
be interesting to know.
I have seen with regret the telegram announcing the death of the Bishop
of Lichfield.
With kindest regards to Lady Selborne, to whom Rachael, did she know
I was writing, would, I know, ask me to send her love.—l remain, yours
affectionately.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Bua, May 17, 1878,— Dear Sir—Your Excellency’s note came duly to hand
by Mr. Swayne. I spoke to the Roko Tui Tailevu about the apprentices
before I left, and thinking it most likely to bring the thing to an issue
quickest by telling him to communicate with R. T. Dreketi by saying “our
138
CHAP.
FIJI


carpenters are ready, send yours that they may go together,” so that I hope
there will not be much more delay.
I confess I am sorry Heffernan has been obliged to be sent back to Colo.
Tui Bua is entirely in favour of a small gathering at the Bose. The only
preparation going on here is the erection of houses, and some of them are very
fine erections.
Loma Loma and Lekeba were said to be in a state of war or rebellion,
‘ ‘ viribai, ” or fencing !!
The Commission commenced its sittings to-day in good earnest. The
most of the forenoon was taken up by my examination, and the Roko Tui was
called upon ; but after he was sworn in, an objection was raised to other natives
being present, as some probably might be called as witnesses in particular
cases, —which I felt it my duty to oppose, not but that I fully admit the force
of the argument, but I submitted it was manifestly unfair that the white
claimants should be present so that they could take advantage of all that bad
been or would be said, which would be certain to expose the weak points of
their several claims. They had had the advantage already of hearing all I had
said, but no native had, as nothing that I had said was translated. I urged
also the very bad impression the course would produce upon the native mind
if all were now ordered to retire, and the whites were left to hear. The
Commission were divided, so the examination proceeded, but it was soon found
impossible to confine the chief to general statements without his quoting
particulars, as illustrations. So his examination had to be abandoned, clearly
enough at a loss to the native interest, and the Executive will not have before
them many things which may be of value and importance in those cases
which will be disputed. It would, however, have been a very great mistake
had the natives been requested to withdraw.
From the three cases got through, it does not appear there will be much
time lost in getting through Bua proper, before the chief will have to leave
for Levuka ; but I fear I may not be able to get away much before, but will
leave as soon as practicable. —I beg to remain your Excellency’s most sincere
and humble servant.
From Mr. Thurston
May 20, 1878, 7 p.m. —My dear Sir—Since my return from town I have
copied out my rough extract from the 1877 Cash Book (made yesterday)
after verifying it carefully—and the result is, I value the present post of
Receiver-General at £I4OO per annum. When I said £I6OO this morning
I forgot, speaking on the spur of the moment, to deduct the £2OO given in
February 1877, and which of course was a special, and not a continual
“refresher.”
I have also made confidential inquiries, and I am convinced that the
Attorney-General’s post is worth quite £IOOO, i.e. salary and private practice.
With regard to Dr. M‘Gregor, I am quite sure, as you say, that he might,
from his professional ability, command a salary equal, or approaching that
which he enjoys now. This I believe he would do if he held an official
appointment. If he were set down outside of an official sphere, many men
with half his skill and experience would command a larger practice.
With regard to Mr. Garrick. He never held a brief in his life until 1
made him Attorney-General to the old Government, and it is the opinion of
139
XX
FIJI


his friends with whom he studied that he (I quote young Barley’s words to
me) couldn’t earn £3 a week in Sydney or Melbourne.
It is this that I confess rather wrings my withers. What Dr. M‘Gregor
may receive does not affect me. I like him very well, though he is not my
very particular friend ; but that Mr. Garrick should have been confirmed
in his appointment at £IOOO per annum is not a fact that it is pleasant for
me to consider daily.
I know the difficulty and anxiety that accompanies the effort to make a
Treasury draft for 20s. discharge a Governmental liability of £2 :10s., and
after all your personal kindness to me it would ill become me to add to
your worries in this respect. If therefore I have said anything that I ought
not to have said, I very much regret it, and ask you to believe that, in
putting these matters before you, I only do so for the purpose of suggesting
reasons why the Colonial Office should confirm my appointment, and give
to my office an adequate salary, instead of one equal only to the salaries and
fees of the Registrar of the Supreme Court, and less than the Superintend-
ent of Police of 1876.
In addition to my other duties, special and general, it ought, I think
not to be forgotten that I have all along done half the duties of the
Receiver - General, not only in the collection of revenue, but until very
lately in keeping the books of that department intelligible.
Yet, after all this, and, as I have on more than one occasion ventured to
submit, my early claim to a graceful and generous consideration from the
Crown, I am holding my post at a loss, and my colleagues are adding field
to field, and lending money (derived from salary and emoluments) at 12
per cent.
I am very sensible of your Excellency’s good intentions with regard to
my official security, and I cannot think that any Secretary of State would,
after your Excellency’s representations, refuse to relieve me from the false
aspersions that were by certain persons made upon my character, and to
place my office in a proper position with regard to the matter touched upon.
If I -were certain of my future, I should take immediate steps to relieve
myself of my quasi position as a planter, but as it is I am bound to guard
my point d'appui, though to do so exhausts my strength. In short, I am
somewhat in the position—to put it in another vein—of the man in the
jungle who held a Bengal tiger by the tail, and could not tell whether to
hold on or let go.
Lady Gordon to Mrs. Ryan
Fiji, May 22, 1878. — This I hope will be my very last
letter to you from Fiji. We have been very busy packing and
preparing for the new people nearly all this month, and we
have been in a great state of mess and confusion, for the smell
of rotten thatch became so intolerable that it was decided that
the centre part of the house (where all the bedrooms are) must
be shingled, and the whole of the thatch has been taken away.
As it was not lined, one room after another had to be exposed
140
CHAP.
FIJI


to rain, etc., bit by bit as it was done, and we all but me had
to give up our rooms one by one. (My room has a slight ceiling.)
It took a fortnight’s hard work, five men nailing it on, and
about fifteen more carrying away thatch, etc., and then, of
course, a tremendous cleaning up followed, and the next thing
is to get the rooms ready for the Des Yoeux. Mr. Maudslay
and Mr. Le Hunte are also daily expected, so we shall be very
full. Preparations are also making for the Queen’s Birthday
dinner (forty-five persons), so Abbey has his hands full.
I begin to feel the want of a change very much. It is
fifteen months since I have been out of Levuka, and I have
not been feeling well lately—always tired and good for nothing
—and the least exertion knocks me up. My daily ride is the
only thing which keeps me alive ! At the same time I almost
dread paying visits and going among people again. After
living so long shut up in this extreme seclusion, one feels so
behindhand and out of anything that is going on.
May 27. —I meant this to have been a long letter, but I
have not had time to go on with it. The Des Yoeux have
arrived, and we are charmed with them both, and they have
such a charming boy of two. He is very strong, and very
taking, clever, and sensible—quite a little dear. It will make
our last month really very pleasant. It is so long since I have
had a lady to talk to !
I must end this, for I have a good many letters to write,
and I find the mail closes earlier than I thought. I just sent
Jack over to the office to ask, and his answer is “ Herficially , it
closes at four, but Arthur says you may go on all night! ”
To Capt. Moore, R.N.
Nasova, May 28, 1878. —My dear Moore—l am afraid I cannot altogether
pass over your breach of the Quarantine Law. We know by sad experience
from the Dido that a man-of-war can carry infection just as well as a trader.
You are not a stranger in the group, and if you did not know, you certainly
ought to have known, that to land anywhere in the group without having
received pratique at a port of entry was to subject yourself to a heavy
penalty.
If I were to admit the plea of ignorance in your case, it would be difficult
to refuse to do so when it was urged by masters of vessels less well known
in the group. Nor can I attribute more weight to the inconvenience of
going to Loma Loma. No doubt it is inconvenient, not only in your case,
but in that qf everj r vessel desiring in the first instance to call at some
other island. I wish the inconvenience could be dispensed with, but am
convinced that it is a necessary precaution to preserve the people of these
islands from destruction.
141
XX
FIJI


As is explained in my official letter, it is not I who have to take any
steps to “cause any action to be instituted.” The law provides for that,
quite independently. I need do nothing to 11 cause an action to be
brought ” ; but to prevent its being brought I should have to take active
steps to prohibit the officers of justice from obeying the provisions of the
law. This lam sure I ought not to do, and you must forgive me for saying
I will not do.
But your convenience shall be consulted in every way as to the time
when it may suit you to appear to answer the charge ; and when a convic-
tion has been obtained (and of course you will not dispute it) you will not
find me indisposed to remit the penalty.
Nothing can be more proper than your letter on the subject, and personally
I should be very glad to let you off. But though I may do so substantially ,
i.e. as regards tine, I cannot with propriety do so formally, i.e. as regards
conviction. Unluckily, too, those windward islands are just our weak
point, where we expect infection to be introduced by canoes from Tonga ; and
as we always take up the Tongan canoes, and fine them for breaking
quarantine when they do so, I am afraid there would be a strong feeling of
injustice experienced if the Magistrate said nothing to you.
From Capt. Moore, R.N.
H.M.S. Alacrity, Loma Loma, June 3, 1878.—Your Excellency—l beg
to acknowledge your Excellency’s kind letter of 28th ult. Strange as such
an admission may appear to your Excellency, I was not aware of the Quar-
antine Law, though I had the Ordinance on board. Never thinking I
should have occasion to use it, the paper was laid by and not looked into
until too late. The impropriety of landing at the different islands before
Loma Loma never occurred to me (or to any of us) until reminded of it on
our arrival. I thought only of the time to be saved.
I am very sensible of your Excellency’s courtesy in consulting my con-
venience as to the time I shall answer to the charge, and in promising to
remit the penalty on application.
The fine weather we have lately experienced having enabled us to get
our work into a very forward state, I am quite able to leave the surveying
ground for Levuka on 21st June.
Mrs. Moore will, I am sure, be only too glad to avail herself of the kind
invitation of your Excellency, Lady Gordon, and Mr. and Mrs. Des Yoeux, if
she comes up in the next steamer, which I believe she will. But she will
arrive under the impression that she is going into lodgings, and be very
much surprised at being offered the hospitality of Nasova, knowing that your
Excellency is on the point of going away.
I beg to remain, your Excellency, yours most obediently.
To Mr. Swanston
June 6 1878.—Sir—I enclose for your information a copy of the treaty
lately concluded between the U.S. of America and the Government of Samoa.
2. I have to direct your attention to one singular, and, as it appears to
me unprecedented, peculiarity in this transaction.
3 You will observe that the treaty is said to have been ratified by the
Samoan plenipotentiary on the 11th Feb. 1878. The usual course is for a
142
CHAP.
FIJI


treaty to be negotiated and signed by plenipotentiaries of the contracting
powers, and for their acts to be ratified or disavowed by those on whose
behalf the treaty was made. In this case the treaty purports to be one
between the U.S. of America and the Government of Samoa. The President and
Senate of the U.S. have ratified the act of their minister ; but on the part of
Samoa, the ratification is not that of the Government of Samoa, but simply
that of the plenipotentiary himself who signed the treaty, a manifest
absurdity.
4. You will call the attention of the Government of Samoa to this peculiarity,
and will enquire whether Le Mamea received any authority to ratify his own
act, and if this enquiry is answered in the affirmative, you will request a copy of
the instrument so authorising him, before admitting the validity of the treaty
itself. If the answer is in the negative, you will point out how derogatory
to the dignity and independence of the Samoan Government has been the
act of their agent.
5. You will also enquire whether it is intended by the Samoan Government
to extend to English and German subjects and vessels the same privileges as
have been accorded to those of the U.S. ? Should you learn that these privi-
leges are intended to be exclusive, you will inform the Samoan Government
that you have reason to suppose that H.M. Government will not view with
indifference the grant of privileges so manifestly injurious to British
commerce in these seas.
6. You will communicate these instructions to your German colleague, and
will endeavour if possible to act in concert with him in any representations
which may be made to the Samoan Government with respect to the topics
touched on in this despatch.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Friday, 7.6.1878. —Soon after your Excellency left this morning I pre-
sented to Eoko Tui Ra the “Ai vakananutni,” 1 and with which he was. highly
pleased and very grateful, evidently regarding it as a very special mark of
your Excellency’s confidence and favour. During conversation with him on
various matters, the question of the marriage came up, and from that I have
ventured to take a very great liberty, and which I hope your Excellency will
regard as pardonable,—not that I ought to claim any right to do so. It was
to present one of the rings to Roko Tui Tailevu instead of Roko Tui Bua. It
would be only a waste of time to give here the fifty reasons and arguments
that passed through my mind for and against, before I decided to take such
liberty with your Excellency’s instructions, and I still feel anything but
happy about the matter. From what I gathered from Isikeli I knew there
was a delicate and rather difficult piece of work to be done, and I felt con-
vinced that the present would greatly assist and do real good ; and I thought,
sir, if you had been here you would have approved of the course. And if I
have committed an offence or grave impropriety, I must crave your Excellency’s
indulgence. The present was most gratefully received by the Roko Tui, and
I saw pleased him exceedingly. Our interview was a very long one, and the
whole thing was both unpleasant and difficult. The issue has not been what I
should have liked ; but it has this. Things are now clear and put straightfor-
1 Mark of friendship : in this case a ring.
143
XX
FIJI


ward between him and Roko Tui Lan, whom he requested me to see, and explain
many things, and deliver the message that he wished to put the marriage off
for the present. Roko Tui Lau, who I found was very much put out about the
whole affair, accepted the explanations ; and while he would really have pre-
ferred an answer in the negative altogether, it was now on a clear footing, and
as one Chief ought to communicate with another, much of which had not
been all right, he could see now. And it is very evident that the Togans of
Draiba took too warm and active a part in the affair at first, and hastened
what I feel sure would have been brought about if left to a more natural
course. Ratu Epeli was (after the question was fully opened) most candid,
and I believe sincere ; but I felt it would have been unwise to have done more
than state to him the three questions your Excellency wished me to lay before
him, and which he thoroughly understood and regarded as another evidence
of your Excellency’s deep and true concern for their best interests both as
individuals and Chiefs. While lam not pleased with the issue, still I think
some good has been done, and it is not at all unlikely I may hear more of the
matter before all separate. Ratu Epeli gave as the reason why he wished a
postponement was that a very small objection in his mind kept starting up,
so that while he felt it was his great mind to marry the girl, yet there was
this little one starting up which showed all his mind was not towards her.
And I think he is sincere.
The interview Mr. Des Yceux had with the Chiefs this afternoon was all
that could be desired, and I find has given them considerable assurance that
they are likely to be well cared for during your Excellency’s absence.
Maafu wished me to mention one thing in connection with what your
Excellency said in re Land question. It appears in every instance and under
all kinds of pretences the lessees of his lands try to refuse to pay the rents
regularly ; but the special reason given is that they don’t know how soon the
Government may take the rents, and they might be called upon to repay
what has been already paid. He asks if he could not have a letter from the
Colonial Secretary which he could show to them that he has full right and
authority to receive such rents. And this appears to me would meet the
case, and relieve him from very considerable annoyance and vexation.
Saturday. —Very early this morning Rokos Tui Ra and Ba came to see me,
amongst other matters, in reference to the marriage case ; and for very strong
reasons urge that Ratu Epeli is bound in all honour as a chief to marry the
young lady—that he having gone so far, it is no longer a matter in which he
must follow his own inclinations entirely ; that not only on the score of
example, but from rank and position, every chief in the group is concerned in
his action, and especially out of consideration for Maafu’s feelings and position.
They urged that I should again see Ratu Epeli and lay their views before him,
and at once communicate with Tui Lau, which I consented to do, I confess
with some reluctance, and asked Maafu to delay his sailing till the afternoon ;
but he said he was satisfied to leave the matter, and a communication from
either Ratu Epeli or myself would put the matter right with him, that is, if
any change took place.
In the afternoon I went down to Naikorokoro and saw Ratu Epeli, when
he told me that the feeling in his mind was he ought, on account of your
Excellency, on Maafu’s account also, to give a more definite reply, that while
he knew a mistake had been made by too much being made of the whole
144
CHAP.
FIJI


affair, he was responsible, and has now promised to see me again or write me
his final decision in the matter on Monday or before he leaves.
After the subject of the wedding or no wedding had been disposed of
this morning, Roko Tui Ba remaining behind, I saw he had something to
communicate, and after considerable hesitation, and extracting a promise
that what he had to say I would only regard as from a friend, he told me
that Heffernan when there (at Sagunu) had talked in a very strange way
about the “Ra business,” and put such questions to him as had greatly
disquieted his mind, and led him to think very strange things about the
conduct of Government matters and Government officers. One of his state-
ments was something as follows “ Heffernan said, ‘Look here, Ratu
Yuki, you know me and I know you. We know each other well, don’t we ?
And I know all of you engaged at the trial at Navolau. I know the tone of
each of you. Tell me the truth between ourselves—Did you or did you not
believe in and fully indorse all that was done and written ? Roko Tui Ba said
—“I looked at him for a time. I think I saw his object, but he did not think
I did; but I feared him, and said, this is no true friend before me. I will not
try him, but tell the truth at once, and he will stop. I said all we did I
endorse, and fully believe that Roko Williami meant mischief—evil which
would have far exceeded the evil you put down in Colo. He ceased ; I think
he saw I was annoyed; but my disquiet did not leave me for many days, and
I felt our (Fijians) helplessness if such men have authority amongst us.”
Of course I had to tell him that I must not, dared not, hide such a thing
from your Excellency. He said, “Then I pray of you don’t report (officially).
Tell the Governor as I have told you. You don’t know Heffernan as well as
we do, and how he can serve us out for repeating such a matter. Not that
I either fear inquiry or am ashamed of what has been done, but I must think
of the future, ” Of course I could see the force of what he said, as well as the
great, yea, absolute necessity there is for the chief to have the fullest con-
fidence, in all and everything, towards your Excellency, and at all times
without reserve. I assured him that I would represent the matter just as he
desired, and he might feel assured that whatever your Excellency thought,
any action taken would be with due regard to every interest and feeling con-
cerned. I saw also that but for a feeling of trust and confidence the thing
would never have come out; but would have been brooded over, very seriously
affecting his conduct under similar circumstances, and with a less independent
or intelligent mind than Ratu Yuki’s the consequence must of necessity be
very much more serious.
As your Excellency will conceive, this has left me in anything but a happy
frame of mind. In fact, looking at the whole question and the work to be
done, I feel in despair, and it requires something more than the human to
keep me at my post and duty. It is well, perhaps, that Heffernan is not
here ; but I feel I must tell him very plainly what I think of such conduct,
and the course I shall pursue towards him or any one else acting so in the
future—of course in such a way as will shelter or preserve the chief’s con-
fidence in future, etc. Fearing your Excellency may not be back before we
leave, I have named the matter to Mr. Le Hunte (to him alone), and asked him
to explain the whole position more clearly than I can possibly do here. But,
Sir, I submit the matter to your Excellency, and reiterate what I have often
said before, that I have far more fear of real evil arising out of the unauthorised
HI L
145
XX
FIJI


wandering about and meddling of officials and those connected with the
Government than I have from anything that outsiders can say or do. A
native error or mistake is easily rectified as a rule : but not so a statement
made or an impression produced by meddling irresponsible officials in their
intercourse with the people.
Monday. —l am exceedingly pleased to be able to inform your Excellency
that Roko Tui Tailevu came to-day and confided to me his “true mind,” and
wished me to inform your Excellency that he is determined to consummate
the marriage with the Togan lady ; but wishes the matter to be kept strictly
quiet for the present—in fact that the impression that the match is broken
off should not be removed. He will convey his determination to Maafu him-
self, and ask him that the wedding shall come off at the Bua Bose Yaka
Turaga. But the only hope that he has of being able to live at peace at Bau
is that they should suppose it is all at an end, and will do as he has said, if
nothing in the meantime arises to break it off.
The Yunivalu is here. He came up to lunch at Nasova to-day. I think
he is sorry at not being here at the Tatau, but very pleased that your
Excellency naqunuvtd Mr. Des Yceux. He blames the letter (invitation) for
his being late, but thinks Tui Cakau’s absence very reprehensible and
unbecoming. lam very sorry that I may not see him before we leave. If I
do not, I think I will call there on my return from Toga, if possible ; or visit
the province as soon after as practicable. The whole time is spent with the
hundred and one things that each Roko Tui requires to be attended to.
Rokos Tui Dreketi, Nadroga, and Namosi have left. I confess that there is
much in the conduct of the first I am pleased with this time.
I asked Roko Tui Ba to be present while I gave R. T. Maeuata a little
friendly admonition and advice, with, I think, very good effect.
lam thankful to say that lam very much better to-day. R. T. Bua, Dr.
Brewer, and Mr. Johnston were examined on one of the Bua disputed land
claims, —Nukuseva.
Wednesday. —l am glad to be able to say, Sir, that Isikelihas successfully
made peace with the Yunivalu in re his supposed wrong and hasty marriage,
and all are now friends again. The Yunivalu has sent Joe to me to say he
wishes an alteration or addition made to his will, so have promised to see
him as soon to-morrow as possible.
I am beginning to fear we will leave before your Excellency s return,
Heffernan is°here, and I shall seek an opportunity to speak to him and try
to put him on the right track.
Speech to Planters
His Excellency said that before taking leave of those assembled he
wished to say a few words, and they should be but a few. It was exactly
three years ago that day that he first landed in Fiji, and to those who had
enabled him to accomplish what had been done during those three years he
desired, before quitting the Colony, to return his thanks. First, he wished
to thank the whole body of settlers for the ready aid which he had generally
received from them, and which, when the condition of the Colony at the
time of his arrival was remembered, was, he thought, in the highest degree
creditable to them. Of course he did not mean to say that they had not
exercised the wholesome English privilege of grumbling, but it had been
146
CHAP.
FIJI


exercised in a fair and moderate spirit without any want of respect or courtesy,
never or seldom degenerating into spite or malevolence. If in a very few
instances it had done so, they had, he was sure, been properly appreciated
by the bulk of the community. His thanks were next due to an individual
—the Yunivalu Cakobau. If, on ceasing to reign, Cakobau had cherished
any ill-will towards the new order of things, or had even given way to a
feeling of sullenness, it would have been in his power to cause the Government
very considerable trouble and annoyance ; had he merely passively held aloof
from affairs, embarrassment would probably have followed. But from the
first day of British rule up to this moment the cordial co-operation of the
Yunivalu had never been wanting, and his efforts to render the new order
of things intelligible and palatable to his people had been unceasing. It
was but just that this should be publicly acknowledged. To the subordinate
members of the Civil Service he also begged to express his thanks. Some
of course had been more and some less efficient, but as a whole they merited
his gratitude, and deserved the expression of his satisfaction. There were,
however, three gentlemen whose services he wished especially to mention.
They were Mr. Smart, Mr, Eyre, and Mr. Cocks —all these gentlemen were
overworked and underpaid, and he feared the expression of his thanks and
his recognition of their services was but a poor reward for their arduous toil.
Another and a better reward was, perhaps, to be found in the consciousness
that by their services they had contributed in no slight degree to place the
Colony in its present position, and secure the accomplishment of what had
been effected. His Excellency wished also to mention Mr. Langford, whose
duties as Chief Clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s Office and Clerk of the
Council had been performed with an exactness and celerity which demanded
his commendation and had earned his confidence. Of the higher branches
of the Service it would be invidious to speak. Were he to mention names it
might appear to some that a reflection was intended to be cast on those not
so specified. There, too, some were of course more efficient than others, but
he thought that all those who worked in the spirit to which he had referred,
not perfunctorily, but for the sake of doing well the work they had to do,
were perfectly well aware that he knew and recognised their services, and was
grateful for them. One exception he would make, however. He should be
ashamed not to acknowledge the invaluable assistance which he had received
from the Colonial Secretary, whose great abilities and indefatigable industry
had been unremittingly devoted to the service of the Colony. The sensitive
independence of the Bench would be alarmed were the Governor to express
himself as obliged to a Judge, but as a member of the Legislative Council
and a friend he trusted the Chief-Justice would accept his thanks for much
efficient help.
He had spoken of the occasional grumbles which had issued from settlers,
and wished to say that as regarded one subject he thought they had fair and
legitimate grounds for dissatisfaction. He meant the delay in the issue of
Crown Grants for the portions of land allowed by the Governor in Council.
He deeply regretted this delay, arising, he was going to say from causes not
under his control, but that was, perhaps, not altogether so, and he was
prepared to take his fair share of blame.
In the complaint made that the investigation of titles had been dilatory
he could not altogether concur. It was, perhaps, not known to them that
147
XX
FIJI


between 800 and 900 separate applications had been considered and dealt
with by the Governor in Council. When they remembered that the in-
vestigation of each one of these cases required deliberate thought and care,
they would better appreciate his assurance that there had been no undue
delay in this respect. There was one more thing he wished to say before
bidding them farewell. He thought this Colony had before it a great future.
Its resources were not more considerable, perhaps, than those of some other
tropical colonies, but it had advantages of position and extent which, if
properly developed, could not fail to ensure its prosperity. Such develop-
ment depended of course mainly but not altogether upon their own energy.
To ensure the healthy condition of things in the immediate future, he believed
something else was requisite. “You will not, lam sure,” said His Excellency,
“resent the free expression of my opinion any more than I do the free
expression of yours, and I am bound to say that I think the ultimate and
lasting prosperity of the Colony depends very largely on the policy pursued
towards the native population. The treatment of native races by settlers is
not a brighter or more creditable page in our own history than in that of
other nations. We have here the opportunity of acting in another spirit,
and of achieving a different result. If we follow the example of those great
masters in the art of government, the citizens of ancient Rome, and permit
those who have come under our sway to develop in their own way and after
their own fashion the civilisation that suits them, we shall do wisely and
well. But if we attempt to erect that most odious of all aristocracies, an
aristocracy of colour ; —if at all times and in all circumstances native interests
are to give way to the convenience or interest of the settler; —if we regard
the native occupants of the soil as those whom it is our right, and almost
our duty, to oust and dispossess ; —if we look on them as mere instruments
of servile toil to contribute to our own aggrandisement and profit, then I fear
that sooner or later we shall feel the ill results of our own acts.
“There is no lesson in history more clear than that the commission of a
social wrong, slowly or swiftly, but in all cases surely, works mischief to
those by whom it has been committed, and this by the inevitable operation
of fixed natural laws. I say by the operation of fixed natural laws, but
which are not the less on that account also the eternal laws of Him who
hath said that ‘the Lord God of recompenses will surely requite.’
“And now, I bid you farewell. In doing so I will reply to a question
which has more than once been directly or indirectly put to me, as to the
probability of my return. I will answer that question plainly. The chances
of life forbid us to reckon on the future, but it is undoubtedly my intention
not to abandon the work I have begun. It is no secret that, before I came
here, posts of higher emolument and in a social sense more desirable, were at
my disposal. It was by my own deliberate will and choice that I undertook
the task of organising this new Colony. I did so, knowing full well that, as
a distinguished man has lately written to me,. the work was one in itself
great, but 1 absolutely certain to be almost unknown, and altogether under-
estimated and misunderstood, and therefore well Avorth doing. Having
undertaken it in this spirit, it is not to be supposed that I should be otherwise
than reluctant to leave it uncompleted. The responsibilities which I have
assumed have not been lightly or carelessly undertaken. They will not be
lightly or carelessly relinquished,”
148
CHAP,
FIJI


Reply to Address of Legislative Council
I am deeply gratified to learn from the very kind and cordial address
which has just been read, that in the performance of the duties of my post
I have earned your approval. I am, however, painfully conscious that com-
paratively little of what I had desired and hoped to accomplish has been
effected by me, and that any exertions on my part to perform the task allotted
to me fall very far short of your indulgent estimate of them.
Thanks to your co-operation, many laws of great utility have already been
enacted, but you will not, I trust, permit the contemplation of what has been
already done, to divert your attention from many matters which still call
urgently for notice. Among them I may mention the preparation of a
Customs Ordinance—the consideration of the as yet untouched question of
Education—the adoption of measures for the due protection of the Crown
Forests, the Water Supply of the Colony, and [for the preservation and
development of the valuable beche-de-mer and turtle fisheries—measures
which may now be easily effected ; but which if delayed may hereafter be
found difficult of accomplishment. These, with others which I will not now
pause to enumerate, may well occupy your attention during the period of
my absence.
That period I do not intend at the utmost to exceed a year, and although
the chances and uncertainties of life render idle all confident expectation of
future events, it is in the hope and with the purpose of meeting here again
that I now bid you farewell, as I trust but for a time.
During the last six weeks of my stay in Fiji my journal was
very ill kept, and the entries for the most part brief and frag-
mentary. A few of them, however, are inserted as giving some
picture of our life at that time.
Sunday , May 19. —Showery day, with intervals of sunshine.
In the morning we went to our own pretty little church in
Levuka, but in the afternoon I only crossed the rara to attend
service at the Armed Native Constabulary’s “Bure.” Our
“ military ” chaplain, Seteveni, preached on Galatians iv. 5. It
was a simple and good sermon under three heads: (1) The
necessity of good works; (2) their nature; (3) an exhortation
to earnestness in them.
I rather enjoy these services. The Bure, the A.N.C. barrack,
is an ordinary Fijian house, with the usual high-pitched roof,
supported on fine wooden posts running down the centre of the
room. The men, in their full dress, sit cross-legged in rows,
facing the minister. Knollys and I sit (also cross-legged) just
inside the door, one of the men bringing my small tabu kaisi mat
for my seat. The men are very quiet and attentive, and when
prayer-time arrives, throw their bodies forward, without un-
crossing their legs, till their noses touch the mats, while Seteveni,
whose long white sulu reaches to his feet, goes down in the
149
XX
FIJI


attitude of a sitting dog, supporting himself on the palms of his
hands, and in that posture utters his prayer, resuming, however,
an erect position for the sermon and hymns. The whole thing
is quiet, devotional, decorous, and yet unconventional.
Thursday , May 23.—Des Yoeux arrived this morning in the
Wentworth. He has brought with him Mrs. Des Yoeux and a
baby, but no secretary or A.D.C., which may prove awkward.
I sent the barge to meet them, had a guard of honour turned
out to greet them on landing, and received them on the pier.
Mrs. Des Yoeux seems very nice indeed, and the child “ Poppie ”
is a two-year-old of great size and boldness.
Friday , May 24 {Queen's Birthday). —Gave a big dinner to all
the officials, the Mayor, and the members of the Chambers of
Commerce and Agriculture. Fifty people ! —pretty well for Fiji!
It had been admirably arranged by Knollys and Abbey, and all
went off capitally. I drank Des Yoeux’s health, with a few
laudatory words of introduction. He was very unwell, and I
was afraid he would not be able to appear at the dinner, which
would have been unfortunate, as it would have been sure to be
misunderstood.
During the next week Des Yoeux did not get much better.
He seemed thoroughly upset by his long voyage, from the effects
of which he did not easily recover.
I got through a great deal of work meanwhile. The Native
Regulation Board met, and we passed some useful measures. The
Executive Council, too, sat almost continuously, to consider
reports on land claims and to decide them. We used to meet
an hour or two before dinner. The members of the Council
dined with me, and after dinner we resumed our work, carrying
it on often till the small hours of the morning.
The first week of June I spent on the upper waters of the
Rewa, and up the Wai ni Mala. Both in going and returning
I stopped a night at Andi Kuila’s big house at Navuso, and was,
as usual, struck by its stateliness and repose. Though only a
big barn, its interior is singularly dignified. Notwithstanding
the number of retainers about, there is a silence and orderliness
which would do credit to a court. In quietness and dignity
the Fijians far exceed any other semi-civilised race with which I
am acquainted. We took the barge up the river as far as it
would go—a little above Yiria—and then took to canoes.
Nakorovatu is picturesquely situated on a bluff at the junction
of the Wai ni Mala with the Rewa. The view from it of the
great range of mountains in the interior, seen over a plain, backed
by low wood-covered hills, is very beautiful. Carew has a very
150
CHAP.
FIJI


good house, and a fine one has been built for my meeting with
the chiefs. One day, we walked up the Wai ni Mala to Na
Eukuruku, and from thence ascended the river for some distance
in a canoe. The scenery all the way very attractive and varied.
In the woods we passed a good many kauri trees—that strange
conifer which does not look the least like a conifer. We came
down again the whole way to Nakorovatu by water.
The following day I held a meeting of the chiefs of Soloira,
Matai Lombau, and the Wai ni Mala. It was a large meeting,
though not so picturesque as many which I have seen. I made
the usual sort of speech, but dwelling specially on the land
question. In the evening, after yaqona, I spoke to the Bulis
and each chief separately, lecturing on my favourite five points
and rubbing them well in. l
The next morning we were off at daylight, down the river
again, and reached Navuso at sunset. We slept again at Andi
Kuila’s house, and the next day went home, stopping half an
hour at Navuloa en route to say good-bye to Fison, who, though
rather a wind-bag, certainly knows more of native law, customs,
and belief, than any of his missionary colleagues.
The three weeks which passed between my return and our
leaving Fiji were weeks of high pressure. I had a gathering of
planters and made them a farewell speech, which is given above.
Two days before I sailed, I assembled the Eoko Tuis to bid them
farewell. We had a solemn yaqona drinking at night in the
Bure, and I handed the bowl to Des Yoeux and thus “buli”
(drank him in) as Kovana Vakatawa. Eatu Ezekeli made a
farewell speech on behalf of the Eokos, which, as usual with his
speeches, was a really eloquent one.
Here are the two last entries in my diary before leaving
Nasova:—
Tuesday , June 25.—Went early in the morning with Carew
and Le Hunte to Cawaci to settle, if possible, with Wilson about
the native town on his land. Ido not wish it to be removed,
but in my own mind I came to the conclusion, though I did not
say so, that the right is on his side, and that, if he insists, it
must go. I strongly recommended a compromise, but found
both parties very obstinate. Cawaci is a beautiful spot —one of
the most lovely in this lovely island of Ovalau. The entrance
1 The five points were : (1) To see that the towns were kept clean and neat
and none but good houses built. (2) To see that the roads were kept open
and new roads made. (3) To see that the children went to school. (4) To
see that plenty of food was planted. (5) That the Bose vaku Tikina were
regularly held.
151
XX
FIJI


to the native town through a cleft in a great baka tree is
wonderfully picturesque. Got back rather late for breakfast.
After breakfast, saw Langham and Webb about Rotumah—in
the very highest degree unsatisfactory. 1
The Legislative Council met at two and presented me with
a farewell address—rather an absurd one—to which I made a
suitable reply. At three I held a levee, and afterwards finished
up all sorts of odds and ends. Wrote my decision as to Cawaci,
but did not tell any one, not even Thurston or Le Hunte, what
that decision was. I put it in a sealed envelope, and left it to
be opened in a month’s time, if no compromise is meanwhile
effected. The doubt as to the result may make both sides think
this the safer course.
Wednesday , June 26. —Bathed with Le Hunte from the pier
for the last time. Dived many times into the clear water, which
we were reluctant to quit, and sadly we got into our clothes again.
Packed up last stray papers' Saw Langham again, but could not
move him. At twelve we all went on board the Wentworth
and sailed immediately, Alacrity manning yards as we passed her.
We reached Sydney at 9 P.M. on the 6th July, our tenth day
out, having covered with much regularity something over 200
miles each day. Truly those at home who look on Sydney as
close to Fiji —a sort of place one can run over to at any time —
would stare to know that it takes longer to get from Fiji to
Sydney than from England to America!
1 We had received information that a war was on the point of breaking
out there between the Wesleyans and Roman Catholics ; but that it might still
be stopped if we interposed, and especially if Thurston, who knew all the island
chiefs and had great influence with them, went down for the purpose. He
was willing to go, but there was no vessel in which to send him. I therefore
asked Webb, who in Langham’s absence acted as head of the Wesleyan
mission, to lend us, or rather allow us to hire, the missionary schooner, the
John Wesley , for the purpose. He willingly agreed, as it was for the purpose
of preventing bloodshed, and all the mischief certain to attend open hostilities.
He, in fact, promised me the vessel, but said that, as Mr. Langham was on
the point of returning, it would be better to await his arrival and obtain his
consent also, which he made certain would not be refused. But Langham,
when he came, would not hear of it. He had, I believe, received private
information that the Wesleyans were the stronger party, which was true,
and wished to see the Catholic district conquered by them. But he professed
to disbelieve news of the probability of impending war brought us by a
trading vessel, because his letters from the native minister, of eavliev date ,
made no mention of it, and averred that he was not justified in diverting the
vessel (then lying idle) from its mission work for political purposes, adding,
somewhat impertinently, that if the Government wanted vessels it should
provide them.
152
CHAP.
FIJI


The voyage was intensely monotonous —not a ship, nor a
whale, nor a bird did we see on the way. The weather was
calm and fine, with only one really rough day off the New
South Wales coast. Part of the time, Rachael was unwell and
rheumatic; the others did not suffer at all. I enjoyed the rest
and quiet, and every morning at sunrise, Arthur, Knollys, and I
had a capital douche from the hose on deck, which freshened
one up for the day.
We stayed another six days at Sydney. We stopped at
Pfahlerts, but dined every night at Government House, where it
was pleasant enough. Ronald Gower was staying there, and I
saw a good deal of him, and had much talk with him about his
sister, 1 whom I shall greatly miss when I arrive in England.
The Robinsons were kind and cordial. I had many walks with
him among the magnificent camelias in his garden, and heard all
his grievances against Bowen, which did not deeply interest me.
I was of course very busy all the time seeing people, especially
Dr. Chapman and Dr. Smith, the heads of the Wesleyan body in
New South Wales, and sought to persuade them of the iniquity
of Mr. Baker’s ways, but they are dull of hearing.
Two afternoons I crossed the harbour and walked on the
north side to the cemetery where Goodenough is buried.
He lies between the two sailors who were killed with him.
Three simple crosses form their monument. I gathered violets
there to take to Mrs. Goodenough.
Rachael, Arthur, and the children went on a visit to the
Mac Arthurs, and I went on alone with Knollys to Melbourne.
Thursday , July 11.—Saw missionaries again. Rain. Took
leave of Lady R. and started at 6 p.m. per mail train in the
Governor’s saloon. Very comfortable carriage with beds at each
end, but I dislike the shaking.
Friday , July 12.—Reached the top of the road at 8, and
drove thence, through the rain, across the Murrumbidgee, to
Wagga Wagga, where we had breakfast. Site of the Claimant’s
house pointed out to us. Drove on to a station, 8 miles. Thence
by bush tracks to another, 25. Monotonous flat, studded with
gum-trees. Walked on a few miles while horses were resting.
Saw hundreds of beautiful red, green, blue, and yellow parrakeets.
Reached Germantown about 7.30. Neat little inn all on ground-
floor, with three little bedrooms opening into a little parlour.
Drizzle all day.
Saturday , July 13. —Off at 7, in a fog, which cleared and gave
us sunshine. The “ Riverina ” district an improvement on
1 The Duchess of Argyll.
153
XX
FIJI


that we passed through yesterday. Saw white cockatoos and
wild kangaroos. Reached Albury between 12 and 1. Found
Major Pitt (Bowen’s A.D.C.) there, and crossed the boundary with
him to Wodonga, where Bowen himself was waiting. Started
with him in special train, and got to Melbourne in time for
dinner. Government House is like a big inn, smelling of gas.
Sunday , July 14. —Did not go to church. Had to go all over
the house. One very good room —the corridor, and one very
vast one—the ballroom. All in very bad taste, except the
corridor. Walked with Bowen through the Botanic Garden.
Revived memory of old times in Corfu with Lady B.
We stayed some days with the Bowens. Rachael, Arthur,
and the children came from the MacArthurs, and we diligently
did the sights of Melbourne, of which the Public Library, a noble
institution, the splendid organ in the Town Hall, and the natural
history collection at the University, best pleased me. I was also
present at sittings of the two Houses of Assembly, and heard
Graham Berry propose a Reform Bill. The imitation of the
House of Commons is, in externals , excellent. I was interviewed
by a deputation of would-be New Guinea Colonists, which I
severely snubbed, and of course by the Polynesia Association and
the Forties. The interview with the Polynesians was as good
as a play. Their memorial was full of bluster; the language of
some of those who brought it, full of mildness. But to this soft
language others objected. They quarrelled among themselves,
and nearly came to fisticuffs. I left the room, and on my return
to it, they begged to be allowed to withdraw the memorial, to
which, of course, I graciously assented. Then came the Forty
Thieves —much more reasonable and rather more honest than
their Polynesian friends.
One night the Bowens gave a ball. It was well managed,
and looked well, though the room in which it was given is as
ugly as it is huge. A certain Lady Wilson was very well dressed,
and looked as if she had stepped out of the frame of a Titian at
y en i ce — a sort of greenish-brownish dress of stamped velvet.
Lady Bowen’s dress, too, was a handsome one, also of stamped
velvet.
But my general impression of Melbourne is that it is an odious
pl ace —very Yankee in its general appearance, the river Yarra a
disgusting and stinking ditch of yellow mud, the living part of
the Government House like a vulgar hotel, and the State apart-
ments like a barrack.
Whilst at Melbourne I went to see Miss Carmichael, the only
survivor of the wreck of the Loch Ard, in which poor Townie
1 54
CHAP.
FIJI


Mitchell was lost. Poor boy, had he stuck by the spar she was
on, he would have been saved, for it was washed ashore at the
only spot in a narrow fiord where there was any beach to be
found, just round a headland. Near its head was a cave, with
a sort of beach leading up to it. Here Miss Carmichael was
drifted in, and managed to scramble up into the cave. But he
and a companion, seeing nothing at the end of the fiord but
perpendicular cliffs, swam out again to seek a landing place.
Reply to the Memorial of the Fiji Agricultural Society
Sydney, July 8, 1878. —Sir —I am directed by the Governor to acknow-
ledge the receipt of your letter of the 22nd ultimo, giving cover to a memorial
from the Agricultural Society of Fiji, and signed by the President of the
Society on its behalf, but which is not stated to have been submitted to, or
adopted by, any general meeting of its members.
lam desired by His Excellency to inform you that he has perused this
memorial with attention, and that a copy of it will be communicated by him
to the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The memorialists commence with the statement that they ‘ ‘ view with
great apprehension the system adopted by the Government of Fiji for the
investigation of Land Claims ” ; but His Excellency perceives with satisfaction,
from a perusal of the memorial, that it is not to the system itself which under
the direction of Her Majesty’s Government has been adopted for the investi-
gation of land claims that the objections of the memorialists are directed, but
to certain alleged departures from that system, and to certain points in its
detailed working.
They complain—
1. That the Commission has not been “erected on a permanent basis
composed of the same sitting members.”
2. That some of the Commissioners have conducted their inquiries in a
manner which appears to the memorialists objectionable.
3. That single Commissioners have been empowered to take evidence and
conduct inquiries.
4. That the issue of Crown Grants has been retarded by the Survey
Department.
5. That copies of the evidence and reports of the Commissioners have
been refused to the memorialists.
6. That the reservation of the right of the Crown to the foreshore and to
the minerals “ is a direct injustice ” and “breach of faith.”
1. That of the Commissioners originally appointed some no longer act in
that capacity is undeniable, but the Colonial Government cannot be held
responsible either for the promotion and death of Sir W. Hackett, the
withdrawal of Lieut. -Colonel Pratt and the detachment of Royal Engineers
under his command, or the resignation of Chief-Justice Gorrie. It is also the
case that Mr, Mitchell was for some time absent from Fiji on an important
mission, but the memorialists have omitted to notice that he some months
ago resumed his ordinary duties, and that any complaint founded on his
absence is at all events a complaint which regards not an existing, but a past
state of things. Whether it was more to the advantage of the interests of the
155
XX
FIJI


colony that Mr. Mitchell should undertake a mission for which no one else in
the colony possessed similar qualifications, or that his co-operation with his
colleagues on the Lands Commission should undergo no interruption even of
a temporary nature, is a matter of opinion. His Excellency himself has no
doubt whatever on the subject.
2. Any charge brought against one of the Commissioners in the execution
of his duty will of course be strictly investigated by the Governor ; but the
memorialists must permit His Excellency to decline discussion as to words
alleged, on the authority of an unnamed member of the Agricultural Society,
to have been uttered by a Commissioner equally unspecified, and the whole
bearing and importance of which, if spoken, must, it is evident, depend on
the circumstances under which they were used.
In cases of disputed claims the substance of the Fijian evidence ought
undoubtedly to be interpreted to the claimants, and that of the claimants to
the natives. His Excellency much regrets to hear from the memorialists
that in some cases this has been neglected, and care will be taken to prevent
the recurrence of such an omission.
3. The delegation to single Commissioners of the power to take evidence
and report was strongly pressed upon the Governor by many influential
letters, including members of the Agricultural Society. The objections to
such a course were pointed out by His Excellency in a speech made by him at
Vuna in the month of December 1876, and it was only with reluctance that
he consented to its adoption. It has, however, materially expedited the
performance of the work, and His Excellency is bound to say that it has not
been attended with the inconvenient results which he had apprehended as
possible.
His Excellency fails to appreciate or indeed wholly to comprehend the
objection of memorialists that the fact of inquiries being made by single
Commissioners “is calculated to strike at the root of that deliberation by
which all reports should be characterised.”
The report of an individual may be, surely, one of as deliberate a character
as that of a body. If, however, the memorialists mean that all reports should
be preceded by deliberation, it may be replied that while such deliberation is
by the nature of the case necessary where several persons are engaged in the
preparation of a report, it is equally by the nature of the case impossible
where (as in so many instances it is) a report is called lor from an individual.
4. His Excellency must freely confess that the issue of Crown Grants has
not kept pace with allowance of claims by his Excellency in Council. In this
respect His Excellency considers that the memorialists have some reason for
complaint, and he directs me to state that no efforts on his part will be want-
ing to remedy what has already given him the greatest uneasiness and concern.
Whether this delay is, however, wholly or even principally due to the cause
assigned by the memorialists, His Excellency hesitates as confidently to pro-
nounce. His Excellency must at the same time remark that, if he is correctly
informed, it is the case even in this colony, where every appliance exists to
facilitate their issue, that Crown Grants of land purchased frequently do not
reach the purchasers for more than two years after the establishment of their
title. No such delay has yet occurred in Fiji, and that it should occur here
is a proof of the difficulties inevitably attending this operation in all cases,
and under the most favourable circumstances.
156
CHAP.
FIJI


5. The evidence taken by the Commissioners has in some cases been printed
for the consideration of the Executive Council, a sufficient number only being
struck off for the use of the Government. These printed papers have been
refused to applicants, but no difficulty exists in obtaining from the Crown
Lands Office, on payment of a moderate fee, manuscript copies of the evidence
taken.
6. The views of the'memorialists with regard to the retention by the Crown
of the foreshore and mineral rights will be duly laid before the Imperial
Government, and will no doubt Receive careful consideration.
His Excellency cannot, however, perceive that any breach of faith is
involved in the reservation by the Crown of its ordinary rights.
They are so reserved by it in no selfish spirit, but as the trustee of the
public interest. The instructions of Lord Carnarvon, quoted by the memorialists,
distinctly state that the Grants were to be issued subject to such modifications
as “good policy” might demand, and that the possession of the foreshores
of the colony by private parties, and the consequent exclusion of the public
generally from their use, would be detrimental to the interests of the colonies
in a far greater degree than it would benefit the individual in question, is, His
Excellency thinks, impossible to controvert.
The memorialists also make three requests of His Excellency :
1. That the first price paid for any lands should not be unduly considered.
2. That a rehearing of all disallowed claims may be granted.
3. That His Excellency will take measures to ensure the consideration in
his absence of the matters treated of in the memorial.
1. His Excellency concurs in the opinion that too much weight should not
be given to the original price paid, but the instructions of Lord Carnarvon,
quoted by the memorialists, are sufficient to show that it must receive some
attention, proof of the payment of a “fair price ” being one of the conditions
precedent to the issue of a grant.
As a matter of fact it is only in a very few cases, —probably not a dozen in
all, —that the decision of the Governor in Council has been affected by the
question of the price paid. In those cases, the price paid has been compared,
not with the present value of the land, but with its value at the time of
purchase as ascertained by the amount given at the same time for other lands
in the same locality.
If the price given is shown to be even approximate to that ordinarily given
at the time of purchase for land in that district, it is at once admitted to have
been a fair one.
2. One of the subjects on which it is His Excellency’s intention to confer
with Her Majesty’s Government is the provision of a machinery for the re-
consideration of disallowed claims in certain cases. But his Excellency must
remind the memorialists that such a measure cannot be one-sided in its
operation, and that any arrangement which enabled an European claimant to
obtain the rehearing of a disallowed claim, must also enable native claimants,
or occupants, whose pretensions have been disallowed, to demand a rein-
vestigation of their claims. Any sweeping measure of this description would
inevitably be the cause of much mischief and confusion, and it will require
serious thought and care to determine the cases in which, and conditions
under which, the reopening of cases, once closed, should be permitted.
3. During His Excellency’s absence the whole of his powers are exercised
157
XX
FIJI


by the Lieutenant-Governor, who will no doubt deal in the most fit and
satisfactory manner with all matters brought under his cognisance.
It may not be amiss to take this opportunity of recalling to the attention
of the memorialists that, in the brief sketch of the system framed by the
Imperial Government for the investigation of land titles in Fiji, they have
apparently overlooked one, and that, its most important feature.
The instructions of Lord Carnarvon, to which reference has so often been
made, provide not only that evidence should be collected and reports made
by the members of a Commission, but that the ultimate decision in every case
should rest with the Governor in Council, This necessitates a careful review
and consideration of the evidence, oral and documentary, in each case by the
Governor and every member of the Executive Council.
The simple fact that, during the last two years, between 800 and 900 claims
have been so considered and dealt with by the Governor in Council, and that
each has been carefully examined, is enough to show that the charge of
dilatoriness in dealing with this question cannot justly be preferred.
With the exception of some few cases of peculiar difficulty, and some others
necessarily adjourned for the production of documents, or the examination of
absent witnesses, the whole of the claims relating to the principal agricultural
districts of the colony—'Taviuni, the Upper and Lower Rewa, Suva, and the
Navua—have been settled, as have also those in the important provinces of
Bua and Tai Levu, the island of Ovalau, including Levuka, the district of
Savu Savu, and a great part of the south coast of Yanua Levu, to say nothing
of detached but valuable islands, such as Rabi, Kea, Qamea, Laucala, Mago,
Kanacea, Bega, and others.
The number of absolute disallowances has been comparatively small. W hat
the actual number now is, the Governor was not, previous to his departure,
able to ascertain, but at a time when about 600 claims had been before the
Council only sixteen had been wholly disallowed.
No one who knows anything of the past history of Fjji ■could expect that
every claim would be satisfactorily established, and it is surprising that the
cases meriting absolute rejection should have been so few.
In no single instance where there has been bona-fide occupation has a
grant been refused for the portion of land occupied, however defective the
original title, and His Excellency greatly fears that any strictly judicial re-
investigation of claims already dealt with (were such a measure possible)
would not be attended with advantage to the claimants generally.
His Excellency cannot conclude without expressing his regret that the
preparation of this memorial should have been deferred until the very eve of
his departure, and that it should have been published and circulated without
affording time for the acknowledgment which the memorialists must have
been aware it would unquestionably receive. His Excellency has, however, no
doubt that the same publicity will be given to the present reply which the
memorial itself has already received.-I have the honour to be, Sir, your
ARTHUR GORDON, Private Secretary.
most obedient servant,
158
CHAP.
FIJI


Capt. Knollys to Mr. Dods
Melbourne, July 17, 1878. —Sir—I am directed by His Excellency, Her
Majesty’s High Commissioner for Western Pacific, to acknowledge the receipt
of your letter of yesterday’s date.
It is, of course, perfectly open to you, and the gentleman on whose behalf
you write, to apply to the Imperial Government for the grant of a Royal
Charter for the purposes you specify, or to solicit from the Government of
the King of the Netherlands a similar charter with regard to any part of
the Dutch colonial dominions, although His Excellency must decline to offer
any advice as to the measures to be taken by you with a view to effect the
objects you propose, or to express any opinion as to the success with which
such applications may be attended.
His Excellency need scarcely add that no objection can be made by him
to the transmission, in the ordinary course, through the Governor of the
Colony, of the petition to the Queen, a draft of which was furnished to him
yesterday by the deputation.
It was with much satisfaction that His Excellency learned from you that it
was not the intention of the Association to take any active steps towards the
establishment of the proposed colony until a Royal Charter had been obtained
by it; but he thinks it right to repeat the warning which he yesterday
gave as to the position in which parties who, without such charter or authority,
undertake to carry out any such scheme of settlement as appears to be contem-
plated by the prospectus of the Association, are likely to find themselves placed.
It is his duty formally and emphatically to declare that the British
Government disclaim all obligation to protect or interfere on behalf of
persons voluntarily placing themselves in positions of danger in a savage
country without the approval or consent of Imperial authority, and that
those who enter on such enterprises do so at their own risk and peril.
Her Majesty has been pleased by her Royal Order in Council of the 13th
August 1877 to make provision for the maintenance of law and order among
British subjects in those islands of the Pacific Ocean where no settled form
of government exists, and to confer authority and jurisdiction under the pro-
visions of various Acts of the Imperial Parliament upon Her Majesty’s High
Commissioner and his deputies over all British subjects within those limits.
It would be impossible for His Excellency to permit the establishment
of any co-ordinate or rival jurisdiction in the Western Pacific (within which
that portion of the island of New Guinea not claimed by His Netherlands
Majesty is for the purposes of the Order in Council included), and it would be
his duty to make use of the powers entrusted to him to oppose any attempt
of such a nature, or any enterprise calculated to compromise the Imperial
Government or likely to produce collisions with the native inhabitants of
New Guinea, which might seriously embarrass the future relations of British
subjects in that region.
His Excellency has no pretension and no wish to interfere with the
perfect liberty of action of the members of the Association, but it must be
distinctly understood that the plans of the Association, as set forth in the
prospectus, have not received, and cannot receive, his encouragement or
sanction, and are of a nature certain to be disapproved by Her Majesty’s
Government. —I have, etc.,
L. F. KNOLLYS, CAPT. A.D.C.
159
XX
FIJI


To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
S.S. Cuzco, August 1, 1878. —Sir—Shortly before I left Fiji, I received a
letter from the Governor of Queensland enclosing the prospectus of an associa-
tion formed in that Colony for the exploration and settlement of New Guinea.
Sir A. Kennedy also informed me that he had appointed Mr. Ingham, a
Stipendiary Magistrate of Queensland, to accompany the expedition as Agent
for the Queensland Government, and enclosed a copy of the instructions
issued to him in that capacity. He further requested that I would appoint
this gentleman Deputy Commissioner for New Guinea in the same manner
that I had already appointed Mr. Chester, the Stipendiary Magistrate at
Thursday Island, to be Deputy Commissioner for the islands in Torres
Straits.
I have not this letter at present in my possession, but a copy of it will no
doubt have been forwarded to you from Fiji by the Officer Administering the
Government.
2. I deferred returning my reply to this letter until after I had reached
Sydney, in order that, before doing so, I might have the advantage of con-
ferring with Sir Hercules Robinson and Commodore Hoskins upon the subject
to which it related. After consultation with them, I found that we all three
concurred in the opinion that it would be inexpedient to grant to Mr. Ingham
the authority which it was sought to obtain for him.
3. We were led to the adoption of this conclusion chiefly by the belief
that the grant of an official position to a gentleman accompanying, if not
actually forming part of, the proposed expedition, would appear to accord to
it a greater degree of official recognition than appeared to us desirable ; that
the appointment as Deputy Commissioner for New Guinea of the Agent of
the Queensland Government would be certain to excite jealousies in New
South Wales and Victoria ; and that a stimulus would thus be given to
schemes for the acquisition of territory in New Guinea which are already
being pressed forward in Melbourne and Sydney, and the development of
which might lead to requests from the Governments of New South Wales
and Victoria for the grant of similar powers to Agents appointed by them.
4. There does not appear to me to be the slightest resemblance between
the extension of Mr. Chester’s magisterial powers to the islands in Torres
Straits, technically beyond the jurisdiction of Queensland, and of the vicinity
of which advantage was taken to avoid the operation of the municipal law of
that Colony, and the powers it is now sought to obtain for Mr. Ingham in
New Guinea.
5. Whilst, however, it appeared to us inexpedient to comply with Sir A.
Kennedy’s request, Sir H. Robinson and Commodore Hoskins concurred with
me in thinking that it would be desirable that there should be some authority
on the spot capable of dealing with lawless or violent proceedings on the part
of British subjects, and that, as a provisional measure, it would be best to
entrust the powers of a Deputy Commissioner to the Captain of one of Her
Majesty’s ships of war on the station, if we could find an officer on whose
discretion and judgment reliance could be placed. Commander Digby of
H.M.S. Sappho has on several previous occasions given proof that he possesses
these qualities in an unusual degree, and I have consequently, subject to
your approval, furnished him with a Deputy Commissioner’s Commission,
160
CHAP.
FIJI


which, however, I have requested Commodore Hoskins to direct him to
make use of only in case of real necessity.
6. I accordingly wrote officially to Sir A. Kennedy, informing him that
I had appointed Captain Digby a Deputy Commissioner, and was unable to
comply with the request that I would appoint Mr. Ingham to that post. I
at the same time privately communicated to Sir A. Kennedy the reasons
which had compelled me reluctantly to refrain from carrying out his
wishes.
7. You will perceive from the prospectus of the Association that it con-
tains various objectionable features, and that the members of the expedition
have appointed their own magistrate—a proceeding clearly inconsistent with
the provisions of the Order in Council of the 13th August 1877.—Etc.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
S.S. Cuzco, August 1, 1878.—Sir—I have the honour to inform you that
during my stay in Melbourne I received a visit from a deputation of the
provisional direction of the “Australasian Colonisation Company,” an
association formed for the purpose of effecting a settlement in the Island of
New Guinea.
2. I enclose a copy ot the prospectus ot this Company, and also the draft
of a petition which they propose to address to Her Majesty the Queen.
3. A perusal of these documents will at once show the objectionable
nature of the schemes contemplated by the Company.
4. I gave these gentlemen distinctly to understand that such enterprises
as those apparently contemplated by them were discouraged and disapproved
by Her Majesty’s Government, and that the individuals engaging in them
would do so at their own risk and peril, as the British Government would
decline all obligation to protect or interfere on behalf of persons voluntarily
placing themselves in positions of danger in a savage country without the
approval or consent of Imperial authority.
5. I also pointed out to the deputation that the “Victorian Ensign”
could not be used in the manner suggested by them, and that no jurisdiction
could be conferred by the Colonial authorities of Victoria beyond the limits
of the Colony itself.
6. I further called attention to the provisions of the v Order in Council ot
the 13th August 1877, rendering all British subjects in the Western Pacific
liable to the j urisdiction thereby created, and I intimated that I should not
hesitate to use the powers therein conferred on me, should circumstances
arise to render such a course necessary.
7. I enclose a copy of a report of the interview between the deputation
and myself which, though not strictly accurate, contains a fair general account
of what passed on this occasion.
8. On the following day I received from the Association a letter, of which,
as well as of my reply, I enclose a copy. The terms of my answer will, I
trust, meet the approval of Her Majesty’s Government.
9. I am myself inclined to the opinion that no serious results will attend
the efforts of this association, and that its formation is due rather to specula-
tive considerations, than to any earnest intention to carry out the proposed
scheme of colonisation.—l have, etc.
11l M
161
XX
FIJI


To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
5.5. Cuzco, August 4, 1878.—Sir—On the same day on which I received
the deputation of the Polynesia Company, I was also visited by the trustees
of the association known as the “Forty Thieves.”
2. These gentlemen at once frankly admitted that they had no legal status
or claim, and that all they had to look to was the consideration of Her
Majesty’s Government.
3. I think that there is force in the observation made by them that,
although the Polynesia Company declined the offer of £9OOO made to them
by authority of Her Majesty’s Government, they (the Forty Thieves) had
never declined the share of that sum to which the Fiji Government had
assumed them to be equitably entitled.
I believe that the claims of the Forty might be set at rest by a very
moderate money payment, and I beg to request that I may have authority to
negotiate with the trustees on that basis. —Etc.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
5.5. Cuzco, August 2, 1878.—Sir—During my stay in Melbourne I was
visited by a large deputation of the shareholders of the notorious Polynesia
Company. This deputation was introduced by the Mayor of Melbourne, who,
however, took especial care to repudiate any connection with or interest in
the Company.
2. A memorial complaining in somewhat strong terms of the unjust treat-
ment the Company had received, and setting forth its determination to insist
on the enforcement of its rights, was read and presented to me. I remarked
that it was usual to transmit beforehand copies of such documents in order to
facilitate the preparation of an answer, and that as this had not been done, I
presumed no reply was expected. I should therefore content myself by
simply receiving the memorial without any remark beyond the observation
that it contained statements which I knew to be incorrect.
3. The chairman, Mr. A. K. Smith, then said that the memorial had
been hastily drawn up ; that though he had signed it, he had not had time to
consider it, and should be glad to withdraw it, if I objected to its phraseology.
4. Mr. Butters, a very leading shareholder, and formerly Mayor of Mel-
bourne, followed Mr. Smith. He said that he believed the shareholders
generally were quite aware that they had no legal claims whatever against the
Government, and that all they had to look to was the indulgent consideration
of the authorities. He quite disapproved of the memorial, and thought that
an appeal to the good feeling of the Government only should be made.
5. A Captain Perry then avowed himself the author of the memorial, and
spoke in a very violent strain, declaring that the shareholders of the Company
were being defrauded, and that the American Government would see right
done to them and enforce their claims.
6. A good deal of wrangling ensued between different members of the
deputation, and I at last thought it right to observe that 1 was in presence
of two opposite views. The memorial presented to me rested on a claim of
right which the Company was determined to enforce. The chairman and
others were prepared to abandon all such claim and appeal simply to the good
162
FIJI
CHAP.


feeling and generosity of Her Majesty’s Government. It was, I said, a matter
of entire indifference to me which view prevailed, but I should at least be
glad to know which it was that the Company really intended to adopt, and
whether I was to consider the voice of the memorial or that of the chairman
as the true expression of its sentiments. I would therefore, I said, leave them
for a short time until they had composed their own internal differences. I
accordingly left the room, and on my return half an hour later, I was requested
to permit the withdrawal of the memorial in which the claim of right had
been urged, with a view to the substitution hereafter of an application to the
liberality of the Home and Colonial Governments. To this request I, of
course, at once acceded.
7. I enclose a report from the Argus newspaper of the proceedings at
this meeting, which (although the vehemence of the language used is a good
deal toned down) is yet substantially correct.
8. I do not think that any serious danger need be' apprehended from any
ulterior proceedings of this Company. It is evident that it is utterly dis-
organised ; that its members have lost all confidence in their own cause ; that
it is to the boasts of the intervention of the American Government, and
absurd threats of armed force, rather than to legal proceedings, that the more
violent spirits among them look to produce an effect, and it appears to me
very unlikely that they would be able to raise the sums required for embark-
ing in a long course of costly litigation.—l am, etc.
Thursday , July 18. —On the last day of our stay at Melbourne
we went on board the Victorian ironclad the Cerberus, and after
seeing the turrets worked and a torpedo exploded had luncheon
with Mandeville, whom I had known formerly at Seychelles
and in the IFolverine, and who is now captain of this Colonial
ironclad. The crew struck me as remarkably fine looking—
apparently picked young men. Thence we went straight on
board the Cuzco , and sailed shortly afterwards. The Cuzco had
a narrow escape on her last voyage out. Her propeller got
broken, and she had to trust entirely to her inefficient sails.
Do what they could, they drifted every day nearer and nearer
to the harbourless and rockbound south coast of Australia. By
a mixture of good luck and good management they just managed
to get into Portland, but it was touch and go, and the captain
confessed that he had considered the ship and all on board her
as doomed to destruction. Our fellow-passengers were not
particularly interesting, the chief among them being a vulgar
little Sydney Jew, one Cohen, who has a villa at Maida Hill
and a club in the Minories, and a stupid young English baronet
and his bear-leader. We had an eventless voyage across the
Indian Ocean, got into a furious south-west monsoon on August
11, which blew with great force till the 14th, when we turned
into the Gulf of Aden, and in less than ten minutes passed from
high rolling waves and a howling tempest to perfectly calm
163
XX
FIJI


water and a light gentle breeze. The change was quite magical.
Most of the 15th we spent at Aden, picturesque as ever, with
its striking scenery and marvellous mixture of groups of Somalis,
Arabs, Hindoos, Parsees, and English. We landed and enjoyed
to the full the motley scene, besides reading all the latest news-
papers and telegrams at Cowasjees. The Eed Sea in August
has an evil name, but we had a very pleasant voyage up it—
my sixth—and did not find it hotter than I have known it in
February. Port Said has grown immensely in the last three
years. An enormous new hotel, put up by the Dutch Govern-
ment, is really a good building architecturally. Strolled about
the native town —squalid but picturesque, —were entertained
comfortably at Mr. Eoyle’s, and went on board again at sunset.
Then, if you like, it was hot, till we started again at nine. The
Mediterranean was like a sea of glass. We passed close to
Yaletta. The town looked well from the sea, but the island
was parched—indescribably bare and brown, like a bit of Africa,
and Gozo not much better. Passed equally close to the fine
high island of Pantellaria, which I had never seen before, and
as near the Eock at Gibraltar as we well could go. Had a good
view of the Eoman amphitheatre at Tarifa, and of Cape St.
Vincent. Saw Mafra through a telescope, and found the Bay
of Biscay smooth as a mill-pond. Eeached Gravesend at 4.30
on Monday , September 2, went by rail to Charing Cross, and
found ourselves at 41 Seymour Street by seven. Went the next
morning, as is our custom on returning from a voyage, to West-
minster Abbey. The service was a plain read one in Henry YlL’s
Chapel.
164
CHAP. XX
FIJI


CHAPTER XXI
LEAVE OF ABSENCE AT HOME
From Lord Carnarvon
Highclere Castle, August 27.—Dear Gordon — I received your letter
of May 25 yesterday with very sincere regret. I cannot understand how
Lowther could bring himself to write to you in the terms which you have
described —terms which are as inconsistent with the facts of the case, as they
are unjust to you. If he or any one else measures the importance of a colony
by its geographical area, or by its distance from this country, I can only say
that he has yet to learn the ABC of his trade ; and it is disappointing to me
to hear that any one who has filled the place of Under-Secretary of State at the
Colonial Office for the last four years, and who has during that time known ray
mind so well as Lowther must have done, can so write of the work which has
been accomplished in Fiji, or of the Governor who, often at the sacrifice of
health and labour, has accomplished it so successfully. It has been, to my
mind, a great experiment—both administratively and as regards the relations
of the English and the native races, and it is one on which I rejoice to look back
as having had some share in. I urged upon you the acceptance of the office,
believing you to be by far the fittest man within my knowledge to undertake
a very difficult and equally delicate task. I gave you, as I know you will
readily admit, the heartiest support in your work. I felt an entire sympathy
with it as it advanced, and my last official act was to submit your name to
the Queen for a public recognition of services which I felt it was only due to
you to acknowledge in the fullest manner. I hope, therefore, that the in-
considerate expressions of Lowther (written perhaps under some temporary
annoyance connected with other subjects) will not weigh with you. I was
the only member of the Government qualified to express an opinion on your
official and administrative conduct, and that opinion you know. If 1 may
venture to recommend any particular course of action, I should make very
little answer. You can quite well afford to leave matters where they stand ;
and if anything ought to be said in your defence in public, I shall always and
with pleasure be ready to bear my witness to what you have done. Many
thanks for the second volume of the interesting correspondence which you
promise me ; it will doubtless ere long reach me.—Believe me, yours very
truly,
CARNARVON.


From Sir John Shaw Lefevre
Ascot Wood Cottage, August 29, 1878.—My dear Arthur—Your letter
from the Red Sea gave me very great pleasure. I reciprocate the expressions of
your affection, which will be a solace to me during my short remainder of
a long life. I wish that during the interval of your absence I had been as
useful to my fellow-creatures as you have been, but I have done very little
either for others or for my own self-improvement. I have been teased by
various ailments and privations which, although not serious when taken singly,
in their accumulation have pressed somewhat heavily upon me. lam very
sensible, however, of the favour of Providence in dealing gently with me, in
preserving my dear wife and the various members of my family in England,
and in restoring to me yourself and your precious wife and children. You
will not, I think, find much bodily change in me, except that I am bent and
walk with some difficulty. The aid of spectacles supplies my defective vision,
but I cannot obtain the same relief from deafness. What a number of inter-
esting topics we have for discussion between us ! I think the material and
political prospects of England are somewhat dismal, and I have no confidence
in our pilot. Give my kindest possible love to Rachael and your children,
and believe me, yours with sincerest respect and affection,
J. G. SHAW LEFEVRE.
From the Dowager Countess of Aberdeen
Alva House, Alva, N. 8., August 31, 1878. —Dearest Arthur—lt seems
almost too good to be true that I should be writing to you to London with
every hope that you will be there in a day or two, and all safe and well, I
trust, as I hear there was good news after you had got through the Red Sea.
It is cause for much thankfulness that you will find no blanks in the inner
circle of your family, though of course in the time that has passed since you left
England friends are gone whom you will miss, specially the dear Duchess of
Argyll. You will find so many people anxious to see you, and so much to do, that
1 know I cannot ask you to say yet when I may hope for a visit from you here,
but I need not tell you how great a joy it will be when I see you again. I
suppose I shall scarcely know Hevil and Jack, they must be so changed. I
have room for everybody here, and I hope you will see this place before its
summer beauty has quite passed, and lam sure you will admire it. Johnny and
Ishbel are now at Guisachan, but they are to be at Haddo House on the 6th,
so that they will be ready for a visit as soon as you like. Dear Arthur, I know
you will be glad to see poor old me again, and I shall be, oh !so glad to see
you ! —Ever your affectionate sister,
M. ABERDEEN.
From Lady Harriet Hamilton
18 Robertson Terrace, Carlyle Parade, Hastings. —My own dearest
Arthur—Most loving and warm welcome home to you and Rachael and the
children. I got your letter this evening only, but have been thinking of you
the last two days, knowing you were expected. Dearest Arthur, you will find us
all scattered ; hut as soon as I come home, you and Rachael and two babes
must come and pay us a long visit. The Admiral is in Scotland for a few
weeks, and in his absence Laura and I are here by the seaside. God bless you,
dearest Arthur ; and with much love to Rachael, believe me ever,—Your very
affectionate sister.
166
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Gladstone
Hawarden, August 9, 1878. — My dear Arthur—l receive
your letter and the intimation of your coming with much
pleasure. Pray come here as soon as you can. If you could get
here on the 16th, you would probably find one or two whom you
would like. We hope Lady G. will come; but single or dual,
pray come. We have much to talk about. I can hardly expect
you to read my voluminous writings on the Eastern Question, to
which I have been for more than two years simply a slave.
Your concurrence has been a great comfort; the subject cuts so
deep, and the dissidence of some has been extremely painful.
Generally, however, the highest and best men are on the right side.
You do not give me an address, and I send this to the Colonial
Office to await you.—Affectionately yours,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
If you come to Broughton Hall (Mold line), we will send
and meet you.
From Mrs. Gladstone
Hawarden Castle, September 6. —My dear Arthur —Thank God that
you are all safe at home. I have but a moment to tell you how glad we are to
think of you all safe in dear old England. We have interesting visitors on
the 9th, had you been able to come ; but we get out for two nights on the 12th.
Come when you like, you will be welcome ; let me know the day. We are
much pleased with Lyttelton’s engagement to Lord Chesham’s daughter,
Mary Cavendish. Best love to your wife, and specially to my godson.—Yours
affectionately,
CATHERINE GLADSTONE.
From Mrs. Gladstone
Hawarden Castle, September 8. —My dear Arthur —We are longing
to see you, but there would just be a chance of my husband being away on
Saturday. Of course we should be delighted to see you, but I know what
the disappointment would be of not finding him. Wednesday week would be
safe, and do not hurry away. I know how you are pulled.—Always yours
affectionately.
CATHERINE GLADSTONE.
From Mr. Kinglake
Fawley, near Southampton, September 9, 1878. —My dear Sir Arthur
Gordon—Your letter reached me this morning, and I hasten to answer it.
Just a year ago I brought down to this very place the comments and state-
ments which you had been so good as to send me, and dealt with them all
seriatim, and in writing, so that if I had had at my side an amanuensis
competent to decipher my words, the papers would have gone off to you
at once. The copying anything that I myself write is a peculiarly difficult
process, because, apart from my unhandiness in the performance of the
mechanical act, I am always under temptation to keep on altering, and the
knowledge of my own infirmity in this respect makes me hesitate to begin
167
XXI
FIJI


the task. I had performed what I may call the mental part of the work, and
unfortunately allowed myself to delay the mechanical act of copying it. It was
thus that procrastination set in, and when I began to reproach myself for the
delay of which I was becoming guilty, I remembered that you had spoken in
your letter of being ere long in England, and began to cling to the prospect as
one that wmuld supersede the necessity of my having to copy the papers. I at
one time thought I would write a line to you with a suggestion for postponing
the matter till your return, but somehow I took neither the one course nor the
other, and simply continued to procrastinate. lof course acknowledge that
all I have said above fails to make anything like a fitting excuse, and all I can
do, my dear Sir Arthur Gordon, is to express my great regret, and the real
anger I feel against myself for all this hateful delay. It is only from your in-
dulgence that I can hope to receive forgiveness. And now for “reparation.” I
will so shape my autumn movements—and I can do so, I assure you, without
inconvenience—as to be able to be in London at some time when it might suit
you to give me the honour and pleasure of seeing you.
I believe that, even irrespective of my wish to meet your convenience, I
should be likely to be in London before the close of next week, and if you will
tell me freely what time (after the end of this week) will best accord with
your plans, I will make my movements conform to your wishes.—Believe me,
etc.,
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, Sept. 3,1878. —My dear Arthur—l was rejoiced
to see in yesterday’s Times the news of your safe arrival at Plymouth—l
trust, all in good health.—Pray give my congratulations to Lady Gordon :
and tell her, with my wife’s love, that we hope you will both be able to
propose some early time for coming down to see us here.
Your two last letters were very welcome to me.
I wonder what your final thoughts have been about our political situation.
Mine are these. I am, of course, very glad that the danger of war has gone
over : but then, I do not feel that any gratitude is due to the Government on
that account; because, from the time that it was determined to maintain an
attitude of neutrality, down to the peace of San Stefano, there was not any
such danger: and if it seemed to arise afterwards, this was entirely due to
the departure of our Government from their former attitude, and" to those
offensive demonstrations towards Russia, for which I saw no justifying cause
when they took place, and see (if that were possible) still less now, when we
know with what modifications of the peace of San Stefano our Government
was prepared to be contented. So far, therefore, as relates to “peace,” the
boasts of the Government seem to me to be very much the same thing as if a
man, after threatening to shoot me through the head, should claim credit for
having saved my life, because he has not done it. Then, as to “honour” :
I should have seen nothing dishonourable in acquiescence, on our part, in
the peace of San Stefano, either with the modifications of it which have
taken place, or even without any modification at all: but I confess it is not
agreeable to my notions of honour, in an international transaction, to assume
first the tone of a bully, and appear to insist on certain things “for the
maintenance of the faith of treaties,” etc. etc., and then (after giving up
everything substantial, on which we had seemed to insist, and securing to
168
CHAP
FIJI


ourselves an equivalent in the shape of a share of the spoil), to cover our
retreat under a mighty flourish of trumpets, and an enormous quantity of
fanfaronade and self-glorification. As an Englishman, therefore, I could not
be proud of our share in these transactions, even if I were in accord with the
policy (if any policy there really is, beyond party objects at home), which
may be discoverable in them.
As to that policy:—so far as the mere territorial arrangements resulting
from the peace are concerned, it is possible that they may be the best which
could, under the circumstances, have been obtained. Many of my political
friends think so ; and I do not pretend to have a very clear or confident
opinion to the contrary. If I were a philo-Turk, I should be altogether
dissatisfied with them ; if I were a Russian, actuated by that ambition of
territorial aggrandisement which is imputed by most people to Russia, I
should be altogether satisfied: for Russia retains, in substance, all the
territorial acquisitions which she had gained by the treaty of San; Stefano ;
she has entirely, and for ever, cancelled and annihilated all the losses which
she suffered by the Crimean war ; and, if she wished to establish, in the
political arrangements of the provinces of European Turkey, a copious store
of opportunities of influence and interference hereafter for herself, I should
not (looking at the matter as I think an intelligent and not fanatical Russian
would see it) be at all inclined to prefer the arrangements of San Stefano to
those which have actually been made. As an Englishman, with English
sympathies, and considering (so far as is right) English interests, I cannot
help thinking that, even if the mere territorial arrangements are as good as
could have been made, our Government has contrived its own part in them
in such a way as to minimise their advantages, and (if I may coin the word)
maximise their risks, in a way which I should have thought, beforehand,
hardly possible.
I think, for instance, that it is the true and permanent interest of this
country to cultivate and maintain, as far as possible, friendly relations with
Russia. If so, what am I to think of politicians who, professing and
maintaining neutrality during the whole of the war, have been grinding and
gnashing their teeth at Russia ever since peace has been made, and who,
simultaneously with their own accession to a general European settlement
of the terms of peace, have made a sort of conditional declaration of future
war, in alliance with Turkey only, against Russia, and have assumed an
attitude of standing preparation for that future war, involving engagements
and new departures of policy, of which no one can now forecast the course,
both in Western and in Eastern Asia ?
I think, also, that the just and natural sympathies of this country should
go with, and not against, the national and patriotic aspirations both of
Greeks and of Slavs ; and that the whole political experience of Europe since
1848, as well as our own experience in Ireland, ought to warn us against a
policy which seeks to check and counteract those aspirations, and to incline
us to favour their satisfaction and development as opportunities offer ; and
ought, more particularly, to lead us to regard religious agreement on the one
hand, or disagreement on the other, as a powerful factor for good or bad
results. If so, what am Ito think of a policy which has at once trifled with
and made fools of the Greeks, —justified, as one of its motive principles,
fear of and opposition to Pan-Slavism, —and endeavoured to substitute
169
XXI
FIJI


Austria (a Roman Catholic Power) for any and every form of Greek or
Slavonic ascendency, both as an immediate counterpoise to Russian influence
in European Turkey, and as a candidate for the succession to Constantinople
whenever the Turkish Empire in Europe comes definitively to an end. For
this last idea I am not drawing on my own imagination ; it was very
distinctly suggested by Lord Salisbury, in his speech in the House of Lords,
after his return from Berlin.
To travel into the region of more remote and speculative consequences
might be unpractical; in speaking of them one cannot be so sure of one’s
ground. But, if the Anglo-Turkish Convention is to be more than a mere
sham, so far as Asiatic Turkey is concerned, it seems to be very evident that
it will produce an enormous disturbance of the balance of power in Europe
in favour of this country ; and, whatever tone it may be convenient to France,
or to any other European Power, to assume at the present moment on this
subject, it is not difficult to conceive that the time may come, when other
Powers as well as Russia may desire to place limits to our too great
preponderance, especially if that is understood to be backed by the material
force of our Indian Empire. These considerations naturally connect them-
selves with another, which is the real explanation of the facility with which
popular opinion in the country has seemed to applaud, and to participate in,
the game of brag which the ministers have been playing—l mean, the
avowed relinquishment by the present Government of the insular and
pacific tone of policy which has prevailed in this country since the Crimean
war, and the disposition which (as the populace at home, and Continental
politicians abroad, infer from this) they may probably have to make the
voice and power of England felt, as far as possible, in all questions of
European policy. Such a disposition is always agreeable to the passions and
follies of mankind, till they feel its cost too severely. It is the explanation
of the popularity of almost all the wars in which this country has ever been
engaged, and almost all of which must now appear, to any civilised and
dispassionate student of history, to have been impolitic and unjustifiable.
No doubt France is now speculating that, in the event of another Franco-
German war, this disposition will make it necessary for us to interfere, and
that (with due cultivation in the mean time) we shall be found her ally.
The speculations of Germany are probably the same, only with opposite
expectations. Both will be disappointed—and, when that war is over, I
suspect our position in Europe will be more isolated than ever ; with this
difference, that, while a pacific policy would have given no Power any
reasonable cause of offence or alarm against us, an ambitious policy may have
had the opposite effect upon most or all of them.
I must now conclude this. I rejoice in your excellent work in Fiji, and
trust you will be permitted to go on with it without interruption.
I wish I knew Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, but I only know him to speak
to. The late change among the subordinates in the Colonial Office will do no
harm. I must, however, reserve both colonial and domestic matters for some
other opportunity ; and in the meantime remain (with kindest remembrances
to Sir John and Lady Lefevre, if, as I conclude, you are staying with them)—
Ever yours affectionately.
170
CHAP
FIJI


To Lord Selborne
41 Seymour Street, W., September 10, 1878. —My dear Selborne —I agree
in almost every opinion you express as to the present aspect of the Eastern
Question. Indeed I might leave out the “ almost, ”as connected with opinions,
and say that I concur in almost every word you have written on the subject.
But there are many points connected with the present condition of things
which perplex me, and on which I require enlightenment.
Chiefly am I amazed by the apparently complete change in Salisbury’s
opinions and conduct. How is it to be interpreted ?
Am I right in my guess that Lord Derby’s resignation had a real, and
perhaps decisive, effect in compelling the Government to act in some ac-
cordance with their professed desire to maintain peace ?
Did you notice the extraordinary telegram about Cabul in yesterday’s
Times? What does it mean? Are we going to quarrel with Russia about
Central Asia ? And as a matter of grotesque oddity, did you ever before, in a
telegram evidently inspired by Government, and sent at an enormous cost,
see several lines devoted to an outrageous puff of the great qualities of the
head of the Government from which it comes ? Its enumeration of Lord
Lytton’s recommendations read like satire.
When will you be able and willing to have us at Blackmoor ? It is not
very easy to make different visits fit in with one another, but at present our
only positive engagements are for the 12th, 15th, 22nd, 25th to 30th, and the
3rd October.
I was at the Colonial Office yesterday, and nothing could be more agreeable
to me than my reception there. Entire and most thorough approval of all
that I had done, and a very handsome recognition of the success of my
policy, to say nothing of the collar of a Grand Cross, which I found waiting
for me, and which was Lord Carnarvon’s parting gift, but which has not yet
been gazetted.
I was very glad to be of any service to your nephew. We will talk about
him when we meet. With kindest regards to Lady Selborne, to whom my
wife is on the point of writing.
From Mr. Herbert
Ickleton, Great Chesterford, Essex, September 12, 1878. —My dear
Gordon—Don’t apologise for writing to me here. lam always glad to read
your letters, whatever my own subsequent performance may be.
You have probably seen the enclosed extract from the Gazette, which puts
your matter right as far as it is now possible to do so, and associates you with
Royalty !
I will endeavour to get the Sydney Herald, article inserted in the Times,
though I fear they have a practice (which I suppose has its exceptions) of not
noticing editorials in other papers. If they won’t put it in, I will endeavour
to get it back. It is a good and reasonable article.
As to the Government of New South Wales cum Fiji, I think the idea has
strong points which should command for it much consideration, and that I
am sure it will receive. I have ascertained that nothing will be settled as to
the appointments to Sydney and Melbourne for more than a month, and I
shall have full opportunities of talking to Sir M. E. H. B. on the subject. I
171
XXI
FIJI


think the present probability is that a distinguished person (now to be name-
less) will go to Victoria, Norman by to New South Wales, and Robinson to
New Zealand ; but if this distinguished person does not go out, the question
will be entirely reopened ; and if he does go, it is not likely that he will
remain there? for long, when again your suggestion would come under
consideration.
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, September 12, 1878. —It is only due to Lord
Salisbury to say, that I do not think his policy was altered by Lord Derby’s
resignation, so far at least as the difference between a pacific and a warlike
vurpose was concerned. I believe he had always a pacific settlement, and
more or less of benefit to the Christian subjects of the Porte, in view ; but he
persuaded himself, or was persuaded by others, that a minatory tone and
warlike preparations were necessary to secure that object. I can myself only
imagine one way in which they can have been either necessary or useful for
that purpose, viz. to bring round to those objects his chief, and the rising
section of their party, by humouring them up to the brink of war, in order
that they might be satisfied in the end by the display without the thing.
But I suspect that Lord S. himself is somewhat too fond of a quarrelsome
tone and of an ambitious style of policy ; and that, while he thought he
was managing Lord 8., he was really being managed himself.
S.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
41 Seymour Street, W., September 9, 1878. —Sir— I have the honour to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 31st ult. on the subject of
Indian Emigration to Fiji.
2. At the date of your letter, my despatches reporting my appointment of
Mr. Mitchell as Agent for Fiji, and explaining my reasons for that appoint-
ment, and for believing that the Government of India would at once consent
to the commencement of such emigration, had evidently not been received at
the Colonial Office. They must, I should think, have arrived in England
before this time.
3. You are aware that the objections of the Indian Government to the
Fiji Immigration Law were finally reduced to two, both of which related to
provisions which will not have any practical effect for some years to come.
4. I have intimated to the Indian Government that I shall be prepared at
once to introduce these changes into the Act, if on full consideration they
continue to require them ; but that, as the price to be paid for a renewal of
lost certificates cannot become a practical question for ten years, nor that of
redeeming the later years of indenture for three, I am unwilling to make
changes which appear to me by no means improvements, without first placing
before the Government of India my reasons for arriving at a different opinion
to that which they have formed.
5. I have not received any direct intimation of the acquiescence of the
Government of India in this arrangement, for of course any such official
communication would be sent to the Acting Governor of Fiji; but I infer
from a private letter which I have, since my arrival in England, received from
Mr. Mitchell, that this is the case, for he tells me that he is engaged in a
discussion with the Government of India as to the date on which the first
172
CHAP.
FIJI


ship should start—a point hardly admitting of practical discussion, if the
Indian Government had not already assented to its departure ; and indeed, in
a letter from Mr. Hume, Secretary to the Government of India for the
Department of Revenue to the Secretary to the Government of Bengal, dated
Simla, July 25, 1878, a copy of which is forwarded to me by Mr. Mitchell, it
is expressly stated that the formal notification under § 24 of the Emigration
Act only awaits the settlement of the question of the season during which
emigration should be allowed to proceed, “now under discussion between the
Government of India and Mr. Mitchell.”
6. I sincerely trust that, if the intending emigrants have been collected
at Calcutta, and the Indian Government permits their departure, no
objection will be made by Her Majesty’s Government to the payment of
the necessary expenses, which have indeed been provided for in the Fiji
Estimates for the current year.
7, The consequences of such a step would be unspeakably disastrous to the
Colony, and altogether upset my calculations and expectations for the year
1879.—1 have, etc.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
41 Seymour Street, September 30, 1878. —I have had the honour to
receive your letter of the 19th inst. forwarding for ray perusal and observa-
tions the copy of a letter from Fiji, addressed to Mr. M ‘Arthur, M.P.
The writer of this letter displays an ignorance of facts, or a recklessness as
to their accurate statement, which disqualifies him from forming a judgment
and deprives his opinion of any weight to which it might be otherwise
entitled. I have noted a few instances of the misstatement of facts on the
margin of the paper, which I now return.
Taken generally, the objects of the writer appear to be four :
1. The re-establishment of a money poll tax on the natives ;
2. The abolition of the authority of all native officials;
3. The dismissal of Mr. Thurston ; and
4. The retention of the seat of government at Levuka.
1. The native tax system (completely misunderstood and altogether mis-
represented by the writer of this letter) has been fully explained in my
despatch, No. of , nor need I now add anything to my remarks on
that subject. But I would call your attention to the fact that the evident
(and indeed in one passage distinctly avowed) object with which it is sought
to reimpose the oppressive and absurd poll tax of former years is that of
forcing the natives to engage for long periods as labourers on the plantations
of white settlers, by whom the tax is to be advanced to the moneyless natives
in consideration of a pledge of their services until the advance is repaid,—a
date not likely to be of early occurrence in such circumstances.
2. The writer desires to transfer to white officials the whole of the
authority now exercised by natives, and in expressing such a desire betrays
his total incompetence to understand the actual condition of Fiji. The
adoption of such a course would be impracticable, and it would be in-
expedient. It would be impracticable, because the substitution of white
officials for the present Roko Tuis, Bulis, and Native Magistrates would
involve an expenditure which the Colony could not possibly afford, (for I
173
XXI
FIJI


may, I think, put aside, as not likely to commend itself to the consideration of
H.M. Government, the favourite and certainly economical plan of some settlers,
that every planter should be invested with absolute judicial and executive
authority over all natives within a certain radius of his plantation). It
would be inexpedient for very many reasons, of which I will now only
mention one ; viz. its creation of a class at once powerful, discontented, and
dangerous. The chiefs are now the busy and well-affected servants of the
Crown. What they would be were they reduced to a position of enforced
idleness and humiliation, it requires no great effort of imagination to perceive.
Of the utility of their employment, and the inconvenience of any other
system, the history of the disturbances in the mountains two years ago
affords striking proof. I called for help from all the Rokos, and with their
aid the troubles were at once suppressed. But without the organisation
which enabled me to raise a force in a moment, and without the zealous
aid of the native officials, a very long and dangerous contest would have
ensued. It would have been inevitable had the counsel of the writer been
adopted, the organisation and machinery of native social and political life
destroyed, and the natural leaders of the people reduced to a position of
enforced and dissatisfied obscurity.
3. The writer dislikes Mr. Thurston, and desires his dismissal. His
feelings on this subject were three years ago pretty general among the
settlers. But these years have wrought a great change. Many of Mr.
Thurston’s bitterest enemies have left the Colony. By the exercise of
unwearied patience and tact he has conciliated many who were unfriendly,
and a leaven of new men has been introduced, who have not felt, and are
not influenced by, the animosities of the period antecedent to the cession.
Those who share the writer’s sentiments are now, I believe, but a small
minority, and a minority whose will should not be for a moment listened to.
Mr. Thurston is not faultless, —I by no means wish to be considered as his
indiscriminate eulogist,—but he is a man of remarkable ability, of great
clearness and breadth of view, of immense industry, and of large influence.
He has aided me in the task of government with an assiduity which has
never flagged, and a loyalty which has never wavered, and his retirement
from his present position would be the severest blow which the administrative
efficiency of the Government could possibly receive. The causes of Mr.
Thurston’s unpopularity (such as it is) are almost wholly creditable to him
and may be summed up in the facts that he has not allowed himself to be
made the tool of those who wish to exploiter the native population for their
own selfish ends, and that his ability is such as to excite jealousy and detrac-
tion. I must add that the most malicious and unscrupulous enmity has been
unremittingly at work, but has utterly failed to make good, or even to allege
with any colour of truth, any charge against him discreditable to his personal
character.
4. No opinions could be well freer from personal bias than those of the
men who have deliberately preferred Suva to Levuka as the site for a capital.
To myself, the change will be personally inconvenient and expensive, but 1
have not the smallest hesitation in recommending it. The owners of house
property in Levuka are of course indisposed to the change ; but how divided
opinion, even there, is upon the subject, may be seen from a reference to my
despatches of 1876 and 1877. In one of these I transmitted a report of the
174
CHAP-
FIJI


proceedings of a public meeting to petition for the retention of the capital at
Levuka, which ended in a complete fiasco ; and at a later date I forwarded
petitions on both sides, but of which the weight preponderated very greatly
against Levuka.
Before concluding, I wish to draw attention to the fact that although the
writer places his letter “without the slightest reserve” at Mr. M‘Arthur’s
disposal, the signature is withheld. I however recognise with ease the style of
the writer. May I request that a copy of this letter, and of that to Mr.
M‘Arthur with my notes on it, may be forwarded to the officer administering
the Government of Fiji.
From the Rev. F. Langham
Levuka, July 19, 1878. —Your Excellency—lt will be in your Excellency’s
recollection that, when we were conversing at Nasova the evening before I
sailed for Sydney, respecting the Rev. S. W. Baker of Tonga, your Excellency
informed me that you had actually seen the books belonging to the Tonga
Bank, they having been shown to you by the Manager or Secretary, while
you were staying in his house, and that your Excellency saw from the accounts
therein recorded that Mr. Baker had received as a dividend the sum of $2500.
I have this day received from Tonga the following copy of a letter written
to Mr. Baker by the said Manager or Secretary of the Bank :
Tongatabu, June 10, 1878. —Dear Sir —Referring to the subject of our
conversation this morning, Lbeg to state that during Sir A. Gordon’s recent
visit (1) I did not show nor cause to be shown to him the Bank of Tonga
books nor indeed any books or papers whatever; (2) I did not inform him
that you had received a dividend from the Bank of $2500. Such a statement
would have been a gross falsehood.
It is perhaps unnecessary to add anything to the above, I remain, dear Sir,
yours faithfully,
The Rev. S. W. Baker.
H. THORLEY.
I am your Excellency’s obedient servant,
Frederick Langham.
To the Rev, F. Langham
41 Seymour Street, London, September 30, 1878—Reverend Sir—l am
desired by Sir A. Gordon to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of July 19.
That letter contains, first a reference to remarks made in the course of a
strictly confidential conversation, which took place between yourself and him,
and of which you appear to have made public and official use ; and, secondly,
the copy of a letter, written, in consequence, apparently, of the communication
to Mr. Baker in Tonga of an inaccurate report of the conversation in question.
The account of His Excellency’s remarks contained in the opening sentence
of your letter is incorrect. His Excellency told you at Nasova— and he
desires me now to repeat the statement—that the books and accounts of
the Bank of Tonga were shown to him. He did not say by whom they were
so shown, though he did say that the late Secretary or Manager had given him
information (and that information in writing) as to the history of the Bank.
His Excellency never told you that Mr. Baker had received as a dividend
175
XXI
FIJI


the sum of $2500; he told you that a dividend had been declared upon the
nominal Capital, and that as he had ascertained from Mr. Thorley that Mr.
Baker had subscribed half the nominal Capital, it appeared to him that that
gentleman must have received a profit of some $2500 on the transaction.
His Excellency desires me before closing this letter to express his surprise
and regret that you should have thought fit to meet in such a manner his
desire to befriend the Wesleyan Mission in the Pacific, and should have so
gravely violated the confidence reposed in you by him.
Had His Excellency been content with the simple performance ot his
official duty, he would have held no communication at all with you in
respect to the acts of Missionaries not under your control, and would have
at once reported to Her Majesty’s Government the facts he had ascertained,
and the reports he had received at Tonga, with reference to Mr. Baker’s
proceedings.
Such, however, was His Excellency’s unwillingness to do anything
which could injuriously affect the Wesleyan Mission in the Pacific, that he
did not make, and up to this day has not made, any official report on the
subject.
He refrained from doing so at first, because he thought that a private
communication to you would produce reform, if reform were necessary, without
undesirable publicity. He spoke to you in personal and private confidence,
wishing that you should know all that had reached him, in order that you
might yourself procure the investigation of reports, which he said he had no
doubt were in many cases exaggerated.
This confidence you appear to have disregarded, and made use of His
Excellency’s name in a manner wholly unwarranted.
Had he intended to act as an accuser of Mr. Baker, or to make any public
or official communication to you respecting the affairs of Tonga, he would
have done so in a written form, as to the precise tenor of which there could
be no dispute. He spoke in the freedom of friendly intercourse, and was
encouraged to proceed by the assurance asked for, and more than once
repeated, that all he said would be regarded as strictly confidential. Never-
theless, much as His Excellency laments your reception of his communication,
he cannot regret that he adopted a course which has, as yet at all events,
prevented the commencement of a public discussion, which, whatever its issue,
could hardly fail to be attended with consequences prejudicial to the cause
not of Wesleyan Missions only, but of Christianity in the South Pacific. —I
am, Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,
ARTHUR J. L. GORDON.
From the Rev. F. Langham to the Rev. A. Webb
Bau, July 22, 1878.—Your Excellency—l beg to forward for your Excel-
lency’s consideration the following correspondence which has passed between
the Rev. A. Webb and myself: —
Levuka, July 19, 1878.—Dear Brother Webb —His Excellency the
Governor has stated in Sydney that you had agreed to lend the Jubilee to
the Government to take a trip to Rotuma, on the application of His Excellency
the Governor, but that when I returned from Sydney the vessel was refused
to His Excellency.
The Governor has also stated that an address was intended, or in prepara-
176
CHAP.
FIJI


tion, from the Mission to His Excellency on his departure, but which fell
through after my arrival.
As you are named in the first paragraph, and as I presume you are
the only missionary who was communicated with on the subject of the
Mission presenting an address to His Excellency, will you kindly furnish me
with any information you may be able to give on these two matters, and
oblige, yours very truly,
FREDERICK LANGHAM.
Mk. Webb’s Reply
Levuka, July 19, 1878.—My dear Mr, Langham—l wish to reply to
yours of to-day with reference to your mention of Sir Arthur Gordon’s
statements.
1. As to the Jubilee.
I was asked by the Hon. J. B. Thurston to let the Jubilee go to Rotuma
with important despatches that might prevent more bloodshed and ruin on
that Island. I told him that from the account he gave me of the state of
things there, I was individually of opinion that the vessel ought to go, but
that her course was already marked out by the District Meeting, that she
was due at Bua to remove the Rev. J. Leggoe, and that I could not undertake
the responsibility of sending her out of her course ; but that our Chairman
would arrive in a day or two by the mail steamer, and I would then place
the matter before him. I never “agreed” to lend her, and my opinion of
the advisability of despatching her to Rotuma was changed when I saw the
letter of our missionary there. It was no more than a matter of opinion and
wish with me, which I did not feel justified in carrying out without your
consent as Chairman.
2. As to the address.
I know of no such address as you refer to being ‘‘ in preparation ”or even
intended by the Mission here— any further than that I should have been
very glad to have subscribed any address which would convey my high
esteem of Sir Arthur Gordon as a Christian gentleman, whose moral example
and religious sympathies were so favourable to our work, and so much on the
side of Christianity. I suggested the subject of an address to two of the brethren ,
and on your arrival communicated with you. In my feeling, as already
expressed, you cordially concurred, but we were both agreed that an address
of this nature, without endorsing the Governor’s policy, would not strengthen
the position. In private conversation with the Governor I expressed to His
Excellency my high personal appreciation of him, stating at the same time
that, as His Excellency was aware, I differed from him on some points of policy.
I can only say in conclusion on this matter that Ido not believe an address
would have been possible from any of us approving of the Governor’s policy
as a whole, or of any other nature than that I have just indicated, and even
such an one was not in preparation to my knowledge by any missionary.—
I am, yours affectionately,
ARTHUR J. WEBB.
I can only add, your Excellency, that it is extremely painful to me to
have to forward the foregoing notes to your Excellency, but I feel that it is
my duty to do so.—l am, your Excellency’s obedient servant,
FREDERICK LANGHAM.
111
N
177
XXI
FIJI


To the Rev. F. Langham
41 Seymour Street, London, September 30, 1878. —Reverend Sir—l
am requested by Sir A. Gordon to inform you that he has received your letter
of the 22nd July, enclosing the copy of a letter from yourself to Mr. Webb,
and of that gentleman’s reply.
Your object in forwarding these letters to His Excellency is not stated,
but it is apparently intended in so doing to call in question the accuracy of
statements made by His Excellency in conversation with the Rev. B. Chapman
at Sydney, and which would appear to have been repeated to you.
The first of these statements is, that Mr. Webb “had agreed to lend the
Jubilee to take a trip to Rotuma, on His Excellency’s application, but that
when you returned from Sydney the vessel was refused.”
His Excellency certainly most distinctly understood Mr. Webb to have
given his consent to the proposed despatch of the Jubilee to Rotuma, and
that it was not so despatched, previously to your arrival, was, His Excellency
believed, not the result of any want of power on the part of Mr. Webb, who,
in your absence, had all your powers as Chairman, but of a wish expressed by
him, that, as you were so close at hand, your arrival should be awaited. On
this point, however, Mr. Thurston, through whom His Excellency’s com-
munications with Mr. Webb were carried on, is better able to speak than His
Excellency himself, who has accordingly transmitted this correspondence to
Mr. Thurston, and requested him to furnish the particulars to Mr. Chapman,
to whom, no doubt, the correspondence now transmitted to His Excellency
has been forwarded.
That immediately after your return the vessel was refused, in a letter
which contained suggestions as to the proper mode of the performance of His
Excellency’s duties, which were, to say the least, uncalled for, and which
happened to be unfounded, is a fact not admitting denial.
The second statement is, that “an address from the Mission to His
Excellency on his departure” was in contemplation, “but fell through after
your arrival ” in Levuka.
His Excellency never had any communication with Mr. Webb on the
subject of the address in question, but was informed on good authority that
such an address was contemplated. That this was the case is evident from
Mr. Webb’s letter. That after your return the idea was abandoned, is, from
Mr. Webb’s letter, equally clear.—l am, Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,
ARTHUR J. L. GORDON.
To THE Rey. F. Langham
41 Seymour Street, London, October 10, 1878. —My dear Sir—l have
returned formal replies, through my private secretary, to your formal letters,
but I feel so strongly the evils that are likely to arise from any want of
cordiality between us that I write a few lines privately, to deprecate the
continuance of a style of communication which bids fair to reduce our relations
to —at best —purely official intercourse.
The Wesleyan Church has done so much for Fiji, and occupies so important
a position there, that so long as it is, in general disposition, friendly to the
Government, and abstains from that interference in politics which is under-
stood to be forbidden to its ministers, there is hardly anything I would not
178
CHAP.
FIJI


do to prevent dissatisfaction on its part. Where there is a mutual wish
generally to agree, differences about individual points admit of easy settle-
ment. Where such mutual goodwill does not exist, the smallest matters
may be made cause of quarrel,—even such a miserable grievance as the non-
payment of rent for the few square feet of ground appropriated, before the
Cession, for the erection of a lantern to guide ships into Levuka harbour.
Until your visit to Sydney last May, although your letters occasionally
seemed to me to savour more of pugnacity than was necessary, our personal
intercourse had always been most agreeable. On your return, I saw, with regret
and surprise, a marked change in your tone and manner, and I must admit
that when I heard the lantern grievance brought up, about which nothing
had been said for three years, I began to fear that a desire existed to raise
a difference between the Government and the Mission. At first I was inclined
to attribute this to some changed policy on the part of the Conference at
Sydney, but my conversation with Mr. Chapman thoroughly satisfied me
that he, and those acting with him, are as much alive as ever to the importance
to the Mission of a good understanding between it and the Government, and
as desirous as ever to maintain it.
This being so, I look in vain for a cause of change. The matters in dis-
cussion between us—marriage law, land claims, etc. —are not.such as to account
for it. But the tone of your present letters is decidedly unfriendly. They
are not such as you would write to a friend who had, in your opinion, made
such mistakes of statement as you attribute to me.
If, however, you can assure me that lam mistaken, I shall very heartily
rejoice, nor shall I recollect any passing want of concert, if it is resumed for
the future. There are many things, in a purely governmental sense, desirable,
which I have refrained from doing lest they should wound the susceptibilities
or touch the interests of your Church, and my sense of the work done by it
and the value of its aid is far too great to allow of any change in my course
of conduct under any sense of personal irritation, and will be persisted in to
the end, unless indeed I were to perceive the Church to be animated by a
spirit of direct hostility, and its admirable native organisation made use of
for objects, not spiritual, or even ecclesiastical, in their nature.
I cannot say how much pleasure it will afford me to receive from you a
reply written in a similar spirit to that which has dictated this letter.—l
remain, my dear Sir, yours very truly,
ARTHUR GORSON.
Friday , September 13.—Breakfasted with Lacaita. Lord Odo
Russell and Laurence Oliphant there. Lord Odo told us what
is scarcely credible, that Mehemet Ali Pasha’s murder was
ordered from Constantinople. He also told us that Dizzy
had been the sole cause of the frustration of Greek hopes at
Berlin. He opposed them throughout, and would not listen to
their arguments. He fell asleep during Braila’s long speech, and
woke in the pause that followed it, crying “ Order, order.” His
ultimatum to Bismarck was, in Lord Odo’s opinion, well delivered,
and in this fashion: —Bismarck had called on him, and in the
course of conversation Dizzy took the opportunity of compli-
menting the officials of the German railways on their extreme
179
XXI
FIJI


efficiency. For example, he said, he had just ordered a special
train for the following day to take him home, and had not found
the least difficulty on the part of the station officials in managing
it. I confess this ordering a special train looked to me rather
like a theatrical trick. Lord Odo does not think Gladstone’s
idea as to race influence and antipathies affecting Dizzy’s Greek
policy at all exaggerated. He also mentioned a very curious
fact as to the rapidly increasing acquisitions of land by Jews in
Germany. Most of the land in Hungary, he said, was Jewish—
much in Austria —their acquisitions were growing in Russia,
and if emancipation became a fact in Eoumania, the Jews (if
not previously massacred) will in a very few years possess the
whole state. Laurence Oliphant amusing in his stories of the
Times correspondent at Paris (Blowitz), and the dictation of
labourers at San Francisco. Went down to Highclere with
Eachael by 3.30 train. Met Ommanney at station, Lord Lyons,
and Sheffield, whom I had not seen for fifteen years : also Lady
Portsmouth, Lady Camilla Wallop, Lord and Lady Hammond,
and Miss Hammond —a specially nice girl. Smoke in tower
after dinner. Professor Rolleston, whom I used to know twenty
years ago.
Saturday , September 14. Ommanney and I bathed in the
lake before breakfast. After breakfast, walked up to the
British camp, which is singularly like a Fijian Koro. On whole,
Eolleston not much changed, and that agreeably. After luncheon,
to the fishing cottage and lake. Some talk with Lord C. Bruce,
son of Lord Aberdare, Mr. and Mrs. Chatteris, neighbours, and
Edmund Yates of the World came to dinner. The last-named
vastly entertained by hearing Greek quoted in the smoking-
room.
We went down for a few days to the rather nice new
house the Ryans have built at Burley Bushes, and from them
went on for a few days more to the Selbornes at Blackmoor.
Selborne of course is very peaceful. His son Willie, now a
fine grown lad of nineteen, is very warlike.
From Earl Granville
Walmer Castle, Deal, September 23, 1878. —My dear Gordon—l am
delighted to hear of your safe arrival in this country, and of the success
which has attended your.work in Fiji. It always appeared to me that in
the work with too little information I have never been able to learn the
state of things since your arrival in the Colony. It is therefore satisfactory
to hear from you of the increase of Revenue and of your success in managing
the natives. I rejoice at you and yours having stood the great fatigues so
well. What became of my wife’s cousin, Miss Gordon Gumming ? It must
180
CHAP.
FIJI


have been a great pleasure to you to find Sir John comparatively so well.
I hear that the election has been of use to poor Argyll in distracting him in
his great sorrow. The world has not been governed with absolute wisdom
since you left us. lam most anxious respecting Afghanistan. I shall be in
town soon and will look you up. —Yours sincerely,
GRANVILLE.
If you are going to Paris, remember that we are on your way.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, September 25. —My dear Gordon—l have read the
enclosed, and have no suggestion whatever to offer for its improvement. It
seems to me as clear and as short as possible, and should serve to introduce
to Sir M. E. H. B. a subject which he has intentionally deferred considering
until after seeing you.
I am very glad to hear that your views have the concurrence of so high a
legal authority.—Yours ever,
ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
It is not at all too long for our Chief, who has a good stomach for work.
Private Memorandum for Secretary of State
September 1878. —Since I left England, some doubts appear to have arisen
as to the exact force and effect of certain words in the deed of cession, with
respect to the settlement of claims to land, and it has been suggested that
in all cases where a claimant is dissatisfied with the award of the Governor in
Council, his claim should be decided by the ordinary action of the courts of
law.
I strongly deprecate any change in the system for the settlement of land
titles recommended by Sir Hercules Robinson, accepted by the natives and
settlers at the time of cession, deliberately adopted by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment in 1875, and ever since that date practically acted on by the local
government in Fiji.
I am prepared, and should wish to support, my objection to such change
by abundant illustrations, and by subsidiary reasons not now put forward.
But in the present Memorandum (which is not a formal or official exposition
of my views), my object is conciseness, and I therefore confine myself to a
bare enumeration of the chief grounds on which my opinion is based.
1. I consider that a virtual (though probably not a technical) breach of
faith would be involved in any measure which transferred to the Law Courts
the cognisance of land claims. Of the intention of those who framed, and
those who executed, the deed of cession, there can be no doubt whatever.
That of Sir Hercules Robinson is clearly to be gathered from his Despatches
of October 1874 to the Secretary of State, and is explicitly stated in a recent
letter to me, which encloses one from Sir George Innes (who drew the deed
of cession), explaining the meaning which he intended and still believes his
words to convey. Copies of these letters are appended.
That the language of the deed was understood in the same sense by Cakobau
and his Chiefs, and by Mr. Thurston and Mr. Wilkinson acting on their
behalf, is equally certain.
Lord Carnarvon’s Despatch of March 4, 1875, interpreting the deed in a
similar manner, has been published throughout Fiji ; and I have solemnly
181
XXI
FIJI


declared, over and over again, Her Majesty’s decision as to the mode in which
claims to land should be considered. Any intimation now made that, if the
decision of the Governor in Council in any case be adverse, the claimant may
seek to obtain more favourable consideration from a court of law, would un-
doubtedly (and not, I think, unreasonably) be held to be a breach of faith,
and would shake to its very foundation the confidence which the natives have
gradually learnt to repose in the fairness and friendliness of the Government,
2. There would be great inconvenience in imposing on a court of law the
decision of questions which can hardly be determined except locally. It is
not points of law, but questions of fact, that are usually at issue, and in the
great majority of cases the dispute is, not whether a piece of land has been
sold, but as to what are the boundaries to be assigned to it. The delimitation
of boundaries is a matter which, as is recognised at home, may be far more
satisfactorily performed by such a commission as the Enclosure Commission
than by a law court. That, in spite of the natural tendency of courts and
lawyers to seek to extend their jurisdiction, the Chief-Justice of Fiji should
be quite as decidedly opposed as myself to the reference to a law court of
existing land claims, is grave testimony to the unsuitableness of such courts
for their decision.
3. To the white settlers whose claims have been already allowed, the
possible revision of those claims by a court of law would be in many cases
disastrous, and would in all cases introduce an element of doubt into their
title. Claims have been allowed by the Governor in Council on grounds of
occupancy, convenience, etc., which might not hold good in law, and on the
faith of the presumed finality of this settlement large sums of money have
been, in some cases, expended by those who have been admitted as proprietors.
The local government would, it seems to me, be bound in equity to protect
those who had acted on the faith of its guarantee. As an illustration of what
I mean, I may mention that the surveys effected for the Lands Commission
have shown that in many cases estates overlap, and that portions of the same
land have thus in hond-fide ignorance been sold to two or more persons. The
Governor in Council has in such cases divided the land between the different
claimants in such a manner as in the varying circumstances of each case seemed
equitable. A court of law would, I apprehend, in all, or almost all, cases be
bound to admit the claims of the first purchaser, should he put them forward.
To those whose claims have not yet been heard the reference to a legal
decision would in many cases be a hardship, as they would assuredly not
receive the same indulgence as has been shown to those whose cases have been
dealt with by the Governor in Council; and if in consideration of the facts
just mentioned all claims already sanctioned by the Governor in Council were
confirmed, they would have a fair ground for complaint that their neighbour’s
claims and their own had not been dealt with on an uniform system.
4. I have, so far, dealt only with the injury likely to be experienced by
white settlers ; but it is to the native landowners and vendors that the
greatest injustice would be done by the contemplated change. It is not only
that in some cases I have no doubt a claim, prima facie legal, exists, which
has probably no foundation in equity, but that there would be the greatest
difficulty in bringing the native case before the court. Every lawyer in the
Colony is personally interested in land claims, and would be an unwilling
agent in disputing them. This, however, is but a minor difficulty. What is
182
CHAP,
FIJI


more serious is that the natives, generally speaking, have neither the means,
nor the knowledge, requisite to employ counsel, and that an appeal by a
white claimant to the Supreme Court would be practically undisputed. The
extreme unwillingness of the natives to resort to the European law courts,
and their profound distrust of them, do not admit of dispute, nor can I
convey to any one unacquainted with the country any idea of the exceeding
difficulty (amounting to a practical impossibility), of inducing them to prefer
cases, or to produce witnesses. This reluctance is strongest among the natives
of the interior, whose interest it is most important to guard. If it be urged
that the Government might take up the cases on behalf of the natives, I would
reply—
-Ist. That such a course would be attended with enormous expense ; and
2nd. That it would place the Government in a most undesirable-position
of antagonism to the white claimants, instead of allowing it to hold, as it
does now, the place of an impartial and equitable arbitrator.
Moreover, though the Government can procure the attendance of witnesses
before a local commission, it would be next to impossible to bring those from
the mountains before the Supreme Court at Levulca.
5. To these considerations I must add, that, besides being inevitably
attended with enormous practical wrong to the natives, the consequences of a
reference to the legal tribunals, and of the real though unintentional hard-
ships which would thereby be inflicted on the native proprietors, might be in
the highest degree dangerous.
It must not be forgotten that the natives hold their estates by well-
defined though often very complicated tenures ; that they are very jealous of
the ownership of their hereditary land ; that they will not regard with
indifference the substitution of a new tribunal for that which has already
dealt with the land question, and which they know and trust; and that if
they find themselves, by the action of a new tribunal, deprived of what they
hold to be theirs, they will regard the whole transaction as a fraudulent piece
of jugglery on the part of Government. The almost inevitable result of this
would be, sooner or later, an outbreak of a general and serious character, the
suppression of which would prove very costly and very tedious, which would
throw back for years (if it did not wholly destroy) the growing prosperity of
the Colony, and which would result in the ultimate extirpation of the native
race.
In short, then, I consider that the proposed change would sacrifice the
substance of justice to its form, and for the sake of a literal adherence to words,
the strict meaning of which may be open to question, would disregard their
acknowledged intention, whilst a mode of proceedings would be established
which must be infinitely more dilatory than that now in use, which is far less
likely to determine correctly respecting questions of boundary, and which
would practically give an enormous and undue advantage to white purchasers
over the native vendors.
I therefore strongly recommend that the mode of dealing with land claims
prescribed by Her Majesty’s Government in 1875 be maintained, and that if
it be thought necessary to remove any doubts on the matter, a declaratory
Ordinance should be passed defining the meaning of the deed of cession to be
that which it was intended to bear, using for that purpose the language of
Lord Carnarvon’s Despatch of March 4, 1875.
183
XXI
FIJI


At the same time it may perhaps be admitted that a power of revision may
in some cases be desirable, and I believe that such an arrangement as would
satisfy nearly all those who desire a rehearing of their claims might be effected,
without bringing the law courts into operation, and without substantial
injustice to the natives, or to those settlers whose claims have already been
allowed.
Should Her Majesty’s Government be disposed to attach weight to the
considerations urged in this Memorandum, I shall be prepared to submit the
outline of an Ordinance to provide for such revision.
A. H. G.
A.— Sir Hercules Robinson to Sir A. Gordon
August 2, 1878.—My dear Gordon—ln compliance with your request, I
was just about to write and explain fully what my intention was in framing
the 4th clause of the deed of cession, when I found, on looking over the Blue-
book, that what I meant to provide for by that clause, and the mode in which
I thought that provision ought to be carried into effect, are points fully
explained in the 15th paragraph of my Despatch of the 3rd October 1874,
and in the 15th and 16th paragraphs of my Despatch of the 28th October
1874 (see pages 4 and 50 of Blue-book). I do not see that I can now add
anything to make my intention more clear. The view you take is 'precisely
what was in my mind at the time the deed of cession was being framed ; and
the plan which I understand has been carried out for the last three years is,
I believe, substantially in unison with the course recommended by me in my
Despatch of the 20th October 1874, above referred to.
I do not think that the meaning of clause 4, even taken by itself, admits
of reasonable doubt. The words “ shown to be ” were not in the original
draft, but were inserted in the revised copy for the purpose of throwing the
onus of proof of alienation on the claimants ; my feeling being that whilst it
would have been unjust to confiscate lands which had before the cession
become bona-fide private'property, it was necessary to leave it entirely to the
Government to decide, in each case, whether the property claimed had, or had
not, been fairly acquired.
The contention you refer to, of those whose claims have since been dis-
allowed —that “ every claim is to be considered good unless by an action
brought on behalf of the Crown it is pronounced in the Supreme Court not to
be so ” —appears to me untenable. At all events my intention in framing the
deed of cession was exactly the reverse, viz. that the proprietorship should
be vested in the Crown unless a claim were advanced which on investigation
was shown to the satisfaction of the Crown to be good, in which case the title
would be confirmed by the issue of a Crown grant to the claimant. If I
had intended the onus of proof of non-alienation to be thrown on the Govern-
ment, I should have used the words “shown not to be ” instead of “not shown
to be.”
I never contemplated that the investigation into land claims would be
made by a court of law, but recommended that a Commission should be
appointed to inquire into the merits of each claim, and to report upon the
validity of European titles (see par. 15 of 20th October 1874).
I enclose a note which I have received from Sir George Innes concurring
in the view taken by you as to the intention with which the 4th clause was
HERCULES ROBINSON.
framed.—Yours very truly,
184
CHAP.
FIJI


Sir George Innes to Sir H. Robinson
Chambers, Elizabeth Street, July 29,1878. —My dear Sir Hercules —In
accordance with your wish, I have read Sir Arthur Gordon’s note of the 14th
with reference to the “ claims to land” question in Fiji, and I quite concur
in the view he takes as to the intention with which the 4th clause of the deed
of cession was framed.
The clause itself, without any aid from clause 7, in my opinion clearly
expresses that intention, and the onus of proof of alienation is manifestly
thrown upon the claimant in each case. It seems to me simply absurd to
contend for any other construction of the 4th clause.
Wednesday , September 25.—Up to town by first train, and
down to Hawarden by 12.50. Picked up Paulina Irby at
Crewe. Very pleasant reception. No one there but old
Parker and Lady Leven. Long conversation before dinner.
Thursday , September 26.—Lady Leven went. Had a long
walk with Gladstone, and heard many things; on Church
matters he is pretty right. James Hamilton came. Confirma-
tion.
Friday , September 27.—Another long talk and walk with
Gladstone. He is very anxious that I should return to
Parliament. Lord Rosebery and the Rectorship. Lord
Beaconsfield and Bishop Wilberforce. Had a walk with
James and heard his plans explained. Bishop of Adelaide
and Bishop of Cape Town. The latter a terrible Jingo. He
is strongly of opinion that the natives must be “ firmly put
down.” “They are actually acquiring wealth and property.”
Saturday , September 28. —Early church. Most of the party
went to Conway. More walks and talks. Paulina.
Sunday , September 29. —Church and walk in afternoon. How
pleasant it is to see W. E. G. and Mrs. G.—Darby and Joan.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
September 30, 1878.—1 believe the interpretation placed upon the clause
relating to the prohibitory death-rate by the Secretary of State to be correct,
but I have not now the Ordinance before me. I have no objection to offer to
the monthly closing of the ration account, of which in principle I altogether
approve, although I fear it may be attended with some practical difficulty.
But, although I cannot hope that my voice will be listened to when it is
raised nearly alone, I desire to record my decided protest against the abolition
of the right to commute engagements in the fourth and fifth years of service.
I hold it to be one of the most valuable privileges of the immigrant, and one
of the very strongest of those indirect checks on fraud and ill-usage which
185
XXI
FIJI


are so very much more useful and operative than more explicit and direct
provisions for that purpose.
I had intended to call attention to some of the special provisions of, the
law, but I will not now unnecessarily take up the time of the Secretary of
State by doing so.
To Lord Selborne
41 Seymour Street, October 1, 1878.—My dear Selborne—l have not
written to you since my visit to Hawarden. You will, I think, like to know
something of what I saw and heard there.
First, then, I was very agreeably surprised, after the reports to the contrary
which had reached me, to find Gladstone extraordinarily well and vigorous.
The amount of exercise which he takes, and the toil, physical and mental,
which he daily undergoes, are such as would fatigue many a younger man,
and are at sixty-eight really remarkable. Take one of the days that I was
there as a specimen. He walked to church, some distance off, at eight; after
breakfast worked at letters, without a moment’s relaxation, and without any
secretarial help, till luncheon ; then nearly killed a couple of Colonial Bishops
by walking them about the park, up and down steep hills, and over high
fences, at a tearing pace ; and then, when they were gone, set to work to cut
down a large ash tree ; then, it being nearly dark, he returned home and
wrote part of an article ; next, dinner, when he was full of talk ; after dinner,
more composition and letters.
We took long walks every day, and, as there was hardly any one else there,
I saw a great deal of him. Nothing could be kinder or more affectionate ; and,
if you know, as you probably do, how very rare the demonstration of regard
is on his part, you will understand the feeling which nearly brought tears
into my eyes when, one morning, he came past where I was sitting, and
placing his hand gently on the back of mine, looked into my face with an
expression on his own which said many things, but chiefly, “I have been
disappointed in many. I can trust you, can I not ? ”
I need hardly say anything of his views as to the Government or the
Eastern Question. He has very fully and constantly proclaimed them. All
that I will say on those subjects, therefore, is that I think his intention of
permanent retirement has been much shaken, though I have no doubt it is
still his wish to remain aloof from party quarrels. But he repeatedly said
that he had taken no vow , and that the next general election promised to be
a most important crisis in the constitutional history of the country ; one
which might decide whether it was to continue to be governed on 1 its ancient
lines, or to embark on a course of “Imperialism,” or enter on roads which
ended in revolution. I think also that he feels very bitterly towards those
who, being members of the Liberal party, have failed to support him, —far more
bitterly than towards his Tory opponents. It is one of the failings of his
character that his resentments are very keen and lasting, surviving sometimes
the memory of the cause which has given rise to them ; and, should he ever
again influence the formation of a Cabinet, you may depend upon it he will
be not a little swayed by the operation of these sentiments.
On Church matters, I was agreeably surprised to find him so hopeful and
contented. Certainly, as yet, disestablishment has not presented itself to him
as even a possibility. Of the Ridsdale judgment, on the other hand, he spoke
186
CHAP,
FIJI


much more vehemently than I had anticipated, and in a tone which, not-
withstanding the doubts I mentioned in a former letter, I could not approve.
His tone was that the question was really not a legal, but a historical one ;
that lawyers were not, as a rule, good interpreters of the broad facts of history.
“ Did I know any really great historian who was a lawyer ?” That you and
Phillimore were the only two members really competent to take up the
matter—you as having a larger and wider training than mere legal learning—
Phillimore being profoundly versed in Ecclesiastical law, of which he believed
all the other members of the Court to be profoundly ignorant; that the
judgment, at best, was only a provisional one, liable to be upset on the
production of fresh facts—that such facts were contained in Mr. Parker’s
book ; and finally, that common sense would have prevented the insertion in
an Act of Parliament of Charles 11. (I noticed that he evaded the question
whether the “Ornaments Rubric ” was strictly part of an Act of Parliament) of
words referring to the second year of King Edward VI., if the practice of a
much later period had been intended. He also inveighed, and it seemed to
me not unreasonably, against the prohibition of the publication of the dissents
of the dissenting members of the Committee. One would think that he had
enough, and too much, on his hands already ; but, alas, he appears to me to
have a hankering to run away from the subjects where he speaks with
authority, to make an onslaught on compulsory vaccination ! He can do no
good, and may do much mischief, by meddling with such a topic. His thesis
is not that compulsory vaccination is necessarily bad, but that no such
necessity has been proved for it as to justify the interference with individual
liberty of decision which it involves.
But it was the discussion of a matter personal to myself which has chiefly
impelled me to write to you, not indeed to ask your advice, for I have already
made up my mind, but to inquire whether you think my decision to have
been a sound one. He pressed me, with, for him, extreme earnestness, to
return to Parliament at the next general election, explaining to me the mode
in which he believed my election might be made secure, and in no obscure
language holding out to me strong selfish motives for compliance with his
request, even if I were not moved by his own desire, which was clearly a
strong one, on the subject.
Instinct at once said “No”; but I took a day to consider, and I then
told him that, though very much touched and moved by the wish he had
expressed, and very desirous to do anything that so insignificant a person as
myself could do to help him, and show my strong personal devotion to him,
I did not think I should do right to close with the proposal.
It seemed to me that considerations of public duty, personal fitness, and
private interest were alike opposed to my assent. (1) Public duty—l was
engaged in the performance of work in which I knew I was useful and could
not easily be replaced. I ought not to leave this work unfinished for any
private considerations, and I should require very strong public grounds to
justify the abandonment of an obvious and positive duty to undertake a
problematical one. It was not as if a great issue depended on my decision.
My place as a Liberal member of the House of Commons would be easily filled ;
a new Governor of Fiji would be less readily found. Moreover, I was bound
by the promise I had made to return. (2) Personal fitness —I did not pro-
fess any false modesty on this head. I was quite aware that my abilities
187
XXI
FIJI


were likely to be as good as those of any other probable candidate for the
seat in question, but I begged him to observe that such faculty of expression
as I possessed was in writing rather than in speech ; that I had been for
seventeen years, more or less, generally absent from England, and that for
twelve years I had been accustomed to habits of absolute command, which
would in all probability be a bad preparation for action in concert with others
on an equal footing. (3) Private interest—This was clearly not a considera-
tion which I should oppose to a manifest public duty. I should at once
resign if the Government pressed on my adoption a course of action
seriously injurious to the Colony I governed, and I would equally do so if
it were shown to me that by so doing I should render real or essential
service to the country. But I owed it to my wife and children not to
relinquish, without grave cause, my present line of life before I had
completed the two years’ additional service which I have yet to get through
before becoming qualified hereafter to receive a pension.
Nothing could be kinder than he was throughout. Even now he will not
take an absolute denial, and has made me admit a species of reservation for
the chapter of accidents during my stay in England, to which he is very
welcome.
Now, though I have not asked your advice, I should like to know your
opinion.
Mrs. Gladstone’s oddities and fidgets have been much softened by years.
She was always thoroughly true and sincere, and all her better self shines
out now without the disfiguring accompaniments which used to distract and
annoy one. Her devotion to him, and his repose on her, are very beautiful
to see.
If I read over this letter I know I shall correct and rewrite it, and this I
have not time to do, for I am just off for Haddo. I shall therefore send it
without revision, trusting to your affection to make clear what is obscure and
not to “read amiss” what may be “evil writ.”—l remain, etc.
I have had a nice letter from Lord Granville, and a cold and Cardwellian
(but, I believe, kindly meant) one from that noble Viscount.
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, October 15, 1878. —My dear Arthur—Very
many thanks for your letter, which is most interesting. I certainly think
you judge rightly, and for right reasons, on the question of returning at
present to Parliament. I have always felt that it was much safer to trust
to those indications of our line of duty which are not of our own making or
seeking, and which those who believe in the Divine government of the
world may reasonably, and without superstition, believe to be Providential,
than to deviate from that course upon our own responsibility, or upon the
opinion of others, with the idea that we may do better in some other way.
It does seem to me at present, that your line of duty is marked out for you ;
and that, if you are hereafter to be useful in Parliament, there will not be
wanting a clearer call, a more suitable opportunity, after your present duty
has been fulfilled.
It is a strange thing that, with so much intellectual agreement and
moral sympathy as I have with Gladstone on almost all important subjects,
188
CHAP.
FIJI


I should constantly find difficulty in following the movements of his mind
on those subjects which I perhaps ought to understand best. I confess I
never can understand his way of looking at legal questions. For a great
statesman, he seems to me to have strange misconceptions both of law and
of lawyers. Phillimore, for example, is an amiable, honourable, and learned
man ; but when Gladstone puts him upon a pedestal above such men as
Cairns, James, Montague Smith, and Brett, one cannot but see that this
opinion must have been unconsciously influenced by personal regard on the
one side, and by prejudices (unworthy of such a man as Gladstone) against
individuals, or the legal profession generally, on the other. For my own
part, I must, in all humility, disclaim any superior fitness in myself, over
such men, to interpret Acts of Parliament and understand the bearing upon
them of the facts of history, even when a question of Ecclesiastical law is
concerned. The question of the “Ornaments Rubric” is, in the strictest
sense, a question of the interpretation of three Acts of Parliament ; viz. the
Act of 1549, referred to in it; and the two Acts of Uniformity of 1559 and
1662 ; and of the execution (or non-execution) of a Parliamentary power
given by the Act of 1559. It may, or it may not, be unsatisfactory to the
ecclesiastical mind that such a matter should, in point of law, depend upon
Acts of Parliament: but so it is ; and the judges whom I have named (to
say nothing of the others whom I have not named) are really quite as
competent to interpret and apply these three Acts of Parliament as any
others ; and they are at least as competent to interpret any Act of Parlia-
ment as Phillimore is, or as I am. Indeed, I think they, or at all events
some of them, are less likely to miscarry on such a point than any one
feeling the strong interest in ecclesiastical matters which both Phillimore
and I do ; and which (however rigidly we may desire to exclude them)
might unconsciously cause our minds to be affected by some considerations
not properly judicial.
Gladstone’s judgment on this subject does not gain anything in weight
with me from his having adopted (as it would seem he has, from your report
of what he said to you) the idea that Mr. Parker has made some discovery
of facts not known to and not considered by the Judicial Committee
who decided the Ridsdale case. I have read Mr. Parker’s pamphlet carefully,
and I find in it neither fact nor argument (except some incorrect statements of
fact, which no lawyer would have made) which was not presented to the
Judicial Committee in the arguments of Mr. Ridsdale’s counsel. His facts
(so far as they are correct) contain nothing new, nothing which every reader
of Cardwell or Strype did not already know ; and his arguments are not
such as, according to any legal principles that I am acquainted with, could
affect the interpretation of the documents to be interpreted.
When I write to you again, I will put you in possession of the true state
of the case as to the non-declaration of dissents and the reasons for it.
Gladstone is not the only person of authority who is under the impression
which you describe on that subject: I believe Sir W. Heathcote shares it ;
and so did the late Sir John Audrey ; and Lord Coleridge, after communica-
tion with him, spoke to me about it in the same sense. But his view of it
was materially altered by the explanation which I gave him ; and if he was
not (before the explanation) completely in possession of the case, no wonder
that laymen should not be so.—Ever yours affectionately.
189
XXI
FIJI


To Lord Selborne
Haddo House, Aberdeen, October 19, 1878. —My dear Selborne—l
told you, when I last wrote, that my letter had been hastily written, and
that I would not read it over lest I should be tempted to rewrite it. I now
see that this was wrong ; and that, if I reported at all what Gladstone had
said to me (the propriety of which may perhaps be doubtful), I owed it to him
to take care that my words were thoughtfully chosen, and such as should
convey no exaggerated or inaccurate impression of his meaning.
You are, I think, quite right in supposing that Gladstone does not share
the ordinary, and most wholesome, instinctive respect of Englishmen for law,
as law ; and that he does share, in perhaps an exaggerated form, the ordinary
and—well—not wholly groundless—idea of most Englishmen that lawyers,
as a general rule , regard great subjects with singularly narrow views. It is
also true that he bracketed your name with Phillimore’s in a manner which
tickled my sense of humour, and led me, without comment, to repeat it.
But you would do him injustice if you were to suppose that he implied any
equality between you, as such bracketing would seem to indicate. For two
different sets of reasons he considered you and Phillimore to stand, not neces-
sarily on pedestals, but on different ground from the other members of the
Judicial Committee. Phillimore, by reason of special studies ; you, by reason
of a turn of mind which has given you distinction apart from that which
you have earned at the Bar and on the Bench. Ido not think it is personal
partiality on my part, or on his, that would, I am sure, make us both say at
once, that the four names you mention are not names which, in the sense
intended, can for a moment be placed along with yours. To take one point
alone. Cairns is, of the four, the only one who has had the same sort of
political training as yourself, and you need not go farther back than last
session to illustrate the difference between you, —between a lawyer who has
taken to politics, and a statesman who happens to be also profoundly
acquainted with law.
You will understand, I am not professing agreement with or dissent
from Gladstone’s estimate of the value of particular judgments in this par-
ticular case, but endeavouring to explain what appears to me the foundation
for the distinction he draws.
I must add, however, on my own account, that, though it is a bold thing
for me to charge you with a slip in reasoning, you seem to me to have made
one, when you dwell so strongly on the capacity of the majority of the
Judicial Committee “to interpret and apply those Acts of Parliament.” If
that were all, I doubt whether any one would raise a question. Of the
construction and effect of Acts of Parliament, lawyers must be the best
judges. But this is not all. As you yourself say in another part of your
letter, “the execution or non-execution of a power given by the Act of 1559 ”
is a most essential element in the case ; and this is not a question of legal
interpretation of words , but one of evidence, and that evidence of, to an
ordinary mind, somewhat incomplete and obscure character. I accept the
decision simply because it is the decision of authority, and I share the English-
man’s ordinary respect for such decisions; but I confess that, although I
acquiesce in it, my reason did not move along with it when I read it. But
I was not vain enough therefore to say I disagreed. I had read only once,
190
CHAP.
FIJI


and probably carelessly, what had evidently been long and deeply thought
over. I had not given special attention to the subject, which had occupied
the time of and thoughts of so many able men for months. I had never
had any special training for the consideration of such questions, and the
judges were all lawyers of the highest authority. I was, and am, therefore
disposed, ex animo, to believe that the conclusion was a proper conclusion
from the evidence adduced. I merely felt unable myself to follow the process
which arrived at it, and I hold with Gladstone that it is possible that fresh
evidence might modify the conclusion, though it could not modify the meaning
of clauses in an Act of Parliament.
As to the suppression of the dissents, I should certainly be very glad to
be informed, for on this point I feel inclined to agree with Gladstone. Of
course, technically, the Report of the Judicial Committee is not a judgment ,
but practically it is so, and any arguments drawn from an undesirability of
showing division in the Court appear to me very dangerous, and susceptible
of much wider application. A majority of the judges of the Court of
Exchequer decided that Ship-money was legal, but the non-publication of
the opinions of the dissenting minority might have had very serious effects
on English history. The plea of not weakening the effedt of the decision
might have been urged not unreasonably in that case.
What are your movements ? We had been plotting to meet you at
Rennet about the middle of the month, but I hear that you are now not
going to St. Andrews until later than was originally your intention.
I very decidedly like the young Lady Aberdeen, who seems to me all that
is good, natural, and simple.—Yours ever affectionately.
From Lord Selborne
Blackmoor, Petersfield, October 23, 1878.—My dear Arthur—My visit
to Rennet will, I hope (if convenient to Lord and Lady Balfour), be from the
16th to the 20th of November. My wife will not be able to be with me, but
we hope to meet on the 20th at St. Andrews.
I was obliged to postpone the visit to St. Andrews, because I understood
that the 21st would be the most convenient day, for the delivery of my address
there, to the authorities ; and I have been prevented from arranging to pay
a number of visits on my way there, earlier than this on the 16th, by being
unexpectedly called upon to do duty on Appeals in the House of Lords during
the first fortnight in November, owing to the illness of Lord Gordon of
Drumearn,
I should have been very sorry if you had not written to me about your
visit to Hawarden exactly as you did. Your letters are always as good as
it is possible to be ; and you write nothing which, in the light of your last,
could have needed revision or correction. You are not mistaken in believing
me to be a trustworthy correspondent; for I neither show your letters, nor
speak of anything which I understand to be confidential in them, when
they are of such a character as this was. It is, of course, inevitable that
lawyers, as a class, should have legal rather than political habits of thought;
and it may be admitted, without disparagement, that this leads to their
bringing habits of advocacy, rather than free statesmanlike views, into the
discussion of political subjects, and treating them in this sense narrowly ;
191
XXI
FIJI


that their impulse to treat them at all is factitious, and the manner of
treatment is dictated (like a brief) by the exigencies of the Government or
party who are their political clients. I do not wish to enter into the
question, whether I am myself more free from this professional habit than most
of my brethren : if your friendship and intimate knowledge of me leads you to
think so, I am afraid it is more than I can expect from the world in general,
and (to be perfectly frank) it is more than I should have expected even from
Gladstone. I am not naturally, I fear, of a very humble mind ; but I
suppose being humbled is the next best thing to being humble, and the
lessons of my life have had, at least, some tendency in that direction, though
outsiders might not suspect it.
But although lawyers are in these respects inferior to statesmen, they
have their points of superiority also. I think they are better logicians, as
a rule, and less liable in the examination of questions, whether of historical
fact or of law, to the ignoratio elenchi. When legal or quasi legal arguments
have been involved in Parliamentary controversies, I have often thought
that the politicians have exhibited a larger degree of the vices of ‘ ‘ special
pleading ” than the lawyers. A lawyer (of course I mean if an able man) is
much less likely to miss the real point, or to use an irrelevant or fallacious
argument without seeing through it, than a politician of equal ability. This
may be prejudice on my part; but I think so. One reason for this may be
that politicians are almost of necessity rhetorical. Lawyers, who have
habitually to address judges (not juries), are more likely to persuade if they
avoid rhetoric, and contract (as I myself have done) a distaste for it.
I want to send this letter off to-night, and the post is almost due. I
cannot, therefore, at present enter into the question of the rule of single
judgments, and reticence as to dissents, established in the Privy Council.
I still reserve that for another letter. But I will endeavour, even within
the limits of this sheet, to show why an ordinary legal judgment ought to
be deemed as trustworthy on the question of the execution or non-execution
of a statutory power given to the Crown, as on that of the interpretation of
an Act of Parliament. The statutory power is part of an Act of Parliament;
and the same training and habits of mind by which a lawyer is informed of
the legal rules and principles of construction to be applied to an Act of
Parliament, inform him also of the legal rules and principles applicable to
the execution of powers generally, and of the legal requisites for such an
execution in each particular case, having regard to the terms in which the
power is given.
According to these general rules and principles, a power is well executed,
though not referred to, and though no intention to execute it is directly or
indirectly declared, if that is done by the proper person which the power
authorises, and which would not be authorised without it, in the manner
(if there is any such) which is prescribed by the conditions of the power.
Where the power is simple, without prescribing any particular manner, then
the form and manner of execution is not material, so long as the thing
authorised is in substance done by the proper person. In this case, the only
two things necessary to be proved were (1) that an order was made in-
consistent with that of the “Ornaments Rubric” of 1549; and (2) that
this was done by the authority of the Crown, no form or manner of giving
that authority being prescribed by the statute-the former of these
192
CHAP.
FIJI


questions depending simply on the proper construction of the express words
of those parts of the “Advertisements” of 1566 which relate to the robes
of officiating ministers ; and the latter upon the evidentia rei , followed by
many proofs of public legal reception by Queen Elizabeth herself and her
successor, by ecclesiastical authorities in the exercise of legal jurisdiction,
and by the Convocations of the Realm. A lawyer’s training makes him (I
think) necessarily a better judge of the evidence proper to establish such
a fact (in the absence of that pressing and direct evidence which may have
perished by lapse of time, or cannot now be found, but the existence of
which at some time may as safely and certainly be inferred from proof of
this nature as if it were actually forthcoming) than a layman, who receives
the statements of historians of a later age —such as Strype, Burnet, Hallam,
or Cardwell—as if they were evidence, can be ;to say nothing of laymen or
clergymen whose attitude is too controversial to make them impartial judges
of any evidence. The grounds on which the Judicial Committee concluded,
as a fact, that Queen Elizabeth authorised the issue of these particular
Advertisements (as well as put the Archbishop and his colleagues in motion
to prepare them by her previous command) appeared to me then, as a lawyer
(and still appears), to be absolutely conclusive; and, as it has been stated
that three judges dissented from the decision, I feel at liberty to tell you
that only one dissented on this point. Since the judgment was given, I have
met with an original edition of the Advertisements issued between 1574 and
1585, by John Daye (Queen’s printer), “cumprivilegio Regice Majestatis” on the
title-page of which, after the words of the original title, there are added :
“And of late again commanded as well by Her Majesty's letters, as also by
her Proclamation .” No complete collection of Queen Elizabeth’s proclama-
tions is now extant; and I do not feel sure that this book would be legal
evidence of the fact stated in the title-page, though he must be a sceptic
indeed who supposes that Daye would have so stated it if the fact were not
true. This is only one of many instances of collateral facts, showing the
correctness of the conclusion drawn by the Privy Council from evidence
indisputably legal.—Believe me ever yours affectionately.
From Lady (Alexander) Gordon
Ellon Castle, Ellon. —Dear Arthur—l don’t suppose many would
understand what a disappointment it is to me not to get to Haddo again just
now. I don’t often feel it, going there naturally, as you can guess ; but it is
a very different affair when you are there. And I had been so counting on it
this time. Playing to you in that room was no small enjoyment, though, like
all best kinds of enjoyment, it had a sad current. Don’t you really recollect
His Lordship’s fondness for that air of “The day is dark and dreary”?
Now I’ll tell you why it is more to me than the Handel air. I played it
once by chance there long ago, and was struck by his looking up and
stopping talking, but thought nothing more. A few nights after he came
up and said, very low, “ Play ‘ The dreary day ’ again ” ; which I did, and he
stood on the rug silent till I had finished, then sat down and went on read-
ing. This happened once more a short time after, and one night I
thought I would try its effect. I played it very low, and as “ speakingly ”
as I could. He immediately got up, stood on the rug without a word, then
resumed his seat. Some time after that, we were all at Dalmahoy, and he
111 ' o
193
XXI
FIJI


was at the fire end of the drawing-room talking busily, I at the other end, at
the piano. Some one had just been speaking to me about “the nonsense
people spoke about the power of music, etc. etc.” I couldn’t resist it; the
longing to know whether, even in a small way, I could exercise such a power
was too much, and as plaintively and softly as I could manage it, I played the
air. He stopped speaking, walked to the rug, put his hands behind him, with
his eyes bent down, and remained there till I had done. I rushed away to
my room on some pretence, choking almost, and never again did I play that
tune till I played it to you the other night. What would I not give to live
all that time over again—with you, mind, not without. Some little spots of
Haddo House are almost sacred ground to me. I don’t like to see others on
them—places associated with some little act or speech or trifling little incident.
When I rid myself of myself and of what must always be an enduring misery to
me in all these memories, my own unworthiness and seeming cold-heartedness,
then those moments haunt me in their own proper colouring, and that’s why
I like seeing you at Haddo once more, and that’s why I am grieved sore at
missing it now. It may never, never come again, and the whole book may
be closed. Good-bye, dear Arthur.—Your affectionate sister,
C. GORDON.
From Mr. Gladstone
West Hill Park, Ampthill, October 24, 1878. —My dear
Arthur—l can say with confidence that Rosebery has behaved
thoroughly well, and is anxious to extricate himself from the
Aberdeen contest in order to make way for your nephew, if he
can do it with an honourable regard to the pledges he has given
to the supporters who brought him forward.
In considering this affair he is of necessity in some degree at
least in their hands. For if they are determined to have a
Liberal candidate, and upon his retirement to choose another, I
am not sure that he ought to retire. When, as you saw, he said
that he would place himself in my hands, I think he relied on
my duly considering the obligations he might have contracted.
All he can do, I think, is to endeavour strenuously to arrange
with them for an amicable retirement, and this I am persuaded
he will do. You are at liberty to make use of this as far as
you think proper for your nephew’s information, but I am sure
you will take care that no prejudice arises therefrom to him or
to the Liberals of the University. lam confident he may be
relied on to do his best.
The Afghan business is deplorable. We do not know what
was asked and refused, but why has it been kept back 1 Had
the Government had a good case, they would have taken care to
bring it out, as they did with the famous Salisbury despatch.
I must be at a Flintshire Liberal dinner next week, and I shall
take good care, while uttering my final opinion, not to play into
the hands of the Government.
194
CHAP.
FIJI


The more I think of the condition of the country and the
Empire, the more I trust that you will not remain for a
lengthened period banished to the other end of the world. At
the time when you were appointed, I was forward to recognise
your special fitness, but I have faith in you enough to imagine,
and almost to believe, that you have laid the foundations of a
right and sound policy in Fiji, and that it will probably not be
very difficult to send out a man who would carry forward and
complete your work. The next election will be indeed a crisis,
and my disposition certainly will be, taking age into considera-
tion, to accept a decisive verdict, or make the most and best of
one not quite decisive.
Pray remember us very kindly at Haddo.
I can give you a good account of the Duke of Argyll. His
mind is healthily alive. I saw nothing morbid in him. His
work on the Eastern Question usefully exercises his faculties.
He is not very strong, but neither was he before the catastrophe.
We go to Cambridge on Saturday (Mr. Sidgwick’s), and to
Hawarden on Tuesday or Wednesday.—Yours affectionately,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, Aberdeen, October 25, 1878.—Sir—I have the honour
to return the letter addressed to Sir M. Hicks-Beach by Dr. Drew, sent to me
in original in your letter of the 10th inst.
Dr. Drew’s account of the proceedings of the Lands Titles Commission at
Matailobau is not altogether accurate, and in all probability he has only received
very imperfect information on the subject from his correspondents in Fiji.
So far is it from being the case that the Commission recommended a grant
of 800 acres of land to Mr. Drew, that on the contrary it suggested the total
disallowance of his claim. It was accordingly so disallowed (as a claim of
right) by the Governor in Council; but as it was shown that Mr. Drew had
at one time put up a hut on the land, and been allowed to occupy it without
molestation for a short, though but a very short, time by the natives, it was
determined to allow him as a matter of grace and favour 100 acres surround-
ing the site which that hut had occupied. This was regarded by the Council
as very liberal and indulgent treatment of Mr. Drew’s pretensions, and I
should certainly not advise him to seek a reopening of the case, which could
hardly result advantageously to his interests. I have not the papers by me,
but if I recollect aright, the grounds of disallowance were, first and principally,
the proof that the owners of the land had been no parties to its alienation ;
and secondly, that, even if they had been, the deeds were too carelessly drawn
to permit any accurate identification of the ground said to be alienated. I
remember well that the boundaries were described as consisting of a frontage
and two parallel lines produced to their point of junction, a point which I
need not say their prolongation round the whole of the earth’s surface would
never have attained !
195
XXI
FIJI


I would suggest that the reply to be returned to Dr. Drew should be, that
it would appear from the information received that Mr. Drew’s title had not
been made good to the satisfaction of those to whom the duty of their
investigation had been committed, and that the grant of 100 acres had been
made as a matter of grace and favour in consequence of Mr. Drew’s having at
one time for a short period occupied a small portion of the land in question,
and that if Dr. Drew possesses any additional evidence of the validity of the
title, not submitted to the Lands Commission or the Governor in Council, he
will do well to forward it to the Colonial Secretary of Fiji, accompanied by a
request that it may be considered and the case reopened for the purpose of its
reception.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, Aberdeen, October 26, 1878.—Sir—I have had the honour
to receive your letter of the 9th inst. enclosing a despatch addressed to me by
Mr. Deputy Commissioner Swanston on the subject of his refusal to entertain
an action brought in the High Commissioner’s Court at Samoa by a citizen of
the United States against a British subject residing in Samoa.
I have more than once read this despatch and its enclosures with atten-
tion, and I do not feel it easy to express, or to form, a decided opinion with
respect to the course adopted by Mr. Swanston. On the one hand it appears
to me that he was right to refrain from dealing with the case himself, but on
the other I am disposed, though not without hesitation, to think that he
should have allowed the action to be entered in his Court, and have postponed
it until it could be heard by a Judicial Commissioner. On these points, how-
ever, opinions of far more value than my own are easily obtainable from the
legal advisers of the Colonial Office. lam also inclined to regret that he
should not have assigned to Mr. Griffin the perfectly sufficient reason he had
for not hearing the case, viz. that he was himself concerned in the trans-
action to which it related.
I enclose a draft of the answer I propose to return to Mr. Swanston’s
despatch, should it meet with the approval of the Secretary of State.
To Mr. Swanston
Sir —I have had the honour to receive your despatch of the 17th July last
on the subject of the course adopted by you in the case ofYan Camp and
Turnbull.
You appear to me to have done right in declining to adjudicate on a case
in which, if I rightly understand the papers transmitted by you, you would
yourself be liable to be called on as an important witness,
I am, however, disposed to think that you would have done better to
have allowed the case to be entered for hearing, but to have postponed the
trial until it could be conducted before a Judicial Commissioner.
I also regret that the perfectly sufficient reason which you had for not
hearing the case was not stated by you to Mr. Griffin. You were quite right
not to enter into any argument or discussion with him as to its validity, but
it would, I think, have been better, when declining to hear the case, to have
simply and shortly assigned the causes which induced you to do so.
196
CHAP.
FIJI


To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, Aberdeen, October 28, 1878.—Sir—1 have the honour
to return, as directed, the enclosures to your letter of the 24th inst. on the
subject of the murder of a British subject at the Island of Ugi, and the
consequent proceedings of H.M.S. Beagle.
I certainly think it to be advisable that before proceeding to take life, or
execute any other “act of vengeance,” the commanders of Her Majesty’s
cruisers should, wherever it is possible to do so, communicate either with the
High Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner of the district.
I do not mean to say that there are no cases in which immediate and
active interposition on the part of a cruiser may be necessary, but in by far
the greater majority of instances, and especially where the object in view is
not the protection of British subjects in a position of danger, but the punish-
ment of natives for some wrong done by them, advantage would, I believe,
result from such a reference as I have suggested.
The commanders of the cruisers in question usually show, on the whole,
much good sense, moderation, and temper in their dealings with native
populations, but they labour under great disadvantages in handling questions
in dispute between white men and natives.
Their training has not been such as to give them much power of judicial
appreciation of evidence ; their means of communicating with the natives
are necessarily very imperfect; they do not possess that previous knowledge
of the existing state of things in the locality, or of the antecedents of the
parties concerned, which is often of very essential assistance to the true
understanding of such disputes, and it may well happen that, with the best
intentions, they may be led to be the abettors of very questionable trans-
actions. I know this to have been the opinion of at least one very dis-
tinguished naval officer commanding on the Australian station.
Moreover, I think, if the authority of the High Commissioner is to be
respected in the Pacific, it is to him and his deputies that complaints of
misconduct on the part of the natives should be made, and demands for
redress addressed (as they would be to a Consul, where one is stationed),
rather than to the naval officer, who will have to enforce the demand for
redress or execute the punishment to be inflicted, should it appear to be
expedient to resort to such measures. Ido not think it would be seemly, or
conduce to the proper working of the Order in Council of 1877, if a resident
in any island of the Pacific, who has applied to the High Commissioner to
enforce his claims or secure the punishment of natives who had aggravated
him, and has to be refused, should be able (suppressing, as of course he would
do, the fact of such refusal) to seek and obtain from the lieutenant in
command of a cruiser that compliance with his wishes which the High
Commissioner had considered to be either injurious to the interests of British
subjects generally, or unjust as regarded the natives accused.
I should therefore suggest that, except in cases where immediate action
may be needful to preserve the lives or secure the property of British subjects,
all complaints against natives should in the first instance be transmitted to
the High Commissioner or the nearest Deputy Commissioner, and that no
active measures of a hostile or retaliatory nature should be undertaken with-
out the concurrence of such authority.—l have, etc.
197
xxr
FIJI


To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, October 28, 1878. —Sir— I have the honour to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 3rd inst. on the subject of the negotiation of
treaties with the existing governments of Samoa and Tonga.
The two cases are essentially distinct and must necessarily be dealt with
in a wholly different manner.
I. The Friendly Islands
I entirely agree with Lord Derby (see Foreign Office letter of the 24th
March 1877, among the papers herewith returned) that “ it would be prudent
to take steps at once to obtain from the Tongan authorities a recognition of
the right of Her Majesty to exercise exclusive jurisdiction, civil and criminal,
over her own subjects in those islands.”
Without such recognition by treaty,—a recognition which (as I have
already reported in my despatch to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
Ho. 15, of the 27th April) King George of Tonga is quite prepared to give,—
I confess I doubt whether the powers conferred by the Order in Council of
August 1877 could with propriety be exercised, except perhaps in the ease of
a civil suit between two British subjects.
There are in Tonga both inferior and superior courts of justice, holding
regular sittings, and the proceedings of which are on the whole creditably
conducted. It would, I think, he impossible altogether to withdraw British
subjects permanently resident in Tonga from the jurisdiction and control of
these courts without an express agreement to that effect on the part of the
Tongan Government.
What I should therefore propose in the case of Tonga is that I should be
empowered, on my return to the Pacific, to sign such a convention as that
which King George was in April last willing to agree to, and which is fully
described in my despatch, Ho. 15, before referred to. If it be thought
expedient to proceed more promptly, Mr. Maudslay might, I think without
objection, be at once authorised to conclude such an agreement. I would
suggest that the jurisdiction of the High Commissioner’s Court should be
exclusive in all cases between British subjects, in all civil cases where a
British subject is the defendant, and in all cases where a British subject
is charged with an offence against the law of England, or against
Regulations made under the provisions of Article XXIV. of the Western
Pacific Order in Council; but I would not propose to deprive the Tongan
Courts of their jurisdiction in the case of offences by permanent residents
against the municipal law of Tonga, relating to matters not cognisable by
the law of England, e.g. the sale of spirits, which in Tonga is regarded (and
in the circumstances- of the population, rightly regarded) as a serious offence.
Hor would I propose to preclude the inferior Tongan courts from taking
cognisance of the breach of ordinary local police regulations by British
residents.
11. The Navigator Islands.
The position of affairs in Samoa is widely different. Practically the
islands of that group have no government whatever. The so-called courts
are (as a passing reference to Mr. Maudslay’s despatches is sufficient to show)
198
CHAP.
FIJI


a grotesque burlesque on the administration of Justice, and the exclusive
jurisdiction of the High Commissioner’s Court in every case in which a
British subject is concerned should peremptorily be insisted on, with or with-
out the recognition of the Samoan chiefs.
An agreement with the Samoan authorities which would enable the High
Commissioner’s Court to summon before it native witnesses would, however,
be most useful, and indeed is essential to the proper working of the Order in
Council. As things now are, the sole witnesses of the guilt or innocence of
a British subject accused of some grave crime might be natives, and the
Court would have no power to compel their attendance or even to summon
them to attend.
Such an arrangement might, I believe, be effected, but it would perhaps
be as well to postpone its negotiation until the occasion of my next visit
to Samoa.
I return, as desired, the enclosures to your letter. —I have, etc.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, Aberdeen, October 28, 1878. —Sir —I have the honour to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 18th instant,'enclosing copies
of a correspondence between the Colonial Office and the Crown Agents for the
Colonies.
The letter from the Colonial Office to the Crown Agents requests those
gentlemen to take the necessary steps for issuing debentures to the extent of
£50,000, on account of the Fijian loan lately authorised.
Sir P. Julyan in reply assigns reasons for thinking that it would be in-
expedient to take such steps at the present moment, and that to do so would
involve a sacrifice which a little further delay may render unnecessary.
I have no doubt that Sir P. Julyan’s advice is fully borne out by facts,
and in this and all other matters directly connected with the issue of the loan
I should be disposed to accept his opinion and adopt his counsels without
question or demur.
But the greater part of Sir P. Julyan’s letter is devoted to another subject
not mentioned in the letter from the Colonial Office and not necessarily
connected with the issue of the proposed loan, and on this subject I find it
impossible to share the views expressed by the Crown Agents.
Sir P. Julyan adverts to the claims preferred by the Bank of New Zealand
against the Government of Fiji, and urges that these should receive more
favourable consideration than has been accorded to those of other parties who
have put forward pecuniary claims against the Colony, and dealt with on
different principles from those on which it has up to this time been the policy
of Her Majesty’s Government and of the Colonial Government to act.
Up to this time, the Colonial Government of Fiji, with the full approval,
and indeed under the instructions of Her Majesty’s Government, has con-
sistently refused to recognise the promises and obligations of the so-called
Government of Cakobau, but has expressed its willingness to refund (with
interest) monies actually supplied to it, and to pay for goods actually
furnished to it, for which payment has not yet been made.
This principle is just, simple, and in all cases easy of application. But it
is now proposed that in the case of the Bank of New Zealand, this principle
199
XXI
FIJI


should be departed from, and that this corporation should not only be repaid
the sum actually advanced to Cakobau by the so-called “Bank of Fiji,” the
“ Fiji Loan and Commercial Company,” and other parties whose claims have
since been bought up by the Bank of New Zealand, but should be paid the
fall amount promised in the “worthless debentures” of the so-called Fijian
Government.
I confess I cannot see any reason whatever for treating the claims held by
the Bank of New Zealand on a different footing from those held by other
parties to whom the so-called Fijian Government made promises, or with
whom it entered into contracts, whilst I see many reasons against so doing.
Did the transaction stand alone, although I should disapprove the proposed
departure from a clear and intelligible principle, I should not perhaps feel any
insuperable objection to the arrangement suggested, but unfortunately it does
not and cannot stand alone.
I hold it to be absolutely impossible to draw a distinction between the
Bank of New Zealand and other holders of Cakobau’s obligations. It should
be borne in mind that only a very small portion of the debentures now in the
hands of the Bank of New Zealand were originally held by it, and that the
remainder have been subsequently acquired by that corporation from the
“ Bank of Fiji ” or private parties, who are believed, if report speaks correctly,
to have disposed of them at very low prices ; and those of the original de-
benture-holders who still retain their debentures and prefer their claims wdll
have very good ground for complaint if the Bank receives their full nominal
value for debentures which it has purchased at an even lower price than that
at which they were originally issued, whilst they themselves only receive the
amount in consideration of which the debentures were placed in their hands.
If, on the other hand, it be intended not to treat the Bank exceptionally,
but generally to recognise and discharge the unfulfilled promises of Cakobau
and his Government (and, as I have already observed, it will be practically im-
possible to distinguish between them), it will be necessary to reverse the policy
hitherto adopted, and to contract a far larger loan than that now authorised—
one, I fear, which it would severely task the resources of the Colony to bear.
I cannot, I confess, see the justice of burdening the taxpayers of the Colony
to secure the profits of rash and hazardous speculators : I say advisably their
profits, for the system now in force of repaying them with interest what they
have actually advanced secures them from positive loss.
The anxiety of the Bank of New Zealand to have the full value of Cakobau’s
debentures recognised even at the price of an equivalent reduction in the rate
of interest is a proof that this recognition is desired for ulterior purposes, and
those -purposes it is not difficult for those intimately acquainted with the
affairs of Fiji to conjecture.
If for any reason it be thought expedient or desirable to give the Bank of
New Zealand a larger sum than is recommended in my despatch, No. of
, I would much rather that this should be effected by raising the rate of
interest to be allowed to them and other claimants on the money they have
advanced, than by recognising the nominal value of Cakobau’s obligations.
I need hardly remark that great encouragement would be given to the
Polynesia Company, the “Forty Thieves,” and others to persevere in in-
admissible demands, if they found that the Bank of New Zealand had by
obstinate persistence obtained not only (as it already has) terms very much
200
CHAP.
FIJI


more favourable than those originally proposed by Sir H. Robinson and
sanctioned by Lord Carnarvon, or even than those proposed by Mr. Maudslay
in 1877, but also the concession of the principle the maintenance of which
has for the last three years been supposed to be of vital importance to the
Fijian Government.
Any such concession I should in the most earnest manner deprecate, but
it cannot be avoided if the suggestion of the Crown Agents be adopted.
I should therefore venture to suggest that if the Bank of New Zealand
makes any official inquiry of the Colonial Office on the subject (which, so far
as I am aware, it has not yet done) it should be informed that Her Majesty’s
Government has approved of the settlement already communicated to the
Bank, and that the offer of the Colonial Government to pay to it £61,743,
as a matter of grace and favour, and in satisfaction of all demands, will remain
in force until a certain fixed date (say, June 30, 1879), after which, if it has
not been previously accepted, the Colonial Government and Imperial Govern-
ment will consider themselves free from all further obligations.
If, however, it is for any reason thought necessary to give the Bank any
larger sum than £61,743 (which appears to me unnecessary), I should strongly
recommend its being made up by an increase in the rate of interest allowed
on the sum actually paid, rather than by the recognition of the nominal value
of Cakobau’s debentures.
I would also most respectfully but decidedly urge that any further negotia-
tions with the Bank of New Zealand should be carried on, as they have
hitherto been, between the local Government in Fiji and the authorities of
the Bank in Auckland, rather than by “informal discussions” between the
Crown Agents and the agent of the Bank in England.
It is obvious that in any discussion which takes place here the Colony
must be at a disadvantage, except perhaps when 'purely financial arrangements
are being discussed. The Crown Agents are necessarily but imperfectly informed
as to the details and political bearing of all the previous action taken in the
matter, whilst the managing director of the Bank knows exactly what he
wants, and why he wants it.
It is therefore not impossible and perhaps not improbable, that the Crown
Agents might occasionally be misled by plausible ex parte statements which
there was no one to meet, and that arrangements so entered into on behalf of
the Colony might give rise to serious complications and embarrassments. —I
have, etc. 1
P.S. —I have omitted to observe that the cases of the debt of the Transvaal
Republic and that of Fiji, between which Sir P. Julyan draws a parallel, do
not appear to me to be by any means similar.
The Transvaal Republic was a bona-fide independent state, and was, I
believe, recognised as such. It had at all events a regularly constituted and
organised Government, the obligations of which might have a fair claim to be
respected. It is impossible to accord a similar position to the so-called
Government of Cakobau and his chiefs, openly defied by the European
residents in Fiji, and possessing but dubious authority over large portions of
even the native population.
1 Shortly afterwards, Sir P. Julyan became a Director of the Bank of New
Zealand !
201
XXI
FIJI


To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, October 30, 1878. —Sir— I have the honour to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 16th inst., on the subject of the proposed
increase in the number of members of the Legislative Council of Fiji.
The main objection to a small increase in the number of the unofficial
members of the Board, accompanied by a corresponding increase in the
number of official members, is, that it would not remedy the inconvenience
now felt, or improve the position of the unofficial section. Some idea of the
existing state of things may be gathered by imagining the existence of a Board
holding its sittings at Douglas, in the Isle of Man, and composed of four
official members resident in the island, and of four unofficial members living
respectively in Jersey, the Scilly Islands, Orkney or Shetland, and a remote
part of Ireland. If to these latter were added four more gentlemen resident
in Kent, Caithness, Yorkshire, and Cumberland, it is evident that the possi-
bilities of attendance of unofficial members would be increased ; but if, at the
same time, four more official members, resident in the Isle of Man, were added
to the Board, it is evident that nobhange would have been effected as regards
the disproportion existing between the attendance practically possible to be
given by the two classes of members.
Some device by which a larger number of unofficial members may be made
available for the transaction of legislative business, is that which is requisite.
This object would no doubt be accomplished by a mere increase in the number
of the unofficial members, but such an increase it would scarcely be wise to
make, for, though such a contingency is unlikely, it would then be possible
for the unofficial members by combination to assemble in their full numbers
and outvote the official section. What is to be desired, then, is a plan by
which the available strength of the unofficial members may be increased,
without increasing their voting power beyond that of the officials sitting at
the Board. If I were to be called on myself to suggest such a scheme, I
would propose that the Legislative Council should consist of (1) six official
members :
The Chief-Justice.
The Colonial Secretary.
The Attorney-General,
The Receiver-General.
The Agent-General of Immigration.
The Commissioner for Native Affairs.
(2) Six unofficial members.
(3) Four or six additional or extraordinary members, any one of whom
should have a right to sit and vote in the absence of any one of the six
ordinary unofficial members.
But this question is one the decision on which must necessarily rest with
Her Majesty’s Government, and I can only say that whatever arrangement
it may ultimately be determined to adopt, no exertions shall be wanting on
my part to render its working successful.
It has been suggested to me by some members of the Legislative Council
that the unofficial members would be better able to attend its sittings if the
Council met only twice a year, and then sat for several days consecutively
until all legislative business was disposed of. I fear that this plan, though
202
CHAP.
FIJI


not without its recommendations, would scarcely answer, as it would certainly
be necessary on emergencies to hold other occasional sittings which would
probably give rise to much dissatisfaction, whilst the withdrawal, for several
days at a time from their offices, of the heads of Departments having seats
in Council would, in a place where the official staff is so limited as it is in
Fiji, be productive of very considerable public inconvenience.—l have, etc.
Tuesday , October 29.—Went with Alex to Fowie Sands. A
landscape much like Nova Zemhla. Snow and hail at frequent
intervals.
From Mr. Gladstone
Hill Side, Chesterton Road, Cambridge, October 29, 1878.
—My dear Arthur—l need not advert to all the points of your
very interesting letters. Rosebery’s freedom of action is limited
by acts now belonging to the past, but lam sure he will do or
will have done the best he can.
As to your nephew’s position, I think he may feel that,
should he act with the Liberal party, yet entertain a strong
dislike to Scotch disestablishment, he will not stand alone. Not
only does it seem probable that there are many persons of
standing who will have the same feelings, but one at least of
very high claims entertains them with a warmth which I some-
times feel it difficult to understand, —I mean Argyll. I quite
comprehend the opinion, but not the disposition to treat it as an
Alpha and Omega. If I suggest for your consideration whether
you might advise Aberdeen to draw towards the Duke, lam
quite certain I am not entrapping him into too mucli Liberalism,
for, much as I admire him and am attached to him, Ido not find
him quite up to the mark as a politician.
Meantime in all that you have said to him I thoroughly
concur. If, as I hope, you and Lady Gordon can give us a winter
visit on your way southwards, we may talk again about your
duties and the hemisphere in which they lie, in accordance with
the stage which the developments of events may then have
reached, but indeed, having regard to age and all circumstances,
I think myself to speak much more of duties for you than
of duties for myself. My first object of desire is escape
outright, my next not in any way to advance my position.
The circumstances which have forced me forward have been
imperious and most peculiar ; they have lost somewhat of their
special force, and they may, and I hope will, lose more. But I
hope things may so work as to bring you, with the capacity
you possess, to that point in the line, be it what it may, where
you may be enabled to turn it to the best account.
The Lyttelton marriage is to us most satisfactory in all
203
XXI
FIJI


points which most nearly touch human life and happiness.—
Believe me, affectly. yours,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Haddo House, November 1878.—Sir—I have had the honour to receive
your letters of the 19th and 31st October, on the subject of the Fiji Ordi-
nance “No. 1 of 1878, to regulate the acquisition of land by the Crown for
public purposes,”
In your letter of the 19th October you suggest that “exception may be
taken to the powers conveyed under the 12th and 13th sections, as intro-
ducing a principle not hitherto adopted either in this country or in Her
Majesty’s possessions abroad, in the case of private property required for
public purposes,”
It is quite true that the mode by which it is proposed to estimate the
amount of compensation to be given for land taken for public purposes in
Fiji, during the present year, is one that would not be suitable in long-settled
countries, and has not been adopted in them.
But in the case of the foundation of a new Colony, it seems to me that
when making provision for the acquisition of land necessary for the purposes
of Government, and essential to its proper working, a somewhat broader view
may be taken than a mere appeal to precedent, and that, if the proceeding be
in itself just and expedient, there is not only no reason against its enactment,
but much in favour of legislation, which may render it possible to avoid
embarrassments which have in other similar cases arisen, and to prevent
scandals which have elsewhere been but too frequent.
The Xllth Section of the Ordinance runs as follows :
‘ ‘ The value of land acquired for public purposes under this Ordinance
during the five years subsequent to the cession of the Fiji Islands to Her
Majesty the Queen —that is to say, up to the 10th day of October in the year
of our Lord 1879, shall be taken to be its value on the day of cession, together
with the value of any buildings or improvements actually existing at the date
of the service of the notice.”
It will be observed that the operation of this section is limited to a short
period from the cession, and to a very short period indeed from the date of
the passing of the Ordinance, and that it will cease to have effect before the
end of the present year.
The object of its adoption was twofold : the one to provide that in the
first acquisitions of land for public purposes made by Government, mere
speculators should not derive an equal advantage with (and indeed at the
expense of) bond-fide settlers ; the other, to prevent a fictitious value being
placed upon such lands, in order to enhance their price, when it was known
that they were required by the public.
Let us suppose that, the day before the cession of Fiji, three adjoining
pieces of land, of equal size, and possessing similar advantages, were purchased
by A, B, and C. Their properties were then, on the 10th October 1874, of
equal value. Since that time A and C have worked their land, and improved
it, by putting houses on it, by cultivating it, and otherwise adding to its
value. B, the possessor of the centre block, is a speculator in Sydney, who
has allowed his land to remain wholly waste and idle ; nevertheless, its value
204
CHAP.
FIJI


at the present time has been greatly increased, not by his exertions, but by
those of his neighbours A and C. All three blocks of land are now required
by Government. Is it fair that A and C should be taxed to pay B for that
enhanced value which they themselves have given to his land, and to produce
which he has done nothing ? Is it not more just that the land of all three
should be estimated at one original value, and that the improvers should
receive, as they would receive under this Ordinance, the increased price
which the improved condition of the land commanded, but that B should
not be advantaged at their expense, on account of their improvements ?
Any additional value the land may have derived since the cession,
independently of the exertions of its owner (which are taken into account), or
of the exertions of his neighbours, must be due to the establishment of an
improved and more stable Government. Is that Government then to pay for
the benefits which it has itself conferred ?
In a new country, at the time of its first foundation, when the Colony is
still poor and struggling under innumerable difficulties, is it too much to ask
members of the community, who happen to possess land needed for public
purposes, to make some sacrifices, and, foregoing some accidental advantages
for the general good, to be content with more moderate profits than those to
which, under another condition of things, they might deem themselves
entitled, bearing in mind always that the acquisition by Government of a
part of their land in all probability greatly enhances the value of the
remainder ?
If the man who bought land as a speculation, and has left it useless, is
allowed to profit by the result of his neighbour’s industry (and, be it observed,
at the expense of that neighbour’s pocket), it will encourage a most
mischievous form of gambling speculation, which is one of the curses of young
colonies, and retards most perniciously the progress of a new and small
community, and which I had hoped would under this law receive a serious
blow.
But it is only at the very outset that this system of valuation is
contemplated. It is Section XIII. which provides for the permanent
machinery by which land is subsequently to be acquired by Government.
The object of the Legislature in the enactment of this clause, which
(making allowance for subsequent improvements) fixes the value of land
as that which it bore at the beginning of the year in which the purchase
may be made, was to defeat a practice unfortunately prevalent in some
colonies.
When there is reason to imagine that the Government is about to take a
piece of land, the proprietor ostensibly sells it for a large sum to another
party, who appears before the arbitrators as the owner, shows what he jias
apparently paid for the property, and demands, and receives, compensation
accordingly. But this compensation he does not retain. In accordance with
a secret agreement, he hands over the bulk of it to the original proprietor,
who has but nominally received from him the alleged price, and who permits
the nominal vendor to the Government to keep a more or less handsome
commission on the transaction, for the assistance he has afforded in extracting
an exorbitant sum from the public. It is sought by this section to check
such proceedings.
If a sale has taken place since the Ist of January, in any year, which, in
205
XXI
FIJI


the opinion of the arbitrators, shows that a real rise in the value has taken
place, there will be nothing to prevent the arbitrators taking that circum-
stance into consideration, but under the provisions of this section they will
not be bound, as they would otherwise be, to estimate the value from a very
recent sale price.
The two clauses XII. and XIII. are, however, quite separable. Objections
might be held fatal to the one yet not to the other, and the repeal of either
would not necessarily involve that of both.
It is also suggested that the procedure established by this Ordinance
“may be said to be not consistent with the terms of the Deed of Cession,”
and that “cases may arise in which land may have been bought at Suva, at
an enhanced value, in contemplation of the removal of the seat of Govern-
ment to that locality, while, under the principle laid down in the Ordinance,
the price afterwards given by the Government for the same land might be
very much less than the price at which it was bond fide purchased by the
present holder.”
I confess I do not see how the procedure established by the Ordinance can
be considered inconsistent with any provision of the Deed of Cession, fairly
construed ; nor do I think the occurrence of sales such as are referred to,
need be seriously contemplated. I will not absolutely say that none such
have taken place, for, although I am not aware of any, I do not possess that
minute and accurate knowledge which alone would justify such an assertion ;
but I am sure they have not taken place to any extent, and that none have
been effected since the passing of this Ordinance, a year ago. On the other
hand, I am very certain that, were this Ordinance disallowed, sham sales
for the purpose of giving a fictitious value to the land would be at once
largely resorted to.
I hope, therefore, that this Ordinance will be left to its operation. At
the same time, I cannot pretend that its maintenance is of vital importance
to the Colony. Its disallowance would, in my opinion, either lead to a waste
of public money, or would necessarily postpone the acquisition by the Crown
of the land greatly needed by it, and would, in any case, remove a very
useful check on a most mischievous system of land speculation ; but it would
not be attended with the serious political and social consequences which
would attend the disallowance of Ordinance No. IX. of 1878, with respect to
which I have also to-day addressed a letter to you.
I now turn to your letter of the 31st October, which gives cover to a
despatch from Mr. Des Yoeux, No. 89 of the 19th August, enclosing an
Address from the Trustees of the Wesleyan Mission in Fiji, objecting to the
provisions of the Ordinance. I will proceed to consider these objections in
detail.
1. Objection is made to the nomination of a third member of the Board
of Arbitration by the Chief-Justice, instead of the appointment of an umpire
by the two Arbitrators themselves, in the event of their disagreement.
The Colonial Legislature was, I believe, induced to take this course from
a conviction, in the first place, that it would hardly ever be found that the
Arbitrators agreed on their award, and that, in almost all cases, an umpire
would have to be called in. This being so, it was thought that time would
be saved by the appointment at once, in all cases, of a third Arbitrator,
nominated by an external and impartial authority, for, assuming such an
206
CHAP.
FIJI


umpire to be required, it was felt to be hopeless to look for agreement in his
selection by the two Arbitrators.
2. The Memorialists also object, on four grounds, to the power given to
:he Supreme Court for annulling the award of the Arbitrators. These
grounds are—
[.lnsert]
(1) It would, I think, have been better if it had been provided that the
Supreme Court, in cancelling the award originally pronounced, should itself
pronounce the new and final one ; but at the same time there are some
obvious reasons, of considerable weight, against this course. I must further
observe that, although undoubtedly “trouble” will be caused to the pro-
prietor by the re-hearing, “expense” will not, as it is expressly provided
in the Ordinance that the costs of the proceedings are to be borne by the
Crown.
(2) I do not concur in the opinion expressed by the Trustees, but I have
no objection to an appeal being made equally open to a proprietor dissatisfied
with the amount allowed him as to the Crown when it deems the award
exorbitant.
(3) I see, as I have already said, no great objection to a right of appeal
being allowed to both parties, but I ought, I think, to observe that the
statement that “the award may be cancelled if it be considered by the
Government to be excessive ”is incorrect. It can only be cancelled if it is
considered excessive by the Supreme Court.
(4) This allegation is simply altogether unfounded. “The sole power of
judging whether the award should be set aside,” rests, not with the Govern-
ment, but with the Supreme Court, and with the Supreme Court exclusively.
The Memorialists further object that “Section XII. ordains that the
value of land to be acquired for public purposes under this Ordinance during
the five years subsequent to the cession of the Fiji Islands, shall be taken to
be its value on the day of cession.”
They omit the important qualifying words with which the Section con-
cludes, “ together with the value of any buildings or improvements actually
existing at the date of the service of the notice.”
The general objections to this section have been already dealt with in an
earlier part of this letter, and I shall therefore not now discuss those urged
by the Wesleyan Mission.
To the Xlllth Section they do not appear to offer any objection.
I do not myself think the XlXth Section is obscure, as the Trustees of
the Mission appear to consider, but, if necessary, I should be quite disposed
to add words showing more clearly the intention of this section, which had
reference solely to the laying out of a new town, and not the allotment of
sites in old ones.
The answer which I should recommend to be made to the Trustees would
be that they should be informed that H.M. Government is not prepared to
advise the disallowance of the Ordinance ; but that amendments giving to
the proprietor the same right to appeal against an award which he deems
insufficient, as is accorded to the Government when it deems the award
excessive, will be introduced, as well as pthers explanatory of any ambiguity
in the provisions of the Ordinance.
207
XXI
FIJI


TO THE SeCEETARY OF STATE FOE, THE COLONIES
Haddo House, November 1878. —Sir— l have the honour to return with
thanks Mr. Des Yoeux’s despatches, Nos. 86 and 90, sent for my perusal.
The report of the Acting Keceiver-General appears to me on the whole
very satisfactory. lam more sanguine than he is as to realisation of the
estimated receipts from native taxes, and the telegram lately forwarded to
me by you showing receipts up to September 30, appears to justify that view.
If this be so, there is a fair prospect of the estimated total revenue for the
year 1878 being very nearly, if not altogether, attained. —I have, etc.
To THE SECEETAEY OF STATE FOE THE COLONIES
Haddo House, November 9, 1878. —Sir — I have the honour to return
Chief-Justice Gorrie’s despatch, No. 2 of August 1878, sent to me for perusal.
There does not appear to me to have been any sufficient reason for the
detention of the Stormbird, and I am glad that no attempt was made to
detain her.
I imagine that, since her transfer, the Stormbird has always sailed under
the Hawaiian flag. If lam mistaken on this point and she is still employed
in recruiting under English Colours, it is no doubt a subject for remark and
remonstrance.
The vessels of Messrs. GodefFroy, to which the Commodore’s letter refers,
sail under the German, and not the English, flag.—l have, etc.
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch No. 87
Mr. Des Yceux, it appears to me, judged rightly in dissuading Chief-
Justice Gorrie from taking any proceedings against the Stormbird, and 1
should conjecture that she was now a bond-jide Hawaiian vessel. What
other remarks I have to make on the case of the Stormbird are made in a
note on Mr. Gorrie’s despatch No. 2 of August 19.
I am wholly at a loss to understand Mr. Des Yoeux’s ignorance on the
subject of Mr. Gorrie’s position. lam quite certain that his attention was
called to Sir M. Hicks-Beach’s despatch (I cannot here refer to the number
or date) in which it was assumed that the duties of the High Commissioner
would, to a great extent, be performed in his absence by the principal
Judicial Commissioner, Chief-Justice Gorrie. I suppose that, owing to the
great multitude of subjects brought before Mr. Des Yceux at the time, and
his then weak state of health, it must have escaped his notice.
Chief-Justice Gorrie is not, strictly speaking, acting High Commissioner
at all, though, as acting for the High Commissioner, it is very difficult to
give him any other designation.
I agree with Mr. Des Yceux that the relative position of Mr. Gorrie and
himself is in some respects anomalous.
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch No. 88
The reply of Mr. Des Yceux to the memorial of the missionaries,
requesting that the foreshore may be included in the Crown grant to them
of lands in the town of Levuka, consists of two parts. In the first, he
answers, and I think successfully refutes, the arguments adduced by Messrs.
208
CHAP.
FIJI


Langham and Fison ; in the second he states reasons for considering great
indulgence to have been shown by the Governor in Council, when consider-
ing the Land Claims of the Mission.
In the first part of this reply I fully concur ; nor do I see that any other
could have been properly returned byMr.Des Yceux. The statements contained
in the second part are also, I believe, perfectly correct; but lam inclined to
feel some hesitation as to the necessity or prudence of thus retorting on
the memorialists. It may have been necessary to do so, and publicly to
remind them how much they owe to the liberality of the Government ;
but without a fuller knowledge of the circumstances than I possess, I
am not altogether assured of this. The facts of the case fully justify the
expressions used.
I have, however, so high an opinion of the services rendered by the
Wesleyan mission, and so strong a sense of the political importance of retain-
ing the friendship and assistance of a body so powerful and so perfectly
organised, that I would do much to conciliate them ; and did this claim stand
alone, I should not be altogether disinclined, as an act of grace and favour,
to give, or to sell to them on easy terms, a part at least of what they desire.
But unfortunately nearly the whole of the sea coast of Fiji is in the
hands of private proprietors; and to admit the contention of Messrs.
Langham and Fison —in my judgment, an utterly untenable one—that
when the sea is given as a boundary in Fijian deeds, it means the sea at
low water-mark (if not the outer edge of reefs adjoining, though always
under water), would be to yield up nearly the whole of the foreshore and
reefs of Fiji to private hands.
In every grant yet issued, high water-mark has been made the sea-coast
boundary, even in cases where the deeds spoke of low water-mark ; and in
every instance this reservation has been readily acquiesced in, as obviously
proper, except in the case of the present reverend claimants. If, however,
the claim of the missionaries, that the foreshore goes with the land , be
admitted, a similar right must be allowed to all other grantees similarly
situated. I do not think any attempt to deprive the natives generally
throughout the group of their rights of fishery, and of free passage along
the shore, could be made without results of the most dangerous and
formidable character, and the rights of the grantees would therefore
necessarily have to be purchased at enormous cost by the Government.
I would therefore suggest that Mr. Des Yceux should be directed to inform
the memorialists that Her Majesty’s Government consider the foreshores of
Fiji generally to be the property of the Crown, but that if there are any
circumstances of a special character attending the case of the mission, which,
in the opinion of the memorialists render their claim entitled to a favourable
consideration, and they are consequently dissatisfied with the decision of
the Governor in Council, they will have an opportunity of securing its
reconsideration, and that the mode in which such a revision is to be conducted
will be shortly made publicly known.
Mr. Des Yceux should, I think, also be instructed to inform the
memorialists that, pending such an appeal, it is impossible for His Majesty’s
Government to express any opinion on the points in dispute, except as
regards the general claim of Her Majesty under the Deed of Cession, to all
foreshores, reefs, rivers, etc., in Fiji.
11l P
209
XXI
FIJI


I append the copy of a memorandum by Mr. Thurston on this subject,
privately sent me, and of which I beg to request the return.
Three statements are made with regard to myself, in the memorial of the
missionaries, all of which are incorrect.
1. I never made the statement referred to in the fourth paragraph, at
least not in the sense there given to it.
2. I have never received any such instructions as are referred to in
paragraph five.
3. I have never given the assurance referred to in paragraph ten.
From Mr. Gladstone
Hawarden, Nov. 6, 1878.—My dear Arthur—l gather
from your letter that you desire something should be done in
the matter of East Aberdeenshire, and that you are reluctant to
do it yourself on account of your holding office, or on some other
ground. My first impulse was to write to Lord Macduff and
ask him to hold his hand until he should hear again, communicat-
ing with you in the meantime. But he has no Scotch address
given him in Dod, and I do not know whether he lives with
Lord Fife. I therefore write to Adam confidentially, and he
will probably either answer me or you. You cannot, I think,
blame Lord Macduff, for he cannot know what you know, but,
having regard to what you know, I quite agree with what you
say. I refer specially to the course your brother is ready to
take as to the present Government. With regard to the Rector-
ship, I am sorry that Lord Aberdeen has had to retire, though
well pleased that the contest has been avoided. lam confident
Rosebery has done his best, but he could not break or retract
his engagements if they held him to it.
What would be your date for coming south ? I feel sure
your little children must be no impediments. I shall probably
be absent during the last days of the month. The rumour of
an early dissolution, conditional upon war, has revived. Nothing
is impossible.—Yours affectly.,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
From Mrs. Gladstone
Hawarden Castle, Nov. 9,—My dear Arthur —It is not good of you
to suppose that we should not take in your dear children. Pray come here
whenever it suits, provided you don’t name the 26th of November to the
6th of December, on account of London. How well your nephew has
behaved, and we are sure Lord Rosebery had done everything in his power.
On Friday, 15th, Lord and Lady Bath come here, and the previous Wednesday
the A. Wests. You might be interested in meeting them. How would that
time suit you and yours ? I must tell you what a treat your letters ever are.
Really, without flattery, no one writes so clearly and to the point. My
210
CHAP.
FIJI


husband is beautifully well, in spite of all the anxieties. I have a dear letter
from Ishbel. —Yours affectly.
Sunday. —Very sorry you cannot come on Tuesday, but come on Friday
if you prefer it. My husband hopes Lord Aberdeen will sign the paper
asking for a meeting of Parliament. Expected Lord Bath to do so. Duke
of Westminster has. Ask your wife to write to me as to rooms for the
children, what she likes best. We shall be ready. I fear my letter was not
posted yesterday, and I write in case of this. We have just seen Lord
Rosebery is 4 majority. What did you expect? We got to London on 27th. —
Yours affectly.
From the Marquess of Salisbury
Nov. 11, 1878.—My dear Gordon—Many thanks for your
letter. It is difficult to see into men’s intentions, most of all
into Bismarck’s, but if protestations are to be believed, the
German Government has not the slightest intention of annexing
any portion of the Samoan group. —Ever yours.
From the “Aberdeen Journal,” November 16, 1878
SIR ARTHUR GORDON IN ABERDEEN
PRESENTATION OF THE FREEDOM OF THE CITY
Yesterday the Honourable Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon, Governor of Fiji,
was presented with the freedom of the City of Aberdeen. The ceremony took
place in the Town and County Hall at one o’clock, and was witnessed by a
large number of ladies and gentlemen. The hall was neatly decorated for
the occasion. A platform was erected at the west end, and being covered
with crimson cloth and lined with flowering plants, presented a tasteful
appearance. Trophies of flags, arranged by the Clyde men, were hung
around the walls, and, filled as it was to its utmost capacity by a select
audience, numbering about 600, the hall looked its best.
Previous to the ceremony, the members of the Town Council and some of
the leading citizens assembled in the Town Hall and received their guest,
after which the company entered the great hall and took seats on the platform,
preceded by the town sergeants with decorated halberds. Sir Arthur Gordon
took his place on the right of the Lord Provost, and the Earl of Aberdeen on
his left.
The Lord Provost said—My Lord, ladies, and gentlemen, we have met
to-day for the purpose of conferring the honour of the freedom of the city
upon the Hon. Sir Arthur Gordon (applause). The Town Council has
done honour to itself in asking Sir Arthur Gordon to accept the freedom of
our city. Sir Arthur is the son of the Premier Earl of Aberdeen, the grand-
father of the present Earl —(applause)—who, I need not inform this audience,
was a very eminent statesman—who occupied the highest offices of state in
our kingdom, and enjoyed the greatest confidence of our Sovereign—(applause)
—whose history is that of the nation during a large period of his life—a
nobleman who always displayed the warmest sympathy with everything
210
XXI
FIJI




connected with this city, and whose benevolent character as a landlord will
be long remembered over the wide extent of the property he owned (ap-
plause). Sir Arthur’s youth and early manhood were spent at Haddo House.
The first public work we find him engaged in, and by which his name came
prominently out, was the organisation of the Volunteer movement in the
rural districts of the county (applause). Except the city corps, those he
raised were the first in the county and among the first in Scotland. I
became acquainted with something of the character of Sir Arthur Gordon
when living more than twenty years ago in the country a few miles from
Haddo House. I was then informed by some one who likely had experience
of Sir Arthur’s kindness, that the then Honourable Arthur Gordon, during
the period he lived at Haddo House, established a sort of school for the
improvement of the education of the young men employed in the grounds
and garden and farm —(applause),—and that without assistance from any
one, he instructed these lads night after night, not only in reading, writing,
and arithmetic, but for those who wished it, in French, geography, etc.
The ordinary nightly instruction was varied by a lecture once a week upon
astronomy, biographical history, or something else of literary or scientific
interest. A social meeting wound up the session, when prizes, consisting
of useful articles, were distributed. It is not, I submit, very often that you
find an earl’s son employing his time—it may be his holidays—in such work.
To me it stamped him as one whose future might be expected to prove one
of mark. One feels naturally curious to learn what results followed these
beneficent efforts. Sir Arthur tells me that the friendship then formed
between him and several of the young men has continued unbroken to this
day, and that one clever lad whom he got apprenticed to Sir Wm. Armstrong
became one of Sir William’s most trusted assistants, and is now a partner in
the important firm of Sir Henry Jackson and Brothers (applause). Such
unobtrusive benevolent action prepares one for a conscientious if not a brilliant
career. I think we have both in the history of Sir Arthur’s relations to the
colonies he has governed. The first colony to which he was appointed was
that of New Brunswick in 1861. At that time there were fears of a war with
America in consequence of the Trent affair. Sir Arthur had a deal to do in
connection with the movement of troops, and in preparing against Fenian
raids. He shortly established for himself such a name for administrative
and executive capacity as at once placed him in the first rank of governmental
officials (applause). In 1866 he went to Trinidad, and remained till 1870.
When he left he received the warmest thanks of Lord Granville, then Colonial
Secretary. Sir Henry Taylor also at the time said of Sir Arthur, “that he
had done more during the four years he had been in Trinidad than all previous
Governors put together during the five-and-twenty years that their doings
had been subject to his (Sir Henry Taylor’s) review.” Indeed, in every
colony where Sir Arthur was placed, he appears to have been sent because
of the existence of special difficulties, and because he was known and ap-
preciated as a man of experience and judgment and tact, having a thorough
knowledge of human nature, capable of comprehensive organisation, and,
as such, able to overcome the difficulties which had sprung up. The last
appointment was made very much at his own request. In 1874, when
it became likely that Fiji would be annexed to this country, Sir Arthur
offered his services to the Government to organise the new dependency. In
211
XXI
FIJI


doing this he must have known that in this very special case he had to tread
on ground untouched, and to meet difficulties and dangers and disorders,
moral and physical and political, never before encountered. In such a case,
to make such an offer was a mark of true heroism. You know to some
extent how he has performed his work there —a people not then emerged
from the grossest savageism, having little regard for any law, hateful and
hating one another, have been reduced to social order, to the power of the
reign of law, and are now really a law-abiding people. This is surely
something worth a man’s life energies, even if he has been unable to do
anything more. [His Lordship then read an extract from an article in the
Sydney Morning Herald , highly eulogistic of Sir Arthur’s work in Fiji, and
proceeded]: I need not detain you longer. If you wish more details of the
rule of Sir Arthur you must look into the Blue-books. In this case I can
assure you they are not dry. As a rule j 7 ou will find his government always
helps the weak against the strong, right against might. The man whom
we have met to honour I think I have shown to be one of no common order
(applause). He is well entitled to the gratitude of the nation ; but it
specially lies to the chief town of the county to which he belongs to feel
proud of him and of his work —(applause) and to accord to him right
heartily and enthusiastically the honour designed by the Town Council.
It is not probably a great thing, but it is the greatest honour the city has
to bestow, and I may say that, in becoming a citizen of Bon-Accord, he
will find his name in a roll with such illustrious names as those of the
Prince Consort, the Prince of Wales, his own eminent father the Earl of
Aberdeen, Sir Robert Peel, Sir James Graham, the Earl of Carlisle, Mr.
Joseph Hume, Earl Russell, Mr. Gladstone (applause and hisses) —and
Mr. Forster (applause). In conclusion, allow me to say how gratified I
am to be the medium of conferring this honour upon you, Sir Arthur. It
is an accident, but the accident gives me much personal enjoyment, quite
as much as any other duty which has fallen to my official lot (applause).
The Town Clerk then read the Diploma, which is as follows :
Aberdoniae, a. d. XVII. Kal. Decembr.,
Anno Salutis Humanae millesimo
octingentesimo septuagesimo octavo,
Praefectds Ceterique Magistratus et Commune Concilium
CIVITATIS AbERDONENSIS,
Virum Honoratum,
ARTURUM HAMILTON GORDON,
Ex amplissimo S. Michaelis et S. Georgii Ordine
Equitem Cruce Magnifica Illustrem,
Insularum Fijiarum Praefectum
atque Bxcelsum Polynesiae Occidentals Legatum,
In compluribus Regni Britannici Coloniis Provinciisque
administrandis
maxima sna laude patriaeque commodo
din feliciterque versatum,
honoris causa
Civitate donarunt
Quapropter hocce Diploma Sigillo
Publico et Scribae Communis Chiro-
grapho muniendum curarunt,
Gulielmus Gordon,
Scrib. Com
L. S.
212
CHAP.
FIJI


The Town Clerk afterwards decorated Sir Arthur’s hat with the burgess
ticket, tying the parchments with a crimson band. Sir Arthur, having
put on his hat amidst applause, shook hands with the Lord Provost.
Sir Arthur Gordon, who was received with loud applause, said—My Lord
Provost, Gentlemen of the Council, and ladies and gentlemen, did I look
only at the list of those not born in this city whom you have within the last
thirty years enrolled among its burgesses, I should not receive at your hands
the honour you have this day conferred, without some apprehension that
the apparent compliment implied a covert satire. With the great names of
Peel and Russell, Gladstone and Graham, I can have no pretension to associate
my own. I am glad therefore to assume that this recognition of such humble
services as I may have been enabled to render in the course of my public
career is given, not so much on account of the services themselves, which
appear petty and contemptible indeed when the mind turns, as here it must
turn, to the achievements of the men who have given us Free Trade, who
passed the first Reform Bill, and who disestablished the Irish Church—
(applause and slight hisses) —but because you believe me to be the represen-
tative, however inadequate an one, of a just and generous policy of Colonial
administration—(applause)—because you do not altogether regard me as a
stranger, but in some degree associate yourselves with me in my career—
(applause)—because feelings of neighbourly and friendly interest lead you
to witness with satisfaction the bestowal, by the Sovereign, of posts of
confidence afld trust on a member of a family well known in this district,
and which has long been linked in ties of close association with this city
(applause). In this belief I can accept, without shame, and with hearty
thankfulness, the honour you have conferred on me (applause). I can
truly say, my Lord, that no distinction could be more grateful to my own
feelings, and none more highly appreciated (applause). Long years of
absence have not weakened, nay, they have in some measure strengthened,
the ties which bind me to this district, and though the freedom of this great
city is a gift of which any man, however eminent, might well be proud, it
has a special value for one who has been familiar with its spires and streets
from his earliest boyhood, and cannot remember the time when he first heard
the motto of “Bon-Accord” (applause). The course of my Colonial service
and the journeys it has occasioned have carried me to every quarter of the
globe, to North America and South America; Asia, Africa, and Australia have
all in turn been visited by me. Those wanderings have shown me many
races of men, and many striking scenes, but have in no way diminished the
love I bear to my own home (applause). The rugged sounds of our own
native speech have to my ear a charm when heard in a distant land,
which you may perhaps conceive, but which I cannot easily describe
(applause). It is not seldom in those distant parts of the world that one
does hear it, for in every British colony, wherever any enterprise is under-
taken, wherever any progress has been made, there, in the forefront of
action, will be found a Scotsman (applause.) And not only that, but the
odds are great that that Scotsman will also be an Aberdeenshire man (applause).
Nay, more ; it often happens that he is not only an Aberdeenshire man, but
one from the immediate neighbourhood with which I am myself most familiar
(applause). Take for example those met by me on my voyage home this
summer. One of the last people I took leave of in Fiji—that most distant of
213
XXI
FIJI


all British possessions—was a native of Inverebrie, in the parish of Methlick,
who settled in Fiji some fifteen years ago, and is now the possessor of large
estates, of several trading vessels, and has attained a position of influence
and authority. From Fiji I sailed to Sydney, the capital of New South
Wales. There I found in one of the highest offices of that great State—for
one can hardly call it a dependency now, it is almost an independent State—
the President of the Legislative Council, the brother of one of the best known
of the old tenants on the Haddo House estate—(applause) —a man universally
respected and beloved, and who has been most deservedly decorated by the
Queen with the Order of St. Michael and St. George. I mean Sir John Hay
(applause). I passed on thence to Suez. There, in a position of trust and
responsibility, on my last previous visit, I found another native of the parish
of Tarves. He has now gone to a yet more influential position in China.
Whilst near at hand, at Cairo, one of the principal, if not the principal,
physicians is Dr. Grant, a son of the village innkeeper at Methlick—(applause)
—the son of whose neighbour, the village merchant, is, by the way, now
commissioner of a great district in India, where he exercises rule over many
thousands of Her Majesty’s subjects. Now that, I think, is not a bad account
to give of men from two remote and purely agricultural parishes of this
county, found haphazard on the line of one’s journey homewards ; and it
must be remembered that every one of these men has attained the position
which he occupies solely by his own abilities and energy, and without any
adventitious or external help. No matter wherever one goes in the British
Colonies, you will find that Scotsmen and Aberdeenshire men are among the
foremost and most important and successful of the Colonists (applause). The
many years which have passed since I last addressed an audience in this city
have been spent by me, as you are aware, in the Colonial service of the Crown.
The manifold variety of the subjects which daily occupy and engross the
public mind at home, and the transcendent importance of many of the
interests which they involve, dwarf the apparent proportions which properly,
perhaps, belong to Colonial questions. They are looked on as of secondary
consequence, and for the most part regarded with comparative indifference.
Some one has well observed that the destruction of an hundred thousand
people in India, by such a calamity as the great inundation in the Sunder-
bunds last year, excites less thought and attracts less notice than an accident
involving the death of half a dozen men in Great Britain : and I am well
aware that, to use the language of a high authority, the most successful
Colonial career is certain to be almost unknown, and altogether misunderstood.
Yet there are problems of great moment being worked out in far distant
dependencies, interests of no ordinary magnitude are there at stake, and it is
therefore with peculiar pleasure that I see in your present act, not only a
flattering honour to myself individually, but a recognition by you of the
importance of the remoter possessions of this vast Empire (applause). During
the greater part of my Colonial career I have been the governor of what are
called Crown Colonies. Between these colonies and those which are ruled
under the system of what is termed Responsible or Constitutional Govern-
ment, there is a vast and most essential difference ; indeed, except that in
both he bears the same name, and that in both cases he represents the person
of the Sovereign, I should be inclined to say that there was no similarity
whatever between the functions which the governors of these two classes of
214
CHAP.
FIJI


Colonies respectively are called on to discharge. The duties and the
difficulties of a constitutional Governor have lately been described by one
than whom none has ever discharged the functions of that post more perfectly,
or with more thorough appreciation of their true nature. I mean the late
distinguished and successful Governor-General of Canada, the Earl of Dufferin
(applause). Had I any share of his sparkling and ready eloquence, any
portion of that wit and humour which in his family are hereditary possessions,
I would endeavour to parallel the picture he has drawn by painting one of
the Governor of a Crown Colony. That is, unfortunately for me, impossible ;
but I will endeavour in a few words to convey to you some idea of the nature
and responsibilities of that position, and the chief difficulties which attend
the performance of its duties. The functions of a constitutional Governor
have been wittily described by Lord DufFerin as resembling those of the
individual whose office it is to pour oil upon the joints of a machine, over the
movements of which he has no direct control, but which, were his unobtrusive
labours wanting, would speedily begin to work roughly and imperfectly, if
it did not come altogether to a standstill. But the Governor of a Crown
Colony’s functions are of a different nature. He not only reigns, but governs
in the strictest sense. All subordinate officers act in accordance with his
directions. He is responsible for their shortcomings, if he fails to correct
them. They are liable to suspension at his will. The Legislature is so con-
structed as to enable him to secure, should he deem it necessary, the passage
of any enactment he may frame. He is, in the colony, the ultimate referee on
almost every conceivable subject of administration or legislation. He is
called on to consider a multiplicity of questions, great and small, having no
relation to one another, and the strain upon the mind of keeping all of which
before it must be felt to be appreciated. Independently of the greater objects
which daily occupy him, he is constantly required to form opinions and give
decisions upon a hundred topics. He is never free from harness, he cannot
delegate his functions to another, his work is not limited by any office hours.
It is evident that where such powers are committed, and such duties imposed,
great responsibilities are incurred, and that to discharge them efficiently is no
light task. In all Crown Colonies there exist (and it is the reason for the
maintenance of so peculiar a form of constitution) two or more different races,
to neither of which can safely be entrusted the charge of governing the other,
and the existence of which is the cause of the establishment of what is in fact
a species of despotism, modified by a power of appeal to the Imperial Govern-
ment at home, and by the action of public opinion and common sense upon
the mere legal rights of the post. The first qualification, therefore, that
the governor of such a colony should possess is the power of entering
into the views, modes of thought, and objects of interest of other races than
his own. And next, a judicial impartiality in the power of applying that
knowledge, as between them, where their interests are or seem to be at variance.
He should possess a knowledge of the relations under which in past times
men of one race have held sway over those of another, or those of different
races have lived together under one Government —relations, the history of
which may in almost every case serve as a guide, either by way of warning or
example. He should be imbued with the legislative spirit. Ido not mean to
say that he should be the slave of formalised law in the strict shape in which
it is best known to him at home, or that he should be anxiously eager to
215
XXI
FIJI


apply all the technicalities of the English law in an indiscriminate manner,
among those unacquainted with it; but he should be penetrated by the spirit
of law, and able to clothe that spirit with the various shapes which may best
suit a rude and uncivilised people, or least chafe the sensitiveness of peculiar
forms of ancient civilisation, and least interfere with such good elements as
may be found to exist therein (applause). He should have a strong will to
enforce that which he deems right, but an even temper to enable him to
deal with all. He should possess the power of discerning and selecting fit
instruments, and the faculty of inspiring them with the spirit which makes
them work, not only because by the nature of the case they are obliged to
do so, but because it is to further his plans and afford him help. He should
be no mere office man, tied and fettered by red tape, sitting at a table before
a file of papers and a bundle of pens, but one who sees with his own eyes,
hears with his own ears, and works with his own hands ; one who does not
take precedent for argument, or etiquette for law (applause). He should be
accessible to all, courteous to all, reticent with all. He should be his own
Prime Minister, making every official feel that he works under his eye, and
that good service will not fail to receive from him merited encouragement
and reward (applause). He should have an active body, an iron constitution,
and an utter ignorance of the meaning of the word fatigue (laughter and
applause). lam aware that in sketching such a character I expose myself
to sarcasm from the contrast which may be drawn between it and my own
practice, but it is better to cherish an ideal, however imperfectly it may be
realised, than to be content with a lower standard (applause). The man who
among the governors of the present century has perhaps most nearly realised
this ideal was the late Marquis Wellesley, a greater man, I do not hesitate to
say, in some respects, than even his own illustrious brother, and a careful
study of whose masterly despatches I would venture strongly to recommend
to any man ambitious of attaining the higher posts of the Colonial service
(applause). But even if a man possesses all the requisite qualities of a governor
his task will not be easy —difficulties he will have to encounter from the
unreasonableness of individuals, the selfishness of cliques, and the inefficiency
of the instruments at his command, whom, though he is able to remove, he may
be unable to replace. The petty jealousies of small communities will often pre-
clude union where union is essential. The insufficiency of pecuniary means will
frustrate the attainment of objects clearly desirable. The imperious necessity
for action, to which I have before alluded, is also an obstacle in his way. He
may consider the arguments for two different courses to be nearly balanced ;
he may see the objection to either as clearly, and perhaps more clearly than
the objectors on either side themselves, but whilst they wrangle and argue
he must decide and act, he cannot indulge in idle criticism, he has to choose,
not perhaps without doubt and misgiving, that course which seems to
him on the whole best calculated to attain his end, least dangerous and
objectionable, and, having chosen it, to turn it to the best account. But great
as are the difficulties which a man in this position may have to encounter
from external difficulties and obstacles, they are not so great as those which
result from the atmosphere and tone which is almost inevitably the result of
bringing together in the same place a dominant and a subject race. Such
association leads to strong temptation to indulge in considerations of his own
self-interest, or ease, or vanity. He may be one to whom promotion and
216
CHAP.
FIJI


advancement are important, and the inducements, in this case, to adopt
measures rather with a view to the opinion which may be formed of them in
England than with regard to their adaptability to the actual state of things,
are strong. In saying this I make no reflection on the authorities at home ;
far from it. I have served under seven Secretaries of State ; and lam sure
that each one of them has been animated not only by a most sincere desire
to promote the welfare of Her Majesty’s subjects in distant parts, but has
worked to attain that object with a zeal and perseverance which, perhaps,
have not always met their adequate acknowledgment (applause). I entirely
concur in the sentiments expressed by Lord Carnarvon with regard to the
ability, industry, and singleness of purpose which is shown by the higher
permanent officials of the Colonial Department; but it is no doubt the case
that economy of administration, and an avoidance of all questions likely to
lead to Parliamentary discussions, are eagerly desired by the Imperial Govern-
ment. It is natural that it should be so, nay, more, it is right it should be
so ; but a knowledge of this fact may, in such a case as I have supposed,
sometimes deter from even necessary expenditure, and occasion some reluctance
freely to state unsatisfactory or unwelcome truths. Or a man, who has, perhaps,
served long and well in other parts of the world, may be inclined to look on
the appointment he has received as a reward for past service, and desire in-
dolently to enjoy its fruits. He may do so with little fear of external rebuke,
and, perhaps, without self-reproach, but he then cannot help permitting
power to pass from his own hands into those of some local potentate. He
has to shut his eyes to acts of petty jobbery, and does not care to rouse him-
self to perceive the need for measures of reform. He not only takes pains to
avoid running counter to the passions or prejudices of influential classes—for
that every prudent man would do—but fears even to touch abuses profitable
to those whose hostility if roused could make his life uncomfortable, and
destroy the peace and ease he covets (applause). Or again, vanity may
prompt a man to desire the cheap luxury of a noisy local popularity. It is
easy to gain ; but it is quite clear that it never can be gained by the main-
tenance of a strict impartiality and justice ; still less by the defence of the
interests of a mass of ignorant people. They have no paid local newspapers
at their command ; they have no influential agencies and connections in
England and in the greater Colonies. They cannot make their voices heard
in the House of Commons. But there are those who have all these engines
at their disposal, and in advancing their interests it is not difficult to gain
applause and favour. Do not say that I am referring to men who can have
no place, or at least ought to have no place, in the public service. Men,
honest and uncorrupt, painstaking and useful, who would justly repudiate
complicity with any conscious act of wrong, with any departure from the
strictest line of duty, are yet in such an atmosphere not insensible to such
promptings. It is almost impossible to say how subtly and almost imper-
ceptibly such influences work, or how great is the social and moral pressure
produced by an exceptional state of society. Peculiarities of temperament
and accidents of position have probably led me to be less accessible to such
temptations than most men ; yet I have felt their influence. But for those
accidents, I will not dare to say that I would never have yielded to them. I
am not singular in this belief. Other governors of the same experience
would tell you, only in better chosen words and with more effective utterance,
217
XXI
FIJI


the same things. The man who is determined to turn a deaf ear to these
suggestions and to do his duty, simply remembering his responsibilities and
the influence he possesses over the condition of thousands of his fellow-men
with whom he will never be placed in any personal relation, must do so in
the spirit which led the first King James of Scotland to exclaim that he
would accomplish his schemes for the amelioration of the condition of his
people “though he led a dog’s life to bring it about ” (applause). And this
“dog’s life” he must accept, not as a thing to be whined at and moaned
over, but manfully and simply, as a necessary incident in the state of life to
which it has pleased God to call him, sustained by the knowledge that,
whether he succeeds or not, he is at least working on the right side, and by
the hope that when his time of work is over he may be able to reflect that
he has done somewhat to promote the things dearest to God—truth, justice,
and mercy ; something to render life easier and happier to subsequent genera-
tions of his fellow-men (applause). In your welcome of me to-day, and in
the remarks made by you, my Lord, you have given proof of your desire to
support right principles in the government of subject races—(applause) —and
however feebly I may myself have carried them out, however faintly my own
practice may reflect the theory I have formed, you will at least appreciate my
motives, and the desire which I have to act on them (applause). Believe me,
my lord, the remembrance of this day will often act as an encouragement to
me when tempted perhaps to despondency, when overwhelmed by toil, too
often thankless, or when inclined to seek repose instead of labour. And now,
my lord, with the expression of my heartful thanks for this high honour I
should naturally conclude, were it not for one allusion made by you at the
commencement of these proceedings, and of which I have reserved all notice
till the close of my observations for reasons which will, I think, be obvious
to you —I mean the reference you made to my distinguished father. It is no
new thing to me to learn that here, where he was best known, he was most
honoured —(applause)—or that the highest appreciation of him was formed
by those who were admitted to his closest intimacy, and obtained the most
accurate knowledge of his character. One of the most distinguished colleagues
who sat in his Cabinet, and one who has since succeeded him in the illustrious
roll of Prime Ministers of England—l mean Mr. Gladstone—(applause)—thus
wrote to me soon after my father’s death, in the course of a long letter, in
which he dwelt with affection and pride upon his connection with him. He
said this:—
“ I will name, then, the following characteristics, one and all of which were
more prominent in him than in any public man I ever knew : mental calm-
ness ; the absence (if for want of better words I may describe by a negative) of
all egotism ; the love of exact justice ; a thorough tolerance of spirit; and last,
and most of all, an entire absence of suspicion. There was something very
remarkable in the combination of these qualities, as well as in their separate
possession. Most men, who might be happy enough to have one-half of his
love of justice, would be so tossed with storms of indignation at injustice as to
lose the balance of their judgment. But he had, or seemed to have, all the
benefits, all the ennobling force, of strong emotion, with a complete exemption
from its dangers. His mind seemed to move in an atmosphere of chartered
tranquillity, which allowed him the view of every object, however blinding to
others, in its true position and proportion.”
218
CHAP,
FIJI


(Applause.) Anywhere else, statements so personal would be out of place,
but here, in this city, where, though a generation that knows him not has
grown up to man’s estate, he is still well remembered—(applause)—here, in
this building, in one of the halls of which his picture forms so conspicuous an
ornament, I may be permitted to say that if I have been able in the course
of my life to effect any good or useful work, to preserve calmness of judgment
where others have been tossed by passion, it is wholly due to the almost un-
conscious influence of many years of association and intimacy with my father
association, how close ! —intimacy, how intimate ! (applause). In a few weeks
more, eighteen years will have elapsed since that intercourse was interrupted.
My life since that time has not been unhappy or unprosperous. I have had
my fair share of honourable employment; I have enjoyed the highest privilege
that man can have, the opportunity of being useful to my fellow-men. I
have been eminently blessed in the relations of domestic life ; but the void
caused by the loss of that friendship has never in any degree been filled up,
and never can be. Something is gone from the completeness and the fulness
of life which has dimmed its brightness and has dulled its zest; and I trust
I shall not give offence to you, my Lord, or to any of the burgesses of this city,
if I say simply that the gratification —and it is a high one—which I ex-
perience from the honour which you have conferred on me is in great measure
due to my knowledge of the pleasure which it would have given to my
father to see his son receive at your hands this signal proof of your approval
and regard.
Kennet, Sunday , Nov. 17. —We and the Selbornes went
to church at Alloa, a very handsome church. There we found
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Mrs. Tait. Both have grown
old, the latter very much aged indeed; frail, and in deep
mourning for her son Crawford, she formed a sad contrast to
the bright clever matron I remember two or three and twenty
years ago at Cuddesdon. It is clear that the loss of her only
remaining son has inflicted a blow that will never heal, and there
was a look on her face as if she had done with this world and
were only waiting for the end. Saw there also an old friend,
William Forbes of Medwyn. Walked about the place after
luncheon ;it is rather pretty. The day lovely.
Monday , Nov. 18.—-With Selborne and Balfour to Dunferm-
line, which I had never before seen. The remains are interesting,
and give me a higher opinion of Scotch domestic architecture than
I have yet had. There is a new Town Hall, rather good. On
our way back we picked up Principal Tulloch, and stopped at
Clackmannan to go up to the tower, which we went all over.
The Selbornes have with them Sophia, and a Miss Murray.
From Lady Frederick Cavendish
70 Pulteney Street, Bath, Nov. 17, 1878. —Dear Sir Arthur —You
know ray dear aunt, Mrs. Gladstone, of old, and will not therefore be much
219
XXI
FIJI


taken aback by the extremely shabby scrap of paper, upon which you will
recognise her handwriting, which I now enclose. But you will wonder why
it reaches you through me, and via Bath ; and my only explanation of so
odd a fact is that it came to me this morning amid various other half-sheets
of paper, of which lam the lawful owner. Pray forgive me for having read
the eccentric note. It is only by internal evidence that I am able to deter-
mine to whom to send it, and it would waste time for me to return it to
Hawarden. A shadow of doubt I still have as to whether you are the
“Arthur” in question, but only a shadow. If this finds you still at Haddo
(where the newspaper decides me to direct to you), will you remember me
very kindly to Lord and Lady Aberdeen, and tell Ishbel my brother and his
wife were delighted with their beautiful wedding presents ? Remember me
also affectionately to Lady Gordon, and believe me, sincerely yours,
LUCY C. F. CAVENDISH.
We are undergoing Bath for the sake of my husband, who has an obstinate
attack of rheumatism ; it has done him good.
To the Colonial Office
Haddo House, Nov. 22, 1878.—Sir —I have attentively perused the
various papers relating to the present state of affairs in New Guinea, trans-
mitted to me with your letter of the sth ultimo, and have given much anxious
thought to the subject of which they treat.
2. I regret to say that after the most deliberate reflection, I am irresist-
ibly compelled to adopt a conclusion which I should have wished to avoid,
and which I was at first inclined to think might be avoided, viz. that the
annexation by Great Britain of at least certain portions of New Guinea will
speedily become inevitable, even if the necessity for such a step has not
already arisen.
3. The Order in Council of the 13th August 1877, known as the “Western
Pacific Order in Council,” already provides (or with a few comparatively
slight modifications will provide) the machinery requisite for dealing with
any difficulties which, so far as the great majority of the islands of the
Western Pacific are concerned, are at all likely to arise from the action of
British subjects dwelling therein.
4. But adequate as are its provisions for the administration of justice in
the case of isolated British subjects, or that of any small number of British
subjects not engaged in partnership with foreigners in a common enterprise,
the Order in Council in question would, I fear, altogether fail to meet the
circumstances of so different a state of things as that which exists, or very
shortly will exist, in New Guinea.
It may be safely assumed that settlement there will not be undertaken
by independent individuals but by bodies of men, bound together in the ties
of a more or less close organisation, and among these men there are certain
to be many who are not of British nationality.
5. The jurisdiction of the High Commissioner would extend to such
members only of these associations as were British subjects, but it is not to
be supposed that any of the settlers, whatever their nation, would allow
murders, thefts, and assaults to be committed (as against themselves) with
impunity, solely because their perpetrators did not happen to be Englishmen.
220
CHAP.
FIJI


In the absence therefore of any legal tribunal, which all would alike recognise,
a sort of rough court would undoubtedly be set up among the settlers them-
selves for the trial of such cases, and I doubt whether the public opinion of
such a community as the gold-diggers and other pioneers of settlement in
New Guinea are likely to form, would permit the operation of a Court thus
constituted to be confined to persons not of British extraction.
If an English digger were murdered by an American or German, the
High Commissioner’s Court would be unable to take cognisance of the offence,
but the murderer would undoubtedly be hanged by the remainder of the
diggers. If the converse case of the murder of a foreigner by an Englishman
subsequently occurred, the friends of the man killed would claim that the
accused British subject should be tried by a similar tribunal, in which they
would have a place among the judges. So again, if a theft were committed by
a foreigner, he would be brought before this self-constituted Court, and on its
being found, as it would be found, that its proceedings were more summary,
and its punishments more severe, than those of the Deputy Commissioner’s
Court, I am much mistaken if British subjects accused of similar offences by
foreigners would not also be brought before it, and if it would not be called
on to act even in those cases where both parties were British subjects.
6. There would therefore be an utterly illegal Court acting alongside that
of the High Commissioner, and probably in greater request among the settlers
than that possessing legitimate authority. Under such circumstances, the
Court established by Her Majesty’s Order in Council could hardly with
decency continue to discharge its functions.
7. Nor is this all. The intermixture of the foreign element among the
settlers would paralyse the action of the High Commissioner’s Court, even
where British subjects alone were concerned, and had been properly brought
before it.
It would be often found that important witnesses for the prosecution were
not under the jurisdiction of the Court, and could not be compelled to give
evidence ; whilst even when this was not the case, it would always be easy
to allege that essential witnesses for the defence had refused or neglected to
appear, and could not be forced to do so.
In every case, the assertion that he was an American subject (an assertion
exceedingly hard of disproof) would be the natural refuge of an Englishman
charged with any offence ; and the mere allegation would be sufficient, if not
to prevent a trial, at all events to render its conduct a matter of great diffi-
culty and embarrassment.
8. The sort of extemporised courts of which I have spoken would take
little or no cognisance of offences against the natives, and when it was found
that any wrong to them might be done by a foreigner with impunity, the
lawless wishes of any ill-disposed combination of British subjects would
simply be carried into execution by a foreign hand.
9. Even if (contrary to all probability) British subjects were kept under
proper restraint in this respect by the Deputy Commissioner’s Court, it
would be impossible to persuade natives to distinguish between the different
Europeans engaged in a common pursuit and banded together in one society ;
and it is but too probable that the unchecked misdeeds of adventurers of
other nations would lead to the perpetration of acts of vengeance on the part
of the natives which would involve British subjects (and perhaps the Deputy
221
XXI
FIJI


Commissioner himself) in the retribution inflicted for offences of which they
were personally guiltless.
10. Nor should it be forgotten that where a large mixed population of
white men and natives is assembled, offences requiring punishment are
certain to be committed by the natives themselves. Over these, the Court
of the Deputy Commissioner has no authority, but it is not to be supposed
that the white settlers will on that account refrain from inflicting chastise-
ment on those who have offended.
11. Could I see any other way of dealing satisfactorily with such a state
of things, I would recommend a resort to it, but I must with regret admit
that .after the most careful consideration, I am unable to perceive any mode
of meeting these difficulties, except by annexation ; for it appears to me
necessary that territorial jurisdiction should be assumed by Great Britain to
enable us to deal with offences committed by foreigners associated with the
British settlers, or with those committed by natives. But unless such juris-
diction over them be assumed, I question the practicability of exercising it
with the smallest degree of efficiency over British subjects themselves, and I
must confess that I therefore see no middle course between annexation and
the abandonment of all control over the acts of British subjects in New
Guinea, involving a practical acquiescence in the establishment there of
lawless violence and anarchy. This latter is a course we cannot creditably
adopt, and which indeed, were we disposed to take it, we should after a time
be forced to abandon. A greater or less degree of annexation consequently
appears to me inevitable.
Should there be any other method unknown to me, but known to Her
Majesty’s Government, by which such cases could be met, I need not say
that I should prefer its adoption.
12. With a view, however, to confine such annexations as may be found
necessary within the narrowest possible limits, I would propose that, instead
of now declaring any fixed portion of New Guinea to be British territory,
the High Commissioner should be authorised from time to time to proclaim
as such, any place where a bond-Jide settlement had been established, together
with the land within the radius of a certain number of miles from it. I
would further suggest that if this plan be adopted, the settlement should in
the first instance be placed under the control of a Resident Commissioner,
who should also act as a Deputy Commissioner under the Order in Council
for those parts of New Guinea not taken possession of by Great Britain.
18. The Resident Commissioner should, I think, have under his orders a
force of native Fijian drilled and armed police. The aptitude of Fijians for
this species of service has been already shown. Their maintenance costs far
less than that of Europeans, and their ability to resist the influence of the
climate is of course far greater.
Under a chief who understood them, and whom they respected, such a
force would render invaluable service to the Resident.
14. It will be asked how the expenses consequent on such annexation are
to be defrayed, and whether it is intended to suggest that pecuniary assistance
should be obtained from the Australian Colonies ?
15. I entirely concur in the justice of the principle laid down both by
Lord Carnarvon and the present Secretary of State as to the obligation of
those Colonies to contribute to the expenses incurred on account of a work
222
FIJI
CHAP.


of interest to them. I am not, however, particularly anxious to see that
theoretical obligation practically enforced. The grant of money by a Colony
could not possibly be dissociated from the exercise of some control over its
expenditure on the part of the Colony granting it, and that Colony must
acquire a potential voice as to the object to which it is to be devoted.
It is not, I think, at all desirable to place the control of relations between
settlers and natives in the hands of local Colonial Ministers, responsible to a
parliament in which one of the interests concerned is exclusively represented.
16. Ido not myself think that such aid would be needed. I should propose
that the first very moderate expenditure required should be defrayed from
four sources:—
(1) A licence tax to be paid by the settlers themselves.
(2) A light tribute from the natives of the district annexed.
(3) A payment from the annual vote of the Imperial Parliament for the
expenses of the High Commission.
(4) A small annual vote from the Legislature of Fiji—a contribution from
a Crown Colony not being open to the same objection as those from the
Colonies under Parliamentary Government.
17. Commencing without any original debt, and rigidly confining its
expenditure within the limits of its financial resources, I think the new
settlement might succeed without being even at the outset a burden on the
taxpayers of Great Britain,
18. I should myself take a great pride in superintending such an experi-
ment, and in proving in fact what I have maintained in- theory, that it is
practicable to found a dependency without heavy initial cost, if the construc-
tion of cumbrous establishments on the usual Colonial model be avoided.
19. It is clear from Mr. Ingham’s reports, herewith returned, that a
practical though informal assumption of control over the country is already
rapidly going on. He holds courts, he punishes natives, he parades an armed
force, he registers land titles, etc.
These proceedings can have but one issue, and the sooner all these matters
are taken in hand in a regular manner, the less will be the ultimate embar-
rassment and expense.
20. The establishment I should in the firsts instance propose w T ould be
as follows :
The High Commissioner without salary.
A Resident Commissioner at a salary of £SOO, to be paid from the vote
for the High Commission,
A police force of Fijians under a European officer, to be borne on the
strength of the Fijian Police, and their pay taken as the contribution of that
Colony to the expenditure incurred.
The Resident Commissioner would in the first instance act also as
Magistrate and Treasurer, but would require two clerks at a salary say of
£2OO per annum.
21. Should Her Majesty’s Government be disposed to consider favourably
the scheme now suggested, I shall be prepared to enter into the discussion
of further practical details, with which it would appear unnecessary to burden
the present letter, the length of which is already greater than I could have
wished it to be.
22. I enclose a Schedule of the documents returned, and have, etc.
223
XXI
FIJI


From Sir Michael Hicks-Beach
November 22, 1878.—Dear Sir Arthur—Many thanks for sending me the
report of your speech at Aberdeen, in which you have so ably depicted the
important and often very difficult position of the Governor of a Crown Colony
without (so far as I can judge) saying one word that any person could take
exception to. Pray allow me to congratulate you on the well-deserved
recognition which your Aberdeenshire neighbours have accorded to your
services. There can, I think, be few things more agreeable to a public man
than to find himself remembered and appreciated by those among whom his
youth was passed. If a full report of your lecture on Fiji should be published
I should much like to see it.—Believe me, yours very faithfully,
M. E. HICKS-BEACH.
Sunday , November 24.—Bad cold, did not go out. Mr.
Gladstone showed me Lord Northbrook’s letter; also letter from
the Duke of Argyll, and copies of the telegrams. Told him of
Wade’s journey and the China business. Aberdeen will sign.
Monday , November 25.—Bad cold, and still did not go out.
Much talk on various matters, literary and political. Carlyle
and his utterance as to the Shorter Catechism. What a pleasant
house this is ; with what an atmosphere of goodness ! Took the
children up to the tower of the old castle. No one here
but Naples Mary.
To Lord Granville
Ha warden Castle, Chester, November 24, 1878.—My dear Lord
Granville—The good people of Aberdeen have been pleased to confer on me
the freedom of that city, and I therefore made a speech which, inasmuch as
it relates to matters colonial, I have thought it right to send to my former
masters, the different Secretaries of State under whom I have served. It is
hardly worth your reading, yet I should like you to read it, and I think the
latter part of it will interest you, if only for the sketch of my father’s
character by Mr. Gladstone which it contains. He (Mr. Gladstone) and
Lord Selborne tell me it was a good speech, of which compliment I appropriate
this much : it shows, I hope, that it was not a very bad one. As lam
writing to you, I hope you will forgive my making some reference to another
matter in which, as I will presently show you, I have a strong personal
interest, as well as one founded on family and party considerations. I mean
the representation of Aberdeenshire. I have lived too long out of England
to care very much about party, as party, but I have enough party feeling to
wish to see the great influence of my nephew’s family exerted rather on the
Liberal than the Conservative side, and I am sure that the great object of
the Liberal party in East Aberdeenshire ought to be to attach to it that very
weighty if not preponderating influence. That, in the natural course of
things, it will be so secured, I have no moral doubt whatever ; and the
Liberal party will therefore, in my opinion, make a mistake of the first
magnitude if they set up a candidate to oppose my brother in East Aberdeen-
shire a course which must inevitably drive back both him and my nephew
224
CHAP.
FIJI


in a Conservative direction. At this moment both of them are in almost
avowed opposition to the Government. My brother has all along expressed
his strong disapproval of the Eastern policy of Lord Beaconsfield, and has an
equally strong feeling in regard to the Afghan War. He is prepared to act
cordially with the Liberals for the purpose of upsetting the Government, and
I am confident that if a vote of censure be proposed he is prepared to support
it, and if a vote of confidence be proposed he is prepared to oppose it. It is
true he is not prepared, as yet at least, to call himself “a member of the
Liberal party,” but men are always less willing to adopt the badge of a
name than to adopt a new course of action, and I think you ought to be
satisfied by common action to effect a common object in the first instance,
trusting to the strong influence of such association to bring about closer
ties of a more strictly party nature. I have great belief in the effects of such
association.
In a party sense, then, I think opposition to my brother a grave mistake—
first, because, (although it will make, of course, no sort of difference in his or
in Aberdeen’s line of hostility to the Government policy in the present
instance), it must necessarily tend to throw the influence of the family into
the Conservative scale generally ; secondly, because I think it very likely to
secure the return of a purely Tory candidate. I have ascertained in a manner
which does not admit of doubt that on the one hand the Tories are all pro-
foundly discontented with my brother, and that, on the other hand, many
Liberals who voted against him at the last election will now support him.
The Liberal party united is the stronger, but if divided (as it most certainly
will be), I think it highly probable that a Conservative of a strict type would
poll more votes than either my brother or the professedly more “liberal”
candidate. So much for party considerations. As to those of a family
nature, I need hardly say that no member of our family, however Liberal,
will view with equanimity .the transfer to others of the influence hitherto
enjoyed by us, and that every effort will be made to prevent it. Notwith-
standing years of absence, I was surprised to find that I had still not wholly
lost some influence with a portion of the Liberal electors, and it will certainly
be used to the utmost in my brother’s favour. My 'personal interest in the
matter, (which must be my chief excuse for troubling you) is the third point
I desired to mention. It is this. My brother wishes to retire in my favour
a few years hence, when I have completed my eighteen years of Colonial
service. Having so nearly completed them, I should be extremely unwilling
now to relinquish my colonial career, even were my brother desirous of at
once quitting Parliament. This, however, he is not, and is anxious under
any circumstances to be again returned at the General Election. I need not
say that if Mr. Ainslie be elected, neither I nor any member of my family is
likely in the future to represent East Aberdeenshire.
Mr. Gladstone tells me he has already written to you on this subject, but
that he has not mentioned my name, and that he sees no objection to my
making you acquainted with my own interest in the matter, and the facts
within my knowledge, as to the probable results to the Liberal cause in
Aberdeenshire.
My brother has a strong objection to the disestablishment of the Scotch
Church, and disapproves of the principle (or what he supposes to- be the
principle) on which the Liberal Associations on the Birmingham model are
111 Q
225
XXI
FIJI


founded, but I am not aware that these questions have become tests of
Liberalism. I really do not know any point on which he would be likely to
differ from yourself or Mr. Forster. Both he and Aberdeen hold the strongest
opinions on the Turkish and Indian questions. They both say, too, that they
have given the Government a fair trial, have found it wanting, and are pre-
pared to assist in overthrowing it. Pray excuse this very long letter, and
believe me, etc.
P.S. —Since 1 wrote this, Mr. Gladstone has come into the room, and
requested me to add, if I had not closed my letter, that he has just received
a letter from Colonel Mure, and that it is more satisfactory than might be
expected. He expresses agreement in denouncing the Afghan War, and takes
in good part Mr. Gladstone’s rather strong observations on his speech.
In November I hired Armitage Hill, near Ascot, from Mr.
Villiers Lister, and made it my headquarters till my return
to Fiji. On the 26th I find this entry: —
Went to Armitage Hill. My forty-ninth birthday. Age creeps on.
Yes. I regret it and regret it. My feelings are still all those of youth.
From James Esselmont
Craigton Cemetery, November 26,1878. —Sir —I received a newspaper the
other day which I have no doubt was sent from yourself, although indirectly.
Now, the receiving of a newspaper from a friend is not a thing to be wondered
at; but when that friend has justly received the highest honour his fellow-
citizens could confer on him, few indeed, if any, would find a place for one
so insignificant as myself in the circle of his friends and acquaintances. Be
pleased to accept the small tribute I would add to that which you have
already received; no one could better deserve it. Well may the Lord
Provost remark, seldom do we find gentlemen of your position doing what
you did for us lads at Haddo, some twenty years ago. The interest you took
in our education, the provision made for our entertainment combined with
solid instruction, the distribution of prizes regularly according to our several
merits, and permeating all this a tone of sound moral advice reflected from
a mind thoroughly imbued with Christian graces, who loved his fellow-men
because God was their Creator and Christ their Saviour. The little Prayer-Book
you gave me, dated October 27, 1858, is lying before me; and I can imagine
you now —as then I saw you, when you gave it, standing on the walk between
the garden and the House; —your reluctance to part with us, the special
interest you had taken in me, for I believe a Bible or New Testament was never
given with a more fervent prayer that it might be blessed to the receiver.
I have read with pleasure both your speech and lecture on Fiji, and
observe in them the same unselfish interest in minor things as well as in those
of higher importance, the same endeavour to improve those under your control
in all their duties, social, civil, and religious, carried forward with unwearied
zeal and Christian charity. Be pleased to accept my sincerest wishes for
your welfare, and as a late pupil to express my gratitude for kindness then
and generosity still up to the present time. I beg, Honoured Sir, to sub-
scribe myself with much gratitude —Your obedient servant,
JAMES ESSELMONT.
226
CHAt>.
FIJI


From General the Hon. Sir Alex. Gordon
Edinburgh Hotel, November 27, 1878. —My dear Arthur —As you saw
John last, you may perhaps know whether his signing of the Afghan petition
is meant as a clear indication of his intention to declare against the war
policy of the Government. If he does so intend, and means to oppose the
Government in consequence, it would be a mutual strength to each other if
I did so simultaneously with him. If he were to approve of my doing so,
the best opportunity I could have would be, on the day the House meets, to
take my seat on the Opposition side, but it would be rash to do this without
a thorough understanding as to the future, for which the time is short. 1
have a great idea that Lord Macduff does not want to be at the expense of
a contested election on account of his relative Mr, Ainslie, and that he would
be willing not to oppose me if I sat on his side. He might be content to let
Mr. Ainslie wait for his chance at a future time, as he is young, and his
chance would be very good after my time, if no member of our family were
forthcoming, especially if we work together now. Lord Macduff has more
than once spoken to me vaguely on the subject, but after the formation of
the recent Liberal Association I could not well reopen the question with him.
It has occurred to me, however, that you might perhaps, through George
Lefevre, find out what Lord MacdufTs views are, and whether an under-
standing could be come to that I should not be opposed, as far as he was
concerned, if I join the Opposition. You will know best what you can do
in this matter. I forget whether you know Mr. Adam, the Liberal Whip.
From the Earl of Carnarvon
Greystoke Castle, Penrith, December 1, 1878.—1 ought to have
thanked you before now for the paper containing the report of your speech.
I read it with great interest, and with, I think, a very full concurrence in
what you said. It pleases me much to think that you still value my opinion
on it, and I assure you I appreciated your mention of me in it. Matters have
indeed moved since we met, and the prospect (whatever the issue) is in my
opinion a very unsatisfactory one. I propose to go to London to-morrow.
You may be interested perhaps in the reprint of my speech at Edinburgh—
revised and, I hope, improved—in the new number of the Fortnightly. It
has a good deal in it with regard to Colonial administration.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, December 3.—My dear Gordon—l have received your
letter with its enclosure, and also your telegram on the same subject. In
the first place, I assure you that I am most glad to give you any private
and friendly assistance, in this or any other matter, which I am, or which
you may think me, specially able to give. In the second place, no just cause
or impediment has arisen since I saw you to preclude your putting your
views before Sir M. No decision has been come to as to New South Wales.
In the third place, I think your letter an admirable one, both generally,
and as addressed to the particular individual. It is frank and business-
like, and I do not think it would be better (referring to your telegram) to
227
XXI
FIJI


confine yourself to a simple expression of your wish. I have therefore sent
your letter to Sir M. in the bag going to him to Williamstrip to-night.
When he speaks to me on the subject (as he probably will on coming to
town on Thursday), I shall tell him I think the proposal good ; and if he
hesitates (as he probably will) or objects, I shall put it to him (unless you
see any objection) that he might anyhow send you to rule the two Colonies,
provisionally or experimentally, so as to be free, if any difficulty should arise,
to terminate it.
I shall say nothing on the subject to any one but Sir M. until you tell
me to.—Yours ever.
From Professor Jas. Bryce.
7 Norfolk Square, W., December 6.—Dear Sir Arthur—The Fijian
poems and legends which you gave me to read, and which I left in Miss
Shaw Lefevre’s care at Ascot Wood, are so full of interest that I can’t help
expressing to you a hope that you will go on collecting others, and ultimately
publish for the benefit of those who care about one of the most interesting
subjects of inquiry which our own generation has opened up. It is specially
curious to see that the poetical spring of the people still flows. Some of the
little sonnets or occasional poems on passing events were among the prettiest
and most touching. I should have greatly liked to show them to my friend
Mr. Stopford Brooke, who is particularly interested in such matters, but did
not venture to carry off the book without your permission. The report of
the assembly of native chiefs shows a practical good sense and turn for
business and for self-government, indeed, which are very remarkable. It
made me echo your wish that they should be allowed to go on doing things
in their own way, instead of having European ideas and constitutional
mechanisms thrust upon them. Perhaps if you are in London at all before
you leave for the Pacific you will be kind enough to let me know, that I
might have the pleasure of seeing you again, and of trying whether you could
spare an evening to meet two or three friends who are interested in the
matters we talked of.—Believe me, sincerely yours.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeuxs Despatch , No. 93
I most heartily concur in Des Yoeux’s opinions with regard to the propriety
of the course adopted by the magistrate, Mr. Eastgate. I could hardly
indeed do otherwise, as that course was adopted with my sanction and in
accordance with my advice.
Whether Mr. Des Yoeux has forborne to mention this fact out of delicacy
to myself, or whether Mr. Eastgate, with rare reticence, has scrupled to avail
himself, during my absence, and without previous communication with me, of
what, so far as he is concerned, is in any case a complete exoneration of his
conduct, I cannot say.
On the occurrence of the circumstances related, Mr. Eastgate came to
Levuka to request my advice. It appeared to him, to the Attorney-General,
the Colonial Secretary, and myself, that if the parties were brought before
the Supreme Court they would in all probability be acquitted; and I con-
curred with Mr. Eastgate in thinking that for other reasons it was desirable
that the offence should be noticed by the Provincial Court, the jurisdiction
228
CHAP.
FIJI


of which in my opinion includes, if not actually Rape , something very nearly
approaching to it (Na Kucuva vakaukauwa na yalewa ni sa nakita me caita)
Reg. 2 of 1877.
I enclose an extract from a private letter from Fiji, received by this mail,
relating to another case (a charge of murder), which shows but too clearly
what would have been the probable result, had the case gone to the Supreme
Court. It does not appear that Mr. Des Voeux seeks for any definite in-
structions from the Imperial Government on this subject, or indeed that any
expression of opinion is necessarily called for : —I should therefore suggest
that Mr. Des Voeux should be informed that the Secretary of State generally
approves of the view taken by him, and that his attention should be drawn
to the power vested in him to exempt districts or classes from the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, as having been conferred for the express purpose of
meeting the difficulties which cases such as that now reported were likely to
create.
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux s Despatch, No. 94
I quite concur with the Chief-Justice in considering Mr. Blair’s claim
wholly inadmissible.
The Chief-Justice is in error on one point of detail. He is quite right in
saying that the claim was not referred to the Commission on Pecuniary
Claims, for the reasons he states ; but he forgets that it was referred to a
Commission (or rather Committee) of which he was himself Chairman. That
this has escaped his memory is, I presume, due to the fact that, from causes
which I have previously explained in a despatch written (I think) before I
left Fiji, the other members took no part in the investigation, and the report
was signed by the Chief-Justice alone.
I quite agree with the Chief-Justice in both the positions he lays down,
i.e. that the 'Blairs have no just ground of complaint against the action of
the late so-called Fijian Government, and that even if they had, it would be
most unsafe and unwise to adopt responsibility for the acts of that Government.
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux’s Despatch, No. 96
I very decidedly concur with Chief-Justice Gorrie in thinking the amend-
ment he proposes to be desirable.
I may add that the words to which he draws attention will not be found
in the Draft Ordinance prepared in the Colonial Office, and forwarded to me,
for my guidance, by Lord Carnarvon, in his despatch (No. 2, I think) of
March 4, 1875.
These words were added during the passage of the Ordinance through the
Legislative Council, at the request of the late Chief-Justice, Sir W. Hackett,
who by no means contemplated the matter from the point of view taken by
Mr. Gorrie, but who thought that in the trials, not of white men charged
with offences against natives, or of natives charged with offences against
white men (in both which cases it was felt that no chance existed of obtaining
an impartial jury), but in those of natives charged with offences against
natives, cases might arise in which no feelings of race or class would be
aroused, and which might perhaps be most satisfactorily decided by an
European jury, if the accused themselves preferred to be tried vakapapalagi
(in the white man’s fashion).
229
xx r
FIJI


There is no need of any immediate haste, but, if that course is not dis-
approved by Her Majesty’s Government, I should propose on returning to
Fiji to restore the Ordinance to the shape it wore when originally sent to me
from the Colonial Office.
From Lord Selborne
30 Portland Place, December 7, 1878. —My dear Arthur —If you happen
to have at hand my memorandum on the “Rule of Single Judgments” in the
Privy Council, I should he much obliged to you to send it to me here.
The Chief Baron has published a pamphlet on the subject; to which I
think of writing a reply.
I am glad that we are at last going to “have the courage of our opinions”
in the House of Lords.
The perusal of the Afghanistan papers leaves upon me a profound impres-
sion of obstinate mismanagement, by blundering and bullying, ending in an
impolitic and unnecessary war, undertaken, for all practical purposes, in the
interest of Russia rather than our own. And I think the present explana-
tions of Lords Cranbrook and Salisbury have not relieved the Government
from the position of seeking to cover their own blunders by misrepresenting
the policy of their predecessors. As far as Lord Cranbrook is concerned, I
think I can perceive that, when he signed his name to his celebrated despatch,
he was rather trusting to the accuracy of a precis made by others than
intentionally misrepresenting facts. Some of his arguments did not appear
to me to mend his case ; and it was certainly not improved by the foolish
declaration at the end, that if he had to write the despatch over again, he
would do it in the same way. But if credit is given to him (though he could
not claim it) for want of familiarity with the history of the transactions and the
text of the documents which preceded his own accession to office, I think it
is only fair to him to admit that, coupling the Duke of Argyll’s telegram with
Lord Northbrook’s final postponement of the discussion of certain points in
1873, he might have brought himself to think that the assurances given to the
Ameer, in Lord Northbrook’s conversations with his agent, were neutralised
by the final postponement; and that this was done because Lord Northbrook
did not understand the general terms used by the Duke as authorising him
to bind the British Government by those assurances. A more careful study
of what Lord Northbrook actually did, and said, and wrote, at that time,
ought to have led him to see that he was not warranted in a form of state-
ment which, without mentioning those assurances at all, assumed this to be
the true result of what then took place ; and if he had read and studied the
subsequent references, both of Lord Salisbury and of Lord Lytton, to the
same transaction, it would have been impossible for any one, writing in good
faith, to do so. I believe he had not read and studied these despatches, or
verified the paper wdiich he signed, and that, if the truth could be stated,
this would be his real defence.
As for Lord Salisbury, I can only say that his tongue is too Machiavelian.
He does not seem to me to take as strict a view of the morality of suppressio
veri and suggestio falsi as I should have hoped and expected.—Ever yours
SELBORNE.
affectionately,
P. S. — Excuse my writing with a skewer.
230
CHAP.
FIJI


From Earl Granville
18 Carlton House Terrace, S. W., December 10,1878.—My dear Gordon—
lam quite alive to the importance of the subject of your two letters. I spoke
to Gladstone and to Adam as soon as I got to town, and have waited in the
hope of the latter being able to tell me something satisfactory on the subject.
As yet he has failed, the local men believing that they are pledged to their
candidate. Adam will see whether it would be possible to find another seat
for him ; but at present can give no assurance.
To Lord Selborne
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, 9.12.78.— My dear Selborne—My reason
for not sooner sending you back your paper on Privy Council dissents was
that I wished to retain a copy of it, and its length, up till now, had pre-
vented my making one. I return it herewith.
When at Hawarden, I showed it to Gladstone. He admitted, of course,
the strength of the argument from precedent, and also, equally of course,
agreed that, if dissents were recorded, their reasons should be declared ; but
he made much the same distinction that I was disposed to draw between the
application of a known law to a particular case, and the interpretation of a
doubtful law, affecting the conduct of large bodies of men. He was, I
thought, if I may venture to say so, more reasonable as to the weight to be
given to the legal decision of legal points, and attempted (not, I think,
altogether unsuccessfully) to separate this from what he called an argumenta-
tive antiquarian dissertation, “of about the same value as an article in the
Quarterly Review." It is in respect of this that he is so disrespectful to the
lawyers’ handling of questions of ecclesiastical history and practice.
I have read the debates with great interest. The Government case seems
to me a very weak one, and it is with real pain that I see the tricks of which
Salisbury has been guilty. I should have thought him quite incapable of
such a course, but his equivocation in 1877 in replying to Lord Northbrook
trembles on the verge of a harsher designation.
The Ameer’s letter in to-day’s papers is important. Did Lord Lytton
lead him to believe that the 20th was the day before which an answer was to
be written , not received ?
You will have been shocked by poor Mrs. Tait’s death. I thought she
looked very aged and very shaken when we met her at Alloa three weeks
ago.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, December 11. —My dear Gordon—Bramston has read
your memo , and we shall be glad to see you on Friday. If you come between
12 and 3, I shall be most safe from being called away by the Secretary of
State.
Sir M. has spoken to me to-day on the great question. He by no means
rejects the idea, but has not at all made up his mind, amongst other things,
on the general principle, i.e. whether it is expedient to bring Fiji into close
connection with any other Colony. I explained to him that this is not the
proposal; that the Government and Legislature of New South Wales -would
have nothing to do with Fiji, but that you would be Governor -in - Chief,
231
XXI
FIJI


personally and solely supervising the Lieutenant-Governor of Fiji, and
assuming the government when you visit the group. I will not trouble you
with a recital of other arguments which I used, but I did not forget to
impress upon him that Lady Gordon would be a very valuable element, in
the arrangement.
He is very slow in making up his mind as to appointments, and I fear
you will hear nothing for some days. Do not be too hopeful, but I cannot
bid you despair.—Ever yours.
From Me. Herbert
Colonial Office, December 14. —My dear Gordon—Sir M. spoke to me
this afternoon, and I had an opportunity of placing before him the substance
of the ostensible letter enclosed in your other letter of to-day. He listened
to what I said, and did not appear to have any political difficulties.
At the same time, I came away from him with less confidence than I
felt yesterday as to the course which he will take. He does not, I think,
desire to appoint any other Governor ; and he does not mean to offer it to
Fergusson, who has not applied. But I think there is some one in the
background.
Pray, therefore, do not be sanguine. I will write again on Monday if
there is anything whatever to say. If Ido not, you will understand that I
have absolutely nothing to tell you. —Yours ever.
Monday , December 16. —Went to town to attend S. Europe
meeting. No dividend. Fearful black fog. Went to the
Gladstones’, who were sitting in the dark with lamps and
candles at luncheon. He said Alex.’s change of place in the
House of Commons yesterday was well done. To the Abbey.
Sermon from Fremantle. Home by 4.45 train.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, 7 p.m., December 17. —My dear Gordon—Too late to
write, but I think things look more promising. Will write to-morrow.
—Yours,
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, December 18.—My dear Gordon—l was able in this
sense to say yesterday that your prospects seemed more promising; that
Sir M. then told me that Carnarvon had spoken to him in favour of the
idea, and he was inclined to think well of it, but was not as yet in a position
to do anything. I have spoken to him again to-day, and find that it is as
I said (I think in my last note but one) I apprehended, viz. the ground is
not clear. He told me that New South Wales has been offered to a person
in this country. I think it is a member of the Government.
If this offer is accepted, the matter will be at an end, and I shall be
232
CHAP.
FIJI


sincerely sorry ; but if it is not accepted—and I don’t think it will be—then
I think he will be likely to send for you.
I assure you I sympathise much with the suspense and delay which you
have to undergo. I am, however, sure that your case has been now thoroughly
laid before him, has been powerfully advocated, and has been favourably
considered, and no more can be done. I still entertain a good deal of hope
for you, and will let you know (? at what address) the next developments as
early as possible.—Yours ever.
December 19. —No hopes, I fear, of N.S.W. Took Carry-
down with me to Ascot. Stevensons at luncheon. I have been
reading a remarkable MS. fragment of the journal, or rather
occasional notes, of a French lady. She was a girl of high
family, and somehow went wrong. There is no clue how, except
that it appears to have been with a foreigner, that he used more
or less of force, for she always speaks of him as a brute, and of
violence. Probably he was one of the officers of a foreign army
in France. She was advised to seek the assistance of a foreign
grandee—a young man. He sympathised, consoled, and inspired
her with a deep passion. He soon left France, but she preserved
his recollection with absorbing passion. Her own noble family
rejected her ; her sister adopted her child. She was herself
sought in marriage by an elderly roturier of fortune, and after
some struggles consented to a nominal marriage, still keeping
in her heart her sole passion. Her husband lost much of his
large fortune, and in three years died. She helped to recover
much of his fortune, but refused to benefit by it, giving it all
to his immediate relations. Her son, for whom M. de Yilßle
gets a bourse at a college, grows up, and the last entry in the
diary is that in which at 16 she reveals to him that she is not
his aunt, but his mother. I know, however, that she was alive
twenty years later. All kinds of known people—Mde. de Genlis,
M. de Yillele, Baron Louis, Comte Roi, Lord Stuart de Rothesay,
the Bishop of Hermopolis, the Duchesse de Dino, Charles X.’s
confessor Abbe Premord, Frassinous, Abbe de Montesquieu,
Marshal Bellegarde, the Duchesse de Belluno, Mde. de Bruc, etc.,
etc.—appear and disappear. Much is very well written. But
I believe the poor woman would have desired the effacement
of the record, and I have burnt it, leaf by leaf, as I read. But
I have determined to copy this one entry, or rather two entries,
eleven years after she last saw the man on whom she had set
her affections, and to whom once, and only once, since his depart-
ure she had written, but had received no answer :—“ Madame
de Genlis qu’une femme qui se respecte ne saurait
aimer longtemps I’homme qui I’oublie apres. Je ne saurais 6crire
cela —k quoi bon. La digne dame s’est assez donn6 le plaisir de
233
XXI
FIJI


me faire souffrir aujourd’hui; il est inutile de renouveller le mal
qu’elle m’a fait. Que m’importe son opinion 1 Que m’importe
celle du monde entier? Je ne leur demande rien ni a Tun ni
aux autres. Ah, elle connait pen le coeur humain ou elle ne
connait que la vanity et la frivolit6 gouvernent. Ma fierte aurait
dh se revolter, selon elle, et me porter ale hair !! Mais vis-a-vis
de ce que je sens, ma fierte se courbe dans poussiere. Mais ce
n’est pas de I’humiliation que me cause son oubli, c’est de la
douleur—une douleur profonde. Quant ale hair, il y a deraison
a elle d’avancer cette atroce proposition; hair celui a qui on s’est
donn6 corps et ame serait pis que se renier soi-meme, et depend-
il de soi que ce qui a 6te ne soit pas 1 Ce pass 6 exerce sur mon
ame un pouvoir devant lequel ma volont6 serait, helas, sans
force. Ce que Madame de Cenlis ne sait pas c’est qu’il y a des
coeurs qui ne sauraient etre C’est qu’il y a des choses
qui ne peuvent 6tre oubli6es; c’est qu’il y a des affections sur
lesquelles ne peuvent ni le temps, ni I’indifference ni I’oubli
de la personne qu’on aime; c’est que cette affection serait de
nature a resister meme a la certitude qu’elle est
m6pris6e par celui meme qui I’inspire, par celui qui vous I’aurait
jette au coeur sans se soucier qu’elle y dut survivre au fatal
instant qui devait—ah, c’est le souvenir qui m’humilie. Mais ce
n’est pas ma fierte qui souffre, c’est ma conscience que me dit que
les pleurs que me coute le souvenir de ces instants ne sont pas
causes par le Helas ! non. Je vous demande pardon,
O mon Dieu, mais il n’est que trop vrai que ces pleurs me sont
plus doux que ne sauraient I’etre des joies, des plaisirs, et toute
ma vertu a fuir ce qui pourrait me procurer les jouissances
vante du monde, git uniquement, dans I’amer bonheur que
j’eprouve a me d£paitre du coupable souvenir de ces instants
qui devaient faire de ma vie un desert. Oh, que j’aurais pu me
consoler encore de tous ces maux par lesquels j’ai du, je dois,
les expier jusqu’a ce que le tombeau s’ouvre pour moi, s’il eut
tenu sa promesse. Mais non, il Ta et il ne me reste qu’elle
pour adoucir mes regrets et me permettre de croire toujours en
lui. Oh ! soyez heureux !
L’admiration est un impot dont la plupart des hommes sont
impatiens de s’affranchir. L’oeil se casse de contempler longtemps
le meme genre de prodige, et apres avoir suivi avec d6lices le
cours brillant d’un astre politique, la foule attend et 6pie sa chute
presque avec un 6gale impatience. En tous et tou jours puissiez
vous etre tou jours heureux et que j’aimais votre coeur n’6prouve
des deboires nine connaisse le chagrin des mescomptes et des
234
CHAP.
FIJI


deceptions cruelles. II y a des coeurs qui, loin de se sentir
refroidis k I’aspect d’une fortune moins haute, s’en trouvaient
plus exaltes, et reconnaitrent plus de veritable grandeur dans
Fobjet de leur admiration et de leur'affection profonde. Mais
ces coeurs n’habitent pas la sphere oil vous tenez a renfermer
le cercle de vos affections v£ri tables, 6 trop cher. Heias non ! je
ne saurais avoir de fiert6 a Fencontre de ce qui est pour lui dans
mon coeur. Je crois qu’il m’aurait 6te plus facile de ne pas
Faimer et alors de ne pas partager la funeste entrainement
qui m’a perdue, si mon esprit de ce temps avait put s’arreter
sur cette que aujourd’hui me torture. Mais il est trop
tard pour qu’elle puisse avoir de Finfluence. Son aversion, son
s’il 6tait capable, s’il 6tait possible qu’il m’exprimat lui-
meme de pareils sentiments, ne sauraient cette affection
que lui porte mon coeur, affection qui reunit en elle toutes les
affections les plus tendres, les plus les plus
Car, je le sens, je pouvais sacrifier, s’il etait a ma disposition,
meme Findicible bonheur d’etre aim6e de lui, si ce bonheur lui
devait causer un souci, une gene, I’ombre du souffrance. J’ai
besoin de I’aimer pour vivre. Mais pour etre satisfaite je
n’aurais besoin que de le savoir heureux constamment, et de
penser qu’il prend, lui, quelque interet a ma vie. Ah, c’est
moins son oubli qui me fait mal, que la n6cessit6 oil me met
cet oubli de douter de lui, et malgr6 tout je I’aime. Je I’aime
comme la mere aimerait encore son enfant meme en se disant
qu’il ne I’aime pas. 0 que Dieu vous guide!
She adopted a little girl, Henriette, daughter of Mdlle. de
Interview with Villele, and conversations with Stuart, curious.
We passed the winter and spring at Armitage Hill, a many-
gabled red-brick house entirely surrounded by fir woods. A
large and rather picturesque hall, carpeted and furnished, and
backed by a good wooden staircase and gallery, formed the
pleasantest living room in the house. The drawing-room was
conventional and the study dark, but the latter contained a
good collection of books, amongst others, a fine edition of the
Somers Tracts , wherein I found much that was curious and new
to me. I also read for the first time Madame du Deffand’s
letters to Horace Walpole. Their ease is charming, and their
style not unlike that of Madame de Lieven, who seems to me, if
she consciously imitated any one, to have modelled her letters
rather on those of Madame du Deffand than on those of Madame
de S6vign6.
We had a good many people to stay with us, chiefly
relations, near or distant, and an unceasing stream of visitors in
235
XXI
FIJI


the shape of applicants for employment in Fiji. These were of
all sorts, and very queer specimens of humanity some of them.
I selected eight, all, I think, of the right sort, but the choice of
them was not easy.
To the Marquess of Salisbury
Armitage Hill, December 27, 1878. —My Lord— l have the honour to
enclose a despatch addressed to your lordship by Mr. Maudslay, and trans-
mitted under flying seal to me.
2. Your Lordship will perceive from this despatch that a temporary
agreement has been made with the king of Tonga in the sense indicated as
desirable in my previous communications, but that the conclusion of a more
formal and more permanent treaty is looked for on my return to the Pacific.
3. The language of the 3rd article of this agreement is much too vague,
and would appear to limit the jurisdiction of the High Commissioner’s Court
to cases where both parties were British subjects. This Ido not believe to
have been intended, and certainly the jurisdiction of the Court ought to he
differently and more clearly defined in the permanent treaty, and should be
recognised as extending to all cases in which a British subject is the accused
party, except where the violation of local regulations of police is the subject
of complaint.
4. The reasons for the insertion of a clause with regard to extradition will
be found in the third paragraph of my Despatch No. 15 of the 27th April
last.
5. I would suggest that Mr. Maudslay’s action in this matter be approved
and that he be desired to inform the king that on my return to the Pacific I
shall be furnished with powers for the negotiation of a permanent treaty
between Great Britain and Tonga. —I have, etc.
Tuesday , December 24. —James Hamilton has been with us
for two days. He is less strikingly handsome than he was, and
his fair hair is darker, but he is very youthful, very graceful,
and very charming. He is free from all vanity, full of true
enthusiasm, singularly pure, simple, and single-hearted —a true
genius of the best stamp. He is still working hard at what he
calls Leah —the completion of his organ —but his thoughts are
full of his other scheme, of a school on a new model, a sort of
rough colony place on an island off Dorset. I strongly advised
him not to be in too great a hurry about this, observing
parabolically that Rachael’s voice could only be heard to the
accompaniment of Leah’s music. This he sees.
He brought with him a young man, a friend, one Marriott,
who he thinks may be useful to me in Fiji. He is of the right
stamp undoubtedly, silent, straightforward, bold, and trust-
worthy, a sort of second Le Hunte.
On Christmas Day, the whole family —son, daughters, sons-
236
CHAP.
FIJI


in-law, daughter-in-law, and grandchildren—dined with Sir John
and Lady Lefevre, the only absentee being little Janey—Jane
Ryan’s youngest child. Nevil and Jack (who wore the Samoan
shell crowns) dined late, for the first time in their little lives,
and behaved very well. We were eighteen in all. After
dinner there was a Christmas tree and game of Post, in which
George Lefevre caught the footman, who happened to be pass-
ing through the room with coffee cups. The last Christmas
Day we were here, four years ago, Sir John was, we thought,
dying.
On New Year’s Day, John gave a dinner at 37 Grosvenor
Square to all the family, or at least so many members of it as
could be collected. We slept at Grosvenor Square, a handsome
but dull and uninteresting house. At dinner were Claud and
Lady Claud, Alex, and Caroline, Douglas and Ellen, Rachael
and I, Harriet and Willie Lindsay, Katherine and William
Ashburnham, Sir Dudley and Lady Marjoribanks and two young
Marjoribanks, Carry, Victor Marshall and Tora. The most
notable absentees were the Abercorns, Mary, and the Balfours.
I don’t know when we four brothers last met; not above twice
in the last twenty years. We have often met in twos and
threes; seldom, if ever, all. I wish Abercorn had been there
too.
On the 7 th, a fearfully cold day, we went to dine with
the Cardwells, at the Rotherys’ house, which they have taken.
It was pleasant, for besides the Selbornes, whom we went to
meet, there was no one there except Sir John Adye and Miss
Macaulay. Sir John Adye had made a raised map of Afghanistan,
and gave us a very interesting sort of lecture thereon. There
was one very humorous incident in the evening. Cardwell, not
in the best taste, carped at Bishop Wilberforce for having
exaggerated stories, giving as an example one about Sir Robert
Peel in Scotland, the real version of which he had heard told
by Peel himself. I could not help observing that the Bishop
told the story in a way that took in no one; it was quite manifestly
a rollicking exaggeration, an evident piece of fun, and intended
to be so taken. Now comes the joke. Cardwell then solemnly
began to tell a comic story of the Bishop, as to an exchange
of robes and an uniform, which took place in Scotland in 1856.
This he exaggerated just in the way he had condemned. Suddenly
Lady C., in her high-pitched voice, exclaimed, “Sir Arthur!
were you not there?” I admitted that I was, and Cardwell
stopped, saying that if I was there he need not repeat it, but I
don’t think he or any one else saw the humour of the situation,
or how he had committed himself.
237
Xxl
FIJI


From James Hamilton
Adelphi Hotel, W.C., December 26, 1878.—Dear Uncle Arthur —The
more I think of it, the more anxious I am to show you another of my crew,
who would form the complement of young Marriott, and who excels in all
points where the other is deficient. In old days I never cared to take young
Marriott with me unless I took his companion with him. Sidney Marriott
excels only out of doors. The other one excels equally at home. S.
Marriott’s manner is, to say the least of it, rough. The other is by nature
sympathetic and intellectual, of rather a domestic turn of mind, and desper-
ately fond of developing resources. He has won nearly all possible prizes—
indoors and out—when at school.
His name is Gerald Browne ; he is one of Lord Dillon’s family, and his
father is Rector of Woodstock, Please do not fill up the other place till I
have shown him to you. The two would work together splendidly. lam
quite sorry to have shown Marriott separate from him.—Your affectionate
Nephew.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
Sir —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
7th inst. enclosing 4 the draft of a despatch which the Secretary of State pro-
posed to address to Mr. Des Yceux on the subject of the suggestion made by
Chief-Justice Gorrie that the Fiji Criminal Procedure Ordinance, 1875, should
be amended by the omission of certain words, which give to the Chief-Justice
a discretionary power of determining whether in a certain class of cases trials
shall or shall not be conducted with the assistance of a jury.
The Secretary of State having, after consideration, determined on the
answer to be given to this suggestion, it does not become me to urge further
my own reasons for arriving at a contrary opinion. As, however, you request
me to make observations on this draft, I would respectfully state that I have
not seen any reason to alter the views expressed in my minute on Mr. Des
Yoeux’s despatch No. 96 of last year.
My reasons for thinking the proposed amendment desirable were and
are:—
1. That whatever the intention with which the words were inserted, their
practical effect is to throw on the Chief-Justice a responsibility which does
not, I think, properly belong to him, and to which being cast on him he has
some reason to object.
2. That the Chief-Justice being the sole judge of the circumstances which
justify a recourse to the exceptional allowance of a jury, it is impossible to
call in question his decision on that subject, and that if he chooses to consider
the fact of a jury being asked for as sufficient ground for granting one, that
course must, it seems to me, be acquiesced in, though directly contrary to
the spirit of the law.
3. That if, as I fear may be the case, Chief-Justice Gorrie determines that
if the responsibility from which he wishes to be delivered is left with him,
he shall feel compelled to decide that the application of a white man not
to be deprived of that protection from a jury to which he would at home
be entitled, constitutes an exceptional circumstance within the meaning of
the Ordinance, he would I think be altogether in error, but I do not see how
238
CIIAP.
Pi//


any action of the local or home Government could correct him in the discharge
of purely judicial functions ; nor were it technically possible, would it be
practically so, to take any steps against a judge whose error, if it was an error,
was only that of giving, in the discharge of his judicial functions, an unneces-
sarily excessive degree of protection to a British subject, accused of crime
and liable to trial under a process.
4. That the words in question did not form part of the Ordinance as
originally drafted in England, and were not considered to be necessary by the
legal advisers of the Colonial Office.
5. That, whoever prepared it, in my opinion these words introduce an
undesirable element of uncertainty into the administration of the law, as
their application must vary with the varying dispositions of the different
judges who may at different times preside at such trials.
For these reasons, I consider that although any hasty and immediate
change may be unnecessary, it would be well to take advantage of a suitable
opportunity to effect the amendment suggested.
Memorandum on Chief-Justice Gorrie's Despatch , No. 11, 1878
I agree with Mr, Gorrie that it would be well to define more clearly the
boundaries of the Western Pacific, although I much doubt any practical
difficulty having arisen from the want of such definition.
Mr. Gorrie is in error in supposing that the division between the cruising
grounds of the Australian and Pacific squadrons is intended to be followed.
The Caroline Islands, which are specifically named in the Order in Council,
and which it is important to retain within the jurisdiction of the High
Commissioner, are far beyond the bounds of the Australian station. If any
addition be made to the description contained in the Order in Council, it
would, I think, be best adding in the sixth subsection of Article
5, after the words “all other islands in the Western Pacific Ocean,” the
following words “ to the West of the 170th degree of West Longitude and to
the South of the 15th degree of North Latitude.” The eastern and southern
boundaries are practically defined by the exclusion of the English and French
Colonies, whilst it would not be easy to describe in words the exact line which
that boundary forms on the map,
Armitage Hill,
December 28, 1878.
Memorandum on Chief-Justice Gorrie’s Despatches Nos. 8 and 9
December 31, 1878.—1 n the absence of the papers on which Messrs. Hen-
derson and Macfarlane found their case, I feel some hesitation in expressing a
confident opinion ; but assuming, as I think we may very safely do, that the
facts are correctly stated in Mr. Gorrie’s letter to those gentlemen, it appears
to me that the Acting High Commissioner has arrived at a correct conclusion
and that his answer to Messrs. Henderson and Macfarlane is in substance a
right and proper one, although I regret some of the expressions it contains,
and the tone of some passages in it.
The complaints of Thompson and Ohlsen are in my judgment utterly
239
xxi
FIJI


unfounded, and I am glad that Mr. Gorrie refused to pay any attention to them
beyond that which he actually bestowed.
The misconduct of Thompson in Funafuti was brought under my notice
when I was in Samoa, both by letters from the chiefs of Funafuti and re-
presentations made by Dr. Turner, whom I directed to hold an inquiry into
the subject when he next visited Funafuti, and to report to me. This report
has, I know, been made by Dr. Turner, and I am surprised that no mention of
it is made by Mr. Gorrie. Dr, Turner, however, informs me that it was addressed
to the Acting-Governor of Fiji, and it is therefore possible that it may not
have come under the notice of Chief-Justice Gorrie. In this case also, whilst
entirely approving of the action taken by him, I regret the language employed
in some parts of Mr. Gorrie’s letters to Mr. Thompson and Mr. Ohlsen. His
conclusions are, I think, perfectly just, but in stating them he would have done
well to avoid the use of sarcastic and irritating phrases.
I am not quite sure, but I am inclined to think, that the misunderstanding
at Funafuti was mentioned in some of my despatches from Samoa,
To the Colonial Office
January 11, 1879. —Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch No. 100
I concur with Mr. Des Yceux in thinking the acquisition of this site in
itself highly desirable.
I do not, however, think that it would be advantageous, or indeed in
the existing state of the colonial finances prudent, to take possession of
this piece of ground without a tolerably definite idea beforehand of the
amount of compensation likely to be awarded for it. If the Ordinance No. 1
of 1878 is confirmed, it may, I think, be anticipated that this compensation
will not exceed reasonable limits. If, however, it should unfortunately be
disapproved, I fear I could not advise that the Crown should incur the risk
of being compelled to pay as compensation, for having taken this piece of
ground, a sum altogether out of proportion to its proper value. But
assuming this difficulty removed by the confirmation of Ordinance 1 of 1878,
and taking for granted that the award of, though a liberal, still only a fair
compensation need be looked for, there is yet another consideration which
must, I think, be well weighed before the appropriation is decided on, and
which can only be properly estimated on the spot.
That consideration is the degree of reluctance entertained by the
Wesleyan Body to part with the site. I am exceedingly unwilling to take
any step which should be, or even have the appearance of being, harsh or
injurious to a Body which has deserved so well, and is entitled to so much
consideration.
The advantages resulting from the acquisition of the land would be
dearly purchased at the price of the hostility and opposition of the Wesleyan
Body ; but if their unwillingness to dispose of the rock is simply a reluctance
which may be overcome, or is in itself clearly unreasonable, and if there is
no reason to apprehend the award of immoderate and exorbitant compensa-
tion, I think it is manifestly for the public advantage that the site should
be acquired by the Crown, and I believe that the acquisition would prove
one of great utility.
240
CtitAP.
FIJI


To the Colonial Office
January 14, 1879.—5 i have been desired to state my opinion as to
the legislation required to effect a final settlement of claims to land in Fiji
acquired before the cession of that group of islands to Great Britain.
At the request of the Secretary of State, I some time since prepared a
memorandum with respect to the steps to be taken for this purpose, and
although that memorandum was not intended to bear a formal or official
character, I do not know that I can do better than now substantially repeat
its contents.
The Secretary of State having intimated his general concurrence in the
views thus expressed, it now becomes my duty to explain what in my opinion
are the chief points for which it is requisite that an Ordinance should provide.
They may be considered under three heads, as they regard respectively—
I. Claims not yet heard.
11. Claims already heard.
111. Miscellaneous provisions.
I. Claims not yet heard
In respect of these it should be provided that—l. Every claim professing
to be based on deeds executed by natives prior to the 10th day of October 1874
shall be examined by the Commission appointed under the provisions of
Ordinances No, xv. of 1875, and No. xiv. of 1877, and the report of such
Commission shall be submitted to the Governor in Council, as has up to this
time been the case.
2. If any such claim is disallowed by the Governor in Council, notification
shall be made of such disallowance in the Royal Gazette, and it shall be law-
ful within months of the publication of such disallowance for the party
whose claim has been so disallowed to transmit a petition to the Governor,
praying, for reasons to be therein assigned, that the claim should be reheard,
and such claim shall be accordingly reheard by the Governor in Council, and
the reasons alleged in such petition duly considered and examined. And on
such rehearing the Governor shall, in virtue of the powers conferred on him
by Article of Her Majesty’s Royal Instructions of the 1875, summon
the Chief-Justice and Commissioner of Native Affairs to sit in Council, and
the parties may be heard by Counsel or personally, and the Governor in
Council shall have and exercise in these cases all the powers for the purpose
of securing the attendance of witnesses, the administration of oaths, etc.,
conferred on the Commission appointed under Ordinance No. xv. of 1875.
3. If, on such rehearing, the claim be allowed, notice of the Governor’s
intention to issue a Crown grant to the claimant shall be given, as in the
case of other claims allowed in the manner hereinafter provided; but if the
disallowance be confirmed, such disallowance shall be final, and the produc-
tion of a certificate of such disallowance under the hand of the Clerk of the
Council shall operate as a bar to the prosecution in any Court of Law of any
claim to land so disallowed on the part of the claimant, or any one claiming
through him.
4. If any claim is, on the report of the Commission or on any rehearing as
before provided, allowed by the Governor in Council, notice thereof and of the
HI R
241
XXI
FIJI


intention of the Governor to issue to the claimant a Crown grant of the land
claimed shall be published in the Royal Gazette, and if within months
from the publication of such notice no objection or counter claim thereto be
lodged in the manner hereinafter provided, it shall be lawful for the Governor
to issue to the claimant a grant, under his hand and the seal of the Colony,
of the land, the claim to which has been so allowed, which grant, when
registered in the manner prescribed by Ordinance No. xxxiv. of 18/6, shall be
indefeasible.
5. If, before the expiration of months, notice of objection to the issue of
the grant is given, and it be alleged that rights acquired by transactions
between parties subsequent to the original alienation of the land have been
disregarded, the party so objecting, or alleging that the grant ought to issue
to him and not to the party to whom the Governor in Council has signified
his intention to issue the grant, or that rights possessed by him have been
disregarded, shall enter a caveat against the issue of the grant, as nearly as
may be in the same manner as caveats against dealing with registered land
are directed to be made under Ordinance xxxiv. of 1876, and the question of
right as between the parties shall be heard and decided in the Supreme
Court, and the Governor shall issue the grant according to such decision,
and such grant shall, when registered in the manner before prescribed, be
indefeasible.
11. Claims already heard and decided
1. Every Crown grant already issued shall be deemed indefeasible after
the expiration of months from the passage of this Ordinance, provided
no notice of objection thereto be given before the expiration of that period.
If notice of such objection be given, it shall be dealt with in like manner as
if only the intention to issue the grant had been notified as hereinbefore-
provided, and as if the grant itself had not been issued.
2. In like manner claims already disallowed by the Governor in Council
shall, unless a petition for their rehearing be presented within months
from the passage of this Ordinance, be deemed to have been disallowed as is
hereinbefore provided, and a certificate of such disallowance shall have the
same effect as such a certificate of disallowance as is before provided for.
111. Miscellaneous Provisions
Among these care should be taken —
1. That no grant or conveyance of land made by natives before the 10th
October 1874 shall have any force in any Law Court.
2. That on issue of a Crown grant, all prior deeds relating to said land
are delivered to the Registrar-General to be cancelled.
3. That ten years’ occupation previous to passage of Ordinance is to carry
prescription.
4. That power is given to the Governor in Council to submit a case to
the Supreme Court. , , . . . ..
It cannot be too often repeated that the main object of this legislation,
besides providing for the indefeasibility of Crown grants issued to claimants,
and for the rehearing of disallowed claims, is to secure the native proprietors
from the molestation which, without such protection, they would inevitably
undergo from the reproduction in the courts of law of claims which have
242
FIJI
CHAP.


been disallowed by the Governor in Council, and which, in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred, turn on questions of boundary.
Cases where the issue of a grant will be disputed by any one else claiming
that it ought to issue to him, instead of the person accepted by the Crown as
grantee, will be very rare indeed, and may be well left to the Supreme Court
to dispose of.
Cases of complete disallowance are also rare.
The most frequent cases of complaint are those in which the grant has
conveyed only a portion of the land claimed, it having been shown to the
satisfaction of the Governor in Council that the claimants either ignorantly
or fraudulently were contending for boundaries far exceeding those of which
the native vendors had really contemplated the disposal.
Such questions are far better disposed of by a Commission, or by the
Governor in Council, than by a law court; although, if a claimant thinks his
case has not been fully presented, or has fresh evidence to produce, I would
give him the means of securing a full and careful reconsideration of it before
a final decision is arrived at.
I have not attempted to draft a complete Ordinance, as that will be
infinitely better done in the Colonial Office itself, but I hope that an oppor-
tunity will be afforded me of seeing the draft and commenting on its
provisions before it is finally put into shape.
There should, in my view, be a preamble declaring the meaning of the
Deed of Cession in the sense conveyed in Sir H. Robinson’s and Sir G. Innes’s
letters and Lord Carnarvon’s despatch, and taking especial care to secure the
right of the Crown over all foreshores, reefs, and rivers, etc.
From the Rev. B. Chapman l
227 Pitt Street, Sydney, November 26, 1878.—Your Excellency—The
S. Frisco mail, delivered to-day, has brought me copies of letters from Mr.
Langham to your Excellency and of your Excellency’s reply, as also a copy of
a letter addressed to Mr. Langham, dated November 10, 1878, marked private
with a letter of same date to myself.
As the P. and 0. mail has left, my only chance of immediate reply is to
send a few lines via Melbourne overland. I am anxious to respond to the
kindly sentiments expressed in your Excellency’s letter.
I desire to say that not I only, but our Board of Missions and, I am
persuaded, Mr. Langham also, sincerely sympathise in your Excellency’s
anxiety that there should be a cordial understanding between your Excellency
and the Chairman of our Mission in Fiji.
We should regard the cessation or the interruption of the relations which
have hitherto subsisted as very injurious in its effects. And your Excellency
rightly interprets our principles, in assuming that for us to become entangled
in politics would be to act contrary to those principles.
I shall have great pleasure in writing to Mr. Langham on the subject of
your Excellency’s letter to me. Ido not, however, think that Mr. Langham
will need to be urged by me to reply so as to reassure your Excellency.
Your Excellency’s kind and conciliatory letter will itself bring the
assurance from Mr. Langham, that on every account he desires friendly co-
1 Secretary to the Board of Missions of the Wesleyan Body in Australasia.
243
XXI
FIJI


operation with the Government, and I venture to think that when such
desires exist on both sides, differences about individual points can be easily
arranged.
As I am writing I desire to add a few lines in regard to Tonga, and the
Rev. S. W. Baker.
Your Excellency is aware that rumours and complaints have reached us
respecting that gentleman, and that we have instituted inquiries which have
resulted in Mr. Baker being sent back to his station. I have now to inform
your Excellency that Mr. Maudslay has sent a formal complaint against Mr.
Baker which brings out a, to us, new phase of the old charge.
Instructions have been sent to the Missionaries to fully investigate these
complaints in Tonga, and to forward their report to the next Conference to
be held in Sydney in January. I hope full justice will be done. While our
Conference will take care that every man who is accused has ample opportunity
of explaining and defending himself, it will not shield one who is proved to
have done wrong. I have informed Mr. Consul Maudslay of the steps taken,
and that he shall be duly informed of the issue.
I regret to have to say that, while I believe that Mr. Maudslay, in deference
to your Excellency’s course of action, and probably also from his own good
will, will do all he can to protect the character of our Mission, I fear he has
sanctioned methods of seeking information in order to, as appears to us,
secure conviction, which we deem unfair. My information is from Fiji and
the Friendlies. D. Afu, one of our own agents, has been taken to the Friendly
Islands and has been engaged in seeking information among the people. He
has busied himself also about the mode in which some of our church arrange-
ments are carried out, the effect of which will be injurious to us.
I have not mentioned this matter to Mr. Maudslay, lest it should be
supposed that it should interfere with the conduct of the inquiry in hand,
but when the investigation is concluded, 1 may have to bring the matter
under his notice. —I am, your Excellency’s obedient servant,
BENJAMIN CHAPMAN.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Sir —I have to apologise for my long delay in replying to your letter of
the 25th September enclosing the draft of a proposed Order Council for
the amendment of the “ Western Pacific Order in Council, 1877.”
This draft contains two new provisions
The third section provides for the discharge of the duties of the High
Commissioner in case of his death, incapacity, or absence from the Pacific.
This is a useful, and indeed necessary, amendment, and I have no remark to
make respecting it.
The fourth section enacts that each Judicial Commissioner shall have a
seal which shall be taken and held to be the seal of the High Commissioner.
Although there can be no doubt as to the desirability of the object which
it is thus sought to attain, it may perhaps be questioned whether it would in
fact be really accomplished by the means proposed.
The Seal of the High Commissioner is only required to be affixed to
documents signed by him, and it would be useless to provide the Judicial
Commissioner with duplicates of it. It is not the seal of the High Commis-
sioner but that of the High Commissioner’s Court, the absence of which has
244
CHAP.
FIJI


given rise to some embarrassment; and its want is likely to be felt quite as
much by the Deputy Commissioners as by a Judicial Commissioner.
By the Order in Council certain powers are conferred on Deputy Commis-
sioners ; but if reference is made to the different Articles of the Order itself,
and to the forms appended thereto, it will be observed that in every case the
decision or Order, though it may be one within the competency of a Deputy
Commissioner to make, must be given under the seal of the Court. So long,
therefore, as there is but one seal of the Court, or if the Judicial Commis-
sioners alone are to possess seals, the powers professedly conferred on the
Deputy Commissioners are wholly illusory, and their office of practically
little utility.
There are two ways in which this defect might be remedied. Either every
Deputy Commissioner might be furnished with a duplicate seal of the Court,
or the signature of the Deputy Commissioner might be deemed sufficient
authentication in the case of all proceedings within the competency of a
Deputy Commissioner. I should myself prefer the latter solution, which
would at all events have the merit of avoiding expenditure on seals, and
would dispense with formalities which are only relics of a time when the
attestation of a seal had advantages which it does not now possess.
lam also called on to say in what other respects the Order in Council
appears to me to need extension or amendment, and I will therefore mention
two or three particulars in which it appears to me susceptible of improve-
ment.
The powers which the Act 38 and 39 Yict. authorises Her Majesty to
confer on the High Commissioner are not actually conferred by the Order in
Council of 1877. The Act provides (Sect, vi.) that “it shall be lawful for
Her Majesty to confer upon such High Commissioner power and authority in
Her name and on Her behalf to make Regulations for the government of Her
subjects in such Islands and places, and to impose penalties, forfeitures, or
imprisonments for the breach of such Regulations,” but the Order in Council
in an Article headed expressly “Offences against Treaties,” only empowers
the High Commissioner “to make from time to time, in the name and on
behalf of Her Majesty, by writing under his hand and official seal, such Regu-
lations as to him seem fit, for the government of British subjects by enforcing
the observance by them of the stipulations of any Treaty between Her Majesty
and any King, Chief, or other Authority in the Western Pacific Islands, and
for securing the maintenance/as far as regards the conduct of British subjects,
of friendly relations between British subjects and those authorities and persons
subject to them.”
Were it not for the limitation thus imposed, the High Commissioner
would be able to make Regulations for the treatment of imported labourers
in the service of British subjects on the islands in the Pacific, which, as I
have pointed out in my despatches relative to Samoa, are much needed, the
case of employment of such labour in a country where there were no laws to
protect them not having been contemplated by the framers of the Pacific
Islanders’ Protection Acts 1872 and 1875, who, while making very stringent
provisions with regard to the voyage , evidently presumed that when landed
the immigrants would be under the protection of some local municipal law,
as in a British or French colony.
Ido not know whether the variation between the language of the Act and
245
XXI
FIJI


of the Order in Council is intentional, or is only a verbal oversight, but the
limitation it implies is I think to be regretted, more especially when it is
taken in connection with the next point to which I will call attention.
In the draft originally prepared of the Western Pacific Order in Council as
shown to me before I left England, in 1875, the High Commissioner was
empowered to make treaties and engagements with native Chiefs and tribes.
This provision was omitted from the Order as finally issued ; and there-
fore as it now stands, whilst the High Commissioner has no power to make
Regulations for the conduct of British subjects living in native states unless
he has first made a treaty with the native authorities, the power to make such
treaties has been withheld from him.
I think also that, whilst it is quite right that the civil jurisdiction of the
High Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners should be strictly limited, it
is desirable that they, or at all events the High Commissioner himself,
should have power in certain cases to exercise the whole criminal jurisdiction
vested in the Judicial Commissioner, although such powers would usually
remain dormant.
This right should only be exercised in cases of necessity ; but if it does not
exist at all, the intentions with which the _.Order in Council was framed will
in some cases be frustrated, whilst in many others a great and wholly un-
necessary expense will be involved ; a consideration not to be neglected,
when the scanty amount of the proposed Parliamentary grant for the
expenses of the Commission is remembered.
I will state an illustrative case":—
Let us suppose that the High Commissioner, on his arrival at, say, one of
the Solomon Islands, finds a British subject to have committed an outrage
—say, an aggravated assault on another British subject, —of such a nature as
to be only cognisable by a Judicial Commissioner. The witnesses are (1) the
sailors of a German barque, (2) various natives. Both classes of witnesses
are willing to give evidence on the spot; the case itself is simple, and the
denied ; but the nearest Judicial Commissioner is at Levuka,
and the captain of the barque does not feel justified in either weakening his
crew, or in departing from the voyage prescribed him by his owners, in order
to go to so distant a port. In a similar manner, the natives, though very
willing to testify what they know, decidedly object to being shipped off to
Fiji, where they fear they may be detained to labour. The High Commis-
sioner, who has meanwhile committed the accused for trial in Levuka, has no
power over these foreign witnesses, and must either release the man at once,
or if he persists in sending him to Levuka, must be perfectly aware that in
the absence of evidence he must necessarily be acquitted.
But even if it be the crew of an English and not a German ship who
were the witnesses, it would be very difficult to secure their attendance at
Levuka, however willing they might be to give evidence at the place where
they at the moment were. Legally, no doubt, the High Commissioner would
have the power to bind them over to appear, but I somewhat question his
practical power of enforcing such obligations in the Western Pacific ; whilst
even if they were successfully insisted on, what expense to the Crown and
what loss to the owners of the ship would be involved !
Of course such powers as I here contemplate should not be exercised by
the High Commissioner except in extreme cases, and in every instance of
246
CHAP.
FIJI


their exercise a special report would be at once made to the Secretary of State
of the circumstances which led to their assumption ; but the authority to
exercise them, however seldom put in force, should in my judgment be vested
in the High Commissioner.
These are the only observations I have at present to make on the pro-
visions of the Order in Council of the 13th August 1877, though I have no
doubt that a somewhat longer experience of its working will suggest other
amendments. —I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
January s.—Sir—l have the honour to return with thanks the original
despatches from Chief-Justice Gorrie enclosed in your letter of the 3rd inst.
I have read them with much interest.
I have occasionally felt it my duty to comment on exaggerations or in-
discretions of language on the part of Chief-Justice Gorrie, which have caused
me all the more regret because his unflagging energy, zeal for the public
service, and unvarying intolerance of wrong or oppression, are at all times
such as to merit the warmest commendation.
It is therefore with peculiar pleasure that on the present occasion I feel
myself able to express my entire and hearty concurrence in the greater part
of his despatch, No. 7of the 14th October. There is not a word in the first
seventeen paragraphs of that despatch to which lam not ready to subscribe,
and it may be considered as conveying my own sentiments quite as much
as those of Mr. Gorrie. It appears to me to merit, and I trust will receive,
serious attention from H.M. Government.
I should also wish to call attention to the 24th paragraph of his despatch
No. 4of the 15th September, which I believe to be no more than the state-
ment of a simple truth.
To THE UNDER-SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES
January 5. —Sir—I have read with much regret the papers relative to
the late proceedings of the Rev. G. Brown in New Britain which are en-
closed in yourjletter of the 3rd inst., and which I now return.
lam not, however, disposed to form altogether so unfavourable an opinion
of the conduct of Mr. Brown as appears to be entertained by Chief-Justice
Gorrie.
It appears to me that the question whether that gentleman’s acts were
or were not consistent with his character as a missionary is not one on which
it is necessary for me as High Commissioner, or for the Government, to pro-
nounce an opinion. That may be left to the public, and the bodies with
■which he is officially connected. We have to deal with him simply as a
British subject living in a barbarous country, and on whom other British
subjects, including women and children, were dependent. Any rights
possessed by a British subject in such a position are not, I think, forfeited
by him simply because he is a Wesleyan Missionary, although, morally, their
exercise by him may be more objectionable than would otherwise be the case.
But, taking the most favourable view, it is clear that Mr. Brown’s con-
duct requires further explanation, and demands further investigation. An
individual British subject has, primd facie , no right to punish savage tribes
247
XXI
FIJI


for their misconduct, or to levy war upon them, and it is obvious that, under
ordinary circumstances, it would have been Mr. Brown’s duty to report the
murder of the teachers to the High Commissioner or the commander of the
nearest cruiser, and to have awaited their action. But, on the other hand,
I think any British subject in such a situation (more especially if he have
the lives of others to consider) is perfectly justified in taking measures which
self-defence renders needful. The question really then narrows itself to two
points—lst, Were the measures taken by Mr. Brown requisite for the defence
of himself and his party ? and 2nd, Supposing the steps themselves to be
justifiable, were they carried too far and pursued with an undue amount of
sanguinary severity ?I am not prepared to say in answer to the first ques-
tion that it was not necessary for Mr. Brown to take immediate and active
steps as a means of self-defence, for I can easily conceive positions, among
such a race as the savages of New Britain, where not to take the initiative in
striking a blow would be equivalent to suicide, and Mr. Brown (who is known
to me) does not appear to me a man at all likely to have recourse to harsh
measures without grave necessity. On the other hand, lam unable at present
to see that this necessity is proved, or that the fact that a missionary
expedition into the island of New Britain had resulted in the death of those
undertaking it should necessarily involve the murder of those long settled
on Duke of York's Island. To the second question I regret to say that it
appears to me impossible to reply otherwise than in the affirmative.
I think, therefore, that it will be necessary to hold some formal investiga-
tion into the affair, and this I shall be prepared to do on my return to the
Pacific. It is my present intention to return by the Torres Straits line of
steamers, and if a man-of-war met me at Thursday Island, 1 could proceed
to New Britain and thence to Fiji without involving any undue loss of
time.
I would suggest, therefore, that the Aborigines’ Protection Society be
informed that an investigation will take place into the circumstances related ;
that a letter be written to the Committee of the Wesleyan Missionary Society,
informing them that H.M. Government have felt it necessary to direct the
High Commissioner to hold such an investigation, and requesting them to
give instructions to their missionaries to facilitate and assist such inquiry ;
and that, finally, when the time of my departure approaches, the Commodore
should be instructed to send a ship to meet me at Thursday Island.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
January 1879.—Sir —I have the honour to return the papers enclosed in
your letter of the 31st ultimo, on the subject of New Guinea.
I sincerely hope that the opinion, that the influx of settlers into New
Guinea is likely to diminish, and that the prospecting expeditions now in
that country may possibly be altogether withdrawn, is well founded. I
cannot myself share that view, which is I fear far from being likely to be
realised, but, entertaining it, lam not surprised that Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment should consider it expedient to postpone for further consideration a
question involving so many difficulties as that of the annexation of any part
of New Guinea. I therefore defer for the present all further remarks on the
subject. Should the expectations referred to fortunately prove correct, there
248
CHAP.
FIJI


will be no need for me to recur to the subject. If, on the other hand, as I
cannot but anticipate, those hopes are disappointed, I shall have the advantage
of writing, after several months’ additional experience of the course of events
in New Guinea.
Meanwhile, in reply to the questions you put, as to the measures necessary,
under present circumstances, for the temporary maintenance of good order in
New Guinea, I would observe that, whilst, if an officer of the discretion and
good judgment of Captain Digby be found, I should be very glad to issue to
him a Commission as Deputy-Commissioner, I cannot think it expedient to
issue such commissions generally, and as a matter of course, to the com-
manders of cruisers visiting those waters. It must, I think, be left in each
individual case to the judgment of the High Commissioner, whether it is or
is not expedient to give such an authority. I also feel some hesitation as to
the appointment of Mr. Chester as a Deputy-Commissioner for New Guinea,
and should wish to be allowed to defer any decision on that point until after
I have had an opportunity of meeting Mr. Chester at Thursday Island on my
way back to Fiji.
My present intention, unless it be disapproved by the Secretary of State,
is, on my return to Fiji, to despatch a gentleman in whom I have confidence
and on whose abilities and discretion I can rely, to New Guinea and the other
places requiring a visit from a Deputy or a Judicial Commissioner, and to
await his report before returning any positive answer to the query contained
in your letter, or making any suggestion as to the permanent future arrange-
ments connected with the working of the Commission in New Guinea and
the neighbouring islands.
In connection with this subject I may add that I should be glad if the
Governor of Queensland were requested to call Mr. Chester’s attention to the
fact that the reports which in my letter he was directed to make to me under
flying seal through the Governor of Queensland have never been made, and
that he has never communicated in any manner whatever with me or with
Chief-Justice Gorrie. I should also wish it to be specially pointed out to him
that the report in his letter of 6th September with respect to the conduct
of British subjects at Brooker Island (which is far beyond the limits not only
of Queensland, but of the district for which he was empowered to act)
should have been made to me or the acting High Commissioner, and that
such action as he suggests against the lawless British subjects there resident
is a matter for the consideration of the High Commissioner rather than that
of the Government of Queensland, to which he suggests it.
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
February 14.—1 have read with equal surprise and regret the correspond-
ence with the Admiralty enclosed in your letter of the 14th February.
In that correspondence the Lords of the Admiralty object to the proposal
contained in the Colonial Office letter of the 18th November last, and
practically insist that whilst all complaints of natives against whites are to
be investigated and adjudicated on by the High Commissioner and his
deputies, all complaints of whites against natives should be investigated,
adjudicated upon, and dealt with, by the officers commanding cruisers on the
Australian station, although, if within a convenient distance, they may, if
249
XXI
FIJI


they think fit, ask, —and if they think proper, disregard,—the opinion and
advice of the High Commissioner.
In laying down this rule, the Admiralty appear to have forgotten or to
have been in ignorance of more than one point, the consideration of which is
of some importance in connection with this subject.
In the first place, they appear to have forgotten that although the High
Commissioner may not, as such, have any jurisdiction over the natives of
islands not belonging to Great Britain, he is also Consul-General for the same
region, and that although he does not thereby obtain legal jurisdiction, the
task of demanding reparation for any injury done to British subjects is,
in virtue of this office, in the first instance his, and that force should only be
employed when he has notified a necessity for its use, on the failure of other
means of obtaining satisfaction. The lieutenants commanding H. M. cruisers
have no more jurisdiction over the natives than is possessed by the High
Commissioner, and I am at a loss to perceive why they should be entrusted
with a power of demanding forcible reparation for injuries, or of inflicting
punishment for offences supposed by them to have been committed, which
they do not possess in other places where H. M. has an accredited civil
representative of superior rank.
This fact the Lords of the Admiralty appear to have overlooked, and they
were probably never aware, that the conduct of relations with the natives
formed one of the principal objects of my appointment as High Commissioner.
But this is undoubtedly the case, and it was, in the words of Lord Carnarvon,
intended that “within the limits of the High Commissionership, as within
the boundaries of a Colony, the authority of the officer holding such a com-
mission from the Crown should be sole and supreme” What the Lords of
the Admiralty desire is that instead of being “sole and supreme,” it should
be co-ordinate with, and in some most important matters inferior to, that
possessed by very young officers- of H.M. Navy.
Practically, the suggested division of jurisdiction could not work. In
almost every case there are counter complaints from white against native and
from native against white, and if these are to be adjudicated on by different
parties a speedy collision between them is quite inevitable.
I am not quite so certain as the Lords of the Admiralty appear to be, that
(unless instructed to do so) these officers will either ask or listen to the
advice of the High Commissioner, nor do I think he ought to be placed in
the position of volunteering advice, and encountering the risk of its being
disregarded, as that of an “irresponsible person,”—a designation which, how-
ever, I think their Lordships are hardly correct in applying to H.M. High
Commissioner and Consul-General in the Pacific.
But even where there is no desire on the part of the officers in command
of the schooners cruising in the Pacific to act without regard to the views
and wishes of the High Commissioner, cases will arise in which different
views will be taken, and which will lead to great confusion if there is no
necessary concert between them. I will give one case, not wholly imaginary,
something very like it having already occurred in the Island of Funafuti, in
the Line Islands. A complaint is made by a native king, of the misconduct,
threats, and exorbitant demands of a white resident in his island. The
High Commissioner inquires into these allegations, and is convinced that the
white man is endeavouring to defraud and overreach the natives. He is
250
CHAP.
FIJI


admonished by the High Commissioner, and the king assured that he has
nothing to fear from claims which he may safely disregard. Soon afterwards
a man-of-war schooner appears off the island. The white resident, carefully
concealing the fact of the High Commissioner’s action, makes his complaint,
and the lieutenant in command, who has probably no competent interpreter,
and is profoundly ignorant of native tenures, forthwith insists on the king
immediately giving up to the white man everything claimed by him, under
the threat of burning down his village, and shooting his people.
Of course if H.M. Government see fit to try the experiment of such a
double jurisdiction, it can be attempted, but I fear it would be very difficult
for me personally to acquiesce in an arrangement so entirely at variance with
the understanding on which I undertook the office of High Commissioner, so
absolutely certain to produce serious confusion and scandal, and I venture to
add, so inconsistent with the dignity of the office which the Queen has been
pleased to confer on me, if not with my own age and standing in her service.
I must therefore repeat the expression of my hope that, as a general rule,
and wherever practicable, the officers in command of H.M. cruisers will
report upon the disputes which come before them, previously to proceeding to
any active steps of intervention in their settlement.
I would beg to call your attention to the fact that Commodore Wilson, in
his letter of the 23rd December, enclosed in your letter of the 19th inst.,
expresses precisely this opinion, and his agreement with the general principles
of Mr. Gorrie’s letter of the 27th August; and I may add that Commodore
Hoskins evidently took the same view, for in a letter to me, written after the
hanging of a man at Tanna, by the lieutenant in command of H.M. schooner
Beagle , he congratulated himself on the prospect that now that the High Com-
mission was established, these matters would pass out of his hands into
mine.
Of course, cases may and will arise in which immediate intervention
may be essential to protect the lives or property of British subjects,
and in these the officer commanding a cruiser would, and ought, to act at
once, on his own discretion and on his own responsibility. But these cases
are comparatively rare; and in all others lam certain that, unless they
are forbidden to resort to force until H.M. High Commissioner and Consul-
General has pronounced such a resort to be necessary, grave injustice
will often (though quite unintentionally) be done, great scandal will result
from a diversity of action and decision between different British authorities,
and the natives will be led to look on the proceedings of the High Com-
missioner as wholly illusory —finding themselves not unfrequently punished
severely by a man-of-war ,for acts which the High Commissioner has pro-
nounced to be either undeserving of punishment, or such as a very light
penalty was sufficient to atone for.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, February 4. —My dear Gordon—lt is true that the
Treasury adhere to their intention of reducing the High Commission vote to
£3OOO, but I understand that Sir Michael will reply that the sum is quite
inadequate, and that the £SOOO was a low and carefully-considered estimate.
We shall do the best we can. In this, as in all other matters, this Depart-
251
XXI
FIJI


ment can do no more ; and, however disappointed you may feel, I hope you
also will make the best of the circumstances.
I do not think I can express any opinion in favour of a personal applica-
tion by you to Cole or to Sir S. Northcote. Sir Michael does not as a rule
favour informal communications with other departments. But he might be
glad to suggest to the Chancellor of the Exchequer that you could give useful
explanations if personally consulted. Shall I ask him ?
Sir Michael is not now likely to be in town this week. I will give you as
long notice as I can of the time at which he may wish to see you.—Yours
very truly,
ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
From Mr. Herbert
Colonial Office, February 6.—My dear Gordon—The Queen’s approval
of Lord Augustus Loftus as Governor of Hew South Wales has just reached
me. His term of service at St. Petersburg expired, as I understand, some time
ago. He will be succeeded there by Lord Dufferin, and this latter appoint-
ment will, I have no doubt, be generally considered a successful hit, both
politically and on its true merits.
I hear that Lord A. Loftus has a good cook and an imposing exterior, and
I hope he will have a peaceful reign. If a Governor must be chosen from
outside the service, I think his appointment involves no slight on our exist-
ing Governors. I need say nothing more to you on the subject.
I do not at all give up the expectation of being able, in one way or another,
to get larger funds for the High Commission. —Yours ever,
P.S. —The statement in some of to-day’s papers that Lord A. Loftus has
been recalled is a fiction.
Memorandum on Mr. Lackworthy’s Letter —February 14
I would venture to recommend that the Crown Agents should be instructed
to reply to Mr. Lackworthy’s letter to the effect that although the Secretary
of State cannot admit the Colony to be justly chargeable with the delay
caused by the prolonged hesitation of the Bank of New Zealand to give any
reply whatever to the proposals made to it at the commencement of last year,
he is not unwilling to allow interest on the debentures to be paid as though
they had been accepted and issued on the Ist January 1878.
With regard to the land claims, I would suggest that Mr. Lackworthy
should be referred to the correspondence which has already taken place
between the Colonial Secretary of Fiji and the Board of Directors in New
Zealand, to which Her Majesty’s Government has nothing to add, and which
clearly indicates that, should the proposed pecuniary settlement be accepted
by the Bank of New Zealand, the Colonial Government is willing, as an
act of grace and favour, to make over to the Bank any rights the Crown may
itself possess in the Lovoni valley.
I would particularly recommend that this intimation should be carefully
worded in the terms above given. The Bank does not—(as it would appear
from your letter to be supposed)—claim the Lovoni valley wholly, or even
principally, through its Charter , but on the foreclosure of a mortgage granted
by Cakobau to a German Jew. From past correspondence, the Colonial
Government is pledged, in the event of an amicable acceptance of its proposals
by the Bank, to give effect to this transaction, so far as it depends on it to do
252
CHAP.
FIJI


so, and of course the transaction itself was a bond-Jide one. That is to say,
if Cakobau had the power to mortgage this valley, the present Government
is, I think, pledged not to raise, as it might raise, any technical objections
to the enforcement of the mortgage. But, before I left Fiji, I saw grave
reason to doubt whether such power had, in fact, ever belonged to Cakobau,
and I therefore think that great care should be taken not to prejudice the
result of the inquiry which must take place into this subject.
I have not overlooked the provisions of the Act of Incorporation of the
New Zealand Bank, to which reference is made in your letter, and had
called the attention of the Attorney-General in Fiji, and also of the Manager
of the Bank, to the subject. The Manager informed me that the Courts in
New South Wales had decided that the Bank was entitled under that Act
to conduct general banking business out of New Zealand. Having verified
this statement, and the Attorney-General having expressed his concurrence
in the opinion given by the Australian Judges, I felt that it was impossible
for me to raise objections to the action of the Bank, although, as a layman,
I should certainly have otherwise interpreted the Act of Incorporation. As
regards the possession of land, I confess I do not see how the force of the
11th section can be evaded, but I did not think it necessary or expedient
to raise that question, until the time came for the settlement of the Bank s
land claims, other than those made under the Charter.
I am, of course, unable at present to refer to my papers, but I think it
will be found that ray despatch No. 162, of the 12th October 1876, contains
some account of the purchase by the Bank of New Zealand of the business
and interests of the Bank of Fiji to which you refer.
I see no mention in this correspondence of the suggestion to pay the
Bank in cash instead of debentures, which, I understood, was likely to go
a good way towards effecting an amicable arrangement.
To the Colonial Office
January 22, 1879.—Sir—I have had the honour to receive your letter
of the 21st inst., enclosing a copy of one from the Treasury, on the subject
of the grant for the expenses connected with the administration of the
Western Pacific Order in Council 1877. The Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury propose to reduce their grant from the sum of £SOOO, as originally
proposed, to £3OOO, and apparently base their proposal on the fact that
only £3OOO appears to have been expended last year for the purposes of the
Order in Council. Their lordships appear to have overlooked the circum-
stance that during the past year the Order in Council was but very partially
brought into operation. There was no Deputy - Commissioner in Tonga
until June ; there was none (where one is much wanted) in the New
Hebrides and Solomon Islands; no visitation of places where British
subjects are settled was made ; and it was only for a part of the year that
there was a Deputy-Commissioner in Samoa.
£SOOO is the very least for which any useful work can be done by the
High Commissioner, It will become worse than useless, a mockery and a
delusion, if it is restrained from the performance of its most evident duties
by the want of means to erect the simplest machinery for the purpose.
I can make no suggestion as to any substantial alteration in the Estimates
253
XXI
FIJI


submitted by me on November 30 last (and which I learn, from the
enclosures to your letter of the 20th ult., received the approval of the
Secretary of State), for I am convinced that they represent the very smallest
expenditure at which the duties of the High Commissioner can be dis-
charged with the faintest resemblance of efficiency ; and it would be far
better to revoke altogether the Order in Council, and repeal the Acts of
Parliament on which it is founded, than to render the impotence of its
administration a byword and object of derision, as must be the case if
this suggestion be adopted. The only alteration in the Estimate which, on
carefully reconsidering them, seems to me possible, is not one attended with
any material saving. It will not at present be necessary to appoint a
permanent resident Deputy Commissioner in New Guinea (although it is in
my opinion probable that such an appointment may before very long become
requisite) ; but it will be necessary to send a special Commissioner both there
and to New Britain (which, as the Lords of the Treasury may be aware, has
lately been the scene of some questionable proceedings), and this will cost
as much, or nearly as much, as the salary of a Resident Commissioner.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Vceux's Despatch No. 102
Mr. Des Voeux simply transmits without remark the copy of a letter
from the General Manager of the Bank of New Zealand on the subject of
the claims of that institution against the late Government of Fiji.
Mr. Murdoch’s letter does not seem to call for any lengthened comment
from me.
I have already, in my letter of the 20th October last, expressed my
inability to perceive any reason for dealing with the Bank on different
principles from those acted on in the case of other creditors of Cakobau, and
my conviction of the extreme impolicy of recognising the obligations entered
into by Cakobau, as distinguished from the debts actually incurred by his
government.
The only new argument advanced by Mr. Murdoch, is one which rather
makes against his case, viz. that the original scheme of cession, forwarded
by Commodore Goodenough and Mr. Layard, contained a recognition of the
Fijian debt. But Her Majesty’s Government distinctly refused to accept
the cession on such terms, and insisted on the omission of any such clause.
Mr. Murdoch is quite right in saying that when I met him at Melbourne
I expressed my willingness to recommend the payment of the claim in cash,
if its settlement would thereby be facilitated, and such a proposal has now
been made to the Bank. It is also true that I told Mr. Murdoch that his
arguments seemed to me “open to debate,” meaning thereby that they
might not only be contested, but in my opinion contested successfully,
although I did not care at that time and place, without the power of refer-
ring to papers and figures at Fiji, or the opportunity of ascertaining the views
of the Secretary of State, to enter on an argumentative discussion of them,
Mr. Murdoch also refers to what I told him with respect to the lands
claimed by the Bank under Cakobau’s charter. As in the case of the debts
due to it, I see no reason to place the claims of the Bank to land on a
different footing from those of other parties.
254
CHAP.
FIJI


Of these claims some have been, and the remainder will be, investigated
in due course by the Lands Commission, and if the Bank Directors are dis-
satisfied with the decision of the Governor in Council on the report of the
Commission, they will, like others, have an opportunity of procuring their
reconsideration under the scheme of appeal now about to be adopted.
In the case of the Lovoni Valley alone, I should be disposed to issue a
grant at an earlier date, in consequence of the expectations originally held
out on this subject, but I have always from the first moment said that this
grant would not be issued, as a matter of grace and favour , until the
pecuniary claims of the Bank had been settled. If it is to be claimed as oj
right, the claim must go before the Lands Commission and the Executive
Council in the usual course, and abide the issue.
To the Secretary of State for the Colonies
Sir — I have the honour to return herewith Chief-Justice Gorrie’s de-
spatches transmitted for my perusal with your letter of the Ist inst.
I feel confident that Mr. Gorrie’s implicit obedience to the directions
telegraphed to him by the Secretary of State may be fully relied on.
As it will probably become my duty to report upon the whole of the late
transactions connected with Mr. Brown’s proceedings in New Britain, I
should prefer to express no opinion at present with respect to the course
adopted by Chief-Justice Gorrie, as detailed in his despatch No. 16, although
I may be permitted to observe that the events which had taken place appear
to have been such as not only to justify, but to render almost unavoidable,
some inquiry of a more or less judicial nature.
The subject treated of in Mr, Gorrie’s despatch No. 19 is one which more
especially concerns the legal advisers of the Colonial Office. I agree with
Mr. Gorrie in deeming the question one of grave importance and urgency,
and, difficult as it is to deal with, I trust that its consideration will not be
neglected or overlooked.
To the Colonial Office
February 10, 1879. —Sir—l have had the honour to receive your letter of
the Bth inst. on the subject of the appointment of Mr. J. H. Graves as H.B.M.
Consul at Samoa.
Not having had the advantage of seeing the correspondence with the
Foreign Office referred to in Sir J. Pauncefote’s letter, I am unable to say
whether it bears the construction therein placed on it. No such intimation
was made to me.
The number of Deputy Commissioners is by the Order in Council to be
fixed by the High Commissioner, subject to the approval of the Secretary
of State for the Colonies ; the appointment of the Deputy Commissioners
themselves being vested in the High Commissioner. These appointments
can only be revoked (Order in Council, § 11) by “an instrument in writing
stating the grounds of suspension or removal.” These appointments are
evidently placed in the High Commissioner’s hands because it is supposed
that he is best able, on the spot, to select persons conversant with the
languages, habits of thought, and modes of life of those with whom they
will be brought into official relation as his assistants; and I informed Mr.
255
XXI
FIJI


Swanston that I had no power to guarantee his appointment as Consul, but
in reply to a question put by him I told him that the appointment of
Deputy Commissioner was a substantive one from which he would not be
removed except in case of misconduct.
I think it probable that on learning that he is not to be confirmed in the
office of Consul, Mr. Swanston will resign the Deputy Commissionership, and
in that case it will no doubt be desirable to appoint Mr. Graves Deputy Com-
missioner. But should Mr. Swanston elect to retain the appointment, I must
submit that he has done nothing to merit dismissal, or that could be assigned
in a written instrument as a ground of suspension or removal. If lam
correctly informed, Mr. 'Graves is as yet wholly unacquainted with the
language and manners of the Samoan people, and I would suggest that during
the early stages of his stay in Samoa he will find it of the greatest service,
and be saved from many mistakes, by having at his side a gentleman possess-
ing so perfect a knowledge of the Samoan language and of Samoan affairs
as Mr. Swanston.
To the Colonial Office
Sir —I had the honour to receive some time since your letter of February 20
“respecting the facilities and means of transport which it might be desirable
should be placed at the disposal of the High Commissioner ” in the Western
Pacific. It is quite clear that, for two entirely different reasons, the High
Commissioner should have at his disposal the means of either proceeding
himself to different places within his jurisdiction, or of despatching a Judicial
or Deputy Commissioner to such places, without being absolutely dependent on
the chance of being able to obtain the services of a man-of-war for the purpose.
In the first place, the necessity for application to the Commodore at
Sydney, which can only be made once a month from Fiji, causes great delay
even if the Commodore is at Sydney (from which he is often absent) ; and if he
be unable at once to assent to the application, such delay may and often would
render the expedition useless when at last it could be made. For example,
I could last year have prevented with ease a great and sad catastrophe at
Rotuma, had I possessed the means of at once sending a vessel and a Deputy
Commissioner to the spot. Before I could communicate with Sydney it was
altogether too late. .
On the other hand, it is often very inconvenient to the Naval authorities
to have the men-of-war on the station called away from their ordinary duties
to carry about the High Commissioner.
What is required is a yacht-fitted vessel of about 450 tons, somewhat
of the description of Mr. Brassey’s Sunbeam, but without its costly and
elaborate fittings, which would afford comfortable accommodation for the
High Commissioner and his staff—(this is absolutely indispensable to health
in such latitudes)—and which, on a pinch, might be used for the conveyance
of native troops, stores, etc. She should, I think, be a sailing vessel, with an
auxiliary screw of sufficient power to get her out of dangerous proximity to
coral reefs, in case of calm weather, or adverse winds.
The need of such a vessel it is not difficult to demonstrate. The means
by which she is to be obtained are not so easy to discover. The vote for the
expenses of the High Commissioner has been reduced by the Treasury to an
amount altogether inadequate to meet even the most necessary expenses,
256
CHAP.
FIJI


calculated on the most niggardly scale, and it is obvious that nothing can be
looked for from that source for the purchase of a vessel.
I am not without hopes that as this is not a part of the ordinary annual
expenditure, but a special charge once for all, that a separate and special sum
mightbe appropriated for this purpose, to be charged half to the revenues of Fiji
and half to the vote for the High Commission, and that if the whole amount
were advanced now it might be gradually repaid from these two services. The
Sunbeam cost, I believe, about £
To the Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
February 5, 1879.—Sir—I had the honour, on the 28th inst., to address
to you a letter on the subject of the confirmation of certain appointments in
the Civil Service of Fiji, and on the 4th inst. to reply to a letter from you
on the subject of an increase of salary which had been applied for by the
Agent-General of Immigration.
It is, I think, desirable that 1 should take an opportunity, in connection
with those letters, of pointing out certain changes and additions which appear
to me to be required in the Establishments of the Colony.
In the first place, I have to recommend that some addition be made to
the salary of the Colonial Secretary and Auditor-General. In the original
schedule of salaries sanctioned by the Secretary of State in 1875, that of this
officer was estimated at £6OO, and it was only in consequence of the extremely
impoverished condition of the Colony at that time, and the fact that the two
offices were temporarily separated, that this sanction was not acted on. The
time has now come at which the original intentions of H.M. Government
should at least be carried into effect, and the salary of the Colonial Secretary
replaced at £6OO, if indeed it be not increased to £650 or £7OO.
At least two, if not three, additional Stipendiary Magistrates are required.
Recent legislation has continually thrown additional duties on the Sti-
pendiary Magistrates, and rendered their consent or presence necessary on
many occasions of ordinary business. I have in various despatches explained
the enormous size of their districts—the multitude of their functions—the
general dissatisfaction which is felt at the difficulty of finding one when
wanted, —and the inconvenience and injury to the public service occasioned
by the necessarily long intervals between their visits to different islands.
It is, I think, quite essential that a resident magistrate should be re-
appointed to the large island of Kadavu, containing a population of over
10,000, and separated by sixty miles of sea from the province in which the
magistrate, under whose supervision it is supposed to be, resides. I with-
drew the resident magistrate from Kadavu in 1877 on grounds of economy,
but I was wrong in so doing, even on that scdre. Not only is the presence
of a magistrate socially and politically required, but even financially I am
sure that more has been lost than gained by the suppression of this post. I
therefore propose its restoration at the old salary of £250 per annum.
A resident magistrate is equally needed at Nadroga, to take charge of the
South-West and Western Coasts of Yiti Levu. These districts are at present
under the jurisdiction of the Commandant at Fort Carnarvon, whose time is
almost wholly absorbed in attention to the affairs of the interior. The
planters on the coast complain, and with reason, of the impossibility of
making long journeys to take cases before him in the Highlands. He, with
111 S
257
XXI
FIJI


equal reason, complains of the impossibility of making frequent visits to the
towns on the coast. This magistrate also should have £250 per annum.
Again, a second magistrate is much needed in Yanua Levu, the whole of
which great island, over 130 miles in length and with a coast-line three times
as long, is now under the charge of a single magistrate, whose whole time is
consumed in travelling round his extensive district; but, though I wish this
fact to be kept in sight, I do not at this moment press for such an appointment.
I have already, on more than one occasion, pointed out the great need of
additional medical officers, and the impossibility, as things at present are, of
securing the proper vaccination of either Europeans or natives. I should at
present wish that the appointment of two might be sanctioned, one for the
port of Loma Loma, where there is no properly qualified health-officer, and
the other for the islands of Yanua Levu and Taviuni, where a population of
perhaps 50,000 is wholly without medical assistance. Ido not think it will
be possible to secure the services of a qualified medical man for less than £3OO
per annum.
This expense may, however, possibly in some cases be reduced by combin-
ing the offices of Stipendiary Magistrate and Medical Officer. But it is
impossible to arrange this beforehand, and without regard to individual
qualifications.
The same man who is a very good doctor may be a very bad magistrate,
and there are magistrates —such, for example, as Mr. Le Hunte —whom it
would be very false economy, as well as very bad policy, to remove, in order
to save a few pounds by appointing a medical man in his place.
The withdrawal from Fiji of the remaining officers and men of the Royal
Engineers will necessitate a fresh arrangement for the performance of the
duties of the Surveyor-General. Until ray return to Fiji, lam not prepared
to say what may be the most economical and at the same time efficient mode
of effecting this object, but I am inclined to think that the employment of a
Crown Surveyor and Director of Works, without keeping up a wholly separate
department, may suffice.
I have in my letter of the iust. recommended an increase of £lOO a
year in the salary of the Agent-General of Immigration and Commissioner of
Crown Lands. Should the present holder of those offices receive promotion,
I am disposed to believe that the duties of the two posts might be divided,
and assigned to officers already holding other employment, whereby a saving,
to some extent, would be effected.
The rapid development of the Colony has involved an enormous increase
of work in all the Government offices, and in the Treasury (Customs Branch),
and Immigration Office, additional clerks cannot be dispensed with. I pro-
pose, therefore, that the employment of another clerk in each of these offices
be sanctioned, at a salary of £2OO per annum, or less, should I find any fit
person in Fiji willing to accept the employment at a smaller salary.
It will, I hope, be understood that I am not suggesting alterations which
I think merely desirable, for there is no department which can be said to be
at present efficiently manned, or in which greater assistance is not needed.
I now only propose those which are absolutely necessary to prevent an
immediate and disgraceful collapse in the administration of the Colonial
Government.
The total suggested increases of establishment will stand thus
258
CHAP.
FIJI


Colonial Secretary and Auditor-General . . . . £100 0 0
Commissioner of Lands and Agent-General of Immigration . 100 0 0
Two Stipendiary Magistrates 500 0 0
Two Clerks . 400 0 0
Two Medical Officers 600 0 0
Total . £1700 0 0
—I have, etc.
To the Marquess of Salisbury
January 23, 1879. —My Lord—Your Lordship is aware that I receive
no salary as Her Majesty’s Consul-General for Western Polynesia.
I do not seek or ask any salary for that office, but it ought, I think, to
be allowed to be a source of expense to me.
The correspondence of the Consulate-General with your Lordship on the
one hand, and with the Consul in Samoa and Vice-Consul in Tonga on the
other, is considerable. The small number of officials in Fiji are necessarily
employed in the business of that Colony, and are in fact inadequate to the
proper performance of the clerical work required there, which is unavoidably
almost always in arrears, nor indeed could they properly be called on to
perform duties which do not properly belong to them.
In these circumstances I beg to solicit the grant of an allowance of £250
per annum as the salary of a consular clerk, or as an allowance for office
expenses, as your Lordship may determine.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
February 1879.—1 have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 31st ult. informing me that the Secretary of State proposes to
direct the officer administering the Government of Fiji to cause instructions
to be given that all ships engaged in the introduction of Polynesian immi-
grants should carry a medical man, npt only between the months of December
and April, as recommended by Dr. Macgregor, but at all seasons.
I have no objection to urge against the principle of this measure, which
is manifestly sound, but I fear that practically its adoption would be
tantamount to a suspension of the introduction of Polynesian labour. It
may be just possible to find medical officers for the few ships employed at
the season indicated, but it would undoubtedly be impossible to obtain a
sufficient number for all immigrant ships whatsoever, unless salaries were
paid of a much higher amount than can be contemplated, whilst even then
I doubt whether it would always be easy.
I would venture to suggest that Mr. Des Yceux’s attention should be
called to this subject, but that the imperative injunction with regard to
medical attendance should only apply to the four months mentioned by Dr.
Macgregor.
To the Colonial Office
February 1879.—Sir—In my letter of this day’s date returning the papers
connected with the proposed reference of the draft Ordinance for the settle-
ment of land claims in Fiji to the Law Officers, it may be observed that I
use the expression, “if it be determined to retain it in its present form.”
My reason for employing this phrase is a doubt which has occurred to me
whether the end which it is sought to obtain might not possibly be effected
259
FIJI
XXI


in a manner which may appear to the Law Officers to be freer from possible
objections.
I believe that all claimants to land under native title have petitioned for
the issue to them of Crown grants, and that the Ordinance would therefore
have the desired effect, even if it were in terms limited to such cases ; whilst
the hypothetical rights of possible parties in Europe or America who it may
be imagined have not yet put forward their claims would be preserved intact.
Of course the Ordinance, as it stands in the draft, would be a far more
complete and satisfactory measure ; but I confess it appears to me that the
Law Officers, after having distinctly declared in their letter of the 3rd August
1876, that it was “not competent for the Legislature of Fiji to enact that no
right or title to land, or any interest therein, shall be recognised in any Court
of the Colony unless it is founded on a grant made by the Crown,” and that
owners of lands bond fide alienated before the cession cannot be called on to
accept grants of those lands, —may find great difficulty in accepting the third
clause of the draft Ordinance, as it at present stands.
The same difficulty would not apply to cases where the claimants have
already voluntarily submitted their claims to investigation and applied for a
Crown grant of the land claimed by them.
I enclose a few notes of alteration, which would I think suffice thus to
change the character of the Ordinance, were such a course deemed expedient.
—I have, etc.
(The words underlined are those the insertion of which is submitted for
consideration.)
Preamble. —“Whereas” many parties claiming to be bond fide possessors of
lands in Fiji, previous to the 10 th day of October 1874, have submitted their
claims to the investigation of “the Commission . . . thereon” and have
petitioned the Governor to issue a Crown grant in respect of such lands ; and
whereas the said Commissioners “have investigated, etc. ...” (to the end).
Clause 3. In all cases where “claims of titles to land arising under any
contract entered into” between natives of Fiji and foreigners “before the
10th day of October 1874,” have been “submitted to the above-mentioned
Commission,” and a petition for a Grown grant of the land to which such
claims relate has been addressed to the Governor by such claimants, such claim
shall be dealt with in the manner hereinafter provided.
From Mr. Gladstone
January 29, 1879. —My dear A.—l. Depend on me for the
18th unless some claim of fate or duty, stronger than my will,
shall intervene. Time and place 1
2. Is there anything more that I can do where you say you
wash your hands ? Remember that Lord M.’s language was
perfectly satisfactory. I fear the opening you name was not a
very attractive one.
3. I do not expect to be in town until the 18th, but shall
be very glad to be instructed by you on the formidable topic
with which you close. —In haste. —Yrs. affectly.,
W. E. G.
260
CHAP.
FIJI


February 13.—Went to town to Grosvenor Square. Saw
Ishbel’s baby—a poor puny little thing. To Colonial Office;
saw Herbert and Bramston. To luncheon at Hampden House.
The I)uke very kind and cordial. Louisa not well enough to
see me. The Lansdownes there, and Victoria Edgecombe and
the young Lady Claud; also, of course, Georgy. Then to
Cavendish Square, to be introduced to the future Mrs, Frank
Russell. It seemed strange to be in that familiar house again,
old Lord Wicklow’s. The last time I was in it was at Aunt
Frances’ funeral.
From the Marquess of Salisbury
20 Arlington Street, S.W., February 18, 1879. —My dear
Gordon —I will reply to the beginning of your letter as soon as
I hear what the Office has to say for itself. There has been
evidently a muddle, but of course I had not intuitive knowledge
of what had passed in 1875.
For the second part of your letter, will you let me say that I
was not the aggressor ! Why I was “ Lord ” Salisbury I could
not understand, but I thought I was bound to reciprocity. 1
Your kind assurances are very welcome to me, and I should be
very sorry if the feelings of affection which have survived
between us for so many years were ever to grow colder.
I am now in town for good, and at your disposal for
Polynesia any afternoon.
To the Colonial Office
February 25.—Sir—I have the honour to return the papers enclosed in
your letter of the 18th inst., and in compliance with your request I proceed
to make a few observations on the draft of the letter which it is proposed
to address to the Law Officers.
Paragraph 3. This paragraph is not exactly accurate. So far as I am
aware, every single claimant has submitted his claim to the Lands Com-
mission, and petitioned the Governor for a Crown grant of the land he claims.
I cannot of course say that there may not exist, in England or America,
absentee purchasers, possessing claims which they have not yet put forward ;
but, so far as I am aware, every one claiming land under native title has
submitted it to investigation and applied for a Crown grant, certainly every
resident claimant has done so.
Paragraph 4. I would add to this sentence—“ Practically, however, it is
believed that every existing claim has been so submitted.”
Paragraph 8. I would suggest the omission of the word “possibly ” in the
fourth line of page 9 :—claims having undoubtedly been disallowed. It may
be right as a matter of speculation to consider the case of claims not submitted
to the Commission, but, as I have already said, I believe none such exist.
1 I had addressed him as “ Dear Lord Salisbury,” and he had replied to
“ Dear Sir Arthur.”
261
XXI
FIJI


Paragraph 10, I could wish to see this paragraph state, in somewhat
stronger terms, the necessity which the Secretary of State recognises for the
adoption of measures to prevent a subsequent disturbance of the awards of
the Governor in Council.
Paragraph 11, Without suggesting any definite alteration of this para-
graph, I should wish to recall to consideration the facts that the Crown
grants have hitherto been issued under instructions from the Secretary of
State, which have been published and widely circulated, and that their
discontinuance will probably create dissatisfaction.
I would also point out that the mode of taking out grants is regulated by
Ordinance Ho. xvii. of 1877, and that, without some such procedure as is
there provided, the expenses of the Lands Commission will not be, as
intended, recouped by the fees paid by the grantees.
I would also venture to suggest some revision of the 3rd question put
to the Law Officers (p. 19), and also a previous reference to the opinion given
by them as to the legislative powers of the Legislative Council of Fiji, which
will be found embodied in a confidential despatch addressed to me by the
Earl of Carnarvon on the 30th of December 1876.
In conclusion, I think it desirable to repeat that the object of the
projected legislation is not (as may have appeared to be the case) to compel
claimants to submit their claims to the Commission (no such compulsion
being required), but to maintain against subsequent disturbance the awards
given upon claims already voluntarily submitted. To make this clearer, I
would request that a slight alteration may be made in one of the paragraphs
of my letter of January 14, before it is sent to the Law Officers, and that,
under the heading “1. Claims not yet heard,” instead of the words “Every
claim professing to be based on deeds executed by natives, prior to the 10th
day of October 1874 ” (which would appear to require every claim to be
submitted, whether voluntarily or not), there should be substituted the
words “In every case where a petition has been made to the Governor
in Council for a Crown Grant of lands alleged to have been bond fide
acquired from native proprietors before the 10th day of October 1874, such
claim shall,” etc.
Practically these two things are the same ; but theoretically, in the
latter case, the proposed legislation will only apply to those who have
voluntarily sought the confirmation of their titles by the Crown.
In conclusion, I would venture to suggest that as the saving of time is in
this matter a very great object, it might tend to expedition if a draft of the
proposed Ordinance accompanied the reference to the Law Officers.
From Mr. Gladstone
March 1, 1879. —My dear A.—l know of no reason why I
should not be able to attend on April 22. If the dinner also
migrates, I only hope it will not swell from its present modest
dimensions into an affair of gross publicity. —Yrs. affectly.,
W. E. G.
From Dr. Sandwith
The Old House, Wimbledon, S.W., March 16,1879. —My dear Gordon—
I have an engagement to dinner on the 18th, and with no wish to harbour
262
CHAP.
FIJI


even an uncivil thought against my hosts, I must say I should very much
have preferred to have heard your lecture. I retain the ticket on the chance
of ray host being taken ill and the dinner not coming off, but if you would
like to have it, soy so. More massacres are being prepared in Macedonia and
Eastern Roumelia. I suppose they must be held in honour of our Moloch
idol, Lord Beaconsfield, as any modification of the Treaty of Berlin would be
mortifying to his pride.
From Mr. Gladstone
73 Harley Street, March 11, 1879.—My dear Arthur—
In some small dudgeon I write to say that I have received a
notice that the Colonial Institute Dinner will be at St. James’s
Hall, i.e. not a private entertainment.
If this has been at or with your desire, I certainly will hold
by my engagement, but I am entirely unwilling to be trotted
out, in the present state of things, on the subject of Colonial
Policy and connection; advisedly and strongly desirous not to
take a forward place in discussing the South African question,
though I must of course carefully consider it. What I should
like, at the least, is to request that the promoters will be good
enough not to assign me a place in the public proceedings.
Viva voce I can easily explain to you the motive with which I
thus work, and which perhaps may not be obvious to you upon
the surface.—Ever yours affectly.,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
From Mr. Gladstone
March 12, 1879. —My dear A.—Many thanks for your
seasonable explanation. Emboldened by it, I have accepted the
invitation to dinner, which had hung fire. My H.E.ship
(which was without salary, though Ido not know that this
signifies, indeed I am not absolutely sure of the fact) only
caused my re-election, as I perfectly remember. I cannot
answer your question positively, though I should think my case
a precedent. Try Lord Blachford! lam glad we are to meet
long before March 18. We are eking out our stay here if
possible till Tuesday.—Yrs. affectly.,
W. E. G.
From Mr. Gladstone
73 Harley Street, March 17, 1879.—My dear Arthur —
I am sorely vexed to find that I have not the least chance of
being able to use my voice to-morrow, nor indeed do I expect to
get out of doors, especially in the evening. I have employed
the time since your note arrived in reading your address, and it
shows me that 1 lose something more than I had expected. As
263
XXI
FIJI


the best thing in my power, in these untoward circumstances, I
enclose a note to the Secretary" which please to give him if you
approve of it. My wife is, lam afraid, destined to a day or
two’s longer confinement than myself. I hope to get out of bed
to-morrow at some time.
I know not whether Her Majesty’s Opposition in Fiji would
accept your statement of their case, but as far as I can com-
prehend the matter from your lecture, I am entirely and very
warmly with you.
I think your spirit, and feeling towards the natives is an
honour to the Empire, so sadly disgraced in other quarters.
1. Your plan, if I understand it rightly, is more analogous
to a Corn rent than to any other arrangement known here.
2. Might you not, as a matter of policy, revise once more,
for fear of any little word which might weaken your hands on
your return, in dealing with the whites 1
3. When you speak of the Highland incursion, should you
not mention life as well as the cost in money ? —Ever affectly.
yrs.,
W. E. GLADSTONE.
Clark has just been here and his inhibition is peremptory.
From Lord Selborne
Christ Church, Oxford, March 10, 1879. —My dear Arthur —I shall
not fail (health, etc., permitting) on the 18th ; and I have accepted an invita-
tion to an early dinner, before the meeting, at the Institute.
I have twice carefully read over your proof-sheets, and have made a
number of suggestions (almost all trivial and verbal), in pencil. One or two
passages, as to the ill-conditioned part of the white people, I think may be
softened in expression, without changing the substance : but these are almost
the only alterations, of any consequence, which it has occurred to me to
suggest. I think the paper excellent in matter, manner, and arrangement,
and throughout clear and intelligible.
I am here till Wednesday morning, when I return to London. I will
leave the sheets, properly enclosed and directed to you, under my servant’s
care when I go out, which I must do, for a meeting of the Oxford Com-
missioners at 11 A.m. I shall, however, return about 4.30 p.m. ; and shall be
at home till I go out to dinner. I shall also, probably, he at home most
part of Thursday, and, I need not say, shall be very glad if you come in
while I am there.—Ever yours affectionately.
From Lord Selborne
30 Portland Place, W., March 18, 1879. —My dear Arthur —We shall
meet at dinner.
I send for your inspection (if you can spare time to look over 114 MS.
pages) my production on the “Privy Council Rule of Judgment.”
Thank you for your revised sheets. But there must have been some
264
CHAP,
FIJI


mistake (probably the printer’s) at page 18. The short paragraph, “ This is
an evil . . . inconsiderable ,” seems to be clearly out of place, and is not, as
it stands, intelligible. Another question, which did not at first strike me,
suggests itself now, viz. whether the illustration at the top of page 23 is
sound, or, if it is, whether the previous explanation of the system of taxation
is sufficiently clear, on the point to which this illustration refers.
If the tax is, so much produce, from such a place, the profit, on an advance
of price, on that quantity of produce, would seem to go to the Government,
not to the cultivator.
If, on the other hand, the reddendum is only so much produce as, at the
time of the tender, will bear a certain price in the market, I do not think this
is sufficiently explained : nor do I myself clearly understand whether, in that
case, the tender mentioned at page 17 furnishes the datum price, according
to which more or less produce is to be delivered by the native cultivator ; if
so, the modus operandi should, I think, be rather more full)" explained. For
this, probably, a few words would be enough.
Forgive me for sending such a suggestion at the last moment.
To the Colonial Office
March 1879.—5 i have the honour to return the despatch of Mr. Des
Yoeux, No. 2 of 1879, enclosed in your letter of the 19th instant.
I was distinctly instructed by the Earl of Carnarvon on the 4th March 1875
to take care that “in all Crown grants” issued to those claimants to land
who were accepted as entitled to the lands they claimed, “full power should
be taken to resume at any time such land as may be required for roads or
public works. ”
The form of grant used was one drawn up by Her Majesty’s Land and
Emigration Commissioners in 1868, for use in the Island of Trinidad.
I should certainly be very unwilling to surrender the right to resume
lands for the purpose of road-making, but I see no objection to limiting the
reservation to that and similar purposes as suggested by Mr. Des Yoeux.
It was pointed out to me after I left Fiji (I think at Sydney), that owing,
I believe, to the accidental omission of certain words from the printed forms
of grant which came last from the press, these powers of resumption had
been inadvertently extended ; and I at once said that this clerical error
ought to be, and should be, corrected. But unless my memory plays me
false, the power to resume land for road-making has been reserved in every
grant issued from the first foundation of the Colony.
From Lord Selborne
30 Portland Place, W., February 19, 1879.—My dear Arthur —I send
down by this post your draft memorandum and the letter to the Law Officers.
I do not see anything in the latter which is likely to do harm ; but no
harm can be done by your dwelling on the point you mentioned to me ;
and, perhaps, on this also—that questions arising out of conflicting native
grants, or such native grants, before the cession, as on moral or equitable
grounds ought to be wholly or partially disallowed, cannot possibly, in their
nature, be questions of English law, on which judges (whose duty it must
always be to judge according to law) would be the fittest persons to decide :
265
XXI
FIJI


but, on the other hand, are likely to involve considerations of great practical
importance to the well-government of the Colony, and to the future relations
between the natives and the European settlers.
On the first page of the letter to the Law Officers, which I have dog’s-eared
(line 4), the word “ that ” seems to be omitted after “secure.” On the other, I
notice, the S.S. does not wish to “ declare the meaning of the deed of cession”
by a local ordinance—in which he is probably right. But, without doing
this in form, it seems to be important practically, and not ultra vires, to
proceed on that view of the meaning of the deed of cession, on which you
have hitherto acted, in laying down the rule on which Fiji titles are, for the
future, to depend.—Ever yours affectionately.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeuxs Despatch No. 1 of 1879
I cannot but repeat, with the most hearty concurrence, Mr. Des Yoeux’s
opinion that Fiji will suffer loss by the departure of Mr. Mitchell, but that
“he is eminently fitted, both by character and by special knowledge,” for
either of the appointments which he seeks.
The loss to the Colony will be serious. Were Mr. Mitchell a younger
man, I should wish to keep him a little longer in Fiji; but as it is nearly
twenty years since he first entered the colonial service, I feel that he has
fully earned a higher position than that which he now occupies. I can—
and do —in the most emphatic terms I can employ, recommend his applica-
tion to the most favourable consideration of the Secretary of State.
I am very sure that it is in the highest degree improbable that any other
man so highly and specially qualified for the post of Agent-General of
Immigration either in Trinidad or Guiana, should be a candidate for it. He
unites shrewdness and prudence with a singular tact, coolness, and firmness.
Perfectly free from any enthusiasm, he is yet fearlessly just, and during
the long course of my colonial career, I can truly say that I have never
seen a man who approached him in some of these points. If Mr. Mitchell
obtains either of the appointments he seeks, I am certain that the Secretary
of State will not only never have reason to repent the choice, but will find
that he has made a selection which it would be difficult to equal, and yet
more difficult to surpass, and which will be admitted to be so by those
with whom he is brought into official relations.
I may add that if Mr. Mitchell’s application be successful, a reduction
may be effected in the Fiji establishments by assigning the duties of the
two offices now filled by Mr. Mitchell to officers already occupying other
departments.
The charge of the Immigration Office might be confided to the Super-
intendent of Police, who was Acting Protector of Immigrants in Mauritius,
and understands the duties of the post, and those of the Commissioner of
Crown Lands might be performed partly by the Surveyor-General and partly
by the Colonial Secretary.
As the Secretary of State cannot be expected to have any knowledge of
my usual course with regard to the recommendation of applications from
officers serving under me, I wish to add that a reference to the records of the
Colonial Office will show that lam very chary of such support: that I think
266
CHAP.
FIJI


it no part of my duty to pay compliments to those who have merely done
their work without discredit, and that I do not at this moment recollect
that during the last twenty years I have recommended an appointment
with the same strength of language or entire certainty of conviction that I
now recommend and indeed urge the employment of Mr. Mitchell as Agent-
General or Protector of Immigrants in some great Colony.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch No. 4 of 1879
Ido not think any objection can he made to the Ordinance enclosed in
this despatch.
The abuse of the privilege enjoyed by subscribers to the Hospital, under
the old Ordinance, was notorious (as is stated by Dr. MacGregor) ; and it
was necessary to put an end to it. In doing so, advantage has been taken
of the opportunity to introduce a few other beneficial modifications of the
previously existing law.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch No. 5 of 1879
The proceedings of the Bua meeting appear to have been eminently
satisfactory, and I should wish to call especial attention to the remarks
with which the Administrator concluded his address to the chiefs when
taking leave of them. I trust I shall not be considered to go beyond my
province if I venture to express ray hope that the Secretary of State will
inform Mr. Des Yoeux that he has read with gratification the passage w T hich
I have marked, and that he sees with satisfaction the attention bestowed
by the assembled chiefs on matters of grave public concern and interest, and
the good sense and self-restraint wdiich have characterised their discussion.
To some of the Resolutions of the Council, especially the Eighth, Seven-
teenth, Twenty-Second, and Twenty-Fifth, I may hereafter have to recur ;
but at present I will only notice Mr. Des Voeux’s reply to the questions put
to him with regard to the sale of land, that being the only point treated of
in Mr. Des Voeux’s despatch under consideration.
I fear that in one respect the nature of the apprehensions of the native
proprietors has escaped him, and I regret that he did not at once assure
them that no land in their occupation and use would be sold without their
own free consent , which is, I fancy, the point about which they are most
anxious, and with respect to which alarm has been created in consequence
of a sale of what was supposed to be waste land, and consequently the
absolute property of the Crown, but over which it subsequently appeared
that proprietary rights existed.
I do not wholly agree with Mr. Des Voeux on some of the points he
raises. In the case of waste and unclaimed lands, and of lands formerly
held by the sovereign chiefs, in that capacity, I do not think there is any
obstacle to their sale by the Crown, or that the natives are entitled to part
of their sale price. On the other hand, Ido not think that the Crown has
power to sell, without the full and free consent of the owners, any lands
belonging to private parties, villages, or tribes, oi to the chiefs in their
267
XXI
FIJI


private capacity as heads of families ; and in the event of their sale, I have
grave doubts whether any portion of their sale price should accrue to the
Government, except perhaps a small percentage on account of the trouble
taken in managing the transaction.
But the subject is too large and grave a one to be discussed at length in
such a memorandum as this.
To the Colonial Office
Chief-Justice Carrie's Despatches Nos. 3 and 6
There is much in No. 3 which deserves very serious attention, and both
the Chief-Justice s despatch and the copy of his letter to the Commodore
vill repay perusal. Townshend’s previous character leaves, I think, little
doubt of the real cause of his murder, and induces at least some suspicion
that he was himself a murderer.
But the details of a past transaction are of little importance as compared
v ith considerations as to future action, and in that connection I find in
these papers matter for much serious reflection. In the practical conclusion
that the High Commissioner and the Commodore should act together in
dealing with cases such as that at Ugi I entirely concur, but the mode in
which such co-operation should be effected will require careful arrangement.
I shall bear these despatches in mind, and when reporting, as I have been
directed to do, on the steps to be taken to improve the future working of the
High Commission, I shall be prepared to make some suggestions on this subject.
I have no observation to offer on Chief-Justice Gorrie’s despatch No. 6.
To the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
Sir I have the honour to return the printed papers on the subject of
recent proceedings in the South Seas, lately laid before the German Parlia-
ment, a copy of which was enclosed in Lord Odo Russell’s despatch No. 40,
of the 20th ult., and communicated to me in your letter of the 7th June.
I have not been able to give to these papers the careful and attentive
consideration which their importance deserves, and I should esteem it a
great favour it the Secretary of State would request Lord Odo Russell to
endeavour to procure an additional copy for my use. It would, lam sure,
prove of very great utility, and indeed its possession, and a knowledge of
its contents is almost essential to the proper discharge of my duties as High
Commissioner and Consul-General in the Western Pacific,
I should wish to call attention to some of the clauses of the treaties with
the Ellice and Marshall groups of islands, which will be found at pp. 154
and 157, and which are of a somewhat peculiar character. These treaties
confer very large and exceptional privileges on the German Government
and German subjects, such as the decision of all complaints, not only
against German subjects, but those preferred by Germans at/ainst the
natives, by the Imperial Consul at Apia ; the reference for previous
approval by the German Government of all rates and taxes imposed on
foreigners ; the engagement to recover deserters from German merchant
ships ; the guarantee of undisturbed possession by Germans, not only of
land they have bought, but of that belonging to native women with whom
268
FIJI
CHAP.


they may live, and the “surrender to the Imperial Government,” not only of
the port of Jaluit, but of “ any other island ” of the Rallick group, if desired.
It is not, however, to these clauses, which it is of course quite open to
the German Government to impose, that I especially wish to call attention,
but to the eighth clause of the treaty with Funafuti, and the tenth of that
with Jaluit, which, if I translate them rightly, stipulate that Germany
exclusively shall enjoy these privileges, and that similar rights shall not be
accorded to any other nation.
This provision appears to me inconsistent with the known intention of
the German Government not to seek for exclusive advantages in the South
Seas.
I may add that, when known in New Zealand, these treaties will cause
much irritation, as tending to exclude from these groups the British agents
of Auckland houses, which (especially that of Mac Arthur & Co.) were con-
ducting important and rapidly increasing transactions among them, and
who not only possess none of the privileges which are by these treaties
secured to the House of Godeffroy of Hamburg (in the interest of which
alone they appear to have been made), but are precluded from in future
obtaining similar advantages, and practically excluded from all share in
the trade of these groups.
To Lord Selborne
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, April 2, 1879.—My dear Selborne
You will, I fear, say that I have kept your manuscript most unduly long.
It is, however, rather bulky to send by post, and I wish, when I return it,
to accompany it by a few lines, which I have not yet written to my own
satisfaction.
If, however, I do not go to town myself this week, I will send it back,
either by post or some one else’s hand. Your demonstration that the practice
of the Privy Council has been uniform and invariable is overwhelming.
Meanwhile, would you mind telling me whether you think the accom-
panying draft Ordinance will effect the objects I have set forth in my letter
also sent? 1 do not again send my “memorandum,” both because you have
already seen it, and because it is not material to the point now in question,
i.e. whether the draft effects the object I desired to embody in my rougli
sketch of an Ordinance.
From what I have seen in the Law Officers’ reports in other cases, when I
have endeavoured to modify a rigidly legal construction of matters, I fear
they are not at all unlikely to prove reluctant to allow what I am convinced
is a measure absolutely essential, whether to effect substantial justice or to
prevent dangerous disturbances. Can you suggest anything likely to make
the morsel more palatable, or easier to slip down their throats ?
The Colonial Office authorities are, privately, aware that I have consulted
you in this matter, so there is no breach of official confidence or propriety.
I cannot tell you how important to the future welfare of the Colony is the
satisfactory solution of this question.
From Lord Selborne
House of Lords, April 4, 1879.—My dear Arthur—Many thanks for
your note. I have read over these papers, and think that the draft Ordinance,
269
XXI
FIJI


if passed, will sufficiently accomplish the objects in view. Nor does it seem
to me that I could usefully suggest anything, to be laid before the Law
Officers or otherwise, which does not already sufficiently appear in these
papers.
I do not know enough of the present Law Officers, to be able to judge of
the way in which they may be likely to look at such questions : but the
Attorney-General has the reputation of being a man of rough good sense,
rather than a technical lawyer : and the Solicitor-General is thought rather
a good man for a jury, than great in legal science. I should hope that they
will not be perverse about Fiji: and I think it would be nothing less than
perverse to prefer, for the investigation of claims of title depending on
transactions before the Cession with natives, the ordinary Law Courts of the
Colonies to such a Commission, and such a specially constituted Appellate
Tribunal, as you propose.
You will, I am sure, be sorry to hear that a telegram from Rome reached
my brother Edwin yesterday, from which it is impossible not to conclude
that our eldest brother is in a very critical state there. Edwin left last
night: and he is to telegraph to me the state of things which he finds on his
arrival —probably on Sunday morning. My own duties in the House of Lords
prevented me from accompanying him : but I mean to follow him, unless his
message should be such as to prevent it: starting (if the case is not too urgent
to admit of that delay) on Monday night. How long I may be absent it is,
of course, impossible now to say. —Believe me, ever yours alfeetionately.
From Lord Selborne
30 Portland Place, W., April 7, 1879.—My dear Arthur—Edwin arrived
in Rome too late; we heard from him by telegraph yesterday ; and as I
could not reckon on £eing in time for the funeral, I did not go, as I had
intended.
Ido not think you ever knew the brother whom we have lost. He was
much the ablest, most learned, and most remarkable member of our family;
and in virtue and self-sacrifice a rare example to all of us. The peculiar turn
which his mind took, from an early age, in working out ecclesiastical problems,
with the self-suppression in which it ended, when he joined the Roman Church,
prevented the world from knowing much of, or getting much fruit from, his
powers ; and for the same reasons, his character was known to comparatively
few. But I have suffered few greater losses and misfortunes in life than that
of ecclesiastical estrangement from him ; and now that he is taken out of this
world, I feel it all the more, though I trust we may be united again, with-
out any estrangement, in the other world to which he is gone. —Believe me
ever yours affectionately,
To Lord Selborne
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, April 8, 1879. — My dear Selborne — I
knew your brother slightly ; that is to say, I have met him at Portland
Place ; have gone over his drawings from the Catacombs ; and once, at his
request, furnished him with statistics as to the ages of specially long-lived
cows in Aberdeenshire, to assist some theory regarding the sacred bulls of
Egypt.
270
CHAP.
FIJI


But I never knew him well, and have not seen him at all for some fifteen
years. Nevertheless, I saw enough to make me able to understand in some
degree what you say of his learning, and the earnestness and singleness of
his character.
I know, too, enough of your loving nature to feel, after a fashion, how such
a loss, in such circumstances, must affect you.
I am glad to see that you speak of ecclesiastical, not religious estrangement.
The older I grow, the more deeply rooted becomes my conviction of the
absolute essential unity of those who acknowledge our Lord as their God,
when set over against those who, at best, regard Him as an able and excellent
enthusiast, whom His followers have turned into an impostor.
In the light of His presence, how utterly forgotten will small, though
conscientious, disagreement be, by those who are habitually engaged in the
perpetual contemplation and adoration of Him, for Whose sake they have,
however erringly, sacrificed all they had to sacrifice, and in Whom they
have trusted with perfect faith and love !
To the Colonial Office
I have to apologise for my long delay in replying to your letters of January
20 and March 8, on the subject of the proposed issue of Letters Patent to
authorise H.B.M. High Commissioner to issue licences and make leases with
regard to islands situated within certain limits in the Pacific.
I have no objection to offer to the draft of Letters Patent enclosed in your
letter ; but I confess they appear to me superfluous, and that if they do not
extend to further limits they would be better delayed.
H.B.M. High Commissioner would appear to be the natural person to
whom this power should be confided in respect of all parts of the Pacific
not within the jurisdiction of any Colonial Government; but if it is thought
requisite that the Governor of New South Wales should possess this power
over the greater part of the Pacific, including the immediate neighbourhood
of the Fiji group, I see no advantage in conferring similar powers upon the
High Commissioner in regard of a remote and narrow strip within which, so
far as lam aware, Great Britain neither possesses nor is likely to possess any
islands or “other places” (?) whatsoever.
Not long before I left Fiji, an application was made to me by two gentlemen
for permission to establish a depot on a reef just outside the limits of the
Colony of Fiji as defined by the Charter. I was compelled to refer them to
the Governor of New South Wales, although I confess that, whether as High
Commissioner or as Governor of Fiji, such a reference hardly appeared
consistent with the position which I had imagined it was intended that I
should occupy in the Pacific.
To the Colonial Office
Armitage Hill, April 1,1879. —Sir—In reply to your letters of February
27 and March 31 on the subject of Mr. Whitmee’s projected publication, I
have the honour to state that I have read Mr. Whitmee’s letter, enclosed
in yours of February 27, with some surprise.
I met Mr. Whitmee by appointment, and then pointed out to him how
unreasonable it was that Fiji should be expected to bear the whole expense of
271
XXI
FIJI


publishing a dictionary in which the Fijian language had no 'place, and which
did comprise the Maori language, but towards the publication of which no
contribution was made by New Zealand. I added that I understood that the
Crown Agents had been authorised by Lord Carnarvon to advance him a
certain sum—£loo or £lso—and that of course the Colony must and would
pay what had been so advanced ; but I was sure that any vote for a further
contribution would be looked on with the greatest reluctance by the members
of the Legislative Council, and that nothing short of the positive command
of the Secretary of State would induce me to propose it to them.
Nevertheless, I told him I should be prepared to ask for a moderate grant
in aid of his work on twm conditions—the one, that the Fijian language was
included, the other, that the Governments of New Zealand and of Tonga
would also assume a proportionate share of the expense.
I am surprised that in his letter to Mr. Herbert he makes no allusion to
these conditions.
When in that letter he speaks of a grant of £l5O, he, I presume, refers to
the sum—whatever it was—which I told him I understood the Crown Agents
had in 1875 been authorised to advance. I was under the impression that,
whatever the sum was, the whole of it had long ago been paid to him.
I see no objection to Mr. Whitmee receiving the balance of this sum, if
any of it remains: for it was, I believe, distinctly promised him by the
Secretary of State.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
April 2, 1879.—Sir—I have the honour to return the petition addressed
to the Secretary of State by Mr. Peter Patterson, which is enclosed in your
letter of the 18th instant.
Mr. Patterson’s petition has no date, and I am not aware whether it was
written in England or Fiji. If (as I suspect) the latter is the case, I would
venture to recommend that the paper should be returned to the writer, to
be transmitted through the proper channel, and accompanied by Mr. Des
Yceux’s report.
Mr. Patterson complains pf the disallowance by the Fiji Government of
a lease obtained by him from Tui Cakau, and requests compensation for the
loss of the privileges enjoyed under it. I perceive several very grave in-
accuracies in Mr. Patterson’s account of the transactions connected with
this lease, and I suspect there are others, with respect to which (at this
distance from the papers to which I should wish to refer) I cannot now
speak with certainty.
Mr. Patterson omits all mention of the fact that, long before my arrival
in Fiji, he had received notice from the Administrator, Mr. Layard, that his
lease would not be in any way recognised by the Government. It was in
fact an arrangement which could never have received the sanction of an
equitable Administration. Briefly, it was a deed by which Tui Cakau made
over to Mr. Holmes the use of all the cocoanuts on a very large tract of
country, to the total exclusion of the native proprietors, and without their
consent. Tui Cakau contends that he thought he was only giving to Mr.
Holmes the exclusive right to buy from the natives of the district, but by no
means an exclusive light to the nuts themselves, to which he freely admits
he had no claim.
272
CHAP.
FIJI


Even if Tui Cakau had been able to exercise any such control in his
sovereign capacity, he had already a few days previously resigned those
rights to the Queen. But it is unnecessary to dwell on the nature of the
lease, for Mr. Patterson does not seriously complain of its non-recognition,
nor does he ask for its renewal, but only for compensation for its loss, alleging
that such compensation has been given to Mr. Ritterhoff, whose lease of a
somewhat similar nature has been in like manner disallowed.
The cases of Mr. Ritterhoff and Mr. Patterson are, however, very different.
Mr. Ritterhoff held a lease of cocoanuts from the late Roko Tui of Macuata,
Ritova ; he had for some years worked under it; and though there is strong
ground for believing that Ritova understood the transaction in the same
manner as Tui Cakau did in Mr. Holmes’s case, he is dead, and his evidence
on the point cannot be taken.
Patterson’s so-called lease was only made the day before the proclamation
of the sovereignty by Great Britain ; its invalidity was almost at once notified
by Mr. Layard ; its alleged meaning is repudiated by Tui Cakau ; and what-
ever may have been done under it has been done with a full knowledge that
it was regarded by the local authorities as possessing no weight or value.
Mr. Patterson has not therefore at all the same claim for compensation as
Mr. Ritterhoff.
At the same time, if it be understood that the question is simply as to
the award of a moderate indemnification for losses he may have (actually,
and not constructively) sustained, I have no objection to the reopening thus
far of the case, and again to consider any arguments which Mr. Patterson
may urge why such compensation should be awarded to him.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
April B.—Sir—l have the honour to return the various papers enclosed in
your letter of the 31st ult.
The Ordinance of which a draft is enclosed would, I have no doubt,
effect the objects desired, and (if it be determined to retain it in its present
form), I have no alteration to suggest, except the addition, in the 10th clause,
of the words inserted in the 11th clause, as to the nature of the contracts to
which it is intended to relate, and which I have written in pencil on the
margin of the draft. One or two other slight changes of wording may be
subsequently considered ; and it would, perhaps, in the first instance, be as
well to leave blank the number of months during which a petition for re-
hearing may be presented—a question open to a good deal of discussion.
In the letter to the Law Officers the only addition I would make is that
of a parenthesis in the 7th paragraph after the words “there may be some
few who have not submitted their claims to the Land Commissioners.” I
would here add (“though it is believed that no such cases exist”).
To the Colonial Office
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, April 9, 1879.—Sir—I have the honour
to enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from the well-known
Russian explorer, Baron Maclay.
I entirely agree with Baron Maclay in thinking that les tentatives
genereuses des Gouvernements Europeens pour proteger les indigenes contre les
111 T
273
XXI
FIJI


violences et les injustices des envdhisseurs sont ordinairement venues . . . trop
tard quand le mal etait dejd fait, and that comparatively slight precautions
taken in time might avert misunderstandings which lead too often to the
murder of white men, and the steps (too generally of a most unsatisfactory
nature) which have then to be taken for the punishment of those who
have committed them.
I also agree with him as to the importance of recognising the native
titles to land, and of discouraging the importation of spirits and fire-arms.
But it is not easy to see what practical effect can now be given to Baron
Maclay’s suggestions, and I propose to inform him that, as Her Majesty does
not claim sovereignty over New Guinea, it is impossible for Her Majesty’s
Government to impose obligations on subjects of any other nation who may
repair there, but that the right of the natives to their own land is fully
recognised, and that so far as British subjects are concerned, I shall do my
utmost to check the introduction of fire-arms and spirituous liquors into the
country.
To the Colonial Office
Sir—l have the honour to return Mr. Des Voeux’s despatch No. 9 giving
cover to the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for 1879.
On these Estimates I have few remarks to make, except that I entirely
approve of all Mr. Des Yceux’s suggestions in the comparatively few cases in
which alterations on last year’s estimates have been proposed by him.
You will observe that Mr. Des Yoeux includes in this estimate the two
additional magistrates whose appointment I had proposed, but does not
propose any immediate augmentation of the medical staff, which, however,
I feel bound still to press.
I must, moreover, add to my former proposals that every letter I receive
from Fiji shows me more and more plainly that the pressure on the Native
Office is such that it must break down under the strain, if something is not
at once done to increase the amount of available assistance, and to provide
for keeping up a competent staff of interpreters. One of the very few
interpreters really well acquainted with the language (Mr. Payne) has just
died, and there is hardly a possibility of replacing him.
Mr. Des Yoeux is in error in saying that there has been no application
for increase of salary from “ those very few higher officers whose peculiarly
valuable services give them the first claim to consideration,” such applications
having been made both by the Colonial Secretary, and Agent-General of
Immigration, and submitted by me for the consideration of the Secretary of
State.
I most sincerely trust that the suggested increase to the former officer at
all events will not be withheld.
As to the * ‘ Assistant Law Officer,” I certainly am of opinion that temporary
additional legal assistance was frequently required, and that it should always
be rendered by one person to whom I promised such employment, but I do
not recollect having made the promise of a permanent appointment as
Assistant Law Officer. But I will not say that I have not done so, for Mr.
Des Yoeux must of course have had good ground for the assertion.
It is very satisfactory to me to see that Mr. Des Yoeux so well understands
and appreciates the system adopted for the government and taxation of the
274
CHAP.
FIJI


natives, and it is curious to observe how closely his description of it resembles
that which I myself gave in a paper recently read by me before the Royal
Colonial Institute.
I strongly recommend the approval of these Estimates, and I trust the
Treasury will no longer withhold its assent from the augmentations of
establishment proposed by me not long since, in a letter addressed to you.
To the Colonial Office
April 12, 1879.—Sir—I have the honour to return Mr. Consul Layard’s
despatch of January 12 enclosed in your letter of the 24th ultimo, respecting
an alleged outrage said to have been committed by the crew of the Iserhrook
in the Santa Cruz Islands.
I beg to request that Mr. Layard may be directed, when he receives
information of outrages committed by British subjects in the Western
Pacific, to communicate not only with the Commodore, as he has on this
occasion done, but also to transmit the information to Her Majesty’s High
Commissioner for the Western Pacific.
I may also remark in connection with Mr. Layard’s demand for the
infliction of punishment on the (alleged) native murderers at Aoba, that
it might not be altogether amiss to remind Mr. Layard that Aoba and other
Islands similarly situated are not within the Consular jurisdiction of Her
Majesty’s Consul for New Caledonia, but that of the Consul-General for
the Western Pacific. I mention this point because Mr. Layard appears
to entertain some vague idea that his Consulate includes the New Hebrides
and Solomon Islands, and, if I am correctly informed, has appointed his
son, Mr. Leo Layard, Vice-Consul for those groups. Mr. Leo Layard, I
understand, not very long since made a tour among the islands in that
capacity.—l have, etc.
From the Rev. J. E. Moulton
8 Montague Villas, Richmond, April 9, 1879.—Your Excellency—l
have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of April 7
and to return the letter which you enclosed.
I am almost as much surprised as your Excellency at the course affairs
have taken ; but accustomed for years to be in a minority, and to experience
defeat when preferring charges against Mr. Baker, I was to a certain extent
prepared for what has happened. Still I did think your Excellency’s efforts
would have met with a different result. However, I would point out that,
though technically defeated, the substantial results of victory are yours. Even
if the case had gone the other way, I question whether Mr. Baker could or
would have left Tonga before 1880.
I have received no communication from the Islands as yet, and Mr.
Chapman only barely mentions Mr. Baker’s acquittal and approaching removal
from Tonga, but I have no doubt myself that he will leave the Islands really
early in 1880. I understand it is so printed in the Minutes of Conference,
which ought to be here by the S. Francisco mail.
Allow me to congratulate your Excellency on the great success of your
policy in Fiji. It must be highly gratifying to you, if I may say so without
impertinence, to see your principles and public conduct, often misunderstood,
275
XXI
FIJI


recognised at last, and meeting with the approval of the foremost men of the
State, and to find yourself openly designated by political thinkers as eligible
for what I suppose is one of the very highest positions the world knows, the
Yiceroyalty of India. But while congratulating your Excellency, I can only
commiserate Fiji and ourselves at the prospect of your being appointed to
another part of the world; and as selfishness is allowably predominant, I say
with the Fijians, Malua manda. I —l remain your Excellency’s obedient servant.
To Lord Selborne
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, April 12, 1879.—My dear Selborne—l now
return your manuscript. You will, I fear, think that I have detained it un-
reasonably long, and I cannot deny that this has been the case. It is true
that, for a week before my late meeting, I allowed Colonial Office “references”
so to accumulate, and so neglected my own private correspondence, that I
had considerable arrears to make up, and was unable at first to give your
paper the careful attention required to become master of its contents. But
that, I fear, only accounts for a very small part of the time during which
I have retained the volume.
In now returning it, I shall not make many observations ; indeed, I think
it would be quite out of place for me to do so.
The demonstration that the Orders of 1627 have been uniformly and
continuously observed is conclusive. I do not see how a word more can be
said in support of an opposite opinion.
I have, however, been struck by one fact, which is perhaps worth some
passing notice, although it does not directly affect the question of publishing
opinions given in Council. The point I mean is this. There is a real differ-
ence between the position of a dissentient member of a Committee of Council
in 1627 and that of a similarly dissentient member in 1879. In 1627 the
Privy Council had a very real existence, and, speaking roughly, its meetings
were attended by the members generally. The dissentient member of a
Committee would therefore have been able in Council , when the Report
was presented to the King in Council for his approval, to give his reasons
against it, and to tender his advice, if he thought fit, that the King should
order otherwise. Nowadays, the Councils held in presence of the Queen are
purely formal, and consist of only a few high officers specially summoned to
attend, and, with the exception of the Lord Chancellor, I suppose few if
any of the members of the Judicial Committee are ever present when their
report comes before the Queen in Council. It is a different question, no
doubt, from that of publication, but it is akin to it, and I must confess
that, looking to the nature of the Privy Councillor’s oath, and obligation,
which appear to me individual, I think a very strong case might be made
out for the right of a Privy Councillor to advise the Sovereign as to his own
opinion of any question which has been submitted to him, if he is not content
to accept the decision of those to whom along with himself, it has been
referred by the Sovereign for advice. This would not be a publication of
his opinion, but it is manifest that, if he submitted a separate report to
the Queen, it would not be a much further step for a member of Council to
solicit the Queen’s leave to make that report public.
1 Wait a bit.
276
CHAP.
FIJI


On the general principle that in the Court of Final Appeal the judgment
given should be a single one, I entirely adopt, if I may say so, your reasoning ;
but the point is one on which Ido not feel entitled to form an opinion, and
on which I think a sensible layman would be content to accept the decision
of the most competent professional authorities. It would appear that the
majority of these concur with you in considering that the reasons in favour
of a single judgment outweigh those which can be urged in favour of the
expression of various opinions,—a conclusion which commends itself, I think,
to common sense.
Why then, notwithstanding all this assent, do I feel an uneasy instinct
that there is a substantial difference between such cases as that which has
caused this discussion, and those which ordinarily come before the Privy
Council, and that a desire for the publication of the opinions given, is, to say
the least, not unnatural and possibly not altogether unreasonable ?
If this were simply my instinct, it would not merit consideration, but I
believe it to be that of many hundreds of other people ; and this fact, if it
be one, makes it worth while to endeavour the discovery of its cause,
I have tried without success various modes of giving formal expression
to this vague sentiment. At one time I was inclined to think (and the idea
was rather favoured at Hawarden) that a distinction might be drawn between
the question whether a recognised law did or did not affect a particular case,
and an inquiry into the character and provisions of the law itself. Not
satisfied with this, I strove to separate cases affecting individuals from those
affecting large bodies or classes of men—decisions as to private rights and
obligations, from those relating to the performance of duties of a public
and official character. But, though not without a certain superficial
plausibility, none of these distinctions will, I fear, bear the test of careful
examination.
If there be any ground at all for the feeling of which I have spoken, I
believe the key to it will be found in two passages of your manuscript —a
reference to an opinion of Judge Storey at page 80, and a few words of your
own at page 87.
Judge Storey was of opinion that every Judge of the Supreme Court of
the United States should state his reasons for differing from the decision of
the majority, if he did so, on constitutional questions brought before that
Court.
You dispose of this by a reference to the special powers of the Supreme
Court of the United States with regard to Constitutional questions, and
treat them as cases arising “not under the British but under the American
Constitution.”
It is no doubt the case that the Supreme Court of the United States has
powers of declaring acts to be unconstitutional which are not possessed by
English Courts, but it will I am sure be admitted that grave Constitutional
questions have been decided in the English Courts, that is to say, if I
understand the word rightly, questions affecting the limits of the powers
and obligations of different authorities in the State, and their relations with
the body of the people, although in form the question may only have been
the strict legality of the act of some individual.
Now to these cases I conceive Mr. Justice Storey’s opinion applies, and
the reason for that opinion appears to me to be given by you on page 87,
277
XXI
FIJI


where you say that in a Court, which is not one of final appeal, “it is of
the greatest importance that the reasons which influence the minds of the
different judges should appear.”
In Constitutional questions . the ultimate tribunal is, in fact, not a Law
Court at all, but the Legislature and the nation at large. This is true
to a not inconsiderable extent, even under the written Constitution of the
United States. With an unwritten and shifting Constitution, it is far
more decidedly the case in England. That is accepted as “Constitutional”
which Parliament and the people consider to be so.
I quite admit that it may be questioned whether the case of Mr. Ridsdale
involved any Constitutional issue of the kind to which I refer. This is fairly
open to argument, but it certainly appears to me that a case involving matters
of such great and general interest as the mode of performing divine service
in the national church, and the amount of liberty to be allowed to the clergy
in the performance of their duty, may, without straining, be so considered; and
that the more so, because the case certainly fulfils one of the conditions which
appear to me essential to a “Constitutional” question, the ultimate decision
as to the liberty to be allowed the clergy in these matters being undoubtedly
one which the nation will itself pronounce. Now is there anything in this,
or just nothing at all ?
I am not so perfectly satisfied as I should wish to be by your argument
that no practical utility could result from the publication of opinions. You
say that you know of no case where legislative action has been founded on
the opinions of dissentient judges in the House of Lords, and that if the
judgment shows the law itself to be defective, that is in itself sufficient to
ensure legislation to amend it.
This is all no doubt true, but I do not feel sure that it applies altogether
to the cases which I have supposed, and where the nation requires instruction
as to the action which it is ultimately to take.
Let us take this very ‘Ridsdale case. Had the decision of the Privy
Council been exactly the reverse of what it was, and had it been discovered
that every clergyman in England was bound by the usage of 1549, there
can be no doubt that, as you say, the judgment would have shown legislation
to be necessary, and that it would have been at once resorted to in order to
relieve the clergy from obligations so repugnant to a great majority among
them, and so distasteful to the nation at large. But if, which is conceivable,
the decision had been what it is, but the minority had all but equalled the
majority in number, and exceeded it in weight and character, the fact would,
I think, have exercised a very great influence on the decision of the nation
as to the measure of indulgence to be granted to those whose practices had
been pronounced to be, strictly speaking, illegal. It would have greatly
strengthened the hands of those who endeavoured to obtain legislative sanction
for more than one mode of officiating, and might at all events have led to an
extension of the toleration now universally accorded to the use of that illegal
vestment the stole, to the use of the other vestments, which had been assumed
in good faith, and the law with regard to which was so doubtful. I am there-
fore inclined to think that you have underrated the practical effect which
might result from the declaration of dissents, in cases where it is a question
whether legislative action should or should not follow the decision of the Court.
But I imagine that when you sent me your manuscript, it was not so
278
CHAP.
FIJI


much to invite a discussion of 'matters which lam quite aware lam not
big enough, or strong enough, properly to handle, as to seek my opinion on
the practical point of its publication.
I must confess that, as to this, I have the greatest difficulty in forming
any opinion at all. Your explanation of the practice of the Privy Council
is so complete, your contention as to the general utility of that practice is,
I conceive, so satisfactory, that I cannot but desire to see them published.
I the more especially desire it, because lam sure that the general impression
(I think Gladstone shares it), is that the “Order” of 1627 was dormant, and
brought out of the legal lumber-room for the purpose of stifling utterances
which would have had an important share in the formation of public opinion as
to the measure of latitude to be permitted to the clergy in their ministrations.
On the other hand, while nothing could be more studiously courteous and
reticent than your language, you cannot, by the nature of the case, avoid hitting
the author of the “Letter to the Lord High Chancellor” some very hard blows.
The mere facts demonstrated by you show him to have been guilty of offences
serious in any controversialist, but doubly grave in a Judge of the highest
official rank, dealing with a legal question. You show him to be inaccurate
in statement (pp. 3, 16, 23, 27, 59, 66, 73, 79, 85), careless in reference to
authorities (pp. 19, 20, 26, 28, 51, 81), incorrect in quotation (p. 18), and
illogical in argument (pp. 10, 45, 50, 56, 66, 76, 78, 79). You, moreover, leave
it to be surmised that he was guilty of a very gross betrayal of confidence,
though, of course, it may have been another member of the Court who allowed
its discussions to be communicated to the newspapers.
It is not to be expected that the Lord Chief Baron will abstain from an
attempt at a reply, and Sir F. Kelly’s late writings, and Lord Mayor Day’s
speeches, do not lead one to expect that he will display the same sobriety of
tone, or use the same temperate and moderate language as yourself. He
may even write in such a manner as to render some rejoinder inevitable.
I do not think an assault by the Lord Chief Baron on the late Lord High
Chancellor, would be a desirable addition to the polemical literature of the
Bench already existing.
You are far better able than I to judge of the probability of this danger,
and the importance to be attached to it.
If you think it unlikely to occur, or of no serious consequence, then lam
clearly and strongly in favour of publication.—l remain, etc., yours affection-
ately,
A. H. G.
From Lord Selborne
Mixbury, Bracelet, April 16, 1879. —My dear Arthur—Thanks, very
many, for your two letters. I did not know before that the Law Officers
had in 1876 expressed the opinion to which you refer. That being so, I
think you were right in suggesting the alternative mentioned in your letter
to the Colonial Office of the 7th, the copy of which I return.
I also return a sheet (which looks like part of a draft or copy made for
yourself) which came with the letter about my own MSS., and which occurs,
in that letter, in its proper place.
I am very much obliged by your remarks on the MSS., which I think
very good, and much to the purpose. Your suggestion as to the possibility
of there being a principle specially applicable to ecclesiastical cases, interest-
279
XXI
FIJI


ing to a large section of the clergy, etc., is at least of sufficient value to
make it worth my while to put a few words into the proper place, which
(without going into the point) would reserve the question, whether any solid
ground for dealing with those cases exceptionally can be shown.
Your observations as to the possible effect of publication will weigh much
with me. lam not insensible to their force, though it is somewhat provoking
to be restrained by any impediments of a kind personal to myself, rather
than relevant to the question treated, from contributing what one can towards
a proper balance of opinion on a subject which may really be of large
practical importance. What would you think, as an alternative, of my
having a small number of copies privately printed, and giving them to a very
few persons only (of whom the Lord Chief Baron, and the authors of the two
other pamphlets to which I refer, must, I suppose, necessarily be some) ? If,
at any future time, circumstances might appear to make it necessary or
advisable, it could, of course, be made public.
To return to your suggestion as to ecclesiastical cases. It might,
perhaps, be more easy to judge of its real weight than I now find it, but for
these practical considerations. First , it is certainly not the least of the
difficulties connected with those questions, that legislation about them is
much less easy than about temporal matters ; and legislation, in a direction
opposed to the prevailing public sentiment, is practically impossible. And
secondly , there is danger in any deviation from the ordinary practice in such
cases, unless there were really a chance of doing some practical good by it.
The danger is twofold—(1) the very fact of deviation might be laid hold
of by controversialists of so unscrupulous a temper as (I am sorry to say) is
characteristic of our present religions parties, as evidence that ecclesiastical
cases are not treated like others ; and (2) the spirit of anarchical resistance
to law would be nearly certain to derive fresh fuel in these cases, from any
judicial language, which might appear to give it encouragement; and if we
cannot subdue that spirit, it is, at least, for the general good to keep it as
separate as possible from all that passes in the administration of justice.
I do not think myself at liberty to put your suggestion to the test of the
reasons actually given by the dissentients in the Eidsdale case for their dissents;
but I may say that I am quite unable to imagine that the knowledge of them
could have exercised the smallest influence upon the Legislature, or have
added anything to the weight of such reasons as may (without that knowledge)
incline many moderate men to indulge, to some extent, the humours of those
who are determined to be their own lawyers and judges on these subjects.
I do not differ from your view, that a dissentient Privy Councillor would,
in strictness, have a right (supposing him to choose to insist upon it) to have
his separate opinion submitted to the Sovereign. But as the Sovereign
would necessarily be advised to disregard it, this would be little more than
form. In one case, within my knowledge, this was very near being done,
but it was not pressed.
I have written (like yourself) a separate letter to you by this post upon a
quite different subject.
Let me thank you very warmly for your reply to my letter on the occasion
of my recent loss. Ido not think any other friend has so exactly touched
my feeling about those ecclesiastical separations. My heart went with every
word which you said. And it really does refresh me (for the disappointment
280
CHAP
FIJI


of public hopes, especially about Church matters, has made me feel a moral
loneliness as I get old, which even the blessings of unbroken domestic love
do not entirely overcome) to find that so dear a friend is so thoroughly of the
same mind with me about these highest things.—Believe me ever yours
affectionately,
From the Same
Mixbury, Brackley, April 16, 1879. —My dear Arthur—l should fear
that your recruiting for fellow-labourers in Fiji is likely, by this time, to
have brought you in more offers than you can find openings for. If not, I
should like to commend to your favourable consideration the husband of a
lady, whose letter to my daughter asking for an introduction of him to you
I enclose—an introduction which I have given, desiring him to enclose it
to you, with a letter inquiring whether it would suit you, or not, to appoint
any time and place at which it would be convenient to you to see him.
This gentleman, Mr. Walker, is the son of a naval officer, turned (I
suppose) of forty ; below the middle size, of active habits, with some experi-
ence in agriculture, intelligent, most exemplary in character and conduct, a
gentleman in feeling and manner, though showing that he has had to rough
it in the world ; also a good churchman and a good Christian. His wife
(quite a lady, accustomed and willing, like himself, to do anything needful
for an honest livelihood, —her letter will hardly give an adequate idea-of her,
but she is a thoroughly good woman) is a first cousin, once removed, of
good Lord Hatherley. He (Lord H.), when in office, got Mr. Walker some
employment in the last census, which, of course, came naturally to an
end, and he was too old for anything else in the public service here, to
which Lord H. could have recommended him. Since then he has been
managing a small moorland farm, very near Blackmoor, for a relative of his
own, a General Boileau, who has just given it up, and so he is thrown adrift
again. It was as near neighbours at Blackmoor that we came to know so
much about them, and there is not one of my family there who does not feel
regard for and interest in them. They have (I think four) little children,
all, I believe, girls.—Believe me ever yours affectionately,
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux’s Despatches, Nos. 18 and 22 of 1879
April 20. —Mr. Des Yceux’s despatch, No. 18, gives cover to a petition to
the Queen from the Agricultural Society of Fiji. This petition, as Mr. Des
Yoeux remarks, is substantially the same as that presented to me before my
departure from Fiji. As a copy of this petition, together with a copy of my
reply, is not only appended to the present petition, but had already been
submitted by me to the Secretary of State, and as I was informed by you,
on the , that the terms of my reply were approved by Sir M. Hicks-
Beach, it is unnecessary for me to make any lengthened observations on this
document, and I shall accordingly confine myself to noticing ttyose few
points in it which were not touched on in the memorial already replied to.
The complaint in the 9th clause that petitioners are debarred from access
to the tracings of claims and counter-claims prepared for the use of the
Lands Commission is new to me. The petitioners were apparently satisfied
281
XXI
FIJI


with my answer in the previous case of complaint as to the non-communica-
tion to them of the printed evidence, for that complaint is not revived. The
reason why the tracings in question have not been communicated to claimants
is that which I am about to state ; but as its publication would cause great
irritation in Fiji, I must request that it may be considered confidential.
There was strong reason to suspect, in some cases, that claimants who,
claiming large areas, but not aware what the boundaries of such areas would
be, were anxious to see the plans, in order that, having ascertained the points
to which the claim reached, they might suborn native witnesses to swear to
these points. In order not to make a manifest and invidious distinction in
such cases, it was, I believe, thought necessary to make the prohibition
general. In a bond-fide claim this is of no importance, but such an inspection
might be very useful in bolstering up a bad one.
I have no conception what transaction is intended to be referred to in
the 13th clause, and I shall at once require an explanation of its meaning
from the Secretary of the Agricultural Society.
I am altogether incredulous as to the allegations contained in the 13th
clause.
The decision of Her Majesty’s Government with regard to the claim to
foreshores, has already been announced in Sir M. Hicks-Beach’s despatch to
Mr. Des Voeux, No. of the
As regards the complaint made in the 12th clause, with respect to the
slowness with which the investigation proceeds, I have all along admitted
that, though grossly exaggerated, it is not unreasonable ; and I greatly
regret that Mr. Des Voeux should have failed, equally with myself, in
securing the services of a sufficient number of trustworthy surveyors.
I would venture to recommend that the petitioners be informed that Her
Majesty regrets that there should have been any delay in the progress of
the examination and establishment of titles ; but that this delay has been in
a great degree due to causes over which the Government of Fiji had no
control, and that it is hoped that they may in a great degree be in future
obviated : that on my arrival in England I suggested the constitution of a
tribunal for rehearing disallowed claims, and that on my return to Fiji, an
Ordinance to give effect to that suggestion will be proposed to the Legisla-
tive Council: that Her Majesty’s Government sees no reason to alter the
decision already arrived at, and announced to the Acting Governor, with
regard to claims to the foreshore: and that the remaining allegations of the
petition not already disposed of in my letter of July 8 to the Agricultural
Society, will be investigated and dealt with by me on my return.
In conclusion, I beg to call attention to the fact that the petition is not
signed by the President of the Society, and by but one of the Vice-Presidents.
And I may add that though the Agricultural Society of Fiji is a high-sounding
name, the Society in fact does not include the majority of the settlers ; and
that in both the chief centres of agriculture (the Rewa and Taviuni) there
are other and rival “Agricultural Associations.” I presided over what was
supposed to be a specially well-attended meeting of the Agricultural Society
at which perhaps twenty or thirty people were present; and on one occasion,
two years ago, I have known a long string of imposing resolutions to have
been passed as those of the “Society ” at a meeting attended by five gentle-
men, of whom two dissented from the other three.
282
CHAP.
FIJI


To the Colonial Office
April. —Sir —l have the honour to return Chief-Justice Gome’s despatch,
No. 8, and the other papers enclosed with it in your letter of the 19th inst.
It is clear that Mr. Liardet’s estate is liable for the repayment of £55 to
Mr. Dunlop. Whether, in the absence of available assets, the Foreign
Office will be disposed to assume this liability, is a question on which I
cannot pretend to give an opinion.
To the Colonial Office
April. —Sir —l have the honour to return Chief-Justice Gorrie’s
despatches, Nos. 9 to 16 of 1879, enclosed in your letter of the 19th inst.
Nos. 8 and 9 will, I presume, be communicated to the Foreign Office.
Nos. 11, 12, 13, and 14 call, I think, for no special remark from me. The
contents of No. 15 would appear to show that the provisions of the Western
Pacific Order in Council, 1877, had been overlooked by the New Zealand
courts, and the attention of the Governor of New Zealand should, I think,
be called to that circumstance. I have written a separate minute on No. 16.
To the Marquess of Salisbury
Armitage Hill, April 15, 1879. —My dear Salisbury —
(Why do you not permit me to be properly respectful to my
Chief ?) I see by to-day’s papers that the United States Govern-
ment is going to send a ship-of-war to Samoa to intervene in
case of probable disturbances there.
Now I have not the least wish that we should annex Samoa,
but I confess I am very unwilling that the United States should
practically do so, and I think you will find that unwillingness
fully shared by the German Government. The American
interest in Samoa is by far the smallest. The German is the
largest, then ours, lastly the Americans’.
What I am anxious you should do is, that you should by
telegraph instruct the Acting Consul-General (Maudslay) to
repair at once to Samoa and concert with the United States
authorities there as to the steps to be taken for the protection
of foreigners. To this the United States cannot object, there
being ten Englishmen there to one Yankee, and whilst it would
not interfere with any steps needful for the general protection
of foreign interests, it would prevent the commander of the
American man-of-war taking advantage of the opportunity to
use it —as he is otherwise sure to do—to advance the exclusive
interests of American citizens.
I am sure the Germans would go along with us in this.
Maudslay should be telegraphed to through Sydney. —Ever
yours.
283
XXI
FIJI


From the Marquess of Salisbury
Hatfield House, April 18, 1879.—My dear Gordon—l
will examine at once into the matter to which your letter refers.
Of my own unassisted lights I do not know much concerning it,
but Munster has spoken to me about it several times in a way
which makes me feel pretty sure that you are right in looking
forward to the co-operation of Germany.
From the Rev. B. Chapman
227 Pitt Street, Sydney, February 20, 1879.—Your Excellency— l have
to acknowledge your letter of December 4, 1878, with a copy of extracts
from letters received by your Excellency from Tonga.
Press of work arising partly from the session of our Conference caused me
to miss one mail.
I enclose a copy of the letter to Mr. Langham, as desired by your Excellency.
Concerning the utterances attributed to Mr. Baker by your Excellency’s
correspondents in Tonga, I shall not be able to say much. If Mr. Baker has
expressed himself as reported in the extracts your Excellency has forwarded
to me, I can have no hesitation in saying that in my judgment he has acted
in a manner that does not become a minister of religion. But your Excellency
will excuse me if I plead that Mr. Baker ought not to be condemned, nor do
I think he ought to suffer in our estimation, upon an ex parte statement,
I fear that your Excellency’s informants have not spoken to him of reports
they have heard, and sought his explanation.
Lest I should seem to judge others as I would not have Mr. Baker judged,
I may say that Mr. Wilkinson made certain statements in writing to Mr.
Langham about Mr. Baker to be sent to me.
One of these complaints referred to alleged statements By Mr. Baker at
a 80-lotu. I forwarded a copy of Mr. Wilkinson’s communication to Mr.
Baker and have his reply, and I am compelled to say that the complexion of
the statement complained of is very much changed by its connection, which
Mr. Wilkinson did not give. Further, Mr. Wilkinson says, “ I ought to give
a copy ” (referring to his complaints) “ to Baker, but I fear to do so,” etc. I
am sure your Excellency will not think that Baker has received fair play from
Mr. Wilkinson in this matter.
I also desire to say that I regret that Mr. Maudslay did not send a copy
of his complaints to Mr. Baker. Mr. Watkin is here, and upon his authority
I have reason to believe that Mr. Maudslay has not sought any explanation,
though Mr. Baker wrote to him on arrival, and called upon him in company
with Mr. Watkin.
I do not think that such a course is a right one, especially as Mr. Watkin
seems to have invited the Consul to say what he desired to say in Mr. Baker’s
presence.
I will not fail to communicate to Mr. Baker what is imputed to him, and
seek an explanation. I will also correct his views as to the course your
Excellency has taken.
Will your Excellency pardon me if I say that I believe, from information
that has reached me, that Baker has been watched keenly, and his acts and
words reported and misrepresented, though 1 do not say designedly? The
284
CHAP.
FIJI


natives have been questioned, and have found that a certain kind of informa-
tion is sought; and those who understand the native character will be prepared
for the result.
I think I informed your Excellency that instructions had been sent that
the complaints of Mr. Maudslay should be carefully inquired into and
reported upon at the district meeting. My letters were in time. An inquiry
was instituted, and Mr. Baker was acquitted of the charge. I may say that
the two senior missionaries are men well acquainted with Tonga, and are
aware of Mr. Baker’s weaknesses, and by no means endorse all his procedure.
They did not recommend Baker’s removal, and were not likely to do so in
view of the course which has recently been pursued toward him in Tonga.
I know, however, that one of them has privately advised him to leave. I
may, however, inform your Excellency that after his acquittal I was desired
by Mr. Baker to request of the Conference permission to leave Tonga by the
first trip of the John Wesley early in 1880. I presented this request, and
the Conference granted it. We may therefore expect that Mr. Baker will
finally leave the Friendly Islands in about twelve months from this.—l am,
BENJAMIN CHAPMAN.
your Excellency’s obedient servant,
To the Rev. B. Chapman
48 Upper Grosvenor Street, April 22, 1879. —My dear Sir—l have to
thank you for your letter of February 20. lam of course glad to learn that,
in the opinion of the Tonga district meeting, Mr. Baker is not guilty of the
reprehensible conduct attributed to him, and has been by it acquitted of
the charge brought against him. I have, however, in a previous letter
pointed out to you that there were reasons which would in any case diminish
the value of such an acquittal, and I cannot say that their force is weakened
by what I learn of the proceedings by which this acquittal was preceded.
Whether Mr. Baker presided on this occasion at his own trial I do not know,
but it must be evident to you that to impartial and dispassionate people the
oracular acquittal of the district meeting—that is to say, of Mr. Baker himself
and three other clergymen junior to him, pronounced without any examina-
tion of witnesses, or any opportunity being afforded to Mr. Maudslay to make
good his charges—will! hardly be deemed sufficient to rebut affidavits on oath
as to facts, of some of which I think I have sent you copies.
Moreover, it does not appear whether (1) Mr. Baker has been pronounced
“not guilty ” of the conduct imputed to him ; (2) whether it has simply been
held to be unproved, and he therefore acquitted; or (3) whether the alleged
conduct is in fact admitted, but held by his colleagues and the Conference to
be blameless.
In the first case, I will only say that the district meeting must have
singular views as to the proper mode of conducting a judicial inquiry, if they
gave their verdict simply on the ex parte statement of the individual charged,
without taking evidence, and without giving any opportunity to those bring-
ing the charges to make them good. In the second case, I would observe
that the charges were necessarily unproved, the proof having never been
called for. The third case would be of far graver moment, for instead of
simply affecting the character of an individual minister, it would seriously
compromise that of the Church generally. You say ‘ ‘ the natives have been
285
XXI
FIJI


questioned, and found a certain kind of information sought,” which they
consequently willingly gave. I will not now discuss this, though I think
you must see that this is an argument which tells both ways ; but I would
remark that the suspension, before the district meeting was held, of several
native ministers and others, for the offence of giving evidence before an
inquiry ordered by the king , was not exactly calculated to promote open
disclosures of fact or free expression of opinion.
You seem to be under some error as to the relations between Mr. Maudslay
and the missionaries, and will see by the extract I enclose that he has some
reason to complain of discourtesy to himself. That Mr. Baker has not acted
with courtesy to Mr. Maudslay I can well believe, when I reflect that he has
not thought proper even to acknowledge letters which I have addressed to him,
letters most courteous in tone, and which, were it only out of consideration for
the high office I have the honour to hold, were I think entitled to a reply.
From the enclosed correspondence, too, it would appear that your letters
did not arrive till after the district meeting.
But these are comparatively trifling points. If Mr. Baker leaves Tonga
next January, and does not meanwhile inflict irreparable injury on British
interests there, and on those of the Tongese themselves, I shall not care to
inquire into past transactions. But I think it right to say that, so far as I
can judge, no one in Tonga really anticipates his leaving, and that the screw
is now being applied to provoke a ‘ ‘ perfectly spontaneous ” petition from the
people for his retention, which it is thought the Conference will be unable
to disregard.
Meanwhile, Mr. Maudslay, very naturally irritated at his charges being
pronounced unfounded, without being afforded the least opportunity of
substantiating them, has written to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of
State has sent the papers to me, and has empowered me to take whatever action
in the matter may seem to me requisite. My first step naturally would be
to communicate to you officially copies of Mr, Maudslay’s despatches. Never-
theless, my wish and present intention is to do nothing, and to report that
Mr. Baker’s approaching departure from Tonga renders any investigation
unnecessary. I therefore only send you, privately, the most material state-
ments in Mr. Maudslay’s despatches. I will still hope that Mr. Baker may
see fit to withdraw before my official visit to Tonga in September next, but
even should this not be the case, I shall seek to avoid all occasion of scandal
or dispute, unless indeed, which is but too likely, Mr. Baker has before that
time forced the king into another treaty, to the prejudice of British interests,
and giving exclusive advantages to another Power. The first exercise of his
revived influence has been to induce the king to upset an agreement already
made, and to apply to the Emperor of Germany for the appointment of a
German as Secretary of Tonga.
I deeply regret that I cannot accept as conclusive such an “acquittal” as
that which Mr. Baker has obtained, though I should have been much disposed
to receive without question the decision of any impartial and able com-
missioner selected by the Conference, who had gone to Tonga and heard both
sides of the question.
I went to Tonga with no sort of prepossession against Mr. Baker ;on the
contrary, I had defended him against the attacks of Mr. Layard ; but I have
not taken part in public life so long as I have done without acquiring some
286
CHAP.
FIJI


powers of observation as to the aspect and feelings of a people. I neither
asked questions nor sought complaints ; but I left Tonga with the conviction—
and it is a conviction which conveys a warning not lightly to be disregarded
—that I have seldom seen a population so deeply and profoundly discontented,
or where there was more cause to fear a sudden and lamentable uprising
against a system the pressure of which was too heavy to be borne. —I am, etc.
To the Colonial Office
April 30, 1879.—Sir—On the 24th inst. I had the honour to return with
some observations of my own, a despatch from the Administrator of the
Government of Fiji giving cover to a petition on the subject of the investi-
gation of claims to land.
Whilst I do not think that (at all events until the middle of last year)
the investigation of titles proceeded more slowly than might have been
reasonably expected, I fully admitted that the issue of grants had not kept
pace with the allowance of claims. I have, however, all along felt that the
proceedings of the Commission itself would be rendered both more expeditious
and more methodical if it were possible to secure for the Chairmanship of the
Commission the services of a gentleman who would be able to devote his
whole time to that duty, and not be compelled, as all the members of the
Commission now are, to give constant attention to official business of another
description. I have hitherto been deterred from recommending such an
appointment on account of the cost likely to attend the selection of a gentle-
man fitted for the post by ability and acquirements, and not connected with
the Colony or the public service.
I am happy to say, however, that Mr. V. A. Williamson, a barrister of
some standing, and one of the Royal Commissioners sent to Mauritius in 1872
is willing to undertake this duty without any remuneration beyond the
payment of his travelling expenses, etc. I can have no hesitation in request-
ing the Secretary of State’s approval of my having at once closed with this
very liberal and advantageous offer ; and I would suggest that an intimation
that Mr. Williamson will henceforth act as Chairman of the Commission
(supposing, which I cannot doubt, that the Secretary of State approves of
that arrangement) should be added to the reply which Mr. Des Yoeux will
be directed to give to the petitioners. Such an announcement will, I am
sure, afford general satisfaction to the claimants of land in the colony,
and remove all ground for the reproach that the members of the Commission
are unable, through the pressure of other duties, properly to discharge their
functions.
The cost of Mr. Williamson’s travelling expenses, etc., would be defrayed
from the vote for the “Expenses of the Lands Commission,” already passed
by the Legislative Council, and would need no additional grant from the
Colonial Legislature.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeuxs Despatch No. 17 o/1879
I entirely agree with all that is said by Mr. Des Yoeux, nor do I think I
can add anything to his remarks ; but Mr, Parr’s letter enclosed in this
despatch calls for some more lengthened comment from me.
287
XXI
FIJI


Mr. Parr is an indefatigable writer. By every mail he sends letters
containing attacks on me and on my policy to almost every public man in
England. Some of these come into my hands, and I lately wrote a long
reply to one addressed to Sir W. Lawson, This reply I have the honour to
enclose in original. I have not time nor appliances for recopying so
voluminous a paper, and I beg to request its return.
It would be a great mistake to suppose that Mr. Parr represents the
feeling of the Colonists. With the exception of Mr. Griffiths, the Proprietor
of the Fiji Times , I doubt whether any man of respectability or education
would endorse his sentiments. Of this a good illustration has been given
by the Petition which Mr. Parr widely circulated in Fiji, and sent home
direct to the Secretary of State and Under Secretaries, several months ago.
To that petition he said he had got, or could get, fifty signatures. It would
not have been strange if this had been the case, considering what many of
the settlers in Fiji are, but the fifty signatures have never been forwarded,
the petition itself has never been sent in to the Administrator, and I hope
it is not uncharitable to surmise that had the signatures been forthcoming
it would have been so sent. I will now examine Mr. Parr’s letter in detail.
The first two paragraphs suggest that I have disobeyed the instructions
of Lord Carnarvon with respect to the scheme of Native Taxation. As Lord
Carnarvon himself is certainly not of this opinion, and as I have no reason
to believe it to be that of Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, I shall not pause to notice
this allegation.
In the third paragraph, Mr. Parr says, “ that he has been told ” that the
late Sir William Hackett spoke of the scheme of native taxation as one of
“unvarnished slavery.” Mr. Parr has, I have no doubt, “ been told ” many
very extraordinary things since his arrival in Fiji. Whether there is or is
not any foundation for this particular report, it would be difficult now to
ascertain. Sir William Hackett is dead, and cannot be appealed to. I
would, however, observe that he was both a very cautious and a very
honourable man, and is not likely to have thus carelessly spoken. He
never expressed such an opinion to me, and I am pretty confident that he
would have considered it his official duty to have communicated his dis-
approbation of the system to me before speaking of the matter publicly.
The fourth paragraph contains a very absurd reference to the native
custom of “lala,” —which, I may observe in passing, is no more a “cannibal
custom ” than yam planting, or any other native usage or industry which
was in force during the period of cannibalism. “Lala,” under proper
restrictions, is a very defensible and useful institution ; but it has nothing
whatever to do with native taxation. The fact is that it is a mere name to
Mr. Parr, who (like most strangers in the group Avho are ignorant of the
language and unfamiliar with the natives) does not in the least understand
its nature.
Of the example of the above abuse, which he calls “lala” (though, if
true, it would not be “lala” but “vakasaurara”), which he refers to as
having lately taken place, I can of course at present say nothing ; but
further inquiry will of course be made of the Stipendiary Magistrate, before
whom he says the matter came.
Of the statements in the sixth paragraph I am better able to judge, and
I am quite certain that they are wholly unfounded, so far as relates to the
288
CHAP.
FIJI


Bua meeting. The allegation in the same paragraph, that in September
1877, the death of a native at Toganavere was occasioned by fishing Beche-
de-mer for a chief, will of course also be further enquired into ; but if there
is not a strange coincidence of dates and places, Mr. Parr will find that he
has been very unlucky in his reference to the subject, and that the man in
question was fishing, not for a native chief, but for a white man, who refused
to remove those employed there from the reef, although requested to do so
on account of the state of the weather. That Mr. Parr should be under the
necessity of referring to a dubious case occurring nearly two years ago, as
an illustration of the improper manner in which native taxation is enforced,
is indicative of his finding considerable difficulty in discovering cases for
quotation of a later date.
The assertion in the eighth paragraph is altogether mistaken. Long
before the Native Taxation Scheme was thought of, and indeed from a time
long antecedent to the Cession of Fiji, it has been the habit of some of the
wilder tribes to spend a month or two in the year, in the woods, gathering
wild yams and indulging in a roving life, from the attractions of which,
though settled in villages, they have not so wholly freed themselves as
their more civilised brethren.
The assertion in the ninth paragraph, that natives steal cocoanuts from
plantations of settlers to make copra is, I believe, untrue ; but if in
individual instances such a thing has occurred, the offenders are liable to
punishment. It is altogether false to say that any Stipendiary Magistrate
“will not punish the natives unless the settler has actually obtained his
Crown Grant.” The only colourable foundation for such a statement is
that in some cases where land is in dispute, and where the site on which
large existing native towns and their cocoanut groves stand is claimed by
some white settler, the Magistrate has (very properly) declined to disturb
the exercise of the rights of actual possession until such claim has been
proved before the Lands Commission. The refusal at once to admit the
claim, and to oust the natives from rights they have uninterruptedly
enjoyed, has, I know, in some cases been termed “a permission to steal.”
The assertion in the tenth paragraph with regard to suicides is unfounded
and absurd. An enquiry takes place in every instance of suicide, and in
almost all cases, either jealousy, or some complication brought about by the
removal to a distance of engaged labourers, has been shown to be the cause.
Mr. Parr may have received information of nine suicides in one district,
but the Commissioner to whom he refers, and from whom I have received a
private letter by this mail, has not received such intelligence ; whilst had
there been double the number of suicides in the particular district it would in
no way strengthen Mr. Parr s case, as that district happens to be exempted
from the operation of the Native Taxes Ordinance !
The eleventh paragraph contains numerous misleading passages. From
its terms it would appear that an unjust exercise of the “ lala ” in connection
with the native taxation scheme led to the perpetration of a terrible out-
rage ; that a question was asked in the Legislative Council with respect to a
paragraph in a London paper on the subject; and that a scandalous
difference took place on the subject between the Lieutenant-Governor and
the Chief-Justice. On this I would observe :
Ist. That “lala” and native taxation had absolutely nothing whatever
111 u
289
XXI
FIJI


to do with the order for arrest of the man whose apprehension was the
origin of this disgraceful occurrence.
2nd. That (though greatly exaggerated by Mr. Parr) a grave offence was
undoubtedly committed.
3rd. That for reasons I gave in a former letter, I thought it expedient,
as did Mr. Des Yceux and the Attorney-General, that the criminal should
be proceeded against before the Provincial Court rather than the Supreme
Court. On this point alone a difference arose between the Administrator
and the Chief-Justice. That Mr. Des Yceux and I were, however, right in
our action, and that this grave offence would have gone unpunished had it
been brought before the Supreme Court, I have no doubt, and I am much
mistaken if the acquittals which, on legal grounds, he has since been obliged
to direct in somewhat similar cases, where there was clear moral evidence
of guilt, have not shown the Chief-Justice himself that our opinion was not
ill-founded. The paragraph in the English newspaper to which Mr. Parr
refers is an extract from a letter written by Mr, Parr himself to the Fiji
Times, and quoted by the English Journal.
The thirteenth paragraph relates to the disturbances in Yiti Levu. I have
dealt with this so fully in my notes on Mr. Parr’s letter to Sir W. Lawson,
that I need not here enter into details. I will content myself with saying :
Ist. That it is not true that “during the time of the disturbance
with the mountaineers in Yiti Levu, martial law was declared within two
miles of the coast.” Martial law was never declared at all anywhere, and
absolutely no difference was made as to the administration of justice from
what is the case in ordinary times.
2nd. It is not true that Mr. A. Gordon is my nephew, or even any very
near connection of mine.
3rd. It is not true that natives who had committed offences within the
districts excepted from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, under the
provisions of the Ordinance drawn up in the Colonial Office, at the beginning
of 1875, for the constitution of that Court, could claim to be tried by it.
4th. It is not true that these prisoners were sent away again from Cuvu
on the day following that on which they arrived there.
sth. It is not true that they were executed in the manner indicated ; and,
6th. It is not true that I have ever “ admitted to a settler ” in Fiji that
“ if a certain course had been taken with regard to the mountaineers ” (Mr.
Parr prudently does not say what this course was !), “not a life need have
been taken.”
In the fourteenth paragraph, Mr. Parr objects to the composition of the
Legislative Council. As it happens, he is curiously mistaken in stating
that the non-official members are purely nominees of the Governor ; for the
three original members were in fact chosen by the votes of a large meeting
of planters and other settlers. I stated at that meeting that I could not
permit an election , but that, as I was a stranger in the Colony, I should be
much obliged if the gentlemen present would supply me with the names of
those they thought most fit for seats in Council, although I could not
pledge myself to abide by their choice. Three gentlemen had a clear pre-
dominance of suffrages over all others, and I appointed them members of
the Legislature. In two instances, I have no reason to regret the choice I
made. The third was not quite so satisfactory a selection, and I should
290
CHAP.
FIJI


not be sorry to accept his resignation. I have since appointed two other
members. One of these, Mr. Leefe, belongs to the “anti-nigger” section
of the community. But he is a gentleman who, though holding strong
opinions adverse to my own, expresses them with propriety and decorum,
and I thought (and think) him an excellent representative of that powerful
section of the community which is decidedly opposed to me in my native
policy, and which ought to be well represented in the Legislative, Council.
Mr. Hill is one of the largest proprietors and employers in Fiji. He is a
man of some ability, and excellent character, and if “many men never
speak to him,” I think it is just as probable that this arises from his not
caring to speak to them , as from any other cause. I did not think that the
fact of his agreeing with me as to Native Policy was in itself a sufficient
reason for his exclusion from a post for which he was otherwise well fitted.
The fifteenth paragraph relates to the appointment of Mr. Hobday as
Crown Solicitor. As I have said before, there is some obscurity about this
appointment; but I had not any hesitation in selecting Mr. Hobday for the
purpose I had in view, that is to say, as Counsel in certain cases before the
Lands Commission. In the first place he is, I believe, the only member
of the Fijian bar not directly interested in land cases, and in the next, he
w r as recommended to me for this particular service, in the strongest terms,
by both the late and the present Chief-Justice, as the only man fit for the
duty, if a choice was to be made in the Colony itself. I cannot quote their
recommendation, for it was couched in terms which were not altogether
flattering to the character or habits of the Fijian Bar, and which were not
meant to be officially recorded. I never heard before of Mr. Hobday’s trial.
At all events it appears that if such an accusation were brought against him,
he was acquitted of the offence with which he was charged, and I agree
with Mr. Des Voeux that it is not desirable to look too curiously to events in
Fiji before October 10, 1874.
The sixteenth paragraph contains a libel on myself. Mr. Parr shields
himself by attributing it to “rumour.” He will, no doubt, be glad to learn
that the rumour is unfounded. I have no partnership or interest in Mr.
Wilkinson’s estate. At the same time, I perceive what has given rise to the
rumour, and though I should not otherwise have obtruded such particulars
on the Secretary of State, I will now describe the transaction, of which no
doubt Mr, Parr has received some incorrect report. Mr. Wilkinson, like
many or most settlers, was in debt, and his estate mortgaged for £3OOO.
These mortgages were in the hands of men whom I will not name, but who
are strongly opposed to my policy. They suddenly called on Mr. Wilkin-
son to pay his debt, intimating that if he did not do so by a particular day,
they would foreclose, as by the terras of the mortgage they were entitled to
do. He asked for time to communicate with a correspondent in England.
This was refused him. He asked the Bank to advance him*the money upon
a draft draw r n on his English correspondent. This a,lso was refused, unless
he could produce a guarantee that the Bank should not be a loser. At the
same time it was intimated to him that if he would resign his office, ample
time should be allowed him, and the mortgage should not be pressed. Mr.
Wilkinson informed me that he had no option, and must resign under this
compulsion, although he was very unwilling to do so, for he was as well
aware as myself, and as those who thus pressed him, that by his retirement
291
XXI
FIJI


my difficulties would be enormously increased, and that without his invalu-
able aid it was almost impossible to keep up effectual communication with
the natives. Indignant at the attempt thus to embarrass the Government,
strongly sympathising with Mr. Wilkinson’s difficulties, and determined
that the Colony should not lose the services of Mr. Wilkinson through such
an intrigue, I, at once and unsolicited, gave the Bank the guarantee the
Manager required. The money was advanced to Mr. Wilkinson on his
draft on England. The mortgagees on the appointed day, much to their
astonishment, received their money, and, much to their disappointment (for
the estate is a very fine one), had to surrender their mortgage. Mr.
Wilkinson remained Chief Interpreter. His draft on England was honoured
by his correspondent, the advance of the Bank was repaid, and the
guarantee, which had then served its purpose, became useless.
This is by no means the first time that I have been enabled to assist
meritorious public servants when placed in circumstances of difficulty. I
hope it will not be the last. But I must say that I have not found such
transactions personally profitable to me : indeed the result is usually alto-
gether the reverse.
Of Mr. Wilkinson himself, Sir H. Robinson, Commodore Goodenough,
Mr. Layard, Mr, Des Yceux and I have all formed the very highest opinion.
None of us considered that the interest which (instead of purchase money)
Tui Bua holds in his estate, in any way interfered with his efficiency or
usefulness. The charge brought by Mr. Parr as to the employment of
forced labour on that estate is, to my own certain personal knowledge, alto-
gether false. I can well understand why Mr. Parr is so anxious to injure
Mr. Wilkinson, and entertains towards him so keen an animosity.
In the eighteenth paragraph, Mr. Parr charges the Government with
knowing nothing of the feelings of the natives. I reply, that it is Mr, Parr
himself who knows nothing of them. He first came to Fiji at a later period
than myself; he has spent a large part of his time since in New South
Wales and Queensland, endeavouring ineffectually to raise an agitation as
to the grievances of Fiji ; and, when in Fiji, he resides chiefly in Levuka,
where little can be seen of natives. He is, moreover, ignorant of the lan-
guage. To this paragraph of Mr. Parr’s letter I shall, however, again recur.
The nineteenth paragraph contains an attack on all the magistrates in
the Colony except two. I have no fault to find with those two magistrates,
one of whom especially I think a most honourable and courageous, though
somewhat ignorant, man ; but it is worthy of remark that the only two
magistrates whom Mr. Parr does not condemn are also the only two who them-
selves happen to he planters.
To say of any of the gentlemen whom I have appointed magistrates that
they are “of a notoriously bad reputation,” is a gross libel; and I trust Mr.
Des Yoeux will be directed to call on Mr. Parr to name those whom he thus
attacks, and to adduce proofs in support of his allegations.
The twentieth paragraph has, I must say, afforded me some amusement.
The fact that the settlers in general do not complain is, Mr. Parr perceives,
primd facie evidence against the validity of his accusations, and he there-
fore endeavours to assume the attitude of being himself the one only cour-
ageous and independent man in Fiji, who stands forward as the champion
of others who dare not speak. Sir Michael Hicks-Beach is probably too
292
CHAP.
FIJI


well acquainted with the character of British communities in a distant part
of the world, and how little accustomed they are to even the slightest
reticence of language, to give much weight to this rather ingenious mode of
accounting for the want of support accorded to Mr. Parr’s outcries. As a
matter of fact, I may add, that of those who have shown the most persistent
opposition to all schemes of native government except those which involve
their complete subjugation to the authority of the planters, the most per-
sistent (as, for example, Mr. Leefe) have been those who have not received
their Grants, and whose claims have indeed not yet been heard.
In the twenty-second paragraph, Mr. Parr requests the appointment of a
Royal Commission of Enquiry into his allegations. Nothing could in many
ways be more agreeable to me than that a competent Commissioner, possess-
ing a leisure which I unfortunately cannot command, should describe in a
carefully elaborated and well-digested Report the whole system and appar-
atus of government in Fiji, which the time at my disposal only permits me
to notice in fragmentary and hastily-written despatches ; but I am bound
to say that I concur with Mr. Des Yoeux in thinking that not only is there
no sufficient reason for incurring so heavy an expense, but that such an
appointment would utterly destroy the authority of the Governor. I may
add that I should myself be somewhat hurt, were I to find that the confi-
dence of Her Majesty’s Government in my administration were so easily
shaken as to deem an enquiry needful on allegations such as those now
brought forward. I think, therefore, that Mr. Des Yoeux should be directed
to inform Mr. Parr that it is not the intention of Her Majesty’s Government
to appoint a Commission of Enquiry ; that they have—(if, as I trust is the
case, this is the fact) —continued confidence in my equitable dealing with all
classes of Her Majesty’s subjects, and that his time would be better employed
in aiding me to carry out successfully the measures I have initiated for
the difficult work of national organisation, than in the preparation of
ill-founded complaints, and the transmission of false and malicious
“ rumours.”
I suggest this last sentence because Mr, Parr is not a gentleman capable
of feeling any ordinary rebuff. lam told by private letters that he parades
the intimation he has already received from the Secretary of State that he
must send his letters through the ordinary official channel, as an intima-
tion from the Secretary of State that his letters have been read and con-
sidered, and that all that is required before his representations are acted
on, is that they should be put into official form. lam further told that he
takes pains to inform the natives that he has sent home for a greater chief
than the Governor, who will be severely punished on the arrival of this
special emissary evoked by Mr. Parr, and they must confirm all his state-
ments, or they will share the punishment which he has succeeded in
bringing down upon Sir Arthur Gordon.
I speak somewhat bitterly, for the mischief this man has already done
among the natives is incalculable. Two chiefs of high rank have, I know,
been utterly ruined by his intrigues and persuasions, by the encouragement
he has given to their most vicious propensities, and the immunity from
punishment which he has led them to anticipate. Native ladies have been
grossly insulted by him, and no efforts spared to excite disaffection and
discontent.
293
XXI
FIJI


The interference of mischievous meddlers in the administration of native
affairs is, however, a very grave question, and one of which I must treat in
another letter, but it is clear that if the principle of native administration
is to be maintained at all, it will be necessary to take some measures for
checking the active propagation of discontent among the native population,
—I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
April 1879. —Sir —I have the honour to return the letter of the Rev.
Mr. Inglis, giving cover to a Petition relating to the Polynesian labour
trade, addressed to the Secretary of State by the Synod of the New Hebrides
Presbyterian Mission, and enclosed in your letter to me of the 18th ultimo.
I also return the letter from the Aborigines’ Protection Society on the
same subject enclosed in your letter of the 10th instant.
The question to which these papers relate is a very difficult and painful
one, and I find it by no means easy to express my own sentiments with
regard to it.
The Petition of the Synod appears to me exaggerated in its language
and extravagant in its assertions ; but I fear there is but too substantial a
foundation of truth for the antipathy of its authors to the Labour traffic,
although the improvement in its conduct during the past five or six years
has been very great; so great, indeed, that all the most crying evils of the
system formerly pursued have, I believe, disappeared for ever. There is now
no forcible kidnapping. I am not inclined to think there is any direct
purchase of unwilling recruits, and I believe almost all those who embark,
do so quite voluntarily.
To any attempt entirely to prohibit the recruiting of labourers by
English vessels lam altogether opposed. Even assuming (which lam not
prepared to admit) that the cessation of emigration from the New Hebrides
and Solomon Islands is itself desirable, this measure would not effect its
object. It would but drive the trade from English vessels, by which it is
carried on under strict regulations, to French and German vessels, by which
it would be carried on under no regulations at all.
The so-called inter-insular traffic is, I fear, accompanied by many abuses.
It was altogether put a stop to by Commodore Goodenough. I agreed with
him in opinion, but I have some difficulty in speaking on this subject, for
on the representation of Her Majesty’s Consul at New Caledonia that such
a course would be convenient, this traffic was renewed, and its control placed
in the hands of the Consul and the Governor of New South Wales, to the
exclusion of the High Commissioner.
The Beche-de-mer and Pearl Shell Fisheries appear to need greater
supervision.
Having made these general remarks, I will proceed to notice seriatim
the eight points which the New Hebrides Synod desire, “ in a more special
manner,” to bring under the notice of the Secretary of State.
§ 1. The practice of giving a present when a man is “recruited” un-
doubtedly obtains in all the islands ; but I very much doubt whether it
amounts to “purchase money.” It rather is equivalent to a recompense
for loss of service or aid, just as the sum paid by the bridegroom for the
bride is really an equivalent for her services given to the father (as in our
294
CHAP.
FIJI


English law of Seduction). This custom has been abused by some powerful
chiefs, who have sent their men away, but not as a rule. It should be
observed that the man who goes has a desire that his friends staying behind
should be benefited by his going.
§ 2. This is, I fear, in the main true, though the statement is highly
coloured and exaggerated. It should be borne in mind that none of these
Islands have a superabundant population ; that considerable labour is
required to cultivate the soil; and that therefore if a large number of able-
bodied men are taken away from any one place, there is a tendency to
scarcity and consequent disease.
§3. Of the death-rate in Queensland it is not my duty to speak. That
in Fiji is by no means excessive. That the Beche-de-mer and Pearl Shell
Fisheries require far more stringent inspection and regulation than at present
exist, is, I think, manifestly the case.
§4, This is no doubt a strong point on the part of the Petitioners. The
labour ship endeavours to obtain as many recruits as possible, and it often
depends only on the character of the Labour Agent whether they recruit
women, and in what way. Some only take women accompanied by men who
profess to be their husbands ; some will take any woman who offers. Now,
the presumption is that any woman who offers herself is married, and if she
offers herself singly, that she has run away from her husband. This has
led to such cases as the following :
(1) The woman being caught by her husband and very likely being put
to death by him. The Rev. Mr. Bice saved a woman’s life at Oba two years
ago, who had thus run away, and whose husband was on the point of
killing her.
(2) The husband demanding his wife back again, and on being refused,
wreaking his vengeance on any white people he may come across. This was
the case at Lakona, on the Island of Santa Maria, where two women were
recruited and refused to their husbands, who demanded them, and who
then killed two Mallicolo men, the boat’s crew of a white trader living
there.
(3) The woman being given to some man as his wife, which gives rise to
complications on their return home.
That women are (especially in the Line Islands) recruited avowedly for
immoral purposes is undeniable. But there is another aspect of the recruit-
ing of women which has not been touched on in this memorial, and which is
of much importance. It may, I think, be questioned whether the immigra-
tion of labour into Fiji or Queensland should be permitted at all, unless the
immigrants are accompanied by a certain proportion of women of their own
race. Not to speak of obvious moral evils to which this absence of females
is in both Colonies likely to give rise, there is, in the case of Fiji, the
additional inconvenience that the introduction of a number of strange men
into the midst of the Fijian population tends to disorganise the domestic
life of the Fijians themselves, find to give rise to dangerous disputes and
quarrels.
§5. I should say this is exaggerated. The official returns would show
to what extent it is true. But greater care should no doubt be taken to
return to their actual homes all the labourers who are sent back, as much
injury has been done to the individual by the non-observance of this rule.
295
XXI
FIJI


The question of the moral improvement is a difficult one. In some cases,
I am given to understand, the people have returned much benefited, and
Bishop Selwyn, than who there can be no better judge, informs me that he
thinks this is oftener the case from Fiji than from Queensland. But this is
not general, and they are certainly, except in a few bright instances,
returned from the Colonies untaught anything but vices.
§ 6. Bishop Selwyn’s opinion is that the inter-island traffic stands in
need of very strict supervision, if not suppression. Places like Havannah
Harbour, he informs me, are very unfit for the employment of imported
labour. The settlers there are generally needy adventurers, and, as such,
neither able nor willing to pay their men. They have no means, as a rule,
of returning their labourers to their homes at the proper time, and no
supervision is exercised over them. Every trader now has a certain number
of men under him, but I hardly know by what authority. Mr. Layard, on
whose recommendation, I think, licenses are issued by the Governor of New
South Wales, does not correspond with me on the subject.
§i . This statement is far too sweeping, but I certainly think it would
be better if the officers of the gunboats held more aloof than they do at
present from the traders and labour vessels, so that the natives might have
the idea impressed on them that they are their protectors as well as that of
the white man. The latter is certainly their belief at present, and if
countenance be given to the theory which, though not that of the Com-
modore, seems to be in favour at the Admiralty, is adopted, viz., that the
cruisers are to investigate and punish the offences of natives against whites,
whilst the High Commissioner is only to deal with the offences of whites
against natives, the conviction of the natives that the schooners are there
to support the labour trade and white irresponsibility generally, will only
be confirmed.
§ 8. With regard to the “depths of iniquity, cruelty, and horror ” which
II are being perpetrated under the sanction of British law,” I can only say
that I am unaware of them, though I cannot deny their possibility, or even,
I fear, their probability. But I think the memorialists should be called on
to state facts in support of their assertion, if they have facts to show.
The petition of the New Hebrides Synod concludes with three definite
requests—
-Ist, That the further recruiting of labour in the New Hebrides for the
British Colonies may be discontinued,
2nd, That the so-called inter-island traffic in labour may be stopped.
3rd, That the Pearl Shell and Beche-de-mer Fisheries should be placed
under stricter supervision.
With the first of these requests, I do not think that it is necessary or
desirable to comply; the second should not, I think, be refused, without
careful examination and enquiry ; and I have no hesitation in saying that
the third is altogether right and reasonable.
I would suggest that I should be directed on my return to the Pacific to
make careful enquiry into the facts connected with the inter-insular traffic,
and to prepare Regulations for its control under the Order in Council, if it
should appear possible to permit its continuance at all.
Mr. Inglis and Mr. Chesson might perhaps be informed accordingly.—
I have, etc.
296
CHAP.
FIJI


To the Colonial Office
April 1879. —Sir —I have the honour to return the papers relating to the
case of the Prospector, enclosed in your letter of the 10th instant.
Mr. Duncan’s application for compensation from the Government of Fiji
appears to me one of the most impudent demands which has ever been
submitted to my notice. He may esteem himself extremely fortunate in
having escaped the payment of a heavy penalty to that government, in
consequence of a technical flaw in the bond into which he had entered.
Mr. Duncan entered into an agreement with the Government of Fiji to
take back returning labourers to their homes, and to bring to Fiji such
fresh immigrants as might be recruited for service in that Colony.
There was exceptionally great mortality on board the Prospector ; the
number of fresh recruits was above all example small; and on her return to
Levuka the Government agent on board reported to the Agent-General of
Immigration that Captain Duncan had been guilty of many grave offences
and serious breaches of his engagement. The Agent-General held an
enquiry, at which these charges were fully established. At this distance
of time, and without papers to refer to, I cannot well remember the whole of
them, but I recollect that they comprised insufficient issues of food, and a
failure to call at several of the islands which he had engaged to visit. It
was the opinion not only of the Government Agent on board, but of the
Agent-General and Chief Medical Officer, that the great number of deaths
on board was partly due to the former cause, while it is but too probable
that the neglect to land returning immigrants at the proper places, has led
in more than one case to their murder.
There would have been considerable difficulty in prosecuting Mr. Duncan
criminally, and it was consequently determined to proceed against him for
the forfeiture of the bond of £5OO into which he had entered.
Unfortunately this bond, though prepared by the Attorney-General, had
been somewhat loosely drawn ; and although the facts were fully proved,
it was held by the Chief-Justice that as the obligation of the bond, instead
of being stated in express terms, was only described by reference to the
provisions of an Ordinance, which though passed and published had not
been brought into operation at the date of its execution, its conditions could
not be enforced. But so far is it from being the case that he “ w r as acquitted
from all blame,” that the Chief-Justice in giving judgment passed a strong
censure on the carelessness which had so drawn the bond as to permit the
escape from punishment of clearly proved misconduct, whilst he stated that
the case being one for the enforcement of a penalty he was bound to construe
the engagement rigidly.
It is true that the United States Consul presented to me a petition from
Mr. Duncan. Ido not remember that he supported its prayer, even in the
first instance, though he may have done so ; but if I am not much mistaken,
he left me amply convinced that Mr. Duncan had had a very lucky escape
from a penalty which he had justly incurred.
Mr. Duncan is not, in my opinion, entitled to any compensation what-
ever ; nor does he merit the slightest consideration from either the Colonial
Government or the Secretary of State. —I have, etc.
297
XXI
FIJI


To the Colonial Office
Sir —I have the honour to return Mr. Layard’s Despatch No. 2of the
11th January, enclosed in your letter of the 2nd inst.
I confess I receive with much scepticism a good deal of the statements
of Messrs. Chaffin and Johnston. It is very much the practice of the men
who first settle in a South Sea Island, to adopt as their special friend some
particular chief, declare him to be the most powerful and highest in rank
in the place, and by pushing his interests and showing themselves willing
and able to protect him, secure for themselves corresponding advantages.
Although, therefore, I am far from asserting that such is the case in the
present instance, ray first impression on hearing a couple of American
adventurers indulge in extreme laudation of an individual chief, would be
that he was to some extent their tool; and that they had motives of their
own for desiring to exalt him above his fellows, or to put others out of the
way in order to extend his power. Therefore, although “Loo” may merit
all that is said in his praise, I should require some further proof of it than
the bare assertion of Messrs. Chaffin and Johnston.
I am also utterly incredulous as to the cause of the murder being “a
lust for a feed of human flesh.” I will not assert that no murder of a white
man has ever been committed for this reason, but I have never heard of one
for which there were not other motive causes, usually retaliation for some
offence, of which the murdered man was himself often wholly innocent, but
for which he was (as' one of the same nation with the offender) held by
the natives, according to their lex talionis, to be himself responsible.
If it be the case that Mr. Chaffin is indeed able to identify the plant
yielding the poison which gives to the arrows of the natives qualities so
deadly, he has made a discovery of some importance. It has hitherto been
always supposed that this poison was animal, not vegetable, matter, but I
do not presume to say this is so.
To the Colonial Office
April 1879. —Sir—I have had the honour of receiving your letter of the
31st ultimo, enclosing the copy of a letter from the Law Officers reporting
adversely to the adoption of the plan suggested by Chief-Justice Gorrie, for
the exercise of the High Commissioner’s jurisdiction in cases of injury done
to white men by the natives of Islands in the Western Pacific.
The objection taken by the Law Officers to the plan suggested is a legal
one, and it is therefore out of my province to enter on its discussion.
But the general advice with which the report concludes is not purely
legal, and deals with a question of policy. Ido not dispute the general
maxim, broadly laid down, that acts of violence committed by savage tribes
are to be treated as acts of war, but I find it impossible to think that
violence or injury inflicted by a single savage is necessarily to be considered
as an act of war on the part of his tribe, and treated accordingly.
No doubt the violence or injury, if inflicted by a tribe acting as such,
may be regarded as war, but I cannot consider it reasonable that the act of
an individual, or perhaps of two or three individuals, should be deemed an
act of hostility on the part of the whole tribe or nation to which he belongs,
and justify hostile proceedings against them generally.
298
CHAP
FIJI


Assuming it to be impossible, however, to attain the object desired by
Chief-Justice Gorrie in the manner suggested by him, there is possibly
another mode by which it might be effected.
If his speech is correctly reported in the public papers, it was distinctly
laid down by Her Majesty’s Attorney-General, speaking in the House of
Commons on the 24th ult., that without any surrender of sovereignty the
right of exercising jurisdiction and even of legislation may be conceded to
the Sovereign of another state. If, therefore, the native chiefs of any group
in the Pacific are themselves willing to grant by treaty such a jurisdiction
as that suggested, it will not, I presume, appear open to objection upon
legal grounds, should its adoption seem for other reasons expedient to Her
Majesty’s Government. Such Conventions might, I believe, be easily
obtained in various localities. —I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Vcrux's Despatch No. 14 o/1879
I entirely concur in the language used by Mr. Des Yoeux in his message,
and in the propriety of an enactment such as that transmitted by him.
But I am inclined to think some verbal amendment to the Ordinance is
needed. I do not at all disapprove of making the Agent-General of
Immigration, rather than the employer, the purchaser of goods for the
returning immigrant, but I am not sure whether the “shall” is not some-
what too imperative, as it would appear to render it absolutely indispensable
that the money must be expended, even if in some special and peculiar
cases the immigrant desired to keep it, or to expend it personally. I think
also at the end of the first clause words should be added showing that the
money is to be expended not only in the immigrant’s presence but according
to his wishes. As the clause now stands, a philanthropic or enthusiastic
agent might spend the immigrant’s money in ploughs or Bibles, though the
immigrant’s own desires might be for very different objects.
To the Colonial Office
Minutes on Chief-Justice Gorrie's Despatches Nos. 17, 18, 19, and 20
No. 17. Chief-Justice Gorrie was, I think, mistaken in sending a sub-
poena to the British Consul in Samoa, who could not leave his post without
permission from his official superiors.
No. 18. It is very disheartening to find that such practices as the reck-
less use of firearms, and the employment of boat’s crews who are taken up
at Tanna and left behind there, in order to obliterate evidence of such
transactions, are not only still carried on, but that they can be carried on
without the Government Agent on board the vessel becoming aware of the
fact, unless, as in this case, he learns it by accident subsequently.
If the man shot by Captain Waite’s order was killed, it is probable that
the next time a white man lands on the island he will be murdered, and
then a man-of-war will visit the place, and failing to obtain the murderer,
will probably shell the village and kill various islanders" having as little to
299
XXI
FIJI


do with the murder of the white man as that white man had to do with
the shot fired from Captain Waite’s boat.
The Acting High Commissioner has, I presume, sent a report of this case
to the Commodore.
No. 19. The addition to the Order in Council of a provision with regard
to unsworn testimony is no doubt desirable, although practically no diffi-
culty seems to have arisen in receiving evidence from witnesses not
Christians. But I should deprecate any further delay in r the issue of the
Amending Order now, I believe, ready to be passed in Council in order to
add such a provision.
No. 20. The original letters from Mr. Swanston, of which copies are
enclosed in this despatch, have already reached me, and have been forwarded
by me to the Foreign Office.
To the Colonial Office
Sir—l have the honour to return Chief-Justice Gorrie’s Despatches Nos,
21 to 24, which do not appear to call for any special comment from me. I
may, however, remark that Chief-Justice Gorrie’s proceedings in connection
with the case of John Daly, as reported in his Despatch No. 23, appear to
have been both judicious and correct.
Memo for Lord Salisbury
May 4, 1879. —I have been requested to prepare the draft of such a Treaty
with Samoa as, in my opinion, ‘ ‘ would meet the requirements of the case,
and which should include stipulations for privileges equal to those granted
to the United States and to Germany.”
This is not altogether easy to do, without a knowledge of the Treaty
recently concluded between the German Consul and the Samoan chiefs, but
which has not as yet been made public.
I have delayed for some while returning a reply to Mr. Yillers Lister’s
enquiry, in the hope of becoming acquainted with the terms of this instru-
ment, but as time presses I now forward the draft of an Agreement with
the Samoan chiefs for Lord Salisbury’s consideration.
In so doing I should wish to make a few general observations.
1. I have some doubts whether any formal Treaty at all could be con-
cluded, to which Her Majesty the Queen would be nominally a party, and
which would require Her Majesty’s ratification. There is at present no
king in Samoa, and has been none since 1876, although, if we are to attach
any weight to the “ Constitution ” at present supposed to exist in Samoa,
the sanction of the king is required to all Acts of State. If, on the other
hand, that Constitution is disregarded, the existence of a king is, according
to old Samoan usage, even yet more indispensable ; and it may be doubted
whether the majority of Samoans would consider as binding any inter-
national agreement entered into by any other authority.
The Taimua and Faipule may be recognised as in de facto possession
of a certain degree of power, but they have no legitimate authority what-
ever. Not only are they legally incompetent to act apart from the king,
but their right to exercise such functions as were once entrusted to them
300
CHAP.
FIJI


has long expired. They were elected for a term of years which ended, I
think, in 1877. There has been no attempt at re-election ; but they con-
tinue to assume the position, though I cannot say to perform the functions,
of a Government.
It may indeed be almost said that there has ceased to be any Govern-
ment whatever, for I learn by my last private letters that the members of
the Taimua and Faipule had for some months left Mulina, and were living
separately in different parts of the group.
I am inclined, therefore, to think that, whilst we may admit certain
chiefs to be for the moment in the exercise of practical supremacy, they
should not be honoured by Her Majesty’s recognition of them as a Sovereign
Power, and that any agreement made with them should rather bear the
character of a memorandum of engagements entered into by them, than
assume that of a solemn Treaty between two Sovereigns. This, however,
is a question the determination of which might, to a great degree, be
left for decision on the spot, and according to the circumstances of the
moment.
2. It is impossible to accord to the Samoan Law Courts (which indeed
can hardly be said to have an existence) the same authority which may,
not improperly, be conceded to the Courts in Tonga. It would be impossible
to permit any British subject to be tried by the Samoan judges, and it will
be essential to insist on the trial of every case in which a British subject is
defendant by the High Commissioner’s Court alone. Ido not myself see
the utility of the clause in the American Treaty for the trial by a mixed
tribunal, of cases in which a Samoan is, on the complaint of an American
citizen, the accused party, more especially as no provision is made for the
almost inevitable case of a difference of opinion between the two judges. I
should be disposed to content myself with securing the fair trial of any
accused British subject, leaving the failure, if there be a failure; on the
part of the Samoan Courts to do justice, in the complaints by British
subjects against Samoans, to be a matter of representation to the Samoan
authorities, and the enforcement of redress if needful.
At the same time, if such a provision has been inserted in the German
Treaty as well as in that with the United States, I suppose it ought to find
a place in that with England.
3. I have inserted in the draft the provisions with regard to the
municipality of Apia which formed part of the Convention proposed by
me in February 1878, but of course these stipulations are not of essential
importance, and should only be brought forward by me if there appears to
be a probability of their acceptance.
4. In conclusion, I would venture to suggest that I should be instructed
to require the concession to British subjects resident in Samoa of privileges
equal to those conferred, or to be hereafter conferred, on those of any other
nation, and to endeavour to obtain the establishment of such a municipality
as that contemplated, some arrangement of the kind being highly desirable
for the preservation of good order and security in the locality chiefly
inhabited by foreign settlers.
May 10, 1879.
301
XXI
FIJI


To the Colonial Office
May 1879.—Sir—I have to thank the Secretary of State for com-
municating to me the memorandum of Sir George Grey enclosed in your
letter of the 21st inst.
■ Much of that paper is devoted to an argument which appears to me
unsound, and which is expressed in exaggerated and rhetorical language,
nor do I propose to take any notice of the greater part of its contents.
But it is, I think, impossible to deny that some of the questions raised
by Sir George Grey are such as not only to merit serious consideration, but
are such as will every year press with increasing importunity upon the
attention of Her Majesty’s Government.
I fear also that I must own myself to be not altogether indisposed to
concur with Sir George Grey in considering the measures already taken to
secure order in the Pacific to be insufficient for that purpose.
Knowing how much averse Her Majesty’s Government is to take any
further steps in this direction, or to increase the responsibilities already
incurred by Great Britain in those regions, I should not have voluntarily
obtruded my opinion upon the Secretary of State, and should have acquiesced
in the policy of making the best use of the means already provided, had
not my views been expressly called for. This being the case, it would be
wrong, and not altogether honest, were I to refrain from stating them.
I have already explained that the presence of a single white man, not a
British subject, among those settled in a Pacific Island, goes far to paralyse
the action of the Order in Council, and that I have grave doubts whether,
even as regards British subjects alone, the jurisdiction conferred by the
Order in Council can be efficiently exercised, unless territorial jurisdiction be
also claimed. Chief-Justice Gorrie has also lately pointed out the grave
inconveniences arising from the absence of any jurisdiction over natives
committing offences against whites, and I have myself ventured to observe
that the axiom of the Law Officers, that every crime committed by a
native must be regarded as an act of war on the part of his tribe or
nation, is practically most unjust, and hardly, I think, sustainable in
theory.
At the same time, I do not think that the wholesale annexation of islands
in the Pacific is in the smallest degree desirable, nor can I regard without
apprehension the suggestion made by Sir G. Grey that such annexations
should be made by Colonies ruled by Parliamentary government. There are
obvious reasons, upon which I will not now dwell, why mischievous results
would probably attend such a measure.
The communities of the Pacific may be divided into three widely different
classes. In the majority of the islands —as in the Solomons, Santa Cruz,
and great part of the New Hebrides groups—the inhabitants are heathen,
and for the most part cannibal savages. The less we have to do, as a
government, with such communities the better. It is not to the influence
of government, but to that of the missionary and trader, that we must in
the first instance look for the improvement of their condition.
There are again, in other places, as in Tonga and Samoa, regularly
organised governments, presiding over a Christian and moderately civilised
community. With the independence of states such as these it would be
302
CHAP.
FIJI


scandalous to interfere, nor do I understand Sir G. Grey to suggest such
interference.
But there is again a third class of islands, where the people are all
Christians, are orderly and peaceable, and have made some steps towards
civilisation, but have not organised any system of government beyond that
of their chiefs, and adhere in most respects to their ancient social traditions.
Of this class are Rotumah, Aneiteum, Niue, Savage Island, and a great
part, if not the whole, of Yate.
It is in these places precisely that the mischiefs against which it is
desired to guard are most likely to arise, and where interference on our part
is most desired by the people themselves.
What I should be disposed to recommend in the case of such islands as
these would be that Her Majesty’s High Commissioner should, subject to
the approval of the Home Government, be empowered from time to time, on
their own application for a magistrate, to make with the natives of islands
willing to receive and pay such an officer, and abide by decisions, an
agreement providing for such an appointment. The independent sovereignty
of the island chiefs would be fully maintained, but the administration of
justice would be secured on a basis very different from that on which it
now stands, and the advice given by him in matters of administration would,
no doubt, be generally followed. The continuance of such agreements might
be made to depend on the continuance of the stipulated payment. If that
ceased, or became irregular, the magistrate should be withdrawn. Such an
agreement would, I believe, be at once solicited by the island of Rotumah,
all the inhabitants of which are Christian, and there is no fear of any
disturbance or outbreak on their part.
The dangers pointed out in the latter part of the 15th paragraph of Sir
G. Grey’s minute are by no means unreal, and it will be a matter for regret
if, from a mere unwillingness to face facts which it is impossible to ignore,
the condition of these islands is allowed to drift into hopeless confusion and
“wild disorder,” as Sir G. Grey expresses it.
I do not at all agree with Sir George Grey in his apparent desire to exclude
all other nations than our own from the Pacific. There is ample room and
scope there for all, but I confess I should be inclined to make two exceptions
—the one as regards Tonga, and the other as regards the New Hebrides.
The former group is too closely and intimately connected with Fiji, to
permit the establishment of foreign influence there to be a matter of
indifference, for it must seriously affect the large Tongan population of Fiji.
The New Hebrides, whatever may be now thought, were long formally
declared to be British possessions, have been Christianised by British mis-
sionaries exclusively, and are the home of a large number of British settlers.
I do not now advocate their annexation, the time for which, if indeed it
should ever arrive, has certainly as yet by no means come, but I do think
that we have a right to object to their occupation by any other Power, and
that both in the interests of British subjects settled there, and in those of
the natives themselves, as well as out of regard to claims to sovereignty
which have never, so far as I am aware, been formally abandoned, it is not
only our right, but our duty to oppose such occupation. —I have, etc.
303
XXI
FIJI


To the Under-Seceetary of State foe the Colonies
May 17, 1879.—Sir—I have the honour to return the despatch addressed
to the Officer Administering the Government of Fiji enclosed in your letter
of yesterday’s date.
Without entering upon the subject of that despatch, I wish to call
attention to what appears to me an oversight in its form, which, if un-
corrected, might lead to considerable inconvenience.
It is addressed to the “Officer Administering the Government of Fiji.”
Now the Officer administering the government of Fiji has not necessarily
anything to do with the affairs of the High Commission, and in fact the
officer now acting for me as Administrator is not charged with any of the
duties of the High Commissioner, which are, in accordance with instructions
from the Secretary of State, performed in my absence by Chief-Justice Gorrie,
who also, under the Order in Council about to be issued, will act for me as
High Commissioner when I am absent from the Pacific.
I think, therefore, that the despatch should be addressed to the High
Commissioner, in which case it would be opened and acted on by the Acting
High Commissioner, or else should be directed expressly to the Acting High
Commissioner.
If the Acting Governor of Fiji be the Officer to operate on this fund,
whilst the Acting High Commissioner is responsible for its administration,
I cannot but think that great confusion, misunderstanding, and but too
probably unpleasant feeling will ensue.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
May 1879. —Sir —In reply to your letter of the 13th inst., I have the
honour to state that, in compliance with Lord Carnarvon’s directions, copies
of the Western Pacific Order in Council were sent by me to the Governors
of the Australian Colonies and New Zealand and Tasmania, by all of whom
their receipt was duly acknowledged. In Victoria a public notification of
the Proclamation of the Order by me was inserted in the Government
Gazette, but I do not know whether this course was or was not pursued in
other Colonies. It was only by accident that I saw the Victorian Gazette
containing the announcement.
In my letter, I gave a short abstract of the contents of the Order in
Council, and stated its objects in words taken for the most part from Lord
Carnarvon’s own despatches. I believe I also complied with the instructions
to send home a copy of this paper, and that it will be found enclosed in one
of my despatches written in the early part of last year.
It is extraordinary that the very existence of the Order in Council should
be so completely ignored, as well as the general instructions of the Secretary
of State to the Governors of all the Australian Colonies, to publish the Order
in Council inextenso. In Melbourne, only “certain extracts” were published
in the Gazette.
To the Colonial Office
May 1879. —Sir—In reply to your letter of the sth inst., enclosing one
from the Exchequer and Audit Department respecting a query with regard to
304
CHAP.
FIJI


the commission paid on the sale of a piece of Government land, I beg to say
that under no circumstances could the charge of that commission properly
fall on me. It is one usually paid by the vendor. It was paid by Mr.
Woods when the land was sold to the Government. It would be paid by me
were I now to sell the land, and I can see no reason why the Government
should be exempt from the same liability.
But when the peculiar circumstances of the case are considered, the
extreme injustice of calling upon me to pay an additional sum, because I
have already spent a large amount on the public account, becomes yet
more apparent.
The possession of this land, as I have mentioned, was essential to the
Government, as its occupation would have been injurious to the public
offices, and to Government House. The owner, Mr. Woods, was willing to
take £SOO for it from the Government, but would not sell it to any private
person except at a much higher rate. In the market it would have certainly
fetched a larger sum. I felt that the Government ought to have the land,
but did not think it convenient that so large an expense should be incurred.
I therefore offered to buy it myself, give the use of it to the Government
meanwhile, and allow the Crown to become the possessor whenever the money
could be repaid me. Mr. Woods, however, would not sell except to the
Crown or by public auction, and it was therefore requisite to avoid the
increase of price which a public sale would have involved, that the Govern-
ment should first buy from Mr. Woods, and then I from the Crown. This
was done, and I gave £SO more than had been asked by Mr. Woods, for the
express purpose of covering (and more than covering) any expenses the
Government might be put to in the transaction, I have therefore, in fact,
paid (and more than paid) the charge legitimately devolving on the Govern-
ment in respect to this commission.
It is by no means the only case in which I have spent my own money on
public objects ; but whilst I ask no thanks for doing so, I certainly did not
expect to be called on to pay for the exercise of that privilege.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
May 16, 1879. —Sir—Before returning to Fiji, I am desirous of calling
the attention of the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the following
considerations:—
There are two modes by which a large native population may be governed
—either by and through themselves, or by exclusively European agency.
The former is the cheaper and, if at all practicable, by far the more efficacious
system, and Her Majesty’s Government has, with great wisdom (if I may
venture to say so), determined on its adoption in the case of Fiji. But this
system of government, though easily worked, requires some external support
and protection against the strong solvents to which it is exposed, from the
action of those by whom it is misunderstood, or to whom it is distasteful. Of
this fact Her Majesty’s Government were, at the time of the foundation of the
Colony, well aware ; and on leaving England to assume the government of
the new dependency, I was instructed to pass an Ordinance, the draft of
which was prepared in the Colonial Office, enabling me to remove from any
district in Fiji persons whose continued presence there was likely to create
HI X
305
XXI
FIJI


disaffection, or be prejudicial to peace and good order. Lord Carnarvon also,
in his confidential despatch of the , authorised me to establish a censor-
ship of the Press, should I consider such a measure necessary.
The “Peace and Good Order Ordinance, 1875,” was passed in accordance
with my instructions, but I have never exercised the authority conferred by it,
nor have I ever availed myself of Lord Carnarvon’s permission to restrict
the freedom ordinarily enjoyed by the Press in other parts of Her Majesty’s
dominions. I mention these facts to show that on the one hand Her
Majesty’s Government was in 1875 quite alive to the danger I have indicated,
and that, on the other, I am by no means given to a hasty or inconsiderate
use of exceptional weapons entrusted to me.
Of the great danger caused by injudicious meddling, it is difficult for me
to speak too strongly. At the same time it is very difficult to convey to
persons at a distance, either an accurate or adequate idea of the nature or
extent of that danger.
A single instance may seem of very slight importance, and it is not easy
within reasonable limits to depict the effects of a constant and widespread
repetition of acts or speeches in themselves trivial.
In my despatch No. I gave a very serious illustration of the danger
arising, probably unintentionally, from injudicious and unauthorised mealing
with native affairs, and to my present despatch I append a single example of
each of the two chief forms which the mischievous interference to which I
refer takes.
In such cases, as at all events the first of these, I should, strictly speaking,
have been justified in removing the offender, under the Peace and Good Order
Ordinance, and should no doubt have had the unanimous support of the
Council in so doing. Not only, however, am I altogether averse to a step
which would necessarily excite much attention and provoke much hostile
criticism, but the punishment itself is too severe a one to justify a resort to
it, except in the last extremity. This is now, I think, generally realised, and
although I will not say it has therefore ceased to have any deterrent effect
whatever, yet it must be obvious that a punishment, which it is felt will not
be inflicted, is unlikely to be greatly feared, or exercise much practical
influence on men’s actions. What is wanted is not so much a punishment, as
a deterrent or preventive, and a penalty, to have this character, must be one,
the execution of which may be reasonably anticipated.
Three different modes of accomplishing this object have occurred to me.
The first is the adoption in Fiji of that part of the Indian Penal Code
which relates to the law of sedition. The circumstances of a dependency like
Fiji, where the native population outnumbers that of European descent in a
proportion of a hundred to one, and where the work of administration is in a
great degree carried on by native agency, resemble, in fact, far more closely
those of an Indian province than those of an ordinary English colony, and
Indian precedents might not unfrequently be followed, and Indian principles
and practices of government adopted with advantage. At the same time, I
clearly perceive that such an application of Indian precedents might in some
quarters be misapprehended, and although the offence of sedition would,
under such a law, be more easily proved than under the English statutes, yet
as all cases would have to be tried before a jury, they would probably
terminate, in most instances in an acquittal.
306
CHAP.
FIJI


Another, and perhaps more effectual, method of accomplishing the
desired object, would be the adoption, with some modifications, of the 26th
section of the “ Western Pacific Order in Council, 1877.” By that section the
High Commissioner is empowered to require British subjects resident on
islands in the Pacific to give security for good behaviour, if he has reason to
consider that their relations with the natives are likely to cause disturbance,
and to remove them from the Island in case of failure to do so. It might be
enacted in the case of Fiji that any person who had been warned a certain
number of times by the Governor in Council to desist from practices or
language likely to create discontent or disaffection among the natives, might
be required to enter into a bond to abstain from such proceedings under a
penalty to be recovered before the Supreme Court in the ordinary manner, on
proof of breach of the conditions of the bond.
This mode of proceeding would have the advantage of resembling a pro-
cedure already in force as regards intercourse with natives outside the Fiji
group, whilst it would have the double advantage of not being so ruinous to
the party concerned as “prohibition” under the Peace and Good Order
Ordinance, and of being inflicted by the ordinary Courts of the colony only,
instead of by the arbitrary fiat of the Governor in Council under the enact-
ment previously referred to.
Another very efficacious measure, though not equally so with either of
the preceding, would be one borrowed from the legislation of several
American states with regard to dealings with the Red Indians ; that, namely,
of compelling traders, in addition to their ordinary trading license, to take
out annually a special license to trade with natives, the renewal of which
might be refused for reasonable cause. But, although this might be an
useful adjunct to either of the previous measures, it could hardly form a
substitute for them, as it would not touch the perhaps most dangerous class
of mischief-makers—that is to say, those who are not traders at all.
I am perfectly satisfied that the native policy now pursued is, in all
essential points, very easy to work, and all but certain to be attended with
the most successful results, but to attain those results it must be left fairly
to its own operation. It will no more stand continued attempts to undermine
it in the minds of the natives than would the system of our Indian Govern-
ment. How dangerous such attempts are deemed there, may be judged by
the severity with which any meddling with native politics on the part of
unauthorised persons is rigidly repressed.
It is quite possible to combine the utmost latitude of expression and
action on the part of the white settlers, whether at their own meetings, or
in the newspapers, or in letters or publications, either in the Colony, or in
Australia, or in Europe, not only as to their own affairs, but as to native
affairs also, with an enforced reticence towards the natives themselves as to
native politics, and the relations between the natives and Government, and
it is this that I desire to see effected.
Of course the great majority of settlers are well disposed, and deprecate
any effort to create ill-feeling between the different races, but a vast amount
of mischief may be done by but a few, and I know that two classes of meddlers
are now busily engaged in exciting and disturbing the native mind. I
hardly know which of these classes is the worse. On the one hand, are those
who go about telling the natives that they are oppressed and enslaved, and,
307
XXI
FIJI


more or less openly, instigate them to rebel. On the other, are those who
boast to the natives of their own coming power, and that when I have left Fiji
the coloured population will be restricted to certain specified reserves of
land, and generally “put into their proper place,” and that they had there-
fore better do nothing now which might be displeasing to their future lords
and masters. In both cases the object is much the same.
If general discontent were excited, the Government might find it
impossible to carry out its system with the same ease as at present, and
might, they think, be driven, for the sake of revenue, to revert to the old
and iniquitous plan by which the mass of the male population was practically
compelled to enter into long engagements with the planter on the planter’s
own terms, in order to escape punishment; while, if a revolt actually did
ensue, the prospect that there would be plenty of prisoners, plenty of con-
fiscated land, and probably a complete overthrow of the native political and
social organisation, would cause such a contingency to be regarded with
complacency, if not with satisfaction.
The other class do not try to work on the feelings, but on the fears, of
the people. They represent their own power as in the ascendant, and threaten
with their future vengeance those who do not now comply with their demands.
In this mode they hope to obtain from chiefs and men of influence a large
amount of involuntary assistance.
lam not an alarmist, neither do I think I am prone to take exaggerated
views of questions coming before me. I dislike all sensational and highly-
coloured language, but I feel bound to say that I am convinced that the
alternative before us is to face now, as best we may, a moderate amount of
grumbling on the part of the white population, if such enactments as those
which I have suggested are sanctioned; or to face, at no distant date, either (and
most probably) a general rebellion of a people three times as numerous as the
Maoris, and who will have been driven to the step simply by the unchecked action
of agitators, or by groundless fears, mischievously and unnecessarily excited;
or, if this fortunately does not come to pass, at all events the creation of a state of
suspicious discontent which will render the presence of a large armed European
force requisite, at a cost ruinous to the Colony, destructive of its prosperity,
fatal to its future progress and development; and which, above all, is wholly
and altogether unnecessary, if but moderate precautions be now sanctioned.
Twenty years hence, and very possibly much sooner, such laws as those
proposed will probably be no longer requisite. It is only at the outset that
they are needed, and if it were thought expedient, their duration might be
limited in the Ordinance imposing them.
I do not ask for minute and detailed instructions on these points, nor do
I wish to remove from my own shoulders to those of the Secretary of State
any part of such responsibility as properly belongs to me with regard to
them, but I should much desire before leaving England to be favoured with
such a general expression of opinion as might serve to afford me some guide
in dealing with so delicate and difficult a question, and one which is sure to
be pressed urgently on my attention the moment I return to the Colony.
To the Colonial Office
April 2. Sir —I have the honour to return the opinion of the Law Officers on
the Fiji Ordinance No. 1 of 1878, enclosed in your letter of the 13th March last.
308
CHAP.
FIJI


The Law Officers continue to consider sections XII. and XIII. of that
Ordinance to be inequitable, as involving a confiscation of private property ;
and consequently advise that the Ordinance should not receive Her
Majesty’s confirmation.
I observe that the Law Officers’ report does not contain any legal or
technical objection to the provisions in question, but expresses doubts as to
their substantial equity.
This, it appears to me, is a question the resolution of which must depend
in a great measure, if not wholly, upon a consideration of circumstances but
very imperfectly known, if known at all, to the Law Officers. Whilst I
should bow at once to their decision on a point of law, I am not so sure that
their opinion, on what is primarily a point of policy, (though no doubt entitled
to great weight), carries with it equal authority, especially when they are
but partially acquainted with the circumstances of the case.
It is, of course, obvious that such provisions would be inapplicable in a
long-settled country and in an ordinary state of society. lamby no means
so sure that they are out of place in such a condition of things as now
obtains in Fiji, and as must obtain in every newly-acquired and newly-settled
territory.
Should clause XII., however, be disapproved, it will be unnecessary on
that account to disallow the Ordinance, for the operation of that section
expires, of itself, on the 10th October next, and all that would be needed
would be to maintain until then the prohibition already imposed on me, of
acting in the manner which its provisions would permit.
I confess, however, that I cannot see the force of the objection to this
clause. I have in previous letters given my reasons for believing it to be
called for in the circumstances of the Colony, and for holding that the adop-
tion of any other course will do substantial injustice to the community at
large, and will retard indefinitely almost every desirable public improvement.
I do not know that I have much to add to my previous arguments, and I
have certainly little leisure to do so. But I will venture to state what are
the two cases in which I should desire to exercise the powers given by this
clause, and in which I still hope I may receive permission to do so, before
the operation of the clause itself expires on the 10th October next.
One is that of a rocky point in Levuka. The value of the property of
which it forms a part has been raised fiftyfold by the action of the Govern-
ment during the last five years ; the owners themselves have done nothing to
improve it. The value of the property as a whole will be still more increased
by the taking possession and removal of this point by the Government. Its
removal is essential to the proper completion of the roadway along the beach at
Levuka, or the commencement of works of reclamation. Is it unreasonable
that the Government should acquire this point at its value on the day of
cession, rather than at the wholly exaggerated and fictitious value now given
to it by the results of surrounding operations, and which, in fact, in the
present circumstances of the colony, would prevent its acquisition for the
public at all ?
The other case is at Suva. Messrs. Mac Ewen and Company have very
handsomely placed their land at the disposal of the Government for a town
site. But a portion of land not belonging to them is also desired for town
purposes. It is wholly unimproved and waste, but of course its value has
309
XXI
FIJI


greatly increased since Messrs. Mac Ewen and Company gave up their land
for the site of the capital. Is it fair or just that Messrs. Mac Ewen, and other
taxpayers in the colony, should have their burdens increased, to pay the
increased value due wholly to the generosity of Messrs. Mac Ewen, and not to
any exertions of the proprietor ? That proprietor will himself be enormously
benefited, and the remainder of his estate greatly enhanced in value by a
portion of it being taken as part of the site of the capital, and he ought, I
think, to consider himself lucky in receiving, as a price, the value of the land
at the time of cession, instead of being called on to pay a price for the benefit
of having the capital partially located on his property. I confess I fail to
see reason or equity in paying him a price calculated on the prospective value
of the land acquired through the sacrifice made by the Messrs. Mac Ewen.
In these two cases, and in these two only, I hope Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment will give me leave to act before the powers conferred by this clause
expire by efflux of time.
Clause XIII. I still think to be the best and fairest mode of providing
against fictitious augmentations of value, but I am far from being wedded
to its form, and will endeavour to devise other means for effecting the
same object.
To the rest of the Ordinance, I understand no objection to be taken.
To the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
Sir—l have the honour to return with thanks the papers enclosed in your
letter of the Bth instant for my perusal.
I entirely agree with Sir E. Thornton in considering that the second
Article of the Treaty between Samoa and the United States by no means
transfers the sovereignty or possession of the harbour of Pango-Pango to the
United States.
There are one or two points in Mr. Goward’s report, in addition to’ those
marked in pencil, (I presume by Sir E. Thornton), to which I should wish
to call attention.
At p. 58 he admits, virtually, that there is now no regularly organised
Government in Samoa.
The allegation on p, 9 that Mr. Liardet took arms and supplies to the
Puletua in Tutuila is, lam confident, untrue. Foolish as were many of the
proceedings of that gentleman, he could not have gone so far as this, and it
would appear from his own despatch, No. 2 of 1878, printed at p. 90 of the
Confidential Papers relative to the affairs of the Navigators’ Islands, that he
went to Tutuila in a boat only, which renders the accusation absurd.
Information lately received, to which I am inclined to attach more weight
than that of Mr. Goward, would tend to show that he is wholly mistaken in
his estimate of the stability of the Taimua and Faipule, and unless they
receive material support from the arms of some foreign nation, their over-
throw, and the return to power of the King, Malietoa, and his friends, is
only a question of time, and within no distant period absolutely inevitable.
I cannot for a moment assent to Mr. Goward’s assumption on p. 10 that
“the present Government of Samoa, the Taimua and Faipule, is a de facto
and dejure Government.”
He is, I think, right in considering, that the Samoans require (p. 10)
310
CHAP.
FIJI


11 assistance in the management of their internal and external affairs, but
such assistance would be much more efficiently afforded by such an inter-
national Board as was suggested by me (see Confidential Papers, p. 98) than
by the interested dictation of some unscrupulous adventurer, or the uncon-
trolled domination of the Consul of some single foreign power.
The admission of Mr. Coward (p. 26) that the American interest is
“small,” and that there is but one United States trader, Mr. D. S. Parker,
is worthy of notice, as also that on p. 27, that “most of the imports are
from the British colonies, and Hamburg, and Liverpool, the greater part of
British manufacture.”
I am sorry to say that I entirely agree with Mr. Coward in his estimate
of the importance of Pango-Pango harbour, and I need not point out how
extremely damaging it must be to the progress of the British colony of Fiji,
now the entrepdt of that part of the Pacific, if the harbour of Pango-Pango,
in the possession of the United States, “necessarily becomes the controlling
commercial point” of the Pacific, as in such hands it inevitably will.
I trust the attention of the United States Government will be seriously
called to the wide difference between the actual terms of the second article
of the Treaty with Samoa and the interpretation now apparently placed on
it. I cannot doubt that such representations would be strenuously supported
by the German Government.
To the Marquess of Salisbury
My Lord—lt is my intention in another letter to report upon the contents
of the despatches from H.M. Acting Consul-General in the Western Pacific,
which have been referred to me ; but there is one matter, with the previous
history of which Mr. Maudslay was not wholly acquainted, and of which he has
therefore failed to appreciate the full bearing, that should at once be brought
under your Lordship’s notice.
When I was in Tonga last year, the King communicated frequently with
me on the subject of the appointment of a secretary to control the finances,
about the condition of which he expressed great anxiety, and requested me to
obtain for him the services of an English secretary. I promised him to make
such a selection as he desired, after the Parliament and Council of Tonga
should have agreed to it.
The Parliament of Tonga, on its meeting, fully approved of this intention,
and the Prime Minister, the King’s eldest son, and Mr. Maudslay, in the
month of July, entered into an agreement as to the salary to be given and the
person to be appointed, who has made all his arrangements to take up the
office. In the month of October, the Imperial German Consul, Mr. Weber,
visited Tonga, and, in ignorance, I presume, of the engagements already
entered into by the Tongan Government, suggested to the King to write to
the Emperor of Germany to select a person for the appointment of Secretary.
The King was himself aware that he was hardly justified in doing this, and
seems to have apologised to Mr. Maudslay, alleging that he was unwilling
to offend Mr. Weber and Mr. Baker, the missionary, who were both determined
that he should accept a German subject as his minister.
Were such an appointment to be made, after what has passed between the
King and myself, it would, according to Polynesian ideas, be a direct insult
to the Queen ; and place Her Majesty in a position of inferiority to the
311
XXI
FIJI


Emperor of Germany, not only in Tonga, but in tbe eyes of her own subjects
in Fiji, between which islands and Tonga there is constant and intimate
intercourse, both on account of their proximity, and from the intermarriages
between so many of the chief families in both groups.
I have on all occasions sought to act in strict concert with the Imperial
German Consul, and have never aimed at obtaining, either in Tonga or
Samoa, any exclusive advantages for England. Mr. Weber has, I believe,
fully acknowledged to his own Government my cordial co-operation with
him ; and it may, I hope, be supposed that, had he known the true state
of the case, he would never have suggested to the King of Tonga to offer
a serious affront to Her Majesty. I hope, therefore, that these facts will
be represented to the Government of Berlin, and that the Emperor will, in
consequence, think it only proper to decline to accede to the request which
the King of Tonga has been induced to make to His Imperial Majesty, for
the nomination of a German as Secretary of State to the King of Tonga.
I may add that, apart from the affront to our own Sovereign, the
appointment of a German as the King of Tonga’s Minister is open to
objection, on the ground that a principal creditor of the Tongan Govern-
ment is the firm of which the Imperial German Consul in Tonga and
Samoa is the salaried agent.
To the Colonial Office
May 27. —Sir—l had the honour duly to receive your letter of April 17,
enclosing copy of a despatch from the Acting Governor of Hew Zealand,
transmitting a memorandum of Sir George Grey on the subject of the ill-
treatment of Polynesian labourers upon a plantation in Samoa belonging
to a British subject.
The Acting Governor suggests that “immediate action is expedient
with a view to giving jurisdiction to the Courts of Hew Zealand over British
subjects committing grave offences in the Pacific Islands beyond the
jurisdiction of that Colony.”
Before making any other remarks I desire to call the especial attention
of the Secretary of State to the extraordinary fact that both the Acting
Governor and the Supreme Court of Hew Zealand appear wholly to ignore
the Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877. Mr. Justice Gillies is reported
on p. 4 of Sir George Grey’s Memorandum to have distinctly stated that
“it did not appear, nor had evidence been offered to show, that any Order
in Council had been made under the Act 38 & 39 Victoria, Cap. 51.”
Copies of the Order in Council were forwarded by me to the Governor of
Hew Zealand at the time of its promulgation in compliance with instructions
given by Lord Carnarvon.
The Amending Order in Council, which is now about to be issued, will
meet the case of ill-usage of labourers on a plantation owned by an English-
man ; but in such a case as that reported by Mr. Maudslay, although the
owner might in this manner be punished, the actual perpetrator of the
outrages, being an American, would escape with impunity, thus affording
an illustration of the point, which I have several times so strongly attempted
to press on the attention of the Secretary of State, as being that in which
in the case of Hew Guinea the Order in Council is likely to prove weak and
312
CHAP.
FIJI


fail in the working, viz. the ease with which a British subject, by employ-
ing a foreigner as his agent and instrument, may practically escape from its
control.
To the Colonial Office
June .—Sir—I have the honour to return the documents enclosed in your
letter of yesterday’s date, respecting a claim made by Mr. W. S. Hunt.
My first remark upon these papers must be to point out the grave irregularity
of form which has been committed, and which, if allowed unchecked, is
likely to produce very serious inconvenience.
Mr. Hunt is a resident in the Colony of Fiji, and by article of the
Colonial Regulations it is, for obvious reasons, directed that all official
letters from thence, to whatever department of Her Majesty’s Government
they may be addressed, should be sent through the Governor and accompanied
by his report. This formality ought to have been observed by Mr. Hunt;
and I would suggest that in accordance with the regulations, he should
be directed so to proceed, and that he and his representatives should be
informed that, till he does so, no answer can be returned to the application.
I would next observe, with regard to Messrs. Monckton, Long and Co. s
letter, and also that from the Treasury of May 17, that there is no such
person as Her Majesty's Consul at Fiji, which is a British colony.
The papers connected with the transaction referred to will be found in
the confidential papers relating to Samoa, printed in December 1878.
I am inclined to doubt the foundation of Mr. Hunt’s claim, on account
of detention of the Canterbury. It will be perceived from the papers
referred to that he was himself interested in the affair, and took an active
part in the arrest of Messrs. Martin, etc. I have also reason to disbelieve
his statement with respect to Bishop Elloy, who made his visitation on
board a French man-of-war, which had, I know, been ordered to give him
conveyance. It is therefore unlikely he should have engaged the
Canterbury.
From the Duke of Argyll
Argyll Lodge, Kensington, May 20, 1879. —My dear Arthur Gordon
—I am amazed and somewhat amused by the w T ay in which the word
“deserted” has been taken. Of course it has an ugly sound, and it was
meant to have it, inasmuch as it purports to express the High Tory or
Protectionist view of the conduct of the Peelites. I as one of them cant
have meant to use the word as my own expression for our conduct. I use
it as the view of our opponents and as explaining their rancour, at which
the whole passage is a sneer. —Yours very truly, Argyll.
May 26.—We have been in town a month and have gone out
a good deal, having a dinner or a party most nights. On the
12th we went to Windsor. Our visit there was pleasant, the
house not being so cold as usual, and the Queen in very good
spirits and good humour. The only other guests were Sidney
Herbert and Lady Beatrix and Theodore Martin. I sat be-
tween Princess Christian and Duchess of Atholl, and in the
313
XXI
FIJI


middle of dinner I heard the Queen say in her deepest voice
to Prince Leopold, “ He’s her great-uncle.” She saw me smile,
and at once called out, “ I’m right, Sir Arthur, am I not ? is it
not so ? ” “ Yes, Ma’am, perfectly right ” ; but it is odd that she
should know so much of the outs and ins of our genealogy.
After dinner she talked a good deal: spoke of Lady Durham,
mentioned Goodenough, asked numerous questions about Fiji,
complimented me, and said Hicks Beach spoke kindly of me.
Our rooms very comfortable in the tower next to the Round
Tower. Next day looked at the wonderful collection of Michael
Angelo’s and Raphael’s drawings in the Library. The Librarian,
Holmes,. is the son of my old friend at the British Museum.
On the sth made a speech at Exeter Hall for the Wesleyan
missionaries—an odd experience, but my dinner with MacArthur
was a still odder one. All the speakers and Wesleyan great
guns collected there, and Mrs. MacArthur in a velvet train (but
the manners of a housemaid), who talked of “lovely” preachers.
After dinner the Alderman proposed my health in a most
eulogistic speech. I dined another day with the other MacArthur.
Frank Russell’s engagement broken off on somewhat slight
grounds. Cosmo’s promotion cancelled on still slighter. Break-
fasted twice with Gladstone.
From James Hamilton
The Elms, Canterbury, Jime 4, 1879. —Dear Uncle Arthur —Hard
work and uncertainty of times kept me from telling you the day when I look
forward to seeing you at Canterbury. I now find that any day after the 12th
inst. will do. lam very anxious that you should hear Leah before you take
a glimpse at Rachael.
But there will be a crew of the King’s School, Canterbury, very proud to
sail you over to the island in their cutter. I very often think of that day, and
have planned it long before,
I hardly think that Leah’s voice will bid you farewell in the Abbey, but
you .may be sure that you will be remembered and thought of in many such
places where it shall sound.
Anyhow I shall be there, and would come any distance to be present, for
you carry with you much of what is my heart’s desire and all my heart s
grateful love.—Ever your affectionate nephew,
JAMES BAILLIE HAMILTON.
From James Hamilton
The Elms,{'Canterbury, June 13, 1879.—Dear Uncle Arthur—Sooner
than run the chance of losing you, I would prefer a mutilated day on Monday.
If you would let me have a post-card with your return train, I shall know how
to arrange the day so as to make the most of your visit.
On second thoughts I am afraid of Arthur Gordon’s coming with you,
314
CHAP.
FIJI


because where you and I would understand each other, he and I would not,
and I should be wasting energy that I would rather devote to yourself.—Ever
your affectionate nephew, James Baillik Hamilton.
P.S. —I am one of those who lose a great deal of vitality over an un-
sympathetic person.
From the Marquess of Salisbury
Hatfield House, June 13, 1879.—My dear Gordon —I
quite agree as to your principle that we should do all we can
to keep the Germans off Tonga. lam somewhat doubtful of
your mode of applying it. No power really attends to a warning
that they must keep their paws off any particular place. They
promise, but they don’t perform; and the fact of having exacted
the promise makes subsequent interference more difficult, as it
has the effect of openly doubting their sincerity. More effect
is produced by dealing with each pretension or encroachment
as it arises. Then it may be possible to get a subordinate
rebuked, and that gives you peace for some time, but the real
remedy is to increase your own power there. Political nature
abhors a vacuum. If we leave any room in the heart of Tonga
for a second affection, Messrs. Godeffroy will fill it. When do
you go ? Have I any chance of seeing you before ? Alas!
Cyprus was filled up a week ago.
From the Marquess oe Salisbury
20 Arlington Street, June 17, 1879.—My dear Gordon—
I have written to Marsh to ask that your powers may be ready
by Thursday night, and hope there will be no insuperable
official obstacle.
I saw Munster on Saturday, and I told him that Tonga was
so close to us that we could not bear any predominance there
of any other Power, and begged him not to tread on our toes.
He quite assented, professed the entire acquiescence of Germany
in this view, and said the Pacific was large enough for both of
us, which was true.
From the Earl of Aberdeen
In Train, near Folkestone, June 24, 1879. —My dear
Uncle Arthur—Thank you indeed for your letter, for your kind
words are a pleasure and comfort. It certainly was rather
trying to have so little farewell talk, and we could have
appreciated the quiet service on July 4th, but it seems right to
leave London now. Folkestone reminds me of the occasion
when I parted from you.
315
XXI
FIJI


Memorandum sent by Wesleyan Missionary Society, London, to
the Rev. B. Chapman
May 27, 1879. —We wish in confidence to express to yon our feelings on a
subject which we know has been under your notice. The transactions referred
to, lying as they do beyond the bounds of our jurisdiction, you will not on the
one hand suspect us of any desire to dictate, while we on the other hand will
not suspect you of any unwillingness to receive a fraternal statement of our
views. You will feel quite as much as we do that anything which would in the
public estimation affect the reputation of our missions in the South Seas would
directly affect not only the influence of the parent Society, but also its resources.
Sir Arthur Gordon, with an exercise of confidence of which the oldest of us
does not remember on the part of a Colonial Governor a second instance, has
given us the opportunity of perusing a mass of papers touching the proceed-
ings of Mr. Baker in the Friendly Isles. These papers consist of letters,
despatches, and memoranda from various persons, official and unofficial, and
were put before us not in extracts, but in their original form.
The first feeling with which, on reading these papers, we are impressed is
that in the hands of a Governor who had wished to do an injury to our
missions they might have been made the means of dealing us a serious blow.
Had the sight of them afforded to us been given to some editors, enough
might have been said in a few pages to call for extended defences, and im-
pressions would have been made on many whom no defence would ever reach,
and even if ultimately every allegation was disproved, the cause of missions
would have suffered in the meantime.
Of course we shall not enter into details, more particularly as the packet
contains letters from you to Sir A, Gordon, and from Sir Arthur to you,
which show that if you have not seen the documents in detail, you are in
possession of the main features of the case. We ought to add that both the
tone and substance of your letters to Sir Arthur fairly represent those which
in your position we should have wished to adopt.
We are quite clear that with such allegations before him, backed by
affidavits, official reports, and formal statements, Sir Arthur could not well
avoid in his official capacity instituting an inquiry into the proceedings of
any British subject holding a position so public as that of Mr. Baker in
Tonga. In the case of any one but a Wesleyan missionary we should doubt-
less say that it was Sir Arthur’s duty to investigate, and therefore, when the
case becomes our own, we are compelled to recognise the rule which we would
have applied to others.
The antecedent improbability of some of the allegations is so great that
statements which appeared in the German press seemed to us worth no
attention; but now clear details, supported by serious show of evidence,
compel us to feel that charges at which we should only have smiled are no
longer for us, as a Society, matters to smile at. It is, for instance, alleged
that Mr. Baker and the agent of a German firm went, the first, as he expresses
it, “ ahead,” lending sums of money, and the second following and taking
up the same sums of money as missionary contributions, the people being
held in debt to the lender, and even pledging their future crops for the
repayment. Apart from the moral aspects of such a transaction, its financial
folly as tending to ruin the people while it debased them would have made
316
CHAP.
FIJI


us treat any ordinary statement in a newspaper or book as groundless. But
formal proofs are produced one after another, which may all admit of an
answer, but which no official man would be justified in treating with neglect.
It is also alleged that Mr. Baker was the principal managing partner or
director of a bank ; that he secretly acts as the agent of a German firm ; that
he conducts a very large part of the affairs of the Government of Tonga ; and,
moreover, that he thwarts British interests, and has lent his influence to secure
the appointment as secretary to the Government of some one to be nominated
by the Emperor of Germany.
It is further alleged, with show of proof, that when an inquiry instituted in
common by the King and the British Consul took place, such officers of our
churches as gave evidence before the Commission were afterwards put by Mr.
Baker under censure. Other grave matters are alleged, but enough has been
mentioned to account for our opinion, already stated, that a strong case for
investigation on the part of Sir A, Gordon has been made out.
Under these circumstances we cannot but feel that the usefulness of Mr.
Baker as chairman of the Tonga District is at an end. A civil investigation
even with the best issue would disturb the interests of our missions all over
the world, and with any issue but the best would seriously wound those
interests. The prompt removal of Mr. Baker seems to us desirable, equally
for local and general reasons. Such prompt removal might avert a civil
inquiry, but it would not supersede the necessity of a thorough Methodist
investigation. That is called for in the interests of Mr. Baker’s reputation,
formally impugned, in the interests of the whole body of our missionaries,
who are in danger of having their good name compromised, or in the interests
of our society, the standing and resources of which might be seriously affected.
For “those who are without” it is manifest that the award of a district
meeting constituted as is that of Tonga will carry little moral weight. But
if in a clearly independent court, and after full investigation of evidence on
both sides, the charges against Mr. Baker were disproved, then would he,
you, and we have cause to rejoice together. But if even a small portion of
them was proved, neither you nor we could escape censure from both the
Church and the world unless the discipline of our society was fully vindicated.
You will, we again say, acquit us of any wish to dictate, and will
sympathise with our anxiety, not only for the work of your Conference, but for
our own wide-spread missions. It is hard to keep them up on the present
scale, and a blight on the fair fame of our South Sea missions might readily
cost us more than all we now from year to year contribute to help you over
the present necessities.
To Lord Selborne
48 Upper Grosvenor Street, May 30, 1879. —My dear Selborne—The
Law Officers admit the competence of the Fiji Legislature to pass the proposed
Ordinance, but object on grounds of policy, of which I cannot say I think
them as good judges as they would be if more perfectly acquainted with the
circumstances of the case.
My hurried reply to the objections of the Law Officers I enclose. lam
very anxious to see you, and know your opinion, before I see Herbert
to-morrow at 2.30. Could I call on you early, or could you breakfast
with us at 9 or 9.30 I—Yours affectionately, A. H. G.
317
XXI
FIJI


It is known at the Colonial Office that we are in communication on
these matters, and I have permission to send you any papers on the subject
confidentially.
The result looked on as “startling” by the Law Officers was distinctly
contemplated. It was intended that Native Deeds prior to 1874 with
regard to land should, after the close of the land claims, be deemed
valueless, except in so far as allowed by the Land Court. Deeds between
Europeans may be presumed to have been entered into with some degree
of intelligence. A native “mortgage” must have been entered into under
conditions not contemplated by English Law.
The interests of the Crown are not, as supposed by the Law Officers,
“clearly antagonistic” to claimants, nor does property disallowed vest in the
Crown, but in the native counter claimants (who seem so strangely overlooked
by all parties), and as between them and whites, the tribunal proposed is not
only the fairest one, but is the only one in which the natives have confidence,
and having existed some years, could not now be changed without the gravest
results.
A. H. G.
To Lord Selborne
48 Upper Grosvenor Street, Saturday Evening.—My dear Selborne—
On the whole I think it best to send back the “ opinion ” —the draft Ordinance
—and some explanatory papers.
The deed of Cession you have, but I enclose Lord Carnarvon’s instructions.
The page is turned down. I also enclose letters from Sir H. Robinson and
Sir G. Innes, who drew the deed of cession, showing their intention. I add
the first rough notes for the composition of my reply.
I saw Herbert and Bramston to-day. They were a little frightened by the
Law Officers, but very anxious to maintain the Ordinance. We agree to
throw over § 11 as unnecessary, and to obviate the objection taken with
regard to the Crown disallowing claims to its own advantage, by providing
that where the result of disallowance would be to place lands in the hands of
the Crown, a report should be called for from the Chief-Justice and the Legal
Commissioner of Lands sent from home, and that the Governor in Council
should, in such cases, be bound to decide in accordance with such report.
Rachael and I went to Ascot to-day, and between our expedition in the
morning, my interview at the Colonial Office on my return, and an evening
visit to Waterfield, who has been very dangerously ill, I have had no time
till now to write to you. —Yours affectionately,
A. H. G.
P.S. —On putting together the papers to send you, I find, to my no small
disgust, that I have accidentally left my copy of the Opinion with Bramston,
and brought away his copy of the Ordinance, of which I now have two, and
none of the Opinion. Till I get it from him, of course you can do nothing.
To the Colonial Office
48 Upper Grosvenor Street, June 5, 1879. Sir—l have had the
honour to receive your letter of the 30th ultimo, giving cover to an Opinion
of the Law Officers of the Crown on the subject of the proposed Ordinance,
with respect to the final settlement of the claims to land in Fiji.
318
CHAP.
FIJI


That Opinion deals with four classes of questions—Questions of Law',
Questions of Interpretation, Questions of Fact, and Questions of Policy.
1. Asa question of Law, the Legislature of Fiji is pronounced by the Law
Officers to be competent to pass such an Ordinance as that proposed, and
they hold that its provisions would, in the main, have the effect contemplated
by its framers.
It is, therefore, unnecessary further to discuss that point.
2. On the question of the interpretation of the Deed of Cession, I perceive
that the Law Officers do not themselves express an opinion, but urge, (appar-
ently as a question of policy), that the arrangement proposed is open to
objection as being such as might be contended to be inconsistent with the
pledges made by the Crown in the Deed of Cession.
I cannot myself think the possibility that such an interpretation may be
placed by some parties upon the Deed of Cession is one entitled to much
consideration.
I have already showm that even if it be admitted that the wording of the
4th Clause is less clear than it might be, the intention of those who framed,
of those who executed, and of those who accepted it, is perfectly clear. It
was understood by Lord Carnarvon and Her Majesty’s Government in the
sense of that intention, and has been interpreted in the same manner by all
(or almost all) parties interested in its provisions up to the present time.
Any apparent ambiguity in the deed is moreover, as it appears to me,
removed, if the fourth article be read in conjunction with the seventh.
On this point, I am permitted to enclose the opinion of Lord Selborne,
from which it will be perceived that he considers there to be no possible
ground for contending that such an Ordinance as the Draft Bill w'ould be
inconsistent with any engagement, expressed or implied, contained in the
Deed of Cession.
No opinion expressed by the Law Officers is here disputed, as they by no
means themselves assert that the Ordinance is at variance with the provisions
of the Deed of Cession, but only suggest that such a contention may possibly
be raised.
3. On questions of fact, the opinion of the Law Officers, though of course
entitled to great weight, does not possess altogether the same value which
would attach to it were they more perfectly informed of the circumstances of
the case, which have necessarily come under their cognisance in a somewhat
imperfect form, so much only of the facts having been laid before them as
was necessary to enable them to give an opinion upon a particular point: that,
namely, of the competence of the Fiji Legislature to pass such an Ordinance,
and the suitability of its provisions to effect the objects contemplated. It is not
the fact that in any but a very few cases, ‘ ‘ Land which is not shown by the
claimants to have become their bona fide property vests in the Crown,” and,
consequently, the conclusion that, “the interests of the Crown and of the
claimants of land are clearly antagonistic,” is erroneous.
4. Although in the consideration of questions of policy, the Law Officers
to some extent labour under the same disadvantage of but imperfect acquaint-
ance with the history of the case, the views taken by them must always be
entitled to serious consideration and deference, and I will proceed now to
notice the objections raised by them on this ground to the Ordinance, or
rather to particular portions of it.
319
XXI
FIJI


Clause 11 is objected to for reasons which are stated at some length by
the Law Officers, and which I need not now recapitulate. I do not think
the Clause indefensible, but it is not essential to the Ordinance, and in
deference to the objections expressed, I would recommend its omission.
The Law Officers also think that claimants to land may reasonably object
to the constitution of the proposed tribunal which is ultimately to adjudicate
upon their claims.
This opinion is, as I have already pointed out, partly founded on a
misapprehension, the cases in which the Crown will derive, from the dis-
allowance of a claim, any absolute right over the land so disallowed being
extremely few.
In at least ninety-nine cases out of an hundred the contention is between
two or more white claimants to portions of the same piece of land, (as shown
in the tracing attached to this letter), or between a white claimant and the
original native proprietors.
As a tribunal of arbitration between conflicting claims, I do not believe it
would be possible to form in the Colony one at all comparable to that which
has been in operation during the last four years, and the formal recognition
of which is contemplated by the Bill.
On this point also, I would refer to Lord Selborne’s Memorandum, in
which the arguments in favour of such a tribunal are stated with great force.
The preliminary inquiries are conducted by a Commission, which pursues
its investigations on the ground itself; the Report of that Commission is
then considered in turn by every member of the Executive Council. Each
member records his opinion in a Minute, and the different position and views
of these gentlemen ensures the consideration of every case from very various
points of view, and a most careful discussion and sifting of all pretensions,
before a decision is finally taken by the Governor in Council.
But even were the tribunal a less suitable one than it appears to me to be,
and even if it were conceded, —which I am by no means prepared to concede, —
that a different mode of procedure would, in the first instance, have been
preferable, it would be quite another matter now to upset an authority which
has practically exercised an unquestioned jurisdiction for the last four years,
and which could not now be set aside without creating an amount of confu-
sion, and producing an amount of distrust and dissatisfaction, which must
most seriously affect the present prosperity and future fortunes of the Colony.
But whilst I believe the tribunal created in accordance with Lord
Carnarvon’s instructions of the 4th March 1874 to be, on the whole, and in
most cases, a more satisfactory one than any by which it could be replaced, I
am unable to deny that, in some few cases, the Crown might be said to benefit
by the disallowance of claims put forward.
I think, however, that the objections of the Law Officers on this score
would be completely obviated if it were provided that in all cases where a
disallowance of the claim preferred would place the land to which it relates
at the absolute disposal of the Crown, a Report on the case shall be called
for from the Chief-Justice, the legal member of the Lands Commission (now
about to.be sent from this country), and, if possible, one other equally inde-
pendent and impartial person ; and that the decision of the Governor in
Council shall, in these cases, be given in strict accordance with the terms of
such Report,
320
CHAP.
FIJI


By this means, the jurisdiction of the Governor in Council in land matters
(any interference with which would produce the most serious disturbance in
the native mind) would nominally be maintained, whilst any allegation that
the Crown acted as a judge in its own case would become impossible.
I may add, what perhaps it may be right to mention, —although, as being a
matter personal to myself, it may be thought of no great moment, —that
having, in conformity with Lord Carnarvon’s instructions long ago, and on
several different occasions, announced the course which Her Majesty’s
Government intended to pursue in this matter, I have since repeatedly
pledged my own faith, and given the strongest assurances, in the Queen’s
name, to the native population, that they need fear no change in the composi-
tion of a tribunal in which —suspicious and apprehensive as they are—they
on the whole have confidence. These pledges would necessarily be a source
of very grave embarrassment to me were a different line of action now resolved
on.—l have, etc.
Lord Selborne's Memorandum on Fiji Land Claims
June 4, 1879. —So far from thinking that there are any reasonable grounds
on which it can be contended that the arrangement proposed to be made by
the “Draft Bill” is inconsistent with the pledges made expressly, or by
implication, by the Crown in the Deed of Cession, it seems to me that such
an arrangement is perfectly consistent with those pledges, and is at least as
natural and reasonable a mode of giving effect to them as any other which
could be suggested.
The Deed of Cession vests in the Crown “ full sovereignty and dominion.”
In the 7th clause it promises that “ all claims of titles to land, by whom-
soever preferred (and also all claims to pensions and allowances on the part
of the native King and other High Chiefs, etc.), shall in due course be fully
investigated and equitably adjusted,” By the 4th clause it excludes from
the absolute proprietorship of the Crown two classes of lands, viz. (1) such
as may be shovm to have been, before the Cession, “alienated so as to have
become bona fide the property of Europeans or other foreigners ” ; and (2)
such as were then “in the actual use or occupation of some chief or tribe, etc.”
It is manifest, in the first place, that there is no pledge here, express
or implied, as to the mode in which claims are to be investigated and adjusted,
or as to the constitution of any authority by which this is to be done. In-
vestigation necessarily implies the power of allowance or disallowance. “In
due course ” cannot possibly mean, with regard either to native titles by use
and occupation, or to any claims of the native King or Chief to pensions or
allowances, that these should be investigated through the medium of such
Courts of Law as the Queen might afterwards establish for the ordinary
administration of Justice in the Island, rather than by the Executive
Government aided by a Special Commission. The words which relate to
these several descriptions of native rights and claims are the same with
those which apply to the claims of Europeans and foreigners. No distinction
is made between them. Even as to the claims of Europeans and other
foreigners, founded upon transactions with natives before the Cession, the
question whether those transactions had resulted in a bond fide acquisition
of property in particular parcels of land must depend, on the one hand (as
much as all native rights not so alienated), upon antecedent native titles,
111 Y
3 21
XXI
FIJI


laws, and customs, and on the other hand, not upon the meaning which
English law might attach to any form of Conveyance or Agreement which
may have been employed, but on the true mutual understanding, and sub-
stantial justice and good faith, of the real transaction between the native and
other parties, at a time when English law had no force in the islands. For
the determination of such questions as these, a special knowledge of English
law (even if it were possible, in so young a colony, always to secure Judges
of the highest ability and attainment) affords no superior qualifications ; any
strong prepossession in favour of technical rules of law, or technical modes of
procedure, would be a disqualification rather than otherwise. The investiga-
tion and adjustment contemplated embraces a much wider field, and requires
a much broader equity and a more independent judgment, than is appropriate
to the ordinary functions of any Court of Law.
This being so, I should have thought it impossible to deny that any mode
of investigation which the Crown, acting in good faith, thinks most likely
to result in a satisfactory and complete adjustment of all conflicting land
claims in the Colony, founded on titles existing, or alleged to have been
acquired, before the Cession, is as much within its moral as within its legal
competency. It is left entirely to the Crown to constitute, for this purpose,
any tribunal or commission which it may think fit, and none could exist,
or have any authority in the matter, except such as the Crown might con-
stitute.
Any tribunal or commission armed by law with authority to make the
promised adjustment, and not liable to have its decisions arbitrarily over-
ruled, is “an independent tribunal” in the only sense in which it can be
contended to be implied in these pledges of the Crown that the investigation
and adjustment shall be made by a tribunal having that quality.
The Governor in Council, aided by the inquiries and reports of the special
Commission, will be such a tribunal. With great submission to those who
seem to think otherwise, I cannot perceive any ground whatever on which
either natives or British subjects, or subjects of friendly civilised States
being claimants to land, could reasonably object to such a tribunal, because
it is so composed as to vest the final authority in the representative of the
Crown and the other members of the Executive Government of the Colony.
On the contrary, I should myself think that no other kind of tribunal could
be more safely relied upon to do full and impartial justice in such a matter
between natives and Europeans, etc., which is at least as important a con-
sideration as any other ; and if any such objection could be reasonably made
by English or other colonists, it would appear to me to be at least as reason-
able that the native population should be heard to claim a representation on
the tribunal sufficient fairly to balance its English or European elements.
For if (under the 4th clause of the Deed of Cession) the interests of the
Crown are “clearly antagonistic” to those of the claimants of land, so are
those of claimants —who say that native titles were alienated in their favour
before the Cession-antagonistic to the rights claimed by natives who may
deny the validity or good faith of such alienations. And if the objection
were sound as against any adjudication on titles claimed by Europeans, by
the High Officers of the Crown composing the Executive Government, among
whom are the Chief-Justice and the Attorney-General of the Colony, a fortiori
it would be sound as against any similar mode of investigating and adjusting
322
CHAP.
TIJI


native claims under the 4th and 7th clauses of the deed, when the only
question would be as between natives and the Crown. I should myself
think it quite essential to the practical government of the Colony, and to
the performance, in real good faith, of the promises made by the Deed of
Cession, that the principle of these supposed objections should not be ad-
mitted. The Crown is the fountain of Justice, and must be trusted to do it.
The idea that just claims may be unfairly set aside, or that the Governor
individually would ever overrule the opinion of the majority of his Council
in order to establish an absolute proprietary right in the Crown, is opposed
to the true tenor and spirit of the Deed of Cession, under which it is the
Crown to which it is to “be shown” that there are well-founded (European
or native) claims to property in land, as against which it is not to assert an
absolute proprietary right. And it is the Crown which is to appoint and
settle the course in which “all claims to land, by whomsoever preferred,”
are to be investigated and adjusted.
Of course, if a practically better mode of investigation could be devised,
which would work equally well, or better, for all the purposes of a complete
and final adjustment of these land claims, that would have been a very good
reason for adopting it; and if, consistently with the general policy and objects
of the proposed Bill, any special provision may be made for particular cases
in which the real competition is between English or other non-native
claimants and the Crown, there can be no reason why such provisions should
not be adopted. But I am myself entirely convinced that the question is
altogether a practical one, and that the Deed of Cession affords no real ground
for any such theoretical objection as that suggested.
Ido not suppose that any one would suggest an objection to the principle
of those provisions in the “Draft Bill” which require that, when a claim
has been finally disallowed, no Court of Justice shall go behind, or call in
question, that disallowance ; and that, when it has been finally allowed, the
claimant shall take out a Crown grant, to be thenceforth recognised in all
Courts and for all purposes as the sole root of title to the land.
The right to make such provisions is clearly an incident of the Queen’s
full “sovereignty and dominion”; it being only the absolute proprietary
right over lands to which private or tribal titles could be shown, which is
renounced by the 4th and 7th clauses of the Deed of Cession. Such pro-
visions are proper and even reasonably necessary to make the “adjustment”
promised by the 7th clause complete and final, and to give definite legal
form, according to the English system of law now introduced into the islands,
to rights established under it.
The opinions above expressed are those which I should have formed on
the Deed of Cession, standing alone. But the view which I take of the
nature of the pledges given by the Crown in that deed, and of the proper
mode of acting upon them, seems to me to be in entire accordance with the
understanding and intention of the parties to the deed itself, as publicly
declared, both at home and in the Colony, and ever since consistently acted
upon,—l refer particularly to the despatches of Sir Hercules Robinson, of the
3rd October 1874 (par. 15), and 20th October 1874 (pars. 15 and 16), presented
to Parliament on the 6th February 1875 ;to the despatch of Lord Carnarvon
of the 4th March 1875 (pars. 12 to 16, both inclusive), presented to Parliament
on the 6th August 1875 ; to Sir Arthur Gordon’s public announcement in the
323
XXI
FIJI


Colony, when he first assumed the Government (Inclosure No. 2in his
despatch of 9th September 1875, presented to Parliament on the Bth August
1876) ; and to the proceedings of the Land Claims Commission in the Colony
down to the present time.
I do not hesitate to say that, in my view, any substantial deviation from
this course, and from this understanding, would have a much, more serious
tendency to raise questions as to the good faith of the Colonial Government
than any provisions in the proposed draft Bill, which appears to me to be
open to no such objection.
SELBORNE,
To the Colonial Office
June 1879.—Sir—I have the honour to return the letter from the Foreign
Office relating to the land claims of foreigners in Fiji, enclosed in your
letter of the 30th ult.
The German Ambassador is misinformed if he supposes no progress to
have been made in the settlement of land claims since the date of cession.
Between eight and nine hundred claims had been investigated and allowed,
previous to my departure from Fiji; and among that number were many
claims preferred by German subjects, especially by the house of Hennings,
the representatives of the great firm of the Godeffroys of Hamburg.
During the past year, the progress of the investigation has slackened,
partly in consequence of my absence, partly from the want of sufficient
surveyors, and partly because it was known that a scheme making provision
for the re-hearing of disallowed claims was under the consideration of Her
Majesty’s Government, the decision of which it was not unnaturally desired
in the first instance to ascertain.
It is quite natural that those whose claims have not yet been investigated,
should be impatient at the apparent delay, but in point of fact the examina-
tion, in little more than two years (between January 1876 and June 1878), of
over eight hundred claims, many of which were very difficult, complicated,
and open to dispute, is by no means an inconsiderable piece of work, and one
which, had it been performed more rapidly, would inevitably have laid the
ground for future misunderstanding and litigation.
But it is clearly as much the interest of the Government as of the
claimants to bring all these questions to a speedy issue, and the German
Ambassador may rely on my constant and earnest efforts to promote the
speedy settlement of the claims in question.
From the Rev. Benjamin Chapman
227 Pitt Street, Sydney, April 11, 1879. —Your Excellency—Your
letter of 21st January reached me three days ago, with enclosure. It has
given me great pleasure to learn your continued good-will toward our Fiji
Mission, and to be informed of the views you entertain towards Mr. Brown.
So far as I am at present informed, no action has yet been taken by his
Honour, the acting Commissioner, in the Hew Britain matter. I hope Mr.
Brown’s suspense will soon be ended.
As I have already informed your Excellency of the result of the District
Meeting inquiry, I desire to offer an observation or two which was called for
by some remarks in your letter just to hand. First , as to the Chairmanship
324
CHAP.
FIJI


of the meeting. It is true that on a former occasion Mr. Baker occupied the
chair, and refused to leave it when his own conduct was under discussion ; but
I may inform your Excellency, that when the proceedings of that meeting
came under review in Sydney, this irregularity was at once detected, and the
dissatisfaction of the Committee was expressed thus :
1. That the Chairman retained his seat and presided over the Meeting,
when charges against himself were under investigation, contrary to the rule
of the Conference.
2. That the District Meeting failed in the discharge of its duty by not
choosing a chairman to preside while the charges brought forward against
Mr. Baker were under discussion.
Mr. Baker had these resolutions forwarded to him, and was not likely to
repeat the offence. Accordingly, at the late inquiry, he vacated the chair,
which was taken by Mr. Watkin, who conducted the inquiry. I may further
say that Mr. Watkin and Mr. Minns only had votes (Mr. B. could not vote
in his own case), hence the two resolutions which passed were passed by the
two gentlemen referred to. One acquitted Mr. B. and the other expressed
sympathy with him. I am particular in naming this, because those of us who
know Mr. Watkin and Mr. Minns know well that there have been proceedings of
Mr. Baker in the past concerning which they have expressed their disapproval.
I wish also to remind your Excellency that the allegation which the District
Meeting had to investigate, and which was referred to by me in my letter to
you as a new phase in Mr. Baker’s conduct, was this : —That he had sold to the
German firm the promises of the natives of copra at the missionary meetings,
and that natives had been sold off by authority of the Courts, to pay off these
debts.
The meeting was not called upon by me to investigate the mode in which
the collections had been made. Upon the latter subject, Mr. Baker had been
questioned again and again by the Conference, and he bad learned its views
on the subject, as Mr. Hurst and I informed your Excellency at Sydney.
On examining the affidavits, they, I find, refer to acts alleged to be done
in 1874, 1875, and 1876. All previous to Conference’s inquiry. We know of
none alleged to have taken place since.
As to the affidavits, your Excellency will, lam sure, excuse me when I
say that their value will be determined mainly by our estimate of the
character of the persons making them. I cannot judge of the persons mak-
ing these affidavits, as I have not their names. Nor do I wish to have them.
If I had, perhaps I should have no knowledge of any of them, but Mr.
Watkin seems to have a knowledge of some who are said to have made
affidavits on the subject, whether any of those forwarded to me I know not,
and he has expressed himself very strongly to me about them.
In conclusion, 1 wish to say that there are some statements or remarks in
the extract which your Excellency has sent to me, on which, if permitted, I
would on a future occasion offer some observations.
Sincerely thanking your Excellency for your very courteous, frank, and
kind communications, I have the honour to be, your Excellency’s obedient
servant,
BENJAMIN CHAPMAN.
P.S. —I think I informed your Excellency in my last that Mr. Baker is
coming away, he having sought and obtained permission of the Conference
to do so.
B. C.
325
XXI
FIJI


To the Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
Sir—l have the honour to return the papers relating to the issue of an
exequatur to Mr. Sahl as Tongan Consul at Sydney, enclosed in your letter
of this day’s date.
The grant of an exequatur to Mr. Sahl would not be at the present
moment, in my opinion, at all advisable. The more proper time for the con-
sideration of this request would be after the conclusion of the Treaty which
is to replace the temporary agreement entered into between the Government
of Tonga and Mr. Maudslay. There are, moreover, personal reasons which
would make me hesitate to admit, at any time, the propriety of the selection
of Mr, Sahl for the post in question.
Count Munster might, I think, be informed that I am instructed to visit
Tonga shortly after my return to the Pacific, and that when our relations with
the Government of that group have been placed upon a settled basis, the request
made by the King of Tonga will be fully considered by H.M. Government
and the King duly informed of the result.
I would venture to suggest that it is not desirable that the King of Tonga
should be led to consider the German Government as his proper medium of
communication with that of Her Majesty. —I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
June 4,1879. —5 i have the honour to return the letter from the
Foreign Office, relating to the appointment of Mr. Lasar as U.S. Consular
Agent at Lauthala, enclosed in your letter of this day’s date.
The intimation contained in the letter from the Foreign Office affords me
great surprise, and unless, (which is possible), Lauthala is a mistake for Levuka ,
I should consider such an appointment not only unnecessary, but decidedly
objectionable. Lauthala is a small island about nine miles east of the island
of Taviuni, and one mile from the island of Qamea. It is not a port of
entry, has not any good harbour, and, so far as I am aware, has not at
present any white inhabitants. There is another still smaller island, called
Lauthala, at the mouth of the Rewa river, which is, I believe, altogether
uninhabited. The appointment of a Commercial Agent at Suva or Loma
Loma might possibly be of some utility, if it is thought that one at Levuka
is not sufficient to attend to the wants and interests of American subjects,
but at either Lauthala a U.S. Commercial Agent cannot be of the slightest
use to his fellow-countrymen, whilst the residence in such an island of a
single white man possessing the prestige and authority derived from the
possession of an official title and a consular flag, might be attended with
many inconveniences.—l have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
June 1879.—Sir—I have had the honour to receive your letter of the 3rd
inst., on the subject of the methods best adapted to check the dissemination
of discontent and disaffection among the native population of Fiji.
I entirely share the view of the Secretary of State that, “ It would be
best, if possible, to avoid fresh legislation on such a subject,” and I can
326
CHAP.
FIJI


heartily assure him that no effort shall be wanting on my part to obviate the
necessity for a recourse to such steps.
But, I fear, the difficulties involved in bringing the Peace and Good Order
Ordinance into effective operation are greater than may at first sight appear ;
and though I will endeavour to apply its provisions to effect the object con-
templated, I am not, I own, sanguine of success.
I have already indicated one of the causes which have tended to render
the Peace and Good Order Ordinance inoperative, viz. the great severity of the
penalty it imposes ; but there are other reasons which have tended to make me
reluctant to enforce it. One of these is the wording of the Ordinance, which,
if strictly construed (as, being highly penal, it must be), might be held not
to apply to seditious speeches, unless proof were adduced that some overt act,
dangerous to peace and good order, had actually resulted from them. The other
is even more serious, and it is this: Under the Peace and Good Order Ordinance,
a heavy penalty can be inflicted by the of the Governor in Council.
I need not say that the exercise of such a power will, naturally and rightly, be
very jealously watched ; and that the amount of sympathy excited, both in
the Australian Colonies and at home, for any one “prohibited under the
Ordinance, would be far greater than in the case of a man sentenced by the
Supreme Court, in the manner I suggested, to the forfeiture of a bond, the
conditions of which had been shown to the satisfaction of the Judge to have
been broken. The danger of a clamour being raised, fatal to the continued
existence of any precautionary measures of the character of this Ordinance,
would also be proportionately greater.
Nevertheless, the expediency of abstaining from fresh legislation on the
subject is so manifest to me that I would not propose to proceed to that
extremity unless formally assured in writing by the Chief-Justice and by the
Executive Council, that the existing Ordinance does not adequately provide
for the counteraction of a great and serious danger.
Should I receive such assurances, and be myself, on full consideration, of
opinion that they are well-founded, I should desire to know in what direction
Her Majesty’s Government think that any such fresh legislation could most
prudently be taken.
It is possible that if the Peace and Good Order Ordinance were at the
same time repealed, a new and more workable measure, such as was suggested
in my former letter, might wear the appearance of a relaxation of severe
legislation, rather than an imposition of fresh restraints. —I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
June 6, 1879. —Sir—I have the honour to return the Treasury letter of
the 23rd ultimo, enclosed in your letter of yesterday’s date.
In doing so, I have the honour to observe that, as regards the first point
dealt with, I entirely concur in the suggestion made by the Lords Commis-
sioners of the Treasury ; that, as regards the second point, I have nothing
to add to what I have already written ; that, on the third point, I
completely share the views expressed by the Treasury ; and that, on the
fourth point, it will be necessary for me to explain myself a little more fully,
as some misapprehension appears to exist respecting it.
The capacity of the Bank to hold land, (whether at Yiria or elsewhere), is
327
XXI
FIJI


unquestionably doubtful, and the general question whether the Bank can or
cannot, under its Act of Incorporation, possess and deal in land, is one no
doubt worthy of settlement. But this question will not, I hope, be compli-
cated by any special reference to the Yiria lands.
Even if the Bank can hold land, its claim to that at Yiria has already
been disallowed, and cannot, I think, now well be revived.
It will be found on reference to the despatches addressed to me by the
Secretary of State, that I was instructed that Her Majesty’s Government
would not, even as a matter of grace and favour, admit the claim of the Bank
to any land which it had not actually occupied, and this decision is fatal to
the claim to the Yiria lands, which have never for a moment been in the
occupation or possession of the Bank. When the claim came in due course
before the Lands Commission, its disallowance was on this ground recom-
mended, and it was accordingly so disallowed by the Governor in Council.
Had it not been disallowed on this ground, it would have been disallowed on
two others : —lst, the absence of any proprietary right on the part of Cakobau
over the land ; 2nd, adverse occupation. The Bank has never for a moment
possessed any part of the land claimed, whilst it is occupied by a populous
and thriving native town, rebuilt on the site of that burnt by Cakobau, and
the inhabitants of which have been informed by the Colonial Government
that the claim of the Bank has not been made good, and that their own
continued possession was guaranteed to them.
I should, therefore, strongly recommend that whilst the abstract question
of the competency of the Bank to hold land should be inquired into and
solved, it should not be complicated by any reference to the special case of
the Yiria lands, which should be dealt with in the same manner, and by the
same tribunal, as all other land claims. The second and third and, I think,
also the fourth of the papers called for by the Treasury will be found in the
Colonial Office. —I have, etc.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch, No. 40
June 12. —I have not time, (nor indeed does it appear to me necessary),
to undertake any very careful dissection of the petition of the so-called
“Chamber of Commerce.”
My general answer is contained in my paper read at St. James’s Hall,
and in the despatches and papers enumerated by Mr. Des Yoeux, and I have
no doubt Mr, Thurston’s promised memorandum will effectually deal with
objections of detail.
But there are a few short remarks on particular paragraphs, which I
may perhaps as well now make.
In the first place, I think the Secretary of State can hardly fail to be
struck with the fact that, out of the three signatures, two are those of the
gentlemen whose names alone were originally appended to the petition of the
“Chamber of Agriculture ” (though two others were added by the subsequent
mail). These two gentlemen appear to play an alternate rdle as “ merchants ”
and “planters,” and remind one forcibly of that triumvirate which dubbed
itself “the people of England.” The remaining signature to the petition is
that of a German, a clerk in a German house at Levuka.
The allegation, in the 6th paragraph, that the Native Taxes Ordinance
328
CHAP.
FIJI


was ‘ ‘ strongly opposed by tbe late Sir William Hackett is not true. He
supported the measure in Council, and never intimated to me any dissent
from its policy. Mr. De Ricci (though he did not “oppose ” the measure)
certainly in his “Report” intimated his disapproval of its provisions, but
his reasoning was very clearly shown to be based on an entire fallacy and
misapprehension.
In the Bth, 9th, 10th, and 11th paragraphs the petitioners are forced to
admit the gradual yearly rise in the receipts from the tax, notwithstanding
an ingenious attempt to represent the deficiency of the returns as compared
with the estimate of each year, as money lost.
The assumption contained in the 12th paragraph is wholly erroneous.
The 15th paragraph has been answered by anticipation in my paper
already referred to.
The statement in paragraph 17 to the, effect that the whole of the non-
official members of the Council are now ‘ 1 unanimous in their strong and
unqualified condemnation of its working,” is, lam sorry to say, untrue. I
had letters by the last mail from both the Hon. J. C. Smith and the Hon.
J. Hill, two unofficial members of the Council, expressing the unabated
approval by those gentlemen of the scheme, and confidence in its success.
I entirely dissent from the opinion expressed in the 19th section to the
effect that the white settlers generally “have exceptional opportunities for
communicating with the Fijians and arriving at their true sentiments.
The majority of them cannot speak Fijian grammatically, and indeed are
often not acquainted with more than a few words of the language, nor are
many of the older settlers (of whom not a few were in the habit of shooting
any Fijian who came within a certain distance of their house) likely to have
gained the confidence or affection of the natives. The general statements
contained in paragraph 20 do not deserve much attention. I have already
explained what is the case as to the collection of candlenuts, in my minute
on Mr. Parr’s petition for enquiry. The collection, moreover, of this product
is confined, I think, almost to one district —certainly to a very limited area.
The assertion in the 27th paragraph that “the natives are entirely
debarred from dealing with their produce,” is simply untrue, and indeed
the petitioners stultify themselves by saying that ‘ ‘ almost the whole of their
produce is monopolised by the demands of the Government.” This is in
itself a gross exaggeration, but were it true it would be a very different
thing from the original statement. Fijians are perfectly free to sell their
produce for cash, and they know it.
I received, a few weeks since, a letter from a Wesleyan clergyman, long
employed in Fiji as a missionary, but who is now permanently settled in
England. I venture to think that his testimony, and far more the testimony
of his native correspondents, who in writing to him could have no possible
motive to conceal their true sentiments, are of greater weight, as having a
much more impartial character, than the petition now before me. I therefore
venture to enclose a copy of it.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Voeux's Despatch , No. 43
June 12. —I have nothing to add to this despatch unless it be the remark
that Mr. Parr appears to entertain the view (which was not uncommon among
329
XXI
FIJI


some of the planters in Mauritius) that the function of a stipendiary
magistrate is to punish men complained of by their ‘ employer, not to
enquire into the justice of the complaint.
I am not, I suppose, expected to notice Mr. Parr’s reflections as to my
supposed motives for desiring to secure a supply of coolie labour. I wish I
could think I was mistaken in perceiving that the supply of Polynesian
labour is rapidly failing,
Mr. F. Parr had another proposal. Having paid a chief a sum of money,
he insisted that the chief should be compelled to perform his contract to
supply Mr. Parr with a succession of labourers.
It is, I think, in the proposals made that the real secret of the objections
to the present restriction may be found.
To the Colonial Office
Minute on Mr. Des Vosuxs Despatch, No. 46
I cannot conceive how Sir M. Hicks-Beach’s speech at St. James’s Hall
can have been supposed to indicate an intention to withdraw me from Fiji.
Mr. Parr says that in all Colonies where I have been, I have “always
been most fervently hated.” By men of Mr. Parr’s stamp I certainly
always have been, and probably shall be, so hated ; but I am proud to
know, beyond the possibility of doubt, that, by the overwhelming majority
of the people, both of Trinidad and Mauritius, I am regarded with feelings
very different from those of “fervent hatred,” and which are in themselves
no light reward for odium, anxiety, and toil.
To the Under Secretary of State for the Colonies
June 1879. —Sir—I have the honour to return, with a few suggested
alterations, written on the margin, the draft Bill “to provide for the final
settlement of certain claims to land ” enclosed in your letter of the 24th June.
Section 3, as it at present stands, might possibly be construed into a pro-
vision making it imperative that all claims already sent in should be again
submitted, whilst its real object is only to ensure the submission of any which
have not yet been made. I therefore propose to add after “ 1874 ” the words
“which have not already been submitted to the Governor, with a view to
their investigation by the above-mentioned Commission.”
In section 10, and again in section 12, I would, in consequence of a remark
contained in the “Opinion” of the Law Officers, suggest the substitution of
the words “ person not a native of Fiji ” for the word “foreigner.”
In deference to the opinion of the Law Officers, I would wholly omit
section 11.
I propose a substantial alteration in the 15th section. As it now stands,
no Crown grant can be issued for a year from the passing of the Ordinance.
I would suggest instead, that it should be provided that no grant should be
indefeasible until after that time. The non-issue of the grants will be
intensely unpopular, and in cases where there is no opposition and no doubt
of ownership, would afford a really just ground of complaint.
I propose a similar alteration in the 16th section, which deals with grants
subsequently issued.
330
CHAP.
FIJI


I have also added a new clause, referred to in my letter of the sth inst.,
and framed for the purpose of obviating the objections raised by the Law
Officers as to the propriety of cases in which the Crown was interested being
dealt with by the Governor in Council.
To The Colonial Office
July 1879. —Sir —I have the honour to return the origiual letters enclosed
in your letter of the 4th inst. relative to the proceedings of Mr. Chester.
The only point on which I have to make any observation is a passage in
the Minute of the Queensland Government, but to this I must beg to call the
most serious attention of the Secretary of State.
It is that in which the Queensland Government “ respectfully decline ” to
accede to the suggestion of Sir M. Hicks Beach that such proceedings as were
suggested by Mr. Chester with regard to action to be taken against the
natives of or residents in islands very far beyond the limits of the Colony of
Queensland, and within the jurisdiction of Her Majesty’s High Commissioner,
were matters for the consideration not of the Government of Queensland but
of the High Commissioner and the Imperial Government; or in other words,
that the Queensland Government claim a right to act independently of the
High Commissioner in islands of the Western Pacific. lam further informed
on good authority that Mr. Chester is about to be furnished with an armed
vessel by the Queensland Government, and that with that he is about to
undertake an expedition to Brooker Island to “punish” the natives there,
and afterwards “to look after British interests in New Guinea.”
I therefore beg to request that the Secretary of State will call the Governor
of Queensland’s attention to the fact that the jurisdiction of that Colony is
limited to its territorial limits ; —that all British subjects in the Western
Pacific not in a British Colony or in a territory in the possession of any other
civilized Power, are under the jurisdiction of the High Commissioner, and that
Her Majesty’s Government cannot permit the appointment of Commissioners
by the Queensland Government affecting to exercise authority or jurisdiction
independently of the High Commissioner, and that no such proceedings as
those apparently contemplated by Mr, Chester will be permitted, except with
the High Commissioner’s sanction and allowance.
I would also suggest that the Governor of Queensland be reminded that
the manner in which Mr. Chester’s reports as a Judicial Commissioner were to
be made was indicated in the despatch in which I acceded to the request for
his appointment, and that, under the provisions of the Order in Council, no
sentence pronounced by him as a Judicial Commissioner is valid until it has
been submitted to the High Commissioner for confirmation.
To the Under Secretary of State for the Colonies
The Red House, Ascot, Berks. —Sir —With reference to previous cor-
respondence I have now the honour to enclose—
1. Specifications, designs, and estimates for the addition of steam-power
and an auxiliary screw to the nearly new sailing yacht Cruizer , now to be
obtained for from £7OOO to £7500, with accompanying correspondence.
2. Specifications, designs, and estimates for the construction of a new
vessel, with auxiliary steam-power, for the use of the High Commissioner.
331
XXI
FIJI


In submitting these designs to the Secretary of State, I .wish to call attention
to the following facts :
If the work of the High Commissioner is to be done at all, there must be
either an efficient staff of Deputy Commissioners employed under him, or the
means must be found for enabling a smaller number of men to visit the places
in the wide extent of the Western Pacific at which their presence may be
required.
There are many reasons which seem to show that it would be preferable
to have a few visiting Deputy Commissioners rather than a greater number
of Residents. In either case, however, means of locomotion must be provided ;
though of course they are most imperatively needed under the former system.
At present I do not hesitate to characterise the whole machinery of the High
Commission as little better than a solemn farce. The amount of the sum
voted by the House of Commons permits neither the employment of the
requisite staff of Deputy Commissioners, nor the use of the costly means of
transport of which alone the High Commissioner can at present avail himself
—that, namely, in men-of-war, of which, moreover, it is difficult to obtain
the services, and the employment of which is often impossible (or, if not
impossible, inconvenient, as regards their proper naval duties), and at other
times leads to unpleasant complications and differences. •
That a vessel of some sort must necessarily be at the disposal of the High
Commissioner, if there is the smallest intention of giving even the most
modest measure of effect to Her Majesty’s Orders in Council, is too evident to
need argument.
It appears to me that the arrangement now proposed is by far the most
economical that could be suggested. A vessel hired for the exclusive service
of the High Commissioner, or a man-of-war employed in the work of the
High Commission, would have to be paid for wholly from Imperial Funds.
The present proposal is that the vessel to be purchased should be partly used
by the Government of Fiji, and .that half the price should be paid from
Colonial sources.
The moment is most favourable, as it is improbable that the prices of
vessels will again be as low as they are at the present moment. Of the
competency of the parties consulted as to the nature of the vessel, and her
probable cost of building, (or altering, according to whichever scheme is pre-
ferred), and subsequent up-keep, it is unnecessary for me to speak. Mr.
Brassey, Mr. St. Clair Byrne, and the Barrow-in-Furness Company are too
well known to require any assurance of the confidence which may be placed
in their respective statements.
My proposal, then, is that, if after survey the Cruizer , as altered, is pro-
nounced a suitable vessel, she should be purchased. That to effect this
purchase, £IO,OOO should be taken from that portion of the Fiji Loan origin-
ally devoted to public works at Suva. That of this £IO,OOO, £7500 should
(if necessary, for I believe it may be reduced to £7000) be paid for the
Cruizer, and £2500 to the Barrow-in-Furness Company at a time to be agreed
on with them. The remaining £2OOO would have to be paid on the delivery
of the vessel, or as arranged with the Barrow Company. This £2OOO would
consist of a sum of £IOOO from the High Commission, and £IOOO from
Colonial sources, to be voted in next year’s estimates, before which time the
money will not be required.
332
CHAP.
FIJI


Of the £IO,OOO taken from the Fiji Loan, I should propose that £SOOO
should be considered as lent to the High Commission, and gradually repaid
by it, although probably years will elapse before it is needed (as it ultimately
may be) at Suva. The price of the Cruizer includes not only that of all the
fittings, linen, blankets, crockery, cutlery, etc., on board, which under ordinary
circumstances it would require a considerable additional sum to supply, but
also comprises that of a valuable steam launch now on board.
So much for the purchase ; I now come to that which appears to be the
great ground for doubt and apprehension,—the cost of her probable up-keep.
The figures given in my former letter were supplied me (except as regards
the wages of the native crew) by Mr. Byrne, and I can hardly conceive a
higher authority in such matters. He informed me that in each case he
had distinctly in his eye the sort of men wanted, and who were to be found
at wages such as he mentioned.
But let us assume that we have underrated the cost, and that the wages,
repairs, insurance, coals, and other charges of maintenance will amount to
£2OOO per annum, £IOOO to be borne by the Colony, £IOOO by the High
Commission. As regards the High Commission, this sum only exceeds by a
few pounds that already borne on the Estimate sanctioned by the Secretary of
State as the probable cost of the “transport” of the High Commissioner,
Deputy and Judicial Commissioners, witnesses, prisoners, etc. As regards the
£IOOO from the Colony, I am sanguine in thinking that it would not all be
expended ; but if it were, I must confess it appears to me no immoderate sum,
and no useless outlay.
But it may be said that these anticipations are sure to be disappointed,
and that unforeseen expenses will be incurred, which will involve far heavier
liabilities. I do not think so ; but of course it is impossible to deny that
such may possibly be the case.
If, however, it is the fear of this contingent possibility that alarms the
Secretary of State, and deters him from giving an assent to this plan, which
would otherwise be willingly rendered, I think it is in my power effectually
to remove that obstacle.
Ido not know that the first High Commissioner of Western Polynesia could
confer a greater boon on the vast regions with which he is connected than by
providing facilities for their visitation by himself or his deputies ; and I am
quite prepared, for the next two years, to bear myself, personally, any expense
exceeding £2OOO which might annually be incurred in the maintenance of the
vessel and its crew.
I claim no merit for this offer, as I am satisfied I incur no risk, but it may
suffice to remove apprehensions, and by its terms I am prepared rigidly
to abide.
As the enclosures are all in original I must request the return of them,
at least of those not addressed to myself, and which are not my property, but
only lent me by Mr. Byrne.
To the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
June 1879.—Sir—I have perused with much satisfaction the despatch
from H.M. Ambassador at Berlin, which I have now the honour to return,
stating that the request likely to be made by the King of Tonga for the
333
XXI
FIJI


nomination of a German as Secretary to his Government will not be complied
with by the Emperor of Germany.
I think it right, however, with a view to any subsequent correspondence,
to point out that although Lord Odo Russell’s representations are in substance
perfectly correct, there is a slight inaccuracy in their form. There is no
statement in my letter of the 28th ult. to the effect that I “ had nominated
an Englishman for the post,” and that the King “had accepted the nomina-
tion made by me.”
It was agreed between the King and myself that if the Tongan Parliament
and Council also desired it, an English Secretary should be appointed, but the
person selected was not nominated by me but selected by agreement between
the Prime Minister (the King’s eldest son) and Mr. Maudslay. Moreover,
although the supervision of the finances was no doubt the object chiefly in
view, the term “Financial Secretary” was not, so far as I am aware, made
use of.
To the Colonial Office
June 1879 (?).—Sir—Before leaving England, I am desirous of calling the
attention of the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the relations existing
between the Colony of Fiji and the Tongan group, and the very different
position of the kingdom of Tonga, as regards Colonial interests, from that
occupied by any of the other numerous groups of islands in the Pacific.
There are three facts which I am especially anxious to impress on the
recollection of the Secretary of State and of Her Majesty’s Government.
The first is the geographical fact, that several of the islands of the Fijian
group are actually nearer to Nukualofa, the capital of Tonga, than they are
to Levuka, the capital of Fiji.
The second is the ethnographical fact, that the eastern part of Fiji is to
a great extent peopled by Tongan immigrants, many, if not most of whom,
are still Tongan subjects, and that almost all the principal families of Tonga
and Fiji are closely connected by descent and intermarriage.
The third is the political fact, that the governing power of Tonga, owing to
the above causes, exercises a wide and powerful influence within the Fiji group.
It cannot, therefore, be a matter of indifference to the Power possessing
Fiji that the Tongan Government should be practically in the hands of
another European state, and although we may view without regret or jealousy
the rapid increase of German authority in other parts of the Pacific, it is, I
think, impossible for us to regard with satisfaction any attempt to bring the
kingdom of Tonga under the direct control of German officials.
I do not say that the German Government has any such desire ; and indeed,
after the repeated declarations which have been made of the absence on the
part of the Imperial German Government of any intention to seek or obtain
exclusive advantages in the Pacific, it is impossible to suppose that it can
entertain any such design.
Unfortunately, however, the majority (I am inclined to think all) of the
officials of the German Government in the Pacific, from the Consul-General
at Sydney, and Consul at Samoa downwards, are also employes of the great
Hamburg firm of Godeffroy, and there can be no doubt that it is the desire
and object of that house to obtain the absolute command of the Tongan
revenues and the sole direction of its Government.
334
CHAP.
FIJI


With this view, the King has been (as he states, —and I have no reason
to disbelieve him) induced, under severe pressure, to give up to Germany the
finest harbour in his dominions ;to appoint as his Consul at Sydney the
German Consul-General, and to write to the Emperor of Germany to solicit
the appointment of a German Minister, as Count Munster phrases it, “ for the
direction of his state affairs.” The person intended for this office was, I
understand (like the “ Consul ”at Sydney), an of the house of
Godeffroy, which would thus have obtained complete control over all the
political and financial affairs of the Tongan Government, and would have
been able to conclude, with itself , any contract advantageous to its own objects
in those regions. •
lam sure that the German Government ought not to take umbrage, and
I think would not do so, if told that while we viewed without the smallest
jealousy or apprehension the extension of German influence in the Pacific
generally, the peculiar position of Tonga, and its relations with our own
Colony of Fiji, rendered it impossible for us (although we desired no exclusive
advantages, or special privileges there) to acquiesce in the assumption in that
group of a preponderating influence by any other Power, or the practical
transfer of its Government from the hands of the King to the officials or
employes of an European state. Nor do I think that the German Government
could refuse to comply with a request that their agents in the Pacific might
be instructed in this sense.
I would suggest that I should be myself instructed to hold similar language
to the King of Tonga, and to point out to him that whilst we desired in no
way to interfere with his authority or independence, and sought for ourselves
no exclusive privileges or rights in his dominions, the interests of Fiji (with
which those of Tonga are closely connected) forbade us to accept the practical
delegation of his sovereign rights to the subjects of another European Power,
or their admission to a preponderating influence in the direction of his affairs
not shared by ourselves.—l have, etc.
From James B. Hamilton
The Elms, Canterbury, June 30, 1879.—Dear Uncle Arthur—l need
not tell you that your letter will be very precious to me, for it shows me
how earnestly you take part in, and are a part in, that which is far dearer to
me than myself, and far better, or rather I often count it my better self. I
think you know what the “it” is, better than I can define it. The training
camp may be its local habitation and its name, but in my mind it means all
that would turn to account the tremendous possibilities of our unspoilt boy-
hood, which is really unspoilt England.
1 know well that you are the champion of the “unspoilt” in your own
kingdom, and although this is sure to provoke the evil spirit of the world,
yet you have as surely that which is stronger than the world on your side.
Meanwhile, “the unspoilt” will think of you here, and you will be one of
their heroes in the talks by our cabin fire ; and you will know that there is
in them a great heart ever growing greater, which will bear you in mind and
will welcome you back, and never leave you lonely in your thoughts.
It is a great comfort to think that two of my boys are with you. It
seems so strange, and yet so natural, that I should part with them under the
dear old Abbey roof, at the “Loadstone” of English hearts, and where all
335
XXI
FIJI


the threads of my own life seem drawn together. I entirely agree with all
that you say about the island. May I always get such true and good advice.
The iEolian grows more beautiful every hour. You were the first that knew
that Leah was won at last. I shall always think of you so.—Ever your
affectionate nephew,
JAMES BAILLIE HAMILTON.
On the 4th July we had a special farewell service in West-
minster Abbey, i.e. in Henry Yll.’s Chapel; I and Rachael, my
staff, and those newly joining it, receiving the Holy Communion
there, with such friends of any of the outgoing party as chose
to come. Most of the friends who were at the similar service
in King’s College Chapel before my first start for Fiji—Glad-
stones, Selbornes, Salisbury, etc., were there again; but while
thankful that so many of my closer friends are still spared, I
felt a blank in the want of the dear Duchess of Argyll, so lately
removed. Her daughters were there. Bradshaw had come up
from Cambridge, grown so fat I hardly knew him. Poor
Acland, too, was present, Hamilton and Harriet, Lord Eversley,
and a host of friends, gentle and simple. The officiating clergy
were the Dean of course, Barry, Knollys’ father, and Marriott’s
father. Stanley gave a short address, very good of course, but
without a word of Christianity. Barry read the Litany. After
service we went into the Chapter House, and there talked to
and said good-bye to most of our friends.
From the Archbishop of Canterbury
Lambeth Palace, July 4, 1879.—My dear Sir Arthur —Most heartily do
I thank you for your kind words. I should not have failed to be in Henry
Vll.’s Chapel to pray fora blessing on your most important mission, but I
must be in the chair at Convocation. May all heaven’s blessings be with
your work, and with your family.—Ever yours,
A. C. CANTUAR.
From the Marchioness of Salisbury
20 Arlington Street, S.W. —My dear Sir Arthur —I am very sorry
that I could not come to the Abbey this morning, as I was not very well.
But I thought of you all, you may be sure. If Ido not see you again, Good-
bye. New discoveries have one great blessing, that they make the world
smaller, by making journeys so much easier and shorter, and so friends have
never now to contemplate those terrible lifelong partings which were so
common long ago. Write to me when you have time. Your letters and
your work interest me much, and I will tell you in return what is happen-
ing here. And now, with every good wish for you and yours, I bid you
in my name and in Salisbury’s a most hearty and affectionate farewell.—Your
old and sincere friend,
G.SALISBURY.
336
CHAP.
FIJI


From Dr. Acland
Oxford, July 5, 1879. —My dear Gordon—Most thankful am I to you
for having allowed me to be present yesterday at your touching and
strengthening service. It was an hour for one’s life, and ever to be looked
back on for support and hope. I was grieved to be obliged to go before you
all left the Chapel. I had to choose between not coming at all and leaving
at 12. I was forced to return here for an urgent case.
May God bless your work, your going out and your coming in. With
my kindest regards and respects to Lady Gordon.
From James B. Hamilton
The Elms, Canterbury, July 9, 1879.—Dear Uncle Arthur—You have
sent me something far too precious to be commuted into money. So it will
remain as it is, a sign of perfect trust and generosity on your part; but even
so, it will do the good that you desire on my behalf, for I shall work with
quietness and confidence, and that is strength. The blank cheque that you
sent will remain “unspoilt” by pen and ink while I am alive, and should I be
called from my work, full directions are left with Herman Smith and others
for its transmission to you. You have done more by this act of yours than
thousands of pounds. It is as an act and a thought that it will help and
will be valued as such by me, and all with whom I have to do.
Memorandum
Before leaving England in 1875, I had the honour of receiving the
detailed instructions of the Secretary of State as to the course to be pursued
with regard to land claims in Fiji. By those instructions I was told “ that,
with the view of disturbing as little as possible existing tenures and occupa-
tions, and of maintaining (as far as practicable, and with such modifications
only as justice and good policy may in any case appear to demand) all contracts
honestly entered into before the Cession ; the Colonial Government, to which
the rights of the Crown are delegated in that behalf, should forthwith require
all Europeans claiming to have acquired land by purchase to give satisfactory
evidence of the transactions with the natives on which they rely as establish-
ing their title ; and if the land appears to have been acquired fairly, and at a
fair price, should issue to the persons accepted after due inquiry as owners a
Crown grant in fee simple of the land to which they may appear entitled,
subject to any conditions as to further payments and charges or otherwise
which may appear just.”
I was further directed to appoint a Commission “to deal with the whole
question of the ownership and occupation of land,” but to confer on the
Commission “no further powers than those of inquiry and reporting to me,”
and “to reserve it to myself, with the advice of my Executive Council, to
direct the action to be taken in each case.”
On the day after my arrival in the Colony a notification was accordingly
issued calling on all persons having claims to land to send them in at the
earliest possible period.
A notice was also issued to the effect that no claims would be received or
recognised if not made by persons resident in the Colony before the 31st
HI Z
337
XXI
FIJI


October, or before the 31st December 1875 by persons resident elsewhere.
The period within which claims might be preferred was afterwards extended in
the case of residents in the Colony to the 81st December 1875, and as regarded
those resident in Australia, England, the United States, or elsewhere, till the
31st March 1876.
Since this latter day, I have received numerous petitions for leave to send
in an application in the ordinary form, stating some special cause why it was
impossible to make application within the specified period. These applica-
tions have been granted in every instance but one or two where the claim was
of a manifestly frivolous character.
On the Ist September 1875, the Charter constituting the Fiji Islands a
British Colony was formally proclaimed, and on the same day, (being the very
first of its existence,) the Legislative Council passed an Ordinance, (No. 111.
of 1875,) providing “that it should not be lawful to commence or maintain
suits in respect of present existing claims to land in any Court of law in
the Colony.” Her Majesty’s gracious allowance and confirmation of this
Ordinance was intimated to me by Lord Carnarvon’s Despatch No. 39 of the
18th March 1876.
On the 30th October 1875, the appointment of the members of the
Commission ‘‘ to investigate all claims to land arising under any contract
entered into before the proclamation of the Royal Charter under the Great
Seal of the United Kingdom erecting the Islands of Fiji into a British Colony,
and to report thereon,” was gazetted, and on the 19th January, in my Despatch
No. 4 of that date, I informed the Secretary of State that I had appointed the
Chief Justice of the Colony, Chairman of the Commission. Lord Carnarvon’s
satisfaction at this appointment is expressed in his Despatch No. 36 of the
14th March 1876.
The Commissioners commenced their labours in the Island of Taviuni on
the 10th December 1875, and sent in their first set of reports, Nos. Ito 42,
on the 2nd March 1876.
These reports were considered by me in Executive Council in accordance
with the Secretary of State’s directions, and after a careful review of the
evidence collected by the Commission, the Governor, with the advice of his
Council, issued certificates of title to those parties “accepted, after due inquiry,
as owners.”
The further direction, that a Crown grant in fee simple should be issued
to the parties, could not at once be complied with. It was essential to have
the boundaries of each grant carefully surveyed before it was issued, and it
was also desirable that no grants should issue till the Lands Titles Ordinance,
the preparation of which was directed in the instructions of the 4th March
1875, had been passed. The certificate, however, contains a promise to issue
the grant at a subsequent day.
The sittings of the Executive Council for the purpose of considering these
claims have usually been attended by the Chief Justice at my request.
The mode of proceeding adopted has been the following
The time and place at which the Commission will sit to investigate claims
in any district is notified by advertisement in the Royal Gazette and in the
newspapers, and all claimants are invited to send in the papers on which they
base their claims to the Crown Lands Office before the day appointed.
When the Commission commences its inquiries, the cases are called on,
338
CHAP.
FIJI


according to a fixed order, and each claimant, either personally or by counsel,
states the nature of his claim, and brings forward the evidence on which he
relies to prove it.
Any opposing evidence is then adduced.
The Commissioners take full notes, but do not usually prepare their report
until all the cases in the district have been heard, as they throw much mutual
light on each other.
When the inquiry is terminated, a separate report on each case is drawn
up, containing a precis of the evidence, and usually, though not always, an
expression of the opinion of the Commission whether a grant should be issued
to the claimant, or his claim disallowed, and also indicating the boundaries to
which, in the event of a grant being issued, the claimant seems to have made
good his claim.
These reports, when made up, are forwarded to the Commissioner of
Crown Lands, who transmits them to the Colonial Secretary for the
Governor’s consideration.
After being read by the Governor, who in grave cases usually appends a
memorandum setting forth the salient points calling for consideration, they
are circulated to the members of the Executive Council, each of whom makes
his own notes and minutes upon them. They are then, with the minutes of
the members of the Executive Council, (which for these purposes includes the
Chief Justice,) returned to the Governor, who after reading them, makes his
own minutes. When the Governor has gone through a batch of reports, he
calls a meeting of the Executive Council. The cases awaiting decision are
brought on in order, the reports of the Commissioners and the minutes of the
Executive Councillors read, and each case discussed and determined; the
decision, if the case be an important one, being recorded in a minute written
by the Governor, and setting forth the grounds on which it is based.
I append some specimens of these minutes, and also some of those by
Members of the Executive Council on reports sent in circulation. 1
They will show the care taken in dealing with these claims, and the
curious and complicated questions which occasionally arise out of them.
To expedite the work of the Commission, each member of it was by
Ordinance No. XIV. of 1877, empowered to prosecute inquiries separately.
As already mentioned, the first district visited was the Island of Taviuni;
next came Levuka ; then the large and important district of the Rewa River,
the island of Ovalau, and subsequently the districts of Tai Levu and Navua
in Yiti Levu, those of Savu Savu, Bua, and Wainunu in Yanua Levu, besides
many important detached Islands, such as Rambi, Mago, Cicia, Kanathea,
Lauthala, Niutambi, &c.
A glance at the map will show how large and important a part of the
group this covers.
Between the Ist January 1876, and the 25th June 1878, over 800 claims
had been investigated and dealt with, leaving about the same number for
subsequent inquiry.
Two things are, I think, rendered very clear by this narrative. Of these
the first is that it was originally the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government that
the land claims could be, and the intention of Her Majesty’s Government that
they should be, conclusively settled by the Governor in Council.
1 Annex A.
339
XXI
FIJI


Had it been thought that a resort might be had to the Colonial Courts of
law to reverse the decision of the Governor in Council founded on the reports
of the Lands Commission, the appointment of Chief Justice of the Colony as
chairman of that Commission would hardly have met with the approbation of
the Secretary of State, nor should he have been directed to declare the rights
of the Crown in terms so absolute and uncompromising.
Neither would conditions have been imposed on the issue of grants of land
which could have been unconditionally obtained through the decision of a
law court, nor would the tone assumed by me in dealing with the claims of
the Polynesia Company have merited or received approval.
The position assumed by the Crown appears to have been, that the
obligation entered upon by the Deed of Cession was only that of giving effect
to such claims as might appear to the Queen to be entitled to recognition ;
and that all claimants should be called on to make good their claims to the
satisfaction of the Colonial Government, to which the rights of the Crown had
in this respect been delegated.
And it appears to have been further held, that even where legal possession
by occupation had been established, there was no power whatever to compel
the issue of a Crown grant, and that this should be withheld until the Crown
was satisfied of the bond fides of the claim.
The second conclusion to be drawn from the transactions which I have
related is that the question is now in a very different state from that in which
it stood on my arrival in the Colony, four years ago.
The plan of instituting in the first instance a Land Court to consider
claims, and from which appeals would lie to a superior tribunal would, no
doubt, have afforded a satisfactory mode of dealing with many of the
questions raised by land claims, although it would have been open to more
than one grave objection. But whatever its advantages or disadvantages, I
was distinctly instructed not to adopt it; to confer no judicial powers on the
tribunal appointed to investige claims, and to retain the decision in each case
for the Governor in Council; and to enable this to be done at once, without
interference from the courts of law, but with the highest legal assistance
attainable, the Ordinance No. 3 of 1875 was passed, and the Chief Justice of
the Colony was, (I believe at Lord Carnarvon s suggestion,) appointed a
member of the Commission.
It is manifest, therefore, that any great change in the existing system of
dealing with the claims in question, cannot be effected, in mid-course of the
investigation, without serious consequences.
The present system of settlement by the Governor in Council rather than
a court of law commends itself by its cheapness and by its expedition.
Few of the claimants are in funds for a tedious law-suit. To almost all,
the early issue of indefeasible grants is a paramount necessity, whether to
enable them to borrow money on the security of their land, or to enable them
to dispose of it, by rendering it possible to convey a good title to the purchaser.
The settler also derives advantage from its indulgence, many a claim being
admitted by the Governor in Council as good which would not stand a
rigorous legal test, and a further advantage from its accurate settlement of
boundaries, the definition of which would not be given in ordinary cases by a
court of law deciding on the bond fides or validity of a claim.
To the native, the present system offers a far greater protection of his in-
340
CHAP.
FIJI


terests than he would otherwise receive. His evidence is more easily obtained,
it is more readily appreciated, and the decision is less fettered by technicalities.
Were any considerable change of system effected, not only would confusion
and uncertainty be created as regards the claims already disposed of, but
serious disadvantages would be experienced both by the white settler and the
native. To the former it would be attended with delay and expense in the
great majority of cases wholly unnecessary. Claimants moreover have been
led to believe that if they complied witli the call of the Crown, and made
good their pretensions, to its satisfaction, they would at once receive an
unquestionable title, and they would have good reason to complain of a
breach of faith were they compelled again to appear before a Court to prove
the claims which have just been pronounced good by the Governor in Council.
Defective deeds too, (and most of the deeds are defective,) would be more
severely judged by a law court than by the Executive Council, whilst it would
be very difficult for a legal tribunal to avoid affording a very unfair advantage
to those possessing deeds having priority of date over others who have bond
fide purchased a portion of the same land at a later period, from vendors who
were honestly ignorant that they had already disposed of it to parties who
were themselves unaware of the acquisition.
These drawbacks are considerable ; but to the natives the disadvantages
attending a general reference of all land claims to a law court would be far
greater.
If he is left unassisted, his case must necessarily fail. He has neither the
knowledge, patience, or skill to conduct his own case, or generally speaking
the means to employ counsel.
On the other hand, there are serious objections to the Crown acting on his
behalf in all cases, for, not to speak of the enormous expense which would be
entailed by such a course, a very different sentiment (and one which it is highly
desirable not to evoke) would be roused in the minds of claimants, did they
see the Crown actively engaged in striving to defeat their claims, from that
inspired by the passive and judicial attitude of simply requiring them to
prove their case.
When, therefore, it was suggested that the course of proceedings hitherto
pursued should be abandoned, and the decision of claims to land left to the
ordinary legal tribunals, or a new court of law to be constituted for the purpose,
from which an appeal should be made to the Supreme Court of Fiji, and
thence to the Privy Council, I felt it to be my duty to combat that suggestion,
and I append a copy of a confidential memorandum on the subject prepared
by me for submission to the Secretary of State. 1 I also append a letter on the
same subject written by the Chief-Justice of Fiji. 2
The views expressed in my memorandum were approved by Her Majesty’s
Government, and an Ordinance was prepared to give effect to them. Some
doubt was expressed whether its provisions were consistent with those of the
Deed of Cession, and on that question, Lord Selborne has'recorded his opinion
in a memorandum which he has placed at my disposal, and a copy of which is
appended. 3
I am now instructed, on my return to Fiji, to introduce the Ordinance in
question into the Legislative Council, and though it will not of course give
1 Annex B. 2 Annex C. 3 Annex D.
341
XXI
FIJI


univeral satisfaction, it will, I am confident, ensure the speedy, just, and
permanent settlement of questions which might otherwise have been a source
of embarrassment for generations to come.
July 3, 1879.
A. H. G.
I ought to have mentioned before that Oxford gave me the
degree of D.C.L. My colleagues were the Prince-Royal of
Sweden, Dufferin, Bishop of Durham, Goschen, W. H. Smith,
and Tourgnieff. Bryce made a good Latin speech on presenting
me, and spoke of the Epulae nefandae of Fiji. In the procession
I found myself paired with the Bishop of Durham, whom I had
not seen since our Cambridge days. Luncheon in All Souls
Library. Dinner at Balliol. Garden-party at Worcester; met
Crowder there, Douglas Hamilton, Anson, Miss Grenfell, and
many more. Rachael came down for the day for the degree-
giving, luncheon, and garden-party, but went back to Ascot at
night. I stayed at Rolleston’s. Saw a good deal of Douglas;
what a nice fellow he is, and how good-looking. All these last
days in England were very pleasant.
When the last of all came, I went down to Liverpool, and slept
at Byrne’s house. Went on board Bothnia the next day, found all
my large party assembled, and steamed rapidly and without
adventure across the Atlantic in that splendid ship. At New
York, one D. Cameron, a great swell there, was very civil to us.
New York has grown since I was last there —grown enormously,
—and has developed elevated street, railways, a novel form of
horror. Dear, dear, what an odious city! Walked about with
Williamson. Admired (in the literal sense) the Fifth Avenue
Mansions, abused the vile, broken foot-pavement,—“ sidewalks ”
I mean, —and looked at the New Roman Catholic Cathedral,
only just begun when I was last here, and though of costly white
marble, unutterably hideous, being of George IY. gothic. My party
consisted of Williamson, Lands Titles Commissioner; Knollys,
A.D.C.; A. M. Gordon, clerk to me as Consul-General; Browne,
private secretary to me as High Commissioner; Romilly, unat-
tached; Marriott and Allardyce, for Fiji service; and Williamson’s
private secretary, Riley. We crossed America to Frisco, staying
a day at Niagara. Nothing can lessen the beauty of Niagara;
but every point from which one can see it is now walled in, and
made remunerative and hideous. There was hardly anything of
this when I was here first in 1862, and not much when I was
here in 1866. The Fall, too, is not quite what it was, a portion
of that wonderful solid mass of green water going over with an
even edge having given place to a foaming rapid. But nothing
can mar its unique grandeur, nor has anything yet spoiled the
extreme beauty of Goat Island.
342
CHAP.
FIJI


The following letters were accidentally omitted in their
proper place :
To the Colonial Office
December 1878.—Sir —I have the honour to return herewith the extract
from the Globe newspaper enclosed in your letter of the 6th instant.
On my return to the Pacific it will, I think, be desirable that I should
make some inquiry into the occurrences related in this extract. I know Mr.
Brown, the missionary at Duke of York Island, and should not suppose him
to be a man reckless of human life, or likely, except' for strong and sufficient
reasons, to adopt, or sanction the adoption of, harsh or cruel measures towards
the aboriginal population.
At the same time the allegation that between fifty and eighty lives have
been sacrificed is startling, and would appear to render some further investiga-
tion necessary; more especially as the somewhat naive statement that
“Mission efforts on the spot are now on a much better footing,” would seem
to imply a strong misconception as to the means allowable to give efficiency
to such efforts. I am, however, glad to notice that the Board of Missions at
Sydney has had the subject under consideration, and have come to the
opinion that the course pursued by Mr. Brown was justifiable. They are
hardly likely to have come to such a conclusion without evidence which is
not yet before us.—l have, etc.
To the Rev. B. Chapman l
Armitage Hill, Sunninghill, December 4, 1878.—My dear Sir—Mr.
Maudslay has sent to me a copy of his letter to you of the sth September.
I regret that before writing to you he did not communicate with Mr. Baker,
and ask him for an explanation of the alleged facts. I have no doubt, however,
that you will cause a serious inquiry to be made into the circumstances.
I enclose extracts from various letters from different persons in Tonga,
which will show you the nature of the reports which reach me.
I confess I am deeply pained by the bitter hostility which my communi-
cation to you of the reports against Mr. Baker seems to have excited on the
part of that gentleman and of Mr. Langham. It is so uncalled for, and so
much the reverse of what I might have expected : for what are the facts ?
I go to Tonga, and there hear very much that is unfavourable to Mr.
Baker, and I myself see much that leads me to think, that although I do not
question the goodness of his motives, Mr. Baker’s conduct has been at least
injudicious, if not objectionable. What do I then do ? Do I write a despatch
to the Secretary of State reporting what I have observed 1 Do I even make a
formal and official representation to the Board of Missions ? Neither one nor
the other, I simply inform a missionary who is going up to Sydney of all
that I have seen and heard, —facts and reports alike, and beg him to repeat
to you in confidence what I have told him, that you may take what steps may
seem proper for the correction of abuses. What could I do less ? It will
hardly be contended that when grave charges are brought against a British
subject, I am at once to deem them groundless, or refuse to take any
1 Secretary to the Wesleyen Board of Missions at Sydney.
343
XXI
FIJI


steps to secure their investigation, because that British subject happens
to be a Wesleyan missionary. If I had at once reported to the Secretary
of State all that I had seen or heard, Mr. Baker would have had no
just reason for complaint. As it is, he (and I venture to think the
Wesleyan Church also) ought to feel obliged to me for the consideration shown
in the manner in which attention was called to reported scandals, and if they
are unfounded, I should have thought those maligned would themselves
have been grateful for having them carefully examined, instead of being
allowed to circulate uncontradicted.
I must say the mode in which my communication has been received by
Mr. Baker, if the statements I received are only partially true, is not such as
to disincline me to believe the truth of the reports circulated with respect to
his acts in Tonga.
I have received the correspondence between Mr. Des Yoeux and Mr.
Langham respecting the claim of the Mission to the foreshore of Levuka. I
cannot for a moment admit the right of the Mission, but such is my unwilling-
ness to oppose them, that could this case be dissociated from other claims to
the foreshore, I should advise its grant, not as a matter of right, but as of
grace. But to do so would render it necessary to show similar grace in all
other instance, and would place in private hands the greater part of the fore-
shore of Fiji—a step which could not be taken without creating the most
serious discontent in the minds of the natives, who would be thus deprived of
those rights of passage and fishery to which they are, I believe, justly entitled,
and which they could not forego without extreme inconvenience.—l remain,
yours very truly.
To the Key. B. Chapman
ApvMITAGE Hill, Sunninghill, January 21, 1879.—My dear Sir—l
have received with much pleasure your letter of 25th November.
I quite agree with you that “ where there’s a will there’s a way,” and that
there is no danger of any serious misunderstanding between those whose
hearts are both set on avoiding one. I shall await with anxiety Mr.
Langham’s answer to my letter. On that will in a great degree depend
whether I continue in my present belief that he allowed himself to be over-
come by temporary irritation, but is at bottom still my friend, or whether I
am to regard him as permanently alienated.
I need not repeat to you assurances which I know you trust, but I will
add that although I could not, without compromising the rights of the Crown
throughout the whole of Fiji, admit the claim of the Mission to the foreshore
of Levuka, I think the Mission has done so much for the good of the Colony
as to render a liberal gift to it by the Crown of foreshore to which it believed
it was in possession, a by no means improper transaction.
I am glad to see that you are again taking up the question of Mr. Baker
and Tonga, and shall await the result with curiosity. But you will, I hope,
pardon my making two remarks.
1, I am very sorry to see what you say about Taniela Toa (Afu). You
say he was “taken” to Tonga. No doubt he was, but you seem hardly
aware that it was at my request. He went with me to Tonga on my visit
there in April, and I asked and obtained permission for him from Mr. Jorey,
the head of his circuit, to accompany Mr. Maudslay on his going there in
344
CHAP.
FIJI


June. I may add it was also the King’s particular request that Taniela
should return as interpreter with the new Consul. Let me further add that
Taniela (who I daresay you know yourself) is a man of unusual ability and
self-reliance, and one of the most useful of your body in Fiji.
So much for his going, but of course I cannot tell what he may have done
when in Tonga, though I must confess, unless it is very clearly shown, I shall
feel very doubtful that he has done anything improper—still less that he has
done so with Mr. Maudslay’s sanction. But in any case, I shall regret any
discussion on the subject, for it will necessarily involve counter-complaints
against the mode in which influence has been used to suppress evidence.
2. The other point is this. I must warn you that I shall be unable to
accept an acquittal by the District meeting as altogether satisfactory. Of
these meetings Mr. Baker himself is Chairman. I am informed on unim-
peachable authority that on former occasions when his conduct has been
impugned, Mr. Baker has refused to quit the Chair, and has himself presided
at the inquiry. But whether he does so or not, he must necessarily exercise
great influence in such a meeting, and if, as I am informed, all who have
given any information against him have been put under an ecclesiastical ban,
it is not an ecclesiastical body that is most likely to elicit evidence.
If the proofs be so overwhelming as to admit of no denial, of course there
is an end of the matter, and no one will be more pleased than myself that
the Church should have freed itself from a scandal without any external
interference, but I must add that I cannot accept as an acquittal the
judgment of any Court in which impartial external authority takes no part.
Before I close my letter, let me say a few words about Mr. Brown. Ido
not share Chief-Justice Gorrie’s view of his proceedings, I am inclined to
think that as a missionary he has taken a mistaken course, but that is no affair
of mine. I, as High Commissioner, have to deal with him only as a British
subject, and as such he was, I think, entitled to take the proceedings he did,
if they were essential to his own safety and that of those with him. At the
same time, the extent of the vengeance taken, and the very unsatisfactory
character of his —what shall I call him ? —his lieutenant, or second in com-
mand?—Powell, make some inquiry requisite, and I shall go to New Britain
on my way out. But I shall go with favourable feelings towards Mr. Brown,
and I have already expressed my opinion that he was probably justified in
his action, both to the Mission Committee here and to the Colonial Office.
345
XXI
FIJI


CHAPTER XXII
FIJI AND THE SOUTH PACIFIC DURING MY ABSENCE ON LEAVE
From Mr. Wilkinson
On board the schooner Louisiana, Tuesday, June 18, 1878.—Dear Sir
—We only made Lakeba this morning, being our fourth day out. Mr.
Maudslay accompanied me ashore. We found Taniela all ready to leave.
Mr. Jorey was very civil, and pleased to be able to allow him to be of
service to your Excellency.
After breakfast, and while a supply of fire-wood and water was being got ready,
I met the Buli, Native Stipendiary Magistrate, and Yunivola, 1 and answered
their numerous questions, giving them instructions on various subjects and
directions in their several duties. The N.S. Magistrate is in some difficulty
about a number of women who have been sentenced to perform a certain amount
of work—so many Tabakaus 2 to make—many of them over two years ago, but
they have not yet performed their task, and there appears little hope of their
being able to do so for the next two years, as in many cases their husbands’
nut-trees will not supply the leaves without serious damage to bearing. I
could only advise him to bring the whole case before the S. M, on his first
visit, and for them together to recommend either a remission of the part of
the sentence not performed, or some other course that, would meet the case.
Everybody seems to overlook the spirit of the Regulation against adultery
altogether, and to insist upon a certain amount of work being performed by
the woman in each case.
I had to caution the Yunivola against receiving fees for traders’ licences
(from natives), and to simply confine himself to reporting the several cases to
the Stipendiary Magistrate for many reasons. One of the charges made
against the late Yunivola was founded on this subject.
The tax appears to be coming in very well, and they expect Lakeba’s tovi 3
will be completed this week. And parties from different surrounding islands
where the nuts are scarce are now on different parts of the island with the
permission of the tauTcei making their tovi, and will soon also be finished.
The traders speak cheerfully of their prospects, once the tax is finished.
The non-reeoverable debts law (or, as the natives call it, the “ Tabu dinau ”)
is regarded with favour by all, I think, especially by the Chiefs.
I was pleased to find that the late removals and new appointments meet
with very general approval; the mission and all think there was good ground
1 Scribe.
2 A kind of large mat.
3 Share or portion.
346


for the changes. There is, however, but one opinion here, that the whole thing
originated at Ban, and was greatly aggravated by Ratu Joe’s visit here, and to
Loma Loma, on the report reaching Levuka on the first occasion. From all I
can hear, he acted in a most blamable manner, and well deserves to have been
called to account or prohibited from visiting Lau for a couple of years, which
would not only have prevented him following up what he had done, but been
a caution to others of his class to be a little more careful for the future what
they may say against the local authorities. R. T. Cakau, I hear, has spoken
very strongly on the subject, and protests that Ban’s influence must be kept
to Bau and their own holdings or rights.
Sunday Night, June 23, 1878. —I am very thankful to be able to say
we are safe at anchor off Nukualofa on this our tenth day out. And now it
appears there was no real need for our hurry, as the Parliament has been post-
poned till the first or second week in July, chiefly, it is said, on account of food
and provisioning arrangements for the visiting friends of the Legislators.
We have not had any direct communication yet with the authorities, but
Maudslay and I took a stroll ashore : sabbath-like, everything was very quiet.
One thing I noticed —several vakai sulu 1 were walking about, and not as when
we were here before, when trousers prevailed. Mr. Baker is here, having
arrived about three weeks ago. The Wesley has left for Samoa, for which I
am rather sorry, as I should have liked to hare met some of the other
missionaries, to have known what may be Baker’s real status and probable
course for the future. We have been told that he has given out that he
hopes I will return here, that he may be able to resist me face to face, and
demand the names of the parties who gave the information to your Excellency.
It is most likely nothing more than empty boast. The whites we have seen
are very pleased at Mr. Maudslay’s arrival.
Monday Night. —We are still on board, but have been on shore most of
the day.
Taniela, who landed in the pilot boat yesterday, came on board with a
message of welcome from the King, and to say that he would be glad to see
Mr. Maudslay as soon as he came on shore ; so that soon after breakfast we
landed, and had an interview with His Majesty, which lasted about an hour,
and was in every way satisfactory. His Majesty expressed the great pleasure
it gave him that your Excellency’s word had been carried out so soon in the
appointment of a Consul. At the conclusion His Majesty said he had set
apart a house for Mr. M. to come ashore into. He was sorry it was not as good
as he would like, but all was being got ready for the Parliament visitors (it is
one of those long sheds adjoining the Germans’ place). It is a big empty place,
but will do very well until Mr. M. can look round. Parts of our traps have
been landed, and we go ashore for good in the morning.
From Taniela we have heard a good deal of news. It appears the want of
food was not the only reason the King had in postponing the meeting of
Parliament: he wished to see whether your Excellency would send* me or not,
as much that you had said he wished to adopt, but feared the how ; he feared
also that they might do more than was required. There has also been con-
siderable relaxation in the operation of certain laws. All the time we have
1 Dressed in sulus.
347
FIJI
CHAP. XXII


been ashore to-day we have not seen a single pair of trousers on a native ; sulu
prevails. Your Excellency will be pleased to hear that Taniela met with the
remark almost everywhere, “The Governor’s visit is bearing fruit.” “The
land is having peace and rest through the Governor’s words of counsel.”
There appears not to have been any positive declaration on the part of authori-
ties on any particular matter ; but the women are allowed to enjoy their
‘‘ seluka, ” 1 and plain sulu, and trousers and coats are laid on one side, no one
being molested as of yore. Baker is said to be keeping his house or pursuing
a non-interference policy. It is said he upbraided Tevita Uga with the studied
attentions paid to the Governor, such as sending ladies of rank to wait upon
and prepare the food for your Excellency, etc., etc. ; none of which I believe
unless I hear it from the authorities themselves. Mr. Baker and a Rev. Mr,
Clifton called upon Mr. Maudslay this morning before we landed ; civil, but
very stiff and formal. I hear that the Wesley was under weigh in Sydney
harbour when Mr. Langham reached there; and she was detained there; Baker
having been sent for on shore and questioned in a very summary manner, to
which he objected. When the Secretary of Missions informed him he must
send the Wesley without him if he demanded a more formal inquiry,
the result was that he received a warm lecture, and has been sent down to
wind up his affairs, and either leave the group or attend to his mission work
solely and purely in some other part of the islands. He gives out he will
leave at the end of the year for England.
I saw Tevita Uga this evening. He is greatly pleased at our arrival. He
complained that I had not gone ashore to see him last night, and hoped I was
going to be friendly. Of course I assured him he could rely upon that. So
far, all things seem very agreeable and satisfactory.
Saturday , June 29, 1878. —Since we have been ashore all have been very
busy getting the place inhabitable and things generally straight. Nothing
very particular has transpired. I have had a few chats with Tevita Uga and
the King and some other Chiefs. Your Excellency’s visit and advice is hailed
and spoken of as a great event, and rejoiced in by the whole of Tonga. They
say, “We know that we have been visited by a Chief.” The appointment of
a Consul so soon after is regarded as testimony that your Excellency truly
intends to help and do them good. lam rather sorry that they look upon Mr.
Maudslay as very young, and I have heard the King says, “ Does the Governor
trust his work to boys ? ” but I have no doubt I shall be able to correct any
misconception they may have. As the schooner Energy leaves on Monday for
Auckland I will forward this by her, as there is just a probability she may be
in time for the San Francisco mail. lam very sorry I fear I shall be detained
here for some time, that is if I am to stay here till the end of the Parliament.
—And beg still to remain, etc.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Nukualofa, Tonga, Tuesday, July 2, 1878. —Dear Sir—l enclosed my
last yesterday in the mail vid New York per schooner Energy.
I have had a very long chat to-day with Tevita Uga on various subjects,
and their Government, the laws and their operation upon the people. He
1 Native cigars.
348
CHAP.
FIJI


said he had found out that a law might in itself be very good, and at the same
time, when put into force, either all but unworkable, or producing very nearly
the opposite results from those anticipated or intended.
I found that he was in considerable difficulty about the laws against
adultery and fornication, as the present laws are entirely powerless to put
down the evil. He said it is purposed to make a new law to punish children
and youths for leaving their homes at their own pleasure or against their
parents’ desire, as this is one source of girls getting astray ; and it is supposed
that without a law nothing can be done. A father cannot even control his
child’s doings or will in anything. After a long chat I said to him, If I was
to give you the advice which is uppermost in my mind, I would say, not
only make no more laws against such things or on such subjects, but expunge
very nearly all that now exist in your code. You set forth in your Constitution
that you give the people their liberty, and then you immediately sit down
and make laws innumerable to bind them hand and foot, and lay upon them
burdens they cannot bear. My advice to you is to restore all your old
domestic customs pertaining to husband and wife, parents and children, heads
of families and households, that are not in themselves unjust 01 cruel ,
enforce upon husband, parent, and heads of households to do their duties
and seek their dependants’welfare.” He said, “I believe you, and such thoughts
are not new to me ; but what about the Church—what will the Lotu say ?” The
conversation then turned upon the subject of Church and State, and their
relation, position, duties, and responsibilities, and especially the tendency of
the former to control the latter when allowed. Of course in this Mr. Baker’s
name and conduct came up very prominently ; but he protests that Mr. Baker
is not to blame so directly as is generally supposed, but they themselves, their
desire for Yakapapalgi, 1 and their ignorance of the effect of measures and laws
until they have seen their operation are in fault. Had they followed Mr. Baker
or any other single individual, he believes they would never have made the
mistakes and committed the follies they have. But he considers Mr. Baker’s con-
duct as a missionary most reprehensible, inconsistent, and arbitrary ; and that
he is by far the greatest power in the land, through the teachers, preachers, and
members of the Church, whom he rules absolutely and tyrannically, without
regard to either their feelings, or Christianity as it is found in the Bible. And
he denounces from the pulpit all or any who dare to disagree with him or to
show anything like a different opinion. He is trader, farmer, and priest,
using his latter position and power with all its ramifications (which, as your
Excellency knows, permeate the whole land) to extend, increase, and amplify
his profitable transactions, to get his farms cultivated, extended, and profitably
improved, to depreciate the character of all others of his own race, and
to extend over them a priestly influence or power, which, from either a
desire to have a peaceful and quiet livelihood, or from more selfish motives,
is admitted or suffered by both native and white to a most surprising
extent.
His accounts of how some of the mission collections are conducted are at
once both ridiculous and disgraceful, and the results upon the people getting
into debt most disastrous ; but this latter, I find, has excited hardly any or
but very little concern in the minds of the people. No complaints, or but
1 European fashion.
349
XXII
FIJI


very few, have been made against Baker, as he is dreaded as a most bitter
and unscrupulous enemy by all, both native and white.
Sunday Night, July 14, 1878. —As the mail closes early in the morning, per
John Wesley for Sydney, there are one or two matters I must jot down
before I close this. All things are going on most satisfactorily between the
Government and Mr. Maudslay. For my own part I am much pleased with
the whole thing or course of events since we landed. Of course there is a
great deal of Malua, 1 native-like, and some might say no progress has been
made, because nothing has been done ; but as your Excellency knows, very
much, nay, all future success depends upon the initiation to establish a
friendly, free-and-easy interchange of civilities with the Chiefs. To let them
feel confidence and repose trust in small matters is not only of the utmost
importance, but really the only door through which one may be able to do them
real good. Well this, I feel, has been done, and Mr. Maudslay’s quiet, kindly,
and yet withal dignified way has won upon the people, both commoners and
Chiefs, and the first pleasurable excitement in hailing the advent of a British
Consul is fully sustained ; in fact in some things they want to do too much,
things that might involve them in some difficulties with other Consuls. They
are in heart thoroughly English. The Chiefs speak of the Consul as their
future adviser and helper, and the common people as the “ Bai,” or shield
to protect them from the supposed intended aggression of the Germans.
They are very desirous that Mr. Maudslay should go and reside on a founda-
tion a little beyond the graveyard on the beach near Tevita Uga’s residence,
beyond Junia’s, the Minister of Finance. I have strongly advised he should
comply. It’s out of the way perhaps ; but it’s amongst the people, and nearer
the Government than any other place. Then, the idea originating with them
is of the utmost importance for doing good.
Some rather important matters have transpired to-day, which I must
briefly state, leaving the particulars and substantiating facts for the future.
Since our arrival, Baker has been anything but sociable or free ; less so,
probably, with myself than either Maudslay or Houstoun. Of course for every
reason this is undesirable. He has been inquiring everywhere what my
business is, how long lam going to stay, etc., etc. A Mr. Clifton, Wesleyan
minister from New South Wales, is here for his health, and the other night
he dined with us, and in conversation said he would have to report on various
matters he had seen while here. Naturally we were anxious to know what
he might have discovered and what would be the nature of his reports. So
to-day, after church, I had a long chat with him. He told me that the
charge of trading Mr. Baker denied in toto, stating that it was utterly false,
and from all Mr. Clifton had been able to find he was disposed to agree with
Baker. About the conduct of the mission collections, he (Mr. C.) believed there
was some foundation, but that it had been greatly exaggerated ; and as to the
amount of debt still owing on promises to pay, he had made the most careful
inquiry, having sent out a prepared schedule to be filled up, and they had
been returned by the native ministers, and the whole amount still due
running over the past three years is under 400 dollars over the whole island.
Baker’s unpopularity amongst the people he was disposed to think is not nearly
so strong as represented. Soon after his arrival he was disposed to think it was
1 Procrastination.
350
CHAP
FIJI


as reported, but on more detailed and particular inquiry he found much of
it was nothing more than talk. In this, I told him, I was forced to a very
different conclusion, and from what I had heard from all sources, my impression
at present was that Baker is both feared and hated by a very large majority, and
my surprise was that the Mission Committee should keep him here, after so
many and repeated charges had been made against him from all sides —from
within the Church as well as from without the Church. I felt sure that his
power for good was gone. With this he agreed, but said his removal at the
present time was surrounded with considerable difficulty. But there could be
no doubt about his future conduct, especially in all matters relative to the
Government or laws : he was most strictly forbidden to interfere in any way
whatsoever.
I strolled along to Tevita Uga’s, and found him in a great state of excitement,
and much put out about Mr. Baker’s sermon this morning. He said he had
been preaching at them (the Government), and had mentioned him by name,
illustrating a point in his sermon that he (Tevita) had picked up a rusty nail
on the beach, taken it into his house, put it into his box to preserve. A drift
“waif and stray” coming across the sea from foreign parts was nothing as
compared to the Bible ;it was the only true riches. Well, all this is supposed
to apply to your Excellency’s visit and advice to the King. But the more
serious one which he related to me was the substance of a conversation Tugi
had had with Mr. Baker last night, in which Baker said your Excellency had
lied about him (Baker) when you returned from the visit here ; then pointing to
a large number of papers or letters, he said, “Those are going by the Wesley
on Monday morning, and to England, where they will confute the Governor
and expose him to everybody in Britannia ; you, who talk so much about him
and think him so great a man, will see that 1 am not afraid of him with all
his power and authority.” This, Tevita said, had given him and Tugi, also
the King, to whom they had reported the matter, much pain and annoyance.
They felt both ashamed and afraid that such things should have been said
about your Excellency, their guest, a stranger, friend, and helper. The King,
he said, was most malignant {sic). Of course all this is getting too much, and
lam determined now to sift the whole matter to the vuna. 1 Facts are what
are wanted, which Mr. Baker has been hitherto trying to suppress, and keeps back
from every inquiry ; but I think we have got hold of the end of the yarn and
may be able to unravel it. I must ask you to suspend any judgment until my
next, when I shall be able to give you fuller particulars.—And beg still to
remain, etc.
From Mr. Matjdslay
Nukualofa, Tongatabu, July 14, 1878.—My dear Sir—l have really
very little to tell you, although I have now been in Tonga three weeks. I
think I have done very little, but Wilkinson says we have done a great deal.
There is certainly a very great deal of satisfaction expressed at our arrival.
I have only seen the King once—the time I gave him your letter. Wilkinson
and Taniela have been of the greatest service ; I don’t know how I should
have got on without them. Wilkinson and David Uga get on capitally, and
I am able to get hold of lots of things I am sure David would never tell me.
1 Its root.
351
XXII
FIJI


Baker has offended everybody, and is playing as far as I can see right into my
hands ; even the King has turned against him, but he does not seem to be
aware of his unpopularity. Wilkinson will, I know, tell you all about the
Bakerian news ; he is full of it, and takes most careful notes. For the present
I have taken possession of a large wooden store-house, which the Government
offered ; we have managed to make it tolerably comfortable.
The natives are very anxious to build me a house in their own part of the
town away from the white traders, and they have expressed such a strong
desire to do so that I think I had better let them build me one. Of course I
shall pay the full value of the house, but even then it would be economical,
as the building of a wooden house here would cost a very large sum, and
without the people were willing to set to work as they are now, Ido not see
how I could get a large enough native house built at all. The Roman Catholic
Mission want to sell their old church, which is a very fine native house, and I
thought of making an offer for it, but David does not quite seem to like the
idea. I think, however, 1 can get over his objections, and then it will not
be an expensive matter. There is no house here which I can rent, and I think
a move to their part of the town would be a good one. Your visit here worked
wonders, and the opposition of Baker is just the thing to keep the natives up
to the mark. If Wilkinson and David were going to stay here, we could do
what we liked with Tonga in a year, but I think Baker is holding back until
they leave, and then he may prove stronger than he appears to be at present.
He is also evidently waiting for Mr. Clifton, a Wesleyan minister from
Sydney, to leave, as he has come here to report on matters, and is not, I think,
very friendly to Baker. I have had a good many of the native chiefs and
Government officers to dine with me, and as Baker never asked me to his
house, I asked him to dine here, and he came, and we got on very well, but I
have seen nothing of him since. Ido not think it is any good writing much
now, as a later boat will probably catch the same mail. Parliament will
probably not meet for another week, as the chiefs are not all assembled yet.
I believe it was really postponed for our coming.
Consular work there is hardly any to do. David Uga says that since my
arrival all the low whites have kept so quiet that the police have very little
work, and this pleases him immensely. I don’t expect it will last. The one
complaint brought to me is one of the usual kind, abuse from a Government
officer, and £IOOO damages claimed. I found a shipwrecked crew here and
shipped them off to Auckland ; the captain had left before my arrival. After
receiving the greatest kindness and care from the Government, he left without
even calling on David or the King to thank them. There is news from Samoa
of the arrival of a German and an American man-of-war. Mamea returned
in the American vessel and Colmesnil.
I have heard nothing of Steinburger’s arrival, but American adventurers
appear to be pouring in, and Van Kamp, a well-known scoundrel, has
returned. Houstoun is with me still, and I shall be sorry when he leaves, as
without him and Wilkinson it will be terribly dull. I have written to a man
from Hew Zealand to join me, but have had no answer yet. Lady Gordon
knows him. The weather is lovely. I sleep under two blankets.
The tabu'on sulus is almost at an end, except at the big church. The King
himself walks about the town in a sulu in the day-time. And I think the
tabu on masi is nearly over too, it is so very unpopular. The King has sent
352
CHAP.
FIJI


his people to meke at my house; they sang all the old songs which called
forth a sermon from Baker on the subject which Wilkinson will have told
you of. I will write by every opportunity. I have only sent one formal
despatch telling you of my arrival. I shall be very anxious to hear how
Polynesian affairs go on at home.—Very sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
From Mr. Wilkinson.
Nukualofa, July 15, 1878. -— Dear Sir—l am afraid my last would not
be very satisfactory. I was not very well, and had been a little put out by
something that had occurred; and then there is much that is unpleasant
—pursuing any course that is likely to do these people real good is both
delicate and difficult work ; and while I know that your Excellency very fully
realises the whole position, yet when it comes to be dealt with in detail all
sorts of things and matters arise, which either perplex or annoy, or both. And
as of necessity there is a certain amount of opposition, either to the system or
regime now obtaining, or to the personal originators or executors of it, to
pursue a course that will neither excite suspicion on the one hand nor wound
the pride and feelings of the people on the other, and at the same time effect
the object sought, to do the people real good, is not an easy task. In many
cases they take it for granted we are opposed to Mr. Baker, and are seeking his
downfall. While there are some advantages in that view being taken, I feel it
best to keep constantly before each and all that your Excellency’s policy or
desire is to do them good, and lead them in a course that is most calculated
to secure their preservation as a race, as well as their advancement in civilisa-
tion suitable to their circumstances and condition.
Much that Baker has done since his return and is now doing is more than
annoying, and as far as he is concerned surprises me much. I gave him credit
for more ability and tact. He has very seriously offended the King, and seems
to be pursuing the course of a spoiled child after a whipping, and is doing
and saying all sorts of mean, dirty little things—to wit, his sermon of yester-
day, which is characterised as a tirade against the authorities for having
received you so well and paid such attention to your visit and advice (which
he seems to take for granted is all intended as against him).
I think I told your Excellency that Maudslay had sent to ask for the
Constitution in English, and, much apparently to the surprise of Uga, every
copy had been removed from the printing-office to Baker’s house. And he
now asks for a little time to make certain alterations of errors which he
says have been made in the translation by the printers.
In a chat with Uga to-day he told me that by last trip of Meteor (while
Mr. Baker was still in Sydney) he sent down a letter, to be read in the church
here in re the mission contributions of this year, and it was to the effect that
as God had had pity upon Tonga, and delivered them from famine, and shown
them great good, they must double their contributions—a family who gave
$4O last year must give $BO this, one that gave $BO last year must give $l6O
this, and one giving $lOO must give $2OO this year, and so on. The reply
by many was, “ If we get love and pity from God, it is evident we must not
expect anything of that kind from those professing to be His ministers and
servants.” Of course the thing will be to get hold of this letter or a copy of
it (Tevita Kata was the Native Minister who read the letter), as this is one
111 2 A
353
XXII
FIJI


of the things Baker denies flatly to Mr. Clifton, the Rev. gentleman I named
in my last who has left in the J. Wesley this morning for Sydney. The
usual course pursued here in Nukualofa as to the amount to be paid, is for
Baker to send down from his house to the head of each Mataqali, and they
commence to prepare and get together said sum. After all have given some-
thing, it is reported, and if short, Baker orders them to return to collect the
balance. By and by the meeting comes off, and as each comes up to the
table and contributes, the name of his family is read out, with the sum con-
tributed ; if short of the amount first named, that is particularly noticed,
and he is told that he is in debt so much to God’s work and cause. Some
are said to be in debt now in this way still from 1876 collection.
Another subject of dissatisfaction much spoken about is in reference to
funds spent on the buildings about the mission property, in the neighbour-
hood of the college, including the Ladies’ College. All declare they know
nothing about how or why money is being spent. Baker tells them in some
meeting, Bolotu 1 generally, “ money is wanted for so-and-so,” and that is all
they know or hear of it. Then the Ladies’ College appears to be Mr. Baker’s
idea entirely: all Chiefs and people, man, woman, and child, object to the
whole thing—the building, its situation, —and say that its object is all a
myth and can never be carried out. If one asks where the money comes
from, the only reply is, ‘ From the Tongans,’ and it is collected by and at the
instance of Baker, and spent by him. A case is reported of a certain iron
gate ordered for some entrance to the King’s Palace. When it arrived, His
Majesty asked what was the cost, and when he got the account, was so dis-
gusted with the price that he said it should never be erected on his premises,
as it would then be only a reminder of a folly and an annoyance, and it lay
rusting on the ground for months, until Uga requested to be allowed to
erect it in front of his own cottage, where it still is.
Of course in all these things it is necessary to get the facts and particulars ;
not that I want to have any thing to do with Baker in any way, but it may be
necessary to use them if he goes too far in his denial, or in his present course.
My advice is not to fight any one, but seek to point out a few of the more
glaring errors and mistakes the authorities are making, with a feasible
reminder suitable to them, the great object being to secure the true welfare
of the people.
Tuesday Night. —Last night I had a long chat on the quiet with Uga till
after midnight, on many subjects, and got the particulars of Baker’s words to
Tugi, which may be summed up something like this: “You appear all to
have been greatly pleased with all the Governor said and did when here during
my absence.” Tugi replied, “We wished to act as became Chiefs to a high
Chief and the representative of the Queen of Britannia.” “ Great Chief indeed !
do you know that his conduct was mean, and that he returned and lied of
me in many things. He said thousands of Church people have been tried,
which is a lie: there is not more than a hundred since I have been in
Nukualofa (members of Church). He said I levied the mission collections,
which is also a lie ; that I broke, that I made the laws ; in fact that I was
Government, —all of which you (Tugi) know to be lies. And see if lam to
be put down by any one. See all those papers ; they contain the confutation
1 Class meetings for confession.
354
CHAP.
FIJI


of the Governor’s bad reports, and they are going home to England, to meet
him face to face, and you will see who will prevail.” Baker was probably
surprised that Tugi protested against such language being used against a
visitor of theirs whom they believed to be a true Chief, a friend of Tonga, and
whom it had been the pleasure and joy of every man, woman, Chief, and
commoner in Tonga to welcome and entertain. He then proceeded to bind
him to secrecy and silence with all the ecclesiastical and priestly vigour
possible, not without an implied threat; and holding up Tauiela as an
example of a traitor to his Church and people by joining or being united with
us said, “He is lost—lost, and you and I will live to see it.” Tugi, in com-
municating this to Tevita, said, “ I feel most solemnly bound not to repeat this
but to you, as it is our common slander, not the Governor’s, whom we all
know was pursuing a straightforward course of duty to which he has been
appointed by the Queen ; let it remain between us.” I know, Sir, you will
be terribly annoyed at this, as I am, more than I can tell ; still a man
that will pursue such a course is almost too despicable for notice in connection
with the high object your Excellency has in view. That it will retaliate
upon his own head, I am satisfied.
The Church, I find, has been put through some inquisitorial examination
by classes, when all have been called upon to confess the number of sins
they have committed against the Church, the laws, and the Government.
I cannot understand it thoroughly, or get to the true root, but it seems
to be for some statistical purpose, and is regarded as a vile indignity—the
whole thing makes me feel disgusted and wish I was at home following my
own proper duties. The breach between the King and Baker seems to be
widening, which I don’t think is desirable at all. For them to be unfriendly
is quite sufficient. If it become too serious, other difficulties may arise with
advantage to Baker’s policy. But I like to feel that a Providence is over
all, and as long as we do the right the end will be well.
I accompanied Mr. Maudslay to the Police Court to-day, which is held
every Tuesday, and the great nuisance is the horrible and incessant noise
made by the policemen walking about in squeaking shoes. There was no
case of any very particular moment or importance.
One woman charged with illegitimate pregnancy. The man she charges
denied all knowledge of her ; so she was sent to prison, and ordered to seek
evidence to substantiate her statement —in fact prove her own guilt. A man
charged with theft was brought up the fourth time, the case having been
adjourned for additional evidence on each occasion, against which he protested
very bitterly. During the hearing, two witnesses were sworn in together,
and examined in each other’s presence. One case of violence had to be
adjourned, because the magistrate was related to the accused. This is the
second regular Court I have attended, and one cannot but be impressed with
the evident desire there is to do justice to all; but the prevailing idea is,
from the Magistrate through all the officials, to get if possible a conviction ;
and then it is clear enough they are entrammelled with the forms and para-
phernalia of our Courts, which they try to match, and often make the whole
thing ridiculous. They say there is a great increase of work at the courts,
and this, as far as I can learn, is considered an evidence that the laws are
working well and efficiently upon the people.
Mr. Houstoun has left us to-day on a visit to Mua, to a Mr. and Mrs. Barnard.
355
XXII
FIJI


All, or nearly so, are here for the Bose. One from Fiji is struck with the
absence of canoes in a gathering like this of Chiefs ; as yet all have arrived in
Papalagi 1 vessels, though it is said some are to follow on from Haapai in canoes.
Wednesday. —Parliament is fixed to open to-morrow, and there has been
a grand Bolotu 2 to-night, although Baker, with his split with the King,
declared there should he no more—but it appears old Nita Vi, the oldest
Native Minister here, in fact the Apostle of Tonga, has prevailed,—and pro-
cured that the political and scandalous character should be left out, and that
they should be conducted as originally. This Mr. Baker announced, and
said, if there were any more of such as the past he would prohibit them for
ever ; to which, it appears, His Majesty replied, the Bolotu have simply been
what the missionaries or their (the Church) leaders have made them.
The Xarifa is in from Fiji, but no news, Maafu having sent her, it
appears, with a sister of Tugi’s. I had a line from Swayne, but he had
only been four days at Lau when he wrote ; he desires me very strongly to
call in there on my way back, there being numerous things to consult about.
It appears a petition was forwarded to the Conference (Wesleyan) in
Sydney just after Baker was sent here, Nukualofa, signed by the King and
some thirty or forty Chiefs, asking he should be removed from Tonga ; but
he managed to get up a counter petition, and the first fell through. There
was the strongest feeling against him, and the greatest indignation felt at his
conduct and doings. The King says the only reason Mr. Baker has not fallen
is not because the charges against him have not been true, but on account
of the way the inquiries have been conducted, and that the natives have
been kept hack from giving evidence. The charges are true ; but Mr. Baker
has been able to blind those making the inquiries, and to hide the truth.
Thursday.— The opening of Parliament has been postponed, it having
rained nearly all night and to-day.
In the Bolotu the other night Baker said he feared this was going to be a
very bad year or age for Tonga. He had seen Tonga through many trials,
but there was danger. The Parliament was about to meet, and it was a pure
one. No Kaipapalagi would be there, and advised them to be careful not to
allow any foreign influence, follow his word, and keep themselves select and
they would live and succeed, etc. etc.
The impression produced is that this is a dig at us, as they say they
cannot see what is likely to come upon Tonga ; the famine is past. The
Constitution, laws, parliament, courts, etc., all are Yakapapalagi, 3 and he
(Baker) is the root and framer of them all. If any change comes, it must be
back to Vakatonga 4 ; and that is what we most desire, and what he opposes.
Berall, one of the merchants here, the representative of the firm of Owen
and Co., Auckland, dined with us to-night, and he says on one occasion
Baker paid £I2OO on account of Government for timber, etc., to a captain of
one of their vessels. He went next day and presented a bill for £IOO against
the Government, but Baker said “I never pay Government accounts, and
have nothing to do with Government.” Berall reminded him of some of their
conversations, and also of the fact he had paid a large sum for the Government
but yesterday ; but Baker replied, “ Yes, but that was the Bank that advanced
1 European. 2 Class meetings, 3 European fashion. 4 Tonga fashion.
356
CHAP.
FIJI


that money,” and produced the bank ledger (in his house this was) and showed
where lie debited the Government to the bank, and the bank to himself, for
the loan of £12,000. When Derail pointed out that such a transaction simply
amounted to one and the same thing, Baker said that was one way of looking
at it.
Since Baker’s return he has been making special inquiries about who gave
information to your Excellency, saying they will probably regret it. He said
to one, “ Sir A. H. Gordon took up several reports about me from here which
I had to answer as charges. Of course I came out clear of them all. I don’t
suppose Sir A. Gordon would stoop to such meanness : it was his followers, in
fact, Mr. Wilkinson.” And he thinks I may regret it. I said to the man,
“Certainly, if I have injured Mr. Baker by spreading a false report.” He
does not know what I can have come for.
Everywhere there is the strongest feeling in favour of Maafu, and your
Excellency’s visit is everywhere held as a gracious providence, and is extolled
and celebrated in their Mekes in a way most pleasing in every sense, and
likely to be of lasting good. But all dread Baker’s presence. They say their
only hope is the Consul. “Oh that he had been an older man!” The
latter prejudice I think I have succeeded in removing to a great extent.
Friday. —The Parliament has been opened to-day with what I suppose
ought to be called great pomp and ceremony.
Tugi the President, Chair (Jea) as they call him, sent us admittance
tickets this morning ; and he had been obliged to fit out Taniela in coat and
trousers and shoes, etc. Tevita Uga told me yesterday that it would not do
for a “ Toa ” to be absent on such an occasion if in Nukualofa : it would be
disrespect to the King ; and to go simply in a sulu, the other chiefs would say
was insolence on his part. All of which Taniela admitted, and while protest-
ing against the folly and wrong, said he of course must submit. The two
Fijians were allowed to go in their native dress. When we got there, about
10 a.m., we found Tevita Uga and the Queen in full dress waiting for His
Majesty. We soon went into the hall (the Supreme Court building), and a
man gave out that on the arrival of His Majesty all must stand up, and when
he sat down all must sit down. The President, Premier, etc., were on the
left of the dais, where we were accommodated with seats also. The Wesleyan
and Catholic Missionaries, with the Queen, were on the opposite side. The
body of the hall was occupied by the nobles and legislators, on seats raised
one above another on each side from the centre, and a small space just within
the door was left for the ladies and public ; there were probably over 200
present, and three times that number of the coatless, outside. “The King
comes ” was announced by the man, and all rose. His Majesty, as he entered
the enclosure, raised his hat and saluted, then ascended the dais, touched
rather than sat on the chair or throne, resting against it in a very uncomfort-
able manner, then arose and said, standing, he thanked God all were alive
and well, that H.B.M. Consul was here, that the Wesleyan and Catholic
Missionaries were here, that the chiefs of Togatabu, Haapai, and Yavau were
here. They were all here through the good providence of God, but some were
absent. Joshua, late Governor of Haapai, was no more. A paper was then
handed to His Majesty by W. Gu, who, with the A.D.C., had accompanied
him, and with great difficulty (still standing) he managed to read it. It was
to the effect he had called them together to make laws and discuss matters of
357
XXII
FIJI


the land. It did not occupy His Majesty ten minutes from the time he
entered the room, and yet he trembled so much that it was feared he would
fall down. Gu handed him his staff, and they returned. His Majesty, Gu,
and the A.D.C. were dressed in red military cloth, with various and profuse
facings and trimmings, which, with all due respect, I say was a kind of finish-
ing stroke to the paraphernalia of the farce ; for such the whole thing really
was, and only tending to reduce their Government and all its surroundings
to ridicule in the eyes of foreigners, and cause contempt amongst themselves.
I have heard several chiefs express themselves disgusted, pointing out the
effect, and how different the effect would have been upon the mind of every
Tongan had the ceremony been conducted Yakatonga, thus preserving both
their own dignity and the respect of foreigners.
Nothing at all transpired to indicate either what they intend to do, or what
policy is to be pursued. I have suggested that we keep well in with Tugi, as
we shall not only get to know most in that way, but do most good thereby.
Saturday Night. —Maudslay had an interview with Uga in reference to
the piece of land they have pointed out for a consular residence. Uga ex-
plained that their desire was that he should reside on their side of the town
and in their midst; they wished to feel he was one of themselves, as well as
feeling that they ought to give him, your Excellency’s representative, the best
site available in the town. Maudslay wisely accepted the proposal. It has
now to be laid before the King, Junia, and the Taukeis, who will arrange all
the details.
During the chat, the question about a copy of the Constitution came up,
Mr. Maudslay having obtained a copy from a carpenter, at which Tevita was
not a little put out. He said he had sent four times to Baker for a copy, but
the only reply Baker gave him was that he was too busy to alter some
portions not correctly translated. He, Uga, has instituted inquiries as to
how, or by whose orders, the books were removed to Baker’s, as they were
printed at the Government Post-Office. This is not the only thing which
shows that Baker has the free run of everything, and simply does as he likes
with every thing and person in the Government, from the King downwards ;
but if I am not mistaken, he has overstepped the mark, drawn the cord too
tight, and if carefully managed the reaction will be all that can be desired to
frustrate his influence over the chiefs and people.
I have been very much annoyed to hear from Taniela fuller particulars of
his first interview with Baker on the night of our arrival. The conversation
that ensued was something like the following :B. “ You are come from Fiji.
Who of you are come ? What old man has come with you, Matuka ? ” (or
Maotana), a term only used by very high chiefs to their inferiors, or menials.
T. “The Consul, Mr. Wilkinson, another gentleman [Houstoun], and self,
with some attendants.” B. “ What have you all come for ? ” T. “In accord-
ance with the Governor’s word to the King, Mr. Maudslay comes to reside
as Consul, and Mr. W. to help to do some good in Tonga.” B. “To help Tonga?
I was not aware there was any need of help, or that any evil existed here.
Tonga is at peace and prosperous. Have you brought us anything ? ” T. “No.
What should webring ?” B. “ Have you brought us any yams ? You might do
us some good by bringing some yams. Are you [Taniela] in the Government
service in Fiji ? ” T. “No.” B. “ Don’t you receive pay from Government ? ”
T. “No ; I have no position in the Government; lam simply a chaplain while
358
CHAP.
FIJI


here.” B. “ I shall have to report you to the elders in Sydney, that you may he
dismissed ; you are a helper with my enemies and the enemies of Tonga’s need.
What will you say to that ? ” T. “I have not come here of my own free will or
choice, but at the request of the Governor, and with the consent and know-
ledge of the missionaries in Fiji.” B. “What filthy practices or doings were
you and the Governor and party guilty of when down here before?” (the word
used pofago, Fijian nokatitila). T. “I know of nothing filthy or unbecoming
we did.” B. “What of the letter sent to Europe containing charges against
me, religion, the college, the schools, and Government ? T. “ I know of no
such letter, I know the Governor was much pleased with the work of the
Church, with the College. He gave great praise to the King for much he saw,
and gave the King advice.” B. “ And what is the ‘old man’ going to do
you have brought now, will he advise the King ? ” T, “He will do his duty,
I suppose. May I leave?” B. “ How very wise you all are in Fiji! Yes,
you may go.”
Such mean dirtiness would not be worth noticing but for the effect such
things have upon the native mind ; and a man with less moral courage and
independence of will than Taniela would have been so much afraid of such a
conversation as to have rendered him simply useless and probably got him
into serious trouble. It is very evident we can make up our minds Baker is
no friend, but I oppose the idea of “fighting” him. It appears to me our
duty is to expose the evils arising out of the practices of which he is supposed
to be the moving spirit, and seek to lead the Chief to change those laws at
once, ridiculous and evil in their effect, and let Baker sink or swim as he may
be able. I have no fear but a true representation of the facts, with proofs to
the Mission Committee in Sydney, will effect the necessary and desirable
change at the proper time.
Monday. —Mr. Maud slay had an interview with Uga this morning in re a
case of complaint from a carpenter against a native indebted to him who
had run away to Fiji, but returned the other day in the Xarifa, which was
quite satisfactory. The case is being dealt with, and the man will be sold
up to pay as far as able.
Rather unwisely, or perhaps in a not very happy way, the subject of
debts generally, and especially Mission Collection debts, was introduced,
which had the effect of shutting Tevita up altogether, and to his asking the
Consul to be of a good mind and get the particulars from other sources, but
that Uga would assist him all he could. As we were leaving, he asked me to
look in again ; and in a quiet way I have got a good deal of information, or
perhaps I ought to say the ends of the threads likely to lead to a very
great deal. There are large numbers still heavily in debt to Baker for
money lent for Mission Collections, and which has been handed over to the
Godeffroys and Son, who are now bringing the people to Court, and getting
judgments and selling them up.
Also the Bank Charter, which gives it power to lend money, gives it power
to recover, and so men have been sold up, land and all. One man resisted.
The King interfered, and the sale, or rather occupation, was stopped ; but
Baker is said to claim it, and has it regularly weeded, and although the owner
lives upon it, still it is only on sufferance. The King is said to be greatly
enraged, and declares no man’s land shall be sold under any pretext. Uga
says there are some very dark, mysterious things lying hid—many that he
359
XXII
FIJI


does not understand himself. Only wait, he says, and all will be unearthed.
Great caution and better native treatment and procedure is all we have to
observe, and all will be right. lam sure we are making quiet and sure
progress in the minds and confidence of the chiefs ; but to push anything
would not only increase our difiiculties, but probably result in failure. °
The question of a Post-Office has been talked about, and I have offered to
put the department into order for them.
There is rather an amusing rumour that the Parliament has expelled the
clerks, and is discussing some matters with closed doors, Tugi saying that,
until they have come to a decision on some particular subject he has to bring
before them, no record or report shall be made.
Tuesday. —The letter from Baker, read in the church, while he was in
Sydney, cannot be found, but there is no doubt of the fact, and of the nature
of its contents. The N.A.M. says it also referred to your Excellency’s
intended visit, and that it was evil, because Mr. Baker was absent; but they
must be careful and move cautiously about, as all their ways and doings
would be observed. The inquisitorial papers sent round, and upon which
the members of the Church were examined, were a printed form, and are now
the subject of racy joking at every foikava.
Tevita Kata, it appears, had the courage to suggest to Baker a milder
course in reference to the Mission Collections, and that they should be free or
voluntary, as now the Collections were both unpopular and the source of great
evils to the people ; but he was told that his duty was to obey, and referred
to the result of late years as compared with those previous to Mr. Baker’s
system, that the people were not capable of knowing how much they could
give, and he would continue to levy the amount on each family.
I am much surprised at the great unpopularity of Baker everywhere ; I
could not have thought it could have possibly been anything like so deep
rooted as it is. The man is positively hated by all classes, in the Church or
out of it, gentle and simple ; he is held up to ridicule and derision, and the
children along the streets call him names, and are encouraged to do so by
their mothers. The state of things, from a religious point of view, is simply
deplorable, and how they can exist and not be known by the missionaries
and heads of the Church I cannot understand.
I find that people are being sold up for debts to Baker and Mission Collec-
tions, and a very strange case is reported about the estate of Matakitoga, the
late Governor of Yavau. At his death Uga (who had been sent by the
King to bury him) found that there was something over $450 due to him for
salary, and that he was in considerable debt to various white men. The
salary was handed over to his widow and child, but she requested Uga to
take charge of it, and pay the whites as far as it would go, all but Mr. Baker’s
claim, which was for the price of their house, and as the house was there as
security, to leave that and they would settle it by and by, either by selling
the house, or by selling a ship or some of the animals, or the whole. In all
of which Uga agreed, and as far as the cash went the white traders were
paid, and the widow engaged to pay off balances by making copra, etc., from
their nuts, and the greater portion has been cleared off. But on Uga’s return
here Baker was much enraged at this course, and said that Uga had broken
the Tongan law in such cases provided, and went to the magistrates and
insisted on his being brought to book. This, I suppose, was more than they
360
FIJI
CHAP,


felt they could do. Then Baker brought his case into Court against
Matakitoga, bullied the magistrates into a verdict, and then bullied the
Treasurer to pay the amount, as the estate had been disposed of illegally by
the Premier of the Government (Uga). The money was paid him out of the
Treasury, without the knowledge of the Premier or any one else. Baker
then told them to go and sell up the widow and child, which also was done,
and the money brought back to the Treasury ; but Uga and the King refused
to allow it to be counted as part of the revenue, saying it was the price of a
widow and a fatherless child, (the bailiff’ having got away to Yavau before
Uga or any one could stop him). Everything the widow had was sold up —
vessel {Caroline), boats, cattle, horses, furniture (but not the house). Uga
was so much affected while he related this to me, that he had to stop for a
time, and some of Matakitoga’s relatives are so much enraged that they
threaten violence. The money remains undivided, and I have heard the King
says “ let it rot there.” It appears Baker brought the house or the timber
from New Zealand, and arranged with Matakitoga that he was to pay for it
in three years. The first year, two-thirds of his salary was to be paid to
Baker ; the second, one-half; and the balance out of the third year: but I
cannot find what was the exact amount due on his death. I think you will
say, Sir, no matter from what point of view the case is viewed, it speaks for
itself. And yet this man has hitherto declared himself no trader, and success-
fully hoodwinked everybody—(his own colleagues and elders included) ; and
yet, as I have heard it expressed by some of the chiefs, the very land groans
and stinks under his oppression and vicious or unloving deeds. From a
Methodist point of view it is abominable ; but it is a scandal and disgrace to
the whole of Christendom, and what is most to be deplored is that the
individual will suffer but little from exposure compared with what the
cause of Christ and of Mission enterprise will suffer by giving occasion to its
enemies to scoff. Were this a solitary instance of his doings that was
reprehensible, one would not fear so much the effect; but lam getting to feel
afraid to make inquiry, or to listen to the reports which one meets on every
hand and at every turn, lest they be true.
When in Sydney, Baker sent down a lot of goods by the Meteor, provisions
for their Bose, no one but himself knowing anything about it. The Govern-
ment refused to take delivery, and the goods were landed on the beach,
and freights, etc., remained unpaid. Finally, to save them from damage by
wet, they were stored at the risk of whom it might concern. Baker now
demands explanation and, of course, payment. Uga says he knew nothing of
the purchase ; it was his business to make provision for the Bose, and he had
done so from New Zealand. Uga says he believes the goods have been paid
for by their Government money in the hands of their agent in Sydney on
Baker’s order, but waits the return of the Meteor for particulars from Sahl.
I had a letter to - day from the King’s A. D. C. asking me to undertake the
organisation of their postal department, and we have discussed the matter
and think it wise I should undertake it. There are many reasons besides
the definite one, where it will be an advantage, and afford opportunity of
doing good.
I find that some of the money given out to the people for Mission Collec-
tion purposes has been advanced by the Godeffroys’ agents. And two accounts
have been kept —one by the agent or trader, who is represented as standing
361
XXII
FIJI


by Baker handing out the cash while Baker is receiving it as collection ; the
second account is kept by Baker of the amounts given by each individual.
The firm then, it appears, collects the copra, and in some instances Baker
sells the copra to the firm, receiving the money in advance. But it is next
to impossible to get to the bottom of the affair, not from want of information,
but from the very profusion of it, and reports of all kinds come in by the
score. Each native, of course, gives his account from his own standpoint, and
under the feelings excited in his own mind at the time, or by the consequences
upon himself and family since he has been able to realise the real truth.
Houstoun is back, and has enjoyed his trip and stay at Mua ; has heard
that some natives have been sold up for Mission Collection debts there, but
could not get the particulars of the cases.
Saturday. Mr. Maudslay gave £5 as a prize for a canoe race. A trial was
made yesterday, which was a failure, but the race came off very successfully
to-day, a Haapai canoe being the winner. Baker sent word down when he
heard of the race, with orders that no preacher of any grade was to go in any
of the canoes on pain of excommunication, which order was of course implicitly
observed, much to the annoyance of the King, who highly approved of the affair.
It is amusing to see the gradual disappearance of trousers and coats, and
the plain sulu is now common even at the King’s foiJcavas.
From all I can gather about the doings of Parliament, it appears they
have had closed doors, that they might decide upon some course of policy ;
and it has resulted in a request to the King to be allowed to rediscuss all
the existing laws. His Majesty has given them full permission to go through
the whole, even the Constitution, and promised they shall be protected
from all interference or influence from without. This, of course, is im-
portant, and a move in the right direction ; the only fear I apprehend is they
may now go to the opposite extreme.
We had Tugi to dinner the other evening, and he is in great spirits. He
says that the effect of your Excellency’s visit is going to be great for good to
Tonga ; that had it not been, he fears to say what would have been the conse-
quences. He says : “We had gone far far astray, and were going farther ;
Tonga was drifting into deep blue water where no anchorage is.”
There was an immense solevu 1 yesterday to the Yavauans and Haapaians
of seed yams. Over 250,000 were given ; the whole of the space from Uga’s
cottage to near Godeffroys’ (on the beach) was covered. It appears they
helped Tonga some years ago when their crop failed through famine. But it
is greatly cried down by Baker and all the traders as a violation of the
liberties of the people and Constitution, having been done at the order of
the King. This only goes to show what a farce the whole theory of political
liberty is, and liberty of conscience as well, under Baker’s rule at all events, —
the canoe race to wit.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, July 10, 1878.—My dear Sir —It being within a week of mail
time, I think I had better begin to write letters. Our present breakfast
arrangements preclude any attempts to write in the early morning, so I fear
I shall find it much more difficult to write letters than it was formerly.
1 Presentation of property.
362
FIJI
CHAP.


I have absolutely no news to tell you. The Des Yceux both ‘ ‘ convalescent,”
but not much more. He is, however, digging into work pretty well, and walks
a good deal, and I think is getting on all right, and will soon be strong again.
Household matters are, you will be surprised to hear, going on all right.
Pierre has proposed again—this time by letter —to Lizzie, and she declines to
give him any answer at all. If only one of them would marry some one else,
or do something to get the matter settled for good and all, I should be very
glad : their jealousy (for both are equally bad at that) is the very mischief.
However, in spite of the rows, we are getting along somehow. The Moores
are still here : he goes off to Mago to-day, but will be back in time for the
mail. The more we see of them both, the better we like them, and I never
before met two people who never are in anybody’s way. It is most pleasant
having them here.
Now to business matters.
1. The nephew—Wood. After you went away nobody knew what was
to be done with him. Both Thurston and I only knew by word of mouth
what you had said you were going to make him. After much hesitation Mr.
D. V. gazetted him as a “Sub-Inspector of Immigration and Assistant in the
Immigration Office ”on £2OO and £SO for travelling expenses. The nephew
was furious, and put in two letters from you, one holding out the hope of a
“Magistracy and Commissionership” at £250, and the second letter telling
him to come quickly, as you were keeping open that appointment for him at
great inconvenience. He said that you had told him before you went that
you had altered your mind about him, and was going to make him ‘ ‘ Sub-
Agent” of Immigration at £250. However, it w T as of no use. Mr. D. V.
would have nothing more said about it, when, lo and behold, as I was copying
the draft of your last despatches, which I had not seen (and which Mr. D. Y.
also said he had not seen), and which Arthur had left me to copy into the
book, I came upon your despatch reporting his appointment at £250. I took it
in fear and trembling to Mr. D. Y., and I must say he took it very kindly,
considering the hole I had unwittingly put him into. However, he refused to
alter his decision, but wrote a second despatch giving his reasons for not
having altered the appointment. He thinks it very hard on Bentley and Eyre
and others, who have worked all this time, to have such a “'duffer” shoved
over their heads, “The nephew ” knows nothing about your despatch about
him, and I think will probably write to you. At present Seed has taken him
for a tour up the Rewa. His wife has taken the little house which “ nurse ”
used to live in close to Ledingham’s boarding-house.
Horne still away.
Orpheus will go next week to Tonga for Wilkinson. I will send your
letters and the sandalwood. About the price of the latter, I suppose that
Government will not pay for your present to King George, so I shall pay for
it out of your money, and if you tell me to get it back from the Government
I can send in vouchers for it. I shall get Thurston to estimate the price of
what is sent to Tonga by comparing the quantity with the quantity and price
of what the remainder wdll fetch at auction. I will not forget your own
private logs.
Cawaci. —Wilson and the natives still beating round the bush. I think
your letter will have to be opened.
Vatukalo. —The Commission heard part of the evidence of the natives,
363
XXII
FIJI


and (I believe) thought it all humbug. The letter from Dunn is said to be a
forgery, I have set Hobday to work on it now, so that it may not be said
that we did not take all the means in our power to ensure the people fair
play. Old Tui Knmini confessed to prevarication, and that turned Carew
against the whole of them —at least as far as I can hear,
Heffernan. —Gone to Colo. I think we shall not have another row. We
parted with a thorough understanding and goodwill to one another. For the
present he is to send reports of every case in which more than six months’
sentence is awarded, and his Commissioner’s jurisdiction is limited to the same
powers as a Provincial Court. All cases beyond that limit have got to be
sent to me for consideration and sentence.
MacTcay. —Kept at the Post-Office on £IOO and a small cottage behind the
Post-Office. I think he has been very hardly used.
Suva. —Your houses are reported as badly requiring repair, etc., in small
matters, such as locks, doors, windows, paint, etc. I will write to Joske and
ask him to have them looked to, and then put in charge of Seed’s police
constable there.
Lake’s confidential clerk—Croft, R.E.—was caught embezzling moneys,
£2l of which is Government money. However, £5 was found and given back,
so he is charged with stealing £l6, and can be settled by the Magistrate’s
Court instead of going to the Supreme Court, which Mr. D. V. was very
anxious to avoid. So we have managed to reduce it to under the £2O (the
Magistrate’s limit) by the above “dodge.” This is very secret. He was had
up yesterday, and I have not yet heard the result. [lo^.—He got six
months’ imprisonment with hard labour : pleaded guilty.]
“Cumquots” still away. The first night after you left the Chief-Justice
dined here, and to my disgust endeavoured to impress upon Mr. D. V. that
Tui Bua was a “ treacherous and decitful old scoundrel.”
It is rather hard work here doing everything. I wish a proper A.D.C. or
Private Secretary would come out. I have to do heaps of work in town about
Mrs. Des Yceux’s bills, etc., and at the same time to stick in the office till
4 o’clock, and then very often Mr, D. Y. wants something else done, and so
one does not get much spare time for anything.
A.N.C. all right. Good reports from Camp.
Thurston has just asked me to take the charge of the Samoan schooner
upon our force, so as to save the money which is now being paid by Govern-
ment to a white man who looks after her. I said I would keep her clean and
dry if he would have her first cleaned out of ballast, etc. For this service my
men are to receive certain recompenses and rewards.
Rotumah. —The two vessels returned from there last week. Natives still
fighting. No man-of-war had been there. One vessel was the Undine and
the other the Louisiana, I think.
You must not mind the links of this letter being rather disconnected. I
put down the things as they come into my head.
Weather here very odd : cold dull days with showers and strong south
winds. Country wanting rain very badly, and no hope of any worth having.
Hill, of Rabi, called here. Sent in his card :
The Hon’ble Mr. John Hill, M.L.C.
He told us that his part of the country did not want rain at all.
364
CHAP.
FIJI


Olive has got the Wakaya people to go over to him. They are to work
one year for him, and after that he is to give them planting lands, and in
return “ lavaka ” them for three mouths in each year. He is to pay £1 per
annum taxes for the able-bodied men. lam very much disgusted at this. I
know it will lead to mischief, for if the partnership breaks up, which it is
certain to do some time, they will certainly be all turned off again, and their
last state will be far worse than their first. He did it without telling any one.
Thurston thinks the matter had better rest for the present, and if Olive makes
a false step he will be tripped up. Wakaya bids fair to become a cave of
Adullam.
I hear Swayne does not like Maafu.
Solomon becoming obnoxious.
I told the Argus to go on sending itself to Sir J. Lefevre, as I had no
orders to stop it. If you don’t want it, please let me know.
Cocks told me that Knollys had made arrangements to pay the Matani-
vanuas 15s. a month each in addition to their regular pay, and so I give it
him out of your money.
Boathouse finished : £lO to be paid by Government.
“Chubby” very well, but insists on galloping up and down the coral as
hard as he can, which must in the end hurt his legs I should think.
Dr. Ricci’s private letters to you. —I fancied that Arthur left them on the
table in our office, and that he pointed them out to me. If he did, somebody
has “prigged” them, for I cannot find them anywhere. Perhaps you took
them away with you.
July 30.—Received your letters, etc., yesterday evening. I cannot tell
you how pleased I felt when I saw the violets in the letter. For the time I
was far far away ; nor is my happiness lost when I have to turn to business
again. It was very kind of you to have done it.
Schedule of despatches will be duly sent to you.
Leefe’s Draft Labour Ordinance also.
Your letters.—Mr. D, V. and I, after consultation, decided to open such
as looked official; all the private ones I have sent to the Colonial Office. As
I have not stamps enough, I put them into an envelope, “to be left till
called for,” so please send for them.
Lady Gordon’s two casks of china arrived. Lake says he will not be able
to have the plans ready for this mail, the affair of Croft having put him all
out in his office.
Solomon.—Gracious. Mr. D. V. has styled him officially “ The Worshipful
the Warden,” which kindles the affections of the Jew.
Missionaries.—Langham and Fison bothered Mr. D. V. for some hours.
He gave them something to remember, and at the same time sent them away
in an oily state of good humour.
Colo. — Very good accounts from Camp. Woodruff seems to hit it off very
well with Ratu Rovo and the men. Wala was completely destroyed by a fire
a short time ago. I ordered our men to go and help and build : they have
built a house.
Our church at Camp is being built.
Two labour vessels in : Black Hawk from Line Islands, fifty-six passengers,
almost all women and children; Patience from Line Islands, fifty-three
labourers.
365
XXII
FIJI


Household.—All well and flourishing.
Parr, F., has written to Mr. D. V., telling him not to believe false reports
about him ; that he is going to live and die in and for Fiji; and that the
Government has no better supporter than himself in the Colony !
Orpheus is in, will sail at once. I have settled with Thurston that the
Government is to buy all the sandalwood (except your private logs), and your
present to King George will be paid by Government; and I got ten men for
the A.N.C. from Bua.
One of the Cakaudrovi A.N.C. had a row with a Draiba man, which
resulted in ten of them going to Draiba last Monday night with “ ula’s ” 1 to
punch his head. Most fortunately Ratu Seru was there, and marched them
all back into barracks. I sent eight of them to jail for a fortnight, and two
for one month, at the same time asking Mr. D. V. to reduce their sentences
by one-half. This they do not know, so I shall give them a happy surprise.
They did not intend to do anything serious against discipline, but I could not
pass it over lest it might happen again. If Ratu Seru had not been there, I
believe there would have been, to use an Irish saying, “heads on the green ”
that night. If that is unintelligible, lam sure that best of Lord Lieutenants,
your brother, the Duke of Abercorn, will fully explain it.
July 23. —Cawaci case. As no terms could be come to, we opened the
letter in the Lands Office. I have communicated your decision to the people,
and will ask Wilson to let them stop till we can see where they are going to.
Vatukalo case.—Again adjourned till goodness knows when, as the Lands
Commissioners are going to Yanua Levu.
A lot of letters to-day from Samoa. I took them to Mr. D. V., and asked
him whether I had better open them or leave them for the Chief Justice. He
said the latter, so I cannot tell you what the news is.
You will'hear of the massacres at New Caledonia. We have only had
flying reports, but they seem rather bad. Eighty-five whites, including the
Commandant of the Forts, killed.
A - very interesting report from a Mr. W. Ingham, Queensland, Govern-
ment Agent at Port Moresby, to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland, dated
May 13, 1878, about the present state of gold affairs in New Guinea. It is in
a despatch from Sir A. Kennedy to the Government of Fiji, dated July 3,
1878, and you will very likely find a copy at the Colonial Office.
Mr. Thurston told Mr. D. V. that he had received letters from Samoa,
which made him think that we had better open Swanston’s to you, and see
if there was anything which ought to be copied out for you by this mail. So
I opened them all, and he and I looked over them, and the result is that I
have made a scribbly copy of all that is of importance for immediate sending.
There is an interesting Minute on customs and laud questions, which Swanston
says are of importance to Great Britain, but I will hand them to the Chief
Justice when he arrives.
I send my two blank Commissions to you for signature, if you will kindly
do so and return them at your convenience. I know you will not bless me
for pursuing you over the ocean with these, but I think now is my best chance,
so please forgive me.
Please tell Lady Gordon that the pony, etc., has gone to Suva, the Masi
1 Small throwing clubs.
366
CHAP.
FIJI


to Roko, Tui Namosi and a lot to the Mata ni Yanuas, and that Dufty was to
send the photos to Miss Gordon Gumming by this mail.
Lake has just sent the plans, etc. They are done up in brown paper
(special), and there is a letter inside the inner wrapper.
I am very tired and sleepy, so I shall say “good-night” for a month.
Please remember me to Lady Gordon and the children, I think of you
all on the sea.—Yours, etc.
From Mr. Thurston
Nasova, July 23, 1878. —My dear Sir—Your note of the 10th instant
arrived per Alexandra on the 19th, together with a full cargo, which I know
you will hear of with pleasure.
The Mission has opened its first parallel, but as yet I am not by any
means sure of the spirit animating the leaders. Messrs. Langham and Fison
had a long interview with Mr. Des Yoeux in their capacity as Trustees of
Wesleyan Mission Lands in Fiji, and presented him with three memorials
or petitions, one of which only I have seen. Ido not think they got much
out of the Administrator, who heard what they had to say, but declined to
express any opinion officially as to the several matters brought up. They
however stayed to lunch ; and—giving them as the mere impressions of one
just arrived in the Colony—Mr. Des Yoeux favoured his guests with some of
his views.
There are three subjects of complaint:—
1. The mode of arbitration laid down in Ordinance No. 1 of 1878 for
compensating owners of land appropriated by Government for public
purposes.
2. The ambiguity of the Ordinance in not defining clearly whether the
appropriating power of the Government is confined to lands whereon a town-
ship is to be erected, or whether it extends to the appropriation of the lands
of towns already proclaimed as such.
3. That in the matter of Foreshore they have been unfairly and unjustly
dealt with, inasmuch as they bought the reefs between high and low-water
mark from the natives, claiming and exercising what was, in fact, sovereign
power over the district in which such reefs were situated, and, in short, from
the same powers as those from whence the title of Her Majesty is derived,
etc. Further, that they have been deprived of a piece of land at the foot
of Niukaubi Hill, Levuka, and situated between the base of the hill and
high-water mark.
Upon the first point I advised Mr. Des Yoeux to decline any discussion,
and especially so as he had not yet acquainted himself with the situation, and
that the Chief Justice, who drew the Ordinance, was absent. Upon the
second, that the Council when passing Ordinance No. 1 of 1878 did not con-
template appropriating any duly proclaimed township en bloc, but that it
certainly did contemplate the appropriation of any specially required piece of
land in any such town.
To the third, that no claim could possibly be entertained to reefs over
which, for twelve or sixteen hours in every twenty-four, the sea—common
right of way to all men—held undisputed sway ; but that in regard to any
strip of land between high-water mark and the base of the Niukaubi Hill, the
claim should be carefully considered.
367
XXII
FIJI


So far nothing has been done and nothing written, but I have thought it
not wrong to say to Mr. Des Yoeux, that it will be unsafe to express any
views or opinions orally, or, if at any time he does say anything, it should
be written down and given to the Missionaries without delay.
I cannot quite make out what Langham is driving at. It is impossible to
suppose for a moment that he apprehends Government will appropriate the
the township of Levuka and the extensive Mission property in it; and yet,
as they own no land in any other township already proclaimed, (there being
none), it is difficult to see or draw any other inference. Besides, they
do not own beyond Levuka any lands other than small blocks for church
purposes.
I can therefore only regard his fears on this head as simulated for the
mere purpose of swelling his grievances in the eyes of the Sydney and English
friends of the Mission.
Mitchell is to show me in the morning the grant for Niukaubi, which he
says, includes everything above high-water mark. If so, their complaint is a
very groundless one.
The native marriage law is, of course, still a sore point, and must be so,
until they awake to the fact that the day of their old power and influence
over natives in this respect has passed away.
There is every reason for my believing that Mr. Des Yoeux will be most
conciliating; but he will not, I think, give way to any demands not
warranted by facts, equity, and public policy.
Mitchell leaves in two days for Yanua Levu, when the Kuludrusi and some
other claims will be re-heard. Hobday goes with him.
We have had several Councils to consider Land Reports, and have worked,
I think, pretty well. Yagadace claims were disposed of, and some at Tai
Levu, Two claims that would have passed unanimously were, on my
motion, held over by Mr. Des Yoeux, at our first meeting, for further evidence
as to native occupation. One was Cook’s claim, through Lee, to a block of
land on the Upper Rewa with a native town upon it; and the other was what
I call the great Gardiner claim at Tai Levu. The latter we finally cut down
to somewhat less than the Commissioner’s report; the other is still subjudice,
and awaiting a letter from Carew.
I regret to say that the Department of the Surveyor-General is in a bad
state. Corporal Croft robbed the men’s military pay from Lake’s chest, and
is now in jail. Sergeant Fraser from the Depot replaced him. Cahill and
Sweeny, both good surveyors, invalided, and going home. Berry from
Taviuni came down very unwell, but seems recovering, and so must go back
again ; but Lake has now no one in the office.
Two men are expected from Melbourne, but we really ought to get a dozen
and finish the work off, as I first ventured to recommend in 1875.
Goodman, the man who took possession of Adi Kuila’s house, has been
dispensed with.
By the Don from Eoa (Tonga) I had a short note from Wilkinson, which
I enclose. From other sources I hear that Maudslay’s reception was very
favourable. The Orpheus will leave this in a day or two for Tonga, as we
miss Wilkinson very much. There is much here requiring his constant
attention.
To-day a vessel came in from Samoa —name not reported yet. By her I
368
CHAP.
FIJI


got a letter from Woods (copy enclosed), and I will procure further informa-
tion to-morrow of the American doings there. Free ports in our neighbour-
hood will not at all events furnish a means of existence to half a dozen low
Yankees with smuggling proclivities. It is very inconvenient in every way
this American occupation of the Navigators, and it is important to know who
General Bartlett, Captain Rogers, and Special Agent Goward are, and under
what authority they act.
I am afraid there is sufficient foundation in what Woods writes of
Swanston to at least make things very unpleasant,
I thought old Mr. Yan Camp was dead years ago. Swanston did certainly
come from San Francisco with one “ Judge Jenkins ” appointed Consul for the
Navigators. While there, Jenkins seized the property of a merchant named
Chapin, then absent at Valparaiso in one of his vessels. I was his friend and
factotum, and people said Jenkins was an old imbecile guided by Swanston.
Be that as it may, I persuaded Jenkins to return to Washington and explain
the affair, leaving Swanston Vice-Consul. Chapin came back and found him-
self ruined, but could never get redress ; Swanston said Jenkins took cash
proceeds of sale to Washington, and Jenkins said he had left it all with
Swanston.
Nothing more came of it than an absurd melodrama published at San
Francisco (and which I once lent to Knollys) in 1859, and the subject has
gradually faded from the memories of South Pacific rangers.
Swanston told me a good deal about it, and gave me the drama, in which
he was represented as the very incarnation of treachery and baseness ; but
I have always regarded it as the production of some person upon whose
toes S. had trodden heavily.
I have been thus prolix for the purpose of showing that whatever the
facts of the case are, the story is by no means new.
Judge Gorrie is still absent at Nawi, so there is no one here to open the
budget of letters sent by Swanston. lam anxious to know whether he has
written anything copies of which ought to be sent you, and must see Mr.
Des Yoeux about it in the morning.
Touching the bribes to native officers, I have returned the £5 to Mr.
Fenton, of Yanua Levu, but only received Ratu Luki’s letter and a packet
of money from Nadroga yesterday. Copy of Luki’s letter enclosed.
This bribery and corruption scheme, so highly enjoyed by gentlemen of
Mr. Parr’s stamp, will require, as I once said to your Excellency, legislation.
The notion of giving “ Yaqona” to friends and relations is simply nonsense.
It is paying, even in that case, a man’s senior relatives to exercise their
influence to compel such man to do something, whether he likes it or not.
This influence is all-powerful in people among whom the patriarchal power
is anything but a dead letter. Thus, the “qasis,” or old men of a village,
want knives, axes, and other things for cleaning gardens, etc. ; or there is
going to be a marriage in the village, probably the Turaga ni Koro’s daughter,
and sulus are wanted. How easy to obtain them. The old men—l may say
old people, for the women do not forget to act as a very fair chorus—tell A,
B, C, and D : “ Look here, you go with this papalagi and work with him for
twelve months, and then we can get these axes, knives, cloth, etc. Go on.
Do you hate us that you won’t obtain for us the things we want ?” And by
a thousand ways they plague, pester, and influence the man to take the
HI 2 B
369
XXII
FIJI


“ Yaqona” and go, There can be little doubt that a young fellow’s village
would be very hot for him after refusing to do as he was asked by the old
people. My own impression is, that no engagement should be ratified where
it is discovered that merchandise or money has been given as “’if’aqona.”
The native should be perfectly uninfluenced and unfettered by the order of
things introduced by the European settler.
With this I send a copy of a late Capricornian, the paper in which Parr
wrote in Queensland. The editor has quite turned round on his corre-
spondent, and I intend that he shall publish a little more still of the real
state of affairs.
I wrote a long letter to Bernays of the Acclimatisation Society (who let
me into Parr’s little game), and he read it to a number of men in the House
of Assembly (I fancy he is the, or a, clerk to Parliament); and he tells me
that great interest is felt in Fiji, and that trustworthy news from the Colony
will be very welcome. They are getting sick of drought. Drought reminds
me that we have not had a shower of rain since the Wentworth left; but I
am happy to say food is plentiful, beyond our most sanguine expectations.
Thanks to that great institution, the Tabu, coffee is up all through
Namosi and the mountains. Matanitabua left yesterday, and “Barb” is
now bringing up his taxes. Taxes coming in very well. Corn just ripening :
5000 bags sent down to Bau and Rewa. I long for rain, and yet dread it;
but these are our dry months, and I try to keep down my anxiety.
By this mail I have written to Mr. W. T. Thistleton Dyer, at the Kew
Gardens, sending him a sample of the Bamia cotton, of which he kindly
sent seeds last year. If he could send by mail Liberian coffee seed, or any-
thing else of economic value, I should be only too glad to care for it, and
report progress. lam trying hard to introduce cacao in seed, but it is very
difficult. Plants as specimens are interesting and obtainable, but I want
them in thousands. lam now trying to obtain seed from Java, and getting
Sahl and Mr. Moore, of the Gardens at Sydney, to put them in boxes of
soil and send on. By this means I may get them just germinating, and
have a place making ready on the banks of the stream at Toko for the
reception of these and other plants. Nasova I abandon in despair, as a
nursery.
My visit to Rotumah did not come off. After the quibble of my Wesleyan
friends and the departure of Jubilee , I could find no means of conveyance ;
and by Undine I received from Hederaann and Co. extract from a letter
written by their agent (enclosed). The fight was virtually over: the
Protestant party were triumphant, and my visit would have been too late.
I have often speculated lately whether Langham and Co. knew that the
Catholic side were a mere handful of men, and that their leader was a
particular friend of mine. However, by this time I fancy every one alive on
that tight little island has joined the “lotu dina,” and that Wesleyan
Providence has decided for the strongest battalions.
I have seen Mr. Des Yoeux, and Risked him to open, in Gorrie’s absence,
Swanston’s letters, so that, if necessary, copies of them may be sent on. He
has done so, but informs me that, with two exceptions they contain mere
formal matter. The two exceptions he has sent in to me, and I have advised
that Le Hunte copy and forward to your Excellency.
Swanston makes no report of arrival of the U.S.S. Adams, nor of the
370
CHAP
FIJI


arrival of General Bartlett to “form or control” a Government, nor does he
mention anything of a “ Special Agent,” or of his own affair.
I hope you approve of my suggestion to have the letters referred to
opened.
Just received another letter to read and advise on. Recommend extract
to be forwarded, containing a Minute of Swanston’s recent interview with
the Taimua, and in which he announces that England will not regard the
American Treaty as affecting her in any way.
I now close so much of this, as I have much to do, asking you to excuse
its jerky, fragmentary style.
I have taken note of all you say touching the claim of Peckham, Winter,
and Wilkinson and Co.’s great lease.
Nothing has been done yet in re Lovoni, but matters are en train , and I
do hope it will be arranged.
The Lovoni men have formed a sort of outpost at back of Scott’s (Viro.),
and are killing and cooking Brower’s cattle as if to the “manner born.”
Poor old Brower absolutely had the tears in his eyes when he came down
about it.
Since writing the above, W. Hennings has called on me. The vessel at
Loma Loma is the Saturnus, not Saxtonus. Weber has written to him to
say that he will write fully by the German ship-of-war, now at Apia, and
coming on to Levuku, re Yankee doings; and as he is going to Sydney in
the morning, Gustave is to communicate to me any contents of a political
character worth knowing. He says Weber’s tone this time is unusual; that
referring to the Adams and the General, he does not know yet what they
are up to. Waits the development of their plans, or whatever the object of
their visit may be.
I have exercised my mind somewhat since yesterday over this affair, and
now come to the conclusion that your Excellency may obtain from Mr.
Thornton a very good idea of what is going on, much better than my guesses
at truth. Probably the United States Government— qua Government—has
nothing to do with the affair, but, as in the days of Grant, some few vagabond
adventurers have to be got rid of, and a national ship is employed to carry
them to the scene of their operations. Ido not think that the existing
state of things in the Western Pacific is fully appreciated in America.
Otherwise this farce at Samoa would never be played, and the late ridiculous
article in the New York Tribune would never have appeared. The Pacific is
to most Americans what the Spanish Main was to the men of Bideford three
hundred years ago.
Regarding the copy of Woods’ letter, I feel bound to send it; but as it is
a private note to me, I am sure you will peruse it as a confidential com-
munication.
I have forwarded your Excellency a complete file of papers to date. In
the Fiji Times of July 3 is an article which I felt it nearly impossible to
let alone ; but as a reply would have been straightway set down to me, I
decided to let it alone, and have at Master Solomon another way.
Mr. Des Voeux has conferred with Mitchell, and decided to write to the
Secretary of State, suggesting the postponement of emigration from India
until April next. His grounds are, first, hurricane months ; second, wet.
Mitchell concurs, and as he, (Mr. Des Yoeux), toned down a most dreadful
371
xxrr
FIJI


paragraph about “rocks,” “shoals,” “hurricanes,” and all the marine bug-
bears known to men in the habit of doing business in the great waters, I
assented. Sir Michael Hicks-Beach would have thought Fiji the very hell of
Insurance Companies had the thing gone home at what I will call 11 premier
intention. ”
I do not remember that I have any further remarks to add to what I
fear will be considered an interminable letter.
Audit and Exchequer have written asking for information as to how
native tax and immigration accounts are audited. It is quite impossible for
me to reply, or dictate a reply, for Chisholm, by this mail, but hope to do so
next month, though I have a hundred things that must be done. Should
you see Mr. Ryan, I do hope he may be made to believe (though it cannot be
necessary) that man cannot be cut up into pieces, and, like an anemone,
develop the requisite functions necessary to his “ environment,” ad infinitum.
So far, we have turned one man into three, and it ought to be appreciated as
a feat unprecedented in the tropics.—Believe me, etc.
Mr. Carew to the acting Governor
Nakoroyatij, Colo, July 26, 1878. —My dear Sir—l left Draiba on the
4th inst., and had to wait about a few days for Court at Naitasiri, and then
held sittings of Lands Commission at Rewa and Bau to complete the investi-
gation into about twenty claims ; since my return I have been engaged in
doing work accumulated during my absence.
I have received several officials from the Colonial Secretary, all of which
I have answered.
When Sir A. Gordon pressed the Yiria people to say if they had any
particular request or favour to ask, it was quite clear to me that when they
asked for a Buli they gave the answer they were expected to give.
As matters are at present, they are simply being swallowed by Naitasiri,
and a Buli certainly should be appointed there.
In the matter of Cudlip’s claim to lands at Wai Nibokasi and his
complaint that the natives are planting on it, I have already reported in his
favour, and have taken fresh evidence and shall again report on his side, and
I think the natives should be ordered to cease any further extension of their
operations there, and have reported to this effect also.
In the case of Mr. Ansdell’s request to purchase lands, part of which has
been disallowed him after investigation, and part of which land he does not
claim, but wishes to be allowed to purchase, I had a conversation with Sir A.
Gordon when he was here about the price.
His Excellency seemed to think, under the peculiar circumstances which
surrounded this claim, he should be allowed to purchase at this low figure,
‘ £ which was by no means, however, to be regarded as laying down the fixed
price for lands hereafter, but simply as consideration for his peculiar mis-
fortune in having laid out a great deal of money on this land.”
I marked on the Government map, at the time of reporting on this claim,
two blocks contiguous, which I recommended he should be allowed to buy.
The next matter upon which I have reported is in answer to your
Excellency’s request for fuller information as to the appointments and pro-
motion of certain Bulis and one native magistrate.
372
CHAP.
FIJI


In the appointments of these officials, I have all along acted with the
knowledge and consent of the Governor before he left.
They would have been appointed more than a year ago to an absolute
certainty, but for my notion that I wished them to be seen first by Sir A.
Gordon. The Governor saw them here, and we discussed the matter fully,
and my report was merely sent in as a matter of form alone.
I fully expected to see them gazetted before Sir Arthur left.
But their relative ranks as Ist, 2nd, and 3rd class Bulls, and the
proposition for promotion of other Bulis, has originated solely with me. In
this matter we had no conversation at all.
I trust your Excellency will see fit to fall in with my views here, as it is
quite impossible that any other than myself can understand the relative
positions of these tribes and their chiefs. lam afraid, if these matters are
ruled entirely in Levuka, without the advice of those holding posts as I do,
where I am held responsible for my advice, that matters will be likely to get
rather muddled.
I was, whilst last in Ovalau, anxious for the return of Mr. Wilkinson, so
that I could put him au fait to these affairs, and he could then have explained
to you when explanation should be required.
There is but one other matter, and that is in the case where I have
recommended a man named “Tete” to be deported.
It struck me, but I may be wrong, that Sir Arthur Gordon would have
done so when here, but for his near departure and natural desire not to leave
too much work to be done at the last moment. I believe it most necessary
that this man be removed, as he received his orders from the Governor in
presence of the whole assembly, and they are now waiting to see the result of
his disobedience.
We have to get 1000 leaves of tobacco, each adult male, this year, towards
the impost of £2OO placed on our side of Colo for this year. lam very busy
at present with business of general importance and with my reports on Land
Claims.
I have meetings to convene and attend, and next month go inland to the
centre of the island for a couple of weeks.—Believe me, etc.
From Mr. Carew
Nakorovatu, Colo, August 5, 1878.—My dear Sir—l left Levuka shortly
after your departure from the colony and have been variously engaged since,
and leave in a day or two for Narokorokoyawa and other parts of the interior.
I have planted out a nursery of coffee here, enough for the whole district,
under Buli Matailobau, which I find by the census I am now taking of Colo
contains 2400 souls, including 650 adult males, and I am now preparing
nurseries in Naboubuco and at Soloira, but am waiting for more seed, which I
have written to Mr. Thurston for. I take a great interest in this coffee
scheme and shall spare neither time nor trouble to make it a great success ;
Buli Matailobau and the people under him also like it very much, and interest
themselves in it. At present we are preparing 1000 leaves of tobacco per man
this year, which will give over 13 tons of tobacco by November or December.
Mr. Horne came through from Nadrau a few days since ; he was enraptured
with my district and has the highest opinion of its capabilities for coffee, and
373
XXII
FIJI


says, “ You can hardly go wrong in putting a plantation anywhere you like.”
I sent him to Soloira with an officer to take him to the Buli, and from thence
he goes across country to Suva, where he expects to meet his wife.
The Colonial Secretary has written for more information with reference to
the appointment and promotion of Bulisrecommended by me before you left,
as the finances are weak, and although I have written again and earnestly
pushed the matter, yet I am in some doubt if it will he done, although I
must confess I cannot see why Nuyakoro and other rebels should receive
places of emolument and power, if my men, who, if they did no more, assisted
us by not joining the insurgents, are to be left out in the cold for ever. I think
the Wainimala people, by not resisting the Government, were of great help and
a saving to the colony of bloodshed and a few thousand pounds.
The faults they possess no man is so fully alive to as I am, but they possess
none that the others all over the group do not hold in an equal degree, with
this exception, and it is a very great and important one, they do not hate us,
whether as rulers or settlers—far from it indeed, for they have frequently told
us they have held the opposite feelings, and had esteem and respect for us and
regarded us as valuable friends.
Now I don’t believe any sane man, knowing the feelings of the chiefs on
the coast, can say they have any other feelings for us than those of hatred,
bitter jealousy, pretended contempt, and dire resentment.
And all this in spite of the many valuable services that not a few, including
Mr. Wilkinson, Thurston, and others, whether officials or not, have rendered
them.
For myself, I have done much for them in preventing absolutely during
the past seven years any sales of land at Naitasiri. I have conferred a great
boon on them when one takes into consideration the comfortable rentals they
will probably draw from leases of these lands in a very few years.
After you had left, I went straight to Bau, where I found the Yunivalu
surrounded by Bulis and chiefs from all parts of Tailevu and from Cakaudrove.
He was in a bad humour, as he nearly always is, they openly say, in these
days. After expressing his opinion of the good I was doing his grandson, Ratu
Beni, by keeping him out of mischief, he suddenly turned round, said that at
one time he thought and said I was a “ tamata yalodina,” 1 but I had become
otherwise, for I had gone inland, formed a government of my own, with laws
of my own, and a very great deal more.
He also said that Great Britain had given the people up again to the
chiefs to do as they liked with them, as also the land, and that we white
men were all bad and good-for-nothing and the plague of his and the
chiefs’ minds.
He would not give me the least chance to speak, so after listening to him
for a long while I left him, returning before I left Bau to shake hands
with him.
It was quite evident to me that he was displaying before the assembled
chiefs, and also that they understood him, for I caught one or two of them
smiling or Fijian winking at me, as though they would say he was talking
nonsense.
Ratu Beni has got away whilst I was in Levuka at the time of your
1 True-minded man.
374
CHAP,
FIJI


departure. I found him at Navuso on my return, and he said he was not
going inland again until he and the Naitasiri people had got over their
magiti to the Cakaudrove people ; he has not come back and probably will not,
as I fancy the Naitasiri Buli has influenced him against doing so, being
determined he shall grow up on what he believes to be the proper model for a
Naitasiri chief. I need hardly say that this is the exact reverse of what
would be considered as qualifying him for a Rokoship ; this could not have
been done had you remained in the Colony.
The next matter is. The man Tele, the one I asked you to deport, but he
was ordered to stay with Buli Soloira and promised to do so—well, the
moment he heard you had left, he left also and returned to Namosi—Buli
Namosi, they say (Buli Soloira), has received him with open arms, and has
sent to ask Buli Soloira not to send any more for him. Now Buli Namosi
was present when you ordered Tete to live with Buli Soloira as one of his
household. Had you remained, they would none of them have dared
to do this.
The next matter is. The Serua people, who you so positively and clearly
ordered to obey Soloira, have disobeyed every order from him. I and the
Roko are now watching the next move.
But I had forgotten one thing. I have written again and reported fully
upon Tete and have again applied for his deportation. I cannot afford to have
such an example as him inland going unpunished ; the next thing the people
of Upper Wainimala will think they can do the same.
Again. Witherow has written me a most intemperate letter, a copy of
which I enclose. I have answered him by refusing to assist him until he
withdraws, or explains all the offensive passages in his letter, which I have
underlined for your own observation. I need hardly tell your Excellency
that in my dealings with him I have in no way compromised you, but have
acted and spoken entirely as upon my own authority.
Witherow was clearly promised from 600 to 700 acres of land if he withdrew
his claim to lands above Matai Navuso, and afterwards you intimated to me
that he would get a site on Matai Navuso, as he pleaded for it for a mill site.
And I promised him that also. Although I told him I would not interfere at
all, owing to his intemperate expressions and bullying manner of writing,
yet feeling myself greatly compromised, and believing there was a mistake
somewhere, I have written privately to Mr. Des Yceux and told him I was
authorised to promise him from 600 to 700 acres by “ one high in authority.”
I have not yet received an answer, as I only wrote yesterday. But I really do
feel most uneasy in my mind about this mistake, as I clearly pledged myself
he should have from 600 to 700 acres, and I feel more in the matter than I
should care to show or state. This again could not have occurred but for
your leaving Fiji.
So you will see, my dear Sir, that I have come to grief in many ways since
you left, but I intend to work away and break down obstacles and not to
give way to them.
The Lieutenant-Governor was very good indeed and hospitable to me after
your departure, and was good enough to tell me the flattering opinion you
were so kind as to give him of me before you left, but which I feel is only
partially deserved.
With many expressions of regard and respect, believe me to be, etc.
375
xxn
FIJI


From the Rev. Dr. Turner
Apia, Samoa, July 31, 1878.—Your Excellency—l returned from my
trip to the Ellice and Gilbert Islands ten days ago, and found your note of
Ist May waiting my arrival. I was sorry to find Mr. Maudslay away and
Mr, Swanston here in his place. I shall be very glad to do what I can to
aid him, especially in the way which your Excellency indicates, but I fear I
cannot do much. Before I returned he had (I am informed) twice at least
been noticeably in a state which indicated that he had not given up his
old habits. After his arrival here, he had Mr. Sullivan living with him in
the Consulate, but Sullivan has now left the islands. Another thing I heard
last night, which I think your Excellency ought to know. I understand
that about the beginning of June your Excellency wrote him enclosing a
copy of the treaty between the United States Government and Samoa, and
giving him instructions to see the Taimua and Faipule and ask them certain
questions, among others whether they (T. and F.) had given Mamea power
to ratify his own acts. Mr. Swanston went down to Mulinuu with Mr,
Weber on the 17th June, taking with him Mr. Sullivan as his secretary, and
Mr. Agar to give a report of the meeting. The Taimua and Faipule were not
assembled, and the meeting was adjourned till next day at the German
Consulate. Thereupon Messrs. Weber, Agar, and Sullivan returned to town,
Mr. Swanston waiting at Mulinuu to call upon Mr. Griffin. Sullivan told
Agar that Mr. Swanston told Griffin at that interview the purpose of their
meeting with the Taimua and Faipule, and the questions which you had
instructed him to ask. So, of course, next day the Taimua and Faipule had
their answers all ready, and the meeting ended unsatisfactorily. He seems to
make confidantes of Tom, Dick, and Harry, and of course when such as Mrs.
Dean know all the ins and outs of his policy, there are not many on the
beach in ignorance. Fortunately your Excellency’s policy at the present
time is pretty well known, and there is no harm done, I presume. Still I
think it right that you ought to know these things.
When I returned, I found H. I.G.M.S. Ariadne here, and also the U.S.S.
Adams , which had brought Mamea and Colmesnil back. I believe Mr.
Swanston sends your Excellency a file of the Samoan Times , so that you will
see from that all their public doings.
Mamea engaged a Colonel Bartlett to come down with him—a friend of
Steinberger’s—to take the place of Premier. He is here at present with his
lady, I have not yet seen him, but he seems to be considered, by all who
have had an opportunity of judging, to be an honest man—rather a “ rara
avis,” considering the quarter from which he came. One Mr. Goward, a
special agent of the United States Government, came down with the Adams
for the purpose of investigating the affairs of the United States Consulate.
Intrigues are going on apparently with a view to get the Samoans to throw
off General Bartlett and offer the premiership to Mr. Goward. Mamea told
the Government (Taimua and Faipule) yesterday that he had not made any
definite arrangement with General Bartlett, nor agreed to pay him S6OOO per
annum, as is currently reported, and that they need not accept his services,
that the other American gentleman (Mr, Goward) is willing to serve them
and make laws for them for nothing ! A second Steinberger ! Mr. Swanston
thinks that Mr. Goward has no intention of remaining here, but I fancy he
376
CHAP.
FIJI


is wrong. Mr. Goward told Mr. Weber that he considers the Samoan
Government a very strong one, quite able to dictate terms to the English
and Germans—in fact that we are all here only on sufferance. But these
remarks were made after dinner ! General Bartlett is very much annoyed at
the evident attempts being made by Mr. Goward to supplant him, and
openly talks of “going for him.”
Another complication is that Colmesnil claims SIOOO per month for his
services as guide, councillor, etc., to Mamca; but the Taimua and Faipule
cannot see why they should pay him anything.
Mr. Clay too got Mamea to sign bonds for SIOO,OOO, while in the United
States, and he will return them all the lands which the Land Company made
advances on several years ago.
Among the lot of wolves, Captain Rogers of the Adams seems quite at a
loss what to do, but I understand he favours Clay’s claim, and looks with
disfavour on Colmesnil’s. He tried to get the chiefs to put in a king the
other day to give dignity to, and consolidate, their Government, but they
confessed that to attempt it would mean war at once.
Many of the chiefs are beginning to see through the swindle, and are
repenting having treated your Excellency as they did. Two of them have
asked me since my return whether you are too angry to listen to them if they
were to again appeal to you. The Adams has gone up to see Pagopago
harbour, and the Germans have hoisted their flag at Saluafata and Falealili
harbours so as to show that they will insist on equal rights with America.
Griffin is to be superseded. His substitute, an ex-clergyman called Dawson,
is on his way here now. My reports of the matters your Excellency asked
me to look into on the Ellice and Gilbert Islands I shall hand to Mr.
Swanston to forward to Acting-Governor Des Yoeux.
I trust that your Excellency’s health will be thoroughly restored by your
trip home.—Believe me, very faithfully yours.
From Consul Weber
Apia, July 9, 1878. —Your Excellency’s letters of Ist May and 7th June
I had the honour to receive, and beg to apologise most respectfully for not
answering sooner ; but when Mr. Maudslay, whose departure I was very sorry
to see, left so suddenly, I had no time, and since no chance.
I am much obliged to your Excellency for communicating Mr. Swanston’s
instructions to me ; this gentleman has also informed me of those he received
since with regard to the American treaty. Ido not doubt Mr. Swanston and
myself shall get on very well together, and I hope our co-operation will prove
of advantage.
Your Excellency may be sure that I never did and never shall forget Mr.
Griffin’s interference ; at present his influence appears to be at an end, and of
little or no account.
The U.S.S. Adams arrived on the 29th June after the I.G.S. Ariadne has
made her appearance on the 23rd of the same month. Although our enquiry
regarding Mamea’s powers for ratifying the treaty had little or rather no
success, the treaty having since been additionally ratified by the Taimua a
few days ago, as I understand, still I have gained sufficient information about
these powers, in an indirect way, to show that they were of a more than
377
XXII
FIJI


doubtful character. Mr. Swanston no doubt gave your Excellency full infor-
mation in this respect, and it is a great question yet what the whole business
will come to. I cannot see how Samoa can arrive at a state of order unless
they agree with all three powers represented here, as we will surely not
submit to suffer from any privileges given to other nations, and as the United
States interference appears after all to be more of a passive kind than otherwise.
Mr. Swanston will no doubt also have informed your Excellency that the
Captain of the Ariadne and myself have very plainly demonstrated to the
Samoans that America’s protection does not exist for them, as far as we are
concerned, by our action taken during the presence of the Adams crew, and
I think it has done a deal of good.
Samoa is a queer and difficult place, but still I do not despair yet that a
better state of affairs may be arrived at in course of time.
I was much pleased to hear that your Excellency is gratified with the
Tongan visit, and I am only sorry your Excellency did not meet Mr. Baker,
as I do not doubt all erroneous impressions, that may perhaps have remained
in your Excellency s mind, would then have been removed. lam very glad
to hear that Tonga will be fully recognised also by Great Britain, and trust
to your Excellency that on the death of the good old King George no difficul-
ties will arise through Maafu. I shall most likely be in Tonga by the end of
August, and I hope I shall then be able to remove all impressions that Great
Britain and Germany are not working hand in hand—if still required in any
quarters.
I understand your Excellency will leave Fiji for a time, and I hope your
Excellency will not be away too long.
Hoping I may soon be able to inform your Excellency of success in Samoa.
—I beg to remain, your Excellency’s most obedient, humble servant,
A. WEBER.
From Dr. M ‘Gregor
Fiji, August 19, 1878.—My dear Sir—Before entering on the serious part
of ray letter, I must tender an apology for what was an omission on my part
on the occasion of your quitting this country. I thank you for the many
acts of kindness I have experienced at your hands. lam afraid the omission
was one the causes of which few people could understand, and they most
probably would ascribe it to either ingratitude or forgetfulness. Having
been so long and so intimately associated with yourself and family, I could
not on your departure suppress mournful recollections of the sorrow I have
had here, and I could not forget that I should leave with a motherless child.
And then, I must confess, the rebuke that you found it necessary to admin-
ister to me at the last moment, added to the painful state of my own mind,
aided not inconsiderably to disconcert me.
I got your note of the 21st ult., for which I thank you. Mr. Des Yoeux
is transmitting by this mail the Comparative Return of Revenue and Expen-
diture for the first half of the year, and I enclose the ordinary return for the
month of July, from which you will see that it is, all in all, the best month
we have ever had. Of course Customs cannot possibly do so well every month,
but I have great hopes of realising the estimates on that item. The weather
has been most propitious for native taxes, and they are coming in bravely.
Mr. Des Yoeux is very guarded indeed in matters of expenditure, and you
378
FIJI
CHAP.


may, I think, trust me to keep an eye on the revenue, and on the expenditure
too as far as I possibly can.
It is, I think, important that the loan funds should be made available as
soon as possible. As the interest we shall pay on the loan will not exceed
the interest that is accumulating on our outstanding liabilities, it would of
course be highly preferable to pay off the latter, to satisfy claimants, and to
circulate the money in the country here. The General Revenue also requires
the refund of the £1768 paid from it by way of an advance to clear off the
Consolidated Fund Account. The Pier at Levuka, now considerably advanced
and paid for out of the ordinary revenue, should, according to the Schedule
of the Ordinance, be erected from the Loan. There is, therefore, nothing
whatever to be gained by delay, but there is positive advantage in rendering
the Loan available as soon as possible.
By the way, I begin to fear that we have made a little too much of Mr.
Smart. He is a very good officer, but one that requires to be kept well in
hand, as he is not so thoroughly impartial as I would like, every now and
then, and he has too great a tendency to distrust his subordinates, a practice
that gives me some trouble, as he evidently wishes that none of the others
should be able to carry on the work of the office. I was very sorry to find it
my duty to prosecute the Captain of the Suva for smuggling, but it had to
be done. The case was a very flagrant one.
The Chief-Justice has now thoroughly recovered his former self, and Mr.
Des Yceux is very much better than when you went away. Wilkinson is
rather wanted at times. I have called upon the Acting High Commissioner
to pay Wilkinson’s salary for the period of his absence from this Colony, on
the principle that a penny saved is a penny made. Mr. Des Yceux has been
much and profoundly exercised over the Mission’s position. I believe the
latter will fight it out. Mr. William Hennings has been elected President of
the Chamber of Commerce. I was invited to the farewell dinner to Mr.
Hedemaun, but fortunately, owing to my absence at Nadi on duty, I was
unable to be present. Mr. Thurston was there, and had unlimited politics
talked at him. As I anticipated, I have had rather a hot time of it over your
remarks on the “great need” for a new Customs Ordinance. The Governor
has called upon me to report what changes are necessary, and I was not able
to find more than three or four alterations that I could suggest.
I have seen only a few of the Chiefs since you left, but those I have met
have described Mr. Des Yceux as “tamata dina.” 1 He is very popular with
the Europeans. There is a great deal of growling about local labour, and
occasional threats of petitions, etc. ; but nothing comes of it all. Des Yceux
can always, if hard pressed, shelter himself behind the defence of “only an
acting man ” ; but I must say he is one of the most candid men I ever met,
and never scruples at the undertaking of responsibility. On the whole, lam
satisfied he is the best man you could have got. He told me he only respected
me the more for having his imports treated the same as those of others, and
he cancelled the order issued through Captain Knollys, to which you alluded
the day you left.
It turned out that I was right after all about the late so-called Club. We
found at the general meeting that there was no club, no subscriptions paid,
1 A true man.
379
XXII
FJJI


no committee, no nothing except the nucleus of a heterogeneous political
clique. The institution has been organised at last, hut certainly not in a
way to suit the views of its original promoters. There is in it and its man-
agement a strong official element that will suppress the discussion of politics.
Poor Mason was unable to have anything his own way. He has lost, and is
losing, ground among the planters.
I see a great deal about New Guinea in Australian newspapers. Should
you find it necessary, I should leave this at any time to proceed thither as
Deputy Commissioner, where I could remain until you go somewhere else ;
for I do not suppose I shall ever be so happy in Fiji as 1 might be elsewhere.
If the home authorities do not wish to confirm my appointment as Receiver-
General, my usefulness here will he limited, and might be greater in New
Guinea if required there. As to the confirmation or otherwise, I hope they
will decide soon.
I hope Lady Gordon and the children have kept well during the voyage.
We have had delightful weather here, but no rain of any consequence has
fallen here since you left. —Yours faithfully.
From Dr. M‘Gregor
Fiji, September 16, 1878.—My dear Sir—l enclose the usual monthly
Return for August. The revenue is not quite so satisfactory as I could wish
it, but so far has turned out on the whole as well as I expected. Stocks are
accumulating at Suva, so that Customs will not be so well supplemented from
that quarter as formerly ; and only few foreign labourers being paid off in
Levuka will materially affect Customs here. lam getting nothing from
Loma Loma. Land sales are dreadfully behind, and I see no hope whatever
of any improvement in that direction, as Mr. Des Yoeux does not seem to see
his way to dispose of any lands. To establishments must be added, of course,
the other half of the Governor’s salary, which you will, as arranged, draw at
home from the Crown Agents. A ruinous murder case from Nadi brought
“Judicial ” up to an alarming figure, which is followed by a startling expendi-
ture on Public Works caused by the erection of the wharf that should be paid
out of the Loan Funds not yet available. Mr. Des Yoeux exercises the most
strenuous exertions to keep down the expenditure, but he does not devote
nearly so much attention to the revenue. A Sola of exchange from Swanston
was presented two or three days ago for payment of over £BO as his salary as
Consul and Commissioner. I must point out to the Acting High Commissioner
that if the Consuls’ salaries (Maudslay’s and Swanston’s) are to be paid here,
the Foreign Office must pay ns the discount lost by us to the Bank, I have
drawn attention to what this Colony is losing on discount on behalf of the
Royal Engineers’ Home and Pensioners, and I hope to recover the loss. I have
also called on the Acting High Commissioner to refund to this Colony the
salary paid to Wilkinson during his absence in Tonga. Mr. Thurston says
yon instructed him to stop Wilkinson’s salary, but that he forgot all about it;
be that as it may, the Acting High Commissioner will not be suffered to
forget until he makes the refund to the Treasury. I cannot find any memo
as to Maudslay’s and Swanston’s rate of remuneration ; not knowing they
were to be paid in full here, I, of course, did not ask for instructions before
you went away. The Governor’s health is rather shaky at times, and work
becomes now and then rather slow, but on the whole we get on very fairly
380
CHAP.
FIJI


well. I am glad that he hits it off well with the Chief-Justice, in whose
abilities he has great faith. Of course you will hear tons from the Governor
about the Mission warfare, so I need not go into it. I have seen the Bake-
well and Winter correspondence, which has been reproduced in the Fiji Times.
I should say Bakewell had the worst of it on the whole, and I infer from his
letters that he is not quite so clever as he thinks himself. Winter is an old
friend of mine, and at heart one of the best of men ; but he was induced by
Parr and Forwood, when ill in hospital, to write something in reply to Bake-
well’s first effusion, and when once Winter put pen to paper, Parr and Forwood
changed, omitted, and added, what suited them, leaving little more of poor
Winter’s letters than his name at the end of them. That is Winter’s own
account to me, and I have no doubt whatever that it is strictly true. I have
no doubt that Parr is at the root of the advertisement in reference to a peti-
tion you will notice in the Fiji Times concerning your administration ; but
if Parr was to go round in the steamer, he is likely to be disappointed, as he
has gone to the hospital to-night with a slight attack of fever. Ido not
think the petition will come to anything, as I am aware that a great many
people deprecate the entire proceeding ; nobody more sincere than Winter in
disapprobation. I understand from private sources that Olive and Co. are on
the verge of coming to grief. lam sorry for poor Olive, but lam sure their
retirement from Wakaya would be no loss to the State. I think it just
possible that there may be a rupture between the Proprietor and Editor of the
Fiji Times, as Griffiths is deeply mortified at the Planters getting up a pre-
sentation to Solomon for advocating the Planters’ cause ; and if Griffiths gets
no share of the guineas, said to amount to about a couple of hundreds, he
will be dreadfully savage, as he told me he thought it should all go to the
Proprietor. Solomon is aiming at knighthood, and therefore satisfies his
spiritual cravings with Florida Water. It is pretty strong, and does not
emit an offensive or a vulgar odour, but it will sooner or later land him in
his own ditch, when, fortunately, I shall know what is the matter, and shall
apply the stomach pump to the Mayor Prince. You will be surprised to learn
that Captain Hill and I are rather good friends—not because he likes me, but
because he dislikes every member of the Legislative Council, but wishes to
be on tolerable terms with some one. He has, therefore, honoured me by
selecting me to pair off with him, Leefe will be more difficult to manage,
because cleverer and less easily led. Chalmers having got his money is now
anxious to become a member. He would, I doubt not, be the best man of
the lot; Cave is well out of it, as his business would inevitably make him a
Planters’ Grievance man, and, moreover, he is a man of rather narrow views
generally. 1 hope I shall hear soon who is to be Receiver-General here,
either one way or the other, whatever you think best: my present position
keeps me in a state of unrest. I have been going into that labyrinthian
maze, Woods v. Cakobau, and have lost about half my head in getting half
through it. The work of the other Commission is finished, according to the
idea of the Chief-Justice, but it leaves me with practically all the work to do
yet. I feel that if a new Receiver-General comes out, the serious work will
be all over before his arrival.
I hope Lady Gordon and the children are well. I have reason to be very
wroth with the Baron, but I suppose he does not care much for that. —Yours
faithfully.
381
XXII
FIJI


From the Rev. Fred. Langham
Leyuka, August 19, 1878. —Your Excellency— l purposed writing you at
length by this mail respecting the subject of the correspondence I forwarded
by last mail, and other matters, but have been so fully occupied over a
document which we have had to prepare in reference to a Minute forwarded
us by His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor on the subject of our Memorial
concerning the Binner Estate and Foreshore.
In a short note which I sent with our Rejoinder I pointed out to the
Lieutenant-Governor that the entire question of Foreshore in the Colony did
not seem to me to be opened up by our claim to a small portion of the Fore-
shore in Levuka—that ours was a special case, and that I hoped our claim
might be recognised.
His Excellency expressed his regret that we should appear to be in
antagonism to the Government, and I have replied that I am as anxious as
His Excellency to avoid the appearance of controversy with the Government,
especially as the Public may construe this controversy into an indication of
something more.
I trust your Excellency will be able to recommend that our claim be
allowed.
I enclose herewith the documents referred to above, and also copy of a
letter sent to the Hon. John Gorrie which will explain itself. —I am, your
Excellency’s obedient servant.
The Wesleyan Missionaries to the Chief-Justice
July 30, 1878. —Sir—It is not without considerable hesitation that we
whose names are hereto appended take the liberty of addressing you on the
subject of this letter, because we are extremely reluctant to do anything
which may have even the faintest seeming of opposition to the Government.
Our reluctance is increased by our grateful sense of the generous help
given to the Wesleyan Mission by His Excellency the Governor, who has on
more than one occasion voluntarily and publicly defended against unjust
aspersions the Mission to which we belong, and the example of whose life
cannot fail to have exercised a highly beneficial effect upon the community.
We have, moreover, observed with respect and admiration His Excellency’s
unwearied exertions in the carrying out of his arduous work ; and we have
not failed to bear witness both public and private to his sincere desire for the
advancement of the country under his rule, and especially for the good of
the natives, to whom he has conscientiously striven to be not a ruler only,
but a protector also and a guide. Most unwillingly, therefore, do we feel
ourselves compelled to place on record our conviction that His Excellency’s
policy with regard to the natives has not produced all the results which
appear to be attributed to it in the Address lately presented to him by the
Honourable Legislative Council. The wording of certain statements in that
Address tends to convey the impression that the country is thoroughly
pacificated, and that the natives, having no single instance of hardship to
complain of, are contented and happy ; whereas we are aware that natives
have been subjected to great hardship, both in the collection of the revenue
382
CHAP,
FIJI


and in other ways, resulting in a discontent which is all the greater because
it is intensified by disappointment.
And inasmuch as the statements referred to do not appear to us to be in
accordance either with facts, some of which were privately laid by us before
His Excellency, or with subsequent events, we can only suppose either that
those facts and events are not within the knowledge of the Legislative
Council, or that their accuracy has been called in question. Had the Address
been a private communication from the Honourable Council to His Excellency
the Governor, it would of course be no concern of ours ; but since it has been
made a public document by its publication in the newspapers; and, moreover,
as it seems to contradict statements made by us to His Excellency as afore-
said, we conceive that (having been unable to communicate with His
Excellency during the interval between the publication of the Address and
His Excellency’s departure from the Colony) we have grounds for thus
addressing you as the Chairman of that Meeting of the Legislative Council
at which the Address was adopted, in order that we may place on record our
convictions in such a manner as shall enable us to appeal to the record on a
future day if it should be needful for us so to do, and yet not place us now
before the public in seeming antagonism to the Government, a position which
would be as foreign to our inclination, as it would be prejudicial to our
interests.
While, however, we have deemed it necessary thus to record our con-
viction as to the present condition of the natives among whom the Mission,
whose servants we are, has been established for so many years, we need
scarcely say that as loyal subjects of Her Majesty, and, moreover, as Mission-
aries belonging to a Society which has earned a high reputation for loyalty
throughout all parts of Her Majesty’s dominion —to say nothing of the
sincere personal respect with which we regard His Excellency, and which is
so justly his due—we must be incapable of presuming to offer any hindrance
among the natives themselves to the carrying out of His Excellency’s policy.
—We have the honour to be, sir, your most obedient servants,
FREDERICK LANGHAM.
LORIMER FISON.
ISAAC ROONEY.
ARTHUR J. WEBB.
WILLIAM W. LINDSAY.
From the Chief-Justice to the Missionaries
Vagadace, Ovalau, August 17, 1878. —Reverend Gentlemen—On my
return from Vanua Leva a few days ago, I received your letter dated
July 30.
I was very glad indeed to read your tribute to the character, the zeal,
and the policy of His Excellency the Governor of the Colony who is now on
leave, and any little difference which there may be between you and the
Legislative Council as to the wording of the Address to which you refer is
as nothing compared to the real agreement in sentiment which your letter
shows to exist.
You seem to be of opinion that some statements in the Address were so
worded as to be calculated to leave too favourable an impression ou the mind
383
XXII
FIJI


as to the actual condition of the natives. The Council, be it observed,
alluded to the actions of the Government for which the Governor is re-
sponsible, whereas you, in your letter, refer to individual cases of hardship
which, unfortunately, will always occur in the carrying out of any policy,
by the mistaken or perverted action of subordinate officers of the Government.
I fear, however, your language also is not so well chosen as it might have
been. You say that “natives have been subjected to great hardship both
in the collection of the revenue and in other ways, resulting in a discontent
which is all the greater because it is intensified by disappointment. ” Now
I take it you do not mean by this that there is general political discontent
among the natives of this Colony. Indeed, I observe you use the word
“natives,” and not “the natives,” as suffering under discontent, but state-
ments so worded are very apt to be misunderstood.
I grieve, however, to learn that it is your opinion that natives have been
subjected to “great hardship” both in the collection of the revenue and in
other ways.
If this be so, I think you ought not to be satisfied with embodying your
opinions in a letter to me. I am neither the head of the Government nor
the head of the Council, and the temporary capacity in which I acted when
the Address was voted has passed away with the occasion itself. Nor could
I venture to be the bearer of a letter to the Legislative Council from any
body of men outside, however worthy of respect and esteem they might be,
which merely criticised the wording of a resolution of the Council, and asked
that criticism to be recorded.
If you know of “great hardships” affecting either scores, or tens, or units
of the native population, which can be removed by legislation, I would re-
spectfully venture to suggest that you petition the Legislative Council,
setting forth facts and making your suggestions in regard to changes in the
law. If, on the other hand, the hardships of which you speak are the
result of the action of officers of the Government, then I think you ought to
make an official and not a private communication of the facts to the Acting
Governor, and he, you will find, will not less strive to be “not a ruler only
but a protector also and a guide” of the native race, as you most justly
describe Sir Arthur Gordon to have been.—l have the honour to be,
reverend gentlemen, your most faithful servant,
JOHN GORRIE.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, August 17, 1878. — My dear Sir—The outbreak in New Caledonia
makes no impression here in the direction where an impression is most to be
watched for — i.e. among the natives. I was chatting with Le Hunte to-day
upon the different way in which we have done things in Fiji. The whole
native population here ruled through natives, at a minimum of cost (with a
resultant, I hope, of a maximum of credit). Rokos, Bulis, Turaga ni Koro,
and Ovisa, throughout the Colony—loyal, though, as a rule, ill-paid ; and
the native population there, —a cognate people, interdicted as “ d—d niggers ”
from entering the chief town. When Cakobau pulled by in his son Abel’s
gig, on his way to dine with the Commander of the Wentworth, the
incident pointed my remarks, and gave me the most lively feeling of
satisfaction. The policy here is honourable and right; and I fervently hope
384
CtlAt*.
FIJI


no clap-trap nonsense will ever be allowed to interfere with it. The days
of miracles are over. We cannot make the uncivilised civilised ala premiere
intention,; but we can put the people in the right track, and must make up
our minds to their being guilty of a few mistakes at the outset.
My mind is running for a moment upon the objection taken to making
natives Magistrates over natives. But any other course would necessitate
the appointment, say, of fifty more European Magistrates at £250 or £3OO per
annum, and would quickly “wipe out” the former elders of the land. As
for their minds running somewhat in old Fijian groove, in which they "were
born, one cannot expect anything else. The exercise of a very careful
scrutiny of Court returns and Magistrate and Police reports will always serve
as a remedy to any little mistakes ; and, after all, the great thing among
semi-civilised people is speedy inquiry and, if necessary, speedy punishment.
I told my friend Gorrie yesterday, who is inclined to grow warm on the
subject, that Sir Matthew Hale was doubtless a dear old soul, and clever
withal, but he thought witch-burning quite justifiable.
However, to return to the Caledonian affair. The “whites” here cannot
talk much about it, and the “ blacks ” only say “Sa ca sara na nona lewa na
Tui Feranisi.” 1 They quite understand from the reports of returned Fijians
the difference between the “Taukeis ” of New Caledonia and the “Taukeis”
of Fiji.
I was very pleased to see the tone of the Melbourne and Sydney papers.
I shall continue to send them any official returns and other papers of
interest.
There has been some correspondence between Winter and some one in a
Sydney paper, but as yet I have not succeeded in procuring the issue or
issues.
Native Regulations enclosed. Mr, Des Vceux is not inclined to spend
£5 if he can avoid it, so that I hope we shall not “outrun the constable.”
I will refer to our receipts and expenditure in another note, and also to our
Lands Revenue.
Murdoch has not written on the subject of the Bank’s pecuniary claims,
and I hear from Butt that, but for Stewart, he would not have discussed the
subject. He is very sore about everything connected with Fiji, and his failure
to get Rukuruku land has made him particularly ill-tempered.
The Daily Telegraph correspondent is I know not whom, but we shall
find him out. Most likely it is that generally drunken fellow Cook, who
was employed by Parr to write.
Wilkinson is not yet back from Tonga. I enclose the last letter I had
from him. Would he were here ! There is so much to do, and so few to do
it. The Orpheus sailed for Tonga some ten days ago —Cocks in charge ;
so I hope soon to see him. Maudslay has got on very well indeed, and has
no doubt written to you very fully. Baker, I hear, is very angry.
In the matter I touched upon in my last, relative to Swanston. Van
Camp is here, and the Deputy High Commissioner has sent up a summons
for the man Turnbull. Van Camp I only know by repute ; and I do not
think he is a very pure bred Merino. Swanston, though no doubt the
adviser and prime agent in all the affairs complained of by Van Camp, acted
1 The rule of the French is very bad.
111
2 C
385
XXII
FIJI


in the name of Jenkins, the American Consul; so come what may, I don’t
see how he can be held accountable personally for anything. Meantime,
however, his action in moving his office to Turnbull’s house is not discreet.
I have handed to Mr. Des Yceux, and asked him to forward them to you
officially, copies of Instructions from the Hawaiian Government to Lieutenant
Jackson, R.N. (retired), in command of Stormbird, together with a Memo.
Jackson, who I knew when in the Service, called upon me (Gorrie had not
returned from Savusavu), and permitted me to take a copy. They are
interesting, and in some sort amusing.
Gorrie, however, wanted Mr. Des Yceux to order Alacrity to detain
Stormbird, because he “didn’t see how a ship that left Sydney only a few
months ago had become a Hawaiian,” etc. He wrote me on the subject
privately, but I am indisposed to any private correspondence. However,
Mr, Des Yceux did not see his way to detain the ship, and she sailed; and
so much unnecessary and inconvenient bother was avoided.
If, however, Gorrie goes to New Guinea, as he told me yesterday he
proposed to do, and had written to the Commodore, I fancy that he will
make a very nice kettle of fish. I pray heaven that Hoskins can’t spare a
a vessel, and that Mr. Des Yceux will not let him leave the Colony.
I notice that a deputation of would-be New Guinea settlers waited upon
you in Melbourne. Judging from a leader in the Argus I don’t think they
took much by their motion.
Gorrie has shown me a letter from the Wesleyan Mission addressed to
him as Chairman of the Board upon the day the Legislative Council voted
you the address. I hope to send you copy. They take exception to the
statements relative to natives, but don’t say in what respect. It is a very
Jesuitical production, couched in terms of so vague a character that they can
refer to it under almost any circumstances of an untoward character that
might arise. Gorrie has not yet told me what he intends doing with it.
You will be sorry to hear that Leefe has had his homestead and all his
effects burnt; also that he is particularly nasty, goaded somewhat perhaps by
the Fiji Times , that never misses a chance to have at him. He wrote Mr.
Des Yceux a very unpleasant note the other day, because the Council had
met (though really only formally on the first day in the month), and his
notice of the meeting had not reached him. He also has a notice on the
paper to ask the Colonial Secretary to explain the circumstances under which
Tavakece and the other Chiefs were removed from Ra, etc.
I am not quite clear that he has any right to ask such a question, but in
any case I think I can give him a reply.
We shall have trouble and expense here some day if the settlers are not
taught to leave natives alone —to mind their own business in fact; and I
think it is well worth considering whether an Ordinance should not be passed
containing a provision like that in the Indian Code, where Sir James Stephen
“put upon a proper footing the European British Subject question” :
‘ ‘ Whoever by words, either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs,
or by visible representation, or otherwise, attempts to excite feelings of dis-
affection to the Government established by law in British India, shall be
punished with transportation for life, or for any term, to which fine may be
added ; or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years,
to which fine may be added.”
386
CHAP.
FIJI


It is to be remembered that we are educating the Fijians. The main
strength of our Police and Armed Constabulary is periodically and exclusively
drawn from the ranks of the people. If these trained men ever become dis-
affected, the results will bear no comparison to recent events in New
Caledonia. It is therefore not a subject to be lightly considered or lightly
disposed of. If in this Colony we are, as I know you so ardently desire, to
be permitted to add a new and a brighter page to our Colonial history, or,
say, to the history of our Colonial Empire, Her Majesty’s Government must
give us its warmest sympathies, and to a large degree permit us to formulate
our own securities. Given these conditions, I fear not for the result.
In the Fiji Times of the 14th inst. you will observe under the head of
“Correspondence” a letter signed “Alpha.” It is in the usual style of
anti-Government correspondents, and is worthy of a place in a West Indian
newspaper. Towards the close of the letter, the writer says, that, given
certain conditions, a “healthy competition for masters and servants will be
the order of the day ” ; but though he indicates a rise of from £3 to £5 or
more per year, it is clear that he only looks upon the Fijian as a servant and
upon himself as a master.
That sapient person, the editor of the European Mail , when commenting
upon our sources of labour, recently said (and was quoted by the Fiji Times):
“In the West Indian Islands and the Mauritius we first utilised the natives
before going abroad for labourers.” With regard to Mauritius, I fancy he
labours under a delusion, and with regard to the “utilisation” of the
aboriginal peoples of the West Indian Islands, I think that the less that is said
the better. The paper containing ‘ ‘ Alpha’s ” letter contains my advertise-
ment calling for tenders to purchase from 9000 at 15,000 bushels of maize.
As for increased exports, I take some little pride in fancying I have contri-
buted to them, and if the natives can be taught to grow produce at home
I certainly prefer their so doing to growing produce abroad, at a rate of pay
not exceeding 2d. a day, and find their own food !
The Fiji Times of the 10th inst. also contains a singularly inconsequential
leader anent the “enslavement by native of native,” and gives as “an
instance that will serve to illustrate this ” a long story about Naigani Island,
which has been invaded ‘ ‘ at the mere whim or cupidity of some half a dozen
natives,” —a most impotent and lame conclusion to a false and mischievous
article.
From the Same
Fiji, August 18, 1878.—My dear Sir—You will receive with this files of
papers up to date, and in the Times of the 24th ultimo will see the Memorials
sent in by Messrs. Langham and Fison respecting their claim to the
“ Foreshore,” and Ordinance No. 1 of 1878.
I suppose that the originals will go home by this mail.
The assurances of our Wesleyan friends in Sydney are really worth nothing.
Whatever they may desire, Langham means to fight, and to make himself as
disagreeable as possible upon subjects beyond the mere interests of the
Mission.
Conciliation has been tried, and they have been told that any appre-
hension they might have that Government intended to “annex” their
Levuka property was without foundation ; but they neither have, nor ever
387
XXII
FIJI


had, any such apprehension. They may talk as they like about Gorrie’s
letter alarming them, but I cannot believe it. The Memorial as to Foreshore
has, in my opinion, only one object, and that is to make the Government
feel that the Mission is a political power in the land. Of course land
claimants here are delighted. The Wesleyan Mission, apparently, is going
to fight their battles. They secure the goodwill and sympathy of all land-
owners whose lands abut upon the sea ; and they secure the newspaper by
employing its editor, in his profession as a lawyer, to advise them upon the
legal points of their claim.
As a whole,'the claim set up to the “Foreshore” is one of the most
impudent that has come before us. No man in Fiji knows so much of their
lands and the value of their claim to it as myself; and I have no hesitation
in saying that their Crown grant confirms to them a much larger area than
they were justly and honestly entitled to.
I wrote a Minute for Mr. Des Yoeux, copy of which I enclose, pointing
out some of the inaccuracies in the Memorial which struck me at first sight;
but since then I have, by a careful study of the whole case, found many facts
all tending to prove the truth of the opinion I have expressed above.
With this I also send you a sketch of the “ Foreshore” between Niukaubi
Hill and the mouth of Totogo creek, with a few notes written upon it.
The spirit of opposition animating Mr. Langham manifested itself in his
determination to make the correspondence a public one, and to so make it
without consulting Mr. Des Yoeux.
Relative to the sixth article of the Memorial, and to the seventh, I trust
that when the Secretary of State is considering the matter, he will give the
fullest weight to that part of Article I. of the Deed of Cession which refers
to Reefs and Foreshores.
Under the old Government we refused to recognise any claims whatever
to foreshores, and the reference to them in the Deed of Cession was by no
means an accident, but was made deliberately and after full discussion and
consideration. Next to Sir Hercules Robinson and his Attorney-General, or
I should say with them, I am an authority as to what was intended, for
though never recognised, for fear of interfering with a theory, my relation
to Cakobau and the Chiefs was by no means an imaginary one. Apparently,
the Cession was a transaction with the Chiefs directly, but, as a matter of
fact, it was by no means so direct as it looks on paper, and I can assure
the Wesleyan Mission that the word “lands” in the fourth article and the
word “ foreshore ” in the first article of the Deed of Cession were not intended
to be convertible terms.
Mr. Des Yoeux took a considerable time over his reply, but sent it about
a week ago. Langham is now in town, and said he was going to publish it
yesterday (Saturday), but he did not do so. He is sure to reply, and I
presume wants both things to appear together.
The friends of the Mission cannot but regret to see such a case as this
brought up, for it must damage the Mission in the eyes of reflecting people.
That a Mission to the heathen should permit one of its servants to be a
land jobber, —permit him to buy up, for speculative purposes, the lands of the
simple-minded natives he came professedly to teach, —permit him to own and
employ in trading small vessels, and to make use of the teachers and underlings
of the Mission throughout the Group as advertising media, —is a scandal to the
388
CHAP.
FIJI


Society. Only one more stigma was possible, and that has been reserved for
Mr. Langham to attach to the Society of which he is the representative in Fiji.
Having secured, not only what Mr. Binner bought for knives and pots
from the native owners, but rather more, the Mission, in the person of Mr.
Langham, now seeks to obtain that which Mr. Binner never bought, and
never had conveyed to him, but which, it is true, he sought to obtain by
one of those acts of sharp practice for which, as a trading servant of the
Mission, he was so eminently well qualified.—Believe me, etc.
From the Same
Fiji, August 19, 1878. —My dear Sir—ln another note I said that I
would refer separately to the subject of Revenue and Expenditure. Un-
fortunately, I must defer doing so until next mail, for the Receiver-General,
I just learn, instructed Robertson (the second clerk, Treasury) not to copy
out any returns for the Colonial Secretary ; and I was, as usual, depending
upon him. However, I may say that our receipts for July were £6387 :3: 7,
and our expenditure £4304 :15 :10.
The Receiver-General has just finished a report upon the six months
ending June 30 last, and Mr. Des Yoeux is sending it home. Having run
hastily through it, I suggested one alteration. Referring to probable revenue
during present half-year, the Receiver-General said it would depend very
much upon the period up to which payments of native taxes for the year
1878 were made. This seemed to me inviting inconvenient questions, and
moreover I shall, now I see a tendency to pick holes in the tax scheme,
close the account upon December 31, after closely calculating what amount
of produce is outlying in the Provinces. It would be prudent also to
avoid refunds. Money derived in excess of the assessed sum due by any
Province should be paid into a special account.
I was pleased to see that the Keceiver-General in his report came round
to my original recommendation with regard to Postage. If he will only
unite with me in thinking that, on the island of Ovalau at all events,
impress duty stamps should be used to tbe exclusion of adhesive stamps,
we may make an improvement in that direction also. He recommends the
establishment of a Money Order Office—a matter also brought up on my
return from Sydney in 1876. It would be exceedingly convenient, and would
justify perhaps some increase at the Post Office.
The amount of Native Taxes paid, or rather that will be payable by the
31st of this month, will be a good deal in advance of the sum paid at same
date last year, and I hope to go on in the same manner.
I enclose you a note from Carew, whose assistance I have enlisted in my
Coffee scheme at Colo. The coffee seed he asks for crossed his letter.
Touching the “oppression ” of the tax, the following extract from Carew’s
July report is interesting and instructive :
“On the 18th the Chiefs of Soloira and Matailobau, to the number of
fifty, met in the presence of the Roko Tui Naitasiri and arranged general
matters of business, including that of taxation for the present year, when
it was decided that each adult male should grow 1000 leaves of tobacco
as his tax.”
This decision is purely a voluntary one, and it will be seen year by year
that the barbarians of the hills will want to know why they are not allowed
389
XXII
FIJI


to “soli M 1 to the “ Matanitu ” 2 ? That feeling will remain until the gradual
progress of the people years hence may make a money payment more con-
venient, or until at a more immediate period some clever person wishes
to impose a money tax by way of producing a “source of labour supply
and increasing the exports of the Colony.” In that case they will simply
decline (without thanks) to do anything.
At this time I have Langton planting away in Colo, and in addition to
planting coffee and cinnamon (of which last I just imported a lot), want to
do a little reafforesting upon the northern slopes and ranges, where fires have
destroyed the primeval forests. I have plenty of good seed to begin with {i.e.
of various suitable trees), but £2OO a year for the expenses and salary of the
officer in Colo ought to be allowed.
Horne has written me a report on the Sandalwood country, which I
enclose, though it is withheld officially until a further report from him is
ready. He is enraptured with the interior as a country for the cultivation
of coffee, cacao, cinchona, and cinnamon.
From Mauritius and Queensland I have received cases of best sugar-canes,
also a case of seeds, Pandanus utilis (Yacoa), which will be useful to both
races. My special nursery now is at Toko, where I can irrigate. Not a
drop of rain has fallen since you left. Batiki has not a yam to plant.
“Barb” went over there two days ago with 3000, part of 20,000 received
from Roko Tui Namosi, and which, in view of failure of seed among the
Islands, I decided to sell only to natives.
Buli Batiki is quite in a seventh heaven of delight, and thinks the
Matanitu a very good institution.
I anticipate a large cotton yield this year.
That reminds me of Bamia cotton, and that again of Kew Gardens. If
you have an opportunity of inviting the Director to send out anything
useful or ornamental, pray do so. I sent home a sample of Bamia cotton
grown here. It yields wonderfully well.
In my next I hope to say that we have done something in regard to
Forests and Beche-de-mer. Education (European) is well in hand ; native
must depend upon the special charge of say 10 per centum on native taxes.
Pray excuse this rambling letter, which has so little after all about
revenue and expenditure.—Believe me, etc.,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
From the Same
Fur, August 19, 11 p.m. —My dear Sir—l add a parting line to my
previous letters, a sort of omnium gatherum, but I ask you to excuse all.
Work was sometimes stiff because you were here, now it is so because you
are not here. Everything has to be explained ab ovo, and time, as in
mechanics, must be sacrificed to power.
Mrs. Garrick died suddenly a few days ago, and the A. G. applied for,
and got leave to run up to the Colonies.
Poor Mrs. Geo. Smith died this morning, and was buried at 3 p.m.
J. C. Smith arranged to leave this mail to meet his younger sister from
the Orkneys. She was to take care of his child in Sydney. . . . Mail
arrived. Child dead of whooping-cough.
1 Pay tax.
2 Government.
390
CHAP.
FIJI


Have not seen poor Smith since. Awfully cut up, and leaves in the morning.
Enclosed extract from Argus refers to a correspondence ’twixt my old
friend Geo. Winter and a Dr. R. H. Bakewell in the Evening News, Sydney.
Unfortunately, I have no copy to send you, but hope some one has done so
from Sydney. It is very hot on Winter’s side ; but, poor old soul, he imposes
upon himself.
Malua. I—Everything 1 —Everything very quiet here. I like Mr. Des Yoeux very much.
He is not strong, but he works very surely and steadily, and is heart and
soul with your policy.
I hope you will accept my correspondence about Foreshores as private, but
not the pressure of work on Le Hunte, and the inability of Mr. Des Yoeux to
keep long at work. I thought it well to advise you of the situation as nearly
as I could. Ho doubt, I have, after all, missed some salient point.
Zephyr in to-night, loaded to the scuppers. Barb following, and I must
charter something to-morrow. Busy times are approaching.
I hope to hear a little from you while en route to England.
Please give our kind regards to Lady Gordon and the children, who, I
hope, will be able to enjoy the voyage. “Chubby” and “ Tom Thumb are
fat and well, but old “Blackberry” seems to have retired somewhere.
Horne leaves for Yanua Levu and Taviuni to-morrow. He is a most
hard-working man.
In the hurry of departure, I was obliged to ask Mr. Gordon to take charge
of a hasty letter for me, which no doubt he has handed over. If you can do
anything for me before the year closes, pray do so, or I shall certainly have
to sell out a few more of the few acres left to me as the result of my long
years in Fiji. Do not vote me a bore, or an unbeliever, but I do think my
office ought to be worth at least half of that (or those) enjoyed by the
Receiver-General, more nearly approaching that of the Attorney-General, and
not so closely followed by the Superintendent of Police and Registrar-General,
the last of whom passes most of his time in riding to office and drawing on
his blotting-pad. By December 31 I expect, in addition to my other work,
to have paid into the Receiver-General £45,000 since January 1876.
And now, if I am to catch the mail, I must conclude.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Nukualofa, Toga, August 1, 1878. —My dear Mr. Thurston—The
Xarifa , which came here about a fortnight ago, leaves again to-day for
Lomaloma, and lam sorry to say lam not returning by her. It is simply
this : if any good is to come out of my visit to Toga, I must remain till the
end of their Parliament, or I might just as well not have come at all. It has
now been sitting a week, and I may say no definite progress has yet been
made, but the effect of His Excellency’s visit is showing itself everywhere,
and not by any means the least in the Parliament, After the opening
ceremonies were over (which from the ludicrous point of view were perfection
not surpassed by “Puss-in-boots”), the first three days it was conducted
with closed doors literally, as they expelled the Clerks or forbade them to
make any report of any kind, and it appears this was to decide what policy to
pursue. The discussions ended in an appeal to the King to be allowed to
1 Dawdling.
391
XXII
FIJI


reconsider the whole of the laws from the Constitution downwards, which
H.M. granted most freely, saying he only desired such laws as were necessary
and suitable to his people, and they have been at work at that for the last
ten days, and will be some considerable time longer.
The Parties here are the Yakapapalagi v. the Vakatoga or native : the
latter by far predominate both in the State, and out of it, and since His
Excellency’s visit they have shown their strength very unflinchingly. Baker
is notably the leader of the former, and is evidently very bitter and sore at
much that has appeared.
From your knowledge of native matters, thoughts, and tendencies, I know
you will see at a glance very much the position of affairs, and the great
necessity there is for me to remain to the end of the Parliament, as not only
is there a considerable danger of their going to an opposite extreme, but that
just at the last minute all that has been done may be upset because nothing
is confirmed until the last three days, and Baker and his friends are not likely
to yield the position without a very strong and final struggle. It is this alone
that has led me to feel justified in remaining here longer, i.e. not returning
by this chance.
I think there is little doubt they will be a month yet. Of course, if lam
urgently wanted there, and my absence is putting you to serious incon-
venience, and His Excellency disapproves of my staying longer, then I must
ask you to send for me at once, and, of course, I will return. I have no
desire in the least to remain longer away from the work there, but if I leave
now very little good will be done, in fact, harm may have been done.
Mr. Maudslay’s introduction to the King and Chiefs has been all that
could be desired, and he is very much liked by all, and will get on well, I
have no doubt, and do much good amongst them.
One thing I ought to name to you. I have undertaken to organise and
put into working order their post-office department, and as I may not have
time to write to your brother, would you kindly ask him to send me one of
each of his blank forms, with a copy of the headings, with an example of the
filling up of all his books of registering mails, inwards and outwards, receipts
etc. etc., and any other information he can give me, or that he may suggest
as right or necessary, and I shall be very glad.
About my return, as there is no prospect whatever of any vessel to Fiji
that I can hear of, unless you may have already sent something for me, I
must still depend upon you for getting back.
I have written a short note to His Excellency explanatory of my doings
and prolonged stay, and I must trust to you to give fuller explanations. Of
course, as I said before I left, I could see no reason why I should spend so
much time over Toga to the prejudice of our work there, but having made a
move which has up to the present had all the effect that could be desired,
success can only be secured by following it up, and we must only hope the
result will be worth the inconvenience and expenditure of time.
Hoping you are well, and that all things are going on smoothly, with
kindest regards, believe me very sincerely yours.
If possible let the vessel you send for me call in at Lomaloma to com-
municate with Maafu to give him a chance of reply to some of his letters
taken now.
392
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Maudslay
Nukualofa, Tongatabu, August 8, 1878. —My dear Sir —I am afraid I
have very little to tell you, everything here is so very quiet. Parliament
opened on July 18. I went to the ceremony, which was very much Yaka
Papalagi, and very silly. For the first three days they sat with closed doors,
and even turned the secretaries out, for, as Tugi told us, “we shall talk a
great deal of nonsense at first, and it is no use writing it all down.” I hear
nothing of what is going on in Parliament, and don’t like to ask questions,
for with all their good-will towards me, they are rather jealous. Wilkinson
says that my time will be when the alterations they are making are submitted
to the King. They are revising everything from the Constitution downwards,
and my only fear is that they will go too far. The Orpheus came for Wilkin-
son two days ago, and, although I should like him and Daniel to stay until
the end of the Parliament, they have been here already so long that I shall
not ask them to stay after this week. I have had most of the chiefs and
other important persons to dine with me, and they all appear very well dis-
posed towards me. Gu is the only one of them who has not called upon me,
and, as I am told he stays away by Baker’s orders, I have not had him to
dinner yet. I believe it is a great hardship to him to keep away, as he is so
fond of white men’s society, and I am told is most anxious to come to me.
I shall ask him this week whether he calls or not, as I want to be on good
terms with him ;we always get on very well when we meet elsewhere. But
I must say he is rather a snob even amongst Tongans, who are all inclined to
be a little snobbish until they are about fifty years old.
We dined at Baker’s last week—a very long and uninteresting entertain-
ment. I have given up all idea of trying to work with him, he has gone much
too far, and is such a brute. Yet it was not easy to find evidence of his evil-
doings which would stand examination, but I think I can get it now. Every
one is ready to tell stories about Baker, but they are all second-hand and not
worth having, but I think the evidence that I am getting now is so important
and trustworthy that it may be best for me to report the matter straight to
the Mission Committee and inform them that I have sent a copy of the letter
to you. This information is about the Mission collections only, for between
Godeffroy’s agents’ books (which I think will be given to me) the Magistrates’
returns, and the amount of money still owing to GodefFroy which was advanced
for Mission collections, I hope to be able to account for the large sums sub-
scribed, and to show how great a portion of it has not yet been paid, and what
a very large amount has been wrung out of the people by the working of the
harsh laws which Baker himself drafted. Godeffroy’s people bring about
thirty cases to court every month. They cannot do more, as they are afraid
of pressing the people too hard, for if they bring a case to court and the
native has no effects, they only get his labour for a time, until he has
worked out the debt that way. This might lead to evil enough, but in
Godeffroy’s case they prefer the money to the labour, and watch until
their debtors have something to seize, when they bring him to court and
sell him up. Bank matters, etc., I cannot find out much about, as both
Troud and Thorley are away in Samoa ; they are expected back, however,
next week.
Last night Tugi came to dine with me again, and we had a most interesting
393
XXII
FIJI


conversation. He told us a good deal about the Parliament, and everything
seems going the right way. The smoking tapu is moderated, and when Tugi
proposed the abolition of the Masi tapu he said, “ Don’t let us talk about it,
let us sweep it away without another thought. ” He tells me he thought they
would bring the house down with applause, and they shouted “ Tugi, Tugi,
we have a father amongst us yet, and we are Tongans still, although we have
hidden ourselves under white men’s clothes.”
We talked away last night for about three hours, and at last I apologised
and said that he must not go away with the notion that I wanted to lecture
him on the things we were talking about. Tugi replied, “ Tell the Consul
that’s all humbug, he does lecture me, and it is the lectures we get here that
have done us all so much good. I knew from the moment the Governor began
to speak to us that matters were on the mend. He spoke to us of things we
understood, and when they were things new to us he put them in a way we
could understand. And tell the Consul not to think that good has not been
done in another way ; this is the first Parliament which has been free from
outside pressure. We talk about things like Tongans now, and don’t have
new things shoved down our throats.”
I must say Baker does not seem inclined to show much fight. I think he
hopes I will tire of the place and clear out, and although the Conference white-
washed him publicly, I fancy he caught it in private, and is by no means as
firm as he used to be.
I have bought the old Roman Catholic Church as a dwelling-house, and
am going to have it moved next week; it is the cheapest way of getting a
house here, and is very pleasing to the people.
The Orpheus brought your letters to me. Ido not think I can leave Tonga
for about two months, by which time I hope Parliamentary matters will be
settled, and a good enough case made out to smash Baker had he twice the
backing. He volunteered the statement to me the other day: “ Tongans
hate debt. I think Maafu is the only Tongan who is much in debt.” The
Germans (excepting perhaps Weber, who has a consular game to play) are
very much down upon Baker, as he has let them in for this large debt which
the people cannot pay. —Very sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
I hope to have more to write about next mail.
The vessel does not start this morning, as the wind is ahead and very
strong, so I have time to add a few lines. Wilkinson had a talk with David
Uga this morning in which Gu’s name happened to come up, and as David
led up to the subject Wilkinson told him that I had some difficulty in deciding
how to act towards him, as he had not shown the same attention towards me
as the others had, etc., and that my position was rather a difficult one, hut
that I intended asking him to dinner to-morrow, and hoped he would accept.
David Uga implored Wilkinson to prevent my doing so, and told him that
the King had called all his family together and given Gu a tremendous blowing
up, “You white men would say he swore at him well.” David said he was
quite frightened, the King used such strong language ; he had already given
him a lecture himself before the King began at him. Gu “ tagid M 1 aloud, and
at last found courage to try and answer, but the King told him to hold his
1 Cried.
394
CHAP
FIJI


tongue, that he would not hear a word from him. Gu said that he was a
dead man if his father and grandfather spoke thus of him, but David says it
was all put on, that he is as alive as ever, and has been several times to see
Baker since, and hopes that I will take no notice of him whatever. The King
mentioned neither my name nor Baker’s in the lecture he gave Gu, but his
meaning was nevertheless quite clear, and he spoke about “ men who had
brought the country to the verge of ruin,” and “those who were trying to
save and help them.”
About 150 to 200 women from Mua brought me a magiti this morning.
Tugi stood up in the middle of them and made a speech ; he was most
amusing ; he said the women were all horribly jealous of him because they
could not speak themselves, but that he would do the best he could for them.
And then followed the usual civilities ; he said the present was not his, and
had nothing to do with him, that it was entirely a “ loloma ” from the women
of Mua. The town is alive to-day—four or five Solevus. No coats or
A. P. M.
trousers to be seen.
If I do write to the Mission Committee, a charge against Baker will only
be implied, not made directly. I shall only show by my figures of Court
cases, etc., the way in which the “voluntary” subscriptions have been
raised, and the debt that is now owing.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, Fiji, August 18, 1878.—My dear Sir—l received your letter .of
July 21 from Port Adelaide. Many thanks indeed for the Treasures of
the Deep. lam very glad that you got through all your journeys and work
with such success. I should very much have liked to have been with you.
I read the account of the New Guinea Company, and its interview with you,
with much amusement.
In answer to your inquiries—
(l) The maps for the Gau teacher. Bird wrote to me that Abbey had
left two parcels like maps, but no directions, with him, and wants to know
what he is to do. I have written to him to send them to me.
(2) Your £5 present to Sawayaki has gone some time ago. They
decided to take a variety of things, —hoes, knives, etc., and some cloth.
(3) Myself and Mr. D. V. He had no idea that he was expected to
write for somebody, and consequently has not done so. Unless I get some-
body to whom I can entrust the A.N.C., I shall not get home until you
come back. When the Lands Commission comes back from Bua, I will try
and get him to let Eyre do my work as Private Secretary for a month, and
go up to Colo. All is very well there. Ratu Rovo and Woodruff get on
capitally together, and the morale of our force is a credit to the country.
Buli Nadrau’s affair with Roko Tui Ba re the Qaliyalatini people is becoming
more serious. He has gone home from Ba (where Heffernan very wisely got
him to come and talk it over with the Roko) in a rage, swearing that the
Government have cheated him out of what he had a natural right to hold,
and, further, that when at Vatulk he had been distinctly told that the
Qaliyalatini people were to remain with him ; that is to say, those who were
already with him. I cannot quite forgive Wilkinson for letting this evil
arise, One word to me before the subject was settled by him and the Roko
395
XXII
FIJI


at the Ba meeting would have, I think, prevented any of this. He is not,
however, open to reason on this point, I fear. The result will be, I think,
that the present arrangement will have to be set aside, on the ground that
the decision was given on an ex parte hearing of the case (of which you could
not be aware, as no one had told you). lam waiting, however, for further
communication from both Roko and Buli Nadrau before I recommend any-
thing definite to Mr. D. Y.
Otherwise everything is quiet and peaceable. Horne has just been in
Navosa. I gnashed my teeth at not being able to go with him. He says
that the sandalwood is not in any large quantity, and much neglected, and
has been terribly ravaged by fire ; that some one should be set to overlook
its condition, and that it should be planted all over the country. He says
that it takes fifty years before it is old enough to be cut! I have a scheme
which, if the Government will agree to, would, I think, be of great benefit
by and by ; that is, that a white man (Langton, I believe, would do
admirably) should be appointed, who would reside at Camp, and whose
business should be to superintend the re-foresting of Navosa, the formation
of sandalwood nurseries, and the making of roads. How, in order to do this
successfully, I am of firm opinion that the Government will have to give up
the portion of taxes which are expected from these districts for some years to
come. It is not to be expected that the people will undertake both that work
and the taxes, nor would it be just to them. The people are now pliable and
ready to work for the Government, and I believe that it is the time to “take
it at the flood.” If postponed till they have become dull and stiff in their
Government work, it will be a matter of much greater difficulty. With the
assistance of a white man, detached for that duty alone, I believe I should
be able to do something for the future prosperity of that part of the Colony.
Thurston is nibbling at my hook as it is. Please let me know what you
think about it.
A very bad thing has happened at Ba. The Roko’s daughter Adi Kelora
(the one who wanted to marry Ratu Rovo) has been got in child by Nayaulawa,
the Buli and N.S.M. ; and it turned out that he had been the same with
a great number of girls in the place. The Roko was most furious, as you
may imagine, and wrote up at once about it. I’ve directed him to suspend
Nayaulawa, and ordered an inquiry to be made by Heffernan and R.
Nemani. N. was put on his trial on several charges of adultery, but having
succeeded in persuading his wife not to appear against him, every charge was
dismissed. He was sent up here, and is at Draiba waiting for further orders,
Heffernan acted very sensibly, and on the termination of the Provincial
Court held a court of inquiry as Assistant Native Commissioner in order that
the charges might be investigated. The result was most detrimental to
Nayaulawa. A letter written by him to Adi Kelora was found, in which he
instigated her to accuse another party. He threatened to commit suicide if
sent to prison. Of course not having been “convicted,” he is not a
“prisoner,” but I have given him very distinct orders not to leave Draiba ;
and as soon as the mail goes I shall bring his case before His Excellency.
Wilkinson never would believe what I warned him about —the danger of the
very anomalous character which is presented in the present native law of
adultery, viz. that if the offender’s wife, as he calls it, “condones” the
offence, it is not punishable as a crime. I always have fought him about
396
CHAP.
FIJI


the point. He replied that I was only arguing from a lawyer’s standpoint
“technicality,” and that the whole foundation for any punishment was the
injury to the wife. lam sure that if he could have foreseen the harm that
this doctrine has caused, he would have been more attentive to my pleading.
I intend to write a memorandum and attempt to get the present law altered.
Either it is a crime or it is only a moral offence. In Fiji it is, and always
has been, a crime ; the injury suffered by the wife was never regarded as
nearly so serious as that suffered by the parents and relations of the girl or
the husband of the woman with whom the adultery was committed. I am
sure that the people will feel the injustice of the present case. The district
“stinks” because of it. Since making up my mind on this point, Mr.
Cocks told me that at the last Provincial Court held by Hunter and l\atu
Marika a large number of adultery cases were dismissed for want of prosecu-
tion (both magistrates expressing dissatisfaction at the way in which the
law was working), and that Ratu Marika told him (Mr. Cocks) that if it went
on it would lead to great evil. After all, old English Common Law is not
the worst master to follow, and the Ba case shows me most clearly that one
of the principles on which our criminal law is based, viz, that no one may
conspire to defeat the ends of justice and evade the law of the land, is one
most strongly adapted to early states of society such as exist in these
countries.
The matter will most probably come before the Bua meeting, and I can-
not believe that the “voice of the land” supports Wilkinson’s theory on the
subject of the law of adultery as applicable to this Colony.
Our church at Camp is finished. I hear it is far the best one in the
mountains. The Nuyakoro people built it, and lam going to pay them £2O
for it. Of this, £lO I hope to get from Government. lam writing home
for subscriptions for the other £lO, so that we may all have a hand in it. If
Lady Gordon would give me something, it would be most gratefully received
by me on behalf of our force. The sinnet was your contribution. It is to be
opened on September 7. I should have liked it to have been on the
Bth (my brother’s birthday), but as that is this year on a Sunday I have
fixed it for the previous day. I cannot but feel that there is a blessing
upon our work in Colo.
J. Stark, of Naciline, Ba, was warned of! the Ba beche-de-mer reefs until the
Roko’s taxes were finished. Not paying any attention to this, he persisted,
whereupon his boat was seized by the Roko, the fish in it I believe taken out
and confiscated, and the boat then returned to him. The Police of course
rose in arms and wanted the various “offenders” arrested, and what not;
but Heffernan declined to do anything without further reference here. Mr.
D. V, backed up the Roko by intimating that he would not protect tres-
passers, and gave Seed orders to do nothing in the case, and for the present
the matter has dropped.
Missionaries in arms and in battle array, but as Mr. D. Y. will tell you
all about this, I will not bother you, especially as he knows more than I do
about it. I regret to say that the Chief-Justice is “at it,” and has stirred
up the missionaries to make a row over the Ra case, and is now trying to
withdraw with a bow and leave Mr. D. Y. to fight it out by himself—(and
all for the benefit of the Chief-Justice and the Attorney-General, who are
hurt because it was not made a Supreme Court case).
397
XXII
FIJI


By the way, Mrs. Garrick died very suddenly the other day. Garrick
has got six weeks’ leave, and is going to Sydney by this mail. Wilkinson
will be back shortly, I hope. Maudslay evidently not intending to leave
Tonga for some time.
Household matters very fairly flourishing. Great row with Pierre the
other day, which very nearly resulted in his going, but he was sensible about
it, and is doing very well. I really believe he is equal to Abbey in the
amount of hard work in everything that he goes through. “The grounds”
are prospering, and “ Rosherville ” is not disturbed, in spite of my threatening
to have it down as soon as Abbey want.
Barge and gig all right.
I heard from Stopford by this mail. I hope you will see him in London.
I think he will come out, if his people ( i.e . my people) do not stop him. I
cannot write to them about him yet; so Ido not know whether they would
or not. I think not.
The Yunivalu and Adi Kuila are here, both well. They are coming to
see us on Tuesday, the Yunivalu to dinner and the lady to lunch. I think
Mr. D. Y. will be very popular with the natives.
We expect the Commodore about the 25th, and the Nymphe will take us
to Bua. Mrs. Moore leaves us by this mail, for which lam sorry.
Lovoni people. —You will, I daresay, hear from Thurston. They have
been removed from Lovoni, and Loco, the old chief, has gone to the
Yunivalu for a bit.
Forty released convict prisoners went back to Colo the other day.
Ninety Sabeto, etc., men from Koro are to go back the first week in
September.
Taukeinibuto “at it” again in Navosa. The Buli of Nuyakoro now
wants him brought to book, and if necessary removed. I have not done
anything in the matter at present.
Kadavu. —The Roko has only just returned from Yiti Levu. The dis-
trict is reported to be in a very bad state from neglect. I fear that Swanston
was little good there, and Friend has no opportunities. The Home Govern-
ment must allow us more Magistrates. The loss in taxes from Kadavu this
year for want of one will probably far exceed the pay of a Magistrate.
I have nothing more to say. Please remember me most kindly to all. I
wish you all, from the bottom of my heart, the full enjoyment of the pleasure
of meeting those from whom you have so long been parted.—Ever yours, etc.
\§th. —Mr. D. Y. rallied to-day, and was able to do a very little writing.
He is getting all right again.
Revs. Fison and Lindsay collared me in the street to-day, and bullied me
about the Ba women who were convicted for abortion. You remember Mr.
Langham wrote to you at Rewa about the case. They are going to petition
Mr, D. Y. to release them, because they still report that the child which was
first born must be the one which was alleged to have been destroyed. I was
very wild, and told them that nothing would give me greater pleasure than
to see the woman let off if her innocence was proved, but that the Court
which sentenced her was perfectly satisfied of her guilt—a belief that was
not altogether an insane one, as the two women had both pleaded guilty.
“Quite so,” say the reverends, “but we have since ascertained that the
women told a lie and were not guilty ! ”
G. K. LE H.
398
CHAP.
FIJI


From Chief-Justice Gorrie
Levuka, August 19, 1878.—My dear Sir Arthur—So by this time you are
at home, after, I trust, an enjoyable voyage, and with Lady Gordon and the
bairns around you in health and in full enjoyment of home comforts. I was
glad to see the Australian papers so sensible, —hospitable and cordial the
people undoubtedly are.
High Commission. I received both your letters from Sydney and
Melbourne. I return the memorandum which you wished returned. The
mail brought another letter from Sir A. Kennedy, covering report from
Ingham as to condition of affairs generally. That, shortly, is as follows:
Two small expeditious have come in in consequence of the theft of a shirt
and a bag. Ingham had paraded eight men with rifles, and tied a fellow to
his doorpost! Articles returned. Natives friendly, and treating white men
with kindness. Sales of land begun, Ingham registering the deeds ; and gold
in size of peas found. Payable gold expected in six weeks from May 13.
While quite agreeing with you as to the chances of the Melbourne affair
collapsing, I fear a stream of diggers from Queensland ; and the parade of
force, and the sales of land, show that the sooner some one is on the spot the
better. I have reported position of affairs to Secretary of State, and said I
am going. I have written to Commodore for ship, and will start as soon as
vessel comes.
I have also reported about the Stormbird , a Hawaiian labour ship, but
there is nothing specially interesting about it. I will write you next mail
about the New Guinea visit, when scheme more matured.
Fiji (1) The Mission. —The fans et origo mali was perhaps my unlucky
self. Waterhouse told me they would have no objection to sell the courthouse
hill, if the Government wanted it, and I put the same question privately to
Webb, telling him I had no authority, and was only inquiring for my own
satisfaction and to act with the Mission. He said they would not sell, but
would consult Langham. I asked him to consult Langham while he was in
Sydney, at the seat of power, and added, not as a threat, but as a piece of
information, that they ought to know in deciding, that if the Government
really wanted the site they could apply for a price to be settled by arbitration
under the Public Purposes Act. The touchy fools, I suppose, have been
offended ; hence their dash at the Foreshore business and the Public Purposes
Ordinance !! Des Yoeux’s answer to the Foreshore is, I think, capital, and I
wanted him, as the Mission had been so discourteous as to publish their
missive, to give them the broadside in return. But he thinks, and perhaps
wisely, that “the canny way is the best,” and gave them a private reading
and chance of withdrawal, —with what result I know not, as he has been so
busy for some days I have not got him talked to. However, the missionaries
are in town in great force. You will see by the enclosed copies that they also
had a shy at the Address. I hope you will be satisfied with the reply. The only
point is, whether I was right in challenging them to bring forward their
instances, if they really had anything to say. Your mode of looking at these
things is, I know, sometimes essentially different from mine ; for if there is
anything to be said, I would prefer that it be said openly and publicly, and
then we know the worst, and it generally comes to very little. However, I
was perfectly clear that I could not allow a body of men like the missionaries
399
Xxtl
Fiji


to tell me, in a quasi-private, quasi-public document, that great hardships were
being suffered, and discontent the consequence, without calling upon them to
state what they knew. The responsibility would have been on me if I had
allowed the assertion to pass unchallenged ; but now, if they shut up, it will
be because they have nothing to say ; and if they send in a tirade about
Rooney’s case and such-like, they will get from Des Yceux as good an answer
as he has given on the Foreshore.
I intend to go on with the court-house proposal as if that little spurt had
not taken place. The unofficials will all support the project, and Smith
estimates that the reclaimed land will sell for £3500, thus giving ample
funds to buy site and build a decent place.
(2) The Ra Coast. —And here comes a ticklish piece of business, which I
wish very much you had spoken about before. A paragraph appeared in the
paper of 6th July, stating that a wholesale rape had been committed by native
officers on the Ra coast. I was at the time in Yanua Levu, and when I came
back for the Assizes, expected the case to be tried. I asked Garrick what had
become of it, and he said that he could not tell; he was not in communication
with the Stipendiary Magistrate, and information was not afforded him, I
told him that, as the Public Prosecuter, he certainly ought to know what
had become of a case of that kind. He said he would ask Eastgate to come
up. In the meantime Garrick’s wife died, and he was off work and at Suva.
Eastgate came to town, and I saw him. I told him my information was that
a most serious case of rape had been perpetrated, and that he, a Stipendiary
Magistrate, who had no power to try, nor the Provincial Court, had tried it,
and inflicted very inadequate punishment. He admitted there was a rape,
and in four different towns, by fifty-three scoundrels, but mumbled some-
thing about the women not being able to detect the individual man, —as if
that were necessary, or as if a fitter judge could not have got out the facts
better. Altogether I felt there had been a gross miscarriage of justice, and a
most unauthorised attempt of these most incompetent persons to usurp the
functions of the Court over which I preside. In order that I might place my
views on record to prevent any such blunders in future, I applied to the
Colonial Secretary for the returns which Eastgate had sent in. I then had a
long talk with Des Yoeux, and it was agreed to let the thing stand over till
after the mail. Meantime, whether Eastgate has been blabbing, or who, I
don’t know, but Master Solomon, having found out the raw, settled on it, as
in the enclosed extract!!
The thing will of course blow over, but I cannot say how vexed I have
been about the business, having such a direct tendency to set us all by the
ears, and a most fatal influence on the maintenance of a policy friendly to the
natives.
And now, having relieved my mind on this matter, I will turn to other
matters of a more pleasant kind.
(3) Land Grants. —The information about the New South Wales grants is
just what I expected. I thought at one time the non-issue of the grant pre-
vented fellows working, but I doubt if it has any influence. They are such a
miserable set, as a rule. lam quite aware that you don’t approve of following
out Lord Carnarvon’s proposal to settle the lands of the chiefs and people, as
well as the settlers ; but if not done, and done soon, the natives will entertain
opinions about the land quite inconsistent with the only theory possible for
400
CHAP.
FIJI


the Crown to hold, and disaster will be the result. At the first rush for
metals, coffee, sugar, or anything promising wealth, there would be a row.
I am all for preventing rows by wise precautions.
(4) Education. —I enclose proof of an Ordinance which the Committee
think of submitting. It is not quite approved yet, and has not been sent on
to Des Vceux. I think it will do, although it is not a thing lam very
proud of!
India Office. —Could you kindly get the Law of Contracts for me, and any
other laws issued since 1872 by the Indian Government ? I have the Indian
Evidence Act. The Crown Agents could send them out.
And now I must stop, although I wanted to say a great deal about Yanua
Levu, but as usual mail day is a day of bustle.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasoya, September 15, 1878. —My dear Sir—l have very little to write
about this mail. Everything is going on just the same : nothing going
wrong. Wilkinson still away, much to everybody’s disgust. Mr. D, V. is
getting wrath about it. The Orpheus went for him a long time ago, and has
not turned up yet.
No news from Maudslay since I last wrote. Griffin is not coming here ;
he has returned to his native city.
Not much news from Samoa. It appears that Swanston declined to obey
the Chief-Justice’s summons to him to appear before him in Levuka in the
case of Dr. Van Camp against Swanston and Turnbull, for defrauding him and
others out of some thousands of dollars about fifteen years ago. I send on a
private letter to you which came from Swanston, and which I opened in case
there was anything which the Chief-Justice ought to know as Acting High
Commissioner ; but there is nothing in it about the obeying the summons, or
anything of a nature to be shown to the Chief-Justice, so I did not show
it him.
The Chief-Justice told me last night that there is another affair going on
like Caffin and his Tanna execution. The Beagle , now under De Houghton,
has gone to avenge the death of one Townsend, lately of Fiji, a most
unmitigated ruffian, who met his end at the hands of some natives at Ugi in
the Solomons. The Beagle , so the Chief-Justice told me, goes there to
capture the murderers, and bring them dead or alive for trial in Fiji! But
in attempting to get hold of them a town has to be burnt, and a running fire
kept up, as to which it is stated “ uncertainty as to whether any natives were
shot.” You will probably hear about it from the Chief-Justice.
Lands Commission returned from Yanua Levu last week to Mr. D, V.’s
delight, as while they were away the Lands Office was shut up, and every
paper, etc., locked away.
Colo. —All right. lam going there by the next Black Swan for a month.
Eyre will do my work as Private Secretary. It is really too disgusting not to
have been able to get away for a day all this time. Mr. D. V. has not sent
for any one to come here, so that I see no hope of going anywhere unless by
some lucky chance Maudslay was to turn up and stay for a bit.
A.N.C. all right, and behaving extremely well.
Parr returned by the mail from Sydney, and at once set on foot a
HI 2 D
401
XXII
FIJI


testimonial subscription to Solomon for having so ably defended the cause of
the planters against the Government in the Fiji Times. I hear it has
reached over the £IOO already. I enclose another bit of his handiwork.
Mr. Winter also returned. He says that only a part of the long letters
which appeared in the Sydney papers in connection with Dr. Bakewell’s
energetic defence of you were his; that he only stated that Dr. Bakewell
was wrong in saying that his land claims were all disallowed, and that all the
rest, which contains the attack on you, was written by Parr.
Missionaries quiet, but hatching a second reply to Mr. D. V.’s replication.
I never heard of such a villainous thing as they did about their reply to his
Minute. At 10.30 P.M., after the mails were closed for England (last mail),
they sent their reply in manuscript to him with a letter full of regrets that
they had had no opportunity of sending it before. But the foxes, prompted
by Solomon, had had time to have had their Memorial, Mr. D. Y.’s Minute
on it, and their reply, printed in the form of a pamphlet, said to be for
“ Private circulation only.” These went by the mail to the Colonies. It was
a low, and not a clever trick. No able man would have laid himself open
to the wound which his opponent (and certainly Mr. D. V. of all men)
would be sure to inflict for such a false step. They have damaged their
case by it.
Chief-Justice quiet, but troublesome. He asked for Eastgate’s reports on
the Ra case, and Mr. D. Y. refused them (courteously of course) on the ground
that it was not proper, as a matter of duty, to send Magistrates’ reports to
the Chief-Justice, or any one else except the Secretary of State. The Chief-
Justice has formally protested, but I have not seen his protest yet. Mr. D. Y.
will probably write a despatch about it by this mail.
The Wolverine , with the Commodore, came here on the 22nd, and stayed
for five days. She went on by New Caledonia to the Solomons and New
Hebrides. The Commodore stayed here part of the time ;we got on very
well with him, and the D. Y.’s liked him. One day we went in his steam
pinnace to Ban, privately amd not with any ceremony. It was a very jolly
day, and in spite of Mr. D. Y. being sea-sick, he on the whole enjoyed himself.
We paid a short visit to the Vunivalu and to Mr. Langham, who gave us
gritt} 7 oranges and the biggest decanter of water I have ever seen. Its size
was immense, and must have once belonged to a very deep drinker, I should
think. We came back by Cape Horn. Some of the Commodore’s party were
very nice. His Secretary, Mr, Carter, I liked ; and I think his aide-de-camp,
Brock, is a very decent youngster. The parson is quite mad—utterly. We
had the band on shore here one day, and lawn tennis, which all went off very
well. We had a cricket match, which also went off very well; but they
got beaten.
The difficulty of the “first call” was got over capitally. The instant the
Wolverine hauled down her quarantine flag, I was over the side with a letter
from Mr. D. Y., offering to pay the first call, if the Commodore wished it,
stating, however, that as a Lieutenant-Governor he believed himself strictly
entitled to have it paid to him ; but as he was only Administrator here he was
not quite clear about it. The Commodore had got a letter written to the
same effect, and offering, on his part, to pay the first call if Mr. D. Y. wished
it. So we settled at once that there was to be no official call on either side.
He came privately to stay with us, and we all went to church with him on
402
OSAP.
FIJI


Sunday, and had luncheon in his cabin. I also went to dine with him the
night before he sailed,
A Mr. Warner was sailing with him. He was Sir W. Jervois’ Private
Secretary in South Australia, and has seen a good deal of the world ; he
seems to have picked up plenty of information about Australia. I believe
he intends to go in for Parliament when he gets home. He stood for
Leicestershire (I think) in the last election, and was beaten by the Liberal
candidate. I hope he will have better luck next time, We liked him, and I
wish we had seen more of him.
There has been a great row between Thurston and McGregor over a private
note-book of yours which Mr. Langford found in the strong room. It had
evidently been accidentally overlooked, and left amongst some other papers
there. Langford did not know what it was, and was taking it to Thurston
when McGregor happened to pass and asked him what he had got. Langford
showed it to him, whereupon McGregor took it away to his own lodgings,
sealed it up, etc. lam going to get it from him to-day, and send it to you
to be left at the Colonial Office till sent for. Thurston was furious at
McGregor having taken it from Langford, and came to me to seek redress !
I told him I thought it w r as very wrong of McGregor, and I told McGregor
that I thought it was very wrong of Thurston, and so they both were
satisfied. It was really just like two children having a squabble. I shall
begin to get conceited if a Colonial Secretary and Receiver-General come often
to me to be consoled and patted on the back.
I also found a private note-book of yours, which at first glance I saw to be
one about our trip out; as there may be something to which you would like
to refer, I send it too.
I have found De Ricci’s letters to you, which I was afraid had got astray ;
they are all right.
As to ourselves : Mrs. D. Y. has been very fairly well, and Mr. D. V. has
been doing a little more work than at first; but things are frightfully
behindhand. He is not a bit fit for duty yet. To-day, lam sorry to say, he
is very unwell, and I am afraid if he does not get better to-morrow our mail
will be a failure.
Poppy is in greater force than ever ; he is twice as fat as he was when he
came. Mrs. D. Y. tells me that they are all better than ever they were in
Trinidad or St. Lucia.
I forgot to tell you that there was a hitch about Swanston’s salary. He
drew a bill on you, as High Commissioner, for some £B4 odd, and the bank
sent it for endorsement to the Chief-Justice. He knew nothing about it.
Finally it came to me, and I could find out nothing about it; no copy of any
letter could be found relating to Swanston’s salary, or how it was to be paid.
At last his Agent, Mr. Drury, remembered that Swanston bad luckily sent
him a copy of that part of your private letter to him which relates to salary,
and on that I got the bill endorsed and the money sent. It was all but being
dropped, and I was afraid that if Swanston’s official bill was not honoured
here, a serious difficulty might arise which would place him in a most
awkward situation in Samoa, especially at a time when these reports about
Yan Camp’s case are being circulated freely. However, all that is settled ;
and there will be no difficulty in future so long as he does not overdraw,
which I presume he is not likely to do.
403
XXII
FIJI


1878.
—Census of Colo (Navosa) and Serna.
Navosd.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Able-bodied Men.
2,755
2,669
5,424
1,242
Serua.
1,041
947
1,988
506
3,796
3,616
7.412
1,748
The Gau teachers’ maps have come by this steamer ; but I have not got
them yet.
Olive’s cousin, Cumberbatch, shot himself the other day in a fit of
temporary insanity. Death was instantaneous.
Rupert Ryder and his wife (Miss Cudlip) have just come down from New
Zealand. She is a lucky girl, and I think he will be all the better for a wife,
if she be sensible.
I have just heard that Jacobs, the incurable drunkard, one of the Wakaya
lot, is off for good by this mail. A smash up appears imminent. —I am, etc.
From the Chief-Justice
Leyuka, September 16, 1878. —My Dear Sir Arthur. —High Commission ,
New Guinea. —The Commodore arrived after the last mail went out, but I
found he could not give me a steamship for New Guinea, so that my trip
there has been indefinitely postponed. By last accounts the men were still
prospecting, but there was no unusual excitement. The newspaper accounts
mention that both Captain Digby and Mr. Chester had been there, but there
is not a scrap from either of them. The former got back to Sydney on
August 27.
As the want of a ship gives a breathing time, I have written a longish
despatch to the Secretary of State, stating what I thought might and could
be done, and what it would be advisable to do, and asking instructions for
my guidance until your return. I have put the legal difficulties down in
black and white, and come to the general conclusion that if a rush takes
place, or the European population in New Guinea get numerous from any
cause, annexation will be the only remedy ; but that if annexation is con-
templated at any time, it had better take place sooner than later, so that the
treatment of the natives might start fair from the first; but that the rule
could only be retained in the Crown, and not given to any of the Australian
Colonies. There is no time to send you a copy by this mail, but I hope
you will find that the spirit and the views are in harmony with your own
policy.
Killing of Townsend. —This is another case where the Beagle flourishes
under her new Commander, De Houghton. You will find all the facts in the
accompanying copy of letter to the Commodore. Townsend was the keeper
of the “Criterion” hotel here, and an “unmitigated scoundrel.” I thought
it as well to tell in plain terms what the character of the man was, and how
in all probability he has been the aggressor. I have written also a despatch
404
CHAP.
FIJI


on this by the present mail, of which I can’t (time) send you a copy ; but
between writing the Commodore and the despatch, I had seen the printed
Parliamentary papers on the Tanna case. I ajso got a squint of your letters
on that subject, to take care I wrote nothing in any sense different, which is
not the least likely, certainly. The result of the printed correspondence
leaves us in this position, that while the Commodore is asked to take the
advice of the High Commissioner, —and under this Hoskins, you will find,
proposes to send me two Tanna men to deal with, —there is as little provision
for the trial of natives by the High Commissioner as there is by the Com-
modore. It is quite clear these erratic Lieutenants cannot be allowed to fly
about burning and hanging, but their superiors have no more legal right to
try a native than they have. Now, I have hit upon an idea, which I hope
will commend itself to your larger experience, of forming a Court which will
conciliate the Admiralty and unite its jurisdiction with that of the Order in
Council. I have proposed that natives should be tried who commit offences
against British subjects, and tried on the same exceptional grounds as enabled
us to deal with pirates and slavers ; not indeed viewing the natives in the
same light, but recognising only that where they have committed crimes they
ought to be tried. I have suggested that the Admiralty jurisdiction of the
Judicial Commissioners be taken as a basis, and a Court formed along with
the senior officers of the squadron (as in the case of pirates) to try natives
who commit offences, and the procedure in the Order in Council adjusted to
this state of things. It would require an Act of Parliament to authorise the
Crown to assume this jurisdiction, as there is a section in the last Pacific
Islanders Act which might be read as preventing such Courts being attempted.
I think the idea is feasible, and it is clear that natives ought not to be hanged
without trial—that they ought to be tried if they commit crimes,—that their
own rulers can’t or won’t, —and that at present we have no authority. If you
are speaking or advising on the subject, you can easily get a sight of the
despatch, I suppose ; but the idea is only thrown out, not elaborated.
Swanston drew the other day for a part of his salary. Not a scrap could
be found as to what he was authorised to draw, and nobody knew. If I had
had our illustrious C. M.G. by the cuff of his new coat, in which no doubt
he is swelling about, I would have done something dreadful. However, it
was quite clear we had to honour his draft somehow, not for the honour of
the drawer, but for the honour of his appointer,—leaving us to draw on the
Foreign Office for his Consular salary. So done.
Did I tell you that some Americans have come down to raise an action
against Turnbull, of Apia, in connection with some past transactions, and
that Swanston is mixed up somehow in it, and could not take the case or
even issue the writs ? They were issued here, and will either be tried here
or in Samoa.
Speaking of Samoa, I may as well tell you a bit of Fiji gossip. Last
week I issued three warrants of imprisonment as absconding debtor—one
after the other was settled—against a Mr. Hutten, a German clerk of
Solomon’s. He was actually on board a craft to go to Samoa, and she was
tacking to get out, when ordered to come back, and Mr. Hutten, with his
five-chambered revolver all loaded, landed, and was put in gaol. lam told
to-day that he has not only been flying all manner of kites, but has been
forging a title to land, with signature ! ! Particulars of course I have not
405
XXII
FIJI


required, but only that the preliminary proceedings have begun for the
felony,
Fiji. Territory of the Prophet Ezekiel. —l commence with this to get rid
of it at once. I enclose draft of a letter I wrote Des Voeux the other day.
I am glad there are 10,000 miles between us, as I know you will be very
an g r y ; but if you think calmly over it, you will see, lam sure, how unworthy
I would be of my office if I allowed it to be trifled with, as was done in this
instance ; and imagine the fellows who thought themselves competent to
exercise supreme jurisdiction,—Eastgate, and a native magistrate ! I have
stood with perfect patience the mountains being taken out of m} r jurisdiction,
—but no poaching on the plains ! If anything is said about it by the Office,
Des Yceux certainly ought to be relieved of all responsibility, as he did not
know the rogues. He is very seedy, I am sorry to say—not down to-day,
although it is mail day. He is very agreeable, and we get on capitally ; I
am afraid you, who never countenance anything that is questionable, would
be occasionally scandalised by our stories. But the laugh is good, although
the story may be bad.
Trial by Assessors. —l have written sending in the report of the trial of
a planter, Walker, for shooting a Fijian boy, reviving the question of the
propriety of my having to refuse a jury in every case, and proposing to have
the optional words struck out, leaving the trials to be by Assessors pure and
simple.
Supreme Court. —I have written asking that the rock be bought, levelled,
and a Court-house built—£looo expenses and £3OOO for reclaimed land —
enough to build satisfactorily and no drain on revenue. Do support, even
though Suva should be in view, as Levuka deserves encouragement. Every-
body, including unofficial members and Warden of Levuka, favourable.
Have said no more to missionaries.
The Missionaries. —You know how the scamps printed off a pamphlet
with their reply before waiting for Des Yoeux’s answer. His notion that
when they saw his first “State Paper” they would withdraw from the
position they had taken up, showed more simplicity of character than I had
given him credit for. His second paper w r as not quite so terse as his first,
but it would tell on any one who had not the hide of a missionary-ecclesiastic.
I have heard nothing from them more, but I presume some mischief is on
foot, as they are all in town.
Education. —l rather think I forgot to send you our proposed Ordinance
last time. I enclose rough draft. It is very nearly the thing, but Mr. Des
Yceux has altered it somewhat. First reading not taken yet.
Send me Sir John Holker’s (or Fitzjames Stephen’s) Bills codifying
Criminal Law.
How is the partition of Turkey getting on ? I was asked to take part in
a public meeting to congratulate Beaconsfield ! I said I had no objections
to congratulate Salisbury, as he had partitioned Turkey and dished Disraeli,
but judges were not supposed to say all those fine things in public. The
example of Sir James Martin in Sydney was quoted, and I added that if I
had any doubt of the propriety of refraining before, I had none now, if Sir
James Martin had set us a warning.
Probably Bakewell has sent you the letters he wrote to Sydney papers.
Old Winter has come down. He came to me to apologise for the reference
406
CHAP.
FIJI


to me in the letters, and said that Forwood and Parr had put it in alter he
had signed the letter in hospital. Arcades ambo —trio—but what can one
expect ?—Ever yours faithfully.
Mr, Maudslay to Sir A. Gordon
Tongatabu, September 5, 1878.—My dear Sir —I have enclosed a copy of
letter I have written to the Mission Committee in Sydney. I think it is the
only course to pursue, as I shall come into open collision with Baker long
before I have time to receive any answer from yon. It is war to the knife.
My letter gives you some fresh information, and in addition you may take it
as granted that all you heard here is quite true. He is so much hated by the
natives and so untrustworthy, that it would be impossible to work together.
The King says his only fear is that I may accept Mr. Baker’s “ soro ” 1 should
he come to me, but it would be impossible to do so. I made a trip to Niwafou
in the Orpheus, Baker’s pet hunting-ground, and some of the revelations were
astonishing. £2OOO a year subscribed by about 1000 persons who live on
the island, only 300 of whom are tax-payers. Troud and Thorley have only
just returned from Samoa, or I should have much more to write to you about.
Wilkinson is still with me, entirely at his own desire, as I have made no
attempt to keep him, although of course he is most useful to me.
The Parliament is still sitting. They have not come to the treaty yet!
They say it is the first chance they have ever had of a good talk amongst
themselves without Baker’s interference. lam on excellent terms with the
Chiefs, and am frequently applied to for advice on all Government matters.
Gu is the only one hostile ;heis a thorough Bakerite, and the King and Uga
are furious with him, so much so that lam told they are going to take
advantage of some other scrape he has got into, to remove him from his
government of Yavau. I much wish to see the other missionaries at Haapai
and Yavau, but Ido not like to leave Tonga just at this critical time. I have
written no despatches, as there is really nothing of importance to report
outside of Mr. Baker’s doings ;itis a great deal worse than Charles the
First and the memorial, one never passes ten minutes without hearing his
name.
Wilkinson talks of returning in the Orpheus next week, and by Fiji. I will
report to you fully then.
Baker is up to every conceivable dodge to beat me ; amongst others he
told Uga that my real mission here was to secure the return of Maafu and his
succession on the King’s death, and thus the annexation of Tonga to Fiji.
Uga promptly informed me of the conversation.
I send this scrawl by a vessel just leaving for New Zealand, and it will
probably reach you some few days before the letters by Fiji.
I have not yet got at any of the financial matters ; they seem rather shy
of showing them to me, but I have no doubt I shall have the whole thing
clear in a few weeks, I fancy the financial condition is worse than you
imagined. No salaries have been paid for nine months, and the rents will
take some time to recover. The boat is just off, so I must stop.—Yery
sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
1 Submission.
407
XXII
FIJI


From Mr. Maudslay to Lady Gordon
British Consulate, Nukualofa, September 23, 1878. —My dear Lady
Gordon —One jogs on here with so little change that there is very little to
write about. Wilkinson is still with me, and about a month ago Frank
Symonds turned up from Auckland, and as you may imagine, I was very glad
to see him. Mr. Houston left for Samoa, by way of Haapai and Vavau, last
month. I am still in my storehouse, and find it comfortable enough, but
shall be glad when I can set about building my new house at the other end
of the town ; but nothing can be done in the matter until the Parliament is
over. The Parliament was nominally closed last week, and of course I went
to the ceremony ; but the King’s Council —the people who really make the
l aws —are still hard at work and are not likely to separate for a few weeks to
come. There is a good deal of sickness about amongst the natives, and my
house is literally besieged for medicines, and cough mixture has to be manu-
factured by the bucketful. Symonds is a pretty good hand at doctoring, and
our fame has spread so far that people from all parts come for advice. I
went over to a town a few days ago, some miles away, and all the cripples
and incurables in the place were brought out to me with the most perfect
faith that “wai ni mate” 1 would put them all right. I have to be very
careful about not interfering with Baker’s patients, and that is no easy
matter, as the people dislike him, so that they will often try to hide the fact
that they have already been to him and taken his medicine, I put down
most of the sickness to the changeable weather (not forgetting altogether the
miserable small houses and the European clothes).
I am very glad to say the Treaty has at last been signed, and I send it to
the Governor by this mail. I have heard twice from Mr. Le Hunte, who
presses me to come back to Fiji, but I can t do that at present.
David Tonga and his wife dined with me last night. He is a native
parson, and both he and his wife talk English : she is charming. They have
dined with me before, and apparently enjoy themselves much. The great
events of last week were—a picnic at one of the little islands in the bay, and
the marriage of Taniela Toa, the native parson who came with me from
Lakeba. The picnic was entirely a native affair in honour of Tukuhaho, the
son of Tugi, coming of age. I enjoyed it pretty well, although there were no
mekes or games, and a good deal too much “ Yaqona ni papalagi” drunk—
not of the best quality. When the matters I have in hand are settled here, 1
hope to go to Haapai and Yavau, and thence to Fiji for a short time. I shall
miss Mrs. Wilkinson and Daniel very much. They go back next Tuesday.
Their departure makes an interpreter necessary to me, and I have engaged a
Mr. Hanslip, clerk in Godeffroy’s employ, who knows the language well, and
is the only man here I could possibly engage, as all the others who know the
language have the usual South Sea failings. I think he will be a success ;
he is far above what one would expect a man to be in his (present) position.
His employers speak very highly of him, and the natives respect him, and he
has lived almost entirely amongst them for ten years. I hope to get my
house started soon, as the shed I am now in would not be healthy or habitable
in the wet season, on account of the swamp which is underneath part of it.
1 Medicine,
408
CHAP.
FIJI


I am delighted to hear from the newspapers that the Governor is to be waited
for before anything is settled about New Guinea, as lam sure he will keep it
out of the clutches of an Australian Colony ; and I hope the Governor will
manage to get a steam despatch boat out of the Government, and then you
can come and pay me a visit in the hot weather. I expect I shall have a
formidable list of things to be chosen by you before you leave England. This
is a miserable place—almost impossible to get anything one wants. Please
give my love to the children, and tell Jack there are some children here even
nicer than those “horrid little children at Draiemberer.”—Very sincerely
yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, September 30, 1878. —My dear Sir—This is a line to say that I
am off to Colo for a month to-morrow. Eyre will be Private Secretary while
lam away. All well. Mr. D. Y. better, but not up to work much yet.
Things are rather at a deadlock, for he won’t let Thurston do a single thing
by himself, and sometimes for two or three days he is not well enough to go
over anything with him. The Lovoni people refused to take anything from
the Government. We offered them £54, to be paid in any way they liked.
(Dr. Brower’s compensation to them for leaving their plantations there. I
think Dr. B. was swindled as to the amount; what I saw was not worth
£l4, if that). They were very cheeky about the matter, and I think we
shall have to come down smart on them some of these days. In the mean-
time the question is, what is to be done with the money ? I am for giving
it back to Brower, but Thurston won’t do that. No doubt it is a course
open to the objection of “being honest.” However, he has agreed not to
make any use of it, but to keep it in trust for the Lovoni people for some
future occasion. Their refusal was so determined that I don’t well see how
we can give it to them.
Thurston and I are getting on capitally together, and so am I and
McGregor, but these two are dire enemies.
I did not send you the second notebook by the mail bag, as it is rather
a fat heavy one, and I see a great deal of it is not written in, so I have put
it with some other papers of yours in your pigeon-hole.
We had a line from Maudslay yesterday dated the 2nd September. No
news. He says that Baker’s exactions in Niuafu have been something
disgraceful. He also says, “ I have evidence enough to smash him at any
moment I like.” Wilkinson not turned up yet.
Missionaries here in arms about everything. They evidently look upon
Mr. D. V. as a foe to be fought with hard steel, not honied words. He
tries to conciliate them, but without success.
Maafu was here the other day. He was in very good spirits. He likes
Swayne only tolerably well. He gave a very good account of his district.
I have shipped four of the largest bits of sandalwood in the Dunkelin for
you. She will take about three months to get home. I enclose the bills of
lading. They are addressed to you, care of Messrs. H. King and Co. I
am taking the payment in trade value (£2O) to the Taukeis of the town
where the sandalwood came from, and the same quantity to the Nuyakoro
people for the church at Fort Carnarvon,
409
XXII
FIJI


Chief-Justice Gorrie to Mr. Des Y(eux (Extract)
On reading Solomon’s article, apart from its general tendency to do
mischief, the first thing that occurred was where he could have got his cue.
Now there are several ways by which this might be done. There is the
verandah prowler at Nasova overhearing what is going on in adjacent rooms
—there is the talkative officer of the Government confidentially enlightening
his chum on Miss Mostyn’s verandah, or in his own room, with every word
being overheard—there is the talk at the court, where fellows sitting very
quietly may overhear what is being said, for instance, in my chambers—
and so on. The houses are made for being overheard in, and the people
about one, having nothing else to talk about, are glad of a blab about
something,
I have known one thing come out of a private letter I wrote the
Governor, and of course it could only do so by his leaving it on that pro-
miscuous table, and some one picking it up and reading it.
It is just what I expected of our reverend friends. 1 think you must
make your answer public, for they are evidently bent on mischief, and the
delicate and courteous mode of acting is quite thrown away. The questions
they have taken up have been so only as blinds. It is the general decay of
their authority which is vexing them.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, September 15, 1878. —My Dear Sir —I wrote you several long letters
by last mail, and sent various enclosures that I thought might interest you.
Since then nothing of any very great importance has occurred, if I except
the further correspondence with the Wesleyan Mission and a little unpleasant-
ness with the Chief-Justice in regard to that very annoying affair at Ra, in
which a number of officers (native) were concerned. Gorrie has, of course,
heard all sorts of stories (from friends calling upon him) about the affair, and
he persists, among other things, in believing that the Roko Tui Ra was at the
bottom of it.
He addressed a letter to me requesting to be furnished with a copy of the
Magistrate’s report upon the subject, and the return of Court cases showing
the sentences given to those convicted. This letter was accompanied by a
private one to Mr. Des Yoeux, in which he stated that he (Gorrie) was going
to stir up the affair, as he believed there had been a miscarriage of justice,
etc.
However, Mr. Des Vceux, who saw him personally on the subject, has
declined to give them to him, and, so far as I may presume to judge, very
properly so, for Gorrie evidently wishes to do a great deal more than administer
the law in his Court in regard to matters brought before him. He wishes to
assume the responsibility of the administration of law throughout the Colony,
or, so far as I understand him, to exercise the powers of a Minister of Justice.
This affair and that of the Missionaries coming together has made Mr.
Des Vceux quite unwell, but I hope there will be no more worries for a little
while.
One thing is very clear to me, and that is, if all criminal cases were to be
410
CHAP.
FIJI


tried in the Province by the European and Native Justices, more substantial
justice would be done than by the Supreme Court with all its wisdom. 1
Take the recent murder case at Nadi as an example. A Fijian woman is
found dead near Blatchford’s. Wounds upon her head show that she had
probably been killed with an axe or large knife. The evidence of one native
goes to show that two foreign labourers killed the woman in the early morning.
The manner in which the witness described the blows dealt was verified by
Dr. MacGregor, who went to Nadi, exhumed the body, and brought the head
to Levuka. (See further.)
The prisoners, however, were discharged, and taken back to Nadi by their
employers; but I believe that if the trial had been held quietly in the
Provinces, in the “ rara,” or under a tree, the evidence would have been much
etter. No semi-civilised man, much less a comparative savage, can stand
being taken into court and put by himself in a box, “the cynosure of all
eyes,”—white men all round him, all glaring at him, —one awful man, in a
“sulu damudamu,” 2 of severe aspect, on one side of him, —another awful,
bumptious, hectoring turaga in a mystical black garb, in front of him, —
other persons, whom he has just seen clad in the white man’s customary
dress, entering the precincts of the court now arrayed in strange costumes.
The fact that his own legal friend (the Attorney-General) has become suddenly
grey-headed, is not the least remarkable fact that the bewildered victim has
to grasp; but when, just as he is about to falter out his first reply, the
policeman in attendance roars out “ Silence ! ! ” he breaks down, and becomes
(for the time) an idiot, who can be made say anything, or contradict himself
ten times in five minutes. Doubtless the case was not well got up owing to
the departure of the Attorney-General, but whether the result would have
been different in any case, is, I think, extremely doubtful. 3
What evidence would, or could, the Ra women have given had they been
brought to Court, or even had the court held a special sitting at Ra ? The
strong probability is that the accused would all have got off, and the law
courts would have become a laughing stock to the natives. As it is, the
principals and accessories are punished by flogging, and imprisonment and
hard labour, for periods varying from one to five years.
1 Mistakes would now and then be made, but a young Colony like this
wants prompt and a little rough-and-ready justice. This is rank heresy,
no doubt, but it is fact.
2 Red dress.
3 Results of this case are General cost of the trial, plus MacGregor and
Seed to Nadi, travelling expenses, postmortem, exhumation, analysis
of blood stains, witnesses’ expenses,—at least £l2O. Natives at Nadi dis-
gusted, as they think this is the third native murdered by Polynesians
without a conviction or any punishment following. Deceased’s people
specially annoyed, because some officers of the Matanitu have dug their
relative up and cut off her head, and taken it away. Murder was bad
enough, they think, but why this action ? This head must go back and be
re-buried in the presence of Heffernan, who will explain the affair.
MacGregor thinks the idea Quixotic, but I shall worry until it is done.
Probable result: the mysterious disappearance of a Polynesian or two
ere long.
411
xxn
FIJI


Mr. Des Yceux will doubtless write to you upon this subject, and he is
strongly of opinion that the best course was taken.
Fison made me a friendly call on Saturday. I almost fancy that he
wishes himself out of the dispute as to Foreshore, but I did not press him.
By this mail and under separate cover I send you a copy of the document,
and the only one, under which they claim. If you consider the case while
in England, it will be a necessary document.
Murdoch wrote from Melbourne in respect to his claim to Rukuruku. I
enclose copy of his letter. The claim of Stoltz has not, I think, a leg to
stand upon. lam happy to say that Mitchell has returned from Yanua
Levu, though as yet he has been so busy*preparing reports that I have not
seen very much of him. From all that he has said lam inclined to think
the re-opening of the Kuludrusi claim results in favour of the claimants,
while that of Naidi was not improved. Upon these points, however, he will
probably write personally.
Here, however, a thought strikes me—whether happy or not, I cannot
say. Ought Mitchell, or I, or any one else to worry you while in England
with the recital of any matters which “gang a gee” here? Should we not,
unless some matter of importance arises, adopt a laisser oiler sort of spirit,
and not transmit a lot of petty irritants that may very well await your return,
and which we might dispose of ad interim by doing nothing ? Sometimes I
feel myself a sinner in this respect, but as I don’t sin of malice prepense you
will doubtless forgive me.
In one of my last letters I said native taxes to August 31st would reach
£7500 as against £4OOO odd of last year to same date. lam glad to say
the result was nearer £BOOO.
At the present moment, I am up to my eyes in Avork, and have, in addition
to Barb and Zephyr, two vessels chartered. They are in and out every day,
and of course everybody has to be driven a little, but so far things have
worked smoothly. Three vessels came in yesterday—two late in the after-
noon, and one, Barb, at 8.30. That took me out for the second time after
leaving office. On return I was so tired that sleep captured me in my chair,
and I only awoke at daylight. This and three hours’ work in the office this
morning (Sunday) has rather knocked me up. On the whole, however, lam
not uncomfortable about native taxes.
The “ Chamber of Commerce ” met in full force the other night in Drury’s
Office (9 x 12) for the purpose of discussing a plan to destroy the Native Tax
scheme. There was, I hear, some very hard fighting, and the particular
member, who at present enjoys the contract, cut up very rough, and was’sat
upon accordingly. The idea seems to be to appoint agents in all the
Provinces for the purpose of getting up “awful cases of oppression,” etc.,
and then to memorialise the Home Government. Meantime the season for
tendering will come round again, and they will all cut one another’s throats
over it. Nothing would be easier than to get up a simulated howl of discon-
tent that would look splendid on paper. Every effort is made by traders to
impress the natives with a feeling that they are being robbed ; and that
hitherto the attempt has failed is owing more to the confidence of the native
in the Government than to any clear convictions of his own. At the end of
this year I shall write a report showing in figures the actual cost of working.
The Times says, “No man may know that and live”; but the actual cost
412
CHAP.
FIJI


has been published every year. 1 What they do not, or will not, see is that
the ships have cost nothing but their first charge. Their full maintenance
for wages and wear and tear is provided for by what the ships earn, or by the
difference between the tendered price of produce in the Province and in
Levuka. If the Government ship did not make this, the ships of the con-
tractor would, and something more also, for they would impose upon the
people by representing themselves as connected with the Matanitu, and rob
both sides.
Swayne is getting on very well at Lau. He was sent down to Lakeba to
inquire into several cases of robbery there ; but as yet we have not received
his report. Maafu went with him. Hitherto offences of the sort have been
almost confined to Lau ; but the other day the stores of MacConnell and
Tarte of Yuna were broken into, and cash stolen. The thing was done so
well that it really appeared the act of white men, but it turns out to have
been Taylor’s 2 boat’s crew !! who seem to be a very polished lot of rascals.
The Lovoni matter is settled, and I think satisfactorily. The natives are
all back in their coast town, and do not seem “rarawa” after all. Their
plantations at “ Naqamulagi ” are very large, and they do not think they
can plant more. Le Hunte, Lake, and I made a day in the valley, taking
the plans with us. This enabled me to show Lake the actual boundaries of
Lovoni, and he agrees with me that outside of the area sold by the Fiji
Government there are 2000 acres still at the disposal of the Crown. Some of
it is beautiful coffee land. Ido not forget that Winter claims a large part of
this, but I know the history of his claim, and feel certain it can only be
disallowed.
When this mail is gone I shall ask Mitchell to let me peruse the papers.
Winter came down by the last steamer, and also Parr. Dawson, of Rabi
(Hill’s “agent” as he calls him), also put in an appearance. I hear from a
connection of mine in Sydney that the Dawsons are not particularly satisfied
with Hill’s administration.
Spence, of Spence Brothers, Melbourne (owners of the Rewa Sugar Mill),
is also here. He called upon me about growing sugar for native taxes.
Stated his readiness to invest £20,000 at once in mill, punts, steamer, etc.,
and then went on to Rewa. We are to meet again to-morrow, but whether
I shall have time to talk is doubtful.
One or two good investments here would soon make an appreciable altera-
tion in our Customs receipts.
Wentworth brought a very full cargo here this trip. I will try to
ascertain its value to the revenue before closing. 3
Business here is certainly improving : it is wonderful where all our stock
goes to, but it goes. People grumble, but they extend their premises
notwithstanding.
Enclosed is an extract relating to the New Guinea adventurers, which
may be interesting. So far there is not much encouragement for Mr, Dods
1 This year my allowance for collection was, if you remember, £l2OO.
Out of this I have paid for bags, seeds, tools, etc., matters connected with
future production. So far my rate of expenditure is below 9-12ths.
2 The Stipendiary Magistrate.
3 Cannot do so.
413
XXII
FIJI


and his friends, either east or west of the 142° meridian which divides the
Island.
Commodore Hoskens was here since my last letter was written, and from
here went on to Noumea. From all I can hear the aborigines of New
Caledonia will disappear rapidly. It gives me much gratification to contrast
the state of our people, and the fact of Caledonia being a convict colony
makes no difference.
Chiefs and people are alike happy, and will continue so if let alone by
settlers. The people are protected by the governing power,—petty chiefs
are made executive officers in their own towns,—superior ones are Magistrates,
Bulis, and Rokos, and aid in controlling the native population while main-
taining their hereditary positions, the character of which alone has changed.
My old friend Cakobau enjoys a never-dreamt-of otium , and is loyal to the
backbone. He enjoys his private boat and his yacht, and if his ambition to
be the owner of a “yavai va” or “trap,” to take him into town, savours of
weakness—what matter ? It shows Tubou that he is not left to beg ; proves
to the Samoans that he does not labour in a white man’s plantation ; and
reflects no discredit upon British good nature and justice. And now, hoping
that you are safe and well in England by this time, and begging you to give
my kind regards to Lady Gordon and the children, believe me, etc.,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
From Mr. Carew
Nakorovatu, Colo, September 13, 1878.— My dear Sir— My last letter
to you was dated August sor 6. Since then I have had a good deal more
correspondence in the matter of the appointment of new Bulis, and have
now finally proposed that they be appointed acting ones only for awhile
until they begin to pay taxes, and that I be authorised to pay them by
subscription—in fact by a “ soli vakavanua. ”
I have not been able to discover that anything has been done in the
matter of Witherow’s land. I have not yet heard from Mr. Des Yceux, to
whom I wrote on August 2in the affair, I now write to Mr. Le Hunte.
Mr. Ansdell has miraculously recovered—l can hardly regard it other
than as a miracle. Nothing is being done in his land affairs that I can
discover, and he is worried and anxious about it to a degree,
I am sorry to have to say that all my coffee seed has died from the
extreme drought; it was planted two months too early, but I allowed
myself to be persuaded by Mr. Horne.
Mr. Thurston has promised to send me two bags more, and it will
arrive in the proper season. The weather is improving and shows signs
of showers; last year the dry weather extended to two entire months later
than this.
I believe it is about over.
The people of Levu have at last promised finally, I hope, to obey Buli
Soloira, and after a good deal of trouble have sent in their census returns
which they had persistently refused to do until the past month, and the man
Tete has been sent for by His Excellency from Namosi; he is ordered to live
at Soloira. Whether he will or not without punishment remains to be seen.
I have lately returned from a fortnight’s journey inland ; there was a
squabble between those ancient enemies Naboubua and Darawau (Muaira)
414
chap.
FIJI


about a boundary village. I have settled the matter, I hope, to the satisfaction
of all parties.
A man at Namosi had also taken off a woman from the Wai-ni-Mala whilst
some of the latter were at former place on a ceremonial visit calculated to
heal old sores. This has had the consequence of re-opening them, as the
Roko, Native Magistrate, and Buli of Namosi espoused the cause of this
man warmly in direct opposition to the merits of the case ; for their man
was altogether wrong, and the others had entirely the law on their side. I
have settled this to the satisfaction of all parties by sending the man to
gaol for three months, and promising he shall marry the woman when he
comes out if she wishes it.
The Namosi people behaved well towards the end, and voluntarily sent
the man and woman to me, although I had not interfered with them at all.
Bat they also sent five large official letters to try and screen him, and all at
one time. I thought it not bad—five official letters on white foolscap, margin,
O.H.M.S. etc. etc.; each one in its own especial envelope —all from the kaicolos
of Namosi, brought to me on one day by the same man.
Mr. Gordon probably instructed them in office duties and the punctilio of
the Service during his stay there.
During the last three weeks of August a man shot himself dead, and three
unsuccessful attempts at suicide by hanging occurred on the Wai-ni-buka, all
in cases of most petty provocation, only originating in quarrels with their
wives, and all clearly caused by polygamy.
These latter three I have sent to Totogo for a year each : on the coast
they are only cautioned, as the Native Regulations have not empowered Courts
to deal summarily with attempted suicides ; which I believe to have been
merely an oversight.
I held a Court at Narokorokowa on eight Nagarawai men, including my
old friend Lialia, who was with me at Nasaucoko ; he ordered the officer to
drag off a young girl, and then barred her up in a house for a fortnight with
a man she refused to take for a husband.
I sent the principal and Lialia to Totogo for two years, and the other six
for one year ; but I have given them all to understand that I shall inflict five
years for any repetition of these matters.
Mr. Langham has lately visited this district: he took away a magnificent
vesi “ lali,” 1 and tried hard to get the large meeting-bouse given up for a
church ; but I would not have that at all, telling him it would be destroyed
if it were left untenanted. After trying to get a new hard-wood canoe from
the Buli, which I also prevented, he went down the river again, not without
first sweeping off all the shalots from a bed I have been in the habit of using
for those little delicacies of the breakfast-table.
When I see people going about always on the look-out for something like
this, I feel inexpressibly disgusted.
I hear there is a probability of a very large mill—they say a twelve-ton
one—to be put up by Messrs. Reece and Gustav Hennings on Yunicibicibi,
and there is also some talk of one opposite Ansdell’s place on Luks land.
Pfluger has been here lately, and planted a considerable nursery of coffee
seed, intending to remove from Ba very shortly and reside here.
1 Drum.
415
XXII
Fiji


I have not been in Levuka since you left the Colony, and have no present
intention of going there. I have finished all my Lands Commission business
long since.
The natives here are busy at work preparing for their tax tobacco. I
sincerely trust they will make a good show this year ; should they not, it
will be ascribable to want of young plants to put in the ground.
The Native Magistrates held Courts here during my absence inland, and
from their action in granting marriage licenses I judge that about thirty per
cent of the marriages performed are illegal.
(I find that I have inadvertently left a blank half-sheet here, so I fill it
up by making the remark that although the English version of marriage
ordinances shows clearly that native marriages “are legal and binding,” yet
the Fijian version merely says “ sa na vakabau,” which words generally mean
may or shall he recognised or suffered. No wonder the Native Magistrates are
doubtful.
But the fact is, Native Magistrates are made to regard it as a matter of
conscience to put an end to the wicked Fijian marriages by all means, and
I fear they are only too ready to grant licenses to all who desire the sanction
of the Church to their union with a younger and prettier wife than the one
cast off.
I beg you will excuse the inadvertence of leaving this side blank and
having to write this the long way of the page.)
It is quite clear in the English version of the Native Regulations that
native marriages performed before May 31, 1877, in accordance with native
custom “ are legal and binding” —well, of course, this includes polygamy.
Any person unmarried according to the rites of the Church has
simply to apply for a license, and gets it —and, moreover, gets it at once,
without the trouble of any second application as is demanded by law in all
cases.
The consequence is, that men are throwing over two and three wives
legally bound to them, and are marrying others without consulting their own
proper wives. The native minister here refuses to marry these people, but
in other parts they are not so nice, and are too ready to receive the fees to be
scrupulous. Last week a man threw over a wife who had had six children
by him, two of whom are living, and was married at Navuso.
I have written a report on the Fiji marriage clause, and have asked the
Lieutenant-Governor to acquiesce in an arrangement whereby parties being
unanimous may dissolve these connections by coming before me and declaring
their wish to do so, and then receive a certificate from me, I keeping also a
Register.
I don’t know if anything will come of it; probably nothing, as nothing
has come of anything I have had to do with since your Excellency left. Ido
not for one moment, however, desire to insinuate that any blame should attach
for this. The Lieutenant-Governor’s position I can fully understand is a most
difficult one, and the arriving at any clear knowledge of native matters out
of his own head so shortly after his arrival seems to me to be a herculean
task, and not to be underestimated, and I am afraid can only be valued at
its true value by persons within the Colony who have knowledge of Fijian
native affairs.
I trust I have not wearied you with these items of business matters, and
416
CHAP.
FIJI


daresay you would much prefer, now you are away, not to be annoyed with
business matters at all; so with my best respects to your Excellency and
to Lady Gordon, believe me to be, my dear sir, your very obedient servant.
Mu. Maudslay to Sir A. Gordon
British Consulate, Nukualofa, September 30, 1878.—My dear Sir—
I fear that you will think I have been very silent and very remiss about
writing to you, but it has been very difficult to know what to say. When
I came here the people were delighted, as they saw that you were in earnest
about what you had told them, and had carried out your promise to send
them a Consul. It took me a week or two to settle down in the storehouse
which the Government lent to me, and where I have been ever since ; it really
makes a very tolerable house, better than I expected, but it will not do when
the wet weather comes. I then set to work to make the acquaintance of the
leading Chiefs and the respectable white people, and, one or two at a time,
I have had them all to dine with me, which has had a capital effect, and I am,
1 think, on good terms with all, both whites and natives.
I tried also to get on good terms with Mr. Baker, but he took very little
notice of me except when we met in public. At last I asked him to dinner,
and he came, and about six weeks after he asked me in return, and I dined
with him ; during this time, however, I heard reports from all sides of his
little sayings and doings in my disfavour. He hit out at you in his sermons,
and I began to find how much the people hate him, although at the same
time they fear him terribly. He boasts continually in his sermons that he is
invulnerable, that he fears no one, that he has been tried several times by the
Conference, and that every time he comes out free and stronger than ever,
that no man can stand before him. This sort of bosh really has its effect if
persisted in long enough, and the people will begin to believe in him again.
When I began to inquire into things more closely, Baker made still further
opposition, not to me personally, but to the natives, who managed in a round-
about way to let me know about it. I had always heard that Niuafu was his
pet hunting-ground, and as the Orpheus was lying here idle, I took her for a
trip there. You know its position, hundreds of miles from any other islands,
and with no safe anchorage. I was only there about thirty hours, but during
that time the people, Chiefs especially, complained to me bitterly of the
Mission rule. There are only two white men living on the island, one an
agent for Godeffroys, the other for Hedemann ; both confirmed the statements
made by the natives. The amount subscribed yearly is from 10,000, to 12,000
dollars ; promises are made of the amount which each person will give at the
beginning of the year, and are worked out in copra, which copra is taken at
about the trade price, and shipped by the Mission to Sydney, so that there is
room for profit. A good deal of money also is subscribed.
Hedemann’s agent told me that he had attended one meeting, and described
it to me somewhat as follows :
‘ ‘ The church was not at all full, but a good many people were loafing
about outside. Mr. Baker sat there with the native minister beside him ; the
latter did all the talking. I thought the whole affair was going to be a dead
failure, and that no subscriptions would be raised. A man’s name was called
out, and he was asked what he would give ; the first few men seemed to give
HI 2 E
417
XXII
FIJI


willingly, and gave large sums considering tlieir means, then one would come
and name a sum considered by the minister to be too small, ten dollars say.
‘No thanks will be given for that,’ would say the minister ; ‘so and so gave
double that amount, and you yourself gave more last year. Come, what will
you give ? ’ ‘ Fifteen dollars,’ would say the man, holding down his head. ‘No
thanks'for that,’ would reply the parson ; ‘think of so and so and so and so,
who have all given liberally.’ ‘Well, forty dollars,’ would say the man, and he
was greeted with a cry of ‘Malie,’ ‘Malie,’ that is right and good, and the
poor devil would bolt out of the church, knowing that he had given four times
as much as he intended to give, but quite unable to help himself.”
The island is about the size of Totoya, and is merely the crater of a large
extinct volcano, the whole of the centre part being a large lake of brackish
water. The land is, no doubt, very rich in cocoa-nuts, much like Samoa, but
the people are not numerous—only three hundred tax-payers, and every male
over sixteen pays taxes. In addition to the payment of the £2OO a year
subscription, the people pay all the local expenses, such as building churches,
schools, teachers’ houses, so that the expenses of the Mission must be next to
nothing. £250 a year should cover them easily. I noticed that the printed
subscription list for 1876 credits Niuafu and Niuataputapu together with
£SOO, and the list for 1877 with £7OO, a considerable difference from the
statements of the natives. What made the people of Niua particularly dis-
contented when I was there was the fact that they had made arrangements
with Mr. Hedemann for the purchase of a vessel, and the Louisiana, a schooner
of thirty-six tons, had been built for them in Auckland. A letter, however,
came from Mr. Baker after the order had been given that it was “tapu”
for any teacher, preacher, or student to assist in making copra to pay for
the vessel, and as every man of consequence in the island, from the Governor
downwards, is a preacher, or is in some way under Church government,
this was an awful blow to them, and quite stopped any chance of the
vessel being paid for, but they to some extent disobeyed the order and
commenced to collect the copra. At the close of one of the missionary meet-
ings Baker told the people that they might subscribe money, and that he
would buy a vessel for them himself, and some money was paid up ; but when
it was subsequently announced that although those who subscribed would
always have a free passage on the vessel, she would be a Mission vessel and
used for the “work,” the affair fell through ; the money, however, w r as not
returned. I told the native minister what the Chiefs had told to me, as I
thought it only fair to do so, and asked him if he could give me any information
on the matter ; he shuffled and quibbled and professed the most profound
ignorance about the amount of subscriptions, and even denied any knowledge
of the amount subscribed in his own town, much to the amusement of the
Chiefs, before whom I got him to repeat his statements. In reality he is a
particularly sharp man, one after Baker’s own heart, and sent especially to
look after such matters. He managed somewhat to turn the tables on the
Chiefs by preaching at them before me with the usual stock phrases about
all gifts to the Lotu being from a man’s own heart, etc., until the Chiefs were
rather “Madua,” 1 but I think I set their minds at rest before leaving. I
have no doubt I should have learnt much more'at Niua but for the fabt that
1 Ashamed.
418
chap.
FIJI


I had no proper interpreter, and had to trust to my own Fijian through Filipi
and the very bad Tongan English of a man David Uga sent with me. I,
however, brought back with me the Governor and some of the others, who
were most anxious to come to the Parliament, and they have since confirmed
all I have told you. The people of Niua are some six or seven thousand
dollars in debt to the traders, and they have been driven to picking unripe
nuts to make copra, and thus forestalling and spoiling their crop. I wanted
much to go on to Niuataputapu and thence to Haapai, but the weather
prevented me ; and with twenty-two of us on board the Orpheus , I was not
sorry to get back to land.
I have had conversations with Uga upon all sorts of subjects, and have
given advice when asked for it on matters now before Parliament, but it is
not at all easy to find out what measures will really become law. The
Parliament, after sitting for six weeks and, as far as I can make out, discuss-
ing everything under the sun, was formally closed last week ; but the King’s
council, who, in absolute violation of the Constitution, are the real legislative
body, have by no means finished their labours. The finances are, I feel sure,
in a very much worse state than you imagined, and they are utterly in the
dark about themselves. I think the hesitation in consulting me about them
arises from the King’s and David’s personal debts, in which I imagine Baker
is concerned. It may all come out if I wait patiently.
Of the Mission collection affairs there is no doubt whatever about the
system pursued by Baker in advancing money. Mr, Troud has told me of it
himself, and Godeffroy’s agents don’t hesitate to give particulars ; they have
lost considerably by the transaction by being so long kept out of their money.
Of course the clearest proof and most damaging case against Baker is the large
number of these debts which have been brought before the native courts, and
the amounts recovered by distress, and it was this clear proof which induced
me to write as I did to the Committee. There are still a number of debts
owing, and some distress warrants had been issued, but the inquiry I was
making frightened Baker, and he paid up the money to satisfy them (I have
it privately from Troud that he paid up £300), and I have little doubt that
when Weber arrives, the amount (about £200) still owing to the firm on account
of subscriptions will have to be met by Mr. Baker if he wishes to avoid further
exposure in the courts. Baker, who is at present away on a trip in the Meteor
to Niua and Haapai, has been working like a horse to put things right with
the people, and I believe, if left alone, would reinstate himself in a few months,
not in the affections of the people, for most of them—the women especially—
hate him, but through the terror which he inspires. He talks a great deal
about his love for them when paying their judgment debts, but where, say
the people, would his love be if tbe Consul were to go away ?
The Treaty is at last signed, and I send it to you by this mail. The King
asked me to strike out the Steamer clause, and I did so. I gave them every
possible opportunity of discussion and explanation, and I really believe that
there is not a word in it that is not thoroughly well understood, and the King
is evidently delighted both with the Treaty itself and the manner it has been
submitted to him ; he says this time it is “Sava sava.” 1 The last clause was
inserted at his own request, and I do hope that I shall soon get an answer to
1 Clean, i.e. clear.
419
XXII
FIJI


my despatch which will show him that the completion of a treaty will not be
delayed.
I shall apply to you next mail for sanction of an expenditure for house-
building. I cannot live where lam now in the wet weather, and there is
nowhere else to move to. Could not the expense be shared between the H.C.
Fund and the Foreign Office ? Anyhow, I shall have to build a house, and
must take my chance of recovering the money.
Wilkinson and Daniela Toa return to Fiji to-morrow. I shall miss them
very much, and so much do I feel the need of an interpreter that I have
engaged a Mr. Hanslip, a clerk from Godeffroy’s, an Englishman who has
been ten years in the country, and knows the people and language well.
Godeffroy employed him to conduct all their court cases and collect the Mission
debts, work which was very distasteful to him. From his late occupation he
knows more than any one about the Baker affairs. Troud recommended him
to me most highly.
I think there is a good chance of Troud himself being accepted by the
Government as Secretary ;he does not speak the language well, but in every
other respect he is well fitted for the post. He is not a clever man, but is
most thoroughly honourable and straightforward, and he tells me that he will
not accept the post (if, as is supposed, it will be offered to him) unless he has
my support, and that he will look to me for advice and assistance. Ido not
think that, although he says this, he will be one bit the less a trustworthy
servant of the Native Government, but that there are many matters connected
with Government with which he has had no acquaintance, and he is unwilling
to accept such a post unless he feels sure that he can look to you through me
for guidance. I forgot to say that there was a bit of a squabble before the
Treaty was signed, as Wellington had put some of the Ministry up to delay-
ing it, in the hope of getting it broken off. There seems to be no doubt in
the minds of the natives that he is acting under Baker’s advice ;he is very
frequently at Baker’s house, and has systematically refused the little civilities
I have been able to offer him. He is at present on very bad terms with both
his father and the King. When the King found out this little plot, he sent
off straight for the copy of the Treaty, signed it, and appointed three of his
Ministers to bring it to me there and then. Gu jumped up from his tea when
the news was brought to him and ran towards the King’s house, but was met
by the deputation on its way to my house with the agreement signed, and
had to retire discomfited. I shall not give up my efforts to bring him over
to my side. I have great hopes that most of the absurd laws are abolished,
but although I am frequently appealed to on certain points, and they are not
backward in asking questions, yet they keep what they have done very dark.
I have been able to learn very little about the Banking business. Mr.
Thorley was away for two months in Samoa, and has been so drunk since his
return that it is impossible to get anything out of him. Troud has bad to
ask him to leave his house and take up lodgings elsewhere for a time until he
recovers, which means until his money has run out. I have been called away
this morning whilst writing this letter to give doses of opium for Miller, the
present, or rather late Government Secretary, who is suffering from an extra
bad attack of delirium tremens. The Government have only lately dismissed
him. I am delighted to see from the telegrams that the Government wait
your arrival before dealing with New Guinea, and I hope you will be able to
420
CHAP.
FIJI


save it from being attached to an Australian Government, without they will
turn Northern Queensland and New Guinea into a Crown Colony of a severe
type and give the Chinamen a chance in the former and the natives in the
latter land. —Very sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
Mr. Maudslay to Sir A. Gordon
Nukualofa, October 4, 1878. —Dear Sir—l will just add a line to what I
wrote to you last week (and Wilkinson, who starts to-day, will take it to Fiji
to post there) to say that nearly all the measures I have recommended have
become, or are very soon to become, law. Namely :
A limitation of amount of debts recoverable before a Court to £1 for
each man.
A marriage and divorce law, nearly the same as in Fiji.
Ditto, adultery and fornication.
An ad valorem duty of 5 per cent with certain exceptions, and additional
duty on arms, ammunition, and spirits.
Abolition of Tappa law.
David Uga and I are to inquire into the finances as soon as the planting is
over, say three weeks.
Troud is to be offered the Secretaryship, and will accept.
One public-house to be licensed in Nukualofa for whites.
£l5 penalty in selling or supplying liquor to natives. Premier to decide
whether charge is to be brought to court in every case.
People to dress as they like, as long as they are decent.
The Commission to inquire into the finances, who in consequence of a
resolution of the “ Yakataha,” the King had sent a message to them, suggest-
ing an inquiry by Junia (Finance Minister) and others, with my assistance.
They replied, “ What is the use of Junia ? he has made a mess of it already ;
if the Consul will be yalovinaka 1 and help us, let him and David do it between
them. £1 per head for each man is, I think, quite a large enough credit;
and I think any credit necessary for permanent improvements, or purchase of
carts or such like, can be managed by a town fund.
The fishing tribes are to be brought back to their allegiance, and to be set
to work again.
The French man-of-war Segonde (?) arrived yesterday ; the captain called
to-day ; she goes on to Samoa.
I should like to get back to Fiji for the Yeibose, but I am afraid to leave
Tonga to the tender mercies of Mr. Baker. The King says that he cannot see
the evil days ahead that the preachers will keep talking about in their prayers ;
he thinks there is a good time coming. No news from Samoa.
lam much in want of Consular printed forms. I should be so glad if you
could arrange for a Deputy Commissioner’s uniform— tropical. I have to
return the French Captain’s call this afternoon, and must row a mile and a
half in the blazing sun in a black coat; thank goodness I have no Consular
uniform, as that would be worse still.
I hope to be able to report officially on the change of laws here next mail ;
at present it is only “ talanoa ” 2 from Uga. Gu seems to be uneasy now, and
half inclined to come round. Daniel Toa is urged to come back to Tonga as
1 Good-minded, kind.
2 Relation, story.
421
XXII
FIJI


Judge at Yavau, so that he may look after Gu. King, David, and Maafu all
of one mind about it.—ln haste, very sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
From Mr. Carew
Nakoroyatu, Colo, October 12, 1878. —My dear Sir—l write you a few
lines, being doubtful, however, if they will reach Levuka in time for the out-
going mail.
The Lieutenant-Governor has agreed to the appointments of the Bulis at
Colo and Viria—to be paid in the usual manner.
Not a syllable, however, have I been able to learn yet in the matter of the
land promised to Witherow, or in the affair of Ansdell’s.
My sympathy for Witherow and his family has disappeared. I have been
subjected to so much unpleasantness in the matter, that but for my pledge
to him, I should not care whether he got an acre or not.
Ansdell, however, behaves like a gentleman, and although dying with
anxiety, never bothers me about his land. He is in poor circumstances, has
spent over £3OOO in the country, has nothing left, and is in disgrace with
his father.
I cannot but feel for him, as he h£s been duped and swindled on all hands
by shares, by his tradesmen, and by all others with whom he has had business
dealings ; he is an easy prey to the most transparent schemers.
Mr. Parr is in full feather again, has some young fellows in tow named
Pelham and Sillifant, lately from home I believe, and it is said the former has
£7OOO. Mr. Parr has kindly offered him, I learn, the half of the “Great
Amalgam,” as they are pleased to call it, for £3O an acre ! and I am told is
determined to ease them of their money if it can be done. It is probable
they will be paying me a visit shortly.
I have just returned from holding Courts at Naitasiri, Mr. Eastgate having
gone to Yasawa. Nothing of any great importance done.
I saw the new mill erecting at Nakorogaga (Waterston’s) ; it is fully a four-
ton mill but has no vacuum pan, only a “ Bour pan.”
Sugar is going at a density now of from to 10^°.
There is a subscription list going round on behalf of Mr. Solomon (especially
for his efforts in relation to Land Titles). Mr. Parr is at the head of it, and
although there were not many names on it when I saw it, yet two were
“Anonymous,” which at any rate shows we have cowards in Fiji.
The Lieutenant-Governor has directed that Namosi be again under me,
but I write asking for assistance from Nasova in the matter, as there are
several difficulties in the way, and it will be necessary for some conversation
between the Lieutenant-Governor and Roko Tui Namosi before I can go there.
I have asked the Lieutenant-Governor’s acquiescence in an order I have
made, that the new law as to clearing two fathoms wide round gardens before
burning off be not enforced.
It cannot be enforced in my districts except in the upper parts of the
Wai-ni-buka.
The labour of clearing two fathoms wide of heavy jungle such as we have
is enormous ; the danger caused by piling it up very great; and the law
would be altogether evaded.
The people of Serua have at last come to their senses, and are showing a
422
CHAP.
FIJI


good and friendly disposition. They have all lately visited me to have a
drink of yaqona, and made a particular request that I would write for them
to J. P. K. Nilom and beg him either to settle on his land adjoining their
town, “or if he could not leave the vicinity of the Bank where all the money
is kept,” then either sell to another white man or let him plant there from
month to month.
I have written this letter, but I imagine the land is mortgaged to about
three times its value, and do not think it likely anything will come of it.
Bulis Matailobau and Soloira have received orders from Roko Tui
Naitasiri to get ready for Ban meeting. lam quite certain, however, that
the Roko has been guilty of a great and intentional breach of courtesy in
not consulting me—or pretending to do so at the least.
The Lieutenant-Governor wrote several weeks since to Roko Tui Namosi
to take the man Tete (whose deportation I have asked for, and who was
ordered to remain with Buli Soloira) to Soloira.
After waiting several weeks for an acknowledgment of the receipt of the
letter, I wrote and asked him if it had reached him. He answers by saying Tete
wishes to live at Namosi, and that he waits to go to Nasova to explain matters.
So now Buli Soloira’s orders to one of his people were set at nought.
Then my positive orders as Resident Commmissioner were set at nought.
Then your Excellency’s positive orders, given in public assembly in
presence of Buli Namosi, were treated in the same manner.
Now, last of all, the Lieutenant-Governor’s letter to Roko Tui Namosi is
what I term disobeyed.
It may seem a hard thing to say, and I would not say it but for a most
perfect and thorough conviction of its perfect and invariable truth, that if
you wish to ruin a native, whether Roko or cook, you have only to pat his
back and he is done for.
And they always say the same thing themselves.
I never praise a native ; no matter how much I may desire to do so, I
would not dare to tell a native that I approved of his conduct, as their temper
will not stand it.
I leave this for the head of the Wai-ni-buka on Monday the 14th, to hold
Court in conjunction with Native Magistrate from Ra.
Trusting I may not have offended your Excellency by making use of the
permission to write fully and freely, and with my very best respects, believe
me to be, your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
WALTER CAREW.
Mr, Maudslay to Sir A. Gordon
British Consulate, Tongatapu, October 26, 1878, —My dear Sir—Mr.
Huge has told me privately that he leaves for New Zealand to-day in his
brigantine Matautau. For some reason or other lam not to let any one else
know ; anyhow it gives me the opportunity of sending a few lines to you via
San Francisco. There is very little to report since I last wrote. Wilkinson’s
going left me without an interpreter, as Mr. Hanslip cannot come to me until
November, and this has placed me at a great disadvantage as far as native
information goes. Baker is squaring up with the Government, and Uga tells
me that they paid him over £lOOO last week. It is not a very rapid settle-
ment, as Baker employs Thorley to do all the accountant’s work, and half his
423
XXII
FIJI


time he is drunk. Uga promises me that immediately they have settled with
Baker the whole of the books and accounts of the Government shall be put
into my hands, but that he must settle with Baker first. lam very much
afraid that Baker will destroy all the papers which would show his connection
with the transactions, but I cannot well press the matter any further.
I send you a copy of a correspondence I had with Baker about an inquiry
into debts which was made with the King’s approval and also of Wilkinson’s
report. I have now learnt that Baker has suspended several local preachers
and other church officers for assisting or giving information, in fact he is
trying to bully them into submission again. The colleague Baker asks time
to consult (in his letter to me) is Mr. Oldmeadow of Mua, a young man who
has only been a very short time in Tonga.
On Saturday, October 12, the German brigantine Matautau arrived from
the north with Mr. Watkin of Haapai and Mr. Minns of Yavau as passengers.
Hearing by chance on Monday evening that they were returning on Tuesday
morning in the Norval , and not having received a call from either of them, I
wrote a civil note on Monday about 6 p.m. asking Mr. Watkin, if he was not
engaged, to come and see me in the evening (of course both were staying with
Baker). I did not ask Mr. Minns, and heard that he was very unw r ell. Mr.
Watkin returned me a verbal answer by a native that he could not come that
night, but would come on Tuesday morning. On Tuesday morning, instead
of coming alone, as I expected he would after receiving my note, he called in
company with Mr. Baker and Mr. Oldmeadow. Of course I entered upon
nothing but general conversation ; however, when they rose to leave, I asked
Watkin before the others if he could spare me half an hour in the course of
the morning as I wished to have some conversation with him. He refused,
saying he should not have time, etc., and they all went on to Mr. Trend’s
house to visit him. I then wrote a note to Mr, Watkin and sent it after him,
again repeating my request that he w y ould call upon me, and saying that I
would delay the Norval for an hour if necessary. About an hour afterwards
he returned alone. I took him to task for his want of civility, and told him
it was only a common act of courtesy for him to come to call upon me, and
that after my note I had certainly expected that he would come to see me
alone, and would not have refused to come when I asked him a second time.
Of course he made excuses and said he meant no disrespect, that he had said
to his brethren, ‘ ‘ Come, let us call upon the Consul; it is a sign of respect
due to his position, etc,” I then told him that I expected to receive the
support of the leading English residents, and that his not coming to call upon
me when asked would give colour to the story already put into circulation
that I had come to Tonga to fight the Wesleyan Mission, and I asked him to
dismiss any such idea from his mind. I told him that I disapproved most
thoroughly of many of Mr. Baker’s doings, that he had done all he could to
discredit both yourself and me, and that he had afforded me no assistance
whatever since I had arrived, and that it was quite impossible for me to work
in harmony with him. Mr. Watkin professed absolute ignorance of the
method of raising Mission subscriptions in Tongatabu, but added that I must
remember that thousands of pounds were spent in Tonga before the Mission
received any return, and seemed quite surprised when I replied that I could
not look upon the conversion of Tonga as a commercial transaction for which
the promoters expected to be paid in money. I gave him an outline of my
424
CHAP.
FIJI


objections to Baker’s doings ;of course he tried to bring about a reconciliation,
and wished me to give Baker a chance of explanation, I refused, giving as a
reason that Mr. Baker was continually boasting of his invulnerability, and
that I was certainly not going to expose my native informants to his tender
mercies by giving their names to any one but such persons as had authority
to investigate and decide on all matters. Watkin seemed very much annoyed
at having heard that a story had been written down by Daniel Afu about his
refusing to bury a native at Haapai because, when alive, the man had not
prepared the food for a preacher on a Sunday, and said that he heard that I
had made a note of it, expressing at the same time strong disapproval, and
intended to send the report to Sydney, and he said that the story was an
infamous lie. I replied that I had no doubt that it was so, but that I was
not responsible for the truth of every story told me. And that as my inter-
preter Daniel only did what was right in writing down a statement in order
to make a proper translation to me, that as to what 1 had done in the
matter, he must be giving credit to mere hearsay. However, on the strength
of the story he had reported Daniel to the Conference.
Before leaving, Mr. Watkin apologised again for any seeming disrespect,
and I think my talk to him did good.
The Norval did not leave on Tuesday, and on Wednesday about one o’clock,
as I had seen nothing of Mr. Minns, I sent a note to him asking him to call,
but he had already gone on board, so I got out my boat and went to call
upon him. I found him with Mr. Watkin in the cabin ; the latter immediately
went on deck, although I said that I had nothing to say that I should not
like him to hear, but Mr. Minns appeared to approve of his absence. I said
very much the same to Mr. Minns as I had to Mr. Watkin about not calling
upon me. He replied that it was fully his intention to call, but that as I
had written to Mr. Watkin he thought that I must wish to see him alone, so
refused to come when Watkin asked him for his company. The truth is that
they are all frightened of one another and of Baker. Minns told me that the
congratulatory address which I had received from Yavau was entirely his
doing ; that there was only one mistake that had been made, which was, not
sending a Consul to Tonga ten years before, as it would take years and years
to undo the mischief which had been done ; that I need look for no opposition
from him should any inquiry be made ; that he had already written to Sydney
strongly approving of what you had done during your visit, and asking that
the matters complained of might be thoroughly looked into. Altogether our
conversation was very satisfactory, and he seemed very pleased at my having
rowed off to see him.
There is only one matter which makes me at all suspicious. I told him
in confidence that I was aware that Mr. Baker had received over £IOOO from
the Government last week, and that my informant was TJga ;he expressed
entire ignorance of the transaction and asked some questions about it. I
have since found out that he had been talking about the very same matter
with a person whose word is not to be doubted, about an hour or two before
he went on board the Norval. This is a difficulty to me, but as he appeared
to be very sincere in what he said on other matters, lam inclined to give him
the benefit of the doubt, and conclude that there was a misunderstanding
somewhere. H.’M.S. Nymphe was here for two days last week. I enter-
tained the captain and officers as well as I could, I should much have
425
XXII
FIJI


liked to go on to Samoa in her, but I did not like to be absent when
Weber arrived, as he is expected soon in the Ariadne, and Uga and others
pressed me so much to stay, fearing Baker’s wrath. I hope to get a
letter from the Sydney parsons by a steamer belonging to Godeffroys,
which is said to leave Sydney about a fortnight ago on her way to Samoa
and Fiji and Tonga ; I expect her next week. I send you a copy of a
statement sworn to by Mr. F. Payne, a local trader here, who was very
much against the advancing money business, but was forced into it by Weber.
I hope to get other statements of the same nature during the week. None of
the new laws have yet been published, and I have not been able to get a
sight at them since they have been passed. The church quarterly meeting
was held last Wednesday ; Baker’s text in his sermon was, “ 0 foolish
Galatians, who hath bewitched you” (Gal. iii. 1). His illustration was that
Tonga and the Church were like a canoe, a native canoe, and that this was a
most critical time ; they were just going about, and the helmsman had been
fool enough to ask a white man to carry the foot of the sail across. What
could a white man know about it, who had been used to cutters and schooners
all his life and never been in a native canoe before ? When the sermon was
over the King prayed and shut up Baker properly, contradicting nearly all
he had said.
I wish I had known a week ago that there would have been a chance of
writing to you. I would have hastened on some matters I have been delaying.
Kind regards to Lady Gordon and love to the children.—Very sincerely
yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
From Mr. Thurston
Nasova, Fiji, October 13, 1878.— My dear Sir—ln the Fiji Times of the
9th instant appears another of those incorrect and misleading articles for
which that journal has made itself famous.
One subject dealt with is “Immigration,” but the facts of the case are
so falsified that I think it well to give you a brief outline of what has taken
place in that Department, in case any comment or inquiry should be made.
The planters and the editor (who is now their paid Agent) say that out of
1573 labourers who arrived in the Colony during the twelve months which
expired on the 30th ultimo, only 526 owe their introduction to the arrange-
ments made by the Government direct. Upon this proposition the Agri-
cultural Society and their organ proceed to throw a little mud at the
Department.
The fact, however, is, as will be seen by the enclosed return, that 307
labourers only have been introduced by [planters upon their own account, as
against 1275 by the Government!
One may well ask how the Fiji Times arrives at its conclusion ? The
answer is, that, as in a recent criticism upon Revenue Statements, it blunders
into conclusions, or else lies wittingly , to please its supporters.
The only vessel chartered privately was the Samoa , by Ryder Brothers
of Mango, which vessel carried 152 labourers for that firm’s own employ.
The Dauntless and Magellan Cloud have been partly chartered. That is
to say, that certain planters in these two cases agreed to take a given number
of men (75 and 80 respectively), the Government receiving and allotting any
426
CHAP.
FIJI


Ship.
Government.
Private,
Dauntless ....
132
Patience ....
50
Dauntless 1
82
75
Marian Rennie .
88
Daphne ....
76
Samoa 2
152
Charybdis ....
59
...
Carry forward
. 487
227
men introduced above that number. In fact, the vessels were chartered
solely by the Government, and their voyages were conducted under the
auspices of the Department in the usual way.
In permitting private persons to make such an arrangement as is described
above, the Government was conceding to the desire and convenience of
the planter.
Men came to the Department and said: “We want 75 men for our
plantation, and would like to send the Dauntless for them, but as that ship
can carry 200 men it would be ruinous for us to send such a large vessel
for 75 only. Will you let us have 75 and take all over that number for
Government (instead of chartering another vessel), and paying a proportionate
part of the expense ? ”
This being done, it is called “private enterprise” !
Then the owners of local vessels, such as the Dauntless, Patience, Daphne,
Marian Rennie, etc., say to the Department, “Employ our vessels instead
of sending to Sydney or elsewhere, and chartering vessels owned out of the
Colony.” The Department does so. It charters all local vessels offered,
that after survey are reported upon favourably, and again meets the wishes
of colonists.
During the year ending 30th September last, twenty-six voyages were
made by local vessels, and they disembarked 983 labourers ; six voyages were
made by vessels owned beyond the Colony, and they disembarked 599
labourers.
The Fiji Times and the Agricultural Society consider that for the last
number the Immigration Department should take credit, but that the intro-
duction of the first and larger number is due to private enterprise !
I could add much more to show the foolishness or dishonesty of the
representations I have noticed, and especially those of Mr. Cave in regard to
the Winifred, but one might go on for ever. No sooner is one web brushed
away than the spinning of another is begun.
I forgot to mention that in one case of “private enterprise” on the part
of Mr. William Fillingham Parr and another, when the men arrived they
could not take the men introduced, and had the Department not fortunately
been able to “place them,” the Government would have had a number of
men to provide for.—Believe me, etc.,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
Return shouting the Number of Men introduced by Private Parties and
Government, from October 1, 1877, to October 1, 1878
1 Part Charter, 2 Private,
427
XXII
FIJI


Ship.
Government.
Private.
Brought forward .
. 487
227
Patience ....
55
Black Hawk
52
Stanley ....
. 149
Dauntless ....
63
Menschikoff
29
Patience ....
21
Daphne ....
28
Patience ....
53
Black Hawk
55
Magellan Cloud 1
52
80
Nymph ....
59
Dauntless ....
. 172
Total .
. 1275
307
Vessels now under Charter to Department
Nymph
Magellan Cloud
Stanley
Marian Rennie
Dauntless
Fiji, October 13, 1878. —My dear Sir— l have been looking through my
former letters to see whether there was any subject upon which I ought to
continue ; but owing to the hasty manner in which I copied, much that has
been written is illegible or nearly so. Looking after the taxes and many
other matters makes the last six months of the year so busy that I have little
time for anything. For my letters I must ask your kind excuses : they are
written rapidly and with the object only of offering an outline of events here.
The drought still continues ; a little rain fell last week and just damped
the surface of the earth. If it does not break up soon, there will be no
copra or anything else next year. The health of the Colony is good, and
the climate (rain excepted) everything one could wish for. The natives are
busy housing cotton and corn. Good order reigns everywhere.
The contractors have every available store in Levuka filled with cotton,
and are now building stores as rapidly as possible for the produce to arrive.
The highest tender for maize was 3s. delivered in the Province, which was
accepted. It is a tremendous price. I leave this on the 27th for Macuata,
the taxes for which place will then be ready. Cakaudrovi is behind, but the
chief says the tax will be made, though a little late. They complain very
much of the effect of drought. I regret, however, having yielded to the wish
that no white man should assist in some Provinces this year. Lau excepted,
no Province should be without an Agent.
As already said in a previous letter, I will not positively say the £20,000
will be fully attained, but I will say that I still hope so. I have now paid
in roughly £ll,OOO. The effects of drought, however, on the north side of
Yiti Levu is telling hard on Ba, Nadi, and Nadroga ; Tai Levu is also
burnt up.
1 Part Charter.
428
CHAP.
FIJI


The Roko of Kadavu seems either as indifferent, or as uninfluential, as
ever. It is a great pity Wilkinson has never been able to pay it (Kadavu)
a visit.
There ought also to be a Magistrate there. A good man who would carry
out his instructions in regard to native organisation would earn his salary
five-fold.
Business still improving. The port is full of vessels, English, German,
and Danish ; also a small German steamer of 150 tons, the South Sea.
Sahl is down in her, on his way to Samoa. The Godeffroys have bought her
for the Fiji, Samoan, and Tongan trade, but as yet I have not the details of
their scheme.
Buildings are going up in all directions, but still the “Agriculturists
and the “Commercials” growl and grumble when they meet in conclave.
When they meet at dinner they smooth one another down, pass each
other the most amiable compliments, and with some rhetorical flourishing
declare their firm and honest conviction that the day is not distant when the
exports of the Colony will value a million sterling ! ! !
Several men are down from India and Ceylon. Some merely travelling,
others spying out the land for settlement.
No definite news has yet reached us from India. Our last information is
that a discussion is going on as to the best month for immigrants departure
from Calcutta. Mr. Des Voeux and Mr. Mitchell seem to think that, after
all, April would be the best month for them to arrive in.
Wilkinson landed yesterday after a very long absence. I understand the
results of his voyage are all that was intended. He tells me he is writing fully.
We have not heard lately from the Wesleyan Mission. Just now they
are assembled at Navuloa. After their Bose there is over we may probably
receive another pleasant letter. Many of the missionaries tell me that they
are quite opposed to Mr. Langham ; but whatever they may think as
individuals, it is quite clear to me that when it comes to a vote they side
with their Bishop.
Mr. Des Voeux has asked them formally to sell Niukaubi for Government
purposes, and they have refused point blank.
So long as Mr. Langham, or one imbued with his domineering spirit, is
Chairman here, the Government will meet with nothing but opposition and
annoyance. Nothing will be left undone to make the Administrator of the
Government feel that anything done contrary to the good will and pleasure
of the Wesleyan Mission will be resented in some shape or way.
Their action in regard to the Foreshore here has so alienated their own
following that a public meeting of Wesleyan residents has been with
difficulty prevented. Two delegates, I hear, are to be sent over to Navuloa
to represent the injury their proceedings are doing to the public weal.
Apropos of Wesleyan Missions, I understand that most of the inhabitants
of Tonga are deeply in debt, and are being sued for moneys advanced to pay
that enormous subscription to the Wesleyan Mission two years ago. The
idea seems to have been the same as prevailed here, only on a larger scale.
The Storekeeper advanced money to the native, and accepted his promise to
pay in copra or other produce. Of course they failed to pay. The island of
“Niuafu” alone, I hear, still owes a large sum on this account—it is said
£lOOO.
429
XXII
FIJI


These things ought really to be investigated. Long before this reaches
England the news of Mr. Brown’s little war in New Britain will have arrived.
Here, I confess, I sympathise with Mr. Brown and the Mission to which
he belongs, dhe precept to turn the left cheek when the right is smitten is
not easy to follow ; and had I been in Brown’s place I am sure there would
have been a fight before my .coloured staff were “Kabob’d” by the “Kai
Peritania You.” Still the event is a new phase in Mission history; and will
call forth some singular and interesting comments. The Wesleyan Mission,
as a clever commercial concern, and as a political power in Polynesia, I have
been long acquainted with, but this is the first time I have met it in the
character of Church militant. If you are compelled to deal with it as Her
Majesty’s High Commissioner, I trust Brown may be let down easily. Judge
Gorrie has written a letter to Langham on the subject marked “ Immediate,”
but I fancy the answer will be “Non mi ricordo .” The Wharf is progress-
ing, and now reaches into seventeen feet low-water, spring tide ; but it will
be another month or two before the steamer can come alongside, owing to the
difficulty in procuring piles.
Garrick returned by this mail, but not J. C. Smith. In fact, if
Smith can see his way to remain in the Colony of New South Wales, I
fancy he will do so.
So far our new members, Leefe and Hill, have not attended Council but
once. Each man wants the Black Swan sent for him.
You will regret to hear that MacGregor has been very unwell lately. A
touch of Mauritius fever I fancy, combined with a bilious attack. To-day
when I called on him he seemed better, and hopes in a few days to be him-
self again.
Horne leaves by the next mail. He came to see me yesterday about his
expenses while in the Colony,—a point upon which I have had no instruc-
tions. I put discussion off until after mail’s departure.
Mr. Des Yoeux is often very ill. The least exertion or worry upsets him,
so that sometimes he cannot see me for a day or two. This lets work
accumulate “in heaps,” and quite prevents my going into the Provinces.
The “Bose vaka Turaga” comes off next month, and the Nymphe is
expected shortly to take Mr. Des Yoeux over to Bua.
Just as I am concluding, a circular reaches me from a tradesman, one of
many addressed to every white man in the Group by Cave, Parr, and others
of the Chamber of Commerce. I forward it, however, under separate cover.
Please give La«ly Gordon and the children the kind regards of Mrs,
Thurston and myself, and hoping soon to hear from you, and that above all
things your Native Policy is approved of and is to be maintained in every
particular , believe me, etc.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, October 14, 1878. —My dear Sir—Herewith I enclose you a circular
letter issued by the Chamber of Commerce.
The chief agent of this scheme, which by affecting the minds of the
natives by perpetual interrogation for some months to come, is Mr. Henry
Cave, who, though a principal contractor last year for native produce, lost
his position this year by reason of W. Hennings outbidding him.
430
CHAP.
FJJI


Comment on this paper is unnecessary. That the planters, merchants,
and traders dislike the scheme of native taxation, because it prevents their
making use of the natives at their good pleasure, is true ; but it settlers are
to be allowed, among a large and half-civilised native population, to interfere
with the plans of the Government in regard to the native race, success in
any direction will simply be impossible.
This is still the “old leaven” working, and can only be cured by the
Government taking an open and firm stand ; by saying in short, “ Between
the Government and the natives, neither planters, merchants, or traders,
shall come.” —I am, etc.
From Chief-Justice Gorrie
Levuka, October 14, 1878. —My dear Sir Arthur—l had a good many
subjects to write to you about of more or less importance, but they have all
been completely snuffed out by George Brown’s capers at New Britain. I
have ordered several copies of the Wesleyan organ of Sydney to be forwarded
to you, containing the long account by Brown of the killing of four of the
Fijian teachers. He sent you a short despatch as High Commissioner, tell-
ing the fate of the people, and adding as the effect of the result of his own
expedition: “A large number of huts were burned, and a number of the
natives were killed in the district where the murders were committed.” A
trader’s account of the affair says fifty to one hundred and fifty were killed.
This is the first time a missionary has attempted such work, —so
different from the spirit of Patteson and Goodenough. If passed over, every
trader in the Pacific will see a necessity to go and burn and slay. On the
other hand, the public opinion here and in Sydney will be wholly favourable
to Brown. That accounts for the finessing resolution of the Wesleyan
Board. I have reported the occurrence, but I have not made up my mind as
yet what to do. It will require very careful consideration, but I will not
funk if I see that duty requires some decided action.
I have had a large mail, but nothing important except this: Wilkinson
is back from Tonga, and by this time you have no doubt got the treaty.
Maudslay has not sent me one word, but I have got from Wilkinson what he
could tell me.
I hope you are enjoying the autumn. Des Yoeux keeps shaky in his
health ; MacGregor has been laid up ; but otherwise all are well.
Kind remembrances to Lady Gordon and the bairns.—Yours, etc.,
JOHN GORRIE.
From Mr. Houstotjn
Samoa, October 14, 1878. —Dear Sir Arthur —I do not know whether you
are receiving official information from here, owing to the delay caused by the
correspondence going through Maudslay’s hands, but in either case you will
not object to receive private intelligence.
I spent several days at Yon Goetz’s place, Vaitele, Godeffroy’s newest
plantation, four miles west of Apia, last week, and had a long talk with him.
Quite spontaneously he gave me his opinion on matters here. I may mention
he came out here with an agreement from Godeffroy in Hamburg in his
431
XXII
FIJI


pocket; the principal condition was, that he was to get a plantation and
plenty of labour. After much delay he has obtained the former and twenty-
five of the latter, with little prospect at present of any increase in their
number. Von Goetz holds that Germany will under no circumstances what-
ever annex or “ protect ” Samoa, and for reasons. The first is, that it
would cost money ; the second, it would necessitate the absence from Europe of
war-vessels required for the defence of the Empire. He also asserts that
as Germany will not uphold or increase Imperial interests in Samoa,[she is still
less likely to incur expense or become involved in disputes with England for
the purpose of aiding or fostering Hamburg interests. No love is lost between
Berlin and Hamburg on account of Prince Bismarck’s failure to sweep away
the independence and ancient privileges of the latter city.
Yon Goetz would have liked personally that Germany would have annexed
Samoa, but there being no chance of that, he would like England to do so.
The labour question has become so serious that he is strongly in favour of
Indian coolies. Chinese coolies would do, but there is sometimes a difficulty
in managing large bodies of them. He quite understands that Indian coolie
immigration must be preceded by British annexation. Although the Mary
Anderson has made one successful trip to the New Hebrides, she will only
make one or two more and then the supply will cease. Even if this be not
so, the supply is totally insufficient—hundreds come in the place of thousands.
As an example of the expensive and unreliable method of procuring labour at
present in use, look at the ship just come in. She left this on the Ist July ;
she returned on the 7th October ; a ship of 750 tons ; took away fifty return
labour, failed to make the proper islands, so had to bring twenty-five back;
got two fresh hands, and 100 tons of copra; stuck on a reef for some days ;
scraped all the copper off her bottom, and will have to go to Sydney for repairs.
Yon Goetz, on the whole, approves of the labour question as settled in Fiji.
The above is the essence of our conversation, and to my mind it is exceed-
ingly satisfactory for two reasons—first, because You Goetz’s sympathies are
military and Berlin as opposed to trade and Hamburg ; second, because his
opinions have undergone a great change since I talked with him in April
last. Then he would hardly condescend to even think of England as a power
possessing interests or prestige outside of her own island coast line.
2. Mr. Weber leaves in a day or two for Tonga in the Ariadne; he will be
surprised to find what progress Maudslay has made. I had a letter from the
latter yesterday ; I also wrote a fortnight ago warning him that Weber -was
about to visit Tongatabu.
3. A San Francisco schooner chartered by Godeffroy, to bring lumber and
other goods here left ten days ago for ’Frisco, but would take no passengers,
even though one man offered $2O in gold above the ordinary fare. Colmesnil
was one of three who wanted to clear out, and I have an idea that General
Bartlett and his wife were like-minded. Weber’s idea seemingly is to render
the escape of another Mamea impossible.
4. The General is, I think, on his last legs.
5. With regard to the money claimed by Colmesnil from the Samoan Govern-
ment for Mamea’s expenses, the award by the American Consul amounted to
$3OOO, but it is generally understood that the Samoan Government have made
up their minds to pay only $lOOO, a great portion of which has been already
paid in to G. A. Woods.
432
CHaP.
FIJI


6. The Mulinuu Government have broken up, gone to their homes, and
are to reassemble on the Ist December ; most people entertain serious doubts
as to the likelihood of the latter event ever taking place.
7. On the 3rd of this month I wrote to your Excellency, per the A. P.
Jordan , direct to San Francisco ; on the 4th, per the Reconnaissance , to Sydney
via Rotumah —I wrote in duplicate to make sure of one letter at any rate
reaching its destination. 1 The general aspect of affairs could not be better
than it is at present: the American bubble has burst; the Samoan Govern-
ment has evaporated into thin air ; the German influence over the natives is
gradually decreasing. All difficulties in the way of the accomplishment of
the scheme laid down in my letters* of the 3rd and 4th inst. seem rapidly
vanishing, and I feel very sanguine. Of the speedy attainment of much that
your Excellency has at heart, I have not now the shadow of a doubt. If your
Excellency be spared to do a few more years’ work in Western Polynesia, the
foundation of a most important and interesting addition to the British
Empire will have been securely laid. Samoa is almost ripe for annexation ;
Tonga is coming wholly under British influence ; and New Guinea’s fate is by
this time, I would fain hope, decided. I earnestly trust that during your reign
the groundwork of the future policy of Great Britain in these seas may be
securely established.—l am, yours very faithfully,
GEORGE L. HOUDTOUN.
From Mr. Houstoun
10 a.m., November 2,1878. —Dear Sir Arthur—You may like to hear the very
latest news. On the 19th of last month the Government held a meeting as to
the advisability of an appeal to the country ! On the 30th they wrote to the
three Consuls, intimating that they had determined to return to their homes,
and after having a fresh election to meet again at Mulinuu on the Ist
December. Weber and Dawson then wrote saying, that unless several
questions yet undecided, amongst others, Colmesnil’s expenses, were settled
immediately, they would go by default. To this an answer came last night,
viz. that three Taimua would be left at Mulinuu and be invested with
authority to settle all matters in dispute. Germany and America have joined
hands. Dawson holds power of attorney for the San Francisco Cracker
Company, now represented by Mr. Young, merchant in San Francisco.
Clay and Woods are both out of it. The schooner is getting her anchor up,
so there is no time for more than a hurried scrawl.—l am, yours very
faithfully.
The schooner Mary Anderson , chartered by Godeffroy, returned ten days
ago from the New Hebrides with eighty-four labour ; the trip having been
successful, she sails again to-day for the New Hebrides.
From Chief-Justice Gorrie
Levuka, November 11, 1878.—My dear Sir Arthur—l was very happy
indeed to get your letter of 12th September, and to hear that you had all
got safe, and that everything was satisfactory at headquarters.
1 Neither ever reached me.—S.
11l
2 F
433
XXII
FIJI


I. The Alderman 1 has not yet appeared. Solomon it seems is blathering
that he is to be sent to him at Sydney by some of the men here, to represent
the true state of the Island, but that is of course bosh. The Alderman will
come to see for himself no doubt, and if he does, we will try to keep him
straight. But the Missionaries will no doubt try to possess themselves of
him, and, as you very justly fear, they are kittle cattle. You were far too
kind and civil to them, and they have misunderstood it. I have seen a good
deal of Langham lately, chiefly about George Brown’s affair, and he professes
quite to see the propriety of having him tried, but Webb goes openly for
him, and they are busy boasting just now of the approbation of one of the
Lieutenants of the Schooners who had found the natives very civil owing to
Mr. Brown ! It is possible the Alderman may hear of things not very nice,
and what is not nice is made ten times worse when it is hidden. There is
notiiing like dealing with disagreeable things in the light of day, and showing
that crimes have been punished, etc. I don’t know, of course, what the
Missionaries know, but I will make some efforts to discover anything likely
to be brought out to a stranger, so as to be able to put it in a proper light.
You would not get my letters about the Missionaries or about the Ra
coast business until after September, and it is possible you may look upon
them at a distance as much more important than they really are. Keep your
mind quite easy upon these points. Having had my say upon the Ra
business, and believing and hoping that it is the worst that has occurred, or
is likely to occur, nothing of that kind will stand in the way of my showing
your policy, which I believe to be so thoroughly sound and just, to the best
advantage. You have no reason to fear inquiry, and the results of the
Native Tax business are so good this year, that that will of itself cover a
multitude of petty acts in connection with it. I see the greatest possible
results to be gained for native races in this way, so that I am an enthusiast
for the Native Tax scheme ; but, as for the abuses, why, they are things to
be removed, that is all.
11. The Lieutenant-Governor. —I can’t understand how you can imagine,
even, that Des Yoeux and I would not get on. He is placed there by the
Crown in a difficult position ; not very strong in health, and only for a
limited time ; and surely it is my part to assist him in every way that I
could ? He does not seem to wish for any assistance, but is rather jealous,
I should imagine, of interference with the Executive, forgetting how we have
been jumbled up together, and what a nice kettle of fish it would have been
if you had commenced, or I had originated, jealousies and nonsense of this
kind. However, I think lam bound to humour him in every way, and to
keep on cordial terms with him at all hazards ; and you may be sure I will
act on these principles. Out of school he is famous ; and we have the
kindred pursuit of lawn tennis.
As for my kicking, bless you, I never gave a vicious kick in my life. In
the course of public duty one may have to combat another man’s opinions,
or show up, when it comes within the sphere of your duty, another man’s
shortcomings, but that is all en rbgle, and to funk it would be pusillanimous.
But I will watch every indication of what you would call kicking, and then
for your sake will withdraw it before it is given.
1 Sir W. MacArthur.
434
CHAP.
FIJI


111. High Commissioner. —I note what you say about the glorious un-
certainty. I saw the difficulty from the first, but as the Crown directed you
to give me the deputation to act, I am quite easy as to consequences other-
wise. However, nothing is likely to transpire involving serious responsibility,
which will not be done as Judicial Commissioner. Of course, you will know
by this time that lam reporting to the Secretary of State. I presumed that
was the right thing to do, and have done it.
(1) George Brown. —I have given orders to have the martial missionary
tried for manslaughter. It seemed impossible to avoid it, and if it too much
delights some people, or too grievously offends others, it cannot be helped. But
I can’t get a ship : three of squadron going home, and the Commodore waiting
for his successor. I would not mind hurricanes, or rains, in a case of this
kind, but I can’t swim and can’t hire. The Commodore is going to send the
Sandjly to do any work required to the eastward, but not New Britain way.
And of course if I go as Judicial Commissioner, I could not go in a schooner,
—for the time, the space, the dignity of the office, and the effect upon the
natives. I have written reporting these matters, and urging that for High
Commissioner’s work you should have more help from the squadron. It
will accumulate so much that it will be simply impossible to get through
with it. I daresay you can get matters easily arranged with Smith, the
First Lord, if you were to get him in a quiet corner, because the other
Departments can have no other interest than the efficient discharge of the
work.
(2) Jurisdiction over Natives. —Of course, the first question of Langham,
on being told that Mr. Brown must be tried, was, “ And what are you going
to do with the chief who prompted the murders ? ” It is a fair question ;
and we can never work the Order in Council satisfactorily, so as to carry
public opinion along with us, without a jurisdiction over the natives for
offences. Of course, we haven’t it upon the usual basis of jurisdiction. It
must be assumed ex necessitate rei, and I think you would find that that
would sweeten the working of the machinery wonderfully. Have again
written on this view.
(3) Tonga.—Wilkinson has just handed me in bills for £l7O for his
Tonga trip. I will try to look at the matter in a way to avoid complications.
Maudslay did not write me a “scrape” about the Treaty or what had been
done; but I got from Wilkinson the general facts, —Baker seems to have
been behaving abominably,—and he has to write me, however, a report about
the mode in which Baker advanced money to get it put into the church
collections, and thus put the poor devils into debt, for which they were sold
up ! As Wilkinson is not very good at reports, I think I will at all events
withhold the money until I can get something to show for it!
(4) Samoa.—Pitched a little into Swanston for not sending me report of
German seizure of harbours, and he says he sent it to you direct before he heard
of any one being left, —so he must be forgiven. Have told him also that he
must not write to Commodore demanding ships, —that is sheer cheek. These
Consul bodies lose their heads always. There has been a case going on here
for some time, Van Camp v. Turnbull, an American, who was once a Consul
of United States in Samoa, against a British subject for having conspired
with another American Consul to sell him up and rob him ! Friend Swanston
was in the business. We heard evidence here, and then additional evidence
435
XXII
FIJI


was to be taken in Samoa. I intimated our opinion, that as I saw no
prospect of a ship, I would have to send a Commissioner to take evidence.
Turnbull, the British subject, was so frightened at the prospect of a Com-
missioner being humbugged in Samoa, that he has paid several hundred
pounds to compromise. Don’t know particulars yet. That again shows how
absolutely essential it is to have ship at disposal. Of course I would have
gone myself if I could.
IV. Court Work, Fiji. —ln return we had a heavier Criminal Session
than usual, and sentenced two Fijians for murders of their wives : one was
executed, Seed making all arrangements in the most approved style. I
put in full force the authority to examine the accused. It felt wonder-
fully like at first inviting a fellow to walk the plank ; but in some of
the cases the result was in their favour. I have written a special report
about it.
I told you, I think, of Solomon’s German clerk forging a certificate of
title : gave him seven years for that, and five years for forging bill of
exchange. Came down like a thousand of bricks upon old Sol, for his care-
lessness. He took an attack of dysentery same night, and the fellows on
the beach teased his life out. He is fortunately now recovered, and working
away very viciously in the old ruts.
Speaking of the German clerk reminds me that we have had the German
man-of-war Ariadne in. A fiery, cheery, dangerous little devil for a
captain, Von Weboer. He told the captain of the Adams, the United
States ship at Samoa, that he was sorry a man who commanded ships
should be such a liar ! Do you call that a kick or not? We have the
Nymphe here just now, but they are very quiet.
There is lots more I have to say, but I am tired with writing. It has
been a very hot day ; we are in for our summer. I think of going up to
Carew’s, and having a scramble, end of this week. Mrs. G. got Lady
Gordon’s letter, and was very glad to hear from her. She has had a nasty
accident with a boiling kettle tumbling on her foot, but is better. I see,
however, from the letters sent down to post, that she has limited herself to
one or two orders from Sydney, but will write with all the gossip next mail.
We see a good deal of the Woods, and I like him. Des Yceux flared up at
some foolish remark he made, and he is not quite happy at his prospects.
He must just wait till you return.
By the way, if anything can be done with my money demands, I would
be glad to hear as soon as possible, as my Edinburgh agent is a director
(Edinburgh one, fortunately) of the City of Glasgow Bank, and I would
rather like to see that my balance is on the right side.
What you say about the state of parties on the Eastern Question is very
interesting. I sometimes wish I were home to have a shy in, but that is
not possible apparently. Thanks for the slip from the Scotsman; that
brackets us together better certainly than the Sydney paper ! But in your
case the laudation is all at least true, for you have done a good work here,
although, of course, if you had taken the advice of a certain person on every
and all occasions it would have been much better ! —Ever, etc.
436
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Wilkinson
Nasova, October 30, 1878.—Sir—My last would inform your Excel-
lency of my return, and that it had been decided I should visit Cakaudrovi.
I thought this course best, as His Excellency the Lieut.-Governor had
got a fear that all might not be going right with Tui Cakau. As I well
knew, he was a little put out at my being unable to visit him as arranged,
and hold the public meeting. I will try and get a copy of my report in
time for the mail. I found all things right enough. They are considerably
behind with their tax, but I have no doubt it will be in before the end of
the year. I was about ten hours ashore at Bua, and the Chief is getting
ready for the meeting, which is fixed to be opened on the 14th prox.
A number of applications to lease and purchase lands were considered
this afternoon, and His Excellency asked me to be present with Mitchell,
when the principle on which lands shall be dealt with was considered, and
it was decided that for the present on all leases or sales not less than one-
half, r W, in all cases shall go to the Treasury, and that the Commissioner of
Lands and myself shall form a committee to consider in each case the
proportion of the rent or purchase money to go to the native or Taukeis,
and how the land shall be divided, the proportion to chiefs and individuals.
On the whole, I think perhaps it’s the best for the present, and there Was
no doubt some fixed principle was very necessary.
But I confess I am not without anxiety on the subject, and I fear there
is a feeling growing to deal rather high-handedly with the matter. I have
little fear if the mode of disposing of lands is fully and clearly understood
and approved of by the chiefs, but if that be not done, Ido fear. Of course
there can be no doubt lands must be dealt with, but under any circumstances
it is a difficult and delicate question and piece of work. I fear there is also
a feeling on the part of many to deal with it as simply and purely a land
question ; while I feel sure to deal with it in any way but purely as a
native question, and from a native point of view, will be a very serious
mistake.
I do not not think your Excellency will say I am apt to cry Wolf, but
it’s better to apprehend the danger than have to deal with the evil which
may arise. I find there is already a good deal of talk about the land
inquiry. I am a little afraid the Land Commission does not give more
satisfaction to the natives than it does to the whites. Tui Bua, from a
remark or two, I found was not very clear what had been done at the
Wainunu sittings, and there are several complaints in from Tailevu ; some,
I rather think, are likely to come up at the Bose.
Mr. Thurston left yesterday morning in the Swan, which has gone to
bring down the taxes from Macuata.
Saturday, November 2, 1878. —Your note {Cuzco, September 8, 1878)
with the copy of the Yunivalu’s will, posted at Aden, came to hand this
morning. I need hardly say how glad I am to receive these communi-
cations from your Excellency ; and especially just now, for I confess I am
anything but happy. Over head and ears in work, which I feel I cannot
get through, and have so little help ; that is, I mean, help to do what I
only can do. I like Mr. Des Yceux exceedingly, but I have a fear he does
not comprehend the native character sufficiently. That he is a staunch
437
XXII
FIJI


native man you know well enough, in every sense, and a thorough
champion for all their rights. But there is a something else wanted, and
I can hardly describe it. To control, manage a native, to lead him in the
way he ought to go, with success, and without him knowing much about it,
he must feel an affinity (for want of a better word) of spirit and instinct,
and that he is understood, his habits and sympathies, by the chief whom he
regards as his superior. It’s not a want of kindness, not at all, but there
is a something.
Of course this makes me feel more responsibilities, and therefore more
anxiety than when you were here, Sir. Of course I will do my best, and
hope for assistance and direction from Him who giveth wisdom to those
who act.
Rest assured, Sir, I will attend as far as possible to your suggestions,
and carefully watch all native right. lam sorry that your Excellency
was indisposed and unable to write more.
The next time I go to Wailevu I will get the meke, and if in time
forward it.
There is one favour I wish to ask. I wanted to have done so before
leaving, but failed. If, Sir, you will not consider it presuming, I should so
much like a photo of your Excellency and Lady Gordon ; of the children
also, if convenient.
I just discovered to-day that the circular to R. T. Ba was still in the
post-office, so have dispatched my last with it to Habukarasa, asking them
to have it forwarded by land or by sea with all haste.
Tuesday. —Roko Tu Lomaiviti and Ratu Marika are back, and lam
more pained at the latter’s report than I can tell. Timoci has sold the
whole of the balance of their tax at Hairi, 100 bags of copra, to young
Levy. He has distributed 70 bags on Nolenakolom of Gau, and 20 at
Savaiyski. The killing and selling of fowls and pigs was the common
practice the whole of the trip. Marika says the people everywhere are
simply in despair.
At present I can see nothing for it but his suspension and removal, but
I feel it ought to be, done in such a way as will prove such a lesson to all
as to be a successful deterrent. I feel sure the Yunivalu will support His
Excellency in the severest course, which will really be the most merciful to
the young man in the end.
Then another thing: Ratu Joe has gone into Marika’s house at night
when he was away and made improper proposals to his wife, but fortunately
she fled. I have recommended that he be brought up at once, and as Marika
cannot try him, let Ilaitia and Usaia sit with Ratu Mele, and in that way
save Marika the odium and secure a verdict, and let him be sent to Taviuni
to do his time, and I think he and others of his class will feel there is
power in the law to punish chiefs.
The complaints of this kind of thing are so numerous that I feel sure
something is needed to protect married women from insult, and the kind of
thing now so common of any or everybody going into her apartments
without fear or check.
The circular your Excellency left behind has not yet been issued to the
white officials. We discussed it to-day, and it is to be issued at once. I’m
afraid His Excellency thought me a little bit hypercritical in some of my
438
CHAP.
FIJI


suggestions, but the sooner the thing is out the better. Now I feel sure
it will do good, and I don’t think there was ever more need of it than
just now.
I have been before the Lands Commission again on the Wainunnu
claims, but to my own mind most unsatisfactory, the whole thing. lam
without document, date, or anything else to go on. And as Mitchell
admits, the Chief kept constantly referring to me that I knew better than
he did. I proffered a statement to-day, which was refused as being too
general; the latter part, which was in favour of certain claims, might be
admitted. I remarked that I considered it most unfair to the people over
there, first, that the claims had not been heard as the other Bua ones were,
and that now when other evidence was offered, the whole of which would
have been brought out had I been there, I am told the closing of the
reports has been held over already much too long, and certainly would not
have been in any other case but that I was a Government official.
Roko Tui Dreketi is here, and he had not been in Levuka more than an
hour before he was dead drunk. So I have advised His Excellency to take
him to Drieba or send him back to Rewa. I’m afraid he’s hopeless, but
something really must be done for these chiefs to feel they can be dealt
with. It is more than disgraceful; it’s altogether disheartening.
There has been another complaint about Naigani, so I have sent Osea
to caution them to remain quiet, but I expect they will have to be removed,
as it appears the grant will issue.
Thursday, November 7, 1878. —Yours, Sir, of September 12th, 1878,
is just to hand (the City of Melbourne got in about 2 p.m.) with the
enclosures —one to the Yunivalu, and the other to the Roko Tuis, which I
will translate, as your Excellency desires.
I have good hopes that your exhortation will be observed this year,
that the meeting will be both small in numbers and short in duration.
And the land question will, I feel sure, be put through into some
definite shape.
I am exceeding sorry MacArthur will arrive here while you are away,
Sir, as he will no doubt be very closely shepherded by the Mission and
others disaffected to your Excellency’s policy ; but, of course, we will do
all we possibly can to put and keep him on the right track. My confidence
in such things is that we are honestly right, and results can only prove the
(end lost).
From Dr. M‘Gregor
Nasoya, November 10, 1878. —My dear Sir—l have to thank you for
your note from Aden, which arrived by the Suva a few days ago, and for
your note of the 9th September. I am quite certain you suffered from an
organic unsoundness when you left Fiji. Rest from the continuous strain
of a vexatious government, and an invigorating climate, will make you as
sound a man as when I first saw T you. Although for many reasons I should
like to see you soon in Fiji, still you owe it to yourself and to your family
to remain in England at least six months, and I sincerely hope that you
will not leave sooner, happen what may in the way of government here.
439
XXII
FIJI


Of course I expected your government here, on the whole, could not but be
approved at home, but that your reception should have been so very cordial
has afforded sincere gratification to myself and not a few others here.
The land question is a triumph, as on that one subject depended the
ultimate result of all your hard work here, so far as both races are
concerned. Here I may remark that I am sorry for the people of Na
Kunimi, and I am determined that I shall make a vigorous stand in behalf
of those Jews of Fiji, the natives of Lovoni. Perhaps the latter may not
be disposed of before your return. What I shall urge in Council is that
they were not dealt with honourably in selling them ; that as the proceeds of
their labour were openly paid into the Treasury , the Government should
return to the claimants of the valley whatever they paid the Government
for it, and reinstate the natives. This ought to be done out of the loan.
If you cannot see your way as Governor to do this, your philanthropic
friends never will have such another chance of doing real and substantial
good to a persecuted people as they would have in repurchasing for them
their native glen. I hope I shall be able to let Cruickshank have some of
ray small appointments at the beginning of the coming year, for lam given
to understand that he is not too well off.
I do not know yet how far my voice will be heard on the subject of next
year’s Estimates. Ido not anticipate anything from beche de mer , as too
little is known about native rights to the various reefs. Had a small
quantity of land been sold, this year’s Estimates would have been obtained
easily. Customs will exceed as much as native taxes will fall short. Of
one thing I am all but certain, that the Governor will stop payments to
native taxes on the 31st December, but it will not be necessary to do
otherwise.
The ship is, I think, in safe hands, and the crew doing well. We have
concocted measures for the reception and guidance of MacArthur, should
he come to Fiji. Nothing done yet as to Sugar Mills. We have paid
£251 : 10s. on account towards Horne’s expenses. I shall endeavour to
carry out, or to assist in carrying out, your wishes in respect of the
Estimates, but much caution will be necessary.
I enclose the usual return of revenue and expenditure. Ido not expect
so good a return from customs this month, but probably December will
be a good month, I have recovered pretty fairly from my fever, but am
not the same man I was. We have been catching it dreadfully from
Solomon, in consequence of an article he says Thurston wrote to the Argus.
I am rather displeased wdth Mr. Butt and the Bank : with the former for
abetting Solomon and being anti - government in everything ; with the
Bank generally for letting Thurston have money cheaper than they give
it to any other person. If you can, let us have another Bank here, for the
principles of the Bank of New Zealand are not satisfactory. They wish to
have every person in their power, and then squeeze them. To other clients
they will not give money under ten per cent, but when the Colonial
Secretary wants £3OOO when Lovoni is in dispute, he gets the sum on
slippery security at nine per cent. I entirely condemn such practice.
Of course they think I do not know. I applied for a little money myself,
but did not want it and did not take it. Butt is our worst opponent here
at present. The executive is loyal to you. Do not believe the contrary.
440
CHAP.
FIJI


Dr. Reid expects the K.C.M.G. immediately, and asked me to crave your
assistance in that behalf. Ido not expect you will feel disposed to advocate
such a measure. Ido not ask it. —Kind regards to Lady Gordon, yours
faithfully.
From Me. Thurston
Fiji, November 11, 1878. —My dear Sir — I was very glad to receive your
letter of September 12, and to learn that things were so pleasant at the
Colonial Office.
After all the worry and trouble out here, and the anxieties I am sure
you have felt since leaving the Colony, it would have been disheartening
in the extreme if the result had been otherwise ; and I am very glad to
see you bracket Sir M. Hicks-Beach with Lord Carnarvon and Mr. Gladstone.
You told me, I think, that you did not know him personally.
The land question is an important one, and its speedy and happy
settlement is of the greatest importance. The points of difficulty, as they
present themselves to me, are the rights of the Crown and the rights of
the natives. Under the Deed of Cession it is, I think, laid down —in
intent —that after all bond fide claims of Europeans have been settled, the
remaining lands, less that in actual use and occupation of any chief or tribe,
or required for their future use or maintenance, shall vest in the Crown.
It is clear, therefore, that before the Crown has any lands to deal with, this
point must be settled. The right of the Crown is therefore prospective and
vague.
The right of the natives is at present limited to the question of actual
occupation. What is required for their future use and maintenance, no
man knoweth ; and it is difficult to say -when such requirements will be
ascertained.
Beyond doubt the natives expect to be paid for their lands, and any
other course would lead to difficulty.
To give the natives some fixed proportion of the price for which land
was sold by the Crown would perhaps be the quickest way out of the
difficulty. A similar mode of extinguishing the native title (and the native)
exists in New Zealand. The evil there is that common to all Parliamentary
Governments, Ministers are not responsible to the Crown but to M.L.A.’s,
who, provided they get a good bone, or the shadow of one, will assist in
working all kinds of iniquity.
In a Crown Colony things could be managed differently, and I trust you
may arrive at a happy solution of the difficulty. Mr. Des Yoeux tells me
he has written, and is writing, on this subject. He does not like to sell
any land for fear of establishing a principle, or of getting into some native
difficulty. We shall therefore derive no revenue from land this year.
With regard to revenue, I hope, and I am trying my utmost, to screw
this up to the highest pitch, and trust not to be far short of £60,000. I
enclose my estimate to 31st of next month, and suppose MacGregor will do
the same. I think, however, it would be much better if you could find a
man in England—well up, if possible, in the routine of office—to devote
his whole time to questions of revenue. The Colony is making substantial
progress, and it is quite one man’s work to see that moneys leviable are
levied, and sums recoverable are recovered.
441
XXII
FIJI


This year our actual revenue will be £IO,OOO over last year’s actual
revenue, and hence I suppose we may hope for £70,000 next year. With
a moderate sale of land it may be regarded as certain, but a Land Tax must
be imposed at the earliest moment. Mr. Des Yceux is altogether in its
favour, but it may be prudent not to [force the subject until a few score
settlers of means have invested here.
The taxes of this year, collected in the Provinces, but not carried to
Levuka before December 31, must go to this year’s assessment. If other-
wise, my revenue under “ Native Taxes” would be nowhere. Last week I
visited Macuata in Black Swan , as per agreement with Tui M. last year.
The trip was a great success. The whole of Bulis met me with an aggregate
following of some five hundred men. The Swan was loaded, decks, hold,
and cabin, in one and half day. We worked from 4 a.m. till the moon went
down— i.e. 9.30 p.m. Great credit is due to Fraser —and I still believe in
the white man—with all the pertinacity of a Galileo in regard to terrestrial
movement.
Leaving Levuka on Tuesday at 6 a.m., I anchored at 5 p.m., Saturday,
with £2OOO worth of stuff. A good white man in each province to aid, and
discreetly stir up the people would be worth double or treble his screw.
These natives cannot run alone yet, and the difficulty is to get the good
man.
Both Mr. Des Yoeux and Dr. MacGregor will doubtless give their views
upon the revenue question, upon which you have written, but, as before
said, I put my “rough” into an enclosure. Do not be afraid of the
“team.” There will not be much useful work done while you are absent,
but I fancy things will at least run easily.
I will, as you invite me to do, write freely on the personnel of the
cattle now in the hands of the new coachman, and will premise by saying
that, though he is really only one remove from a valetudinarian, he has
temper and backbone enough to keep kicking horses straight. To drop
metaphor, many attempts, especially on the part of Gorrie, have been made
to assume an undue importance and authority, but they have all failed,
and I think will fail. Gorrie is certainly piqued at not having the temporary
administration ; and he is so free of the Acting Commissioner that he
intends going simultaneously to Samoa, New Britain, and New Guinea.
Happily, therefore, he will go nowhere. Then at heart he is dead against
our native policy, and death upon a Roko or any native chief. Native
Magistrates are an abomination in his eyes, and the name of a native Court
stinketh in his nostrils. He has written to the Secretary of State on the
Ra outrages, and asked Mr. Des Yceux to forward, if he deems it necessary.
Mr. Des Yceux replies he does not deem it at all necessary, but if the Chief-
Justice wishes it sent, he will send it. Whereupon the Chief-Justice backs
out. The next move is to say that the Chief-Justice has heard of all
sorts of enormities in native courts, and proposes to go through the
country and have a general gaol delivery (Roko’s gaols are driven at).
Whereon the Administrator says he won’t have it at any cost, and tells
me he will prevent it by Ordinance if necessary. On this the Chief-
Justice writes another missive for the Secretary of State, which is treated
as the former one. Then the Chief-Justice sends down to my office —sends
from the Bench in criminal session—for all court returns from magistrates
442
CHAP.
FIJI


for seventy-seven and seventy-eight,—a mere ruse to get the Ra returns
of Eastgate.
The Administrator orders me in writing not to give them, nor allow them
to leave my office. On this a summons is talked of, and in due course the
Attorney-General comes down personally to serve the summons, which is
made out to “ James Cocks or other officer ”in charge of the records. The
Attorney-General asks who will accept service, and I, to be agreeable, say
“ I will; the records are in my keeping.” The end of it is the records don t
go, and no one responds. I tell the Attorney-General to say to the Chief-
Justice that if he wishes to send any one down to examine the court returns
he may do so ; and there the matter ends.
But between Mr. Gorrie and Mr. Des Voeux there will be no peace. The
latter feels that the former has tried to embarrass and annoy him. But Mr.
Des Voeux carries too many guns for Gorrie, and you may rest assured that,
after this, things will go on smoothly until your return, unless Gorrie loses
his head.
Altogether, I do not think you need have any anxiety : there will not,
as I said, be a vast amount of work done ; but Mr. Des Voeux is quite
master of the situation.
Mr. Des Voeux I like very much. He would doubtless like to do some
things different to precedent, but he won’t, whatever he may think person-
ally or incline to. You have the most loyal and honourable lieutenant you
could possibly have selected. Garrick is back, and is much as ever ; he
attends office with reasonable regularity from 11 to 3 in order to transact
his private business, and therefore has no time to bother any one.
Mitchell is hard at work on reports, but the work of the Land Office is
almost at a standstill, and I hope it may remain so, for it is on the question
of lands that difficulty will arise. Some most knotty subjects are before the
Board, but we do not seem likely to take them up.
In my first letter I mentioned that my Rotumah voyage never came off.
The Mission would not send me, though war was raging, and I could not
charter a vessel. However, my friend Reimkan was a dead man before I
could have reached there. Six bullets did for him, and now the island is
pacificated and Wesleyan. The Roman Catholics purchased life by “ going
over.”
Ratus Joe and Timoci are becoming consummate rascals. Tim is the
greatest thief in Fiji ; Wilkinson and myself are worried to death with
them.
We wall look out for Mac Arthur and make every effort to keep him from
falling among wolves. The Bishop of Bau is very friendly ; I had him and
Webb here to breakfast last week ; and I don’t think they will be hard to
manage. The difficulty they are in with the New Britain business makes
them more susceptible than usual to reason. It is a pity MacArthur should
come while you are away, but Mr. Des Voeux will get him down here and do
“all his possible.” Parr and one or two other fanatics will make exhibitions
of themselves, but we shall stump their lies by facts and evidences of which
they ken little.
I am much obliged to you for your kind intentions in regard to myself.
It will be very pleasant to feel a fixity of tenure, and equally so to find my
salary put on a par with that of my colleagues. If it is possible to obtain
443
XXII
FIJI


for me some additional allowance for this year, I am sure you will do so for
me. By December 31 I shall pass through my hands £40,000 of revenue
(native) since January 1876.
The work has kept me going early and late, and if Sir M. Hicks-Beach
is pleased, on your recommendation, to give me a broker’s commission, I
think my acceptance of it will do the State no wrong. If not, I shall smoke
my pipe in perfect peace, perfectly satisfied that virtue is its own reward.
Mrs. Thurston is delighted to hear that the plants reached England in
fair order, and begs to be remembered to Lady Gordon and the children.
I am to say that Tom Thumb is as agreeable as ever, and since Chubby
went to Yiti Levu has all the Ra-ra to itself. Yula Vula had a pretty little
foal, but it died when one day old ; and, strange to say, all the other foals
in the place have died also. The plants and flowers are well kept, but I
fancy they miss Abbey a good deal. Drought and blight have done much
mischief.
Horne leaves to-morrow. He has given us some interesting papers, but
his final report is yet to come.
JVymphe is here to take Mr. Des Yoeux to Bua. None of the officers
(captain excepted) have called at Nasova, nor do they come on shore ; and
, as you may have heard, has been under close arrest (a most unusual
thing in these latitudes) for three months. She seems a queer ship, and I
cannot make out what’s wrong.
Trusting that you have received all my previous scribbles, enclosures,
papers, etc., and with kindest regards to Lady Gordon and the children.—
Believe me, etc.
Mr. Thurston to Mr. Garrick (Attorney-General)
Nasova, November 18, 1878.—Dear Mr. Garrick—l must apologise for
not having answered your note of the 15 th before this, but the fact is I am
so busy with the accounts of this year and the estimates for the next, that
I have hardly time for anything else.
You ask me if I would join in getting up a memorial from the service,
with the object of bringing Fiji within the category of unhealthy colonies,
in order to benefit by the provisions of the Act 39 & 40 Yic. cap. 53,
which allows of two years’ service counting as three in the matter of super-
annuation allowances. I have not seen the Act to which you refer, but
presume it in some way relates to fever-stricken places upon the West Coast
of Africa, and perhaps to one or two exceptionally unhealthy parts of the
West Indies.
The Imperial Government would not, I think, pay the slightest attention
to such a memorial as the one you suggest. Every one writing or reporting
upon Fiji from the time of Colonel Smythe’s Mission to the present day have
concurred in representing these islands as the most healthy in the tropical
world.
Holding, as I do, a similar opinion, such a memorial as you propose
would seem to me not only wrong in itself, but a positive libel upon the
country. In short, I think it would be so injurious and unjust to the
Colony, that I might feel it my duty to oppose it by every argument at my
command, should there be any prospect of the Imperial Government enter-
taining such a memorial. —Believe me, etc.
444
CHAP,
FIJI


From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, December 7,1878. —My dear Sir —Suva arrived here yesterday morn-
ing, bringing us Melbourne papers up to the 23rd ultimo, and also news of
a strike among the seamen in Sydney, in consequence of the employment of
Chinese by the A.S.N. Company. This most likely accounts for the non-
arrival of Wentworth , due the day before yesterday.
I therefore drop you a line via Melbourne to say that all is well here.
The “Bose vaka Turaga ” is sitting at Bua, and Wilkinson’s reports are
very satisfactory. At Nasova things are quiet. Mitchell and Eyre will
doubtless say what they are doing. Land matters are at a standstill quite.
You will, I am sure, regret to hear that the bribery and corruption of
native chiefs by whites, in order to get men, is becoming a great evil. The
Rewa and Kadavu chiefs are great culprits. In my letter by Wentworth I
will give particulars, and send copy of an Ordinance I have drafted to pre-
vent the giving of “ Yaqona.”
If the Government does not now take up a firm and masterful position
between whites and natives, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to do so
by and by, and the Fijians, demoralised and broken up, will follow in the
ruck of other and somewhat similar races we have annexed, and unintention-
ally exterminated. Nothing ever gave me more pleasure than to learn that
your native policy had been so warmly commended, and I am anxiously
looking forward to your further letters.
We hear that Mac Arthur will not have time to visit Fiji, but cannot say
whether the report is authentic.
You will be glad to learn that rain has fallen all over the colony, and so
we are saved from much of the effects of two years’ drought. All my Rewa
and Tai Levu cotton plantation are, however, ruined. Plants fairly burnt
to death. For Rewa I am now trying to get a sugar mill, and if success
attends my efforts, shall plant “ Dovu ” 1 in place of cotton.
People are very sanguine about sugar. Sahl, who is here, has come to
an amicable settlement with the Hennings. He releases them from liabilities
and takes their land with certain exceptions. He is now, therefore, the
largest landed proprietor (or claimant) in the colony.
We had some conversation yesterday, when he told me that he intended
to “go in heavily.”
Hurrah ! Wentworth in sight! Suva leaves in an hour, so I conclude,
but let this go forward as originally intended.
Mrs. Thurston has been very ill lately ; I never saw her so bad before ;
cough, and general loss of strength, or tone.
Please give our united kind regards to Lady Gordon and children.
Believe me, etc.
From Dr. M‘Gregor
Fiji, December 10, 1878. —My dear Sir—l have to thank you for your
letter of 10th October. It will be very humiliating if the home authorities
agree to the Bank of New Zealand’s proposal to pay debentures at their
1 Sugar-cane.
445
XXII
FIJI


nominal value. All the work of investigation would have to be done over
again, and the sum total would inevitably he largely increased. Ido not
see on what principle one could adhere to the promise of the debenture in
respect of the principal, and ignore its condition as to the amount of interest.
I do not expect that anything will really be done in regard to the loan until
this matter of the Bank has been arranged.
I cannot say that I approve of your correspondence with Mr. Langham.
It is doubtless agreeable and gratifying to one’s feelings to confute and
crush an adversary, but there in a case like the present both the pleasure
and the profit ends, as I am all but certain that Mr. L. cannot and will not
see the weakness of his position, the gross discourteousness of his letters, and
the strange spectacle presented by a teacher of religion feeding a spirit of
such wanton rancour and uncompromising vindictiveness. His letter, to
which you have not replied, on the subject of Mr. Baker and the Toga Bank
is a striking example of refined impertinence, but I do not think it
deserves to be noticed by you unless as a fitting object for the practice of
charity.
The Mission in general has been made too much of, and Mr. L. particu-
larly has been led to regard himself as a person of more influence and
importance than he really is. I should like to see a change brought about
gradually, by bit by bit ignoring the political influence of the Mission,
without any so decided step being taken as would rouse them to active
hostility. I have little doubt that, although you have not said so, this is
your own opinion, as you say you have written a pacificatory note to
Mr. L.
I am very much gratified at the appreciation of your work by such men
as Gladstone, Carnarvon, etc. I should not be surprised if the same plans as
you have originated and organised here were put into a much more extended
practice if New Guinea is annexed. I am rather curious to know what
Selborne can have suggested on the subject of land claims that you had
not thought of before. In addition to the Ordinance to establish the finality
of the decisions in regard to claims before the Governor in Council, I hope
you will not forget the Ordinance necessary in regard to prescription through
native occupation.
By this mail you will receive the Governor’s speech to the chiefs at Bua.
His references to yourself are well chosen. There are, however, two or
three paragraphs of it that you will hear more about, unless lam mistaken.
His suggestions as to labour, and his statements as to the necessity of
establishing individual proprietorship in land, will constitute the keynote
of agitation among the discontented planters. Probably he is right in
supposing that something will have to be done in systematising the engage-
ments of labourers, but I presume that the matter will rest in statu quo
until your return ; then almost to a certainty you will be importuned to
adopt his proposal. Carried out strictly, I believe the plan, which, however,
is not original, to be a good one. But his ideas on land are simply incom-
patible with the maintenance of a communal or patriarchal system. The
general principle that wealth cannot become general without the individual
forming the unit of society must be conceded, but here the individual is not
yet able to act independently. Putting the idea into a practical form, I
think that the division of land is at present impossible and undesirable.
446
CHAP.
FIJI


I have argued the subject with the Governor, and I believe he agrees with
me on its radical points.
I enclose a telegraphic account of a speech delivered, it is said, by
yourself, which has, I understand, been freely commented on, and with
general approval, in Australia. Probably you may have spoken as
reported, because you are strong enough to do so ; but I venture to say
there is not another Governor in the service that would express himself so
ingenuously in regard to the Colonial Office. Of course people in Victoria
are in raptures over the telegraphic report, but I expect Mr. Berry and Co.
don’t like it.
I send you the usual return of revenue and expenditure. I have £IOOO
in hand by last mail from New South Wales for mail advances that will be
entered as miscellaneous revenue, reducing the deficiency to £7037 : 13 :6,
We may turn the £60,000, but we may not. I expect about an average
Customs month. If we make the £60,000, I shall not derange the usual
state of matters to make it more, but I shall try expedients to make the
£60,000. I have a good credit balance here —some £IO,OOO at present.
The Governor is getting enthusiastic over the subject, and will assist me if
there is less than £60,000. Owing to my bad health I have not been able
to do anything with my diary, lam not so strong in nerve as when you
left, and were I to think much about Mr. Des Yoeux I might get frightened,
but I think nothing about it. My mother-in-law died. Mr. Des Yoeux is
enjoying tolerably good health now. He is suspicious of the Chief-Justice
still, and is, I regret to say so, encouraged in that direction by one that bears
the Chief-Justice but little reverence. lam still, as I always was, convinced
that you have no more faithful adherent than the Chief-Justice, and I do not
think he gets half justice from any one. He may be somewhat hasty, but
he would do more for you than any other man here, if he is not driven in
the contrary direction. Le H. wishes to close the bag, and I cannot say any
more.—Yours faithfully.
From Mr. Le Hunte
(The whole of this sheet is gossip, not business.)
December 10. —You had, I think, better keep this letter till you are
really hard up for something to read.
Nasoya, December 1, 1878. —My dear Sir— As I missed the last mail to
you (being then in Colo), I must try and make up for it this time if I can.
Imprimis —We are all well, even Mr. D. V. You will have heard of
their trip to Navuso ; it seems to have done them both good, though from
what I hear, they had rather a trying time of it there. lam sorry to say
that Eyre did not hit it off very well with them. I had hoped that he
would, so that in case I wanted to go away anywhere again he could come
on duty here, but as neither party found it satisfactory, I don’t think they
will try again, I hear that a man is coming from Sydney, one Trevor, the
son of the P. & O. agent there. The Commodore and Mrs. Hoskins spoke
very well of him ; he is to be here by this mail. If he turns out a good
man, it will be a great relief to me, as the present anomaly of being supposed
to be in Colo and being obliged to stay here is not beneficial. He comes on
447
XXII
FIJI


trial for a month, i.e. on a visit, and as he is desperately anxious to get
into the Colonial service, he probably will be open to conviction on certain
very necessary points. Of him more anon. The mail isn’t due for two days.
Secundo —Everything is going on all right, except, perhaps, our cook,
Pierre, who fell from the higher position of butler to that which he holds
at present. He is a marvellously good cook, better than “ Ellen Cally ” (or
whatever that useful and ornamental gentleman’s name was), and in
consequence Mr. D. Y. is generally satisfied, but if ever his work degenerates
for an instant a row ensues. I am much afraid that Mr, D. Y.’s threat of
sending him away and living on bread and butter, if carried out, might be
attended with fatal results. The man has been behaving very fairly, but
last night (at 3 a.m. this morning) I was woke by an awful row, which
turned out to be Mr. Gough the scavenger and Pierre. Luckily for him,
Mr. G. got away down the road just before I got to the spot, or he would
have gone to Totoga lock-up. Pierre I found argumentative but not
uproarious ; he is sleeping the sleep of the drunken at this moment, and
it is a question whether Mr. D. Y. will get his breakfast or not. If he does
not, I shall look out for squalls ; but if he does, I think, for the sake of every-
body interested, that I shall not say anything more about it, unless he should
find out about it some other way. I shall take good care that Mr. P. does
not entertain convivial friends at such an hour again.
We have, to my horror, adopted a froggy mode of living ! Porridge in
one’s own room at 8 o’clock, and ddjeHner dla fourchette at 11 ! Ugh ! I
long for the old 8 o’clock (only it never was at 8) breakfasts and lunch.
They tried to have dinner at half-past six, but in that point I, aided by the
long summer evenings, foiled them. We don’t dine till seven. The above
mode of life, however, suits Mr. D. Y. so much better, that my gratification
at seeing him so well far more than silences the feeble protests of my inner
man,
“Chubby” is in Colo, and three times fatter than he ever was here, so
you may imagine how well he must be. If Lady Gordon ever decides on
selling him, I shall be very grateful if she will let me have the first refusal.
Tom Thumb has taken to expensive habits, now that he is left by himself;
whenever he gets the opportunity he marches off to the pound, and in
consequence has to be either shut up or tethered. I am afraid he is going
to lose the near eye. If we can get M‘Gregor to say what ought to be
good for it, I shall try and cure it; it is not very far from “ cika ” I think.
Beni has taken himself off altogether to the Thurstons.
The beauty of Nasova has departed. The office and dining-room wings
are being shingled, and the soft outlines are all gone ; and the longer the
shingles are on the harder and colder they look. lam having new mats
made for the ceiling of the dining-room.
The “Cumquots” are well. The C. J. went up the river to Carew the
other day, and came back very much better. Their Saturday afternoons
have become a regular lounge for the young unmarried people in the place.
I offend their dignities very much by appearing every now and then in
“our” dress-shirt and sash, while everybody else is in black coats and
lavender gloves; it is not considered correct now to take off your coat
before ladies, even in the hottest of lawn-tennis games, I am very deep
in all their black books, and am not too politely treated in consequence.
448
CHAP.
FIJI


We keep up our Tuesday lawn-tennis afternoons very regularly. The
gig goes without fail to bring the Cumquots, and I am afraid they now
look upon it as a matter of right, for if by any chance it is late at all,
they make all kinds of remarks to me about it. I have sent it to Palmer
for repair—replenishing and generally do-up work, which it badly wants.
This brings me to the momentous and disagreeable task of broaching the
ever-to-be-avoided question of the barge. I took the opportunity of the
Nymphe being here the other day to get the carpenter to have a good
overhaul of the two boats (for which I paid him £1 of your money). He
says that something must be done to the barge ; as she is, a scrape on a
rock might do a great deal of damage, for one or two of the planks have
bulged right on her bottom, at the very spot where, if she touched at all,
they must strike and be split. He says that there is only one thing which
will be really worth doing, and that is to sheathe her with planking. He
said that it might be possible to work the bulge out of the planks and
refasten them, but that it was very risky work, and that most probably
they would split. He said that Palmer would be quite able to re-sheathe
her or do any work at her ; he told me that his opinion of Palmer as a
boat - builder is very much increased. I saw Palmer ; he said that he
thought it would be useless to try to refasten the planks which are
bulged, as they would be sure to split, and that to sheathe her with
timber would cost £lOO/ but that were she so done she would never
require anything else, and would last for ever. The cedar planking which
came from Sydney, he says, is no use for this country ; that it does not
last if the salt water gets at it; and that it would be waste of money to
put it on her, but that he would take it off your hands and sheathe her
with pine planking. The matter thus stands waiting for your answer:
are we to try to refasten the bulged planks, or will you have her sheathed ?
In the meantime lam going to have her repainted ( i.e . her bottom, which
wants it very badly), and a few little things set right which want looking
at inside, and then have her laid up for good in the shed until I hear from
you. We used her twice since you went away, to go to the Nymphe, and
return from her in, and Mr. D. V. took her to Navuso. He can’t bear
sailing, so he had one sail hoisted and the men rowing, which resulted in
some of the sculls being smashed. (Lilo’s brother started as pilot, and, I
suppose, did not know about the proper oars which you had made here,
and I did not think of telling Eyre about it when I went away, not
dreaming that they would go on a trip.) They had the awning up, and
steered into a tree, which did not improve the awning; however, all the
damage done to it has been repaired. lam very sorry that I was not there,
because I think I may say without boasting that I can keep a boat out of
any manifest danger of accident, great or small. Knollys would be jealous
if he saw how carefully the men look after every boat now. Such a thing
as even the house-boat bumping on the beach or banging at the pier is
altogether of the past.
And now, to tell you about the business of the Colony, etc. Work is
lagging on dreadfully. The other day one of the people in the offices (I
think it was Seed) said to me, “ Hurrah, here we are at the end of Novem-
ber, and I have just got an answer to an important letter to the Colonial
Secretary of the beginning of August! ” I brought this out two days ago on
111 2 G
449
XXII
FIJI


an opportunity which I was lying in wait for when Mr. Des Yceux was in
a very good humour, and when he was talking about doing some work.
It gave him rather a shock, and the consequence was that he knocked
himself up completely yesterday by getting through more work with
Thurston than he has ever done in one day since he came. Poor man !I do
feel for him very much ; it must be really awful to know that more than two
hours’ work will surely knock one up. He makes a great deal of work for
himself by being very impetuous and afterwards altering what he has
written. His final answers and minutes are very good, full of vigour and
ability, but couched in very courteous, moderate terms. If he could work
he would be a big man, I think. Don’t think me very impertinent for
criticising your friend, ray present chief; I would do so to no one else (not
even the one person from whom I have never kept a thought respecting
anything which affects my private life —of course I don’t say anything
about official matters, public or confidential) besides yourself, but I know
that you do like me to tell you everything, and it is right that you should
know everything that directly or indirectly affects you here. He is most
fearfully particular about any one doing anything on their own responsi-
bility, and poor Thurston comes to me in despair about it. Mr. Des Yoeux
won’t let him send a thing out of the office without first having it before
him, however trivial it may be and however urgent. The Colonial Secre-
tary’s position here now might well be described “ Chief Clerk ” (at £500),
consequently we are almost at a standstill. About every other week Seed
—who, you know, is sometimes in a hurry—falls into awful rows ;heis in
one just now for writing a circular to the magistrates. Whether it was in
consequence of the row or what I don’t know, but he has shaved the whole of
his head except the hair on each side over his ears—he says it will make
his hair come again, but for the present it is the most ridiculous sight
imaginable. Barring the stoppage of work everything is in good order.
I spent four weeks in Colo the other day, and was much pleased with the
result of our trying Heffernan ; he will do very well, I think, when he gets
a little more at home in his official work. We went to Nadrau, and from
there to a queer little spot called Muanasavu, about which there had been
some correspondence passing between Carew, Heffernan, and Buli Hadrau
—the latter of whom was trying to “ bag ” it, to which Carew objected, so I
went to see it. The road there is all through bush after the first two hours
from Nadrau, and we went along the river—the Wai-ni-Vudi—until in the
afternoon we came out suddenly at the edge of a cliff and saw far the finest
bit of mountain scenery I have seen here. The road comes out on the cliff
at the head of a great gorge, and just on your left the whole river tumbles
over into a pool 500 feet below. The little houses which form the “ town ”
are about 300 feet below you, and the rest of the country is 1000 feet further.
The height of the cliff above sea level is 2800 feet. This grey cliff stretches
round in a horse-shoe form ; the timber climbing up its base and reaching to
various heights gives it a very fine appearance ; from the top you see the
Wai-ni-Mala country, and just catch sight of the mountains over Nakorovatu
on the one side and Korobasabasaga on the other. We went to the bottom
of the fall; it was splendid. There Avas comparatively very little water
flowing down it on account of the long drought, but quite enough to shoAV
one what it must be in the wet season. The cliff is dead perpendicular,
450
CHAP
FIJI


and no projecting rocks to break the fall; every now and then a gust of
wind would take the water and drive it clean away from its proper fall on
to the rocks at either side, and then, as the gust passed away, it came down
again from the top to its perpendicular in snowy wreaths, each one trying
to catch up the one in front of it before they both got to the bottom ;
sometimes one succeeded, but more often some blunderer would run his
head against a bit of fern or some little obstruction and almost come to a
dead stop, creating all kinds of confusion among the ones behind him, who
came, head over heels, over him one on the top of another, until you almost
believed the original offender was climbing up behind them trying to get
on the top of the cliff again ; but either he got tired of climbing and let go,
or the others shoved him past his fern, for in a moment or two they were
all going straight down again, hurrying on lest another gust should sweep
them down on to the cold black rocks that overlook the pool. Heffernan
and I and our lads went down, and I bathed in spite of dread warnings
from the taukeis, who told us that there were two great devils of the
waterfall, one of whom lived in the pool and the other under a big rock in
the valley lower down, and that not only was I the first white man that
had ever seen the spot, but that no living man had ever yet dared to bathe
there. Heffernan dreaded the cold ;my lads the devils ; so I had my swim
to myself. The cold was fearful; it nearly gave me cramp. A tumble into
a pond covered with ice was warm compared to it, and it resulted in my
lying all night on my face with the muscles of my back all tight and
straining. However, a really good rubbing with the hand and a little
cocoanut oil every now and then took all pain away. One of the ways in
which the devil of the waters manifests his wrath at being disturbed and
polluted is by causing heavy rain to fall and shroud him and his fall from
tnortal eyes. It was a lovely sunshiny day when I got in, but I had not
dressed before the rain came drenching down, hiding everything. When
we got back to the little town the sun was shining and the people told us
that rain had fallen nowhere else but where we were. If that doesn’t make
some of your Highland water sprites or kelpies, or whatever their hob-
goblinships call themselves, jealous, I don’t know what will. We went
back to Nadrau and the bare country the next day.
We then went back down the river to Korolevu, and from there we started
with Katonasau on a visit to his Nuyakoro towns. Everything was very
satisfactory, and all the towns were clean and good except Yusa, which has
been going downhill ever since the Wai-ni-Mala occupied it. They
appointed a Governor, Magistrates, Chief of the Town, Chief of the Officers,
and I don’t know how many other officials, and told the people that their
Roko was the Chief of Narokorokoyawa see the result. However,
Katonasau set the Governor and his other grandees at work clearing up
some of the rubbish, and I don’t advise these magnates to let me catch
their place in such a condition again. I went to see Nakauvadra, and
found it buried out of the way from everywhere, and ordered the Chief of
the Town, a Wai-ni-Mala man, to move out of it at once to Nabuto. I
most certainly would never have allowed it to be built where it is if they
had asked me. There were only three small houses, so the exodus will
not be a great trouble. I had the Taukei ni Buto up, and asked him before
Katonasau and others of the Nuyakoro chiefs who was the chief to whom he
451
XXII
FIJI


thought his obedience and assistance should be given (I knew to whom it
had been given). He said that he owned no chief but the Chief of Naro-
korokoyawa, upon which I told him that he had better go out of my
district to join his own people. He then made protestations to the effect
that he would obey Katonasau and anybody else that I told him, but I
refused to alter my decision, telling him that the Government would not
be fooled by him or any one else, and that such an anomaly as his position
in Navosa is could no longer be tolerated. So I wrote to Carew, who was
frantic about it; but I was firm, and the following extract from his official
letter to me will amuse you, perhaps, as much as it did me :
“ In the matter of Taukei ni Buto and his people and their disobedience
to your orders, I beg to state that that petty chief is a Nuyakoro man and
not one of Nuyamalo (not the case you bet), he being merely related to
the latter tribe ; he is a bad character, and holds rebellious opinions, and I
disapprove of his being passed over to my care, fearing much the effect of
his example ; and, moreover, not understanding how it is to be supposed
that I can secure his obedience to the Government without police, when you,
with a large force of armed constabulary, appear unable to do so ; and, more-
over, he regards me as his present enemy and has on more than one
occasion exhibited feelings of a revengefully inimical nature towards me
and the whole Government of the Colony.
“ However, as it would appear from your letter that you have ordered
him to leave your district, and no alternative remains to him than to come
to mine, and as it would be damaging to your authority were I to cause you
to retract your orders by a refusal to admit him ( he being a firebrand) into
my Commissionership, I propose that . . . we come to an arrangement
for their removal to the Wai-ni-Mala.”
Everything is quiet and orderly in Colo generally. The Roko of
Nadroga and Yakayavanuku have been stirring up the Qali Mavua against
Nakarasa and Rabalabala, but only in an underhand way that does not
allow itself to be openly caught. There has been a terrific quarrel between
Ba and Nadrau about the Qaliyalatini towns. The hatred that exists
between the Roko and Buli Nadrau vents itself in every shape and way (as
Mr. Thurston would say). We tried to bring about an amicable settlement
by meetings at Ba, but the Roko used such language to the Buli that the
latter left Sagunu in the night. The Roko’s argument is that he is carrying
out your order that a Buli should be appointed, and that the Buli appointed
by him was approved of by you. The Buli, on the other hand, quotes your
promise to him at Yatula, and his statement of what he was told is cor-
roborated by Wilkinson and Carew —viz. that he was promised that the
Qaliyalatini towns who w r ere under him then should remain under him.
The matter has gone to the Bua meeting, but as—most unfortunately—
nobody let me know the date of the meeting, there is not a single representa-
tive of Colo (except Serua) there, though it had been arranged that Bulis
Nadrau and Navola were to go this time. I found that Ba had taken the
whole of the Qaliyalatini taxes, and I made them refund half to Nadrau. I
I went down to Ba and saw the Roko ; we talked it over in a thoroughly
friendly and open way, and the Roko told me he bore me no ill-will, but
that if it was olden times again he would do something very bad to Buli
Nadrau.
452
CHAP.
FIJI


The fires had been considerably less in number and magnitude than
before, and the A.N.C. have been most energetic in rushing all over the
country, from camp right to the coast, helping to put them out. Hardly a
black hill all through Navosa except, as usual, all round Nasaucoko (a
couple of years more and not one scrap of bush will be left between
Nasaucoko and Yatumali). Heffernan and I had congratulated ourselves on
the success of our efforts when, alas, on my road from Ba to Nadi, I was
met by a letter telling me of a terrible fire that was set near Korolevu
(Nuyakoro), and, the wind being very high, it spread like lightning all over
the country. The camp was for a long time in very great danger. Tawaleka
was completely surrounded by fire, but fortunately our prisoners saved the
town by their really magnificent work. All the bush on the Naqaqa side is
burnt, the pretty bit of Tawaleka (Tatuba caves, etc.), Matawalu food
gardens destroyed, and for days the fire was burning between Nasaucoko
and Nalotawa—the bush country that one sees on one’s right when one
is on the top of “Sick-Dog (black) Hill” on the road to Waiwai. From
the beach at Nadi we saw day after day the glare and smoke of the fire.
The long drought and the collected grass and rubbish which had not been
burnt for two years made the whole ground inflammable. Two weeks
afterwards Woodruff was trying to put it out in places. We lost nine goats
and nearly all our pigs ; the grassy bit opposite the bathing-place, where
they were kept, was burnt up immediately. Horses all safe, and the
gardens. Woodruff has done very well there, I was much pleased
with his work. The gardens there are quite a sight. All the bit which
was full of bush weeds and wild canes round my little garden is now cleared
and under cultivation, and so is the land from below the horse paddock
right down the river for ever so far. All our old sergeants and twenty-
five of the men have volunteered for another year’s service. R, Rovo said
to me that as long as either Knollys or myself were in the country he would
stick to us, but that if we both left he would leave too. Our force, I may
say, is very flourishing, and I feel sure that Knollys will be glad to hear of
its being so. I hope I may say, without being too conceited, that we are a
credit to him. lam anxious about what you may wish me to do in regard
to coming home. 1 can’t leave the men until I find some one who I know
will do well with them. If Knollys does not come back I shall try hard to
keep the Commandantship, but I shall be very truly grieved if he does not.
Before leaving Colo I paid the taukeis of the sandalwood a splendid lot
of trade which I got here for £2O, but which was well worth £3O to them,
if not more. I also gave a duplicate quantity to the Nuyakoro people for
our church at camp, which was opened with all kinds of jollifications when
I was up there. It is a fine house and worth the £2O (Government is going
to stand £10). lam going to give them a pulpit (reading-desk) made of
neat woodwork and reeds by a Swede at Ba, Mr. Rydell, who has really
nice taste in such matters.
A rather amusing thing happened about a teacher in Colo, but none of
us knew about it until after it was all over. A teacher belonging to
Na Yeiyaraki went over to Namaururu to preach one Sunday, and in his
sermon he warned the people that if they wanted to be Christians they were
not to follow the Lotu of Na Tua Tua Coko, for there, said he, they are
really devils. This being reported to Buli Nadrau, he drove the man out
453
XXII
/•///


of his country back to his native town, Ba. The old chief chuckled over it
with great gratification when he told me. I had intended going to see
Colaiwase, but he happened to be away. When I go back again I shall go
through Koroinasau and Serua. On 14th November (having arrived the
day before from Colo) Mr. Des Yoeux, Wilkinson, R. T. Ra, and myself
left here in H.M.S. Nymphe for Bua. We went off in the most awful
downpour I have ever seen. Dear me, the difference between my last visit
to the Nymphe! Instead of cheery Captain Suttie there was a pompous old
woman (who by the way was extremely kind to me), and everybody was in
the mopes. You will, of course, by this time have heard of ’s scrape. He
was under close arrest, and had been for four months. He took it very well,
and talked to me freely about the whole thing, and its possible and probable
results. I don’t think that he will get more than a severe reprimand—
which is of course right, for no provocation can be regarded by a Court
Martial as an excuse for one officer to give his superior “a bit of his mind,”
even when, as in this case, a first lieutenant was wrongfully accused of
being drunk on duty, and his wine account overhauled in the presence of
all hands—as happened in this case. Everybody is very sorry about it,
and he and his brother officers have many sympathisers. I need not say
how anxious we all are, I doubly so, because I feel deeply for , who will
be made sad by the news of his having got at all into trouble. The
Nymphe had not arrived in Sydney when the Wentworth left. What lam
most afraid of is that he will be disgusted at getting reprimanded and his
promotion still further delayed and leave the service at once. Whereas, if
they send him back to his ship (which is ordered direct home) and he can
hold out in her till they reach home, he will be pretty certain to get his
promotion when he arrives in England. I told him all this, and he agreed
with me, but I could see that he never would go back to the ship, so lam
afraid I shall hear of his having resigned.
We went up the river in- the steam launch, which was continually
running itself aground because the captain would give contrary orders to
what Captain Cocks, who was pilot, gave. We were received by R. T.
Bua and Mr. Blyth. The veibose was not opened the first day. So, after
looking about and seeing a Macuata magiti and meke (2600 Macuata men
came along in single file, each with one, two, and, in some cases, three mats) ;
this “took” Mr. Des Yoeux very much. Your house is a beautiful little
one, which will be Tui Kubulau’s when the meeting is done. The “ Yale ni
Yeibose ” was also very fine, and is to be the general court and meeting
house for Bua. All the Rokos were there except Dreketi and Lomai Yiti,
who are both in disgrace, and w r ho were not allowed to go this year. We
w T ent back to sleep on the Nymphe, and the next day the meeting was
opened, Mr. Des Yoeux, the Captain, and two officers in full uniform
(myself in plain clothes, with “the nearest match in serge ” visible where
the Levuka tailor had endeavoured to repair the ravages of time). The
Governor’s speech was long, and many fell asleep ; but it was very good.
He has, however, started the idea of individual ownership of land, which I
am dead against, though it is no use arguing about it, and so I have said
nothing about it. Individual ownership in the fruits of land is quite
another thing ; but he is far too much a radical to admit this. Of course
nothing can be done about it, fortunately, until you return. It will be a
454
CHAP.
FIJI


very sweeping measure, and one that will hazard the very existence of the
natives, if carried out while they are in their present condition. lam not
saying, of course, that if, in the future, the native social state is so changed
—improved upon, if you like —as to admit of the introduction of such a
thing, it may not be right and proper to do so ; but sure am I that even
the mention of it by Mr. Des Vceux will have an “unsettling” effect. Of
course the Fiji Times has taken it up and given it the highest commenda-
tion. As Macgregor says, “We have started a stone rolling about of which
we have not by any means heard the last.” A few hours’ reading of Maine as
to the birth, life, and death of communities would do Mr. Des Yoeux a great
deal of good in many ways. After opening the meeting we went to
Wilkinson’s to lunch. There were Mrs. Holmes, Miss Cocks, Miss Raddock
(the undertaker’s daughter, Mr. Jimmy Cocks’ jiancie, with whom Mr.
Des Yoeux fell very much in love), Mother Wilkinson and a daughter to
receive us. Mr. Blyth was “all there” as usual, in great force with the
ladies. I met my very dear friend of “camp times,” Ratu Govu, and
many old faces which I was glad to see again. We came away the same
evening, and returned to Nasova. We go back to close the meeting next
week in the Victoria. Wilkinson’s letters are satisfactory, but Tui Cakau
is making himself objectionable, and if he does I am quite sure Mr. Des
Yoeux will not hesitate to deal firmly with him. He told me the other day
that Macgregor strongly believed that when we were at Waikava, Tui Cakau
really did intend to rise. You remember the story that was about. If he
did believe it he should have kept it to himself, and not said so to Mr. Des
Yoeux, who is too ready to believe all he hears of wars and rumours of wars
—though if he was really called on to act I don’t believe there could be a
better man found for the work. Talking of wars brings me to tell you of
my A.N.C. estimates for 1879. I have not increased my establishment of
the force, but I have recommended that the gaol be placed on a partially
separate establishment, giving £25 a year to Woodruff (in addition to his
£l5O as storekeeper and orderly officer A.D.C.) for his work as gaoler.
I have discharged all the Nadi horse boys and do that work with my
own constables, thereby saving the rations of the other men to the Govern-
ment. Hearing that New South Wales had some long Snider rifles and
accoutrements to dispose of for £2 per stand of arms, I got Mr. Des Yoeux
to allow me to get fifty. They have just arrived by the mail, but I have not
seen them yet. They were to be inspected and passed by some naval officer
appointed by the Commodore. If they are all right I shall consider that I
have done a stroke.
I have also proposed that the Government allow an extra sum as pay to
any non-commissioned officer or constable who re-engages after the expiration
of his term of service (two years), I think this should be allowed. I took
a great deal of pains in preparing and minuting my estimates, and Thurston
kindly went over them with me and approved of them.
Alas, my A.D.C. returns to the paternal bosom of Segaga after this
month. It is real pain to me to part with the lad.
As regards Colo, I have asked for some salary to be fixed for the Com-
missioner, and that Katonasau be appointed Buli of the second class, and
Vatureba (of Tatuba) Buli of the third.
Also, I have suggested that a European officer be appointed to superin-
455
XXII
FIJI


tend the tax gardens in Navosa, the making of roads, and the replanting of
the hills. The people there are in a splendid condition for undertaking
any Government work, if only assisted and overlooked in it. The result
would more than pay his salary if the Government does not leave it too long.
The Kadavu people are all on the move. The other day we heard that
M'Evoy had got a letter from the Roko to his (the Roko’s) wife, and that a
large number of men had been “lesi’d ” I to go and work. Heffernan, being
here, was despatched at once, and he returned two or three days ago. He
found a lot of men improperly engaged, and sent them back, but M £ Evoy
was allowed to recruit others in their places. He found the district in a
very neglected condition. The Roko and the Bulis have quarrelled, and
the Roko and Friend have quarrelled, and the Bulis and Friend have
quarrelled, so there is satisfaction nowhere.
Heffernan said that the Nadrau men were dying to get away—anywhere
out of the island. One man was very impudent and offensive to him, so he
brought him up here.
The Nadi “pig” matter is still unsettled.
Chief-Justice and Missionaries smouldering, but not at present in active
eruption.
Mr. Gus Hennings is going to marry a barmaid, or somebody about that
standing, at which his brother W. is so displeased that he has built himself
a house away from his brother.
Bth. —The mail came in yesterday. All the A.S.N, Co.’s seamen have
struck in Sydney, and there were twenty-four steamers laid up there, and
twenty in Queensland. As soon as the vessels arrive in port the crews
have at once left. The cause is the introduction of Chinese crews. The
men refused to settle the matter by arbitration as the Company offered,
and so the latter are going to fight it out. The men have offered to come
back on lower wages, provided, the Company discharge every Chinaman, and
the men have offered further to pay the Chinamen’s passages back ; but
much as I detest Chinamen, I hope the Company will not give in an inch.
It was only by the greatest good luck that the Fiji steamers got away.
They all but failed to do so.
I got your letters of the 10th September, for which many thanks. lam
so very glad that you met my people, I think my father’s views will
coincide with your own on most points. I had very pleasant letters from
them at home telling me of their having met you.
I shall stay here until you come back. I think, on the whole, it will be
more satisfactory for us all, though I shall not like being away when you
are here again.
Mr. Moore turned up. He is very quiet and “ladylike,” a great
musical man, and a friend of both Cosmo and Arthur Gordon’s. More of
him I don’t know. I think he will stop.
Two new Ceylon coffeeists —Lee and Dickson —just come. They are said
to have money, and intend to settle. Dickson is a bright, gentlemanly-
looking lad, very young, I should say.
9th. —The new man “ doesn’t suit.” He is thinking of going back in the
1 Appointed, i.e. ordered.
456
CHAP.
FIJI


steamer. He is a lady’s man wears too many rings and talks ladies’
dresses and music.
I have just seen your correspondence with Langham, lam most anxious
to see the answer about the Tongan Bank books and Mr. Baker.
I sent four of the best lots of sandalwood home by the Dunelm , and I
now enclose the bills of lading. Lady Gordon had better send them, or
rather one of them, to H. S. King and Co. I paid the shipping account
and duty here out of your money, but the freight home I left to be paid in
England. I send one bill of lading in this letter and the other to Lady
Gordon.
I have just heard that people are saying that from the Blue Book, which
is now at the Club, it appears that Heifernan’s letter recommending Arthur
Gordon for distinction, etc., on account of the action at Matanavatu, was a
job for which he got paid, because the next letter is the one in which you
recommend Heffernan for a gratuity for his services. Macgregor told me
this, and lie says that people are making very nasty remarks about Hetfernan.
10£A.—The new man is going to-morrow. A horrible little man—Davis,
a missionary (London Society) from Samoa —came to see Mr. Des Yceux
to-day. He was simply awful.
Thank you very much for sending back the signed commission.
1 1th. —No more to say, except good-bye and A Happy New Year to all. —
Yours very sincerely,
G. E. LE H.
P.S. —I told Mr. Des Yceux that I was abusing his new “land act ”in
this letter. He says he only meant to hint at it, and that he quite agrees
that at present it would not do. Umph !
Extract from Mr. S. M. Eastgate's Report for month of November 1878,
illustrating Mr. Parr's Management and Sense of Justice
A number (thirty) of men from Nakorotubu, who had worked on W. F.
Parr’s plantation, Waimanu, also passed here. They informed me that
they had requested to be sent home in a vessel, but were informed by Mr,
Storjcs that they were to walk.
From Mr. Carew
Nakoroyatu, Colo, December 3, 1878. —My dear Sir—l was staying in
Ovalau for a few days at the time of the arrival of the last mail, and was
most glad to hear that your policy had been approved of and adopted.
I had intended writing to you, but trusted to be in time after my arrival
at Navuso from Ovalau, but being two days going across and no boats
leaving I was unable to do so.
Nothing of any great importance has occurred. The Bose is sitting at
Bua. As I did not see what use I could be, judging from experience at Rewa,
I did not put myself forward to be ordered to attend there, and, moreover,
Bulis Matailobau and Soloira are both away, and I deemed it good that
some one of authority should be about Colo.
All my recommendations with reference to appointments of Bulis have
457
XXII
FIJI


been approved of and gazetted. The Chief-Justice has lately paid me a
visit, and was much pleased. He stayed four days. lam living now in the
great meeting-house, as the Buli’s wife wanted the other one, and the people
were anxious I should occupy the large one and take care of it. I pay the
Buli 20s. a month for it, which gives him a comfortable income for a Colo
chief, added to his pay of £lO a year.
It appears also that it was the original intention that I should have the
house and without rent, but I prefer paying for it.
A Mr, Stephens has been with me for a fortnight exploring the country.
He is a practical man from Ceylon, and was to start experimental cinchona,
tea and coffee plantations, and put in a certain quantity by the end of three
years, after which it was to be his altogether, together with a right to
purchase another 300 acres adjoining.
After taking him about for a fortnight at very great personal incon-
venience (the weather being most atrociously wet all the time and the
rivers flooded somewhat), and at some private expense in extra travelling
expenses, he has gone back utterly disgusted because he cannot find hills
gradually, very gradually, sloping to 2000 feet elevation.
I left him two days ago a few miles from Namosi.
I am not very sorry for it, as these Ceylon men are terrible fellows
amongst natives, and I think would give great trouble until a few of them
got buturaka’d 1 by the natives as a punishment for their great assumption
and insufferable arrogance.
He speaks highly of the hills for tea, and tells me the Assam companies
are paying dividends of fifty per cent.
A few weeks since Mr. and Mrs. Des Yoeux Navuso, and one
Sunday morning a man of the armed constabulary came here bringing a
box containing “ vola,” 2 sent by the Lieutenant-Governor to Mr. Le Hunte
at Navosa. The man insisted on leaving that day to push on his way
inland, so I sent my best officer to show him the road to the next village
and send him on with message to the chief to help him through.
Well, this officer, who is the only reliable man I have, has been suspended
(from Church membership) by the missionaries for six months for Sabbath
breaking, and is in a great state of mind about it. I have written to
Mr. Langham, who will do nothing, but says he fought the whole question
out with you and retained his own position, for that you told the officials
they should not preach, and they had retorted that they would prefer to
throw up their appointments to giving up the work of God.
I feel most utterly and thoroughly disgusted—the more so as I cannot
see what I am to do, and I think it would be best to bribe the missionaries
by giving them the foreshore in Levuka, so that their pay could be increased.
One thing, I will dismiss every man who hesitates to obey my orders on
a Sunday, but at the same time will continue to avoid, as I have always done
since I came to Fiji, sending people about or travelling myself on that day.
As it is, I am now set at defiance by a Talatala veivuke, 3 a man who was
sent away from Rotuma as a firebrand at the instigation of the French
ships of war and the priests. He was there for twelve years, and undoubtedly
is at the bottom of all the troubles in that island.
1 Knocked down and trodden on. 2 Letters. 3 Assistant missionary (native).
458
CHAr.
FIJI


It appears to me so preposterous that the government of the Colony is
to be divided with the missionaries, and lam determined that I will
endeavour that the officers shall not be subjected to the control and influence
of a pack of arrogant bigots, but at the same time not fall out with the
mission.
Mr. Langham, in reply to me, says it is true officers of police go about
their duty on a “Sabbath,” but post-offices are closed and letters are not
carried about on that day, which is, as he knows well, untrue.
I believe he supports the action of this “Talatala veivuke” by way of
lowering the dignity of the Governor of the Colony in the eyes of the
natives ; indeed lam certain of it.
I have not yet told them of it at Nasova—waiting a little to see if they
will rescind the officer’s suspension or not.
Of one thing I have long been certain, that no servant of the Government
should be allowed to be a “lewe ni siga,” 1 which means that he confesses
without getting absolution. I never allow a domestic servant of mine to
join the affair, and never will. —Believe me, my dear Sir, I remain, yours
very obediently,
WALTER S. CAREW.
P.S. —I have forgotten to mention that the weather inland here has been
very dry —not a drop of rain since you left. Consequently all the coffee
seed planted has died, become desiccated in fact.
The people are working under difficulties with their tobacco for taxes
inland here, as the young seedlings will not appear without rain, neither
will the plants live when planted out. They are really trying, I believe,
in good faith to get this tobacco grown, and Buli Matailobau tells me they
will manage everywhere to do so, but has doubts of the Wai-ni-buka, owing
to the drought being more severe there. The yams will not be affected.
Baron von Hiigel always declared there were no sharks up the river in
Fiji. Three were captured, however, on the day before yesterday at the
junction of the Wai-ni-buka and Wai-ni-Mala, and were roasted and eaten
in front of ray house yesterday. They varied from 4 feet 6 inches to 5 feet
6 inches in length, and of considerable girth.
I have not heard how the Lieutenant-Governor’s health is lately. I
begin to fear that, owing to the successes of the Earl of Beaconsfield, we
shall not see you again in Fiji. It is necessary that you should come. The
natives are again getting alarmed about here, having again been told by
whites they will be put on reserves, and people (who always felt comfortable
enough in old days, when an attack might really at any moment have been
made on the whites) begin asking me all round, even the women, if the
natives are likely to rise soon. There is an uneasy feeling in the minds of
the settlers, I can plainly see. They can thank themselves for it.
I shall be most glad to see you out again, as I believe it very necessary.
Memo, by Dr. MacGregor (Receiver-General)
The Returns of Exports and Imports for the four years ending 31st
December 1878, and published in the Royal Gazette of the 3rd May inst.,
1 Lit.; people of the day—class members.
459
XXII
FIJI


1875.
1876.
1877.
1878.
Gross Exports
£94,266
£103,459
£140,893
£192,865
Imports Exported
16,460
22,673
26,671
46,020
Actual Local Increase ,
£77,806
£80,786
£114,222
£146,845
have been very carefully prepared, and show with clearness the progress of
the Colony’s commercial affairs during that period.
In considering these returns it must be remembered that as yet there
has been no influx of capital or new settlers since annexation. The popula-
tion of the Colony is, as it was in 1875, still under two thousand souls, of
whom only eight hundred and eighty-nine are men, the remainder being
women and children. It may be assumed, therefore, that the progress indi-
cated by the accompanying Returns is due to causes operating within the
Colony itself, the principal of which is the increased industry of the
native population, consequent upon peace between tribes and the gradual
organisation of the system of self-government by which they are con-
trolled.
Upon page 89 of the Gazette will be found a resume of the exports in
gross for the years 1875-78, and on page 87 a return of produce imported
for exportation, that is to say, of produce in transitu , but shown upon the
manifests of ships entering outwards at the Custom House.
The actual increase in the value of local exports is thus easily arrived at,
and is as under :
These very appreciable increments indicate a growing prosperity among
settlers and natives. The same remark applied to the gross amount of export
business done, and which in round figures is—
-1875 £94,266
1876 103,000
1877 141,000
1878 193,000
—indicates an increasing activity among merchants and traders generally.
Notwithstanding, however, that it is evident trade has doubled itself,
without any external aid, during the three years that the Governor’s Native
Policy has been pursued—that is from December 1875 to December 1878—
the air is full of lamentation, and planters, in conjunction with traders, have
made up their minds that “the present state and condition of the Colony
is deplorable.”
But when one looks abroad and observes the anxiety and caution of
bankers, the huge mercantile failures, the consequent scarcity of money,
and the gloom and depression pervading commercial circles throughout the
world, it appears that the settlers of Fiji have more reason for congratula-
tion than for grumbling and despondency. It would be strange indeed if
Fiji did not feel the reflex action of what is going on beyond her borders,
and the wonder is, not that the Colony has progressed so little, but that
it has progressed so much. To some extent the prosperity of the Colony
has been produced by the high price lately obtained for the chief article
of export, viz. copra, but the quantities have increased as well as the
value.
460
CHAP.
FIJI


Summary
Tons.
Value.
1876
1533|
£25,306 10 0
1877
4371
54,641 12 0
1878
6311
79,699 5 0
1876.
1877.
1878.
Weight.
Value.
Weight.
Value.
Weight.
Value.
Tons.
£
s.
d.
Tons.
£
s.
d.
Tons.
£
s.
d.
4109
45,908
10
0
6351J
79,403
12
0
9144
122,194
5
0
2575£
20,602
0
0
1980^
24,762
0
0
2833
42,495
0
0
1533f
25,306
10
0
4371
54,641
12
0
6311
79,699
5
0
The increase is shown in the following
It has been urged, and especially so in a Petition lately made to Her
Majesty by the Fiji Chamber of Commerce, that the system of receiving taxes
in kind from natives has interfered with trade, inasmuch as the native,
having made sufficient produce to satisfy the demands of Government,
relapses into idleness. Copra is the chief article of export, and is made
almost entirely by natives. The following table shows the state of the
copra trade during the years 1876, 1877, and 1878—the three years during
which, as before said, the Native Policy of the Governor has been in
operation :
Exports of Copra
Gross.
Imported.
Local prod.
It will be seen by the above that in 1877 the quantity of copra made in
the Colony was rather more than the amount made and imported in 1876
put together, and in 1878 equalled the gross amount from both sources in
1877.
In view of this fact it is difficult to see how native trade can be said to
have fallen off. The fact is, it is merely a wild and ill-considered statement.
With reference to the labour question, it may be observed that the ship
Leonidas left Calcutta for Fiji on the 3rd March, with 450 adult coolies on
board.
These people may arrive at any moment, and may be engaged under the
provisions of the Immigration Ordinance, at the rate of one shilling a day,
and find themselves.
This wage is not payable whether the coolie works or not, but is for
actual day’s work. It is absurd after this for planters to cry out against
Sir Arthur Gordon on the labour question. If those engaged in planting
pursuits cannot make a profit, after paying these wages and a proportion of
the cost of introduction, in the manner that their countrymen do, (under
not more favourable circumstances), in Demerara and Trinidad, the fault
will lie with themselves, and not with the Colony or Sir Arthur Gordon.
Polynesian labour is also obtainable, and one would think, reading the
planters’ organ, the Fiji Times, that they were in great demand. The
461
XXit
Pljl


following extract from The Report of the Agent for Polynesian Immigration,
1878, shows the actual state of affairs :
“Some planters applied for 30, 40, 50, and one for 60 men, when they
only required Bor 10, and the person who applied for 60 not wanting any,
or not having the money to pay for their introduction if he did.
“There were 6 planters who applied for 100 men each. One application
was withdrawn. One applicant was satisfied with 4 men. No requisition
has been received from the last applicant for 1879. A third person reduced
his application from 100 to 30.
“These instances are quoted to show that all the writing in the papers
as to the wants of the planters have in many cases been exaggerated.
“The proprietor of the Fiji Times (the leading journal here), in whose
paper much has been written on this head, is a good instance in point. He
applied for 30 men, and was so satisfied with 3 that he made no application
for 1879.”
There remains only one subject deserving present notice, viz. the tone
of the local newspaper, the Fiji Times.
The Fiji Times is the organ of the disappointed, the discontented, and
the impecunious, and the majority of settlers will fall under one or other of
these headings.
In the settlement of land and other claims, nearly every one has, in his
own opinion, suffered. He had a miserably bad claim to a block of land—as
it appeared to the Governor in Council; in his eyes the title was perfect.
He wanted to make Helots of certain villages. The Governor has inter-
vened and marred the well-laid scheme.
The Editor of the Times, one P. S. Solomon, is the paid advocate and
special pleader of these people. His statements are not those of an inde-
pendent journalist, and should accordingly be accepted with great caution.
It is he and a gentleman named William Fillingham Parr who stir up the
discontented if they appear to slumber. Mr. Solomon frames a petition to
the Queen, and the members of the community are induced to sign it
somehow.
By way of compensation, Mr. Parr moves heaven and earth to get up a
testimonial to his friend the Editor, and succeeds pretty well, as the accom-
panying papers show.
The Editor accepts the testimonial, notes the hint of there being more
to come yet, and writes accordingly.
In the Australian Colonies these facts are known, and little or no notice
is consequently taken of Mr. Solomon’s diatribes. If the English papers
could be made aware of the actual position held by the Times as an exponent
of facts, justice, and truth, it would be a consummation devoutly to be
wished for.
W. McG.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, December 8, 1878,—My dear Sir —Your note of the 10th October
and its enclosures arrived yesterday per Wentworth, but two days behind
time in consequence of a strike among the seamen of Sydney. The cause of
the strike is owing to the A.S.N. Co. having employed a large number of
Chinese coolies ; and the seamen and working men generally, in all the
eastern colonies of Australia, are determined to act upon the recommenda-
462
CHAI*.
FIJI


tions of Orator Kearney of the U.S.A., whose formula is “The Chinese
must go.”
J. C. Smith and Captain Saunders tell me that by this time the men
have given in, or that a compromise has been arrived at. Had there been
any doubt about this I should have asked Mr. Des Yoeux to let me assist
Saunders to get a good Fijian crew for the time the dispute lasted. Thirty
steamers were laid up when Wentworth left, the Pyrmont Works stopped,
and the ship was actually compelled to touch at Newcastle for coals.
The Colony at large is quiet and progressing. Rain has fallen every-
where, and the hills are once more “with verdure clad.” Brower tells me
that all the old cocoanut trees at Wakaya are killed “right out,” and as
the same thing has happened in other places, you will readily conceive that
the effects of our long drought have been serious. Our finances, or rather
our local revenue, for some months past has exceeded our expenditure, and
the present month (December) will also be a good one.
Of course it has been a great loss to us that no land has been sold, and
that no revenue has been derived, as I so fully anticipated, from the Wharf,
In one of my former letters I mentioned the disinclination of Mr. Des
Yoeux to sell native lands until the principle upon which sales are to be
based has been definitely settled. No doubt the question is one of the most
vital importance, and, were it not that a thousand pounds or so would make
all the difference just now, I should be more than satisfied to see the subject
left to await your return. With the delay in the completion of the Wharf
lam out of all patience. Lake took a long time trying to procure piles
here, but finally, and, as I think, after much waste of time, gave up the
attempt and handed it over to me in despair. Had he done so a fortnight
before he did, the Wharf would have been finished a month ago. However,
I am getting piles gradually, and at about £4 :10s. delivered at the Wharf,
instead of £6:los. delivered in the Provinces, which was the cheapest thing
he could do. We berth the local steamers regularly and also small vessels
of 150 tons, receiving from them 4 per cent per diem. Mr. Des Yoeux has
authorised me to instruct Garrick to frame an Ordinance with regard to Wharf
and Package Dues, and which ought to be brought into force next month.
I may perhaps recall to your memory that two years ago (1876) the
package rates leviable upon things landed then (even rejecting goods in
bulk, such as coals, bricks, and palings, etc.) would at the Sydney Tariff
have amounted to about £BOO. But as trade has increased, and as packages
outwards as well as inwards are charged for, and all ships pay for the use
of the Wharf, I fancy next year will show a very respectable return under
the heading of Wharf and Package Dues.
The Government of New South Wales sent this mail £lOOO on account
of its unadjusted share of subsidy prior to May last; I was very anxious
about it and glad to find it was sent as I asked, in time to be included in
this year’s accounts.
Apropos of Accounts, I am glad indeed to learn that the Audit Office
speaks so favourably of us, and the more so as I am sensible that our
returns might have been better if the rules laid down had been methodically
observed. However, we will do better yet.
As an enclosure to this I will give the probable gross revenue of the
year.
463
kxil
Fiji


In a very short note which I wrote yesterday per Suva, before the
arrival of Wentworth was reported to me (she had come in during the night
and was not in sight, as I said), I mentioned the rapidly growing evils
that are arising out of the wholesale bribery of the chiefs by planters. So
gross has the practice become, that Mr. Des Yoeux finds he must legislate
upon the subject without delay. Rokos, Bulls, and others are regularly
baited by whites. In a case that occurred the other day at Kadavu it came
out in evidence that a planter (M*Evoy) had prefaced his request for men
by emptying a bag of silver at the feet of a Buli, and then, lifting it up
with his hands and letting it fall again, had accompanied his blandishments
with the music of jingling silver. From Rewa I learn (beyond doubt) that
the Bulis from that place are paid £8 and £lO a trip to visit Kadavu and
induce men to leave their village to “lesi” them, as it is termed.
The only way to stop this is, make “ Yaqona” giving a misdemeanour.
Mr. Des Yoeux sees (as I do) the difficulty of enacting that a man shall not
give an intending labourer an advance, or a bounty ; but if it is allowed,
then any Ordinance becomes of none effect, for the money bribe will be given
to the native, and the native will hand it to his chief.
I enclose rough draft as it has come from printer, but it has still to be
considered carefully, as it will be regarded and construed as a most repressive
measure. As it will require explanation, and preambles are weak snares
and delusions, the best way will be to accompany it by a message from the
Lieutenant-Governor, and that message I trust will fully justify such a
strong measure as is intended. On second thoughts I have made up my
mind to forward under separate cover a memo I wrote for the perusal of
Mr. Des Yoeux.
As Mr. Des Yoeux is never very well, he may not touch, in writing to
you, upon some little details which are worth knowing. When the meeting
at Bua was near coming to pass, a number of petty traders in Levuka took
out trading licenses at Bua, and such licenses were issued before we heard
of them. The idea was good, from the trader’s point of view : plenty of
grog to be given away—(the Liquor Ordinance is weak, thanks to De
Ricci, and in some degree even to Havelock)—and plenty of trade to be
paid for. Most of the chiefs had lots of money ; let us hope in part
honestly come by, though some of it was certainly derived from men
“ lesia ” and some from taxes stolen.
On the supposition that he was a very important person, Mr. W. F. Parr
also determined to go, and chartered the little Pollywog for himself, a few choice
friends and interpreters. He, however, suffered a breakdown and returned
ignominiously after drifting about for two days ; but on Mr. Des Yoeux
landing at Bua and acquainting himself with the programme, he issued a
sort of Ukase prohibiting “any persons,” being non-resident in Bua,
landing or abiding there during the time the Bose was sitting. The
traders, therefore, moved across the frontier (so to speak) or came back to
Levuka. Parr heard, and took the hint. Ido not suppose, however, that
we have heard the end of it.
I enclose a copy of Mr. Des Vceux’s opening address, which in some
respects might have been less open to misapprehension. However, Mr.
Solomon of the Times has so perverted the meaning and intent of what
was said that Mr. Des Yoeux is preparing some paper in the form of a
464
OHAfi.
FIJI


message, or speech, that will quite disabuse the Times readers of an idea
that his and their opinions upon native policy accord even in one single
particular.
Lake dropped his motion as to the reasons for the removal of Tavakece,
so there is an end of that.
Lands. —Mitchell will doubtless write upon this subject and tell you, not
what we are, but what we are not doing.
Surveying is slow, very slow work, and John Berry is employed almost
altogether in office here. Our staff is small, but we certainly want more
energy in the head of the office. If the Royal Engineers go home shortly,
may I ask whether anything has been decided as to an Acting Surveyor-
General and additional staff to supply the place of the men leaving ?
Upon one of these heads I have thought, and in telling that thought
I have not the faintest fear of being credited with any personal feelings at
the expense of the Service, —how would Woods do? There can be no
question as to his ability, and none as to energy and activity. His local
knowledge is worth something, and he is not anti-native, but rather the
other way. There must be a Marine Board here also soon, and he is the
only man in the country fit to be the chairman. He was chairman of such
a board at Williamstown.
There is a per contra side to the idea, but on that side it is not for me
to obtrude an opinion. I only add that Woods himself does not know such
a project ever entered my head, and from me never will.
MacGregor, I am glad to say, is very much better, but still talks of leave
of absence ; perhaps when he is quite well he will alter his views.
The accompanying note and my reply to Garrick may amuse you. The
ideas of that over-wrought and long-suffering public servant on the subject
of “retiring allowances ” are very good.
With regard to the Langham correspondence, your remembrance of what
took place between myself and the Rev. A. Webb is most accurate. He
said, in reply to my earnest request for Jubilee, that her work for the year
was “cut out,” but that he recognised the urgency of the case so much and
so clearly that he would have no hesitation in letting the vessel go. But
as Martin, the master of the vessel, was ill, and Mr. Langham would arrive
in two days’ time, he would not like to send her before then, as two days
would not make much difference. If Mr. Langham had not arrived, lam
morally certain Jubilee would have been placed at Government disposal.
Mr. Langham did arrive, and I saw at once. He read me a letter from
Mr. Moore, the resident missionary at Rotumah, dated some weeks prior to
the sailing of the Menschikoff, Captain M'Leod, who brought news of the
carnage going on, and in which letter no mention of actual fighting was
made. I argued in vain, and pointed out that M'Leod was a man of
repute. That Reimkau, one of the belligerent Chiefs, had sent some plants
to me, and a prayer for aid and advice by M‘Leod personally. That
there were twenty men in Levuka who had seen the dead and wounded.
All to no purpose. They had a letter, and that letter said nothing about
it. The use of the vessel was refused by a note from Mr. Webb. Then a
note came to say Mr. Webb hoped His Excellency would not think him
rude in consequence of a construction which might be put upon one
paragraph of his note. Then Jubilee was sent to sea. Then a note came
HI 2 H
465
XXII
FIJI


to say Langham and Webb did not know the Governor wanted the assist-
ance of the mission schooner ; that they thought Mr. Thurston in his private
capacity wanted her. A week afterwards ReimkaU was a dead man, and
the Roman Catholic natives had to choose either to join the “ Lotu Weseli ”
or join the great majority abruptly. Rotumah was “ pacificated,” and no
one now ventures on that island to deny that there is only one God, and
John Wesley is His prophet.
From Mr. Thurston
December 10.—We heard from Bua yesterday. All going on well.
Letters from Wilkinson go forward in the Colonial Office bag ; also reply
to you from Chiefs assembled.
Referring to Mr. Des Yoeux’s speech, and to the probability that in due
time the settlement of native lands will be taken in hand, I think it
extremely doubtful whether the early vesting of lands in the individual, as
apart from the family, would effect anything but harm. It would, in my
humble opinion, be better to confirm lands to “the family” for the next
generation or two. If a resettlement appears necessary, the question of the
“individual ” can be considered with the light of further experience, but it
is too soon yet to think of doing away with the “ family,”
But whether we first confirm native lands to the individual or to the
family, I do hope you will consider the justice and, as it seems to me, the
necessity of enacting that no native estate shall be liable for debts contracted
by the owner or owners.
It is wonderful to watch the dodges of the enterprising trader to evade
the native protection ordinances. The other day, Mr. MacConnell of Yuna
went before Taylor with a lot of debts or contracts to register, the amounts
being £5 in every case. I found that upon a Yuna native wanting “tick”
for a pound, the wily Mac had said, “ No ; the Matanitu forbids us to sell
you anything on credit unless you deal ‘vaka turaga,’ and go up to £5.
You can go down to Yuna and get four more men, and if they like to buy
a pound’s worth each, you shall have what you want.”
Away went the man, and quickly found four others who would take a
pound’s worth of “ trade ”on tick. Mac then obtained their signatures, and
marched them off to Taylor in order to have the contract registered. Taylor
asked for “an opinion,” and the Attorney - General says they may, and
ought to, be registered.
I shall, if this view cannot be set aside, ask leave to amend.
Paul Joske, the irrepressible, has quietly sold the old Emma cutter to
Roko Tui Namosi for 1900 logs of timber for sawing. The vessel is more
than twenty years old, and was worth £BOO when new. The logs are worth
certainly 10s. each. The “deal ” will be stopped. If the ordinance referred
to above is amended, it had better be simplified, and I should like to add a
clause to the effect that no native community should incur a responsibility
equivalent in value to £3O or £SO without the sanction of the Governor.
At Nadi the other day, a fellow made a contract with the community to
buy his boat for forty-five tons of yams. The vendor was to retain and use boat
until she was paid for. When I say that the yams are worth £2 : 10s. a ton,
and that the boat is an old thing left by the S.S. Macgregor , stranded some
466
CHAP
FIJI


years ago at Kadavu, and that her maximum value is about £2O, the honesty
of the transaction becomes startling. I have written to Hetfernan about it,
and expect in both these cases to see the Government roundly abused for
interfering between natives and settlers who are trying to make a
respectable living.
I hope our estimate of this year’s revenue will please you. It will not
be far from the original estimate, and will show a marked advance on last
year. Total paid in during November £3926 : 7s. lam keeping “ refunds ”
in hand, so that all payments are revenue “dina.” 1 Native taxes have
improved also and are not far short of estimate ; but I cannot, in consequence
of the drought, and the consequent destruction of cotton gardens, anticipate
a larger revenue for next year than we shall get this. The work necessary
to do, as we are, has been very great, and in some places the natives have
felt it a little roughly, lam afraid. Whenever I can gather coffee in Colo,
I shall be easy, and consider the “ experiment’’ concluded.
I will add anything that occurs to me between this and evening, and in
the meantime, with kindest regards to yourself, Lady Gordon, and the
children.—Believe me.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Rough diary since last mail left on December 11 th
\2th. Paid the Immigration Office £35 :18 : 4 for foreign labour
wages due when the Gordons went away. Knollys had told me that this
sum had been settled by Abbey just as they went away, but the office
people say that Abbey only talked about it, and never did it. Also paid
Mr. Dovey £2 : 2s. for Mr. G. Moore, surveyer, for surveying Nasooa Point
for Sir Arthur Gordon, Mr. Thurston tells me that this was very badly
done by Mr. Moore, but that he believes it was promised to him, and that
I had better pay it.
13 th. —Mr. Des Yoeux told me to go and see Seed about a case of one
Shute, a Yankee, living on Yanua Levu, who has taken away a lot of Ra
coast people without taking them before Eastgate. Seed says he will send
some one from the office after them ; decides to send Wood,
Old Timothy, the ugly but good servant, came to take service again.
While I was in Colo, Mr. Des Yceux had told Eyre to send for him, and he
said that he could not just then because a Roman Catholic teacher had
killed and eaten a pig of his, and he was waiting to have the law of him ;
but the native Stipendiary Magistrate being away at Bua, he got tired of
waiting, and decided to come up at once.
14 th. —Received the new rifles (fifty Sniders) from Sydney; found them to
have been badly packed ; noticed some of the bayonet scabbards to be most
disgracefully bad. Rifles appear at first sight to be in fair order ; cleaned
and examined forty-two of them ; found thirty-one bad in the barrel, ten
good, one doubtful.
Tuesday , 15 th. —Tea at Seed’s. J. C. Smith told me of Dr. M‘Gregor’s
en g a g eme nt to Miss Cocks (Jimmy’s sister). Astonishment and general
1 True = real.
467
XXII
FIJI


indignation at hearing it, as every one naturally believed he was engaged
to Miss Cumquot. No one likes to ask him whether it is true.
1 Qth. —Ison, the stupid servant, left us. I got rapped over the knuckles
for letting him go without saying good-bye to Mr. Des Vceux.
Mail from Colo. All well.
17th. — Winifred arrived with 126 labourers from [illegible]. Hunter and
the Nut and Screw (Naitauba).
Mr. Des Vceux sent me to see Seed about a case which has just been
reported of a foreign labour baby dying from exposure on Mr. Peckham’s
plantation. Also about a case where Mason has refused to allow some of
his labourers to go after time, upon ground that they were imprisoned for
a month, and that they must work for another month to repay him.
18 th. —Mr. Des Vceux, Mr. Thurston, self, Suani, etc., started in
Victoria for Bua, 8 a.m. Mr. Des Vceux very cross, and nearly refused to
go ; found it no use, and went. Very nice breeze ; dead fair. Ran over
very quickly. Mr, Des Vceux only a little sick. Reached the anchorage
at Bua at 4. Several of the Roko’s yachts and boats lying at anchor ; also a
schooner from Tonga. Went up the river ; met by Wilkinson and Blyth.
Went to dine and sleep at Wilkinson’s. Mr. Des Vceux and self in the
office ; Thurston and Blyth in a house to themselves. Mr. Des Vceux very
tired and restless ; did not sleep. Found my A.D.C., whom I had left at
Bua when we went there in the Nymphe, in order that he might go and
see his father, Buli Segaga. From what Blyth tells me, he is, after all, a
big chief, and has a great many towns under him, so that the “boy’s”
boast that his father was to the other Macuata mountaineers what Buli
Nadrau is in Colo was not untrue. A.D.C. tells me that he would like to
stop with me, but that his father besought him to come back to him, and
sent a request to me to allow fiim to do so. So when his time of service as
A.N.C. expires (in February) I shall lose him, for which I am very sorry.
19 th. —Nothing particular. Went down and saw several large mekes,
but nothing out of the common. The big solevu is to be to-morrow, so that
probably the people are keeping the good things till then. Saw some of
the Rokos about some recruits for the A.N.C. this next year. Met several
old Macuata friends amongst the people —R. Qovu and others. Had long
talks about Colo. They say that they have such a lot of work to do at
home that they think they would be comparatively at rest up in Colo as
soldiers. Come along then, say I. We can’t leave our wives and children,
say they, and so we weep together and part. Old Mali came to me and
tells me that he and Swayne don’t get on together ; that Swayne apparently
ousts him out of his position and takes all his (Mali’s} work on his shoulders,
etc. etc. Told him that I would speak to Wilkinson about it. Dined
with Cocks and Harman in the house. We are by way of staying altogether
at Wilkinson’s.
20^.—Sent presents of ray much - treasured and very carefully kept
Colo yaqona and tobacco to various Rokos ; the demand far exceeded the
supply. We all assembled in the “ rara ” (or, rather, not the proper “ rara,”
but the ground in front of the box-house) to witness the solevu. I got
away from the grandees and sat with one or two old Macuata soldiers,
468
CHAP.
FIJI


where we could see and talk without disturbing others. First came two
canoes in full sail, sailing up the road from Tui Bua’s house, streamers
flying, and, I suppose, each being dragged by about 300 men ; such shouting
and cheering. The thing that spoilt it in my eyes was the sight of a big
Tongan officer mounted on each, and bawling and flourishing his stick
about, ordering the Fijians about their work as if they were the givers or
the principal parties engaged in the solevu. Brutes ! I must say it gave
me a kind of notion how the Egyptians and the Israelites worked together.
Then came a great meke of Macuata men, headed by the Roko of Macuata
and Ratu Bosoko. The two best-dressed men of the lot were the A.D.C.
and another of our Nasova men, but not being in practice, they made rather
a mess of their dancing. Then came a splendid meke of girls from Yadua,
all dressed as men, with spears and clubs ; they were very loudly applauded
by the spectators. Then came the regular solevu. From where I sat you
could see the road down to Tui Bua’s house, about ? yards distant, winding
in between trees and houses, till it emerged upon the open place in front of
us. First came Tui Bua’s children, one by one, each with a train of masi
(the broad coloured tappa), reaching from the end of the road right away to
the Roko’s house. The train was borne up on the hands of hundreds of
men, so that we saw a great white river rolling towards us ; and the waves
were real, for the wind, which was pretty fresh, got underneath every now
and then, and failing to wrench the masi from those who held it, rushed
along underneath till it got out at the far end. Even the little latest born
son of Tui Bua had his long train, he being carried under an umbrella.
Then came the Cakaudrove, and then the Lau solevu. The most wonderful
part about the latter were the Tongans (some sixty or seventy had arrived by
the schooner). The ladies were got up in the most magnificent dresses—
bonnets and silk corsets, etc., that would have put the lawn at Ascot to
rout in respect of colour, if not in taste. But, alas ! like the image of the
Old Testament, their feet were not so grand. The Fijian ladies—amongst
whom was my old friend, Adi Eleanor (ex-wife of Tui Cakau) —turned up
their noses, and appealed to me for my judgment on the respective merits
of their own dresses or those of the Tongans, My answer, I need hardly
say, completely reassured them, and put to flight any little fears about the
Tongans becoming “the rage” amongst us. Then, last of all, came Tui
Bua, supported by the oldest and, Wilkinson tells me, the highest chief
in Vanua Levu, Tui Likutu. Alas !no one knew him. I thought it was
the Yunivalu’s old Manilla man. Dressed in an ancient dress-coat and
trousers, whity brown shirt, and an old pot-hat, it was no wonder that not
a soul recognised him. Tui Bua presented his gifts, and everybody said
that nothing half so big had been seen in Fiji for ages. All the Ban people
are going about saying, “Malua ki Bau.” 1 After the big solevu, Tui Bua
made three other ones, also on a magnificent scale, to Lau, Cakaudrove, and
Macuata, who had helped him in the big affair. About these last there is
a great deal of heart-burning. Macuata got a very little one compared to
the other two, and Cakaudrove gave half his to Lau because of the extra
Tongans, and this caused terrible grumbling amongst Tui Cakau’s men.
R. Maika and R. Luni themselves said that their people were ashamed to
1 Wait till Ban’s turn comes.
469
XXII
FIJI


go home empty-handed. Maafu was also much put out about it, and would
have refused it (the Cakaudrove present) if by so doing he would not have
greatly offended Tui Cakau. Nothing further of interest took place, and
we returned to Wilkinson’s.
21 st. —Early in the morning Mr. Des Voeux, Colonial Secretary, and self
went carefully through the various resolutions of the Council and the answers,
and about noon we went down to close the Yeibose. Mr. Des Yoeux’s speech
was, I think, much too long and too full of repetition. Everybody went to
sleep before it was finished. It was, however, very good. It was quite
dark before the Council rose.
22 nd {Sunday). —We went down to church to the Bua church. Black
Swan arrived, and lat once sent all the baggage, etc., on board. Mr. Des
Yoeux had a quiet talk with Maafu about the Tongans coming and loafing,
as they now do for months and months, on the Fijians. He said that he
hates it himself, and would use his influence at Tonga to stop it. Went
to say good-bye to the Vunivalu. The old gentleman is very well and
hearty. The other day, being sent to bring him to the Council, I found
him sitting in the middle of a new canoe sail which was being made ;he
was in the highest state of delight, and was giving his orders to the
people about him with an energy which can only be produced by lively
interest.
23 rd. —We embarked on the Black Swan. It was very pretty to see the
fleet of craft of all kinds and sizes which were just starting as we started.
They had a fine dashing wind to beat up against to Nabouwalu, and then
they would get a slant to Ovalau. We had a fine cheery passage down here.
Roko Nadroga, and the Bulis of Dreketi, Serua, and Ratu Marika were
part of the company. The Roko dined, etc., with us. We had the table
laid under the awning on deck, and I got the other three magnates their
meals at the same table, only just after we had done. This pleased them
highly. A very great mistake which Mr. Des Yoeux is extremely apt to
make, and about which he is sometimes very obstinate, is the non-
recognition of the great difference in rank between various natives. Unless
carefully watched, he is (in the fulness of his hospitality) extremely likely
to ask Suani, or any other common man who may be about, to sit down at
table with his own Roko, or, when walking with the Vunivalu, will be
very apt to stop and talk to a girl. The other day he was nicely caught
out. Passing by a bathing-place, he heard laughter and merriment going
on, and, always being delighted at seeing the people happy and enjoying
themselves, stood on the bank and waved his hand and laughed and en-
couraged them. After standing there for some time, during which the
merriment was every moment disappearing, and the greatest astonishment
taking its place, not only amongst the lookers-on, but also amongst those
who, instead of splashing and dashing about in the water, were now
crouching down to hide themselves, Mr. Wilkinson luckily came up and
broke it gently to him that he was doing what is a “ Ka tabu sara” 1 to
every one, i. e. watching women when naked in the water ! He was nearly
knocked flat with astonishment, as he had believed all along they were
boys. He put me really into a bad temper one day, when the house was
1 Strictly forbidden thing.
470
CHAP,
FIJI


full of strangers and guests (Fijians), telling Suani and the rest of the
servants to help themselves to brandy and water. Without creating an
unpleasantness I could not directly countermand his order, and as there
were several whites in the house, it was the more awkward. However, I
managed to “look” the brandy and water into claret.
We arrived in the evening, and as the gig was down at Palmer’s and
the police all asleep (Seed was at Suva), and therefore no boat, we went to
Nasova in a waterman’s boat, which was duly remarked by the Fiji Times
in a peculiarly worded paragraph, in which it states that the Lieutenant-
Governor, having “failed to obtain temporary accommodation,” was reduced
to a waterman’s boat. Mr. Des Yoeux was very much the better for his
trip, and extremely well pleased with it. It has done him no end of good
in every way.
24^.—Nothing particular. The gig came up from Palmer’s, having
been repainted.
25 th (Christmas Day).—Went to early service, but found only Mr.
Floyd to say a Happy Christmas to, so went back again much disappointed.
It is an old institution at home, and one that all who are able should keep
up. Day very hot, with showers and heavy squalls. After 11 o’clock
church went to lunch with the Pinnocks. I rather like Mrs. Pinnock, but
I verily believe she paints. The Hills of Rabi (ex-haberdashers) forced
themselves on us for dinner. M‘Gregor and Lake are staying with us for
the Christmas week, and Mitchell and Eyre and Ratu Seru also came to
dinner. The haberdashers were most frightfully shocked at meeting
Ratu Seru.
26^.—Ratu Timoci and a lot of Lovoni men came and meked here.
The Roko being in great disgrace, he was not asked into the house, but I
sent him a great pot of mountain grog and a bit of mountain tobacco.
Went down to see the athletic sports at Yagadace. Fine bright day, and
the hundreds of people, whites and natives, the latter with bright-coloured
sulus, made a very good picture. The sports were decidedly slow. The
A.N.C. came down in war-paint and danced a grand meke, which proved
more attractive to the native spectators than the athletics. Indeed, I
think there was probably as good a display of agility in the meke as there
was in anything else, if not better. There was some rather wild “tilting
at the ring” on sorry jades. The most amusing feature in the affair was
the way in which the native police won two races. As soon as their man
took the lead, four or five of his comrades, who were walking about with
canes by way of doing duty, rushed in and helped him to achieve his
victory in two ways—one by taking him under the armpits and running
him along into goal, the other by vigorously repulsing with their canes the
slightest attempt on the part of the other competitors to approach within
even a moderate distance the victorious “bobby.” The second time it
happened there was much wrath exhibited on the part of the white
spectators. Some of the A.N.C. had volunteered to enter, but they had to
wait so long that they gave it up and went home, for which I was not
sorry, as there was certain to have been a terrific row between them and
the police had the above happened in any race in which they were taking
part.
471
XXII
FIJI


27 th. —The Yunivalu arrived, and finding his quarters at Draiba inhabited
by Tongans and other strangers, took up his quarters in the “bure” here.
He dined with us twice, and amused us considerably by showing Tui Bua
up in the severest terms for making a tremendous display over nothing at
all. That it was a deliberate insult to have brought two such small canoes
into the rara as if they were men-of-war ; and as for the magitis—the pigs
were no bigger than his hands ! There were no vakalalos 1 or nice things, and
that one of his crew had seen a Bua man find one of the pigs lying dead
inside the pig-fence, whereupon he (the Buan) called out to one or two
others to bring their clubs and kill a pig. On the arrival of the clubs, they,
with a great deal of noise and bustle, attacked the dead pig, and having
beat it about the head a good deal, carried it off to present as something
very great to whatever Chief they thought would be pleased at receiving a
magiti of a fresh-killed pig. He says “ Malua ki Bau.” 2
30 th. —Two new Ceylon men called on me ; they are decent young fellows.
They have enlisted Mr. Des Yceux’s sympathies, and are to have land given
them somewhere. [Memo. —If Mr. Stevens does not turn out a thorough
bad lot I shall be very much mistaken. I never saw a man I felt less
inclined to either trust or fraternise with. I often wish that Mr. Des Yceux
would not give way to his heartfelt sympathy with people as he sometimes
does ; it leads them into the temptation (in one of these cases very freely
taken) of saying that he promised them this and that.]
31s£. —Box of mangoes came from M. Leefe (Nananu).
After dinner had yaqona with the men, and just before midnight went
with them to church at Draiba. The service had been going on a very
long while, I believe. We came in while one or two of the Chiefs were giving
short addresses, and some of them were rather good. Watisoni, our chaplain,
was presiding, and during a pause he suddenly gave out, “E na qai vosa
vakalailai na Turaga ni valu.” 3 Fancy the house crammed with people, and
of course instantly every one looked at me with great expectation. I need
hardly say that I modestly declined making any display of my want of
oratorical powers and my ignorance of their native tongue. After church
I went home, but my men stopped and kept the whole place awake till
morning with their mekes.
January 1, 1879. —A Happy New Year to all.
Dull, heavy with rain. Regatta day. Yery little wind. Gig entered
for the four-oared race. Four entries. Police boat; Tokolau crew. A
white crew last—all more or less drunk. Result, easy victory for the gig.
Police awfully disgusted, so I have proposed to them to get Ratu Abel’s
six-oared gig, which is built on the same lines as ours, and that will be a fair
trial. My men have put aside £1 out of the £5 prize as stakes against the
police, so that we shall have another ss. per man if we win (Mr. Des Yceux
has promised 10s.), and I think we ought to win it.
In the evening Seed and I went to see the Sunday School Christmas tree
at the Mechanics Institute. When we got there the tree affair was all over,
and we found them all dancing on a very muddy floor. We joined in, and
for a couple of hours had rather fun in spite of the mud. I asked the
1 Puddings. 2 Wait for Bau. 3 A few words from the Chief of War.
472
CHAP.
FIJI


great Mrs. Hill to dance, and she said, “Well now, I really would not if it
was anybody else, but as it’s you ” (this with a brogue). The whole affair of
course was rather too much of a romp.
2nd. A day of important events, (a) A mail from Colo. All well except
my dear Whopper, who is so bad that Heffernan does not expect him to pull
through ; a lump has come (indeed the beginning of it was there before) in
his throat, and is growing to a most alarming size. lam going to have him
sent here at once. lie the great fire case ; on trial it appears that Buli
Nuyakoro and a few others accidentally caused it. The result is that the
whole tribe have been punished, i.e. out of some of the towns they had to
levy men to work at roads for six months—there are forty in all. We
gave up claims for compensation, which I think was rather a stretch. My
big billy, which cost me £2 when it was young, was killed with several other
goats and twelve of our pigs. I shall have a bit of “lala ”by and by on
my own account. Woodruff all right, but quarrelling with our chaplain,
Steven. It is a great evil that I cannot get away from here until Maudslay
comes. If he does not come this month, I shall ask His Excellency to send
for him for a month. My new recruits go up in March, and I must go
then. Great row between Mr. Des Yoeux and Chief-Justice at Legislative
Council. I was not in my office, so know nothing personally about it;
and as Mr. Dcs Yoeux will write fully, and probably give me the correspond-
ence which must ensue to copy out for you, I will not say anything further
about it. He is most furious.
3 rd. —Meeting of the Levuka Club. To the great disgust of every one
Mr, G. Smith got blackballed, and the only men who got in were Harpur
and Co., the first Ceylon men now in Taviuni. Court of A.N.C. on a
constable for deserting his post as sentry, and giving a comrade’s name
as being the offender. Sentence, forty-two days’ imprisonment, hard labour.
Confirmed by Mr. Des Yoeux.
4 th. —H.M. schooner Sandfly (C. Horne) arrived from Sydney, having
been out thirty days. No news.
s th {Sunday). —S.S. Wentworth from Sydney, with home mails of
sth November.
News from Sydney. News of the Alacrity. Son born. All well.
. Result of trial by court-martial. All right. Got a snub for being
too quick-worded to his captain, and told to return to his duty. All
now depends upon what he does himself. If he goes home in his ship
he will get his promotion on arriving in England ; if he goes by the mail
he won’t.
6 th. —Mr. Des Yoeux had Rokos Tui Namosi and Kadavu up before him.
The first for being very impudent to Carew and, indirectly, to the Governor
himself, about a man named Tete. The result is that he has to apologise
to Carew. Kadavu to be suspended for one year, and go and live at Rewa
during that period. He is one of Parr’s victims.
Talking of Carew reminds me that there has been a complaint from him
as to a case there. It appears that while I was at Fort Carnarvon, Mr, Des
Yoeux went to Navuso, and sent an A.N.C. with letters to go overland to
me. He started on a Sunday, and to help him on Carew sent one of his
district officers—the head of them —to go with my man as far as a town
473
XXII
FIJI


not far off, to see that the people there gave him assistance in getting on.
He had something too heavy for one person to carry alone. For doing
this the native minister has excommunicated the officer, i.e. he has
stopped him from the “curu siga,” which, from its very meaning, shows that
it is tantamount to excommunication. Carew appealed to Langham, and
tells me that he got a sermon for his pains,” and then he proceeds to
denounce the missionaries in no measured terms for being themselves the
worst Sabbath breakers : the white ones for holding the military services
in two places every Sunday, a pretext for travelling on Sunday, and so
not losing a day ; the others for marching about the country in every
direction, carrying to and fro their kerosene cans full of dirty clothes.
Poor Carew !
Ith. —A Board : Lake and Seed, Examined the new Snider rifles from
Sydney, and condemned thirty-three out of the fifty ! I think Mr. Des Voeux
is going to write privately to Sir H. Robinson about it, and see whether we
can get them taken back and good ones sent. It is a most monstrous shame.
Work coming in fast and thick. Mr. Des Voeux’s answer to Chief-Justice
far too hot, but no one can get him to soften it down. The result will
certainly be that the Chief-Justice will resign his seat in Council.
Got together the Yuda correspondence.
Got to bed at 12.30.
Bth. —Working at mail. Have written a great heap of little Hew Year
letters to various people, and a most enormously big letter home. At the
last moment Mr. Des Yceux wanted a copy of a letter from Chief-Justice.
Got to bed at 12.30.
Note. —Peckham’s labourers have been removed, and he, old Peckham,
is to be prosecuted for manslaughter.
Shute’s labourers ditto, and he is to be prosecuted for breach of Labour
Ordinances. Wood did the work, and appears to have done it well.
11.30 p.m.— Sent mail-bag away.
9th. 6 a.m.—Horror !
. . . . . (Bad language)
The steamer left at 5 a.m., and I have just found this under the first
leaf of my blotting-pad ! ! !
After my trying to retrieve my lost character, to find this ! I was so
hurried by Mr. Des Yceux suddenly finding himself able to write a few hours
before the mail closed, that I can hardly be held responsible for accidents.
Last night, after sending off the mail-bag, I was sent for by Lizzie and
the girls, whom I found in a dreadful state of fright, Pierre having been
poking about their bedrooms. Told them to go to bed, and went to bed
myself very tired.
Morning. —Feeling rather done up. Inquired into the Pierre matter.
Found that he had come home drunk and had gone into the women’s
quarters. Suani had seen him and had gone round to peep, and was very
nearly caught by one of the girls, who declared she had seen Pierre run
across the garden. On my examining Suani, he admits having run across
the garden, but “ scorns the haction ”of peeping. Mr. Des Voeux tells me to
send Pierre off about his business. I pay him his wages and tell him to go.
474
CHAP.
FIJI


He makes no defence. If I were a French novelist I should take a separate
line and a great many asterisks to each of these sentences.
Pierre packs up his traps and goes to Levuka.
N.B. This is the second conviction for the same offence.
10 th. —Weather looking rather hurricane-like.
6 a.m. —Secured drawing-room windows, which had blown open in the
night, making the room in a dreadful mess. Sent down for two coils of
rope and axes in case of accidents.
6.30 a.m.— Top of the “bure” blowing off; secured it with rope.
7 a.m. —Top of Cakaudrove barrack blown off ; put it up again.
7.15 a.m. —Top of guard-room nearly blown off; made the guard sit on
it until assistance arrived ; set it right again.
8 a.m. —Everything being more or less damaged by the wind, which is
coming from north and north-west; very bad gusts. Small crafts running tor
Nai Korokoro. Had the “crotons” all staked and tied. Oleanders coming
to grief everywhere.
2 p.m. —Weather looking very bad. If wind shifts to north-east we
shall have it dreadfully bad. Secured boathouse with ropes inside and heavy
timber supports. Worked hard myself with the men, which is delightful
to me.
7 p.m. —Wind moderating. Gusts not so frequent or so strong. Bar-
ometer rising slightly.
1 1th. —Calm. Raining.
Mail from Heffernan, who is on his way to Colo. Has reported on fire
case. Mentions names of prisoners most active in saving Tatuba. Recom-
mends Constable Laisiasa (Macuata), the gaoler, for approval of conduct.
On showing this to Mr. Des Yoeux he releases two prisoners, and orders £1
to be given to Laisiasa as a reward.
Heffernan tells of Nabiri of Nuyakoro having bolted to Nabuto with
Katunasau’s wife and refuses to return. Heffernan has written to Carew
to have Nabiri arrested and either sent to Levuka or to camp. Query, why
write to Carew ?
Great disaffection among the Ruwailevu towns towards Nakarasa,
fomented by Nadroga in every way, Nadroga is trying to get up a petition
to Mr. Des Yceux to have the Ruwailevu towns taken from Nakarasa and
given to him. As Heffernan is on his way here, I shall wait and see him
before taking further steps ; but I am decided as to what to do, viz., on my
next visit to Colo in March to go and stay for a week, or perhaps a fortnight,
in those towns and leave a small detachment of men to watch them when
I go. Some one has spread a report that the Governor wants every one of
the towns to make a lot of masi, and they are doing it. The order came
from Nadroga, and was accompanied by directions as to the time at which it
was to be brought to Cuvu. This must be inquired into carefully.
Race between the gig and Ratu Abel’s boat, with a crew of six Ovalau
and Levuka men. Course from the pier at Nasova round a schooner anchored
off the Custom House, back past the pier, round the Elizabeth, and finish
opposite the pier. Splendid race. Boats even all the way down, but Mr.
Cocks rounded the schooner off the Custom House better than Mr. Gundry
did, and led home. Won by four lengths. Immense excitement all along
475
XXII
FIJI


the beach amongst natives, and considerable interest taken also by whites.
Both crews rowed very well, but ours in much the prettiest style. Mr. Des
Voeux gave the losers a pig. I gave our men £l. We are to have a race
in the same boats : four of our men against four of the police. I have
refused to race in any other matches, as I don’t approve of the Governor’s
boat being “ too common.”
Vlth {Sunday). —Wet. I made the afternoon service for the A.N.C.
optional. Chaplain rather scandalised, and R. Seru exceedingly puzzled
between his inclination to sleep all the afternoon or go to Levuka, and his
sense of duty to the missionary. Mission brig John Wesley arrived from
New Britain with families of the murdered teachers. German government
have purchased Ferguson Harbour in Hunter Group.
—Wet. Nothing of any interest. Legislative Council. Question
as to whether the press is to be admitted or not, in consequence of Mr.
Des Voeux being very badly reported. Decides not to admit it. Griffiths
went away in a rage, with his nose higher than ever in the air.
14 th. Heffernan arrived from Colo. All well. He tells me that
Beimana and the Qalimavua were directed by Sir Arthur Gordon to pay a
yearly tribute to Nadroga of masi, as a “bai ni lala.” It is the very first I
ever heard of it. Nabiri having refused to obey him, he has issued a warrant
and sent it to Carew to execute ; Nabiri having gone off with a woman
belonging to Katunasau (the mother of Durutalo, she is a Nadrau Marama,
and forced herself upon Nabiri). The affair of Nadroga and the trouble in
the Ruwailevu towns is a little serious. R. Rovo has gone to Nadroga to
keep things quiet. A mistake was made in a message which Heffernan
sent to camp asking Woodruff for some men to be sent to take charge of
some prisoners. Putting two and two together, Woodruff and the men
thought a row was on, and the result was that the whole lot were sent off
with arms and ammunition, and came rushing down to R. Rovo. Heffernan
very wisely advised him to send them back and not go with a lot of armed
men into Roko Nadroga’s town, and R. Rovo sent them all back except one
or two whom he has with him. lam not sorry for one reason, viz. that it
showed that we were “all there” if wanted. It is an unlucky thing that
Heffernan has this lawsuit on, for he should be in Colo now especially.
However,'* he states most distinctly that everything was quiet when he
went away, and that there was no chance of a row of any kind.
15th. —No particular news. S.S. Suva arrived in the evening without
any despatches or mails. Called on H.M. schooner Sandfly and found
nobody on board. Criminal sittings of Supreme Court began. Trial of
Merriman for stealing money. Jury unable to agree.
IQth. —No news. Weather very hot. Mr. Des Voeux and Colonial
Secretary at estimates for 1879. Trial of the man from Ba for rape on a little
deaf and dumb child of Mr. Lindberg’s. I trust he will get convicted. —
He is acquitted, to the disgust of all concerned, including the Attorney-
General and Rata Marika, who said it was “macala sara ia ka sa ca na
kenai lakolako,” “as clear as daylight, but miscarried.” Heffernan, who
was in Court, says that the interpreting was very misleading.
476
CHAP.
FIJI


17th. —Went myself to hear a rape case tried. A Ban man for rapeing a
small child. I do not wonder that in nine times out of ten justice mis-
carries in these cases. The way the witnesses were bullied by the Court
would have risked the case, even if they had all been policemen, whose duty
it is to swear to anything and everything. In this case the man got con-
victed, in fact there was no real defence, and he was sentenced to five years’
penal servitude. Dr. Brower, who was an assessor in the Ba rape case, told
Wilkinson that neither he nor his brother assessor “had the least moral
doubt that the man had done the act,” but that the judge told them that
the evidence from a legal point of view was incomplete, and so they returned
a verdict of “Not guilty.” The fact was that the Chief-Justice got into
his head —Heffernan says through the evidence being misinterpreted —that
the principal witness was contradicting himself, and finally arrived at the
decision that the prisoner was the victim of a base conspiracy.
18th. —Rainy day. Went round the garden with Mr. Thurston. Found
a good many of the things Abbey planted, alive ; others, however, dead ; the
live ones looking well. Liberian coffee looking very well. * There being no
man now to look after the place, the grass, etc., is beginning to get the
upper hand. Abbey’s garden by the stable completely gone. The fact is,
that with the very severe drought, all the water having failed, the prisoners
have had so much to do getting water that they have hardly had time to do
anything else.
19th {Sunday). —Went to see the hospital, or rather our people who are
there —two of the foreign labourers, and two A.N.C. Hospital overcrowded.
Native ward disgraceful. Had tea with the Seeds.
‘2oth. —Went to hear the trial of Merriman for stealing, at the Supreme
Court. Found guilty, and got eight months’ imprisonment without hard
labour. Seeds came to dinner.
21st. —Nothing at all of any interest. I paid £lOO to our canteen
creditor, and found that we were just solvent. We have paid between £350
and £4OO this year for the Government, and have not made more than £lO
on the transaction, which shows well for our honesty as agents, but very
badly for us as “traders.” Dined with the Seeds, Mr. Joske, and the
Captain of the Sandfly. Mr. Joske still very sore about the Government
having stopped his sale of the cutter Emma to Namosi.
By the way, the Governor, the Chief-Justice, and I have made a conspiracy
to get Maudslay over here while Igo to Colo. On my suggestion, the
Chief-Justice found some High Commission work on which to send the
Sandfly to Tonga and back ; and Mr. Des Yceux wrote to Maudslay to ask
him to come, if he can, without prejudice to his work. This is a very secret
conspiracy, and not to be divulged to the public.
22nd. —Nothing at all. Had a talk with Heffernan re Colo matters.
Directed that Ratu Josaia shall be sent back to Carew, with the threat of
being tried when I come back to Colo for disturbing the peace of the land.
Nabiri to be sent to Levuka for Mr. Des Yoeux’s orders. I shall recommend
that he be sent for a few months to Roko Tui Bua. It will be a good thing
for him to see a little outside Colo, and it will be an example to the rest
of the people not to defy the law.
477
XXII
FIJI


23 rd. —Ratu Jopi, A.N.C. (Knolly’s pet), brought up by Ratu Seru for
absenting himself from drill without leave. Told him that he must be
confined to barracks ; on which, in a temper, he first asked for his immediate
discharge, and on my refusing that, he walked off to Levuka. Sent Ratu
Nui and an escort after him, and sent him to cool his heels in Totoga for
forty-eight hours. Ratu Seru in a great state with him and about him ;
says he “must be mad ”to do such a thing. At the same time I relieved
him by telling him that, this time, Ratu Jopi will not have his hair cut, or
be sent to work on the roads. Ratu Seru amused me much by the remark
that it was a good job for them that Mr. Seed was not in command of them,
for if he had been Ratu Jopi would have got a month.
Wrote to Maudslay. Sent him some things he wanted ; and hearing
from Wilkinson that Maudslay was very greatly in want of sinnet for his
house, made bold to send him one of Lady Gordon’s rolls from the
drawing-room.
Heard that MacGregor had given one of my men in charge for prowling
about the women’s ward at the hospital. 1 refused to go or send to have
the man bailed out, as I don’t approve of “ such conduct,” and so left him
in the lock-up all night. Knowing, however, that he was a man of good
character, and finding out that he had gone up to see a sick comrade who
is up there, I determined to go and see him through his difficulty in the
Police Court.
24 th. —Went to the Police Court and came off with flying colours.
Doctors and police nowhere. However, the man got a fright, which will be
of use to the rest in case any of them might take odd fancies into their
heads.
Mail from Colo. All well. Ratu Rovo still at Nadroga.
° t
2hth. —H.M. schooner Sandfly left for Tonga. Rainy day ; did some
gardening. The old diminutive Indian was to have come to us to-day.
He did come, but was too drunk to do anything, so sent him away till sober.
Mr. Des Yceux still busy over his “message.” This is about the fifth day
he has been writing and re-writing it. The amount of extra work he gives
himself is enormous.
Ratu Jopi’s heels being cool, he reappears with a penitent mind and a
swelled elbow. He has been reduced from sergeant to corporal. In a short
time I purpose to put the young chief at the head of the new Tai Levu men,
in his place, but he must learn his work properly first.
Heard that the man who murdered his wife in Sabeto has escaped from
the gaol at Nadi, where Mr. Edwards is stationed. Mr. Edwards’ careless-
ness is very reprehensible ; he has now two men escaped from gaol, both on
the loose. The Sabeto man will be the mischief to catch, Hetfernan will
have to send Qalega of Nasovo after him.
2 Qth {Sunday). —Nothing. Rain.
27 th. —Evening party at the Cumquats. Went in the gig and picked
the Seeds up. Left at 1 A.M. Party rather nice, not too many. Joske
still very sore about his loss. He would look at me, and it made me laugh,
which enraged him. No doubt he thinks that I was at the bottom of it all.
At the present moment the three men most detested are Thurston, Wilkin-
son, and myself.
478
CHAP.
FIJI


28 th. —Payne, of the Lands Office, was found drowned this morning, oppo-
site Mr. Hennings’ house. He probably fell over the wall, and owing to its
being high water, and a tendency to apoplexy, he was stunned or had a fit
from the fall, and so came to grief. lam very sorry, for many reasons, and
his place will in many respects be hard to fill. He was buried this afternoon.
Mr, Des Yoeux’s message printed several times, and every time he gets
it back he makes any amount of further corrections and alterations or addi-
tions. Printers and Colonial Secretary’s office in despair,
29 th. — The message still being sent backwards and forwards.
Captain Daly, of the brig Heather Bell, tried to-day for kidnapping.
Convicted of an attempt; sentenced to six months’ imprisonment; fine,
£l5O, and to enter into a bond, with a surety of £SOO for future conduct,
or to be deported from Western Polynesia. Bravo, Chief-Justice !
Legislative Council. Mr. Des Voeux’s message read. He read it himself
and made any amount of alterations in the wording of it as he went along.
Mr. Langford in the deepest despair. How many more editions it will pass
through before it finally goes home no one dares to say.
Letter from Friend saying that he found the Governor’s houses at Suva
in a bad state. Has set his prisoners to look after them. Offers to take
care of them ; also says that he will take charge of the house built for the
Governor at Rewa (Veibose). Wrote and told him I should be glad if he
would look after the Suva houses, but that the Rewa house was in Wilkin-
son’s hands and therefore to leave it alone.
The estimates passed. I have done very well for the A.N.C. Increase
of £25 for Woodruff, and extra allowances to men re-engaging after two years’
service in the force ; details also very satisfactory. I have been put down
as Commissioner for Navosa at £3OO. Have said nothing to anybody, but
I quite expected to get £350. However, all’s well.
31s£.—S.S. Black Swan with “Whopper” onboard. Went off to see him.
Not looking well, but not nearly as badly as I thought he was. Had made
arrangement with Gough to land him ; but when that individual was starting
for the steamer he was so drunk that I was anxious about his trying it.
However, he asserted so strongly that he was all right that I said I would
try him, but I determined to go with him. Found that the side of the
steamer, which has a port out of which they generally shove the horse over-
board, was jammed up against the hulk, and so poor old Whopper had to
be slung high up out of the steamer and over the hulk into the water.
Gough made such a bungle of him the very first moment that I told him to
be off on shore with his punt, and that I and the mate would swim the
horse off, which we did most successfully. MacGregor has seen him for a
moment, and says that he thinks the tumour in the throat is an “ innocuous ”
one. Wilkinson and Heffernan dined. Wilkinson, who lives in his office,
generally dines with us.
Feb. I.—Langham and Mr. Des Yoeux had an interview, at which I was
present. Mr. Des Yoeux got rather too warm, though much that Mr. Lang-
ham said was calculated to keep him cool. It so happened that at one
moment they both said the same thing, viz. that they were “prepared for
whatever action” the other side might take. Langham construed this into
“ I am preparing to take action against you,” and has gone away with this
479
XXII
FIJI


idea in his head. I think that it is well that they have had it out, though
I think Langham got the best of it, for he has disarmed Mr. Des Yoeux,
who showed (as he always does) the whole of his hand in a few moments of
heat. I could not tell him this ; but when he asked me whether I thought
he had not had a great effect upon Langham, I said that I did not think he
had had any, which annoyed him awfully, though he said nothing. I had a
very friendly chat with Langham afterwards on entirely other matters, and
we parted with mutual goodwill.
Letters from Colo. All well. Ratu Rovu says that the country smells
of rotten bananas, there being such a quantity that they cannot be eaten.
(His words are, “As to the bananas, they are falling on the ground to
decay. They keep falling because there is no one to eat them. As we go
through the Ruwailevu country our ‘ waistcoats ’ (stomachs) mourn for the
loads of fruit that are going to waste, and the smell—l cannot describe
it —but you, who know the amount of the plantation there, may imagine it
in part.”)
2 nd {Sunday). —The mail was due on Wednesday, and is not in yet.
Very heavy rain from the north-west. Did a day’s gardening yesterday,
and put out some cuttings on the sea side of the road.
Went to tea with Seeds. After church we were sitting chatting, when
the mail was reported, so we went off. Found that it was a new steamer,
the Gunga, about 1000 tons larger than the Wentworth. She is going to
stop in the trade.
3 rd. —Got our mail; also a nurse for the expected event. A pretty bar-
maid came down and was stolen by Mr. Sturt the instant the vessel
anchored. Her “importer” is in a great state about it.
Very jolly letters from all. No letter from Knollys.
Nothing in the despatches.
4 th, 6th. —Writing for the mail. Thurston ill. Parr’s letters too horribly
disgusting, as indeed are the drafts of Mr, Des Yceux’s despatch on the sub-
ject. Have had to detain the mail on purpose till to-morrow at noon.
Mr. Hunt —offensive brute —came and demanded an interview with Mr.
Des Yoeux re his pardon, and re an agitation he is trying to get up in respect
of treatment of prisoners in Totoga, Got a snubbing for his pains.
The importer of the barmaid is consoled. She turns out not to be his
barmaid, but another who came down “on spec.”
11.30 p.m. Must go to bed. Was working till 12.30 last night, and up
at 6 this morning. There is still the Parr despatch to be re-copied.
6th. —Ratu Timoci had up before Mr. Des Yoeux. Sentenced to be
“interned” at Namara (Tai Levu) for two years. He says that Parr has
brought him to grief, as he will every one of the chiefs if he can, in order
to upset the native policy.
Mr. Maudslay to Sir A. Gordon
British Consulate, October 28, 1878. —My dear Sir—l sent a letter to
you the day before yesterday by San Francisco which will reach you long
before this does. As the vessel to Auckland was leaving the harbour, the
480
CHAP.
FIJI


German ship Ariadne came in with Weber on board ; they leave again to-day
for Fiji.
Weber has not been to see me, but has been much of his time with Baker.
I asked him to come last night, but he wrote back that he had too much
writing to do to spare time to come. He and the Captain have just been to
see the King ; possibly he may come here just before leaving. Baker is sus-
pending from their Church appointments natives who give me information.
If I can get a passage I think I shall go over to Fiji in about a fortnight’s
time. Baker tried to get rid of me before by spreading a report that the
German man-of-war had gone up to the Islands and was not coming here.
I hear that from Fiji she goes to Solomons, New Britain, and Line Islands,
and comes back here to make some stay in January.
The pilot, who is a half-caste Samoan, an old ally of mine, tells me that
thb Taimua and Faipule have left Mulinua and gone to their homes ; that
Malietoa is much stronger than he was a few months ago, all Savaii and Aana
being with him, and that he expects war. The Ariadne is off soon, so I must
finish this scrawl.—Very sincerely yours, Alfred P. Maudslay.
3 p.m. The Ariadne has not started yet.
After his interview with the King, Weber went back to Baker’s, where he
has been ever since ;he was also with him until midnight on Saturday. I
send you a copy of another statement from an American trader, which quite
agrees with the statement made by Payne (which I sent by San Francisco) as
to the method of raising subscriptions.
10.30 p.m. Since writing the above I have had a call from Weber. He
has delayed the man-of-war for a day, and starts the first thing to-morrow.
He is indignant with Swanston, who, according to his version of the story,
has certainly humbugged him ; an agreement was come to between them,
that they should join with the Taimua and Faipule in trying to put down
the drunkenness in Apia. Swanston promised to act with him, but after
letting Weber draw up the conditions, etc., which he says were almost copied
from your draft, Swanston at the last moment refused to co-operate, saying
that he would attend the meeting only out of courtesy to Weber, and the
latter of course had to let the matter drop, although he had told the natives
that the Consuls were unanimous about carrying it through. I have not had
a line from Swanston, so cannot tell you his side of the story. I expressed
my regret at their not agreeing, and told Weber that I had general control
of the Consulates, and hoped to be back in Samoa in a few months, at which
he seemed pleased, and offered to try and arrange for the German man-of-war
to take us up together, which arrangement I should not approve of. Weber
goes in the Ariadne to Fiji and Solomons, their aim being New Britain.
With regard to the New Britain difficulty he tells me that he will support
Brown as far as he possibly can ; but if he thinks to work Brown as he has
worked Baker he has very much mistaken his man, (if I can judge from my
short aquaintance with him in New Zealand). I know very little about the
New Britain raid, but from what is given in the papers Brown seems to have
made a huge mistake, a mistake which will be much better appreciated in
England than in Australia, where they have got used to “dispersing the
aborigines. From New Britain (where I think the Germans mean business,
and may perhaps hoist their flag) the Ariadne returns to Samoa by way of
111 2 I
481
XXII
FIJI


the Caroline and Line Islands, and expects to arrive here in January. Weber
talked rather big about the New German Company, with himself as its
manager out here. Samoa is still to be the headquarters ;he said that there
used to be a good deal of jealousy when Godeffroy and Son were the only people
to be supported out here, and it was more or less at the request of the
Government that it was turned into a Company, as in Germany Companies
were so much under Government control, and it was consequently much
easier for the Government to support them. He evidently thinks that he is
going to make another sort of East India Company out of it with ultimate
views of Empire ; he says that they have 5000 acres under cultivation in
Samoa now, and mean to have 20,000, and intend to commence sugar-planting;
that they have only recruited 400 labourers this year, but are taking steps to
increase the importation, and mean to have 1000 next year. They have
already bought one steamer in Sydney, about 250 tons, which has arrived in
Fiji for the island trade, and intend buying another which will probably
connect Samoa, Tonga, and Fiji, the former to be the depot. Arrangements
have been made with Hennings to act for them in Fiji. My own belief is
that it is a very critical time with them ; a number of ships are said to be
lying idle in Apia, and a determined attempt is being made to find them
cargoes by purchasing the new steamers as feeders. The New Britain enter-
prise, which at first paid well, has failed them, and they will strain everything
to try and get the labour trade into their own hands so as to make their
Samoa plantations pay again ; they are driving the English traders by slow
degrees out of Tonga, and you know how much Samoa is under their sway.
The great danger is, I think, in the labour traffic getting into their hands, as
they will not be over scrupulous, and will quite distance our tolerably carefully
regulated trade, and, having no territorial interest, will depopulate many of
the islands. If the Auckland merchants were to combine and form a Company,
I think that they might do something, especially if Sir G. Gray would grant
(which he would do if he could) a few exceptional privileges to Auckland as a
port for island traffic. It would be worth speaking to the MacArthurs about,
as they are the people who could most easily start the idea. At present the
New Zealand traders only cut one another’s throats, and are gradually
decreasing. With regard to Tonga Weber said very little; he pointed out
that the German Treaty was signed by the Emperor and the King of Tonga,
not by the King and a Consul. Of course I said it was merely an agreement,
and that the treaty would be in due form ; also that the clause about the High
Commissioner’s Court authorised the Supreme Court of Tonga to summon
foreigners to attend the Commissioner’s Court, which he objected to as he
could not see why German subjects should be compelled to attend any court
whilst they had no powers to compel Englishmen to attend a German Court.
I offered to write to him saying that I would not call on German subjects if
they were not willing to attend, but he said my expressions were enough and
sufficient explanation ; but he evidently means to conclude a further treaty
with the Tongans if he can. I asked him to dinner two nights, but both
times he pleaded too much -work, which work seems to be chiefly with Baker,
as he has been with him at his house almost all the time of his stay, and is
there this evening. I want to get to Fiji soon, and think it may be necessary
to get on to Sydney ; for if the parsons do not take some step before the
Ariadne returns, with regard to Baker, I fear we may be in a mess, although
482
CHAP
FIJI


I am still of opinion that the King, Uga, and Tugi are all with me ; the
people are getting impatient at my not doing something to Baker, and are
returning to their old allegiance. Weber evidently thinks Baker to be as
strong as ever (this from Froude), and I am glad he is so far misled. If I
went to Sydney after consulting Gorrie in Fiji I might report to you on the
New Britain business, and also se6 the new Commodore, I should come back
by the return steamer.
I am afraid this is hardly legible, but I have to send it off immediately.—
Sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
Weber (confidentially) spoke much of Svvanston’s drinking, saying he
never saw him drunk, but that it is not pleasant to sit near him, or do busi-
ness with him, after 2 p.m.
A. P. M.
From Mr. Houstoun
Apia, Samoa, December 24, 1878. —Dear Sir Arthur —l. I had secured the
services of a native chief, and my plans for escape were all ready with the
exception of a vessel. At the last moment the owners refused to do any-
thing, and that threw me upon the Germans. The ship that carries this
will miss the mail of the 7th January from Fiji. My last chance is there-
fore cut off, unless something turns up at the last minute. So I have
determined (much against my will) to remain here till the beginning or
middle of April and quietly watch proceedings.
2. The two men whom I relied on to give me assistance and to lend me
a vessel in which to make my escape, when it came to the point, put
difficulties in ray way instead of removing them, and took such a purely
mercenary view of the whole matter that I had, most unwillingly, for many
reasons, to abandon my share of the plan I suggested to your Excellency
in my letter of the Ist October, despatched vid San Francisco with a
duplicate sent via Sydney. I only trust that your Excellency will be able
to get the powers suggested in that letter, and then all will be right.
3. It is becoming hard work to get any mails despatched from here :
the Godeffroy people have quarrelled with Agar on account of the “Suum
Cuique ” correspondence, and will now give no information about their
shipping. Then the American Consul has got foul of Agar and is using all
his influence to discredit him in the eyes of the San Francisco postal
authorities, so it is not safe to send letters vid America (direct).
4. I would here point out that up to the date which stands at the head
of this letter, everything has been kept an almost absolute secret. I only
took Dr. G. A. Turner into my confidence five weeks ago : to him I have
told all. Dr. Turner guarantees the silence of the two men who were to
have got me to Fiji ; they will now learn no more, and what they do know
is not much—only my general plan and my object in being here. Maudslay
knows, of course, that I am intent upon the annexation of this place, but
he knows none of my plans, as I do not care to commit them to paper :
were he here I should give them to him viva voce. I only mention this in
case your Excellency may think that I am creating a disturbance here
without any warrant. I should not hesitate to take open and decided
action (say in April) should such seem desirable. I have, too, a cautious
and trusty counsellor in Dr. G. A. Turner.
483
XXII
FIJI


5. Samoa, it seems to me, is a place that must he annexed ; a voluntary-
cession will not be easily obtained for many years to come : there are too
many internal dissensions and too many conflicting “white” interests, and
there is a High Commission, so that the anarchy which caused the acquisition
of Fiji will never again exist here. But Ido not mean to imply by the use
of the word “voluntary” that there will be any resistance to annexation if
things are properly managed. I think, too, that annexation will be more
easily effected immediately after your Excellency’s return from Europe than
a few years hence : people here seem in expectation of some such event. If
it fails to come off, an opportunity will have been lost that may not again
present itself during your Excellency’s term of office. In this view I may
add that I am fully borne out, backed up, and confirmed by Dr. G. A.
Turner.
6. Everything goes on well. The American General still believes that
he will succeed in forming a government; to everybody else it is quite
plain that the Samoans have not the slightest idea of admitting a white
man to their Senate Chamber. I find, however, that the General expects
an American friend here in February ; I do not know whether this friend is
to aid him in forming a government or starting a sugar-plantation, but in
either case I expect to see both of them return to San Francisco in the
vessel that brings the “friend ” here. General Bartlett’s bubble will burst
noiselessly, and this will be an advantage, as the after evil consequences of
Steinberger’s failure will be avoided.
7. Weber, I believe, will leave Godeffroy’s employ in twelve months’
time, and set up in business himself. He and young Godeffroy do not hit
it off. I fancy that Weber, for his own interests as much as for those of the
Firm, or of the German Empire, is making his present cruise in H.I.G.M.S.
Ariadne. I think he is looking out for places where he can establish his
own traders ; the trip will give him a great insight into the trade of the
South Pacific. Weber, I know, is on your Excellency's side if you take the
islands, though he would probably create opposition were a cession attempted.
He told me months ago that he would not fight against the inevitable ;he
wishes to delay for some years what he knows must inevitably happen ;he
is now prepared for annexation ; show Weber the Imperial authority to
annex those islands, the necessary powers, and instead of a foe a friend
would be there.
8. The Samoan Times is of course favourable; I hope through its medium
to create the right impression on people’s mind here, in Fiji, in Australia,
and in England, In a word, the fruit will be ripe in August, and the knife
of annexation would then easily cause it to fall into the basket.
9. This is, of course, a private letter, in contradistinction to an official
dispatch, and maybe I should not criticise official doings. I venture to
point out, however, that Mr. Swanston’s policy of strict neutrality, in some
respects almost of opposition, cannot be indefinitely adhered to. At the
present time it is undoubtedly the right one, and in my opinion Mr.
Swanston deserves great credit for the way he has played his cards since his
appointment here. It will in all probability be the right policy for the next
six or eight months, but certainly not for the next six or eight years.
Mr. Swanston’s policy is certainly paving the way for a great change at no
distant date, but if that date be passed and no change in the Government
484
CHAP
FIJI


occur, Her Majesty’s Government will have no excuse for sanctioning in its
representative here a mere spirit of opposition and obstruction. After a
time, a consular or some other form of government will be established here,
which will maintain a certain amount of law and order, and be the means
of preventing Great Britain from having any excuse for taking these islands
under her wing. Again, I repeat, the fruit will be ripe in August, if some
one will only come and pluck it from the tree.
I have delayed finishing this letter till this hour (6 p.m.) in case some-
thing might arrive from Fiji or Tonga which would be of service to me.
I trust your Excellency will not think I have written in too bold a style
—if I have done so, it has been caused by my over-zeal in this matter. —I
remain, yours very faithfully.
From Dr. M ‘Gregor
Fiji, January 5, 1879.— My dear Sir— l have to thank you for your
letter of 3rd November. The business questions raised in it I shall deal
with farther on, and shall commence with domestic matters.
The two greatest dangers to our ship of state at present are bickerings
between the Administrator and the Chief-Justice, and squabbles between
the former and the missionaries.
Mr. Des Voeux, if I am not greatly in error, is anything but pleased that
the Chief-Justice acts as High Commissioner, and possessed by a prejudice
arising from this source, he is at all times looking out for something offensive
from the side of the Chief-Justice. What I state on this subject is a deliberate
opinion founded on observation. Des Yoeux even goes so far as to say that
Gorrie cannot act as High Commissioner under the Order in Council, that
he has no Commission, and that the High Commissioner’s account is in the
charge of the Governor, and that he has power to operate on it without con-
sulting Gorrie. He has pointed out to me that lam his servant, and not the
servant of Gorrie, and that as long as the account is in my charge he (Des
Yoeux) is responsible for it. lam most careful to say nothing on these subjects
that could by any possibility produce an inflammatory effect. There are
several sums to be paid to the public from the High Commissioner’s account,
and Gorrie does not appear to see that those amounts should be paid entirely
from the Commissioner’s account. The sums concerned are, I think, all con-
nected with Wilkinson’s mission to Tonga. I have succeeded up to this time
in preventing Des Yoeux from drawing on the account for the amount. The
Sand-Fly has come in, and I heard her commander tell Gorrie that he had
come to put himself at his orders, and I am afraid there may be fresh danger of
dissension from that score, as Des Yoeux often says that he alone, as Governor,
has anything to say to a vessel of war in the waters of the colony.
This matter of the Commissionership, you will thus see, has prepared the
ground for a crop of squabbles that may spring up at any moment and attain
any dimensions. I have done all I can to obviate such a misfortune, and have
frequently had the satisfaction of hearing Des Yoeux declare that he would
not quarrel with Gorrie, whatever cause he might have for doing so. At the
same time, there are others who pretend to be desirous of maintaining
friendly relations between them, but set about it by declaring the last act
of the Chief-Justice, whatever it may have been, as only another example
485
XXII
FIJI


of “ aggressive arrogance,” and thus, it may be unintentionally, the flame is
fanned. Unfortunately, both men are quick-tempered, Des Yoeux more so
than the Chief-Justice, and both on the spur of the moment make most
imprudent utterances, so that, I must confess, I am not by any means free
of anxiety on this score.
Smith, as ill-luck would have it, put a question about the Ra business
in Council, and Des Yoeux himself replied to it. He began by saying that
Garrick had nothing to do with it, that the Administrator of the Govern-
ment alone was responsible, and inter alia remarked that one weighty reason
for allowing the Magistrate to deal with the matter was to obviate the chance
of a miscarriage of justice in the Supreme Court. The remark was an un-
fortunate one, and, made somewhat unskilfully, was liable to a personal con-
struction. Gorrie, with his usual cleverness and promptitude, immediately
took it up in that way, as he “ assured the Administrator of the Govern-
ment that there would be no miscarriage of justice in the Supreme Court,”
and went on to say that the Supreme Court alone had power to deal with
these cases, and that in law it was for the Attorney-General to decide where
they should have been tried. Des Yoeux lost his temper completely, and had
recourse to the weak argument (in Council and in the presence of a reporter
of the Fiji Times) of charging Gorrie with a course of action at once astound-
ing, improper, and dangerous in an official member. Gorrie, as reported in
the Fiji Times, said he was not an official member.
Now, I am quite certain that by this mail you will hear a great deal
about this occurrence from different sources, and I am equally sure that
you will condemn Gorrie. lam also convinced, in my own mind, that had
you presided over that meeting of Council, this squabble would never have
taken place. As soon as Des Yoeux mentioned “a miscarriage of justice in
the Supreme Court ” I knew we were in for a scene. It was analogous to
asking the Government Dispenser to prescribe for one of the patients of the
Chief Medical Officer, and Gorrie could scarcely be expected to listen to it
in silence. I do not put the matter thus in any attempt to render Gorrie
blameless, for his language was not what it should have been, but I wish
you in thinking over this matter to remember that Gorrie had cause for
resentment. When Des Yoeux asked my opinion of the matter, I told him I
thought his reference to the Supreme Court was a mistake, and although he
will not admit it at present, I know him too well not to believe that he will
soon come to agree with me, at least partially. Now, of course one tries to
prevent the gulf from widening, and I have tried to assure each that the
other bears no resentment, a statement that so far as Gorrie is concerned is
perfectly true. But what I dread is that this affair may extend much farther,
as the point whether Gorrie is an official member will probably be raised by
Des Yoeux, and probably the Chief-Justice will get the worst of it. The
question of official or non-official member should not, if possible, be discussed
in such a connection. No man likes to be reminded that he is “ only an official
member," a reminder that carries with it the insinuation that one must act
without consulting one’s own opinion. No doubt it is quite well known to
official members that they are there to assist and not to obstruct the Governor,
and it must be confessed that seldom, save in minor matters, is this relation-
ship lost sight of. It is therefore well to leave the obligations entailed on
one by one’s position as a last resort, and I hope in this instance you may
486
CHAP.
FIJI


not consider it essential to go into that part of the subject. My wish on
that point arises principally from the belief that in the main the Chief-
Justice agrees with your policy on conviction, and that he wishes to co-
operate with you in carrying out what he believes to be good work, and
that he supports you on leading principles with sincerity, and uninfluenced
by official incumbency. No doubt you find him somewhat boisterous now
and then, but he always takes an open position, and is probably much more
manageable than most men would be in his position.
I am afraid you may think I am taking sides with the Chief-Justice. I
am not. I blame both ; but lam afraid that a strong expression of opinion
from yourself to the Chief-Justice might cause him to work less heartily for
you than he has done hitherto. Now for the missionaries. Mr. Langham
is still peppering away at Des Yceux. In fighting the missionaries, Des
Voeux uses occasionally much stronger language than I should under the
circumstances. In no instance has his style been pacificatory towards them,
and in certain instances decidedly provocative. I think he likes to skirmish
with them. Two days ago he told me he was about to commence a new cam-
paign with Langham on the marriage law, when I took the opportunity of
saying that I did not see why the Governor should be harassed by Langham’s
missives. Des Yceux said he should take care that none of them went away
without an antidote. I then pointed out that if they went out of the Colony
each with his reply, it simply amounted to this, that each one of Langham’s
letters carried with it the answer of a Governor, and that thereby he made
a great man of himself, carrying on conflicts of a political nature with the
Queen’s representative, and I hinted that probably Langham did so inten-
tionally, Des Yceux said he thought that after all I was probably right, and
he would perhaps follow out my idea and refuse to carry on hostilities. Ido
not believe that the missionaries will assail your native policy unless goaded
into it. The most influential of them have expressed to me their general
approval of it, but they, like every one else, are very apt to attach too
much weight to any faulty detail that comes under their observation directly.
But that failing is not specific to missionaries. If matters can only be kept
as they are until your return, I certainly think that if you cannot get the
missionaries to work with you, they at all events will not work against you.
There can be no doubt of Des Vceux’s appreciation of your native policy.
Probably he thinks, as I am not an enthusiast, that I do not understand it,
or that Ido not approve of it. He has perhaps at present some reason to
suppose so, because I have somewhat damped his enthusiasm in a measure
that vitally concerns your native policy. He drafted an Ordinance to re-
strict native labour, which if passed simply put an end to the local labour.
No man could leave his district without (1) the written consent of the Buli;
(2) the permission of the Magistrate. No person under 14 could go to work,
and no woman without a husband or father, unless by special license to be
forwarded to the Colonial Secretary. These measures are, I say, excellent,
but they are imprudent. Every non-official member of Council was deter-
mined to persevere in sustained opposition, and to denounce the measure in
Council as simply calculated and intended to prevent the employment of a
single Fijian as a labourer. Des Yceux has promised me to modify the
ordinance, and to restrict it to the prohibition of the “yaqona,” We shall
thus not provoke a crisis. After all, no great number of natives engage to leave
487
XXII
FIJI


their districts in the course of a year —only some 1100 last year. Of course
the majority of that number was principally from the recruiting-ground on
Yiti Levu, but it is better to sacrifice a little than to risk the whole. More-
over, his Ordinance was quite inconsistent with what he said to the Bua
meeting about labour, the result of which has been, he tells me, that the
chiefs have recommended that one-third be allowed to go to work for the
planters. Your old friend Joske has rather come to grief. He sold a boat
to Tui Hamosi, to be paid for in logs for Joske’s sawmill. The Governor has
stepped in and broken the contract, and used very strong language towards
Joske. Some 800 logs cut and ready for Joske are to be sold by public
auction. Of course they will bring less than their freight to Levuka. If
Joske had taken advantage of the chief, a new bargain might have been
made in his behalf, and he might perhaps have got the boat for what will
fetch most probably nothing to the Treasury. The case has created much
discussion during the last two days.
I think I have said enough to show you that I quite agree with you that
Des Yoeux’s notions are good, but I cannot but regard him as being exceed-
ingly impulsive. To preserve the native race, he would allow no white men
in Fiji; to encourage the production of sugar, he would raise a levy of local
labour —in short, to go to Wakaya he would steer a steamer over the reef,
and then hasten to claim the entire responsibility of the course taken. He
is a political Boythorn. Of course, I like him. One must, he is so candid
and his ideas so just; and it is refreshing to meet a man the justness of
whose ideas is so well developed as to make them almost dangerous. He
will mellow with time, and gradually acquire the caution and reserve of the
experienced governor, and will learn to steer clear of extremes even in good
actions, as he sees that moderation will produce better results than the
sweeping measures of enthusiasm. I think the team can be kept together
during your absence if it is not too prolonged ; but if your stay at home is a
long one, or if it were supposed you would not return, there would be
defections.
Having got the Revenue over the £60,000, lam satisfied. Of course the
Administrator will be able to point out that those figures have been reached
without selling any land ; and I may add they have been attained without
any compromise of the revenue of 1879, in perfect fairness, and without any
special arrangement that will not bear the strictest criticism. I have given
Des Yceux an estimate of this year’s Revenue as £66,400, but I do not know
what he is going to fix it at, nor have I seen his estimate of expenditure.
Your answer to the letter of Sir P. July an could not be improved upon.
So far as argument goes, it ought to be conclusive, but it is really too aggra-
vating that he should become the ally of the Bank of Hew Zealand. I have
given Mr. Des Yceux the copies, but I have not been able to have any con-
versation whatever with him on the subject, as he considers himself too busy
at present to be able to see me about it. Personally, Ido not think it possible
to float the loan in this part of the world at present, except at a tremendous
sacrifice. On this point it is quite enough to say that banks in Sydney are
offering 6J to 7 per cent on deposits. But so long as the Bank’s claim is
under discussion we really do not want the loan particularly. I think we
can pull along this year without it, as I shall have probably £SOOO to £7OOO
to our credit here ; and about £SOOO to £6OOO with the Crown Agents after
488
CHAP,
FIJI


paying all the 1878 accounts. It is therefore better to pay 5 per cent on
the old claims than to go into the money market and procure cash at pro-
bably 7 per cent at present. But Ido not see how we can get along much
longer than this year without a loan, as the expenditure is increasing very
fast indeed.
I should be pleased to go to New Guinea if there would be any oppor-
tunity of planting your native policy there, but I should not care to go tor the
purpose of introducing the Australian man-hunting principles. I should
probably be able to do more for you there than in Fiji as Receiver-General.
Fiji, under anything like fair play, may already be set down as a success, and
I should like to see the same principles established in such a place as New
Guinea ; however, in the meantime I must thank you for what you have
done for me as Receiver-General. I only wish the matter were settled for
Cruickshank’s sake.
Wednesday B th. —I have been able to see Mr. Des Yoeux, and to give him
the opinion I gave you here in regard to the Loan. lam very sorry to say
that he has taken up warmly the prosecution of his difference with the Chief-
Justice, and has written a long, long letter to him, and used expressions of
such strength thatfl fear the result will be undesirable. I told Des Yoeux
that I thought it could produce only one result —that of causing the Chief-
Justice to confine himself in future exclusively to his work in the Supreme
Court, and I pointed out that certain of his assertions, as that the Chief-Justice
corresponds with the Fiji Times to the prejudice of the Administrator, are,
to say the least, improbable. But nothing I could say had the least effect,
and the letter left Nasova about two hours ago. I shall see the Chief-Justice
to-night, and do what I can to prevent a complete eruption, as I know very
well what a loss he would be to the Legislative Council, and how very much
better it is to have him working with the Governor than to have him in
opposition, or even in a state of neutrality. Le Hunte, too, has done his
best to at least round off the corners of the Administrator’s letter, but with
only partial success.
The Chief-Justice evidently wished to hear no more of the matter, but
I am afraid he will not be restrained from answering the Governor’s
letter.
I am joining the Agricultural Society, and may probably be able to
occasionally divert the energy of that body into legitimate channels.
I have found excuses for delaying the introduction of a new Customs
Ordinance. The sum accruing to the Revenue by the system I introduced
last year of calculating ad valorem duties, and which you intended to
abolish in the new Ordinance, is as nearly as may be £IOOO. Last year’s
Licence and Tariff Ordinances have worked most satisfactorily, and I do not
wish for any change at present. I have, however, obtained leave to intro-
duce an Ordinance to make the duty on Colonial distilled spirits ss. 6d.,
instead of half that on imported spirits.
Lastly, I would remind you again of the pernicious and murderous system
of paying off foreign labourers here with guns and ammunition. I under-
stand that New Caledonia does not now require foreign labour. Of course
Samoa and Tonga employ a certain number, but by far the majority are
those employed by British subjects. If you can find means of arresting this
disgraceful means of payment by British subjects, I hope you will spare no
489
XXII
FIJI


efforts in such a work of humanity. I need not do more than remind you
of the subject, as you already know my arguments on this matter.
I know it would be very difficult to restrain Queensland, but then unless
you do something in the matter nobody else will, even if every man in the
New Hebrides shoots his brother by our means.
I send you one or two extracts from my mountain journal, about all that
is in it worth sending, or that you do not already know fully.
Lake is becoming very impatient for removal.
With kind remembrances to Lady Gordon and the children.—Yours
faithfully.
From Mr, Houstoun
Apia, January 28,1879. —Dear Judge Gorrie—Many thanks for your note
of the 23rd December. My chief reason for writing is to suggest that the
Sand-Fly should carefully avoid Samoa just at present, or if she comes here
with despatches that her stay should be limited to as few hours as possible.
Weber has compelled the Samoan Government to sign a treaty ;he hoped
to insert a clause that all German titles should hold good without investiga-
tion. In spite, however, of threats and entreaties, all he could obtain was
a Lands Commission composed of Germans and Samoans. Doubtless he
will find means to imbue that Commission with his own views, but when
the Tuamasaga and the Malietoa people hear and see a Government, whom
they don’t recognise as such, giving Crown grants to lands belonging to
them (the Tuamasaga and Malietoa) they will either make war or appeal
to England. But if the Sand-Fly puts in an appearance she will give
Weber the handle he wants—he wants to represent her as a greedy Power
desirous to ride rough-shod over Samoa and gobble up the country.
Leave things as they are for a couple of months : the Samoans have ceased
to believe in America, and ere long they will very distinctly see Germany’s
aims. Then England will be asked to interfere. There is a rumour here
that Weber is going to Germany in a couple of months. I fancy it is much
more likely that he will take a trip to Auckland in a ship of war, and then
settle in Tonga for a few months ; he and Baker would have grand times
roasting Maudslay !
From The Rev. G. A. Turner, M.D.
Apia, Samoa, January 3, 1879. —Your Excellency—l wrote you last
week by a vessel which left this for Fiji, but since that time important
events have transpired which I think you ought to know. In my last I
informed your Excellency that the Taimua and Faipule, after a period of
inactivity, are making an attempt to consolidate the Government. Since I
wrote, the Tuamasaga (middle district of Upolu) have held a large meeting
and decided unanimously that they will have nothing further to do with
supporting the Government, unless Malietoa is reinstated as King. They
did not stop here, but sent boats at once to Savaii for young Malietoa, and
also sent for old Malietoa, and now they have them both at Malie, their
capital. This, of course, is a deliberate throwing down of the gauntlet on
the part of the Malietoa supporters. It remains to be seen what strength
they can muster. I hear to-day the Taimua and Faipule are very angry,
490
CHAP.
FIJI


and have issued orders for all their supporters to come together, no doubt
with the view of crushing the Tuamasaga before others have joined them, as
they did in the fight with the Puletua last year. I hope, and am strongly
inclined to believe, however, that the Taimua and Faipule will find this
movement a very much more difficult one to crush than the Puletua. \ our
Excellency may remember that at the time of the defeat of the Puletua, I
wrote you telling you that many influential chiefs had told me that the
reason why that fight was so soon over was that parties were preparing for a
bigger fight for which they were not quite ready—a fight for the purpose of
re-establishing the Malietoa on the throne. This looks like the commence-
ment of that struggle. When and how it will end, if the natives are left to
themselves, no one can tell. General Bartlett has not yet been taken into
the “Government,” but if the Taimua and Faipule think they are likely to
have the worst of it, they might try and enlist his services on their side.
I hope your Excellency will be able to do something for us while at
home. If the authorities at home would only empower your Excellency to
hoist the flag here in case of emergency, or renewed civil war, etc., etc.,
then there would be some hope. In case of war or of the Malietoa party
being successful, of course you are aware that party is strongly in favour of
annexation. Excuse this hurried line. —Ever faithfully yours.
From Dr. Turner to Dr. Mullens 1
Apia, Samoa, January 6, 1879. —My dear Dr. Mullens — ... I also
wrote you a note vid Tahiti four days ago, enclosing a note to Sir Arthur
Gordon, Governor of Fiji. If this has not reached you when you receive
this, and if Sir Arthur Gordon is still in England, I wish you would try
and see him, or write him, and give him the information contained in the
enclosed slip.
From the Memo, for Sir Arthur Gordon you will see further trouble is
ahead for poor Samoa. Our only hope is in English annexation. Could
you not bring any pressure to bear in the right direction through such men
as M‘Arthur, Lord Shaftesbury, Duke of Manchester, Lord Carnarvon, or
by an appeal personally to the Colonial Secretary ?
The American farce is played out; the Germans will do nothing ; further
war will utterly ruin the group. All that is wanted is to empower Sir
Arthur Gordon to hoist the British flag in case of emergency, further civil
war, etc. Samoa can easily be governed through Fiji—will pay her own
expenses easily; and a creditable central Polynesian Colony including
Tonga is no doubt the solution of our troubles out here. It must come
sooner or later.
If the Governor is still in London, do all you can to urge him to get
powers to annex Samoa ere he leaves. Of course all this is strictly “ entre
nous.” You can use my name to the Governor, but otherwise keep it
quiet. —With kind regards, ever faithfully yours.
P.S. —If Sir A. Gordon is still in England when this reaches you, let him
still see my Memo., please, whether the letter vid Tahiti has reached or not.
1 Secretary to the London Missionary Society.
491
XXII
FIJI


Memo, for Sir Arthur Gordon
At a large meeting of the Tuamasaga (middle division of Upolu), held
ten days ago, it was unanimously decided that they will no longer support
the present “Government” until they reinstate Malietoa as King. The
Tuamasaga have followed this up by sending for the two Malietoa and
taking them to Malie —the capital of the Tuamasaga. Of course this means
war if the “Government” do not agree to the terms of the Tuamasaga.
This will be the war which has been hatching ever since Malietoa
was deposed. It will doubtless unite the Malietoa party, and probably—
almost certainly be the utter overthrow of the present “Government.”
But the danger is that the end will be chronic civil war lasting for years.
The result of this again will be confusion worse confounded in the matter
of land disputes, heavy debt on the islands, and utter ruin for the natives.
No one talks of America now —that farce is exploded. General Bartlett
still hopes for place which he will never get. Mr. Weber has been away for
two months at New Britain in the Ariadne, and when she returns with him
she will almost immediately leave for Sydney.
Are our circumstances not hopeless enough to warrant the hoisting of
the English flag as a dernier ressort to save Samoa from utter ruin? If
Sir Arthur Gordon comes out with power to annex Samoa, then he could
exercise his own discretion about using it.
Apia, Samoa, January 6, 1879.
G. A. TURNER, M.D.
From Mr. Thurston
Nasova, January 7, 1879.—My dear Sir—My last letter to you of the
Bth ult. referred, among other things, to the strike among the seamen in
Sydney, and consequent delay in the arrival of our steamer. lam sorry to
say the contention relative to the employment of Chinese is as far off settle-
ment as ever. The miners have joined the sailors, and A. N, S. Co. are
losing something like £lOOO a day. Wentworth only reached this on Sunday
sth instead of Thursday, her due day. In general respects everything is
well here, i.e. all important things. The financial results of the year have
been better than I expected. The native taxes exceeded £lB,OOO (actual
revenue), and the gross revenue from all sources exceeded £60,000. Macgregor
will forward details by which it will be seen that with a little more business
doing here, we should make both ends meet.
Your approbation of my efforts relative to native taxes has given me much
pleasure. I see, however, that in my remarks as to avoiding “refunds”
this year (August letters) I was a little obscure. It was not my intention
to express any dislike to refunding to natives the surplus cash proceeds of
sales, but to refunding it from the Treasury. At the time I wrote, I was a
little sore with MacGregor, who occasionally gives hints and information to
people that he might just as well keep to himself, and the Times , together
with Parr, Cave, & Co., had been very witty at my putting down the receipts
at £15,000 when so much had been refunded from the Treasury that the
net revenue did not exceed £9OOO (this was not correct; only £250 was
refunded), “if it reached that sum.” MacGregor was also weak enough to
talk to the clerks on the subject of native taxes, and some of the defects of
the system. This alarmed me (though now I fancy it was “ liver” or that
492
CHAP.
FIJI


something had “ganged agee ” with MacGregor, more than any settled intent
to be disagreeable), and it appeared prudent to avoid refunds from the
Treasury. Directly, therefore, a province had paid up, I close its account
with the Treasury, still receiving, however, all the further produce sent,
but paying proceeds into bank to a separate account, which I opened under
the heading of Refund Account. By this means every shilling that appears
as native revenue in the Treasurer’s Books or Quarterly Reports of this
year is actual revenue, liable to no deductions whatever, and at the same
time we are not open to attack from those who aver our Financial State-
ments are delusive.
The Refund Account stood on December 31 at £I6OO, the largest over-
plus yet attained, and had not Maafu sold on his own account a whole cargo
of surplus copra, the sum for refund would have reached £I9OO.
The foregoing will explain, I hope, what I meant by avoiding refund,
and will also meet with your approval.
I shall endeavour to make this year a very exhaustive report upon the
working of the tax scheme during 1878, and on its financial results.
Let me here say, while thinking of results, that the tax for this year cannot,
owing to the effects of two years’ drought, be estimated at more than £19,500.
I am at my wits’ end what to do with Rewa—sugar must be grown there.
Since my last remarks on the subject we have had no further unpleasant
correspondence with the Wesleyan missionaries, or I should say with their
chairman. Whether they got more than they expected in the Govern-
mental rejoinders, or whether they are playing some peculiar waiting game
only known to themselves, I cannot say. They appear, however, to have
had enough. Outwardly, Langham is civil and agreeable, but nothing
passes him, I am sure, that he can carp at, without being carefully noted
down. Everything has been done here to avoid a rupture or anything
approaching it, hut as long as he is here there will be no real change. lam
not sure, though careful not to act on my opinion, but that showing one’s
teeth to these people is the safest course. If they think you want to con-
ciliate them because of their influence here or elsewhere, they would become
perfectly insufferable.
Their system, root and branch, is rotten —it is a delusion and a snare, and
in their hearts I do not think there is a man among them who does not know
and feel it. What tricks and dodges they practise to keep the game alive
among the charitably disposed and wealthy ones of the world !
How well Langham would shelter Mr. Shirley Waldemar Baker if he
could ! Are they not virtually in the same boat ? Is not all Lau indebted
to Jew and Gentile traders for advances made to pay huge mission subscrip-
tions ? Was it not a reverend missionary who counselled the Israelite to go
to “ Yacata” and offer cash for the tax copra lying there, so that the not
less reverend teacher, having preached at the poor wretches of natives for a
month, had some reward for his toil, and was finally able to act as agent for
the trader, and even store the plunder in his house, where it remained—until
a Government officer, not seeing the joke, took it away and referred the Jew
to the missionary for a settlement.
Can any one believe that town officers “kaciwakid” 1 the amount to be
1 Proclaimed.
493
XXII
FIJI


subscribed by each person in the Nadi and Wai Levu towns was an accident ?
The last little thing coming to my knowledge, of which every detail is on its
way to me, is as follows—
Three couples visited Mr, Wylie at Yuna and asked to be married, pro-
ducing their licenses. They had walked many miles, and wanted to be
turned off at once. The poor missionary, having just had a heavy mid-day
dinner, was lolling in a chair, but whether reading Butler’s Analogy or
Huxley on Protoplasm I have not yet discovered. He was reading, however,
and somewhat crustily told them to come “by and by.” The people
waited in the meek man’s verandah, and presently again made their request.
“ Do you think that I am going to bother myself to marry you just when
you like ? ” inquired the parson. More waiting, and again a humble appeal.
“Have you got your fees ready?” said Wylie. “Yes.” “How much?”
“Two shillings each.” “Do you think I am going to marry you for two
shillings each ? Get out of this ! Away you go ! ”
And away they went, but as fate and the old gentleman would have it,
on the road they met an old man whom they knew, and to whom they related
their grief. Said the wise old man, after a moment or two, ‘ ‘ Why don’t
you go to the Roman Catholic Priest ? He will marry you, and you need not
pay him anything unless you like.”
The matter was debated, question put and carried affirmatively, and off
started the marriage party to the “ Badie.” He, good mannie, said, “Oh yes,
my children, I will marry you, if you have a license, and are Kai Katolika.”
Here was a hitch again, but the wise old man was there, and equal to the
occasion. “ That Priest,” said he, “ (and that religion) must be best who does
not ask for money, money, money upon every possible occasion.” “True,”
said his hearers ; “we will join the lotu Katolika.” And join they did, and
being straightway married, left rejoicing. Thus, in consequence of the com-
bined effects of keen business perceptions and an over-loaded stomach, the
Wesleyans lost at one sweep six members of its church (assorted sexes, as
they say of sheep), and the sum of six shillings sterling. By all of which
I mean that they will not dare to quarrel if they think we may turn round
on them.
Polygamy is the question Langham is now worrying on, and had
MacArthur come here he would have been worried enough about it. His
petition (copy herewith) will show the nature of his plaint, and I must say I
think there is something in it, though he might make less fuss about the
thing. The Natal business, perhaps, encourages him.
The Bua meeting was a success. A‘full report, I hear, is in hand by
Wilkinson. I accompanied Mr. Des Yoeux when he went over to close it.
The sensitiveness of the people about their land is clearly so great that
suspicion is hardly a strong enough word to employ in describing it. Of
course we have to thank the whites for most, if not all, of this feeling. The
mischievous remarks they make passes belief; things that we laugh at, play
the mischief among natives, and I again express my opinion that if some
deterrent is not found to stop the seeds of disaffection being sown among the
natives, we shall have some trouble by and by.
There is not, I fancy, much of the “alarmist” in my character, but I do
consider evil habits a dangerous rock ahead.
I am trying to get rough slips of the Bua proceedings printed off for
494
CHAP.
FIJI


your information, and hope to enclose one. We ought to have had the
Chief-Justice there. He would have been pleased, and modified his anti-
native government views. Apropos of the Chief-Justice, we have had a very
unpleasant scene in Council —much more so than you will gather from the
reports, because in them the u manner is absent. Gorrie has all along
determined to have a row over the Ra affair, and he has found no unwilling
seconder in the Attorney-General. So far as Gorrie is concerned, I really
don’t believe he means mischief, but he is not prudent in his language, nor
is he careful to whom he expresses his opinion, and thus he is often repro-
duced verbatim in print. I like him immensely in many ways, but if he
was somewhat more reserved and dignified, and less extravagant in his
language, I should like him better. As I presume Mr. Des Voeux will
write to you fully on the subject, I shall offer no remarks beyond the one
that, both within and without the official circle here, general opinion sides
with the Chief-Justice and against the Governor. The large majority of
people believe all that is said against Ratu Isikeli, and that the matter
was glossed over on the grounds of political expediency. lam only afraid,
seeing how public feeling is being spurred, that some man—say Parr—may
move for a writ of “ habeas corpus” in order to bring the matter before the
Court. It will be done if thought of, and then something very disagreeable
will take place. However, I hope no one will think of it.
Libels are constantly being published against the unfortunate Roko of
Ra, and others, but in no case has notice been taken of them. In to-day’s
paper the intent and object is obvious. If an action was laid for libel
the whole question would come on. The result would clear Isikeli, I
have no doubt, but the end sought by so many people would have been
attained.
If the Imperial Government will allow us £50,000 a year, or perhaps a
little less, we may be able to administer affairs with all the elaborate and
expensive machinery of the Colonies, but if we are to live and pay our own
way, we must be allowed to carry on in a simple manner. And for native
affairs let us have courts held under trees (weather permitting)—no lawyers,
no pomp and circumstance of any, even the mildest, sort. Trial on the spot,
and without delay.
Could we not venture to stand the expenses of one circuit judge, or a
senior and superior magistrate, who should travel ? In the latter case, all
crimes committed by natives to be within magisterial jurisdiction. A man
of some legal attainments, and one having had some experience of natives,
might be found. Something must be done to settle this business of jurisdic-
tion, for so long as the Crown Law Officers and the Chief-Justice cry “ The
Court, and nothing but the Court,” we shall have trouble. There was a
good deal of temper shown the other day, even in moving the Continuance
of Ordinance No. IV. of 1875 (the Native Debtors Ordinance).
Mr. Des Yceux has considerably amended the Draft Labour Amendment
Ordinance sent last mail, and ev en seems disposed to let it drop altogether
until you arrive. Beyond myself, no one favours it; Ido not speak of the
form but the principle, and, excepting by direction, I fear official members
would not vote in its favour.
Mitchell’s argument is that we have legalised or recognised the right of
the chiefs to the labour of their people, and that a native has just as much
495
XXII
FIJI


Working pay (say)
. £820
0
0
Colonial pay
109
10
0
Commissioned Officer, Reg. pay
320
0
0
Colonial pay ......
250
0
0
Reg. pay, clothing, rations
945
0
0
I would suggest
£2444
10
0
Surveyor-General and Director of Works .
. £500
0
0
Five additional Civil Surveyors
. 1750
0
0
£2250
0
0
right to take “yaqona” and give it to his chief, or the chief to take it by
way of commutation for lala service, as he has to take an advance of money
and give it to the Government by way of commuting his tax liability. My
contention is that the things are not altogether analogous. The obligation
to the State is constant, and the State therefore does no wrong in demanding
produce or money. The obligation to the chief is not constant, but is
regulated by the chief s necessities. If a chief wants two houses built, it
is obligatory upon the people to render service ; but if it should happen that
such a want (or any other) does not arise, no service is necessary, and the
people are not called upon to commute a dormant obligation. Besides, I
contend that such rights as these cannot be sold—it is primarily an incident
of land tenure ; and finally, that the chief does not abate his claims to
personal service by the home-staying people, and therefore that he receives
not only his right, but a bonus, bribe, or price, for the man’s service in
addition, and is taught to regard the exodus of his people as the easiest way
of raising money. By next mail I shall be able to report what we have
done.
It is very hard to persuade the people that the semi-depopulation of
towns, in consequence of our labour system, works any harm to the race ;
they not only will not see it, but argue that it must improve and civilise
the natives !
Nothing has been done with regard to issuing of Land Grants. Piles
of reports are ready for consideration, but when they will be taken up
cannot be predicted. The Survey Office is very slow—very slow indeed.
The staff is small, no doubt, but I do not think they distress themselves
with work.
The pay of the Royal Engineers, if we undertake it, will be as follows :
I am surprised to learn from you that Gorrie answered that letter from the
missionaries. I asked him what he intended doing, and he replied ‘ £ Nothing,
and I shall not lay it before Council.” Considering it was addressed to
him as Chairman of the Council, I think he was not justified in dealing
with it individually. However, it is too late now to say anything ; but if
you were not to return—had anything happened to prevent it —Gorrie would
have tried to upset the native policy, and failing, would have got somebody
to move for a Royal Commission. I have been slow in coming to such an
opinion (in which I do not stand alone), but upon my word it looks probable.
From his own point of view Gorrie does not believe in any native officer,
496
CHAP.
FIJI


whether Roko or Ovisa ni Koro. He does not affect to hide his opinions ;
they have been expressed to me often in anything but judicial language.
Touching the school. Friend is the only man we could get at present
as master ; and who is to supply his place ? We ought to have two more
magistrates, —certainly one at Kadavu ; the appointment would pay for
itself in many ways.
Then Le Hunte must be provided for on the return of the staff. How-
ever, in my next, I will return to this subject. The boys for Sydney shall
have my immediate attention. Lala is behaving very well. Instead of
visiting Fiji in the Christmas vacation, I let him visit Brisbane in company
with a tutor—a son of Rear-Admiral Stopford’s. I have not yet seen the
papers as to Loans, nor has M‘Gregor given me any information. I think
we could raise a Loan on fair terms with Imperial guarantee, not without.
I see part of the Canadian Loan is guaranteed. If you can procure anything
of this sort, and authority to float a Loan, it can be done ere long —not just
now, for Colonial Bankers are all calling in overdrafts, and money is very
tight; but the right moment will come, and then we should put into the
market just as much as we want and no more. Unfortunately we have in
regard to Wharf got one account in our books, headed “advance against
Loan.” I will see Mr. Des Yceux as to telegram. By next mail I will try
to forward you some further surveys of Viti Levu. We have already seen
by telegram “that you have been presented with the freedom of the ancient
burgh of Aberdeen,” and I thank you in advance for the coming account
of proceedings. One sentence of your remarks has given rise to much
comment in Colonial journals, and here it has been interpreted into a
quarrel with the Colonial Office.
Need I say how much I am gratified to find my exertions in the native
tax collection has met with your approval. It has been “steep” work, but
“Finis coronat opus.” I have passed £IB,OOO net revenue. Wilkinson
stayed out at Toga till the end, and 1 hope his proceedings were all what
you wished. No news from Samoa.—Believe me, yours very faithfully.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Provincial Office, Nasova, January 8, 1879.—Sir—-In laying before
your Excellency the minutes and the resolutions of the Council of Chiefs
just closed at Bua, I feel it is a matter of great thankfulness that the
annual assembly, with all its surroundings, ceremonies, and business, has
been got through, and brought to a close with such success—and from
almost every point of view, with satisfaction to all concerned.
A spirit of good-heartedness seemed to influence all to give their every
endeavour to attain this issue. A vast amount of work has been done and got
through, which will probably never appear in any document or record, but
none the less important and valuable to the service. At one time I thought
it was my duty to have specially mentioned some names to your Excellency,
but I fear doing injustice to some.
Every official, native and white, engaged during the session, whether
within the Council Chamber or outside, has done his best, and with a will,
as men impressed with the idea that they were engaged as fellow-helpers
111 2 K
497
XXII
FIJI


in a great and, —as some of them were wont to express themselves, it is
indeed, —a weighty work—the welfare and preservation of their country and
race.
There are one or two subjects which came before the Council which call
for more special notice, both from their real importance as well as the
amount of interest, and in some instances the strong feeling, shown during
their discussion. One of these is the inquiry into white men’s lands. The
subject came up several times in various forms, and upon which a very
great deal was said, calling for the strongest expression of dissatisfaction
and apprehension for the future. Avoiding any recital of what was said,
they complain chiefly : —First, of the way the inquiry is conducted :as a rule,
they say, there is seldom more than one native present at a time, and as
soon as one is examined he is told he can go, which he interprets that he
must go ; while the white men crowd the place, and go in and out at their
own pleasure ; and that often, if the persons concerned when the plaintiff’s
witnesses were examined were present, they could explain and confute
statements made.
2nd. That they have no helper or adviser in cases where a piece of land
or its boundaries are disputed ; while the white man is surrounded with all
available help, all of whom understand the customs and usages of all that
is going on—most of which the native is entirely ignorant of.
3rd. That very often they know nothing at all of the nature or
substance of the claimant’s statements, or any of his white witnesses, and are
therefore quite unable either to refute or support. Some instances are
given where they only heard the particulars after the land grant had been
given, and the issue of which had caused the greatest surprise.
4th. They complain very strongly about the conduct and course
pursued by the white claimants and their agents or lawyers while staying
in the towns where the inquiry is held. They go about amongst the
people producing all sorts of erroneous impressions about the Lands
Commission. It is represented as a terrible monster, able to inflict all sorts
of pains and penalties for any infringement of its rights and powers, and
that those who are going to give evidence had better take their (the claimants
or lawyers’) advice, and either say nothing at all, or as little as possible, or
just what they (the lawyers), as their friends, are quite willing to teach
them to say or do ; that it is a thing most strictly forbidden (ka tabu )
for them to meet together and consult about the sale or boundaries or
anything whatever pertaining to the land under investigation before going
before the Commission, and that if they do so, and it becomes known,
all they say will go for nothing.
These are about the principal causes of complaint, excepting in reference
to the issue of the Crown grants, which they say they often only hear of
through the white man, who generally communicates the fact in the most
bombastic and insolent manner, telling them that he has won the day, and
that their opposition was all false, and the Government considers them
liars, and believed him, the white man, only.
This kind of thing has in some places created the greatest difficulties to
the chiefs in the control of their people, and the most serious heart-burnings
amongst the people, and a very unfriendly feeling towards the Government.
A good deal also was said on some cases, in which when second inquiry
498
CHAP.
FIJI


was made, sufficient publicity was not given, or any explanations of the
object of such second inquiry. To give a literal rendering, this is called
“stealing an inquiry.” I ought to say that there appears to be every
confidence in the gentlemen who are members of the Commission, and I
believe that they are held in the highest respect wherever they have been.
On the question of labour nothing could be more marked than that the
chiefs had the greatest distaste for the question ; there is but one feeling,
that the whole system should be stopped.
It interferes seriously with the supply of food, and is prejudicial in a
large degree to the increase of population, prolific of all kinds of trouble,
breaking up homes and families, and creating a wandering and vagabond class
in the communities where the system prevails, who are notorious for little
else than setting at defiance all authority and every domestic tie and bond.
There was not a word against local labour to any extent, which they say
is nearly altogether a benefit, as they earn good wages, are near to home,
and it does not interfere seriously with any of their tribal or district
regulations and duties. It was clear enough that their opposition to the
system is from no idle or simple opposition to their people working for the
white man, as is often stated, but purely on account of the evils associated
with and arising out of the system.
Their suggestion as a whole I would strongly support, as likely to very
much mitigate the evils, while, at the same time, not so very seriously as to
interfere with the supply of labour.
But there is a strong impression amongst many of the chiefs, in which I
think there is a good deal of truth, that the settlement of their lands
on a regular and firm basis will before very long render unnecessary any
legislation on the subject.
To say only that the consideration of the land regulation excited a
great deal of, or the most interest of any subject, would not be the whole
truth. The discussions, which occupied the greater portion of five days,
were characterised throughout with a patient, cautious, and very thorough
practical sincerity. There was a kind of delicacy, almost sacredness,
about the thing. It was apparent enough they felt they were dealing
with, to them, a vital question, which cannot perhaps be better expressed
than by giving a few of their individual remarks. One said—“ We have been
many days legislating, and have had three Boses previous to this, and have
done much, no doubt, very good and useful; but as compared witli this
subject, they are but as the branches and leaves, this is the root and stem.”
Another All that is past is but the husk and shell, very good and
useful things in their place, but this is the flesh and kernel we are at now.”
Another “ Laws and regulations are very good things and very necessary,
but they will neither fill the belly nor clothe the loins.” “ Laws and orders
and sermons are very good, but often apply only to individuals or classes ;
the soil is the life of every man, woman, and child in the land now, as well
as of those who will follow us.” They have adhered strictly to the customs
and usages ot the past, and what has been done has been simply to write
down or codify the best known, and the most common generally observed
customs and rules followed throughout the group ; and it is surprising to find
how very general land customs are, in the majority of cases—any difference
there is, is in mere names used, —supporting very strongly a theory
499
xxn
FIJI


or legend they have amongst them, that land customs are from the
beginning.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, January 8, 1879. — My dear Sir—Your letter of Guy Fawkes
day reached me last Sunday, and very great pleasure it gave me to get
such a New Year’s present.
I know I deserve your very just reproaches about my writing too little,
and I have tried to amend, but it is no easy matter to keep going so many
things without now and then coming to grief over one.
Qaliyalatini. —The affair was hardly discussed at Bua, the Roko Tui
saying that he never knew you had said anything to Buli Nadrau about
them, and now of course that I told him, he would leave the matter alone ;
and so there it is, just as it was before the row began,—in fact it has been
a great storm, and all is calm weather again.
Tankei ni Buto is under orders to go out of Navosa, and I am only
waiting to hear from Carew about what he thinks is best to do with him.
I showed your letter to the missionaries to Mr. Des Yoeux. He told me
to keep it and bring it back to him after the mail, when we will decide
whether to send it or not.
Wilkinson did not leave anything undone in Tonga. He waited for the
rising of Parliament.
I quite well remember the two big envelopes from the Chief-Justice
going into the bag. I hope they have turned up before this. To be quite
sure about it, I have written to ask him whether he remembers them. I
am perfectly certain that if I received them they went straight into the bag.
MacArthur never came ; very wisely, too, I think, for I cannot conceive
a more unpleasant position than he would have found himself in just at the
moment. Indeed, I think, for some reasons, it is just as well that he did
not come.
There was some hitch about the Witherow affair owing to Mr. Des Yoeux
not being able to do any work until lately. I believe it is all right now.
Carew’s Bulis have been appointed some time ago.
The partition between the drawing-room and your bedroom is still intact.
New Guinea. —You have startled me considerably by what you so very
kindly offer in the event of its partial annexation. It is hard, without
knowing a little what one’s work would be like, to choose between carrying
out Avhat I have begun in Fiji and striking out in a new place. lam
inclined to say “Yes” to the offer at once ; but I think the best way, and
what I feel most right to do about it, is to say that if after you see your
way clearly to what has to be done, you like to send me there, you may be
sure that I shall work to the best of my ability. At the same time, I most
frankly and freely tell you that if you see at hand somebody who has a
better claim in any way, or who would be better fitted, the only recollection
of the offer to me will be one in my mind of gratitude to you for thinking
of me, and there will be no feeling of disappointment or supposed injury at
any one else going there.
The Chief-Justice and Mr. Des Yoeux good friends again, and probably
both the better of their little war.—Believe me, yours very affectionately.
500
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Carew
Nakoroyatu, Colo, January 28, 1879. —My dear Sir —I have just
returned from Narokorokoyawa, after a painful journey, owing to the wet
weather and the flooded state of the rivers, and my feet are almost com-
pletely knocked up with wading day after day over slippery boulders.
I had to w T ade to-day thirteen times above rapids. In no case did the
water reach lower than my chest, and frequently up to my chin, and even
higher ; but as this will barely have time to reach Levuka in time for the
outgoing mail, I must, tired as I am, not lose the opportunity.
I was much pleased on receiving your letter (whilst at Narokorokoyawa)
to learn that there was not any probability of your policy, initiated and
carried on at the expense of so much labour and anxiety, being upset.
I had seen by the home papers that you had been presented with the
freedom of the city of Aberdeen.
The matters concerning Serua, “ Tete,” etc., have all been as we wished,
and Witherow is to get 600 acres of land ; but I fear they will keep him
waiting, as some are displeased at his getting the land, and will therefore
not hurry matters on for him. Did I believe him guilty, as they do, I
should simply feel and perhaps act as they do. However, he has no real
cause to complain, as others have to await their Crown grants as well
as him.
Ratu Beni was here a few days ago and breakfasted with me. He has
grown a big fellow now, and is considerably taller than I am. I will send
your letter to him and endeavour to see his mother ; but the old natives of
Naitasiri are quite averse to his being under the care of any white man, and
wish him to be exactly in every respect as his forefathers on his father’s
side were.
Some whites also who have the ear of Adi Kuila have been making
mischief, and I have not been able to see her since you left the colony, as
I have not been in the neighbourhood of Bau during that period. But I
will write to her at once.
Mr. Des Voeux has always treated me with the greatest consideration
and kindness.
With reference to the missionaries, I am quite disgusted with them ;
they are getting worse and worse every day, but have been showing a dis-
position to be very kind and hospitable to me. Mr. Langham has several
times asked and written to me to come and spend a few days with them,
and Mr. Fison lately twice asked me to come and spend a night with him to
read a work he is going to publish, and to discuss Polynesian and Melanesian
ethnography, and to exchange ideas, and has begged me not to pass Navuloa
without calling in. But I cannot sympathise with them in their opposition
to the native policy, and try to keep out of their way as much as possible.
There is likely, I am sorry to say, to be a squabble between us now,
although everything so far has been of the most friendly nature between us.
I have had to fine a great stalwart 6 ft. 3 in. “ vuli” of theirs in two
sums of 10s. each, for abusive and threatening language to Scott and Harvey,
our retail traders in the neighbourhood. The circumstances are as follows
Scott and Harvey sent a canoe down on Sunday with, as they said in
evidence, important letters. The men were yearly Fijian labourers, and
501
XXII
FIJI


went willingly. Well, this vuli (Josefata) was on his way up the river,
and in a most authoritative manner ordered the canoe to be brought ashore,
and the bow hauled up on the beach. Then he several times demanded of the
men to return at once to Colo to their white men, for that it was Sunday,
and it was forbidden to work on that day. They refused, and went on.
Next day or so, this Josefata went past Scott and Harvey’s place with
some friends ; (he belongs to a village adjacent to their house). Scott and
Harvey asked him what he meant by stopping their men and ordering
them to turn back again, when he abused them, and held put both his
hands in a threatening manner, and told them he had an arm for each of
them, and, but for the “lotu,” 1 it would be an easy matter for him to kill
both of them on the spot.
On a subsequent day he said that Scott was a “ bokola” 2 for him to eat
with his “taro.” 3
The evidence was most clear and conclusive, although the defendant in
the last case brought a relation who as nearly committed perjury as any
man in this world ever did, and has confessed so since to me.
I fined him 10s. for each offence, which Mr. Fison has had to pay, or
has been pleased to pay, out of his own pocket —more, as I believe, to show
what his opinion of the affair is than anything else.
The defendant’s manner was defiant in the extreme ; he disobeyed the
summons the first day of hearing, although told personally by me when he
would have to appear, only a day or two before the hearing.
Mr. Langham had previously written to me about the case then pending,
and Mr. Fison had, although protesting not to intend to attempt to speak
on a case awaiting hearing, yet managed very jesuitically to give me his
idea of the affair.
This is quite in common with the action of the bulk of the whites, who,
when laying informations, almost invariably ask one’s advice whether one
thinks they will require any witnesses, and get quite offended and insulted
when told that that is an affair for their own sole judgment.
In addressing the prisoner,—he having stated that he had used the bad
language in return to their arguments (Scott and Harvey’s) and their
having said to him they believed in no religion at all, —I told him he was
not a minister, and had no right to stop people and thrust his opinion on
them ; that every man’s religion was an affair for his own conscience, and
(worst of all) that the Wesleyan Church formed but a small division of the
whole Christian Church, and that each division had different ideas as to the
proper mode of observing the Sabbath.
Well, Mr. Fison tells me in a friendly note that they are not going to
say anything in regard to my judgment on the case (for which I thank
them)! but that they must notice my remarks on the observance of the
Sabbath.
Had I received your letter ten days sooner than I did, I should simply
have fined the man and made no remarks at all. But I will see if I cannot
make matters right again if they give me the chance.
The fact is this—the man was from Navuloa and full of zeal, and zealous
subordinates always get every one connected with them into trouble.
1 Religion 2 Man to eat. 3 A vegetable.
502
CHAP.
FIJI


The disgracing of the officer mentioned in my last by suspending him
from church meeting (excommunication) for six months, for obeying my
orders to show an armed constabulary man to the next village when carry-
ing the Lieutenant-Governor’s despatches to Mr. Le Hunte, had been much
talked of and discussed at Navuloa and in mission circles, and much eclat
had been got out of it; and this man came up with the determination of
doing a stroke of business in the same line, or, as they would call it, “ vueta
na Lotu.” The mission work is done all by spurts. Every now and again
fresh steam is put on.
We have sent off about eight tons or more of tobacco for our taxes, but
I fear it will not bring much if forced on the market. I have written
privately to Mr. Thurston in a friendly note, and made some recommenda-
tions in this and one or two other matters.
Every male of the Matailobau district who can get away is now off to get
money for the mission subscription now near at hand.
Everything is going on satisfactorily inland, and I have told the inland
tribes that I intend to take them to the Bose vaka Turaga at Bau in
November next, and they have promised to assist with pigs, magiti, etc.,
and to take a proper “kaukau” or offering of property.
There is now only one more thing to write of that I can now think of,
and that is coffee.
All the imported Ceylon seed—and I have planted it several times has
simply rotted in the ground, having been sent simply in bags, and not
packed in sand, as it should have been. It was also far too old.
We are now going to have fresh seed from Bua, by my recommendation,
and that of all who know anything of coffee, and this will be sure to grow,
when it shall be my constant effort to make the coffee plantation a success ;
and I do not fear the result, although hurricanes may give trouble, and we
have been spared now for several years, and ought to expect a severe one
every year.
I am most glad to learn that Lady Gordon and the children are in good
health ; and with my very best regards to Lady Gordon, and trusting you
are enjoying your period of hard-earned relaxation from the terrible wear of
your work in Fiji. —Believe me, etc.
Acting Consul-General Maudslay to the Marquess of Salisbury
Nukualofa, Tonga Tabu, January 23, 1879. —My Lord—l have the
honour to transmit to your Lordship copies of some notes and correspondence
having reference to the large amounts of money collected from the natives of
these islands by the ministers of the Wesleyan Church, and the manner in
which this money is raised.
The actual missionary work of converting the natives from heathenism to
Christianity has long been accomplished, and the whole population, number-
ing 25,000, is Christian ; about 18,000 being attached to the Wesleyan, aud
7000 to the Roman Catholic Church.
2. During his visit to Tonga in April last, Sir Arthur Gordon, in conversa-
tions with, and letters to, King George, laid much stress upon the danger
accruing to the Government from the natives running largely into debt with
foreigners. On my arrival here, in conversations with the King and other
503
XXII
FIJI


high Chiefs, I again called their attention to this subject, and it was agreed
that an inquiry should be held at a few of the villages in Tonga Tabu, in
order to form some idea of the amounts really owing.
This inquiry was held by an officer of the Tongan Government, assisted
by Mr. Wilkinson, the Chief Native Commissioner in Fiji, who had accom-
panied me to Tonga on a visit, and who was acting as my interpreter.
3. Before this inquiry actually commenced, I became aware, from pro-
ceedings before the native Courts, that much of the indebtedness was owing
to the natives borrowing money to give to the mission collections, made for
the purpose of supporting the Wesleyan Church in Tonga, and for assisting
Wesleyan missionary enterprise in other countries. I, therefore, suggested
to the King the propriety of allowing Air. Baker, or some person chosen by
him, to assist at the inquiry ; and, on the King assenting to my suggestion,
I wrote to Air. Baker, the Chairman of the Alission, on the subject, and I
now have the honour to inclose copies of the letters which passed between us.
4. The inquiry did not extend beyond three or four villages, and I will
quote some paragraphs from a report made to me by Air. Wilkinson before
his return to Fiji: —
“ The results of the inquiry do not at all bear out the common rumours
of the large amount of indebtedness —that is, at the present time. Of course,
this may be accounted for in that the whole of the cases have not been reported
to the inquiry ; but I think it most likely the reports do not apply so much to
the present time, but were true enough nine or twelve months ago, at which
time there was, no doubt, a large number of people heavily in debt; and in the
aggregate the amount was, I believe, a very large sum.”
It must, however, be borne in mind that this inquiry would not touch the
higher Chiefs, who have developed a taste for European clothing and other
articles of European manufacture.
Again : “ It was found that by far the largest amount at present owed is
on account of moneys borrowed by the natives, from various sources, for
mission contribution purposes, and it is on these generally that most of the
distress warrants have been executed.”
The inquiry had one decidedly good effect, which is mentioned in another
paragraph of Mr. Wilkinson’s report.
“Two days after the last inquiry it was reported to the Government that
the Rev. Air. Baker, Chairman of the Wesleyan Alission in Tonga, had satisfied
all the warrants of distress then issued against natives for mission debts, as
near as can be ascertained, to the amount of £300.’
5. One statement made by Mr. Baker in his letter to me requires some
notice. The paragraph 3of the letter, dated September 2, is both misleading
and untrue. Mr. Baker was absent on a visit to Sydney from January to
June 1878, but the whole of the cases were tried and judgments delivered
when Mr. Baker was resident in Tonga, as the Court records will show.
Applications were made for distress warrants in a few instances only whilst
Mr. Baker was absent. In almost all the cases distress warrants were issued
and executed whilst Air. Baker was in the country, many of them since my
arrival; and it was not until the inquiry had taken place that Mr. Baker
stayed the distress, by himself satisfying the judgments of the Court, whether
with his own or mission funds I am unable to say.
6. About the time of this inquiry I received a private letter from Sir
504
CHAP.
FIJI


Arthur Gordon, who had called at Sydney on his way home to England, and
had there seen some of the leading members of the Wesleyan Church. This
letter contained an expression of their opinions, which I considered justified
me in addressing a letter to the Mission Committee in Sydney, of which I
have now the honour to inclose a copy.
I should not have written this letter without first reporting the matter to
your Lordship, had I not been well aware that Mr. Baker was using his
influence to discredit both Sir Arthur Gordon and myself in the eyes of
the natives.
7. In addition to the evidence already given at the inquiry into the
indebtedness of the natives, I made sure of the truth of reports so frequently
brought to me, by taking statements on oath from some of the European
traders, most of them agents for the German firm of Godeffroy and Son, who
had been engaged in distributing money to the natives previously to the
mission collections. Copies of these statements I now inclose ; and I also
forward to your Lordship copies of some statements made to me by Tongan
natives.
8. Soon after this inquiry I received visits from a native preacher, who
came to tell me that he and several others had been suspended by Mr. Baker
from their offices in the Church for countenancing or assisting at the inquiry
which had been held. On hearing this I wrote to Mr, Baker a letter, copy of
which I have the honour to inclose, and received a reply stating that, before
answering my question, he desired to consult his colleagues. Opportunities
occurred of communicating with the other islands, but I received no further
answer to my letter. In December the missionaries assembled at Nukualofa
for their district meeting. A few days after their arrival I asked one of the
missionaries if the matter had been brought under his notice ; he replied that
it was the first he had heard of it, and on my showing him Mr. Baker’s letter,
he requested me to call Mr. Baker’s attention again to the subject whilst the
district meeting was assembled, which I did in a letter dated December 11.
The meeting, however, came to an end without my receiving any
acknowledgment or answer. After waiting a month I again wrote, merely
requesting to be informed if my letter dated December 11 had been received.
My own servant gave the letter into Mr. Baker’s hands, but he has not even
extended to me the common courtesy of acknowledging my communication.
I may add that there is no doubt of these preachers having been degraded
from their offices in the Church, and that the grossest intimidation is used to
prevent my acquiring any information.
9. In the month of August I paid a visit to the small island of Niuafoou,
situated about 350 miles to the north-west of Tonga Tabu, and distant 200
miles from any other land except one still smaller island of Niua Tabu Tabu,
half-way between it and Yavau.
This island is merely the rim of the crater of an extinct volcano, the crater
itself forming a lake about three miles across. The cliffs are precipitous
towards the sea, and, there being no safe anchorage, the island is but seldom
visited by trading vessels,
10. I had not been an hour on shore when the natives came to me com-
plaining of the heaviness of the mission collections. Unfortunately my visit
was a short one, and I had no efficient interpreter with me. As the Governor
and some of the Chiefs of the island were anxious to attend the sittings of the
505
XXII
FIJI


native Parliament, I gave them a passage back with me to Tonga Tabu ; and
they have since confirmed the reports made to me when at Niuafoou.
11. When the district meeting of the Wesleyan Church was held at
Nukualofa in December last, I addressed a letter to the missionaries, of which
I now inclose a copy. I particularly asked that an answer might be given to
me before the meeting broke up ; but the letter, of which I have the honour
to inclose a copy, was not handed to me until an hour after the vessel convey-
ing the missionaries back to the other islands had left the port.
12. On December 24 I received an answer to ray letter addressed to the
Mission Committee in Sydney, a copy of which is inclosed, directing that an
inquiry should be held into the matters I had brought under their notice.
This letter was brought to me in the barque Meteor , and I was aware that Mr.
Watkin, to whom the inquiry was entrusted and who was resident at Haapai
(about eighty miles distant from Tonga Tabu) was about to leave the islands,
and would be a passenger in the Meteor on her return trip to Sydney. I
therefore left at the earliest opportunity for Haapai (where also some other
matters required attention), intending to ask Mr. Watkin when and in what
manner the inquiry would be conducted. To my surprise, I learnt that no
such inquiry would be held. I have the honour to inclose a copy of a letter
which I addressed to Mr. Watkin after my conversation with him, and to
which I have as yet only received a verbal reply.
I wish especially to call your Lordship’s attention to the statement made
by Mr. Watkin, that he could not have given his consent to any native
evidence being received before the Mission Board, notwithstanding that over
8000 of the natives are accredited members of the Wesleyan Church.
13. I have the honour to inclose a copy of my reply to the Mission
Committee.
14. Mr. Baker’s circuit (over which he has sole control) consists of the
islands of Tonga Tabu and Eua, and the two small and distant islands
of Niuafoou and Niua Tabu Tabu. The method of raising money in
Niuafoou I have already shown in paragraphs 9-11, and the letters there
referred to.
I will now state briefly (what may be gathered from the inclosures to this
despatch) the manner in which these Mission Collections were conducted in
the islands of Tonga Tabu.
15. Mr. Baker advanced money to the agents of Messrs. Godeffroy’s firm
(resident in all the principal villages) immediately before and on the day of
the Mission Collection.
The natives, who had been worked into a state of considerable excitement
by the local preachers and ministers, principally by means of a series of
“bolotus” (night services), by no means always of a religious character, and
by promises of resident native ministers, of the erection of wooden churches,
etc., which it is the ambition of every township to procure, finding that
money was to be had merely by asking for it, naturally borrowed much larger
sums than they were in a position to repay. It was always agreed that such
repayment was to be made in copra.
16. On handing the money to the agent, Mr. Baker received orders for
the amount advanced on the manager of Messrs. Godeffroy’s firm at Nukualofa.
This arrangement suited both Mr. Baker and the firm of Godeffroy and Son,
for the former obtained a larger amount of money than would otherwise have
506
CHAP.
FIJI


been possible, and the firm of Godefiroy secured a lien over the succeeding
crops, which gave them a very great advantage over rival traders.
17. The system of advancing money to the natives to be returned at the
collections, was not, I believe, originated by Mr. Baker, but by some other
missionaries who had preceded him, who only carried it on, however, on a
very small scale.
But to Mr. Baker alone is due the great development of this system, and
the credit of the ingenious scheme by which ready money was secured to the
Church, and the scandal of the natives being heavily indebted to the Mission
apparently avoided.
18. I have the honour to append a Table compiled solely from printed
Mission Reports, showing the numerical strength of the Church and the
amount of money collected and expended for mission purposes in these islands
for the last five years, and some Returns, compiled from the same source, of
the Mission receipts and expenditure in Fiji during the same period.
19. As an example of the extravagance of the schemes involving large
expenditure undertaken by Mr. Baker, I may call your Lordship’s attention
to the foundation of a “ Ladies’ College,” a notice of which (copied from the
Tongan Times , a publication belonging to Mr. Baker) I have the honour to
enclose.
20. The College, which is by far the largest building in these islands, has
now been erected, but a large sum of money is still required to complete and
furnish it, the erection of the shell of the building alone having absorbed the
money already subscribed.
It really requires some personal knowledge of natives to appreciate the
extreme absurdity of shutting up Tongan girls in a wooden building designed
apparently for their entire seclusion, and educating them in a style which may
be readily guessed at, by the allusion to ornamental needlework and fancy
bazaars. I can only add that I have reason to believe the scheme has not
received the support of the other missionaries, and it is a common laughing-
stock amongst the natives.
21. By the departure of Mr. Watkin for Australia, these islands are left to
the charge of three Wesleyan Ministers : Mr. Baker resides at Nukualofa,
Tonga Tabu, the seat of Government; Mr. Oldmeadow at Lifuka (Haapai),
distant 80 miles ; and Mr. Minns at Yavau, distant 150 miles from the
island of Tonga Tabu.
As communication between the islands is neither regular nor very frequent,
the opinions of his colleagues can have but little influence in guiding the
course of action which Mr. Baker may choose to adopt.—l have, etc.,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
Acting Consul-General Maudslay to the Marquess of Salisbury
Nukualofa, Tonga Tabu, January 24, 1879.—My Lord—ln my despatch
No. 1, January 23, I have endeavoured to place before your Lordship some
account of the Constitution and some of the laws of the Tongan Government,
with a view of showing the influence exercised by the Chairman of the
Wesleyan Mission. In my despatch No. 2, January 23, I have enclosed
papers which show the manner in which funds are raised in Tonga Tabu for
507
XXII
FIJI


the support of the Tonga Mission and assistance to the Wesleyan Mission
in other countries, and the steps which I have taken to bring the matter
under the notice of the District Board, and of the Controlling Committee in
Sydney.
2. I now desire to add some information respecting the commercial transac-
tions of the Chairman of the Mission, and the connection which he has
established with the financial business of the Government; but, before doing
so, I am anxious to state that I do not call in question the honesty of these
transactions, if looked at solely from a commercial point of view, provided
the standard of commercial morality is not placed too high; but I believe I
shall have your Lordship’s concurrence in considering these transactions
anything but creditable on the part of one whose influence is entirely due to
his position as a minister of religion.
3. About the year 1871 I learn that Mr. Baker attempted to start a sugar
plantation in partnership with the Government of the country ; from the
nature of the country such an undertaking was almost certain to have failed ;
and in addition, the natives engaged in the scheme had no knowledge or
experience of the business on which they were about to enter. The whole
project, however, was put an end to on the arrival of two Wesleyan ministers
from Sydney, who, I believe, came to make some inquiry into Mission affairs,
but this was not until the Government had been put to very considerable
expense.
4. In October 1875 Mr. Baker was instrumental in starting the Bank of
Tonga, and it was closed in 1876. The nominal capital was 50,000 dollars, of
which only 15,000 dollars was paid up. The Tongan Government and Mr.
Baker were each to subscribe half of the capital. The first call was for
5000 dollars, and to meet this each party paid 2500 dollars in cash into the
Bank to start the business. Two subsequent calls were made, the amount of
each being the same as the first. The Tongan Government met the second
and third calls by drawing cheques on the Bank against their deposit account.
When the Bank was closed, the paid-up capital is stated to have been refunded
intact, and a dividend of about 10 per cent paid.
5. The profits of the Bank were derived from interest on loans granted on
good security to natives, 10 per cent being the rate of interest charged—loans
to natives for trading purposes, which were repaid from time to time in island
produce : as copra, cotton, coffee, etc. The produce was delivered by the
borrowers to the German firm of Messrs. J. C. Godeffroy and Son, and it was
by them accredited at current rates to the Bank account. The Bank charged
no rate of interest on these loans, but credited the borrowers for produce
delivered by them at a lower rate than that allowed by J. C. Godeffroy and
Son to the Bank, the difference was about 5 dollars per ton and was the profit
derived by the Bank from the transaction. Another source of profit was the
exchange of Chilian money (imported by the German firm) for English, French,
or American at a discount of 5 per cent. Bills of Exchange on Sydney were
granted by the Bank to persons remitting funds, and a charge was made for
them therein from per cent to 5 per cent. The authority to draw on
Sydney was derived by the Bank from the firm of J. C. Godeffroy and Son,
who exchanged with the Bank, at par, their bills on Sydney for cash, with
which they bought produce.
6. All the money of the Tongan Government was deposited in the Bank,
508
CHA-P.
FIJI


and the expenses of Government defrayed by means of Treasury orders payable
at the Bank. No interest was allowed on current accounts, but on fixed
deposits of one year 5 per cent per annum was given, and on fixed deposits of
six months interest was allowed at the rate of 3 per cent per annum. The
Wesleyan Church had a considerable sum deposited bearing interest. The
money deposited at the Bank was principally owned by the Tongan Govern-
ment, the Wesleyan Church, and by the Rev. S. W. Baker. There were a
few other accounts, but their amounts were inconsiderable.
7. The banking business was conducted by three trustees —Mr. Baker,
Teita Alomee, and Filakeba—and by the Secretary, Mr. H. L. Thorley, a man
of considerable experience in Bank management, and who conducted the
operations of the Bank in a manner that made them a financial success. He
for a time gave up his connection with the Bank, and was replaced by the
Secretary of the Government and one of the native clerks. These alterations
did not prove a success ; the Banking business became hopelessly entangled.
Mr. Thorley was requested by the trustees to render his assistance to extricate
them from their difficulties. The books of the Bank were by him closed, and
the banking business wound up. The trustees had been in the habit of
meeting once a week at the Bank, a Minute Book was kept, and Resolutions
formally passed. The business was always arranged beforehand, and Resolu-
tions were submitted to the meeting by the Chairman, Mr. Baker, and
invariably carried unanimously. The two native trustees were men utterly
ignorant of all financial operations, and totally useless in connection with the
Bank for any practical purpose.
8. I have the honour to inclose a copy of the law confirming the Bank
Charter, and making all Government lands and property security for any
overdraft cr* the Government account. Mr. Baker must have been well aware,
from his long experience of Tongans, how very ready natives are to borrow
money, however slight their chances of being able to repay it may be, and I
inclose a statement made to me by a native which gives a fair idea of their
average capacity for financial transactions.
9. During the last three years Mr. Baker has obtained complete control
over the business transactions of the Tongan Government in Sydney, and
considerable influence in the management of the local finances. One of his
first acts, on attaining his position, was to induce the Tongan Government
to transfer their agency in Sydney from the firm of MacDonald, Smith,
and Co. (who the Premier assures me gave them complete satisfaction, and
whose letters show that they conducted the business with carefulness and
honesty) to that of Rabone, Feez, and Co., conducted by Mr. Sahl, the Imperial
German Consul, and who, it is worthy of noting, is Mr. Baker’s own agent
and also agent for the firm of J. C. GodefFroy and Son.
10. The Premier informs me that since the transfer was effected Mr. Baker
has taken charge of and conducted all the correspondence with Sydney, the
whole of which is still in his hands, the Government having been furnished
with no accounts either from their agents or from Mr. Baker himself, although
I presume the former are in his possession.
11. It has, I know, been frequently alleged, and as often denied by Mr.
Baker, that he has for some years been acting as an agent for Messrs.
Godeffroy’s firm (of which M. Weber, the Imperial German Consul, is the
manager), and in furtherance of German interests. 1 should be unwilling to
509
XXII
FIJI


make the statement myself without further information, but it may be as
well to point out the foundation such an allegation might rest upon, which
may be gathered from such information as I am able to lay before your
Lordship, viz., the heavy liens on the copra crop of the natives, obtained
through the advance of money by Mr. Baker to be distributed amongst
natives previous to Mission collection, were with one exception given to the
agents of the firm of J. C. Godeffroy and Son (as shown in my despatch
No. 2), thereby securing to them by far the largest share of the chief article
of export from the country. Secondly, that all the produce, obtained by
money advanced to native traders by the Bank of Tonga, over which Mr.
Baker had complete control, was made over to the same firm. Thirdly, that
it was through Mr. Baker’s advice that the Government agency in Sydney
(their only foreign connection) was transferred to Messrs. Rabone, Feez, and Co.
(managed by M. Sahl, the Imperial German Consul), who are also agents for
Messrs. J. C. Godeffroy and Son. Fourthly, that it was almost entirely owing
to Mr. Baker’s management and influence that a Treaty was concluded grant-
ing considerable advantages to Germany, including a tract of land as a coaling
station in the best harbour in the group. And I will now add that the King
has lately informed me that, although he himself had other views on the subject,
the German Consul and Mr. Baker have induced him to assent to the appoint-
ment of a Secretary, to be nominated by the Emperor of Germany, to conduct
the affairs of the Government.
12. It is in any case clear that Mr. Baker’s influence with the firm of
J. C. Godeffroy and Son is sufficiently strong to induce them, at his request,
to postpone the enforcement of payment of debts of very long standing, as
shown in his letter dated September 2, a copy of which is inclosed in my
despatch No. 2.
13. I trust that in this and my two previous despatches I have given
sufficient grounds to justify the wish I have expressed that he (Mr. Baker)
may be speedily removed from these islands. However improper his conduct
may have been, and however distasteful it may now be to the native Govern-
ment, I can assure your Lordship that his position, as a minister of religion,
is, and would always be, sufficient to prevent any member of the Government
from taking any active steps to secure his removal,
I am continually receiving from them expressions of such disapproval, and
I have no doubt this is done in the hope that Mr. Baker will be removed, on
account of representations which I might make, and in which they imagine
they would not be directly concerned. I feel sure, however, that should his
removal be effected, it would be looked upon as an act of deliverance by the
greater number of both whites and natives on this island.—l have, etc.,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
Mr. Matjdslay to Sir A. Gordon
British Consulate, Nukualofa, January 25, 1879.—My dear Sir—l
received your letter, dated 9th October, on Christmas Eve. My opinion of
Wesleyan missionaries is certainly getting very low, but I had hoped for
better things from Langham. I have not shown your letter to Baker, as you
left it as a matter for my own decision, and on the whole I do not consider it
expedient. I have sent you some despatches addressed to the Secretary of
510
CHAP.
FIJI


State, which give all the information I can collect. It was a much more
difficult matter than I anticipated. Stories and reports one hears without
end, but they are not evidence.
What I fear is that to an outsider or even to a stranger (who knows
nothing of the natives), oo first arrival here, much that Baker has done looks
well enough, and it is not until one knows the nature of the material he has
been working on, the shamefully unfair way he has used the influence his
position as a minister gives him, and the utter unfitness of his schemes
for such a community as this is, that the mischief he has done becomes really
apparent.
I believed for a long time that the Sydney people were right in disbeliev-
ing in any definite agency by Baker for Godeffroy’s firm ; but Mr. Hanslip, my
interpreter, who was, for some time employed by the firm, assures me he saw
the draft of an agreement between Weber and Baker, the exact terms of which
he is not able to remember, but that it was of much the same nature as the
Steinburger agreement, that Baker was to use his influence with the Govern-
ment for the advantage of the firm, especially in the matter of inducing them
to levy a money and not a produce tax, and that he was to receive 10s. per
ton commission on all produce which by his management was sold to the firm
(as for instance on all the produce bought by the native traders with money
loaned by the bank, which was invariably transferred to the firm). Baker
made some alterations in the draft, one of which was to the effect that enough
produce should be received as taxes to load the , a vessel which
belonged to the Government, and was at that time making regular trips to
Sydney. Mr. Hanslip did not see the agreement after it was signed, but was
told by Mr. Troud (the manager) that its terms were accepted. That Mr.
Baker received f he commission on copra brought to the firm through his agency
Mr. Hanslip has no doubt whatever. Of course I cannot make any use of this
information, and even could I do so it would be impossible to obtain any
confirmation of its truth. Apart from disapproving of such an arrangement
(as I am sure he would do), Mr. Troud was very sore on this matter, as he
only received as manager in Tonga half the commission on produce secured
by Mr. Baker, which he was accustomed to receive on produce which passed
through his hands in the usual course of trade.
The knowledge of such an agreement having existed makes me, as a matter
of course, very suspicious in other cases where Baker’s honesty may be called
in question.
Some account of my trip to Haapai is given in my despatches ; we had a
very near shave of shipwreck on the Hafaiva reef in a heavy squall.
I hardly know what to think of Mr. Watkin ; the white people swear by
him, and I think myself he is a very earnest man, but his ideas about the
natives are not what one would expect or wish ; he talks about his love for
them, and at the same time he shows by his conversation that he despises
them. Once, in the course of conversation about the Secretaryship to the
Government, he said casually that no salary, however large, would tempt
him to accept such a position ; in fact, that in no other way but as a missionary
would he think of living in Tonga, or having anything to do with Tongans.
And his volunteered statement that he in any case would never be a consenting
party to the admission of native evidence before the District Board shows the
sort of position which the missionaries arrogate to themselves.
511
XXII
FIJI


They seem to consider that they are in some way distinct and superior to
the rest of the community, and even at Watkin’s farewell sermon to the
whites at Lifuka at which I was present, although I believe he wished to say
all that was kind and encouraging to them, he seemed to be labouring under
some difficulty in bringing himself down to their level, repeatedly saying,
“Let us remember that we are brethren,” in a manner that implied that at
other times they w T ere not, and the address certainly failed to be either
sympathetic or effective. The worst news I have for you is about the
Secretaryship. It was quite evident when I arrived that Mr. Miller was to
go ; he was suffering badly from delirium tremens, and was no use whatever.
I, as you know, suggested Mr. Troud to fill his place, and the King appeared
to approve highly of the idea. I did not speak about the matter to the King
myself, but through Wilkinson and Daniel. When Weber was here, he
regularly jumped the claim, and persuaded the King to accept some one on
trial, selected by the Emperor of Germany. Baker acted as interpreter, and
certainly did not dissent, and, from the King’s account to me, appears to
have thrown his influence on Weber’s side. I heard nothing of this until
just before Christmas, when the King let it out on my making some allusion
to their employing Troud. The King told me that it was his mind to ask
Troud to be Secretary, but that he did not like to refuse Weber and Baker ,
who had explained that it was a mistake for them to have a man who was
too much of a chief , and that a man from Germany would want such a very
small salary.
1 forget if I have told you that Baker, some months ago, offered Troud the
Secretaryship, saying that he could manage to get it for him, and Troud has
very properly replied that he could only consider such an offer if made by the
Government itself (surely all this is an interference in Government matters ?).
The King tells me that he gave Baker no authority to make the offer to
Troud, but may have expressed his wish that Troud would accept such a
position in Baker’s presence.
I told the King how very unpleasant the notion of a German Secretary
was to me, and that I was sure it would not be pleasant news to you. I shall
of course do my best to stop it, but it is difficult to find out how far the King
is pledged in the matter, and I am quite sure that Weber will not let the
grass grow under his feet.
I had a talk with the missionaries (except Baker) on the subject, and they
all three expressed their opinions very strongly on the subject, disapproving
thoroughly of the idea of a German Secretary ; and I asked them before
leaving Nukualofa (it was the time of the district meeting) to speak to the
King on the subject. This they promised to do, but as usual drove it off till
the last minute, then, as the King happened to be out when they called, went
away without saying a word about it.
It is with the greatest difficulty that I get a missionary to answer a letter.
My letter to the meeting about Nmafou was not answered till the missionaries
had all gone to their homes, and very unsatisfactory the answer was. My
letter to Watkin at Haapai asking for a confirmation of my account of our
conversation is at present and I have only his word to say that
it is correct, although he had three days to answer it in, and knew that I was
about to leave Lifuka ; and Baker has apparently given up answering my
letters altogether.
512
CHAP.
FIJI


By-the-bye, my second letter to Baker about the suspension of the native
preachers was written at Mr. Minns’s own request, on my showing him a copy
of the first letter. He told me that Baker had not said a word to him on the
subject, although he had had many opportunities, and that no Church usage
was involved, and hoped that, now that he and Mr. Watkin were in Tonga,
I would again call Mr. Baker’s attention to the matter. Minns disapproves
of Baker, and would gladly be rid of him ; and even his own friend Mr. Watkin
admits that Baker is a failure in his dealings with the natives, and tells me
that he has advised him, as a friend, to leave the islands. My own impression
is that the Conference will try and tide over the scandal for a year, when
Baker can leave on the excuse that his time in Tonga is up. If they do this
he ought to be exposed.
In the matter of the Bank I think you have been somewhat misled; the
interest was paid on the paid-up capital only. The Bank was closed because
Thorley, who was the only one who understood the business, got into a hope-
less state of drunkenness. All the information in my despatch comes from
him. He is quite willing to afford all the information about the affair which
he thinks, according to the usages of Banks elsewhere, the public ought to
know. I believe the Bank accounts and books to be perfectly correct, for
poor Thorley, notwithstanding his drunkenness, appears to be perfectly
honourable in all his dealings. I have not sent any despatch about my
house-building yet, as I think that, having started without any authority, I
had better finish and prepare all the accounts before reporting the matter.
I found that it would cost over £3OO to build a three-roomed wooden cottage,
without offices, fencing, or furniture. A native house will, in the long run,
cost quite as much ; but instead of one of the miserable cottages the Chiefs
here live in, I shall have a really comfortable house and surroundings. The
situation is not quite what I should have chosen, but it was the wish of the
King and of the governing Chiefs that I should live near them, so I made no
objection. I bought the old Roman Catholic Church at Mafaga, and made
arrangements with David Uga for the prison labourers to move and re-build
it at a certain price. The work is being tolerably well done, as the King takes
a good deal of interest in it. All the European carpentering we are doing
ourselves, that is we have put up about 300 yards of good picket fencing, and
have nearly finished building a wooden kitchen and store-room, 20 feet by 10
feet, which is roofed with iron for the sake of the drinking-water. This
sketch gives you some idea of the position. The house lam in now is miser-
able during this wet weather ; mosquitoes swarm, as it is built half over a
swamp, and, as there are no windows, it is necessary to put up the shutters
when it rains, which makes it hot and dark.
Hanslip is a very fair carpenter, and directs our building operations, and
I find the work keeps me in good health, without the necessity of going long
lonely walks along these very dull roads. And I hope to finish the new
Consulate without giving a day’s work to a professional carpenter, and
I shall be very proud of my work by the time you come to pay me a
visit.
I have at last secured a copy of the,laws printed since the last Parliament.
There has been a great deal of delay about getting them into form, and now
I find, after all the discussion and the number of resolutions passed, the laws
are hardly altered at all!
HI 2 L
513
XXII
FIJI


The Tappa Law is relaxed, and Tappa may be made and worn anywhere
but in the large towns.
The smoking law continues a restriction on persons under sixteen, child-
bearing women, and the penalty has been increased to 15 dollars, 3 dollars to
go to the informer. The clothing law certainly says nothing more about
coats and trousers, but insists upon an upper garment, and the clause about
domiciliary visits is retained. Almost the only clear gain is a law making
5 dollars the highest amount recoverable as a debt from a native before
the courts. This is almost a complete contradiction of the account
given me when the Parliament broke up. I am inclined to think that
the Parliament made very considerable changes, but that Baker has got
at the King since, through Gu. The Parliament would have nothing
to do with Gu, and snubbed him not a little, and the King, too, was
angry with him, but Baker stuck to him all through ; he almost lived at
Baker’s house, and when the session was over he remained for some weeks
in Nukualofa.
I could find out more about it from Tugi, but that gentleman has been
sulking up at the Mua for the last two months, I much expect because of the
Parliamentary resolutions being so completely upset. I do wish Tugi had a
little more pluck ; the King places great reliance on him, and he has a far
stronger personal following, and much greater command over the people, than
any other Chief I know of ; he is intelligent and very thoughtful, and manages
his own people well. The jealousy between him and David Uga is intense.
If Tugi had made a stand and backed the Parliamentary resolutions, I have
no doubt more would have been done, but he has no pluck at all, only growls
and grumbles and bolts off to sulk amongst his own people ; and as Baker and
Uga have both such a down on him, any proposals coming through him would
be looked on with disfavour. The King is worth all the other Chiefs put
together ; I only wish he was ten years younger. David Uga I managed to
get on very well wdth, although, at the same time, I believe that the popular
opinion of him is correct, that he is utterly untrustworthy ; no one, either
of natives or whites, has any respect for him. If the King were to die it is
hard to say what would happen ; Uga might step into his place, and things
might go smoothly for a time, but I much doubt it. I think Uga as King
would bring Tugi up to boiling-point. The other powerful Chief in Tongatabu,
Aba of Hihifo (whom I have never seen), would be against Uga. In fact, if
it came to a row, I don’t think he would have any followers out of Haapai,
and not very many there; Gu’s only followers would be a few stray whites.
If Maafu were to land in Tonga, he would have the whole country with him.
Of course the Church has to be taken into consideration, and what line it
would take is beyond ray knowledge. Uga and Baker are not friends, but
Uga would come round directly if he saw it were to his personal advantage.
I feel quite certain that the bait held out to Gu has been that the Germans
would back up his claim to the kingdom (or his father’s, which comes to much
the same), and I have strong suspicion that he is getting largely into Weber’s
debt. Gu might turn out a very good fellow in another ten years’ time, but
were he to come into power now, he would play the mischief with the country.
Uga does not like a native Chief, he never has any matabules or old men with
him. I have never known him to give a public Faikava, or to entertain in
any way, and Gu, l am told, lives quite vakapupalagi. The tranquillity of
514
CHAP.
FIJI


Togatabu on the King’s death will entirely depend upon Tugi. If he opposes
Uga there will be a general row.
My opinion about Baker is that he will do his very best to hold his own
here in spite of you or the Conference. His preparation for leaving the
Islands next year I believe to be only a ruse. If he finds he must go, he will
try and get off under flying colours, saying that he has asked for leave of
absence or that his term of office is up, but his hope is that by transferring all
the accounts to a German Secretary he may escape any financial inquiry, and
that with the German influence in his favour, he may be able to hold on.
If the Conference do not remove him at this approaching meeting, I hope
that you will be able to do so when you arrive in Sydney on your way
to Fiji. Surely the collection trip alone is enough to upset him.
As you may imagine, I was a good deal disturbed at a telegram from
Berlin in the Auckland papers, announcing the intention of Germany to
annex Samoa, and am delighted to see a contradiction of it in the papers
which have just arrived from Auckland by the Vavau. I am surprised to
hear (Auckland papers) that Sir W. Cairns is to have New Zealand ; I thought
he had had enough of Colonial Government. I am sure he will find New
Zealand, socially as well as politically, much more difficult for him than either
Queensland or South Australia, and he did not appear to be particularly
happy in either. I enclose a letter I have just received from Mr. Minns ; it
will give you some idea of what he thinks about the Secretaryship, or rather
Baker’s scheming in connection with it, as that is the subject on which he
wished to see the King. Soon after I first heard about the German Secretary
from the King I spoke to Uga about it, and rather upbraided him for not
letting me know about it before, as he always professes to be so confidential,
fie seemed surprised and said he knew nothing about it. I was rather in-
credulous at the time, but he has since assured me that such was the case, that
on hearing the news from me he went to Tubou and learnt from him that it
was at Baker’s special request that the matter had not been mentioned to him.
Mr. Watkin arrived yesterday from Yavau in the Meteor, and leaves
to-morrow for Sydney. He has voluntarily made two appointments with me,
which, as usual, he has failed to keep. The ways of missionaries are inscrut-
able ; I shall be glad to get free from them and retire to the wilds of New
Guinea on your return. lam delighted to see that the gold-hunting expedi-
tions to New Guinea are turning out failures ; and I hope you will be able to
get a good hold of the place before the white migration sets in, as I suppose,
gold or no gold, it eventually will.
A stray paper I have just received from Samoa looks more war-like ; the
natives are raising the King question again, the only political matter in which
I believe they take any real interest. I hear part of Atua has gone for
Malietoa, and in that case he is sure to win. Ido so hope you will be able
to do something in the way of ships for the Deputy-Commissioners. No boat
has arrived from Fiji since September 24th. I have been shut up here, often
with nothing to do ; if I had only had a 20-ton cutter, I might have visited
all the islands in my district, though a larger boat would be safer for long
passages in these months ; and what makes the isolation worse is seeing so
much going on which one would like to have a hand in. I believe, with a
little decent management, that this country could pay its way well; but last
year only about a third of the tax was collected, and only one quarter’s salary
515
XXII
FIJI


paid to the Governor’s offices, at least to those not holding the highest posi-
tions. All the Government accounts with Sydney are and have been in
Baker’s hands, and he never renders any account of his doings. Uga is
frightened to ask for them, and the King appears indifferent.
I had some time ago told the King that as I was well aware how many
wild reports were in circulation, I should always be glad to give him the fullest
information about any of my doings.
Some days afterwards, when we had been drinking kava together, I
noticed he sent all his people away when the Faikava was over, and when we
were alone he asked me if I would tell him what I had written about Sydney,
and what I was doing about Mission matters. I assented, and we met by
appointment again that afternoon. In the meantime I wrote out some notes
for my interpreter, and when we met I gave the King a consecutive account
of all I had done in the matter, including the account of your interview with
the Wesleyan ministers in Sydney. No one knows better than the King the
dodges Baker has been up to to prevent my gaining any influence. He listened
most attentively to the account I gave him, and thanked me very much for
putting the matter clearly before him. Before leaving, he turned to my
interpreter and said that he did not wish to pay me compliments, but that he
could not sufficiently admire the patience with which I had done my work
under the treatment I had received, and that he felt sure that had the affair
been in other hands it would have speedily ended in a very unpleasant quarrel
(I believe the expression was stronger and better put in Tongan, but much to
that effect).
The resolutions passed by Parliament about engaging a doctor have come
to nothing. I have spoken to the King on the subject, but nothing definite
can be got out of him. He, however, admitted the truth of what Baker
always denies, that it was owing to Baker’s advice that the attempt to engage
a doctor two years ago was frustrated.
I think I told you in a previous letter that the native preachers had been
preaching against me politically, and that when David Kata, one of the oldest
native ministers, had told one of them to mind his own business and not
interfere in politics, Baker has publicly reproved the old man, which offended
him and his family and friends not a little. Baker has moved Kata to Yavau,
where he will be out of the way : in fact, at the last meeting he managed to
shift all those who were not very docile out of the way. I have been so long
now waiting for an opportunity to send my despatches that I fear you may
have left England. I have therefore sent them all to the Secretary of State,
and send you copies to Sydney to meet you there.
The Meteor is just off, so I cannot write any more. I had intended writing
to Lady Gordon, but must delay until a vessel sails by New Zealand. Please
give my love to the children, and believe me, very sincerely yours,
ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, February 4, 1879.— My dear Sir—l am so unwell—in fact I have
got up from bed to write—that you must excuse a long letter from me this
time. For some days I have been suffering from liver, and something like
determination of blood to the head. My eyes are especially painful.
516
CHAP.
FIJI


Your note of the 4th December arrived per Gunga on Sunday night
(the Ist), together with the very interesting Aberdeen papers, I should
have liked to have been present, but next to that the graphic account of
the paper is the best thing. I do not think the Fiji Times will print
anything but its own adverse comments on what you said. You may
depend upon it that if exception can be taken, it will be—and alter tbe
manner of the Times. Another paper would be a good thing, but it would
get no support unless it abused the Government and supported the planters’
view of everything.
As time rolls on, and further experience is gained, the opinion grows
upon me which I have so often expressed,—the Government must take a
stand, and take it early, upon the question of native government. If no
stand is taken, but, on the contrary, efforts are made to fall in with the
planters’ views, then the whole native policy must go by the board.
The just, sensible, and humane policy announced here—the only one
that can possibly save the natives—will not stand the solvents to which it
is now exposed,
I do hope you will come out empowered to say to settlers : “ Gentlemen,
government is my business, planting and the pursuit of other industries is
yours. Mind your own business, and don’t attempt to interfere with mine.
As to interference, directly or indirectly, in native affairs, understand that
it is an offence, which I will visit with fine or imprisonment, or with both.”
This position can be taken up now. Later it will be difficult, if not im-
possible. Depend upon it, that settlers as a body are determined to break
up the native policy if they can. Even if they do not succeed, they will
do incalculable harm. We are ruling the natives by and through the
native:;, but the power we exercise in doing so is a moral power only. Nor
is anything.'stronger wanted, if people will let the natives alone. When
natives are continually told that they are being outraged and enslaved,
and the persons saying so walk about and speak with open contempt and
anger of the Government, they look at it and reason after their own manner.
They know nothing of our ideas of freedom of speech. It is impossible for
them to understand that Government cares little or nothing for what men
say , so long as they don’t do anything. They think that the mischief-
makers are speaking the truth, and that Government cannot do anything
with them. Suppose men like Ratu Epeli or Tui Cakau kicked over the
traces, what a very nice situation we should be in. The only safe way of
ruling these people by moral force is to show them that white people are
ruled, and that the Government is not a thing “beca” (to be despised) or
il bolea" (challenged). I know all that may be said in opposition to what
these views of mine really mean ; but I know, on the other hand, that the
time has arrived when the choice must be made whether we shall have a
very small row with the whites now, or a very big one with the natives
hereafter. So long as Langham is here w r e shall have trouble with him
also. I regret to say that after a cessation of hostility, that I hoped was
lasting, he has broken out as bad as, or worse than ever. Mr. Des Yceux
met him a day or two ago, and there was very sharp sparring between
them. Mr. Des Yceux, I hear (I was not present), got very warm, and
talked to Langham in most severe and firm terms. Langham was cool and
bitter, and left with the evident intention of sharpening the dug-up
517
XXII
FIJI


hatchet. If you could only get Mr. Nettleton, now in England, and of the
same seniority as Langham, appointed here, the Mission and the Govern-
ment would work together admirably. There is also an idea that the Chief-
Justice is opposed to the Government, and all the angry and disappointed
fly to him. He, I think, likes it. Even a man like Mr. Hennings, speaking
to Maafu not long since about his wrong-doing to tenants, said, “Remember,
Maafu, if Captain Swayne prosecutes you, it would not be a Matanitu 1
business. You will have to deal with Mr. Gorrie.” “ Yeitalia,” said Maafu.
But it is strange that in the minds of men like Hennings there should be
the idea that the Chief-Justice and Matanitu are hardly related.
These things (I mean native questions) will naturally give you much
thought and anxiety. I hope you may be empowered so to act as the state
of things may appear to you to demand. Timothy has had to go. Mr.
Des Yoeux had him up finally the day before yesterday, removed him from
the Rokoship, and ordered him to live at Namara (near Yiwa) for two years,
unless otherwise instructed. In the meantime Mr. Des Yoeux made a most
excellent address, which Tim felt for an hour perhaps. He is really a very
bad fellow, and has been ruined by the whites, Parr and others.
The result of Mitchell’s re-investigation I knew would vex you. No
decisions have been arrived at in any of the cases, nor will be till you
return. I object that the Magistrate or the Commissioner who first heard
these cases was not present to assist Mitchell. I cannot find that you
ordered the cases to be heard alone. I shall not forget to oppose any titles
to land where native towns may be situated ; but, as I have said before, Mr.
Des Yoeux has great disinclination to go into land matters, so that I do
not anticipate much, if anything, will be done. As for Eyre and Mitchell,
I don’t think for a moment that either of them would become the partisans
of the oppressed white settlers, but they are great friends with many of them.
That which lat least avoid, they have become. Their little dinner and
“poker” parties are usually attended by Joske, Parr, W. Hunter, and that
sort. These people by their incessant talk might have produced an effect
really unknown to Mitchell, but nothing more. Of the conscientiousness
and honesty of his intentions there cannot be a shadow of doubt.
I am surprised to find M‘Gregor praising old Mr. Winter—perhaps they
have had a deal; but the fact is, (and it is the only thing Ido not very
well like), both he and one or two others yearn a little for popularity.
Probably they do not yet know the many-headed beast can turn round and
rend its favourites. There is little chance of Winter getting “Gavo,”
though I wish it was settled, lest old native witnesses die out.
I hope the Ra business is laid at rest. In my last I mentioned that the
Lieutenant-Governor and the Chief-Justice had had it out, and all was
quiet. What we shall do about a Loan Ido not know ;it is very embarrass-
ing. You will, I trust, be satisfied with the Estimates ; but if we don’t
raise the wind, we shall certainly have to pay out of ordinary revenue what
should come out of Loan. lam too unwell to write on a subject requiring
thought, but I may say there is no chance of raising money in the Colonies
just now. Everything there in the money line is very tight. Bankers are
offering 7£, and are calling in overdrafts without remorse. At the same
1 Government.
518
CHAP.
FIJI


time, we hear of more heavy failures at home. We stand financially much
better, however, than we had any reasonable right to expect; and as men
are settling down quickly in the country, and things are prospering, we
shall get through our troubles, I have no doubt, if we keep internal quiet.
To-morrow I am to meet the representatives of the Sydney Sugar Company,
with which I first communicated five years ago. If we can get them to
“ go in,” it will be a splendid thing, and my mind will be at ease in regard
to Rewa.
I enclose you an extract from Fiji Times, re suicide of a native. In
my reply to the Chief-Justice in Council, I said Fijians frequently committed
suicide on account of jealousy in regard to women, etc., but my answer was
set down as “evasive.” A day or two afterwards the man at Caves
destroyed himself; and the Argus having stated that the act had been
committed in consequence of hearing that during his tenure of service with
Cave his wife had committed adultery, the Times brought out a cock-and-
bull story of his having got sulky because he was sent for his master s hat
and coat. I send it to show what the planters’ organ is capable of doing.
B shows again how women are left to take care of themselves when
their husbands are induced to hire for service in remote districts.
C is an interesting and amusing letter from Parr’s Fijian labourers to
Friend the magistrate. The “va koterae ” 1 is enough to fix the nationality
of the first European settlers in Fiji, if the Max Mullers of 3879 get hold
of it.
Subsequently the labourers sent up the stick with which they are
stirred, addressed “ Kivua na Qase mai Nasova,” 2 which the bearer said
meant me. Flattering ! but verging on truth. I have it in my office, and
the clerks have humorously dubbed it the “Great Amalgam,” the name
of the plantation whence it came. Seed is going on there in a day or two.
I hope to send another letter before you leave England, and in the meantime
must wind up, as my head is aching horribly.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasova, February 5, 1879.—My dear Sir—You will have been surprised
at what I said last mail about my having tried to do what you want, but
after all my pains I found I had left my diary notes in my blotting-paper !
However, you will get them now, so that it will be all right. I hope you
will have time to read them, but I doubt it. I also send the Chief-Justice s
correspondence, which I sat up all night writing out to catch last mail, and
Mr. Des Yceux left it on his table (no uncommon occurrence) underneath a
miscellaneous pile of papers of all sorts !
An infern—l letter of Parr’s has just caused me much trouble, for Mr.
Des Yceux, at the last moment, has brought ten or twelve sheets of foolscap
covered with pencilled hieroglyphics, and we have had to detain the mail
for it. I was at it six hours to-day, and have managed to make a draft copy
of it. About four hours’ steady writing will finish it to-morrow morning.
The mail waits only for it.
We have had heavy rain, but it is fine again now, and looks “blowy.”
No news.
1 G—d d—n fashion, 2 To the Old Man at Nasova,
519
XXII
FIJI


I think we shall have to send the circular note to the missionaries. I
shall send it as if it had come by this mail. Langham has taken up the
side of the oi ttoWoL as opposed to the dpLaroi (I wonder if that is correct).
I got a charming letter from two great friends of mine of Cambridge
days. They are brothers. One was far away up the Nile country, and the
other started from home to join him. He got on his trail and communicated
with him, and having appointed a rendezvous, they both set out for it,
missed each other, and spent two whole months trying to find one another.
At last one day they were both out on the banks of the river stalking a
“hippo ” from opposite banks, “all unbeknownst to one another,” and both
fired at the beast. Tableau !! ! M. Ernest Grizet ought to illustrate the
story.
We have a new steamer on the Fiji line, the Gunga , 1000 tons larger
than the Wentworth.
All well in Colo and here. A.N.C. very good. Many thanks for the
Aberdeen paper (they sent it also to me from home). I was delighted at the
whole thing. Please remember me very kindly to Mr. Waterfield, if you
see him again. Chubby very well up in the hills. Garden looking rather
wild for want of some one like Abbey. I have planted lots of cuttings in
the bit between the sea and the road, inside the fences. I have sent to
Sydney for a lot of things to plant in Colo.
Mr. Thurston tells me that his consignment of cacao plants was in
splendid order when he got them by this mail.
From Dr. M‘Gregor
Fiji, February 4, 1879. —My dear Sir— l have to thank you for your
note of 4th December, from which I was happy to learn that you were all
well. I am, of course, greatly pleased with your reception in Aberdeen,
and I think I am not far wrong if I call it an unprecedented success in
things of that nature. lam very glad you have carried your point in
regard to the Bank, in spite of Sir Penrose Julyan. lam not despondent as
to the raising of the loan. lam not by any means sure that it might not
be raised in Australia at five per cent, under good management, in the course
of a few months. The most favourable time for trying it in Sydney or Mel-
bourne would be when you are there on your return here. It would certainly
he well for you to have full power to try such an expedient should circum-
stances then appear favourable for having recourse to it. My Comparative
Statement of Account is ready, and might have been published and trans-
mitted by this mail, but Mr. Des Vceux is not sure that he will publish it
at all. My own opinion is that he cannot be so injudicious as to suppress it,
but I imagine that, under the impression that all the world will greedily
rush after his Message, regardless of figures, accounts, or statistics, he
wishes to sound his solo and to an undivided audience. I am inclined to
think it a matter open to question whether even a Governor’s Message goes so
far to demonstrate the progress of a country to practical and thinking men,
as brief statements of advancing revenue, and summarised tables showing
marked increase in trade. Probably once his Message has gone forth to the
world he may allow the Comparative Statement of Account to be published.
As the estimated revenue was, roundly speaking, realised, and that without
520
CHAP.
FIJI


the sale of land, a circumstance that receives only a dark-cornered reference
in the Governor’s Message, I am inclined to think it a great mistake to
delay the publication of the accounts. My wish was that you should have
in your hands before you left England published financial and trade returns
for the year 1878, and both myself and my subordinates were putting forth
special exertions for that end. Meantime I must wait and see what a
change of the wind may produce.
When I last wrote, I was in great apprehension of a terrific row between
Des Yoeux and the Chief-Justice. Des Vceux wrote an official letter to the
Chief-Justice bristling with superlatives. My opinion of the result was, I
am happy to say, dreadfully wrong. It must have caused a fearful mental
struggle to the Chief-Justice to take it in the way he did, but his sincere
appreciation of your work generally here, and his genuine admiration of the
motives that guide the special points of your policy, enabled him to receive
quietly what very few men of even a placid temper could have borne with
equanimity. I know human nature too well to imagine that such things
are completely buried in oblivion ; but at all events they are now the best of
friends, and from the action of the Chief-Justice in the late crisis, I have
now no fear whatever that peace will be maintained until your arrival. In
this affair Gorrie has shown himself more devoted to yourself and to your
work than any man I have ever known serving under you.
You express your doubts as to the orthodoxy of Mitchell and Eyre. I
have no doubt there is a certain amount of dissatisfaction in that quarter.
The truth is that Mitchell is seldom indeed consulted in matters belonging
to his own special work, and your experience will show the result, all but
inevitable, of such a state of matters. Mitchell is so thoroughly honest and
straightforward that it were doing him a great injustice to doubt him. Of
course in dealing with land claims there are two great considerations to be
dealt with. Firstly, the great principle of honestly and honourably giving
to every claimant that to which he can establish any reasonable title. So
far as that requisite is concerned, Mitchell is second to no man in either the
Executive Council or on the Lands Commission. But there is undeniably a
second principle to be kept constantly in view in settling these claims, the
question of expediency (I do not like to call it policy), as to the application
or extension of which Mitchell is probably not quite at rest in his own mind.
The two notions are not, however, incompatible, as I should show, were I
writing to any one that did not understand the subject better than myself.
I believe that were Mitchell consulted a little more—a consideration to which
his experience, position, and character entitle him—his mind as to the
question of expediency would undergo a change, although I would wish
you to remark that I sincerely believe the change would be purely an
unconscious one. Eyre’s ideas are of less importance, but you may remem-
ber that I at one time dissuaded you from making him a Lands Commissioner.
I need scarcely point out to you, who (I say it in all sincerity) have seldom
indeed made a mistake in the estimate of the character of a man, that men
like to be consulted, even if their opinions are not adopted.
After this homily, let me say a word about the Mission warfare, in
w’hich we have undergone a crisis. Most happily your Aberdeen utterances
have come to hand most opportunely, and by their aid, supported by the
notice by Sheriff Thomson of that part of your address, I have been able,
521
XXII
FIJI


through Fison, to throw a little oil on the waters. I told you formerly my
idea of how the Mission should be dealt with, and, acting on it, I showed
Fison the Aberdeen papers, while I pointed out to him that you, who knew
more about their work, past and present, in Fiji than any other person, had
always and still continued to speak of them as earnest workers and God-
fearing men, and that you never lost an opportunity of saying something in
their favour. Fison, who probably has more influence than Langham,
admitted that all I said was perfectly true, and he was exceedingly pleased
with the remarks in reference to them at Aberdeen. Mr. Des Yoeux and
Langham had a frightful row on Saturday. The former, inter alia, said to
Langham, “Oh, should we raise a question as to the presence of a church
here, I can soon see what can be done.” Langham replied, “If you mean
that as a threat, and if the Government wishes to put in peril our existence
as a body of preachers here, we must use means for our own preservation.”
This was told me by Fison. I have urged on him with all the power I
could to exert his influence to prevent a recurrence of such a scene, and to
leave any question that can stand over until your arrival. He admitted
freely your consistent support of them as missionaries, but complained
bitterly of the strong language used towards them by Des Yoeux. He
(Fison) assured me that the Mission does not and will not oppose any
Government measure, and he hopes that matters will not assume a more
serious complexion until your arrival. I am very glad I was fortunate
enough to meet Fison, and that I happened to have the Aberdeen papers.
If we can only keep matters tolerably quiet, and from the knowledge of the
natives, I am quite certain you can manage them, and manage them in such
a way as to drop them gradually without their noticing it. But strong,
threatening, or rash statements, though cleverly put, will not succeed against
them. There was a meeting last night of the Chamber of Agriculture —or
whatever its name is—to raise some commotion because Esikeli had written
a letter to a Buli stating that no labourer should leave the province to work
for the planters. I upset that little affair through Chalmers of Koro, by
showing him, what he readily saw was a good argument, that it was absurd
that the Chamber should meet to discuss a supposed copy of a Boko’s letter,
and suggested that the person aggrieved —for there was only one such—
should in the usual way apply first to the Governor if he had any just cause
for complaint. Chalmers upset the affair, and no resolution w r as framed on
it; but certain parts of the Governor’s Message bearing on the question of
labour were brought forward, and now the idea is to petition the Queen on
the subject. For this, of course, I was quite unprepared, and Ido not
know whether, if it is persisted in, anything can be done to avert it.
I fear that this letter must make you think I am bilious, or losing faith
in our present pilot. There can be no doubt as to his sincerity and motives,
but he will put on too much steam every now and then ; perhaps there may
be some mathematical ratio between the ingesta and the generation of
energy. If I thought so I would recommend spoon diet. Every official
all round seems to be on splendid terms with every other official. Write
in reassuring tones to Wilkinson. He is very useful and, I believe, sincere in
his work. He too is too seldom consulted, and does not quite like to receive
no credit for the details of the native work. His last grievance is that
Thurston appropriated his Native Academy Scheme, and Des Yoeux first
522
CHAP.
FIJI


mentioned it to poor Wilkinson as “that splendid idea of Thurston.”
Wilkinson believes in you and in your work. I hope you will not forget
him, and will show him that he has your confidence. If there is any
unpleasant or disagreeable intimation to make to a chief, it is done through
Wilkinson ; if there is anything agreeable or pleasant in its nature to com-
municate, it is done through the Colonial Secretary.
From Mr. Carew
Nakoroyatu, Colo, February 28, 1879. —My dear Sir —I fear I am
almost too late to catch the mail, my only chance being to get this and
other letters to Mr. Langham by to-morrow night (Saturday) and rely upon
his going over on Monday to catch the steamer leaving on Tuesday.
Nothing has come of the little breeze I wrote of in my last, between me
and Mr. Fison, in reference to the “ vuli ” I had to punish.
Mr. Fison has written a very nice letter to me, and says the man will be
further punished. He has, I know, taken down the river a miserably lean
pig, in compensation, I suppose, for his fine paid by Mr. Fison.
Ratu Beni has returned, and is living now again with me, and appears
very happy. I know he is comfortable. I make him copy my Fijian letters
into the book for me, which will give him a good knowledge of the work in
Colo with the tribes.
I have not visited Ovalau since the beginning of November, and have
no intention of going over at least until April, but possibly not before
your Excellency’s arrival.
The weather looks very threatening now.
I am just sending in my report for February, and strongly recommend
the appointment of a stipendiary magistrate (native) for the River.
We have lately been visited by Usaia, a very active, smart fellow, and
who understands his duties well. This is the first native magistrate we
have had for over six months, and no marriage licences were issued during
that period and no District Court held, which gives the missionaries such a
terrible pull.
The Estimates have lately come out, and in his address to the Legislative
Council his Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor has, I should think, pretty
nearly annihilated the hopes of our Colonial democrats in reference to freeing
the “ 100,000 slaves of Fiji.”
A number of Nalawa men, I learn, have just gone home, after five or six
months going from one plantation to another at Naitasiri, for a month at
each place, without going home in the meantime, and taking their wives
with them. The Government has thus so far been defrauded of taxes, and
the chiefs of the men’s work in their districts. I have sent to the native
stipendiary magistrate of Ra to have them up, and make them pay, or in
the probability of their having spent all the money, to punish them by hard
labour, I have told him in a long letter on the subject, which the Roko Tui
Ra will be sure to see, that now we have only one more step for the men to
take, that is, to build their houses on white man’s land, plant their food
thereon, and snap their fingers at the chiefs. I think this will stir
them up.
The Court business on the river is increasing rapidly, owing to the gangs
523
XXII
FIJI


of monthly labourers working there, and a growing fondness for litigation
for petty debts, especially by boys.
Last Court day I found a man had been kept in gaol by the white sub-
inspector for twenty-five days awaiting trial, on a charge of stealing a shirt
from one of the blackguard Ellises, opposite Navuso. No appearance of
complainant, and I believe the whole affair was trumped up. Also another
man, on a charge of stealing one cocoa-nut at the sugar-mill, was detained
twenty days awaiting trial. I have reported very strongly indeed in these
cases.
I have read your Excellency’s speeches at Aberdeen with pleasure for
the most part. I certainly did not relish the portion relating to the
Aberdeen youths, who may come out here to supersede us in our appointments,
I also perceive by the Estimates that the Secretary of State has it in
contemplation to appoint as magistrates medical men.
Now you will pardon me, I feel sure, my dear sir, when I state my
belief that this is totally unfair to those who have borne the brunt of the
battle, that men possessing one good profession already should supersede
others who have, it may be said, no other way of gaining a subsistence than
by the use of their very very hard-earned knowledge and experience in these
colonies. It appears to me as though no one should make shoes but a
carpenter, or no one make ships but a butcher. The best and most popular
districts, and those inhabited and settled on, will be given to the medical
men, who will get the large pay ; while the poor out-of-the-way places of
low value will be handed over to the pioneers until they become sufficiently
valuable for it to become advisable to supersede them with medical
magistrates. There will be no difficulty in getting 1000 at least. I myself
have in the colony of New Zealand come across many Scotch doctors, young
men who have come out in emigrant vessels, and many dozens of these
were from Aberdeen. With my very best respects, believe me, etc.
From Mr. Wilkinson
f
Rewa, February 11, 1879.—Dear Sir—l am thankful to be able to report
myself so far on my way, though the weather is very bad. Your Excellency
will be pleased to hear that my visit to the Vunivalu was all that could
be desired.
As far as a father can be said to approve of the punishment of his son,
the Vunivalu is entirely with your Excellency’s decision. He said, “Tell
the Governor I have added to his sentence by ordering he shall plant his
own food.” But what had given him annoyance, or rather perhaps surprise,
was that nothing should have been told him when he was in Levuka after
his return from the Bose ; also, that none of the family should have been
acquainted with the charges, or been present when he was tried and
sentenced, so as to have heard both. Then a rumour had got to him, or
rather to Bau, that it was the reports and ill-feeling towards Timoci of the
Lomaiviti Lomaiviti Bulis and chiefs alone that had influenced your
Excellency in your decision. Of course, when I explained that it was on
facts alone you had acted, he was appeased.
My candid opinion is that as far as Timoci is concerned, very little is
524
CHAP.
FIJI


thought of it. The real source of anxiety with them is their family and
all its interests generally, and especially in connection with Lomaiviti,
which is, of course, but right and natural, especially in this age of un-
certainty, as they call it.
The Roko Tui’s conduct throughout has been all that could be desired.
He had succeeded in persuading the Vunivalu not to visit Levuka now,
and promised to go himself. This I found when I got there. The affair
with the Rev. Mr. Langham has assumed the shape of long letters from
him to the Roko. I was sorry I could not see him there as he had left,
but I have had a long chat with him here, and I hope some good may
come of it. I find they will ask for a reply to their memorial, and if it is
not satisfactory, they will ask it to be sent, with additions, to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies. I think, if your Excellency will excuse me, there
are two things ought to be noticed in the reply. One, most of the causes
and cases of complaint are of the past now, and what arose solely and purely
from the institution of the Regulation ; the other, the recommendations of
the Roko Tui’s Council, which met most of their objections, and have not yet
been considered. These, he says, they won’t shout for, as they don’t believe
it is the province of the Government at all to interfere, and nothing good
can come out of Nazareth. The Roko here I find away at Bega. All things
seem to be going on right enough. The Roko Tui Kadavu is all right, and
as content as his circumstances will admit. I shall leave at daylight, and
if possible communicate from Namosi. —I am, etc.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Rough Diary Notes from 6th February 1879
6th. —Daylight. All hands busy writing for the mail, which we have
detained till 12 o’clock. J. Cocks came in to help me, and was of great
assistance reading out the Parr despatch to me, which enabled me to get
through it in 3 hours instead of sor 6. The first copy I made from Mr.
Des Yceux’s draft took nearly a whole day, but then a great deal had to be
“ deciphered." Mr. Des Yoeux wrote out the fair (?) copies of some of his
despatches himself, and between the lot of us I got the bag out of my office
at 1V55. The rest of the day I spent in idleness, which was excusable.
Ith. —Nothing of interest. A Mr. James Murray from the Sydney Sugar-
Refining Company came to call on Mr. Des Vceux, with a view to seeing
about the establishment of a contract factory. He dined with us and
seemed pretty decent. There is a party at the Hobdays’ to-night, to which
I have accepted an invitation, but in consequence of being rather tired and
the weather looking very like rain, I shall not go,
Bth. —Seed started at 6 a.m. for Rewa, and expects to be away about
ten days. He has gone to see into some cases about Parr’s or Reece’s
labour. He did not get back from the party (Hobdays’) till half-past two.
Weather very wet and blowing hard from the north.
9th [Sunday). —Wet. Just got a fine hour and rode Whopper to Toko.
Whopper is getting fatter than ever he was, and is as strong as a bull.
M‘Gregor has not decided about operating yet. The road is made very
525
XXII
FIJI


nearly to Toko. In consequence of the heavy wet it was very muddy. The
gaol looks very swampy in this wet weather. The men (A.N.C.) stationed
there complain much of the mosquitoes, so I shall get them a net made.
As they are only five, it will not be a very difficult matter.
10 th. —Still wet and blowing. Heffernan started early this morning for
Vatukarasa in the Zephyr. Mr. Des Yoeux seedy, and will not do any
business. Stupid row about nothing, connected with my estimates. I had
not said anything about two of our men who draw the extra shilling,
promised to those who took active part in the Colo row, during the remainder
of their time in the force. I had (as we always have done before) put them
down amongst the others, but this time M‘Gregor refused to pay them the
extra shilling without a special order, and so on going to Mr. Des Yoeux
the whole of his wrath fell on my head for not having specially reported
the matter to him. This I heard from M‘Gregor. Mr. Des Yoeux has not
said anything to me, and has authorised this fearful expenditure of 2s. per
month.
Went for a ride with Mr. G. Smith, who informs me that I am about to
be one of the best men at an approaching wedding. Of course I thought he
meant J. Cocks’, but what was my astonishment when he told me that
it was Mr. Kirsten, the German, a partner of Hedemann’s, who is going to
be married to a Miss Kate Robertson, whoever she may be. I don’t know,
and as I have only a very slight acquaintance with him, I am at a loss to
know how or why I should have been made the subject of such a report.
Mr. Drury wants to buy Whopper, but will only offer a price which he may
keep to himself. He is quite in love with the horse, principally because he
is so quiet. (Mr. Drury’s horse died the other day just as his buggy was put
to rights.) I think I shall “hook” him for a larger sum by and by, if I
want to sell Whopper,
Wth. —Very wet, and blowing a gale of wind from the north. Mitchell
and Lake came to see Mr. Des Yoeux re the mistake which has been dis-
covered in the survey of Taviuni. Mitchell told me that he would have to
issue caveats against any future dealings with the grants, and have them
all recalled and the surveys rectified, by which some people will lose and
others gain in area. He attributes it to too great haste having been made
at the early stages of the work.
12 th. —No change in the weather. Had a great clearance of papers
which have been accumulating on Mr. Des Yceux’s table. Settled all but a
very few. Some had been lying there I don’t like to say how long, and
now he swears that he never saw them before. I don’t contradict him.
13 th. —No change in the weather. If anything, looking worse. Rain
coming through the drawing-room thatch in several places. N. B .—l find
one great advantage in the shingled roofs : instead of everything becoming
damp and mildewed, as they used when our rooms were thatched, they are
quite dry. All my things have been feeling dry and comfortable, while
Mrs. Des Yoeux tells me that all her and Mr. Des Yoeux’s things in their
part of the house feel like half-dry sponges and are covered with mildew.
A large full-rigged ship, La Rochelle , came in from Sydney. She is a
German trader (of course). I wish Jack had been here to see her. She is
526
CHAP.
FIJI


the biggest ship they have had here. She was within an ace of being lost
on the north side of the passage. She shortened sail too far outside (being
froggies they haven’t the pluck to bring a ship in under full sail as English
sailors do) and just missed the passage. She swung round, and the boat
that was towing astern of her was in the break of the reef. If she had
touched she would have sunk almost directly in the deep water at the
edge of the reef. In the afternoon she came in, and anchored where the
Barracouta used to be. She forms a great addition to the harbour.
\§th. —Meeting of the Exhibition Committee. The Fiji Agricultural
Society and the Chamber of Commerce had taken the matter in hand, and
were going to represent Fiji at the Sydney Exhibition on their own hook.
They sent a letter to Mr. Des Yceux asking for subscriptions to the fund,
when he suddenly made up his mind that the Government should undertake
the thing, and w ithout delay I sent a circular (of which copy is herewith
enclosed) to the people whose names appear on the back of it. All the
people in Levuka accepted except Mr. Chalmers, who said that he could
not conscientiously support the Government, as he had already accepted a
seat on the Committee of the F.A.S. (thereby showing that he considered
the Government and the F.A.S. to be real enemies). The Committee held
its first meeting here yesterday. Colonial Secretary presided, and I acted
as secretary. The Levuka people, Cave, etc., were inclined to be oppositious
at first, until they were soothed and told that the Government intended no
insult to either the F.A.S. or the Chamber of Commerce, and that it would
communicate with these august bodies and ask their co-operation. The
meeting went off very well. Amongst other matters it was resolved unani-
mously that the materials for a Fiji Bure should be collected and sent to
Sydney together with some Fijians, who should put it up, and who should
remain in Sydney during the Exhibition.
\§th {Sunday). —Drizzling. Went to call at the Cumquots. No better
than they were.
nth. —Mr. Pfluger from Ba called on me. Told me that there had been
a severe blow down at Nadi, and great floods at Ba. Ten feet of water in
Sagunu town. Many natives lost their yams. Ba cotton garden washed
away ; 300 goats belonging to Woolcot drowned. Yuda town swept away,
and several of the other towns greatly damaged. Jim Monk ill with
erysipelas in the arm. Took M‘Gregor to Draibe to see him.
18£A.—Wrote to my Lau boys to come down. Wrote an official letter to
Colonial Secretary re the obstruction in Colo criminal cases caused by the
provisions of the unsworn Testimony Ordinance (1875).
19th. —A day of days —
Hie dies vere mihi festus atras
Eximet curas . . .
Two events happened to-day of considerable interest to the inhabitants of
Government House generally. One, the arrival of a baby boy, about whom
Lady Gordon will probably hear enough, so that I shall not particularise
further than to say that he is going to be enormous, I hear, and at present
has not squalled. The second was of far more interest to me, viz. the
527
XXII
FIJI


arrival of the Sandfly with Maudslay from Tonga. They had very had
weather and could not go to Samoa, therefore he did not know of the
arrival there of the German man-of-war, for which he has been waiting so
long, and in consequence says he must go back by the very first opportunity.
He has brought Ratu Epeli back with him, also his boy Charlie, whom he
is going to send home. He is full of stories re Baker, etc.
The men had a holiday to go to the “ Vaka-misioneri ”at Levuka.
They rather amused me by coming the day before to get the money that
was owing for the care of the Elizabeth. I told Ratu Seru that I would give
them January and February (£3), but he said that half that would do, so I
gave him a cheque for £1 :10s., which he got converted into sixpences, and
thus provided the force marched away, got up in high costume. This meke
(a club one) was, I believe, the best that was performed there. I got a lot
of yaqona and tobacco for them, and we had a grand drinking of the new-
born “ Kai Yiti’s ” health in the evening.
20th. —Court of A.N.C. for trial of a constable for “malingering” —the
first one that has ever been tried for that offence. He was sentenced to
thirty days—the sentence prescribed especially for this in the Ordinances,
—but we recommended that for various reasons it should be reduced to
fifteen days, which was done.
21 st. —Took the Police Court for Hunter. Fined a Chinaman £lO for
smuggling. Recommended Mr. Des Yoeux, when the matter was referred
to me, that the fine be reduced ; so he reduced it to £5, and M‘Gregor is
furious.
22nd. —Had a talk to Ratu Epeli, and asked him if he would care to join
the A.N.C. as an officer, there being one vacancy (I had previously sounded
him through Maudslay). He says he will come, for which lam very glad.
He is a thoroughly good man, and a relation of Ratu Seru, who, however, is
the lesser in rank, though the older of the two. They are mutually pleased
at the idea. Ratu Epeli is to go and s6e Ratu Timoci at Namara (?), and then
come here when I return from Colo. As luck has it, I have got some Rewa
and Kadavu recruits coming, who will be just the very people to come with
him. (He is a son of Musudroka, and the Kadavu men obey him thoroughly.)
I consider I have done pretty well for our force in getting him. lam sure
Knollys will be glad.
Mail arrived from Colo in the evening. All well. Woodruff still
planting, and wants coffee trees to try. (He is worth a lot of money to us,
is that “snake.”) He says that he has received numbers of applications
from the natives of Colo to be enlisted in our force. That speaks something
for us.
Dined at Mitchell’s. Lost 14s. to Lake at whist (being very sleepy and
thinking of other things, besides being a very poor player).
23 rd {Sunday). —Fine, bright, dead calm, and very hot. Mr. Cocks
and I went out at 6.30, and made a list of every Government article in
barracks belonging to our force. It will be rather a job to do in Colo.
Forgot to say that on Thursday night, while at dinner, I was sent for by
Lizzie to attend to the cook, who was very drunk and had been beating
the boys. Sent him off to the guard-room, with orders to handcuff him if he
became “ obstropulous. ” Next morning had him up, and told him that I
528
CHAP.
FIJI


should take £1 off his wages for the month, and that he had better go on
with his work, for if he threw it up before the week’s notice was out I should
have him summoned by the boys for assault; on which he went back to the
kitchen, saying that he would go that day week, to which I replied—as
usual—“ All right.” He has been on the drink ever since.
2Uh.— Poor Jocko, the parrot, died, which lam very sorry for. Maudslay
skinned him. He is a great loss to me, for we had become great friends,
and I had taught him to laugh at me in a peculiar manner which was very
amusing (to me at anyrate).
Maudslay went off to hold a Court upon a Captain White of the Marion
Rennie for having caused a native of Aoba to be shot. Chief-Justice
and Magistrates, Judges or Judicial Commissioners ; Dr. M‘Gregor and
Horne (H.M. schooner Sandfly), Assessors. Verdict, guilty. Sentence,
nine months’ imprisonment; £25 fine. £SOO recognisances to keep the peace.
Called on the Webbs. Nothing of interest.
25 th. —Nothing at all to say. Did nothing all the morning. As usual,
played lawn-tennis in the afternoon. I would give a great deal to be some-
where where I could find some work to go at heartily.
2 6th. —Called on the Sandfly, and found only the “bo’sun” on board.
Went on and called on the Cumquots. More civil than usual, but no less
“Cumquotty.” Horne and Lake came to dinner. The Suva arrived. In
her, amongst others, the fair Miss Wilkinson from Melbourne, without,
however, her Lord Kilblessington.
272 A for the Royal Engineers to go home. Nothing to do
all day except little odds and ends of things. There was a concert this
evening in aid of the church funds. Seed and I went to it. Not good.
28 th. —S.S. Gunga from Sydney. Home mail of 31st December. Very
satisfactory despatches. Ra coast and missionary foreshores. Dreadful
news of the 24th Regiment. The Black Swan returned with Wilkinson.
Dined at the Seeds’. Went with them to a party at Garrick’s given in
farewell to Mr. Butt, who is going away for two months to get married.
March 1. — Had a long talk with Wilkinson. He says that there is a very
great deal of “rarawa” 1 in Nadroga at the affair of Hetfernan and Ratu Josaia.
He says that the Roko has behaved very well about it, and talks about it
sensibly. As not unfrequently happens, Wilkinson, in pottering about the
details of the case, missed the casus belli altogether. He was led to believe
that R. Josaia had been arrested by Hetfernan in Cuvu because he had
gone with some men to get the masi from the Ruwailevu towns. The fact
being that Hetfernan met him and his mob of men up in Colo, and finding
that he had not got a pass, sent him up to camp, thinking that I was there
(he heard from one of my men, who had gone from here just before the
steamer went, that I was coming down in her), and in consequence R, Josaia
was detained in camp (not in jail) until he returned from Levuka, which
was not for some weeks. When I told this to Wilkinson, he said that he had
heard nothing about it before, and now saw that the whole affair wore a
different complexion, though he blames Hetfernan for the way in which he
did the thing, and for some of the things he said. He said he would v rite
1 Annoyance —vexation.
111
2 M
529
XXII
FIJI


to the Roko and tell him that I had given him the above explanation.
What I am most sorry to hear is that the ill-feeling against HefFernan is all
over the country. The people are anxious to know whether he is a
permanency, or only acting for me. I must do what I can to allay this
feeling when I go up this month, and, until some one else comes out, we
must keep Helfernan there. If at any time it becomes advisable to give him
some work of a totally different kind, I should put him as a sort of general
overseer of the native tax work under Thurston. He would do well, and
would save Thurston a lot of detail work and correspondence. Wilkinson
says that his head and heart are all right, but that he requires a very strict
supervision, which is at present impossible. Sent my A.D.C. to camp to
make things ready for my going there by the next steamer. I shall take
two months this time.
2nd {Sunday). —Fine. Called on the Chalmerses at their new house at
Waitovu. Very civil. Had tea at Seeds’, and took the Gorries to church.
Back to Seeds’ for Sunday “arguments.”
Maafu arrived in TJlui Lakeha.
3 r d. —Busy writing for the mail. Nulelili, Buli Garawa, died in hospital,
of internal disorder. Funeral at Draiba. Sent some of the A.N.C. to it.
My two Loma Loma boys turned up, at which lam very delighted. The
Baby has grown into a big lad, and the other looks a fine young fellow. I
take some credit to myself on their account.
Letter from Scott of Nadi. Rather a good one. Sent it to Knollys. It
describes the flood and storm rather well.
Maafu came to dinner. Very good humour. No particular news. Had
yaqona with the men. Told them about the 24th Regiment fighting till
they were all killed. Did not say anything about the colours or the capture
of the arms, etc.
4_th. —Busy writing for the mail. Letter from HefFernan. Says he has
lost his office book and papers in a bag which went astray on a journey and
has not since been recovered. Is on his way to Ba to see after a row which
has been going on between Mrs. Woolcot and the Ba people. Her labourers
armed. Cutting down houses. Drawing knives,, and threatening also about
the Nadroga affair. Says that R. Rovo returned from Cuvu and reported
that the Roko had declared he would send up two white men and some of
his people to go through the Ruwailevu towns for masi, whereupon HefFernan
(in accordance with my directions, which were, if he thought necessary, to
be followed) sent five A.N.C. to Raiwaqa to stop any one coming up without
a pass. I must be off by first chance. The Swan goes in ten days.
Wilkinson, however, says that he knew all about this when he was at Cuvu,
and that there is no “row.”
Forgot to say that Mr. Webb called on me yesterday to tell me that
Loa Loa, Mudu’s son, had bolted off to his country. Told him I would get
him back for him. He declined my suggestion that he should be recovered
through. Mr. Rooney. —Must stop.
G. R. LE H.
Ratu Marika’s Report on Visit to Kadayu
Nasoya. August 2,1878.—0 n arrival, found Roko Tui Kadavu away.
Found Stipendiary Magistrates all adrift. Marriage licences not given to
530
CHAP.
FIJI


applicants. Some applicants had waited for three months. R. Marika then
gave them. He thinks the reason is that the scribes and magistrates do not
live together. The scribe was away with the Roko. The forms of marriage
licences are with the scribe. One of the magistrates lives at Bulia (R.
Meli). Many persons, after waiting a long time, got married without a
licence ; was told by Filikesa, the native minister at Nakasaleka, that the
result is that many are living in an unmarried state. R. Marika used some
of his own forms ; the Kadavu forms w r ere with the Kadavu scribe.
One licence written out for Epeli of Ogasele by Sailasa the scribe
had been improperly filled in by Sailasa, and the European missionary, Mr.
Robson, refused to marry Epeli, and also refused to let Ratu Marika see the
licence, though he requested him through the native minister. The licence
w r as signed by Ratu Semi, the N.S.M. It was given by Sailasa to Epeli to
take to R. Semi for signature,
No marriage returns kept by the scribe. Births and deaths are kept.
Court returns not kept. Records of sentences and warrants of conviction
improperly kept.
Prisoners working under sentence of the Courts are by order of the Roko
left with the Bulis.
Noticed four prisoners with Buli Natewa, but the town and road was in
a very bad state. On inquiring, found that they were engaged on the
Ovisa Buli’s house and garden; that Ovisa Buli died. Ratu Marika
requested the Buli to set the prisoners at work on the road and town.
This was done.
During the whole time he was there he never heard once of any directions
being given to do the Government work, such as taxes or the district wmrk.
At Tailevu and Rewa* etc., all were busy at work, but at Kadavu there is
no such activity going on. The corn in Tailevu and Rewa, etc., is in the
ear ;at Kadavu they are just clearing the ground for planting it. Noticed
large cotton plantations neglected. Great quantity of it in bearing.
Bulis Ono and Nabukelevu were energetic and making use of their
prisoners. The others seemed to him to be neglecting their duty. When
the Roko arrived (after R. Marika had been there three weeks) he wrote
and asked him to come and visit him. Had some talk with the Roko.
Advised him to do his duty properly in his province.
No particular report of crime.
Very nearly a row over the boundary between Tavuki and Nabukelevu.
He decided that the land should be left with the Nabukelevu. The people
from both sides wrote to the Buli (they had tried to settle it amongst
themselves, but could not) to have the matter settled at the Provincial
Meeting. It was discussed, and settled that the Nabukelevu people should
have it. It was R. Marika s idea that the Roko and the Buli were keeping
the decision of the meeting back because they wanted the land. The Buli
of Nabukelevu told him that the request of the people to have the matter
settled w r ould be kept back. R. Marika examined into the case. He found
that some time ago the land belonged to Nabukelevu. A devil priest of
Nasegai came over to the place near Levuka and begged land to plant
the devil’s cocoa-nut trees; this was granted. After the priest died the
Nasegai people kept coming over, and finally set up a claim to the land.
He read out both letters before all the people interested, and decided in
531
XXII
FIJI


favour of Nabukelevu. He did not actually decide himself, but he left it
to the Roko and the Bulis after putting the case before them ; a large
majority decided in favour of Nabukelevu. The Bulis told him that if he
had not been there this question would not have been settled. They com-
plained that complaints were not fairly considered at the meetings, that
the questions were shelved and packed away.
Heard nothing special respecting whites and natives or debts.
R. Marika to go round Lomai Yiti to hold Courts, to make particular
inquiry as to Bulis having held Courts by themselves, and to furnish me
with a list of such sentences, etc., if any have been passed. He had better
wait and go with the Roko.
G. R. LE H.
From Dr. M‘Gregor
Fiji, March 3, 1879. —My dear Sir —I have to thank you for your letter
of the 24th December. My illness, I may state at the outset, has left very
little trace of its existence, only that I get sooner tired yet than I used to
do, not having gone to a colder climate to recruit myself.
It would he useless for me to say anything about accounts, as you have
heard long ago all there is to hear. We are making a very bad start for
’79. The Estimate of Revenue is, I think, too high, but I found that
undigested theory "was more than a match for knowledge acquired as the
result of experience, so that you may anticipate a disappointment in regard
to this year’s revenue. Of course you will say lam croaking, on the
principle that doctors are basely represented as making believe that their
patients are worse than they really are, in order to gain credit by their
recovery. At the Council table the Auditor - General assured me that
customs dues must increase £3OOO this year, and that I had forgot various
factors that go to make up the product. Nous verrons.
The proceedings of Parr and Co. are not lethal. As you say, they have
numbers ; but, as you are aware, that is their weakness, inasmuch as six of
them cannot agree as to any course of action. They have impudence, as
you state, but, as experience has shown you, it only leads them into
exaggeration and misrepresentation, that can always be exposed. It is
true they appeal to popular prejudices, and that they will enlist the
sympathy of a certain class not void of importance and power ; but those
that understand the questions at issue, and look on them without partiality
or self-interest, cannot fail to see that Parr, Cave, and Co. must not be
allowed to have their own way. What you say in reference to Butt I have
anticipated in a former letter. I am worried in turn by what you say
about the Chief-Justice, the most genuinely honest of your followers, the
one of all others that has his heart with you in your work here. lam
vexed because he has been misrepresented to Des Yceux, who, I am led to
understand, has reported him home for what the Chief-Justice never had
any intention of doing. Raps over his knuckles are the greatest mistakes
you can fall into, unless I am becoming an imbecile. They cannot be
given to any one that less deserves them, nor to any one you can Tess
afford to dispense with in Fiji. I do not mind telling you that in your
absence you are losing the zeal of more than one valuable adherent, simply
on account of the way that they are treated and kept apart from Mr. Des
532
CHAP.
FIJI


Yoeux ; and if you suffer yourself to be influenced to the prejudice of the
Chief-Justice, you will find only one official of importance in a contented
mood on your return. As I said so much in my two last letters, I shall
not recur to the question again, as I have so freely and fully expressed my
opinion on the whole matter.
I must now say something about myself. Mr. Des Voeux has sent you
a telegram to try to get me the appointment of Chief Medical Officer of
Mauritius, It has occurred to me that I might probably suit the office, and
the office would in some ways suit me. I should on many accounts regret
leaving Fiji, but in Mauritius I should be able to do much scientific study
that lam entirely cut off from here by the nature of my occupations. It
has struck me that it is almost singularly fortunate for me that the vacancy
occurred during your visit to England, and that your friend Sir George
Bowen should be the Governor. I have made no application to the Colonial
Office, as I leave the matter entirely to you. Maudslay would become
Receiver-General here, and you would have no difficulty in finding a
Medical Officer to take my place.
By the bye, I had to-day a post-mortem examination of the body of a
Fijian chief, and his brain, sliced, weighed 53\ ounces.
We have had plenty of rain, and if we have no blow, copra will do
well this year. Unfortunately, as you will hear from Thurston and
Wilkinson, a certain amount of damage has already been done to corn and
cotton. We are being flooded by Ceylon men, who are, of course, laid hold
of and kept at the Club (your old prot6g<S), that I was so desirous of
strangling. It is more dangerous than the Chamber of Commerce and the
Agricultural together, as nearly all political schemes are hatched there,
as the place is presided over by Cave, Butt, Parr, Mason, and Co. Poor
Olive is very quiet, drifting quickly into bankruptcy, 1 am afraid. The
missionaries indisposed to fight. I think we are going to do some land
claims soon after the departure of this mail.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, March 3, 1879. —My dear Sir—When I last wrote to you I was very
unwell, in fact I got out of bed to write. However, the attack, whatever
it was, passed off, and I am myself again now, barring a slight tendency of
blood to the head when worried. Oh ! for a good, long, full-drawn breath
of North Sea air. I dream of it at times, but wake to a temperature of 85°
and the perfume of trumpet flowers and “sich like,” instead of storm-drifted
seaweed.
Your notes of the 10th and 31st of December and Ist January arrived
here upon the 28th ult. per Gunga, the steamer which has replaced Went-
worth. Need I say their contents very much gratified me, or that lam very
sensible of the kindness and consideration with which you have settled my
position here. But on this subject I will touch in a separate note.
By this time you will be in possession of last year’s financial reports, and
of the Estimates for this year, and I hope you will approve generally of
both. Of course there has been expenditure charged against our anticipated
Loan ; and as the Loan has not yet been raised, we must ad interim
take it out of the general revenue, and adjust it by and by. On the whole,
533
XXII
FIJI


however, I think our affairs are looking as well as could be expected. I sent
a brief telegram in January, which I hope was intelligible. Mr. Des Yoeux
told me, almost at the last moment, that he should not telegraph, and so I
determined I would, thinking it might arrive in time to be of use. After
all, he did send a message, I believe. The Engineers go home next mail,
and so Lake is busy, and especially with his stores—l mean Imperial stores.
In my last but one I gave the total cost of the present strength of the Com-
pany as it now stands, and made a suggestion as to the future. In your
note just received I observe that a “ Crown Surveyor ” is proposed, and that
he should be an officer of the Crown Lands Office. This plan would be good
if a thoroughly competent man filled the post. At times men with a high-
sounding title expect a high-sounding salary, and at others men will accept
a more modest stipend if they count something by honours. Should not
the Commissioner of Crown Lands and Surveyor-General be one and the
same office ? The post of Surveyor-General is an all-important one, and so
far Ido not think we have much occasion for congratulation. Most of the
w r ork will have to be done over again. The consideration of this'subject
brings me to Mitchell, and, as you have requested me in confidence to write
frankly, I will say that Mitchell is not happy. I believe he wishes to get
back among his Trinadad or Demerara friends. This fact has only dawned
upon me lately, and I have heard, with what truth I know not, that he has
written asking to be removed. If this is so, and he does return to the
West Indies, it might be well to find at home some qualified man to take
Lands and Survey ; but immigration —immigration is the rub, and what
we should do without Mitchell I really do not know, for unquestionably he
does seem to have the whole subject at his finger-ends. For some time past
I have noticed a change in Mitchell, and this alteration has evidently
attracted your notice. From himself I have learned nothing, but from the
remarks of others, and especially M‘Gregor, I am afraid he is disappointed
or dissatisfied. Knowing as I, do your very high opinion of Mitchell, and
having myself an idea of his value, I have the less hesitation in expressing
my opinion on this subject, as a note might clear off the gloom and laissez
faire spirit which now seems to possess him. He thinks his appointment
ought to have been confirmed, and he feels hurt that after three and a half
years’ residence here his salary appears on the Estimates under ‘ ‘ Provisional
and Temporary.” M‘Gregor had something epigrammatic to say on the
subject when the Estimates were passing. Mitchell was silent, but looked
more than M‘Gregor said. Mr. Des Yoeux merely replied that as his time
here was so short he would rather not make any alterations whatever, etc.,
etc. If I were on more intimate terms with Mitchell I think I could talk
him out of these ideas ; but alas ! the charmed circle of “men from home ”
doesn’t “convene,” as the Yankees say, with my temperament. I cannot
take my walks abroad in a road where the notice “On sufferance only”
stares one in the face at every turn.
But whatever may be Mitchell’s desire for Trinidad, or his hopes of
succeeding to his father’s post, I am sure he has got a little pet grievance
of his own, and that it is humoured a good deal by his most particular
friends. Were you here for ten minutes, I believe it would die a natural
death straightway.
Eyre must have given a very wrong version of Whippy’s land claim. So
534
CHAP.
FIJI


far from having given him 10,000 acres, we have not read the report. Before
the report was written, Wilkinson and myself heard that one, if not the
principal, native witness had been spirited away by the Whippy people and
their lawyer “Scott.” We have got affidavits of the whole affair now, and
the Commissioner does not half like it. My own opinion is that no claims
will be settled until you return to take them up again, and perhaps that is
the safest thing that could happen.
I hear that some provision has been made for appeal (in the matter of
land claims), but Mr. Des Yoeux can give me no particulars. Also, that
the Crown decides to maintain its right to reef and foreshore. Of this
latter I am very glad, and hope Messrs. Langham and Co. will be so too.
Scott of Viro sends home a petition in re his claim to Bensusan’s Land.
It goes by this mail, and Mr. Des Voeux sends Mitchell’s comments with
it. As it is the first case submitted, and will reach London before your
departure, I forward under separate cover a copy of my minute on the
claim, and also a tracing of the locality. The claim is not a bad sample ot
what may come hereafter, and possibly you may find both plan and minute
useful. I would have sent copy of Hunter’s report, but could not get it
without Mr. Des Yoeux’s order. In my minute, however, I have quoted
Hunter’s recommendation.
Touching the petition for your recall, I believe it was sent home either
in one of my letters, or in the columns of the Times , which has been posted
regularly. The whole thing was a farce. No one would sign it, not even
my sturdy patriot friend, Jemmy M‘Connell. It was read at the Club, I
believe, and laughed at. Parr was called “fool” and “ass” to his face by
his bosom friends, and the whole affair, after some smoke and stink, ended
in what Americans call “a fizzle.” The Agricultural and Commercial
“Chambers” are nuisances, but I am beginning to think they bark more
than bite. Nothing yet has come of that wonderful circular about Native
Taxation. No man knows what information they acquired, and I almost
fancy they must have forgotten the matter. Most people here fancied they
were going to persuade Mr. Des Yoeux into anything. They were quite
chatty and cheerful over it, and congratulated one another on “what they
were going to do now.” This idea, I think, caused an unwonted stir among
the Commercials and Agriculturalists, but the idea was short-lived. He
astounded one or two deputations on the subject of native rights and policy,
and at present, with the exception of Parr and just one or two men, people
have given him up as hopeless. They are, however, quite ready to do harm
among the natives if they can, and I am very sorry we cannot punish them.
This is the time to make a stand—nothing now would surprise people.
They have been told that the Government will carry out its policy without
reference to clamour within or without. If they were now prevented from
interfering in native matters or with natives, under pain and penalty, they
would eat the leek and declare that they had got all they wanted. “Now
we know,” they would say, “what we may and may not do.”
The natives are loyal —chiefs and commoners. Little clouds, of course,
rise now and then, but so long as the Fijiman says “ noda matanitu,” 1 things
are going all right.
1 “ Our government.”
535
XXII
FIJI


The action of the Wesleyan party here —that is the Mission—will bring
about queer results. I hear of natives going over daily to the Roman
Catholic Church. The priests are jubilant and zealous, and their strong
cry is “No Yakamisoneri.” 1 The idea is taking, and what is more, taking
with the chiefs. Epeli sent the other day for a priest to “ lotu” him, and
nothing but obedience or respect to his father stopped the event coming off,
Wilkinson thinks he will “go over,” however, directly his father dies. If
so, the larger part of Tai Levu will go also.
Langham talks at him on week days, and preaches at him on Sunday,
Result, Epeli hates him in return. In all Cakaudrovi there are, so Elyth writes
me, only three Bulis who are Protestants, and those three are very shaky.
With regard to interpreters. You will regret to hear that Payn is dead.
Poor fellow, he came to a very sudden end. A few days’ residence with
Gus Hennings settled his fate. He thought bailiffs were chasing him (wrote
Pinnock to that effect the night he died), and most probably dashed out of
the house and fell over the rough stone wall in front of the gate. He must
have stunned himself, and the tide being high and at the “top of flood,”
was actually smothered within the flux and reflux of the water.
Mitchell wants his place filled, but no decision has yet been arrived at,
Gorrie complains, and with justice, of young Thomas ; in fact his inability
is so great that a change will be necessary. The idea is to take him over to
the native office, where another man is wanted. Cocks ought now to be
employed outside to some degree ; Wilkinson cannot be everywhere, though
he ought to be. It is among the people, and not in office, or in Levuka, that
interpreters should be trained. Thomas, like most of the Levuka lads,
translates English into Fijian, but he cannot think like a native. Utterly
insensible to a reply or remark pregnant with meaning, and full of himself
and his position in the Court, it is no wonder that the lad has made the
Judge give what some whites and all the “ blacks ” think queer decisions.
Harman and Turner are the two best men at command now. The Moores
ought to be useful in case of need, but there is not one of them to be trusted.
Cocks will be the great “stand-by” in case of need. The natives regard
him with full confidence, many of them with a kind of affection. He has
grown up among them, and, unlike other youngsters born here, he has not
succumbed to women, yaqona, and South Sea blackguardism. I do not
think he will ever be so strong as Wilkinson in what I may call “apprecia-
tion,” but he may do much by study.
With Wilkinson the power of feeling at once “what the matter is”
seems due to intuition, but he has also had unusual advantages. I hope we
shall long have the benefit of his experience. Carew is a good Fijian
“scholar,” perhaps better than Wilkinson, but he is passionate at times and
has strong prejudices, hence some chiefs and people do not love him much.
Heffernan is a very useful man, but wants attentive watching. He always
was and will be inclined to native intrigue. Most of the chiefs are afraid
of him, for when there is nothing afoot he approaches every subject with
an air of profound mystery. I hope Lala will be of use in due time. The
native office should, I think, find work for him when he leaves school.
Native Education. —What to do in this matter I cannot think. Mr. Des
1 i.e. No Missionary Collection.
536
CHAP.
FIJI


Voeux was going to make this subject a speciality, but so far the result of
his good intentions is nil. My idea is, and will continue to be, that Gau is
the place for the school. Wilkinson still talks of 10,000 acres, going in for
cattle, and heaven knows what not; and Mr. Des Yceux told me a day or
two ago that he says the chiefs are against Gau, and want more than one
school, and that they should be in Yiti and Yanua Levu. Two more
Navuloas probably —scholars wandering off at their own sweet will, relatives
making daily visits, and upsetting everything in the shape of necessary
regime.
Directly this mail has gone I will ask Mr. Des Yceux to go into the
matter and decide something.
Sugar. —At last a glint of sunshine falls upon Rewa. After much
negotiation, Spence Brothers of Melbourne are going to invest £20,000 or
£25,000 in mill, punts, steam-launches, etc. The terms briefly are On
condition of their investing as above, we sell them four or five hundred acres
of land. They bind themselves to take all the cane we grow at the current
rate, or at a price fixed annually, and to take it when required to do so, i.e.
planters’ cane must await the crushing of native cane. We bind ourselves to
nothing. The only security they have is the good faith of the Government,
and the certainty that Government is interested in the success of the scheme
as much as the Company is.
For the last five mouths I have been much exercised over this affair,
Edwardes and Hoerder, Dr. Chalmers, and the New South Wales Sugar Refin-
ing Company have all been coquetting, but they all stand out for conditions
viz. Government to guarantee so many tons of cane per annum ; contract to
last for five or ten years ; Government to “assist” in finding “labour” for
the mill; Government to find fuel! or to assist in finding fuel; the
“ miller and his men ” to be placed beyond the limits of native jurisdiction ;
no Roko or Buli to interfere with any men wanting to w r ork at the mill,
etc., etc. ; and above all, Government to give a block of land as an “induce-
ment ” ! !
I am so glad it is all over, and that we have got what we want without
any entanglements. Next week I propose going to Rewa and arranging
for the cane to be planted. Two hundred acres at least must go in as
quickly as possible.
BSche de Mer. —This subject is as perplexing as ever. Mr. Des Voeux,
who felt certain of hitting upon a scheme, has given it up as a bad job. I
have a plan before him, which I will describe, but I do not think he will
write “fiat” on my memo. When I say “a plan,” I should like to say in
addition, for the purpose of raising money immediately. Beche de Mer is a
Crown fishery, or at least a fishery in which the Crown claims a royalty.
No good scheme has been suggested by which the revenue can be improved
from such fishery. Meanwhile the reefs are lying “fallow” and unproduc-
tive, at a time in our history when every £IOOO revenue is of vital importance.
At present the natives cannot fish for want of means, and the whites cannot,
for the natives prevent them. My idea, therefore, is to furnish both Ba
and Nadroga on the one hand, and Bua and Macuata on the other, with a
small vessel and half-a-dozen boats. Vessels to be fitted up with boiling-
down pots and drying “vatas” on board. Fish caught to-day cured
to-morrow. Division of labour attended to. Each vessel to be under the
537
XXII
FIJI


command of a white man at current rate of wages, or half wages and
a per-
centage.
Cost of each vessel with boats , etc., all fitted out
say £500
0
0
Wages of fishing-master
„ 150
0
0
Rations and allowances
„ 100
0
0
Insurance, 12 per cent
„ 60
0
0
Wear and tear, 20 per cent
„ 100
0
0
Total cost first year
£910
0
0
With these vessels and boats fishing constantly (except from Ist January to
Ist April), and a party of thirty or forty men working in relays as arranged
by themselves, I think we might put the annual results of each fishery
down at £2OOO.
The average value of the fish on the spot is £6O per ton. There is, as
traders say, a lot of money in Beche de Mer. The annual results of the
fishery should be divided, so many 60ths to the Crown, so many to Rokos
and Bulis, and so many to each town concerned.
This scheme might not be regarded as a permanent source of revenue on
the exact plan sketched, but it might help us to make both ends meet for a
year or two, and would completely save us from any shortcoming this year,
in case Bua, Ba, or Rewa fails. Bua is eaten up by the last Solevu, Ba is
washed out by frightful floods, and Rewa sugar gardens will not yield till
March or April 1880. Mr. Des Yoeux says the scheme is good and looks
sound ; and he does not object altogether to my taking an advance from the
Bank, as in the case of Macuata Island ; but he says if I died, or had to be
invalided, no new man, nor any here, would try to carry out the scheme,
and therefore it is unsafe, and for him not to be thought of. If, however,
you think well of the proposal, I can do a great deal between June or July
and January. M‘Gregor thinks the thing illusory, but that is because the
thing is big enough to be seen without the use of a microscope.
You will see by the newspapers accompanying this that we are going to
represent Fiji at the International Exhibition in Sydney. I hope we may
do well, but tropical countries never make any great show.
Everything ought to be done to get another Bank here. To have only
one is very objectionable, and especially when, like the B. N. Z., it is con-
nected with a Mercantile Loan and Trading Company. The Bank is already
everywhere in Fiji; interested in every spec, and actuated accordingly.
Butt has made two or three mistakes, I fancy, and is a strong anti-Govern-
ment man. He was very angry at our stopping the sale of the Emma by
Paul Joske to Tui Namosi, and I am quite sure he was “in the swim,” as
Joske would say.
Butt leaves in the morning for the Colonies, and told me he should be
absent for two months. I imagine that in consequence of the law-suits
against the Bank lately (and which they lost with costs) his constituents
have invited him to render an account of his stewardship, though I have
heard he is about to marry. He is always very friendly and agreeable to
me personally, but rather fond of telling me directly and indirectly that he
has been brought up in a “ democratic colony.”
Maudslay is here —came over in the Sandfly— but, as I understand him,
538
CHAP.
FIJI


will not stay here long. He looks well, but thinner than when living here.
I have almost heard some splendid stories of Baker, but Maudslay doesn t
seem to finish his yarns, and leaves me in doubt how they end.
You will be pleased to hear that after many failures I have succeeded in
introducing cacao in quantities. Dr. Thwaites, writing to my Colombo
agents, G. Watt and Co., says, “Tell Mr. Thurston he may consider
himself fortunate if he succeeds in getting a few living plants of chocolate
to Fiji.” By the mail steamer that brought his letter I received a thousand
living trees of cacao and a case of cloves.
Mr. Des Yceux and every one else is surprised at my success, but it has
taken me two years and a half to evolve the idea which led to such a fortu-
nate result. The fact is I got them from the Batavian gardens. Seeds
planted the day before steamer sailed. Cases opened by my nurserymen in
Sydney, and spare cases for planting out got ready by Rabone Feez. Since
April 78 I have planted out in addition to the above a great number of
coffee trees, 800 cinnamon trees, 60 Pandanus utilis, 500 vanilla. I enclose
a requisition from Carew by which it will be seen 150,000 coffee trees must
be procured somehow.
There are large nurseries at Namosi, I hear, made by Langton last season.
I must go and see them. It is dreadful to think I cannot get about a little.
But for the drought of last year I should have had millions of coffee
plants. However, we shall succeed in time.
You ask me about the new offices, and where they are situated. The
offices are those of Survey and Native Commissioner ; the cost is about two
years’ rent of the house near the English Church occupied by Colonel Pratt,
and latterly by Lake. The place is at the end of the building in which my
office is placed, and a bridge leads from the verandah of one to that of the
other. Lands and Survey are thus brought together, to the convenience of
everybody. The buildings have also been shingled. Government House
part was simply getting uninhabitable. The drawing-room ought to be
done before Lady Gordon returns, for the thatch is now rather bad. Coolies
will, I presume, arrive next month, and will be housed at “ Yanuca lai lai,”
bought for £250. The ship will lie on the landward side, i.e. in Moturiki
Channel, close to the island. Lady Gordon may be pleased to hear that the
road from Nasova to Gavo will soon be finished. It is possible now to drive
from this place to Toko. Brower tools his buggy daily. Chubby is still at
Nadi, or with Le Hunte in Colo. Tom Thumb, poor fellow, has chronic
ophthalmia, and is on the sick list.
In bringing this long letter to a close, let me say that everything is
quiet, and that, excepting things are not very progressive, there is nothing
to cause you the least anxiety.
From Mr. Le Hunte
Nasoya, March 4, 1879.—My dear Sir —I received your letter of the
24th December the other day,
I do feel very penitent about not having written better at first, and
perhaps the greatest punishment I could have is to know that I have vexed
or disappointed you. However, before long, I hope to hear that you have
received my long letter and diary notes.
539
XXII
FIJI


Bills of lading were not sent in December, because I could not get
them for that mail.
Lovoni Valley.—Nothing further has happened. lam sure that there
is something behind the scenes in which has a hand.
2. Parr and Co.—Very irritating both to ourselves and everybody in
the Colony. I believe the colonists and planters wish h ? was gone, as his
mad letters damage their cause.
3. Chubby.—All right in Colo.
4. Nakaukawa.—Still here. Managed somehow to evade going to Bua.
What he will do, Ido not know. Ratu Tui Ba wanted to take him back to
Ba, but others did not see it, and he was banished to Bua.
5. Mitchell and Eyre. —I agree with you they are a good deal anti-
native, especially anti-chief,
6. Namosi. —Had better be left as it is until you return. Any alteration
now would, even if practicable, be inexpedient.
7. Nymphe and Cosmo.—You will by this time have heard all about it
and the successful termination.
8. Stopford.—l don’t think he understood about going or writing to you
until he was told to. He is the very last man I know to do anything which
could be construed into neglect of respect, politeness, or duty.
A most laughable mistake occurred in a letter of mine to him. I asked
him to get two pipes for me, but wrote it so that he read it “for HE.” He
says he has got the pipes for you, but that as every one tells him that he
must have made a mistake as to my letter, he thinks he had better not
offer them to you.
9. Chief-Justice.—Peaceable though voluminous. His row with Mr. Des
Vceux has been productive of much good.
10. M‘Gregor all right. Half wants to go to Mauritius, but really wants
to go to New Guinea.
11. Rags.—R.l.P.—is in the heaven where all good dogs go to.
12. Dai Yalu, Yirikula, Doidoi, are at their respective homes. Virikula
is a good lad and is very useful to me,
I have got my flower and garden seeds from Sydney, but they cannot
send the plants till June —our worst time. I forgot to tell Knollys Mr.
Lake has sold Jessie to Mr. G. Smith for £25.
Could you get us some good Snider rifles and accoutrements. Mr, Des
Vceux not settled with the Sydney Government as to what is to be done
with what we got from Sydney. We have sent back the twenty-five stands
I rejected, and have asked to keep the twenty-five good ones at £2 per
stand. If we could get twenty-five or fifty good ones from home it would
be well; and as Knollys is really Commandant still, all the official part of
the business could be done by him. Just now we might get them for very
little, as they are supplying all their troops with Henry-Martini rifles. The
Engineers will have all their Snider ammunition.
This is only an idea of my own. I have not spoken about it to Mr. Des
Vceux. Perhaps it is not feasible —if so it will not matter my having
suggested it; and please forgive my bothering about it, but ‘ ‘ zeal for my
force ” makes me importunate. We have a vote for it on our Estimates.
I am going to Colo by next Swan. I hear an account of an extra-
ordinary row between Mrs. Woolcot and the Ba people. She appears to
540
CHAP.
FIJI


have armed her labourers, cut down houses, draw r n knives on the chief.
Lindley wrote to Heffernan to go there at once to stop bloodshed. He is on
the spot now.
There is a row on between Heffernan and the Nadroga people. From
what he says, the Roko and his people decline to conform to the Ordinance
with respect to passes, and R. Rovo, on his return from Cuvu, reported to
him that the Roko had said he would send two white men and some of his
people to Raiwaqa, whereupon Heffernan sent a corporal and four men to
“occupy” Raiwaqa and prevent any person going up without a pass. It is
about time I went. The “occupation” lam responsible for ; I told him to
do it if really necessary.
Maudslay is anxious to be off to Tonga. The German ship did not go
there, but is expected about April, so Mr, Des Yceux will be in a mess. Eyre
will not come, and Mr. Des Yceux does not want him as private secretary ;
they did not get on. What he will do I don’t know yet.
Wilkinson has just returned from a visit round Viti Levu and Kadavu,
He says that there is no “ row” about Nadroga and Heffernan, only a great
deal of misunderstanding on both sides, and some “ rarawa ” 1 about Heffer-
nan’s action.
P.S.—l think it would be well if Gordon could get a complete set of the
Fiji correspondence (printed) books, —confidential and blue books, —as some
of those in your office are much the worse for wear, especially the early
ones and the Colo disturbance one.
G. R. LE H.
From Mr, Maudslay
Nasova, Fiji, March 4, 1879. —My dear Sir —I must give you a short
account of my doings since I last wrote. When I sent my last letters by the
Meteor to Sydney, I hardly expected that they would reach you in England.
A week after that letter was sent, the Sandfly arrived with despatches from
the Foreign Office, dated July and August, and others from Mr. Gorrie
saying that he had sent the Sandfly to give me a passage back to Fiji,—if I
could leave my district, —as Mr. Des Vceux w r as in great need of my services.
I was not very willing to leave on account of the expected arrival of the
Ariadne and Weber, who were already behind their time. However, on the
whole, I thought it best to go, so I left Symmonds in charge of the Con-
sulate, with instructions (as far as possible) to attend to shipping matters
only, and started for Fiji on the Bth ; and after an awful knocking about in
a five days’ gale, we got into Loma Loma on the 17th, and on here on the
20th. I found no letters from you, as I had expected, but three months’
letters from home, and the sad news of my mother’s death.
Since my arrival I have heard that the Ariadne is in Auckland, having
gone there direct from Samoa, which is somewhat of a relief to me ; but still
I am anxious to get back as soon as I can, as Weber may come down in one
of his own vessels, and I do not like leaving him there alone. I have told
Mr. Des Yceux that I will remain here until the end of March, when I hope
the Wolverine or Cormorant will be here and I may get a passage back
1 Annoyance.
541
XXII
FIJI


again. After recent experiences lam not going to risk a passage in a small
trader until the bad weather is over—in fact most of the small traders are
laid up during this month by the terms of their insurance. I see in the
Times that a new Consul has been appointed for Samoa, but have not heard
of it in any other way. I wish communication between Tonga and Fiji were
more regular. I have nothing of much importance to write to the Foreign
Office. I had begun a letter to you before I left Tonga, and written a good
deal, but unfortunately left it behind. Mr. Watkin behaved to me quite
Vaka missionary—neither answering my letters nor keeping appointments ;
and I have written a despatch about it which I send by this mail. I see
that the Conference •permit Baker to return to Colonial work after the next
meeting of the Conference, which gives him a year’s grace. He ought to go
sooner. If I find by the next mail that you have left England before my
despatches have arrived, I will send copies to Sydney. I expected some
difficulty with the Chief-Justice, as our positions as Acting High Com-
missioner and Acting Consul-General are not very clearly defined ; but he is
very cordial. I hope I shall hear from you by the next mail. I suppose
then we shall know what your plans are and if it is any good writing to
England. I wish you could come to some understanding about a protectorate
for Tonga if Maafu succeeds. I think there is a way of making it acceptable
to him. With kind regards to Lady Gordon and love to the children.—
Sincerely yours.
From Mr. Thurston
Fiji, March 29, 1879. —My dear Sir— l arrived late last night from Bau,
after an absence of eleven days in Yiti Levu, where I have been opening
coffee and sugar plantations. The s.s. Gunga (in the middle of a tremendous
thunderstorm) arrived at the passage as I landed at Nasova pier, where, to
my intense astonishment, I met Mr. Des Yoeux walking up and down. He
was delighted to find it w r as Thurston, as I had been circumstantially killed
several times by “disaffected natives,” and that I had no news on the whole
to report but good news. Of these matters, however, more in a separate note,
though I shall leave Wilkinson to write you the whole “Tukutuku.”
Your kind note of January 29 was sent up to me this morning, and its
“confidential” enclosure quite upset me. I do not know myself, after
reading it a dozen times, why it should do so, but it has. After a long
day’s work looking up arrears of business, talking to Mr. Des Yoeux on
native affairs, and attending a meeting of the Exhibition Committee, I
find I cannot rest, and so resolve to sit down and write in the hope that
doing so may enable me to place myself quite right with you in the matter
referred to, and at the same time have a soothing effect on my mind.
Imprimis. —l shall religiously obey your direction. I shall ask no
question, and shall treat the enclosure to immediate cremation. If the
Bank of Hew Zealand is foolish enough to suppose that the fact of my
borrowing money from it upon very ample (I may say unusually ample)
security would afford it ground to attempt any exercise of its influence
upon me, then I can only say the Bank is most wofully deceived. My
duty would be very clear, and I should act upon my sense of it instanter.
If its desire is to injure me personally, then while congratulating myself
upon the contents of your note, I must say that the Bank is about the
542
CHAP.
FIJI


meanest Corporate Body I have ever had anything to do with. A somewhat
varied experience has long since taught me that Banks have no bowels, but
they usually adhere to some regard for honour. This Bank departed from
the customary line in another instance that I (and you) know of the fact
being that the Bank here has interests which causes it to dabble mischievously
in political and personal matters. The advent of another Bank would
traverse the scheme of the now sole institution, and at the same time do
immense good to the mercantile community.
It is a source of deep regret to me that I had to avail myself of the Bank’s
assistance, but what was I to do ? The facts were simply these. I owed a
sum of money (the result of cotton culture and political fighting up to the
hoisting of the flag), which was due in 1880, and until which time no claim
could be made. My creditor got pressed by his sole creditor, who had got
sorely pressed by the loss of some very important law-suits involving the
payment of several hundred thousand pounds. In his straits he made a
proposition to my friend that for an immediate payment in cash he would
strike twenty-five per cent off the account. My man jumped at the offer, and
begged me to make him an instant payment on the same terms. I did so,
and thus shared the advantage offered to him.
To do this, and pay off plantation liabilities, I borrowed from the Bank,
but not upon lower terms than is usual when the security is good—that is
to say, nine per centum —a tolerably good percentage. There was one thing
I declined to do—and it may be regarded as favouring me, though I do not
see it, nor would I have done business on such terms. I discovered that the
Bank bound its borrowers among the planting fraternity to do all their
business through the Bank, i.e. transmit to it all their produce, upon which
of course the Bank got a commission. This was not pressed on me, perhaps
because I have no “produce,” perhaps because they saw I wouldn’t stand it.
Beyond this concession, however, if it is one, I am in no way indebted to the
Bank’s consideration. If the Bank had charged its highest rate, viz. ten
per cent, it would have made no appreciable difference upon the rate actually
charged. The fact is, however, as stated above, the security was unusually
ample.
And now, my dear Sir, having said thus much, let me ask your patience
to read a little more. What I shall say will, I believe, put me quite right
with you —will explain why I have, to my regret, seemed sometimes im-
portunate, and having said all, will render all further recurrence to the
subject on my part unnecessary.
Under the old Government I did not make any money, but on the
contrary, and rightly or wrongly, maintained my position in a great degree
by money derived from personal resources. (The enemy never held a secret
caucus without an agent of mine being present.) Of the only two blocks I
owned at the time of annexation, I subsequently sold one (Chippendals) to
enable me to keep office and still keep the Taviuni place going. Upon your
arrival here it was a moot point with me, and an important one, whether I
should endeavour to maintain office in the face of all the difficulties apparent
to me, or look after my plantation and go into private enterprise, of which
several good opportunities then and since presented themselves. I made
my decision, however, with what wisdom the future alone can tell. I
thought that with very strict economy I could live on £SOO a year, and
543
XXII
FIJI


keep my Taviuni coconut plantation going, but tbe wish was father to
the thought, and I found out my mistake. By adhering to office, I have
had to pay and provide another to look after my private interests, besides
paying labourers all along, and this has left me very little over £250 a
year to live on, a sum totally inadequate to my position, even though
economical to the verge of inhospitality. The result has been that I
had for this and the first-named reason to borrow money on my plantation.
In short, if I had gone out of office, let this house and grounds, and
looked after my own affairs, together with those of many colonial men
and firms who wmuld have put all their business and interests in my hands,
I should have, pecuniarily, been much better situated than I am to-day.
It has been this conviction, together with the fact of my appointment not
being confirmed —my hanging between heaven and earth as it were—that
has made me, I fear, seem, as I said before, importunate. If I could, during
the last four years, have been sure of office, I might have sold out and looked
entirely to office as my future. If, on the contrary, office had been denied
me, I could have given it up and gone into business, or whatever else seemed
best to me. But I have been in a dilemma and suffered accordingly. My
private interests, vested in a plantation, could not of course be regarded as
the private interests of some of my colleagues vested in professional
knowledge, which they are either allowed to turn to account or are
compensated for ; and thus, while I have got poorer and poorer, they have
added field to field, and enjoy the excitement (which I do not envy) of
lending out small sums at the glorious rate of twelve per cent. While
I have made my £250 a year, they have made their £l2OO and £l5OO if not
more, and therefore, lucky fellows, have had no reason to borrow of any one.
However, I shall be very cautious indeed, and my first step will be to
relieve myself with all possible speed of my connection with the Bank. The
recent failures at home have made money tight in the Colonies, but in a
short time I hope to see a better feeling, and then my friends there will do
what I want.
My plantation, which is nominally in the hands of Mrs. Thurston’s
brother, contains about 160 acres of coconut trees, a large number of which
are beginning to bear, and the majority should bear in two years, and also
some promising young coffee plantations. Ceylon men who have seen it say
in a year or two it should turn out some £2OOO worth of copra and fibre
annually. I have recently imported an engine and fibre machine from
England, so that I only want to be able to finish out the struggle. I have
had to keep the place since the nuts were planted, now nearly seven years
ago. This, with the proposed addition to my salary, I shall be in a position
to do with ease, though would I might say to the Colonial Office authorities,
“Bis dat, etc.,” “This is all,” as the Fijians say. I fear I have tired you,
but it has done me good to tell you the whole story. Like the Miller of
Dee, I can sing “ I owe no penny I cannot pay,” provided I sold my lands,
which Ido not w T ant to do. Nor is there any occasion, for after many years
of toil and wrong, the flood-tide is setting in. 160 acres of coconuts in one
flat block means a good annual revenue. As for the object of the Bank, I
thank you very heartily for estimating it and me correctly, and for your
goodness in letting me know a very unsuspected evil.
544
CHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Thurston
Nasova, March 30, 1*879, — My dear Sir —Having partly got over your
P.S., I address myself to the contents of the body of your note.
My December and January 7 letters will have put you in possession of
the exact amount of revenue and of current topics of interest. Thanks very
much for your intention to urge the point of an allowance for work done,
which I do trust Colonial Office will grant, in spite of its well-founded
dislike to concessions of this kind. The fact is, however, that if it does
not do so, then I shall be considerably out of pocket; for no one who knows
anything of the cost of living in Fiji, or knows that I have given up my
whole time to the service of the Government to the exclusion of my private
interests and duties (which I pay an agent to care for), can suppose that
£5OO per annum has met my necessities.
The fact that (in addition to Colonial Secretary’s work, Auditor-General’s
work, frequent occupation and anxiety in native affairs, often, and occa-
sionally very laborious, work in the character of “prehistoric referee”) I
have had sole charge and control of the larger part of what may be termed
“ Inland Revenue,” which has yielded in the three past years £43,000, may
operate with the Secretary of State to consider ray case as even a more
favourable one than that of Mr. de Ricci, who was allowed, though his
salary was only £5OO, to draw £lOOO a year in consequence of his having
given up a possible, though not very probable, good private practice. I
may add also that since January 1878 there has been a clear saving of £250
per annum on the sum voted for the Receiver-General.
However, I am sure I need not try to find reasons provided the money
can be fairly spared. When my colleagues are saving and making money,
the Colonial Office will hardly let me lose, but if it does I must bear it
philosophically. At all events I have gained your commendation, and that
I regard as no slight compensation for work done. ■ Would that I had done
more and done better. Had my spirits been as elastic as they once were,
I might; but constant anxiety and other things have, though unseen,
constantly wearied me and robbed me of my old strength and energy.
However, I have great hopes that when Colonial Office does confirm or
settle the footing on which its unworthy servant is to be plkced it will con-
sider my case as a whole and from the beginning, and make such moderate
allowance as may seem just, etc. etc. etc. Do you know that lam actually
saving from £BO to £lOO a month now to the Government in yams alone, by
a plan that I don’t believe many others would do even if they could ? Yams,
of which we consume under Gaol, Police, Immigrants, Provincial, Armed
Constabulary, etc., 30 or 40 tons a month, were tendered for at £6 : 10s. I
determined to refuse it, and Mr, Des Yceux let me have my own way. The
traders formed a’ring and offered long odds that they would make the
Government give £B. I kept the departments on biscuits, bananas, and
anything I could get for a week, sent Barh and Zephyr away, and have
since supplied at a maximum of £4 :10s., and see my way clear for all the
year. Ihus John Cole Hawkins and the Jews are circumvented, while the
gain to Government is immense.
Touching the land question, you may rest assured that nothing will be
done until you arrive. Much may be said, but nothing more. lam sorry
HI 2 N
545
XXII
FIJI


about Mason's case. I knew very well that you had in some degree pledged
yourself to its sale ; but on the other hand it was clear to me that you did
not know where the land was situated when Mason wrote to or saw you on
the point. The official letters on the subject are very guarded. On a
careful survey of the land it was found that the head waters of the two
principal creeks on that part of Tavumi both had their sources upon it. I
mean “ Dreke ni wai” and “Wailagi.” To make the land applied for of
any use, the place must be cleared ; to clear it is to destroy the creeks,
and—the two native towns situated upon them. I will try to enclose sketch
of the country. If I fail the following may convey an idea : [Plan.]
I note your remarks upon the New Ordinance (Appeal). It will not give
satisfaction here. What will ?
The Native Debts Ordinance has been approved of. I am delighted,
because it has been damned here as worthy of the seventeenth century. In
one of my recent letters I mentioned an improvement or two that might be
made by way of addition. There is also a little ambiguity in the first clause
about £5 and exceeding £5. I believe it works well, but will, as time
enough has now elapsed, call for a report from the magistrates.
The question of native lands is a very difficult one. You sketch a far
more liberal policy than was dreamed of here. I am, however, glad to see
that you propose making some classes of lands absolutely inalienable, and I
hope that for some years at least no native land will be taken in satisfac-
tion for debt. Let legislation be against the creditor. He is almost always
the rascal.
I now turn to the subject of “white interference,” and truly this is a
large subject, and daily growing more dangerous. You will hear from
Wilkinson, and perhaps from Mr. Des Yoeux, all about it. Since my return
Mr. Des Yoeux has cooled down, but from all I can hear he was nearly being
urged into taking a step which might have prejudiced him in the minds of
the chiefs and led them to think him wanting in coolness. However, I
think after this he will believe absolutely in Wilkinson, and if so he will
in 90 cases out of 100 be quite safe. It is very hard, though, for men who
know their business to see it upset or interfered with by men who know
nothing at all about it.
I left this per Black Swan on the 17th for Navua via Suva. My inten-
tion was to arrange for opening a sugar plantation on Deuba Island ; thence
up the Navua and over to Namosi on coffee business. From there to Rewa
on the great Sugar Mill business. I reached Suva about 4 p.m. of the
same day, and there heard most awful stories. “Rebellion was imminent.
“The natives were arming in every direction.” “Nine hundred men in
Rewa had their faces blacked and were awaiting orders to begin. Friend
was to be killed first. Mr. Ewen’s people had taken all their arms and
ammunition off to the hulk. Girdwood had just cast 100 bullets for his own
use Everyman ranted in the “raw head and bloody bones’ style, and
every one of them had had confidential yarns with chiefs, and knew their
grievances and what was going to happen. I asked one man who ‘ knew all
about it” what the natives were going to “rise” for, and what they expected to
get when they had risen ? “ Well,” he said, “they won’t stand it any longer,
they’re sick of it.” “What have they got to complain of? I asked. Oh
everything. They’re jumped on by the Government, made to work without
546
FIJI
CHAP.


pay when they could get lots of work and fair pay for it too. This native-
tax business won’t do ; it will burst up directly and there will be an awful
row. However, I have got a good rifle and a revolver or two,” etc. etc.
This was the general burden of the song—no particulars, no anything.
Mere rant with a strong dash of real funk. We had a lot of passengers,
new men, and they asked me what I was going to do. Wasn’t I going
back to see the Governor and urge some measures of instant defence and
precaution. When I said No, that I was familiar with white man’s
twaddle, they were almost disposed to be rude. On I went to Deuba, and
from there through the mountains. Everywhere quietness, hospitality,
and a desire to do what was asked. I arranged for the planting of sugar
at Deuba, distributed a quantity of coffee seed to the Serua people, and then
on. All through Namosi I found the coffee nurseries looking beautiful.
Langton was with me, and I left him there.
Mr. Mackenzie, an old coffee-planter, who was my guest and companion,
aided and assisted with his advice, and was in perfect rapture with the
plants and the land.
The chief and the people of Namosi were in ecstasies, and clearings
commenced in all directions. I went from town to town on the Wai dina,
and found everything satisfactory.
On the 26th I arrived at the Sugar Mill (Edwards’), and here I heard
wonderful news again. Men some fools and some scoundrels—had been,
to use Edwards’ words, “flying up and down the river.” Na Musadroka
and fellows of his stamp were interviewed something in this style:—
“ Tell me, Musadroka, when does this row begin ? ”
“Row, Acava ?” 1
“Oh this £ vere,’ 2 to kill all the white men and defy the Government.
We know all about it, you know, so you may as well tell me the time.”
“Isa, I know nothing about it.”
“But aren’t you going to fight the Government, like the New Cale-
donian natives ? ”
“Acava era a cakava mai Niu Kalitonia ? ” 3
The ass tells him, 4 and adds : “But you can’t do that certainly, for the
Government have disarmed you ; all the guns have gone up to Nasova.”
The chief: “ But if we want to kill a white man we can kill him without
a gun. We can fire his house and cut him down with axe. and club as he
runs out. That was our way before you came.”
The ass now leaves, goes up the river, and announces that Na Musa-
droka has told him he doesn’t care a d for the Government; as for their
guns, the Government can keep them ; they will kill with club and axe,
etc., etc.
In addition to asses, mischievous men are about. The Fiji Times darkly
hints something is afoot, and says the Government will nurse its bantling
(the taxation scheme) until it (the scheme) ‘‘turns and rends it! !! ” Parr,
it is said, writes and sends a special messenger to Ratu Epeli (we are trying
now to trace this), and the natives generally are getting as excited as the
1 What? 2 Plot>
3 What have they done in New Caledonia ?
4 There had been a serious native rising against the French in New Caledonia.
547
XXII
FIJI


whites, so that any foolish chief desiring to die for notoriety’s sake, or any
half-dozen flash young bloods dying for a row, have all the ingredients for
a small but disagreeable one at hand.
In Levuka the lies and excitement are wonderful. I have been killed
and eaten in half-a-dozen different ways, and people, even from Nasova,
won’t call on my wife for fear she will ask them about the news.
Maudslay, so I am told, questions common fellows coming up from Bau,
and it soon gets wind that there is a funk at Hasova. People want Wilkin-
son to start for Bau or Rewa, to write to the paper, and even Mr. Des Yceux
loses temper because W. declares it’s all lies and nothing but lies.
While almost stormy discussions are going on at Nasova, the “insurgent ”
chiefs, Rewa and Tai Levu, are with me preparing lands for sugar, and for
sale to the mill-owners, Spence and Co. They put a large area of land
freely at Government disposal. They decide to plant over 400 acres of cane
jointly for taxes, and with every expression of joy they hand over their
eldest sons to go per Gunga to school in Sydney as you desired, “This looks
not like rebellion.” But at the prospect of a row between Government and
native, numbers of people take no pains to conceal their delight. And lam
certain, more so than ever, that unless the whites are deterred from
mischief-making by the fear of heavy punishment, there will be trouble here
ere long—not trouble on a large scale, but far larger than will be agreeable.
Let me suppose a case, one that might happen any day. Let it be remem-
bered that there are men in Fiji who would willingly die by rifle-shot or
bayonet if they felt sure of their names going down to posterity with
notoriety. Let it not be forgotten, also, that a well-known proverb hath
it, “a mate na cegu ” (death is rest). When a barbaric people love
notoriety, are prone to gain it at any cost, and are careless of death, they
want delicate handling. Suppose some chief, urged by whites, says he will
not pay any more taxes, or will not do something else that he ought to do,
and is ready in the event of being dealt with for contumacy to show fight
for it ? What should be done ? Hundreds of his people would go with him
to their death because he was their chief. The veneer of Christianity would
peel off, and their chief would again be their God. Hundreds of others
would join him because he had done a bold though foolish thing. The
supremacy of the law and of the Crown would have to be maintained. A
few homesteads would be sacked, a few families destroyed or reduced in
number, a few hundred natives would be killed off, and then we should
report all quiet again.
On the other hand difficulty might arise with an insolent, bold people
like the people of Kadavu. They—thanks in a great measure to Swanston’s
teaching while magistrate there—care for no one, chief or Government
officer. Their chief cannot control them ; they do as they like. The flash
men take any man’s wife or daughter they can make an assignation with.
Yei batakoci and Yei dauci are as much the order of the day as the morn-
ing and afternoon meal. The favourite places of meeting are the village
chapels, which (ask Friend and my man Lomberg) are largely attended at
night by both sexes. Constant communication is going on between this
place and Rewa. Whites are constantly over there, and instilling their
minds with all sorts of evil notions.
One matter is the labour question. They say, Why should the Govern-
548
CHAP.
FIJI


ment put all sorts of restrictions on your going to labour or leaving your
island when you please ? Why should the Government stop your buying
grog ? Why should you plant cotton when the whites don’t do it ? Why
should the Government prevent a white man giving you credit ? Why can’t
you buy boats (rotten) as you please ? Why are you prevented leasing your
land or selling it unless the Government intends taking it all ? etc. etc., and
so on ad nauseam. As regards what is said to them about taxes, the above
is harmless twaddle. Now, constant dripping wears a stone, some mud will
stick if enough is thrown, and this “ damned ” iteration will not be without
effect.
But for the whites, many of whom are unwittingly sowing dragons’
teeth, the natives would be a mere crowd of laughing, tractable children.
Of course I have thought over this matter daily, and my idea is that we
should “go straight” at the whites, not the blacks. Now is the time,
while the white population is small, and while their minds are prepared for
it. Settlers coming in hereafter will come to a settled order of things ;
they will know that order before they come in, and they will accept the
position when here. Up to almost to-day all our settlers have come from
Australia and New Zealand—all democratic, all full of a sense of their own
wisdom, ability, and responsibility ; all determined to assert these rights
and push their way to whatever they may consider the front. If they
don’t like the Government policy, they think to upset it in the way they
would do at Sydney or Melbourne with a Jack M‘Elhone or a Graham Berry.
They lie freely, and harangue the “working man.”
The incoming men of means from Ceylon and other Crown colonies will
not do this sort of thing —at least I think not. They are familiar with the
exercise of the Crown power. But even with the former class I think a
good deal of their action is owing to the fact that the Government has not
declared itself. They do not know on authority what is the mind or policy
of the Governor. If the Governor said to-morrow: “Now, gentlemen,
look here. lam the Governor, and responsible only for all that takes place
in this colony, and especially am I answerable to Her Majesty in all matters
affecting the native race. Please understand, therefore, that I will not
allow you, either directly or indirectly, to interfere with my policy in the
manner that you have hitherto done. If you do so I will punish you
promptly and severely. Let there be no doubt in your minds about my
determination. If you take exception to any of my measures or to my
native policy, you are at liberty to make your views known to Her Majesty’s
Government in the usual way, but you shall not intrude your opinions and
advice between myself and the natives of the colony directly”—or some-
thing to similar effect, people would simply shrug their shoulders and say,
“Now we know where we are ; before we did not.”
If the Indian law required a jury, could not the jury clause be struck
out ? Juries are more of a survival than anything else. But I suppose it
would be impossible. Then put the Deportation Ordinance in force, or
rather (for it is in force) use it. The 2nd and 3rd clauses would work
marvels, and one or two “ removals, ” pour encourager les autres would most
likely eradicate the mischief. Remove a man like Burness from Tavua,
Parr from all districts but Lomai Yiti, and caution one or two others.
I do think the direct plan, acted upon early and firmly, would be the
549
XXII
FIJI


most effective and safest plan of the two. Our object is to make the
native also respect the Government, but a native will think in his own way.
They know that Parr, for instance, has written the Imperial Government,
charging the Governor and many of his officers with all sorts of wrong-
doing. These things are all communicated to men like Timothy, and they
spread. They know he writes to papers, and that he is the moving spirit
against the Government. They know he spends his money freely on this
object, and they believe the Government is afraid of him. Wilkinson tells
me he has adopted, or been given, the name Nai ka dina, “the real thing”
or “the true one.” Now, if the Governor walked this gentleman out of
Rewa for two years, and cautioned his myrmidon Shave (Manager at Rewa),
the natives would know instantly wdio was “Nai ka diua” ; but if they
were told not to go near him under some “tabu levu” regulation, they
would think him more important than ever. Besides, in the present day
the ‘ £ tabu ” would be of no effect to what it was in Swanston’s time.
Then a man was dependent for everything on the native. The “tabu
levu ” was an extreme form of excommunication ; even food and water
might be cut off, so the sufferer had to leave or die. But now, with the
exception of labour, and not that to a great degree, every man is independent
of the natives, and the “tabu,” even if obeyed, would work no real good.
The white and his party would say to the natives, “You are forbidden
to go near this man, because he is your friend, because he fights your
battles,” etc. “If he has done wrong, why does not the Government punish
him ?” “Because it cannot do so. He is a Kai Peritania and a free man.”
“You are Kai Vitis and slaves to the Government,” etc. Looking at it
in this light, which I believe is the true one, the “tabu levu” would not
effect the object in view. I vote for going straight at the enemy, so that
he or they and all on-lookers shall know exactly what can and will be done
to keep fools and dangerous people in order.
Fiji Times —l do not think this could be bought out. It would be no
use to do so ; another one of the same type would soon rear its head. But
Ave ought to have another paper. If any man of sense would go in for the
Argus, that would be something better than our present state.
Since my November letter you will have read some further free remarks
on Gorrie, and will observe that I arrived after further reflection at the con-
clusion that he “did not mean harm.” As you say, he does not understand
the policy. He has been an altered man since the storm burst a month or
so ago, and now we get on admirably.
M‘Arthur, as you know, did not come to Fiji. Business in the other
colonies prevented him. Timoci has behaved very badly, and is now
rusticating near Yiwa. The Vuni Yalu Avas in a dreadful frame of mind
when Tim was suspended—not on Tim’s account, whom he talked of
hanging, but for fear that Lomai Yiti should have any other than a Bau
Roko. Ratu Vuki is a good man, but when Naitasiri can have its own
chief, or even now, I think, Ratu Epeli would be the best officer to take the
management, and the people would prefer it. But all this will stand over
until your return.
We shall be anxious to see how our coolies go off. Mitchell will have
plenty then to do, and I hope planters Avho have money will take them off
our hands. Coffee promises to be a great success here. My late journey
550
CHAP.
FIJI


through the hills and down the Waidina was very pleasant. What a vast
area of land waiting its coffee planter. lam more than ever convinced
that, with management and ordinary good luck, this colony ere long will
be a rich and thriving one. My native coffee plantations at Bua are bearing,
and my nurseries in “Colo” (now being planted out) are simply looking
splendid. I noticed everywhere large numbers of children. The natives
themselves say they think people are increasing in number. The Tokalau
ringworm, however, is everywhere. It is a very great pity, and most
strenuous efforts must be made to stop its progress. It is a common thing
to see a clean-skinned man and a ring-wormed one sitting “dos a dos ” ; and
there lies the difficulty in dealing with it.
The boys I am sending to school on your account, as directed, are
Ratu Peniah, or Ratu Kadavu Levu, Epeli’s son by his wife—a fine, bright
lad, and of high rank 1 ; and Roko Tui Sawan, Tui Dreketi’s son—he is of
the first rank among Rewa chiefs, and an intelligent, nice boy. I hope you
will approve of all I do in the matter. They are to be given over on the
20th, and will stay with me till the 29th, when they will leave for Sydney
in the Gunga.
No hurricane —and I think we are now safe. What a blessing ! I dread
the effect of last year’s drought— a hurricane would have been a finisher.
You will regret to hear that poor Mrs. Des Yoeux has lost her child. It
was a wonderfully fine boy, and only ill for a few hours. We hear that
Lady Gordon is not returning with you, for which we are very sorry.
Please give her the kind regards of my wife and self, I fear I have no
particular news that would interest her. Nasova is more comfortable now
it is shingled. The drawing-room also should be roofed in same manner.
The garden is as usual. Trees getting larger, but they want Abbey
cruising among them in the early morning.
You speak, I see, of Eyre having sent Minutes of Council on hand, but
you omitted to enclose the intended notes. My late arrival in Levuka and
the mass of work to be seen to after a few days’ absence has prevented my
reading Parr’s letter to Mr. Herbert. By this mail Parr sends another
idiotic letter to Sir Michael Hicks-Beach. You will see in files of Times
which I send the lame and impotent conclusion of the Chamber of Commerce
in its crusade against native taxation. I shall write a memo, to go by
next mail. This will be the last note you can receive before starting, so
let me again thank you very much for all you have done for me. The
relief to my mind is more than I can express. Remember me very kindly
to Knollys and Arthur Gordon, who I hope to see here with you about
August, if you leave after the receipt of this. —Believe me, etc.
From Mr. Wilkinson
Bua, Friday night, March 14, 1879. —Dear Sir—l got here last night, and
lam sorry to say found the chief just up from a very serious illness. He
was able to sit up, but that was all, of course. I am very glad there are
some signs of recovery, but he is very weak. As far as he was able, we
1 Now (1903) the able and energetic Roho Tui of Tai Levu. —S.
551
XXII
FIJI


chatted on the various matters of his province, general and particular.
He was much pleased at your Excellency’s decision about the land at
Wainunu “ Muanacula.” It remains just as it was before the inquiry,
until the Executive shall have considered the matter.
Things general in the province are favourable, but rather afraid that
this effort at the balance of the tax will interfere with the present year as
soon as it is announced, but he hopes to do most of it with Beche de Mer.
Food is plentiful, but there is a good deal of sickness about —influenza and
cough. The census has been very successfully taken. A meeting of Bulis
is called for Monday.
Wailevij, Saturday night. —We got ashore here about 4 p.m., the Swan
going on to her anchorage. The Buli had gone home, but soon returned.
This is a good town, and well kept. He is an active man, and keeps his
people well in hand, and is anxious for their advancement in industrious
habits, and is therefore very pleased to receive his quota of 50 lbs. of
coffee seed, complaining only that it was not three times as much. One
thing, he is evidently very much against the residence of the white police
sergeant and the erection of a gaol near his town, and I am strongly dis-
posed to support his objections. Hot having heard it was decided upon, or
being in possession of all the “pros and cons,” I cannot but think the
measure rather unadvised, and I know the R. T. Cakau supports the
Buli’s objections.
This is a splendid district for food, and there will soon be tons for sale.
He is erecting a large shed for canoe-building purposes. The town is at
present full of strangers—young men on their way to Yuniloa to a Solevu
(in Natewa bay), and are spending Sunday here on their way.
I find the message summoning the Bose Yakayasana has been here a
week, and the Buli is preparing with the chiefs of towns to leave on
Monday, but says he will delay two days more and put in his coffee seed,
so as to put in a claim for more. There is a boundary dispute between this
district and Korolevu in Natewa Bay, but I have no doubt it will come up
at the meeting. It is rather an important question, involving the lands
of people of a considerable inland tribe conquered by this man with the
assistance of Cakaudrovi, and I rather think the Roko Tui favours the
Korolevu claim.
Somosomo, Tuesday morning. — l reached this at 7 A.M., and had a
short interview with the R. T. Cakau, who is well and in good spirits,
preparing for the Bose which is to be held at Wainikele. As he is sending
his vessel Gone Alewa to Levuka, I will close this to your Excellency.
The tax appears to be coming in fairly, and I think may be completed.
He is very pleased at your Excellency’s decision to sell no more land at
present here, and quite delighted with the plan of the island, which he
very soon will sufficiently understand. He expressed surprise at seeing so
much of Yuna gone.
I join the Swan to-morrow at the north end of the island, and proceed
on to Lau, and I hope to be able to get through the work there to be back
here about the 16th inst., all being well. And desire to remain, etc.
552
OHAP.
FIJI


From Mr. Wilkinson
Nasova, March 29, 1879.—Dear Sir—The Gunga, with the mail, got in
last night, and I am in receipt of your Excellency’s note of January 29,
with enclosures, and I am surprised again to find from Mr. Maudslay,
acting P.S., there is every probability of letters by this mail reaching
England before you leave. So, not having kept a diary letter, I must give
a summary of the events of the month. There has not been anything of
importance.
Before this you will have heard all that has been done with Timoci, and
I am sorry to say that he is not abiding by the Government orders not to
exercise any chiefly rights or authority. He sent a vessel to Gau the other
day with orders to the Buli Sawayake to fill up the Dalo planted by the Ra
chiefs while there, and, if that was not sufficient for them, to fill up the
vessel. Of course it was done, but the Buli Sawayake had the courage to
protest to him. He is constantly sending begging letters here for all
sorts of things; to Samoni, to Mr. Cocks, and others for kerasine, Waini-
malt (really grog), biscuits, etc. Of course to such (Ratus Samoni, etc.) it
is a temptation to do wrong, and must be stopped.
You say, sir, “Something must be done to make the Tabu on spirits
more effectual.” I do not think anything will be effectual but heavy
penalties. At present two classes give grog: one, the respectable, who
(either out of respect, or as a gentlemanly act towards a chief) give a glass or
more and regard the fine as a joke or little more, should they be brought
to book. From such there is not much to fear. But not so the other class, who
generally give grog for some advantage either in trade or to pave the way
into some house or family for immoral purposes with the women ; if for the
former reason it generally pays them, and the fine is ho real loss should they
be found out; if for the latter reason, the gratification of passion is not gener-
ally valued at the amount of cost. Why should the fine be less here than it
is in Victoria ? There it is not less than £5O or more than £5OO, I believe,
or a publican may lose his licence. Let the law here be similar. Say, a
trader to lose his licence for three years after the first offence. But the
£5O itself would be sufficient check for all small traders. lam satisfied
nothing hut a more severe measure will form sufficient remedy for the evil.
Your Excellency’s third —“ Has anything been done to make a beginning
in the matter of clearing up native land ownership questions ? ” From the
report of the Bose I have no doubt you will see that a great deal has been
done, and on the whole satisfactory—that is, from a native point of view.
The next thing, of course, is the law or regulation to make it law. I have
no doubt it wants putting into shape, but I think if adopted it is by far the
best and most practical, well suited to the capabilities of the people.
Your fourth —“ Native Education.” Something is being done, although
I am sorry to say very little. Mr. Des Voeux has asked me for my views
on the question which I am now preparing, that is the industrial, and very
much endorse the views expressed by the Bose on the subject, which on the
whole are what I have already laid before your Excellency. The idea is that
there shall be two—one on Yanua Levu and the other on Na Yiti Levu,
Of course one only started the first year ; and, all things considered, I
think it will be best, especially as it will greatly reduce the risk of failures
553
XXII
FIJI


and difficulties generally. The selection of the site is of the utmost import-
ance, and somewhere in the neighbourhood of Nasavusavu bay has been
named as the most central for the Yanua Levu one ; and it should comprise
the five Provinces of Lau, Cakaudrovi, Macuata, Bua, and Lomai Yiti.
The first batch of students ought to be older than would be admitted after-
wards, and have a good proportion of married men. At the rate of two
from each district it would give 106 to begin with, and the same number
each year would of course give an establishment over 500 strong. They then
could commence to return to their homes. Only a few volunteers, or very
superior youths selected by the Managing Board, allowed to stay two years
longer with increased advantages and privileges on leaving. Probably it
would be wise to allow at least a portion of the original men to withdraw
on the third or fourth year. Besides the allotment, I think volunteers
ought always to be admitted under regulations, and, I should say, any or
all races, with half-castes. The management, I think, ought to be in the
Native Regulation Board and the Native Commissioner under the Governor
as Managing Director. Its whole affairs would then come under the super-
vision of the Bose Yakaturaga. The chiefs must be directly connected with
the management if it is to be a success in the widest sense. They must
have, and feel they have, a real responsibility in it. Their desire for the
thing to be started is most encouraging. I am disposed to suggest the
Yanua Levu one be started first. The chiefs are better to manage. A
site will be more easily got, and as it is purposed to do it “ vakacoko,” that
would be—as it always is—much better managed under chiefs who are
Turaga-Taukei.
Then, as sugar is to be started in the Gardens of Yiti Levu, that will
give them much occupation this year. I think Mr. Thurston and I will be
likely to agree in all points but the site. He is all in favour of Gau, but
the chiefs are against it, and the Gau people dread its going there. I
suggest one Principal (Friend, I suppose), four assistants during the first
year, an agriculturist, and, as early as possible after, a carpenter. All
whites connected with it to be proved men. It is purposed the “ vakacoko ”
by Bua, Macuata, and Cakaudrovi; Gau and Lomai Yiti helping with
furniture, as mats, sinnet, etc., and food for the first start.
Of course, these are rough and crude enough, but they are in the main
my own and the chiefs’ ideas. The course of instruction and all the detail
of payment are subjects for future consideration, and can be dealt with by
the board from time to time.
The importance of your fifth question —“What can be done to check the
inculcation of discontent among the natives by a few disaffected whites ? ”
is getting more and more important ; and that something must be done or
we shall have trouble there is nothing so true or so sure. About a fortnight
ago, intimating that a general rising to massacre the whites was being
meditated, soon after the excitement had become, as some calculated,
serious, and it was soon reported from Rewa that the disturbance had
broken out. Suva-was said to be put into a state of defence (M‘Ewan and
Co,), that labourers were being armed and drilled. Fear and dread became
intense ;at times it taxed all powers to be cool. I was convinced there
was not a word of truth in the matter, but as many in Ovalau said,
“ Where’s your proof, Wilkinson ? ” my reply was simply, “ Where’s yours ? ”
554
CHAP.
FIJI


Fortunately Mr. Des Yoeux remained as cool and unbelieving as possible,
my fear being that something would be forced upon me that would show or
indicate to the natives that we had a fear, or to some extent believed. Of
course, without making any special or specific enquiry, we heard every day
from Tailevu, Rewa, and round there by the canoes coming into Levuka,
and peace and quiet was the only thing heard ; besides which, I knew Mr.
Thurston was in the neighbourhood : finally they . had it on the beach he
was clubbed, then eaten ; then that he and I together had run away or been
driven out of a town on the river, etc., and of course every native in or out
of Levuka was being plied with all sorts of questions, and not a few came
to me wanting to know the meaning of it all. My reply was that it was
simply one of the foolish ways of the white man, and one man said, “ Yes,
Sir, it’s what I always say to our people when they begin to tell of what Mr.
this or that says or does or tells what is going to happen. The white man
is like the kingfisher ; he gets on to a branch and makes a great noise, but
the moment another bird comes in sight he screams and flies away.’ Now
that the whole is over many who were most excited and apprehensive, and
urgent that “something should be done,” say now, “What folly to take
any notice of such things.’’ I am sure no one will so clearly understand
the true position as your Excellency, or think it folly to allow something to
be done to protect a race, at once superstitious and excitable to almost any
extent, from the influences to evil and disaffection toward the Government,
the truth or falsehood of which he knows little or nothing, or only as much
as he knows of the motives which influence the whites in their continual and
bitter tirade against the Government, or policy, or anything else. No one
knows better than your Excellency the native fondness for novelty and
change, or his aptness to be taught—which is no doubt of the greatest value
in his education and improvement, but, diverted into channels of mischief
under designing and bad men, it simply converts or develops the docile and
teachable into the cunning desperate savage.
The more sensible of the body of the people, I believe, regard the whites
as all having designs upon their rights and lands, and hate them accordingly,
looking only to the Government as their only protection, but the common
and ignorant people will follow their leader for good or for evil.
The position of the Government is fully recognised by all —believed in
and trusted ; but it is assailable from a white man’s point of view, and
it is being assailed continually daily through a thousand channels, which
in a civilised or equal race would cause little more than amusement, but
here is fraught, sir, with the most imminent danger to both Government
and people. I think you know me, sir, not to be an alarmist, but see
and feel there is danger to both peace and the race. And the remedy we
have in our own hands. It is a short ordinance that the whites shall not
interfere with the natives to influence them against the Government, or any
of its measures, under heavy penalties and punishments ; and one case will
probably quash the whole thing. Ido not think the deportation law could
meet the requirement, but of course it has never been tried, and is generally
supposed by the whites to apply to the natives only, and considered by them
a very good thing. I believe it is better to face the evil at once, and to do
it boldly and effectually. Let the whites agitate, complain, or do anything
else they like among themselves, and to their hearts’ content, but say plainly to
555
XXII
FIJI


them “ one word or intimation you shall not speak or give to a native against
the Government or its policy, or you will be punished with such severity as
shall make it a caution to you and yours forever,” on the principle that
it is better to punish one man than have to arrange the slaughter and
sacking of whole homesteads and families ; and anything short of the most
decisive and severe measures will be ineffectual. Just now the feeling is so
strong against the agitators that such a feeling would be rather hailed
than otherwise by every respectable and sensible man in the Colony.
One day, when the excitement was very high, I was stopped on the beach
by some three or four, and asked what I thought about the rumours, if there
was any truth in them, or real danger. I said my opinion is that there is no
cause of fear whatever. I stood perhaps a quarter of an hour, and by that
time there were eight or ten probably, all respectable men, merchants, and
all unhesitatingly denounced all agitators (Parr and Co. were mentioned),
and called upon the Government to put them down with a strong hand,
or deport them, whoever they were. When life and property are at stake,
men as a rule abandon ideas and theories. Then I say it is only just to the
native that he should be protected from the influence and inculcation of
a spirit of discontent against the Government, which up to the present
time all look upon as their great chief and friend.
Roko Tui Namosi’s rights and interests are, I think, being looked after,
but that affair with Carew was most unfortunate, as no one could support
the chief s action with reference to that man ; still nothing severe was done,
at all events outside the Bose. Some of the chiefs spoke pretty sharply
to him there, and I think it did good to all. Your Excellency’s last
paragraph is to me a source of thankful pleasure, but it also discloses a
truth I feel every day, and I long for your return, I hope I try to do my
whole duty to these people as well as to the trust you place in my judg-
ment, but I feel it’s only with help from on high and under the blessing
of a gracious Providence that the work can be accomplished or succeed ; but
it is encouraging to feel that we are thus making some progress. But, sir,
your return is very much needed. I hate to complain of others, especially to
their superiors, but things are not as they ought to be or might be. This
almost seeking opportunities to take offence at another treading on ones
toes is not in my opinion either consistent or dignified, and is doing the
service real harm, because of course every clerk sees, hears, knows, and
sympathises with his chief in what is going on. I told Macgregor the other
day, it may be true that Thurston is egotistical, grasping, and overbearing,
and has fifty other faults and failings, but none of them will alter the fact that
he is both able to do and does the work, which cannot be said of the chiefs
of all departments. I shall hail your safe return, sir ; and every chief of
the land is looking forward with much concern to the time —not but Mr.
Des Yoeux is very much liked by all, but he is not Sir Arthur Gordon. If
anything was to happen to prevent your Excellency’s return it would be
regarded as a calamity.
There is nothing very strange or special to report during the month.
I ought to say that Mr. Cocks has married Miss Raddock, and I feel sure
they will have your best wishes.
I paid a flying visit to Bua—the chief is well, and all things going on
all right; there is but one opinion, that food was never so plentiful, notwith-
556
CHAP.
FIJI


standing the abundant supply to the Bos6, and the drought. Somehow or
other it was given out at a meeting that Bua and Macuata tax was paid
up or nearly so, and the former is very near \ behind, and the latter nearly
i, and nothing or but very little has been done since in either place ;
still the chief says they will make it up this year, as they are going to fish
Beche de Mer largely. There has been abundance of rain, and two coffee
plantations not two years old are bearing. I have urged upon Mr.
Thurston to distribute the fifty lb. of seed to each Buli throughout the
group this year. And have printed instructions for making nursery. (I
shall enclose one.) If this is fully carried out it will give every Buli over
100,000 plants for planting out next year.
So far the taking of the census on the 11th of March has been a success ;
and by the time all are in, and we get them compiled, we shall have a very
correct estimate of the population. I think it will be a trifle under the
mission estimate.
The Bose Yakayasana of Lomaiviti has just been held, and all things are
very satisfactory. The Buli of Ndletokabau or Koro is dismissed for bad
conduct. The returns of births and deaths for 1878 are complete, and show
an increase of the former over the latter, for the Province, of 32 —the births
are 139, deaths 107. The largest increase is Sawaiyake, where there are
15 births and 2 deaths. Moturiki is the worst, 5 births and 11 deaths.
Levuka 13 births and 22 deaths. These are the only two that show a
decrease.
£351 was distributed as refund of taxes at the close of the meeting,
which gave great satisfaction. Roko Tui Ba being here, I got him to
stay to the meeting, and his presence did good.
He has had a writ served upon him by Evans for £7OO damages. The Ba
people drove Evans and his “Dri” 1 fishers off the reefs, and he now sues
the Roko Tui for damages. Of course it has been handed to the Attorney-
General for defence, and the trial I have got postponed for three months, as
of course I must be here myself, and I have a hope your Excellency may
be back before it comes off, as it is really a most important case—several had
been driven off from different places, and should Evans succeed, others will
no doubt try.
I leave for windward by Black Swan. I will detain her one day at Bua,
in order to communicate with Macuata ; one day in Nasavusavu, calling
at Somosomo, and fix the day for their meeting ; and at Lomaloma will
detain her three days, to hold the meeting there for which I expect Maafu
is all ready. I return in her to Taviuni, and after the meeting there, come
on in my own boat. I shall in all probability be away a month or there-
about.
I am afraid your Excellency will be a little put out at the turn affairs
have taken in Toga, and I confess I am surprised that the Germans have got
such an advantage over Maudslay with the King. Still I think there is
still hope, if they be carefully watched. Chances are almost sure to arise,
and if taken at the right time, may turn the German policy against them-
selves entirely. I should strongly advise Gu being got to visit here for
a couple of months, especially when Baker has left.
1 Beche de Mer.
557
XXII
FIJI


Maafu says he cannot understand Tubou’s weakness, and he is more anti-
German than ever : it is very pleasing to see the effect increase of population
is having upon both him and the other chiefs ; and it is greatly strengthening
their attachment to the Government and its policy.
Everything possible is being done to get all native products and
industries well represented at Sydney Exhibition ; but I am afraid the time
is rather short, there being only two clear months. A circular has been
sent to the Roko Tuis, and a list with instructions is printed for distribution.
Wednesday morning, 7.30, April 2, 1879. —I must close this, sir, as Mr.
Maudslay has just sent to say he is sealing up the bag. I have just heard
that Roko Tui Tailevu is in, and that Parr wrote him a letter about the
rising of the natives to avenge Ratu Timoci, dismissed ! And it was his
letter which was the first intimation at Bau of any such feeling ! The Roko
Tui was very much annoyed and put out, and expressed himself as surprised
that whites are allowed to spread lies of such a kind amongst natives.
Hoping soon to have the honour of welcoming you back in our midst.—l
am, etc.
From Mr. Thurston
Nasova, April 27, 1879.—My dear Sir—Mr. Des Yoeux and I landed from
the Cormorant at 6 p.m. yesterday, and found your letters had arrived the
day before. You will regret to hear the cause of our absence, viz. to bury
Tui Cakau, and make arrangements for the executive duties of the large
province of Cakaudrovi. The following is a resume of the affair. If it is
too brief, pardon me, I am tired, worried, and not very well.
On Sunday night last, i.e. 20th, at 9 p.m., messengers from Somosomo
entered the house, having pulled all the way in a canoe from Taviuni, and
announced the death of “ Ra Turaga,” with a request that I would come up
immediately. The hereditary herald of Cakaudrovi, ‘‘ Ko mai Kavula, ” 1 went
on to Mr. Des Yoeux. He went to report, and say he was going on to Bau.
Native law or custom required that the event should be reported to the
Vu-ni-Yalu, and leave obtained to bury the deceased chief. What better
proof could possibly be given of the position of the man whom Goodenough
and Layard described as not “king,” but “an influential or important chief.”
{En parenthese. When Cakobau dies —the Kai Lefuka, originally Bau men
Maafu’s men, will have to be present at the burial—they also “buli” or
crown him, for want of a better word). The boat with a fresh crew and
“Ko mai Kavula” went on at 10.30 to Bau. Happily Wilkinson arrived
at Somosomo from Lau, the day before Tui Cakau died.
He wrote me in great haste, and I regret having torn up his note.
Wilkinson found him suffering from what looked like cold accompanied by
high fever. On the evening of the day of his arrival, the 17th, the chief
grew delirious ; he raved all night, got easy at 1 A.M., and died at 4 quite
easily, but without recovering sensibility. The excitement in Somosomo
was very great, and it was well that Wilkinson was there. Cakobau says
it was “Nona lewa na Kalou” (God’s appointment). It was also fortunate
the death was sudden and at night, or Somosomo would probably have
1 “He from Kavula.”
558
CHAP.
FIJI


been burnt and some of Golea’s (Tui Cakau) family been clubbed by the
Rakuru branch, i.e. those who murdered his father Tui Kila-Kila. As it
was, the presence of Wilkinson, and his tact and intimate knowledge of men
and their family history and connections, turned the scale, and things went
on quietly and contentedly.
Mr. Des Yoeux first detained Black Swan , intending to send me up, but
I advised his going in the Cormorant personally, and as the weather was fine
and he wanted a change, we left on Wednesday morning (23rd). There went
with Cakobau, Ratu Epeli, Roko Tui Dreketi, Ratu Elijah, Ratu Jo, and the
“Matas.” We steamed up in nine and a half hours. No news had reached
Taviuni of the presence of a man-of-war, and the “Rakuru” people were
asking, “ Where is the ‘ Kovavna ’ (Governor) ? Where is the ‘ Matanitu ’? ”
The little Cormorant flew up the straits, passed the little island of
Koro Levu at the rate of ten knots, and dropped her anchor within speaking
distance of the town. The effect was magical —the murmurers shrunk out
of hearing. The “Matanitu” (Government) had dropped in force, as if
from the clouds.
Next day we called on the widow, and consulted with regard to the
future (I do not mean consulted with her) ; in the end it was decided to
adopt the following : question of succession to await your arrival and the
meeting of* the chiefs at Bau in September ; the chiefs then to submit to
your Excellency the course they would adopt if acting on their own behalf,
your Excellency to decide.
Meantime the executive work to go on under the following commission :
Ratu Kuila (Komai na Koro vo).
Mata Ki Toga.
Ratu Semi.
Ratu Maika.
All the Bulis and native magistrates were present, and the order seemed
to give perfect satisfaction. The foregoing men are all of Ratu Golea’s (Tui
Cakau’s) family, and the “ Kai Cakaudrovi ” are all in favour of that family
remaining in power.
Ratu Kuila is nearly dead, but I believe everything will go on well.
The funeral took place at 3 p.m. of Friday 25th and was most interest-
ing. A large concourse of natives were present, and nearly all the men and
otticers from H.M.S. Cormorant under arms ; the ship’s company landed at
1.30, and piled arms under the coconut grove at 2 p.m. The Lieutenant-
Governor, Captain Bruce, Maudslay, and myself landed the Cormorants ; over
a hundred presented arms to the Lieutenant-Governor, and then fell in, and
followed him to the house in which the widow alone sat with the dead
chief (the house was “tabu”) ; the Lieutenant-Governor with those named
above, with Wilkinson, Blyth, and the officers, entered (tabu does not affect
the papalagi), and the guard fell in outside. The chief was in an enormous
coffin made of “yacca,” and the coffin was enveloped in numerous folds of
the finest Masi. Owing to measures adopted by Wilkinson and the natives,
no suspicion even of death pervaded the house.
According to custom (for it is tabu to carry a great chief out of a door-
way), the end of the house had been carefully cut down ; the wind which
was blowing swept through the building, which you may remember is a
very large one ; and but for the presence of the gigantic coffin, and that of
559
XII
FIJI


the Catholic Priest and his attendants, we might have supposed that we
had met for a feast or for an important “hose.” After a short service by
a Roman Catholic Priest, the “ Wai ni keli” men (who alone are allowed to
touch a dead Tui Cakau) came in and lifted up the body and bore it
forward ; Adi Lousiana his widow, and Adi Eliza his sister, followed the chief,
then the Lieutenant Governor, the Yum Yalu and myself (representing
Ratu Lala), and so on. The natives came within a certain distance of the
enclosed “yavu” and then sat down, it being “tabu” to approach closer.
A short service was held at the grave, three volleys were fired, and—with all
his faults —the boldest, proudest, and truest spoken chief in Fiji was hidden
by the earth which, to use his exact words, “ had drained ” his father’s blood.
His grave was the “foundation” or “yavu” on which Tui Kilakila was
murdered by Ratu Kuila, Ratu Cakobau, and others. After the burial, Adi
Lousiana sent me his ring : one I had given him in the end of 1873, and of
which the secret meaning was only known to us three. The story is too long
to tell here—suffice it to say, that once when tempted by Maafu to join in
making war on Cakobau, he yielded to my persuasion and disbanded 3000
men he had collected at Na Savusavu. We had a secret meeting, and he
swore a heathen oath —that is, he invoked his father—never to hide’ his real
mind from me, never to commit any hostile or overt act without letting me
know. I gave him the ring, and it was agreed that if he ever felt “yalo
ca ” (ill minded) to the extent of crossing the Rubicon —that the ring with-
out a word should be sent to me beforehand. When he put it on he said,
“Sa Yinaka (very good), when I am dead then shall the ring be sent to
you.” He once lost the ring in Somosomo waterhole, and had hundreds of
men searching till they actually found it, and thus it came to Lousiana’s
knowledge. After this it was locked up in a small box, where it remained
until; given to me with the words “Sa mate Ko Ra Turaga ” (The Lord
Chief is dead ”).
Mr. Des Yceux addressed the people in the open “rara.” Mats were
spread, and with all the “qalis” (tribes) of the province present, Yaqona
was presented, and then followed the speech—very good, kind, to the point,
and firm ; natives very much pleased, the few whites present not very much
pleased. Cakobau followed on family matters and past history. As usual,
he was pithy and loyal.
After Mr. Des Yceux went off, I strolled round and had a pipe with some
old friends in the hopes of hearing their views. I also had with me my old
“ vunivola,” Eroni, who stayed ashore altogether and heard on my account.
Our visit and landing the men has done immense service. At first many
of them doubted the object of our visit, but when they saw that the
Lieutenant-Governor had come, first, to direct who should carry on the
work, and second to show his regard for the Roko of the province, they
could not conceal their feelings. One old man, a Buli, said to me, “We
know now more than ever we did that the Matanitu is a Ka dina (true thing)
it is “ noda Matanitu.” You think with us and of us, we know now that we
are of one people, though you are white and we are black.
Another man said to me, referring to some remark he had heard,
“Compliment! this thing is not a compliment (meaning not an empty one),
it is a true regard for our chief and for us. Would the Governor take all
this trouble merely to please us.”
560
CHAP.
FIJI


We left Wilkinson behind to hold the Bose vaka Yasana (Provincial
Council) and remain some days. He had not a moment to write. Maudslay
and Mr. Des Voeux will doubtless both tell you something about this sad
event, and so I will only add that all is well.
Lies—horrible lies—are current everywhere, issued from the papalagi
mint, and they must be stopped, but Mr, Des Voeux won’t touch the matter.
In my opinion the Peace and Good Order Ordinance would soon suffice. One
or two good examples would work marvels, but he does not like putting it
in operation, lam sorry my December letter has gone wrong, and cannot
make it out. I wrote on the Bth and 10th rather a long letter, and cannot
think how the envelopes containing Gorrie’s correspondence should have
reached and the other missed. It was my intention to have enclosed these
notes,, but left them out, and so put them in a separate envelope. Perhaps
you may have got it later.
Parr is a nuisance, he works night and day, and spends a lot of money
in postage. I think I have referred in my former letter to the lies about
suicides, and the matter is referred to in one of the Legislative Council
Reports. Fijians commit suicide, and always have done so—they say “A
mate na cegu ” —“death is rest.” In every case ever coming to my
knowledge during thirteen and a half years’ residence, the causes were
jealousy or wounded pride,—ninety cases out of one hundred would be
jealousy, in no case has there been the slightest suspicion of proof that the
causes were connected with native policy or taxation. But every effort will
be made, every conceivable lie will be uttered to cover the native policy,
and those who support or originate it, with obloquy. For this object the
whites may be considered to be in a solemn league and covenant. They
want the natives, and they will have them if the Colonial Office is not as
firm as a rock.
With all our “ highfalutin” to the contrary, the wrongs we have com-
mitted in the names of Christianity, civilisation, progress are manifold.
We are, as a race, a race of robbers and spoilers. Let it be remembered
that New Zealand for some years past has been adopting principles that
obtained a footing here, even under the Buccaneering Government of
Cakobau ; and it would go further, even to our length if it could, but it
cannot (see excerpt from a late paper).
I say that unless your policy is firmly upheld there will be ‘ ‘fire raising
and home sacking” here in time. Parr and fools like him may say “apres
moi le deluge ”; though for my own part I do not think they have wit
enough to perceive the possibility of highly probable results of their asinine
and most mischievous interference.
The Commodore is just entering from Samoa and Tonga, so I will break
off and resume presently. Many thanks for the confirmation of my appoint-
ment from October 1874, and let me express my regret for the trouble
Treasury is giving about my salary. I have nothing to add to my last, nor
shall I revert to the matter again, feeling that already I have said too
much.
28th, 11 p.m. —We hear from the Commodore that a vessel is to await
you at Thursday Island, on May 28. This being so, it is quite useless my
sending this to England. I shall concert some measure with him to send
this by the vessel ordered to go, and also a bundle of papers, though their
Hi 2 o
561
XXTI
FIJI


contents are nearly all lies. I have just found Wilkinson’s letter, which
was not torn up after all, and so enclose it.
Trusting your New Guinea Cruise may be pleasant and interesting, and
with kindest regards.—Believe me, etc.
From Mr, Thurston
Fiji, May 27. —The misrepresentations of the Times are simply
monstrous. You might have noticed one letter signed “Justice” —a more
than suggestive letter. Would you believe that there is not even the
shadow of foundation for it! I have succeeded in showing the Melbourne
Argus and Age, and also the Sydney Morning Herald and some Queensland
papers, that the editor of our leading rag is a mere “hireling scribe,” —for
such he really is, —and now they take little notice of him. He has lately
walked into the Argus and Herald for dissenting from him, called the latter
“purblind and wrong headed as usual,” so I think we may there leave
them, but we ought to have another paper here. If any decent fellow
could be found to write up the Fiji Argus it would do good, though every-
body knew it was what is commonly called a Government organ.
All Governments have or ought to have their organ. Nothing can be done
with the Times ; it has adopted a role and will keep to it. No land has been
sold in Namosi in the sense in which the news has reached you. A block of
Namosi land at JVavua has been sold. It in no way affects Colo, and when
you know the circumstances, I do.not think you will disapprove of what has
been done. The land soli was land perhaps never occupied, nor in human
probability ever likely to be. The original owners even had all died, but
some two or three. In short, it was “ waste land,” if there is such a thing.
The Leonidas left Calcutta on March 3, and arrived here after seventy-
one days’ passage. You will regret very much to hear that, a day or two
after leaving, a seaman was taken with cholera and died. Ten days out,
one of the interpreters, a Mr. Chick, was taken with smallpox. He was
isolated and successfully treated. But some half-dozen cases of smallpox
have since disclosed themselves amongst the coolies. The cases are very mild,
and the patients are convalescent. We have, however, exercised a most rigid
observance of quarantine. The ship is really as if in a state of siege, but
the fearful risk justifies the most absolute precaution, and I think we have
omitted none (once bit, etc., etc.) Macgregor is working splendidly, quite
equal to the occasion, and the surgeon superintendent on board, a Dr.
Norman Welsh, seems a zealous and efficient officer. We hope to land the
immigrants to-morrow or next day at “ Yanuca lailai,” which is well
guarded, and to which we have conducted water from Ovalou. Nothing
has been left undone to secure ourselves from the risk of infection, and 1
think you need have no anxiety. Money, however, we must spend, but all
economy is being used. Only seventeen deaths, including one sailor, occurred
upon the voyage, and none since arrival. No deaths from smallpox, aIJ
from cholera or dysentery in an acute form. About half-a-dozen are now
under treatment, but all doing well.
Leonidas brings a case or two of plants from Botanic Gardens, Houra,
and a pair of buffalo for Mitchell.
562
CHAP.
FIJI


I take a careful note of the contents of your last letter, but as I cannot
learn whether you have left England or not, I do not make any reply, as it
is better to await your arrival. Excuse this hasty note, I write “ currente
calamo,” notes from Mitchell and Macgregor are coming in every minute in
connection with quarantine affairs. By this “Gunga” the sons of Ratu
Epeli and Roko Tui Dreketi go up to Norton’s School, they are both very
nice young lads.—Believe me, my dear Sir, faithfully yours,
JOHN B. THURSTON.
Somosomo, June 28, 1879.—Dear Sir—l got here last night and find all
things very peaceful and quiet: the three acting chiefs are away at Natewa
where the disturbance is, and from all I can hear, your Excellency will be
pleased to know it is nothing of any importance, and altogether local-
confined in fact, as near as I can find out, to one town. One man is said to
have got his head broken, but is not dead. Of course I shall visit the place
and see the chiefs so as to ascertain the full truth, and give them such
assistance as I may be able, and hope to be able to join the Swan on her
return from Lau ; should anything turn up to detain me, I will be sure to
communicate particulars by her.
On Taviuni all things are very quiet; there have been a few little
matters in the family—matters of the chief, but all has been settled well
enough, or, agreeable to all, suspended for my regular visit.
The winding up, or 100th night’s ceremony, is to come otf on Monday, but
I cannot wait, and seeing the Chiefs are all absent, the Lady says the
conference usual will be postponed till their return. Mr. Taylor is here,
just going the circuit of the island, and reports all well.—l remain, etc.
Mr. Carew to Mr. Des Y(eux
Nakoroyatu, Colo, Sunday evening, June 22, 1879. —My dear Sir—
Your Excellency’s note of the 18th of June I have just received, as also an
official letter, from the Colonial Secretary, of the 12th, on the same subject—
both arrived together.
The latter I shall not be able to answer for a few days, owing to the
absence of the officer who was suspended from “Church membership” at
Bau where he has gone with the chiefs to the Roko’s Bose ni Yasana.
The particulars are, however, as follows : —On Sunday the 20th October
last, a private of the Armed Constabulary arrived at my residence, Nakoro-
vatu, at about 10 a.m. He showed me a small cedar box, and said it con-
tained letters from your Excellency at Navosa for Mr. Le Hunte, and that
his orders were to make all haste to Natuatuacoko.
Buli Matailobau and several others were present at the time, and upon
my asking him if he desired to remain over Sunday, he expressed a wish to
go on at once.
I then sent the chief officer of Matailobau, the only one at hand at the
time, and who moreover volunteered to show him the way and to accompany
him to where he would sleep that night.
563
XXII
FIJI


I also wrote notes to all the principal chiefs on his route, asking them to
provide guides for the man and assistance in carrying his box. Some time
after this the officer came to me in very evident distress of mind, and com-
plained loudly that he, doing the work of the Government, had been by the
teachers suspended for six months for Sabbath-breaking, from “curu siga”
(i entering into daylight).
He afterwards came many times to me ; but, after native custom, sat down
merely without speaking, but staring at me for hours at a time ; and, in
accordance also with Fijian nature, has never since been of half the value as
an officer that he was before the occurrence.
Believing that this action of the teachers would require the confirmation
of Mr. Langham, the missionary of the district, I wrote privately and in a
most friendly manner to him, believing he would reinstate the officer,
stating at the same time my belief that the functions of the police were in
all countries carried on on Sunday as well as other days.
Mr. Langham answered my note in an equally friendly way, saying he
would make enquiries, and also that although it was true the work of police
was carried on on Sundays in all countries, yet such could not be said of the
work of the post-office.
The officer had not been reinstated a few weeks ago, I know.
Since this occurrence the native magistrate living at Namata near Bau
has assured me that he himself had on two occasions been suspended for
long periods for forwarding letters through to me from Sir Arthur Gordon
on Sundays.
Buli Matailobau also was put out in October or November last, and has
not been reinstated ; his offence was leaving Nakorovatu late on a Sunday
evening, in response to an urgent request from Roko Tui Tailevu that he
would at once go to Bau to embark for Bua. The letter, having been delayed
on the road, had given him but little time to get to Bau in.
I have not kept copies of any private letters of mine except those relating
to business matters, and have, I feel sure, destroyed Mr. .Langham s letter
to me, which was, moreover, marked private.
A man from Navuloa, sent by the Rev. Mr. Fison, has been busy vacci-
nating here for three weeks past, and appears to be doing well. He is the
nephew of Buli Matailobau.
Another man has just reached me, sent by Dr. Corney, who will go off to-
morrow to the Waidina to vaccinate the people under Buli Soloira.
I propose myself to do the people of the inland districts, but shall not
be able to commence until the beginning of July. I trust within six weeks
from now to be able to report all vaccinated on this side of the dividing
range.
The weather has been very wet during the whole of this month, which
has turned out exceptionally rainy for the time of year. —Believe me to be,
my dear Sir, your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
WALTER CAREW,
Res. Cmr., Colo East.
These were the last letters I received from Fiji previous to
S.
my leaving England on my return there.
564
CHAP. XXI!
FIJI


APPENDIX




PAPER
ON THE
SYSTEM OF TAXATION IN
FORCE IN FIJI.
Read before the Royal Colonial Institute ,
BY THE
HON. SIR ARTHUR GORDON, G.C.M.G.,
March , 1879.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
printers in Orbinarg to Her Hlajeatg.
1879.




ON THE SYSTEM OF TAXATION IN FORCE
IN FIJI.
I have been requested to read before the Royal
Colonial Institute a paper containing an account of
the system of taxation which, with the consent and
approval of Her Majesty’s Government, has been
established among the native population of Fiji.
Having received permission from the Secretary of
State for the Colonies to accept this invitation, I
have not hesitated to do so. Whatever judgment
may be ultimately formed of the system in question,
I am desirous that it should be based on authentic
information as to its true merits, and not on erroneous
impressions or partial reports. I therefore gladly
avail myself of the opportunity now afforded me to
explain its true nature. I venture to hope, moreover,
that an account of what is in fact an experiment
of a somewhat novel character, may not be in itself
altogether uninteresting. The stage on wdiich that
experiment has been tried is, no doubt, distant and
obscure, but the trial itself involves principles of
considerable importance and, it may be, wide appli-
cation.
There may be some present who have come in
search of miscellaneous information of a wider scope,
and will hear with dissatisfaction the announcement
I have now made. I regret that any should meet with
disappointment; but it appears to me to be impos-
sible, in such an address as this, to treat with
advantage so large a subject as the foundation,
A 2


past history, present position, and future prospects
of the colony. I should have to choose between the
presentation of a sketch so general as to be destitute
of the slightest value, or the production of a paper
of a length unsuitable for a meeting of this descrip-
tion. I have, therefore, determined to confine myself
to the single topic which I have chosen, to state
simply the objects which the legislation in question is
designed to effect, and to describe the plan and actual
working of the scheme; leaving argument as to its
merits or defects, for the most part, to others.
Before entering upon any description of the
system itself, however, it is essential, to render it
intelligible, that I should offer some explanation of
the circumstances which led to its adoption ; and, in
doing this, I am compelled to review, though briefly,
the condition of the colony at the period immediately
succeeding its foundation. Many of those present are,
no doubt, already familiar with much that I shall
repeat, but it is safer to assume that this is not the
case; and whilst I must apologize to those whom I
may weary by repetition of facts well known to them,
I shall, yet, for the sake of clearness, speak as if to
those who have no acquaintance with the subject.
Sovereignty over the Fiji Group was formally
assumed by Great Britain on the 10th October, 1874.
The archipelago contains seventy or eighty inhabited
islands, of which some are of considerable size ; the
largest being of about the same area as the counties
of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex, Berkshire and
Hampshire, and the next in size somewhat smaller
than Cornwall, Devonshire and Somerset. Every
kind of tropical culture can be carried on in them


with advantage, and their climate is, for the tropics,
unusually healthy. At the time of their cession
they were inhabited by about 1,500 whites and
150,000 natives.
The government of the new dependency was in
the first instance conducted by an administrator,
acting under the direction of Sir Hercules Robinson,
the Governor of New South Wales, and I did not
myself reach the colony until June, 1875.
The state of things which disclosed itself to me
on my arrival was not encouraging. A terrible pesti-
lence, heedlessly admitted, had swept away one-third
of the entire native population. Though its violence
had diminished, its ravages had not wholly ceased.
Even where it had passed by, it had left behind it
terror and despair. The same cause had carried
off many of the imported labourers of the planters,
who, from a variety of causes, were themselves, for
the most part, reduced to the greatest straits. The
revenue had fallen short of even the modest estimate
of Sir H. Robinson, whilst the expenditure had
largely exceeded his anticipations. The introduction
of labour from other parts of the Pacific had almost
ceased. The season had been unfavourable for
agriculture, wet, and unhealthy, and gloom and
discontent pervaded all classes.
The white settlers had apparently imagined that
by some magical process the assumption of sovereignty
by Great Britain was to be followed by an immediate
change from poverty to wealth, from struggling
indigence to prosperity, that their claims to land
would be at once allowed, that an abundant supply
of labour would be at once found for them, and that


their claims to supremacy over the natives, which the
Government of Cakobau, —whatever its faults, —had
steadily refused to recognise, would be at once acknow-
ledged. They were, therefore, bitterly disappointed
to find their hopes not realised.
The natives were cowed and disheartened by the
pestilence, which they believed to have been intro-
duced purposely to destroy them ; —a belief en-
couraged, I am ashamed to say, by some of our own
countrymen, and which was probably the main cause
of the disturbances in the Highlands of Yiti Levu in
the following year. They were perplexed by reiterated
assurances from the whites living among them that by
the mere fact of annexation to Great Britain their
own laws and customs had been abolished ; that their
rules of succession, and for the transmission of pro-
perty, had no longer any existence, that many of
their cherished habits were illegal, that their lands
had become the property of the Crown, and that
they would themselves be expected, if not required,
to labour on white men’s plantations. They were
told, moreover, that all distinctions of rank among
them were at an end, a notification more perplexing
than pleasing, in its suddenness, to the people gene-
rally, and which naturally caused irritation and
distrust among the higher chiefs.
A third element in the population, the immi-
grant labourers from other parts of Polynesia, whose
contracts of service had long expired, but whose
employers had no means to send them back to their
homes, and who had remained in some cases for
many years in by no means voluntary servitude, were
exasperated by the bad faith they had experienced.


At the end of the year 1875, I found myself
with a revenue of XI 6,000, from which I had to
meet an expenditure of over X 70,000, and at the head
of a dissatisfied and impoverished white population
of some 1,500 persons, in the midst of a native
population nearly one hundred times as large, suspi-
cious, watchful and uneasy ; while on but too many
estates, bands of wrongfully detained immigrants
formed a real, though apparently unrecognised, source
of danger.
It is not my object, in the present paper, to narrate
the steps taken in the administration of the govern-
ment since that time. Suffice it to say, generally,
that the revenue of the colony has swelled rapidly
from £16,000 in 1875, to £38,000 in 1876 ; £47,000
in 1877, and over £61,000 in 1878,* while the
expenditure has been reduced to a level with the
income ; that the receipts from Customs, which were
in 1875 but £B,OOO, amounted in 1878, under practi-
cally the same tariff, to £20,000 ; that the imports
have nearly doubled in value, and the exports, (which
exceed the imports,) have quite done so ; that the
Polynesian labourers, whose term of service had
expired, have been conveyed home and replaced by
labour newly recruited : that more than 800 land
titles have been settled after laborious and minute
investigation ; that measures have been passed by
the Legislative Council which do honour to those
who framed them, and compare favourably with those
of many older colonies ; that the Government service
has been organized, Courts of Law established ; that
* The revenue for 1879 is estimated at £75,150.


a dangerous disturbance has been put down quickly,
cheaply, and effectually; that capital is being invested,
and that after a careful investigation, extending over
more than a year, it has been reported to me, by most
competent, and most cautious, scientific authority, that
the annual value of the agricultural exports of the
colony, when its powers of production have been fully
developed, will probably exceed £10,000,000 sterling.
It is necessary, however, to an understanding of the
system of taxation, which I have undertaken to explain,
that I should dwell with somewhat more minuteness
on the measures adopted to secure the good will,
and promote the interests of the native race.
The mode in which subject races have been
dealt with by alien rulers has varied in every age
and place, but nearly all these varieties of treat-
ment are in fact governed by one or other of three
principles of action.
The doctrine, that a superior race may right-
fully oppress and utilize for its own benefit the
existence of a subject one, has been, in former times,
very general, and it is at this day not only very
far more widely spread than it ought to be, but far
more so than is perhaps commonly suspected. But
this is not a principle of policy which any civilized
government of the present day would avow, or, I
trust, on which it would, without avowing it, act.
A somewhat better sentiment has been that which
combines an acknowledgment, (though perhaps a
grudging acknowledgment,) that strict justice is
required from the dominant race to the inferior,
with a jealousy ever on the watch not to ex-
tend that justice one hair’s breadth beyond the


narrowest limits within which it can be restrained,
and to take every opportunity, which can without
manifest bad faith be taken, of improving the position
of the conqueror at the expense of the conquered.
A third and higher principle of action is that
which recognizes the interests of all classes of the
population as equal objects of solicitude. But in
this case the really benevolent intentions of rulers
are often frustrated. The most enlightened views
and the most liberal legislation can be neutralized
by the social aversion between discordant races
which may accompany a full concession of political
rights, and which renders their practical exercise
impossible. Even where no such conscious repulsion
exists, there is not unfrequently a want of imagina-
tion on the part of the dominant race which prevents
any conception by them of matters from a native
point of view, and produces a lack of tolerance for
laws or usages not in accordance with European
modes of thought, which is often not only as in-
jurious as real injustice, but frequently leads up to
it. Indeed it is probable that as much real wrong
has been inflicted by the conscientious but narrow
minded desire to act in accordance with maxims in
themselves generally sound, but not of universal
application, as by violence and consequent tyranny.
Where the governing power itself has not shaken
off such prejudices, it is probable that the harm
done by it will be in almost exact proportion to the
degree of activity with which it strives to effect good.
Under the influence of a desire to effect improve-
ment, a pressure is put upon the native to adopt
European habits, perhaps unsuitable, and almost


certainly distasteful. He is subjected to laws which
are strange to him, and which in some respects conflict
with his own ideas of justice, whilst he is aware that,
although on a footing of nominal equality before
them with his white fellow subjects, the advantage
in any contest under such laws is all on the side of
those who have long been familiar with their operation.
He is urged to simulate ideas which are unintelligible
to him. Impatience at the ignorance and levity, if
not misconduct, too frequently displayed by natives
in authority, leads to their services being set aside,
and all native agency is replaced by that of white
officials and magistrates. Something,—perhaps much,
perhaps little, —is done for the native ; nothing is left
to be done by him, or in his own way.
Such a mode of treatment I hold not only to be
rash and unwise, but, where a native population
greatly outnumbers the whites, to be also attended
with no inconsiderable danger. Even where the
settlers are too strong to be resisted with success,
such a policy may lead to collisions ; while at best
the natives, bewildered and depressed, deprived of
all interest and object in life, sink into indolence,
apathy, and vice, and exposed almost without any
safeguard to snares and temptations innumerable,
they lose position, property, self respect, and health,
and perish from off the face of the earth.
It is manifest that the more the native polity is
retained, native agency employed, and changes
avoided, until naturally and spontaneously called for,
the less likely are these results to follow. But it is
not enough to abstain from seeking hastily to replace
native institutions by unreal imitations of European
models.


The moral sensq of a semi-civilized race is often
very unlike our own, hut is not on that account
the less real; and it would be a great mistake
to suppose that it does not exercise a most
powerful influence upon thought and action. A
native may suffer very patiently what we should
deem a grievous wrong, because to him it may not
present the same intolerable appearance; but if rights
really cherished by him be touched, if his moral sense
be shocked, or his honour seriously wounded, it may
be doubted whether he will ever again entertain
any belief in the justice of those who have, as he
conceives, wronged him, respect those who have
shown, what seems to him, moral weakness, or
forgive the insult he has received. Severity he
can pardon, and perhaps admire ; some things which
an European could not forgive, —(blows, for instance,
or an imputation of falsehood), —he may take with
indifference and easily condone ; but there are
offences which are indelible, and wherever white
and native races meet, such offences are sure to be
committed, partly in careless indifference, and as
frequently through well-meant blundering. It is
therefore of the utmost importance to seize, if possible,
the spirit in which native institutions have been
framed, and endeavour so to work them as to develope
to the utmost possible extent the latent capacities of
the people for the management of their own affairs,
without exciting their suspicion or destroying their
self respect.
Of course the application of these principles
must vary greatly according to the capacities and
condition of the people with whom we are called


on to deal. No one would dream of placing on one
level the acute and cultivated Hindoo or Cingalese
and the wandering and naked savage of the Austra-
lian bush. The Fijian resembles neither; but he has
more affinity with the former than the latter.
He has not indeed , the literature, the art, the
culture and luxury of eastern civilization, but he has
in many ways advanced beyond the ruder stages of
savage life, and possesses those receptive powers which
fit him for far higher social and intellectual advance-
ment.
The people are not nomadic ; they live a settled
life in towns of good and comfortable houses; they
respect and follow agriculture; their social and
political organization is complex; they amass property,
and have laws for its descent; their land tenures
are elaborate; they read, they write and cypher.
Women are respected, hold a high social position,
and are exempt from agricultural labour. There is
a school in almost every village. Their chiefs possess
accounts at the bank, conduct correspondence, and
generally exhibit capacities for a higher grade of
civilization. On the whole I should class them in
their present condition with the Hovas of Madagascar,
whom in many respects they much resemble. Like
them, the Fijians all profess an at least nominal
allegiance to Christianity, and that it has largely
influenced the life and character of great masses of
the population, not the most incredulous can, I
think, deny. Like them too they have shown a
gradual progress, which is in my estimation of far
more hopeful augury than a rapid imitativeness of
unfamiliar habits.


The political unit is the village. In every one of
these is found a local chief, practically hereditary,
hut nominally appointed by the District Council, of
which I shall hereafter speak. He is assisted by a
council of elders and certain executive officers, a
magistrate, frequently the chiefs brother, one or more
constables to carry out his decisions, a town crier,
(an hereditary and important officer,) and a garden
overseer. The resemblance of this organization to
that of an Indian village will at once strike everyone ;
but as there is certainly no Aryan strain in the
Fijian race, I am inclined to conceive that this form
of organization is not essentially Aryan, but simply
the shape into which the first elements of society
when emerging from barbarism naturally crystalize.
An uncertain number of villages, —sometimes few,
sometimes many, —are grouped together under a
superior officer, the Buli of the district, who once a
month assembles all his town chiefs, and discusses
with them, in the Bose ni Tikina or district council,
the affairs of his own district. These district councils
nominate the chiefs of towns, whom they may also
suspend from office. They discuss and regulate all
local matters, such as the cleansing and scavenging of
villages, the management of animals belonging to the
different communities as distinguished from individual
property, the keeping open and maintenance of roads
and bridges, the control of public bathing places.
The council also superintends the payment out of
local rates, of the village constables. In a similar
manner the Buli districts are grouped under the
headship of a greater chief, the Boko Tui, of whom
there are twelve, and each of whom twice a year


assembles the Bulls of his province in the Bose vaka
Yasana or provincial council, where the local affairs
of the province are discussed and settled, by which
local rates are imposed, and to which each Bull
makes a detailed report of the condition of his own
district.
This organization is purely native,- and of spon-
taneous growth. To it has now been added a meeting
annually of the Boko Tuis with myself, thus
completing the chain from the village to the
Governor. This Bose vaka Turanga, or Great Council,
is also attended by the Native Stipendiary Magis-
trates, and by two Bulls from each province, chosen
by the Bose vaka Yasana. At it each Boko Tui in
turn makes a detailed report of the state of his
province, and suggestions are offered as to executive
and legislative measures which it is thought desirable
by those assembled that the Government should
adopt. The suggestions made by the Bose vaka
Turanga have received, and I think merited, the warm
commendation of Her Majesty’s Government, on
account of the good sense and practical capacity for
affairs therein displayed. There is a curious though
unconscious resemblance between them and some of
the short Acts of the ancient Scottish Parliaments
in the first years of the fifteenth century; and it
should always be borne in mind that the state of
society for which they are intended is not that of
England in the present day, but more nearly
resembles that of the Highlands of Scotland some
three or four hundred years ago, or that of the
remote parts of Ireland in the days of Queen
Elizabeth; except, indeed, that property and life


enjoy in Fiji a security then unknown in either
Scotland or Ireland; that reading and writing are
far more widely known among Fijians than among
the Celtic population of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries; and that they are far better housed than
the Highland and Irish peasantry of either that or a
much later day. This council has, however, no legis-
lative power. Its. resolutions are mere recommenda-
tions. If the Governor thinks it expedient to adopt
them, they are brought before a Board composed
partly of Europeans and partly of Natives, which
has the power of enacting regulations for the conduct
of the natives, which, when so enacted, possess,
subject to the approval or disapproval of the Legis-
lative Council, the force of law. In framing these
regulations it has been thought best to retain them
as far as possible in the same shape in which they
had been framed by their native authors, only alter-
ing them where they contained provisions manifestly
objectionable, or where some modification appeared
likely to give them greater practical effect, or render it
easier to bring them into operation. It was not sought
to alter them merely because it might appear to us that
better could have been devised when abstractly con-
sidered. It was always borne in mind that these
regulations had, to a great extent, to be administered
by the natives themselves, and that a code which
they thoroughly understood and had taken part in
preparing, and which was in harmony with their own
ideas and modes of thought, would be far more easily
worked, and far more willingly and intelligently
obeyed, than much better regulations imposed by
external force, but which they might neither compre


hend nor appreciate, and which would therefore be of
far less real utility.
The working of native self-government, native
courts, and native legislation, is, however, foreign to
the object of the present paper, though not itself
uninteresting. Briefly, I may say that I have no
reason to be dissatisfied with the results. I have no
doubt tha,t the native magistrates make mistakes,
and sometimes grave mistakes; I have no doubt
that in individual instances the Boko Tuis are harsh
and overbearing ; but it is, I think, far better that
they should now and then be so than that all share
in the administration should be taken away from
them. The employment of natives in the adminis-
tration of the government was, indeed, a financial
necessity, for the means did not exist, and do not
yet exist, for the payment of such a staff of white
officials as would have been required had the services
of natives been dispensed with. But had no such
imperative cause existed to render their employment
inevitable, I should equally have deemed it to be
required by considerations of policy. Unless removed
from their habitual places of residence, and treated
with a harshness wholly incompatible with the under-
standing on which the islands had been ceded to
England, chiefs of intelligence, high rank, and great
social influence, would have become, if stripped of all
authority and deprived of all employment except that
of brooding over their own changed condition, very
dangerous elements in the colony. For, be it remem-
bered, the legal non-recognition of their position
would not have in any way deprived them of the
power they possessed over those who yielded to them


an instinctive and unquestioning obedience. As it
is, they are cheerful and willing assistants to the
Government in the performance of its duties.
The results of the system actually adopted
were apparent when the mountaineers of Yiti Levu
attacked the Christian villages of the Singatoka.
I appealed to the Hokos for help, and named
thirty men as the contingent each was to send. Had
the same state of mind existed that I found on my
arrival, sullen and reluctant submission would at best
have been given to the order, and more probably
excuses would have been made for the non-appear-
ance of the force ; the mischief would have spread,
and a long and costly war would have resulted.
What was in fact the answer to the appeal ? From
almost every province came double the number of
men asked for, picked men out of a host of
volunteers, and the troubles were suppressed by
native forces alone, without delay and at a trifling
cost.
I dwell on these things because I should be
sorry if it were supposed that taxation was the
only,—or the chief, —object to which attention had
been turned, but, as that is the topic which I have
chosen for my paper, I must now more directly
address myself to it.
Forming, as they do, ninety-nine hundredths of
the inhabitants of the colony; causing, as they do, a
large part of its expenditure on police, administra-
tion of justice, &c., it is only right that the native
population should contribute, and that in no incon-
siderable measure, to defray expenses incurred for
their protection and on their behalf. The mode in
B
17


which such contribution may best be made, is, how-
ever, by no means easy of determination. To the
ordinary sources of revenue the natives pay compara-
tively little. With the exception of cloth, and
cutlery, of which large quantities are bought by them,
they use few articles on which customs duties are
levied. They do not consume spirits, they do not
take out licences, and they have no need of stamps.
Any impost upon them must, therefore, to be pro-
ductive, be one of a special character.
The tax imposed on natives by Cakobau’s Govern-
ment was an uniform poll-tax of a £1 per man and
45. per woman, throughout the Group. I, how-
ever, find it difficult, and indeed impossible, to
suppose that revenue was the object contemplated
in the imposition of this tax, or that its payment
was ever seriously looked for. If any such expecta-
tions existed, they were doomed to disappointment.
The largest sum ever obtained in any one year
from a population of, at that time, certainly not less
than 150,000, was £6,000, and of this sum a large
part, as I will presently explain, was not, in fact,
received from natives as payment of their tax, or
indeed from natives at all.
I believe that the main design of the native
poll-tax, when first imposed, and as it existed on the
arrival of the British Commissioners in Fiji in 1874,
was that of furnishing through its instrumentality a
large supply of labour to the plantations of the white
settlers. And in this respect it no doubt worked
successfully. The unknown consequences of dis-
obedience to the order of the “ Matanitu ” (the
equivalent of the Indian “ Sircar ”) exercised a


mysterious terror over the minds of the natives,
which induced them in many cases, in consideration
of the advance of their taxes on the part of a planter,
to contract with him for a year or more of gratuitous
service. These, however, were of course the except
tions. In the majority of cases, the tax was simply
not paid, and could not be paid. When this hap-
pened the legal penalty for default was six months’
imprisonment, which was spent in labour on the
plantation of any settler who would pay to the
Government the amount of the defaulter s tax. But,
though six months was the limit allowed by law for
such assignment, the magistrates of that day were
not very scrupulous in their reading of the Act, and
sentences of a year, and even eighteen months,
seem to have been pronounced; while by the imposi-
tion of heavy costs, and the assumption that the default
of their payment might be similarly punished by “ im-
prisonment on a plantation,” even these periods
were almost indefinitely extended.
A faint glimpse, and but a faint glimpse, of the
working of this system is given by some of the in-
closures to Sir H. Robinson s despatch of the 16th of
October, 1874, printed at page 6 of the Blue Book
laid before Parliament in 1875. The more search I
have made into the records of that time, and the
better I become acquainted with their contents, the
darker does that period appear to me. I have in vain
endeavoured to obtain accurate statistics of the
numbers torn from their homes, and consigned to
servitude under the operation of this law, but its
effects are sufficiently visible. Whole districts have
been well nigh depopulated, and the reckless depor-
b 2


tation of the male inhabitants, has left two formerly
fine provinces almost deprived of cultivators. The
memory of these times is terrible to the native
population, and any step which might seem to be in
the direction of renewing them is to be profoundly
deprecated.
I should add, that the amount paid by planters to
Government for these assignments of labour appear
under the head of native taxes, as do also, of course,
those to which I have previously referred, where the
payment was made by the native, though advanced
to him by the planter.
With these deductions, the amount of tax
actually paid by natives themselves becomes very
small; but even of this small amount a large portion
was in fact actually paid in kind, the articles taken
being estimated at a low valuation, or, as I was
particularly informed by the late Commodore Goode-
nough, invariably at a third or fourth of their proper
value.
Sir H. Robinson felt strongly the impossibility
of maintaining such a system, which he rightly
described as one by which the services of the entire
male population of whole districts had been in effect
sold to European planters in other and distant
islands. He at once abolished it, and substituted an
arrangement by which all but adult males were
excused from taxation, and the tax of these men fixed
at twenty days' labour in the year, redeemable by
money payments of various amounts, according to the
supposed wealth, or poverty, of the district in which
they lived.
Sir H. Robinson, I fancy, imagined that redemp


tion in money of the obligation to labour would be
generally resorted to, and at first, while the population
remained under the impression that a money poll-tax
still continued to be exacted by the Government, this
was to some degree the case ; but, as a better know-
ledge of their liabilities spread, and especially after
it was found that the redemption payment could not,
as heretofore, be made in kind, there arose a disposi-
tion to claim the right of discharging the obligation
by three weeks’ labour.
This, therefore, was the problem which I had
presented to me : —Should I continue the labour-
tax of 1874 ; should I re-enact and attempt to
enforce the direct tax in money of the old Fijian
Government; or should I endeavour to provide some
substitute for the existing system which should bring
larger returns to the treasury, and yet be neither
oppressive, nor opposed to the traditionary habits and
feelings of the people 1
The labour-tax in its existing form was clearly
unsustainable. It is impossible to transport the
whole population for twenty days to those places
where public works are being carried on. Such
places are few, and in most districts of the colony
there are really no public works on which the
inhabitants can be employed. In such cases either
works have to be invented which are not needed, and
which lead to an employment —(or rather a waste) —
of labour in no way beneficial to the colony, as well
as an expense of supervision wholly thrown away, or
the tax must be quietly permitted to fall into disuse.
The practical alternative, therefore, was the
renewal of the poll-tax of the old Fijian Government,
or the substitution of some as yet untried system.


I have already mentioned some of the reasons
which rendered a return to the poll-tax of former
times impolitic and objectionable ; hut even if it were
not associated in the minds of the natives with ideas
of tyranny and misrule, and were as efficient, as it
proved, in fact, an inefficient agent in the production
of revenue, I should still think it open to objections
which would be in my mind fatal to it. They
are :
(1.) Its literal equality, but substantial inequality
of incidence, the greatest Chief and the poorest
servant, the strongest youth and the feeblest elder,
all paying alike.
(2.) The facilities it affords for corruption. The
collectors were necessarily, for the most part, natives
of inferior rank—constables, or less—and the in-
stances of favouritism on the one hand, and oppres-
sion on the other, of which they were guilty, were,
I have every reason to believe, countless.
(3.) Its individuality ; which I think one of its
greatest faults as a system of native taxation. Among
natives, the individual invariably acts as part of a
family or village, and the traditional feeling of cen-
turies will only slowly change under the influence of
altered times and manners. As yet no alteration
has taken place in this respect, and it is necessary
to accept the fact, deal with it as we may.
(4.) The abuses to which it was liable as an
engine for forcing men into involuntary servitude,
to which some allusion has been already made.
(5.) The impossibility of practically enforcing it.
There are limits to the power of a government to
inflict punishment, and if, as would often have hap


pened, whole districts had failed to pay, it would have
been impossible to commit the inhabitants en masse
to prison.
But, if the idea of re-enacting a poll-tax be aban-
doned, no other direct money-tax could be imposed.
In fact, there is a species of absurdity in the imposi-
tion of pecuniary taxation on a population, nine-tenths
of which possess no money. I know it has been
said that if they do not possess money, they, at least,
might all become possessed of it by engaging to work
for planters. I confess lam unable to see the force
of this assumption. The ordinary wages given by a
planter to an able-bodied man, were, in 1875, Is. a
week, or £2 12 s. per annum. This is a small sum
from which to pay a tax ranging from £1 downwards,
even if the wages be paid in money, and not, as was
invariably the case, in “ trade,” of often questionable
value. Whether it is to the native’s advantage to
leave his taro patch and yam plantations, his own
village, his generally comfortable home and his
family, to work on some distant estate for 5 2s. a year,
may be questioned, nor do I think he can reasonably
be expected to do so, except under strong compul-
sion.
But if a money-tax be not enforced, all that re-
mains is the alternative of contributions in produce,
■or the performance of gratuitous services. Either of
these aids to Government would have been in accord-
ance with the habits and usages of the people, but
there are obvious reasons why the latter should, if
possible, be avoided.
The payment of taxes in money is of course
generally preferable to their payment in kind; but


payment in money being in Fiji impracticable, tbe
real question in this case was between payment in
kind and payment in labour, if any payment is to be
made at all. Payment in labour was a course open
to so many objections, that the idea of it was at
once and altogether set aside by me.
Although taxation in money is generally prefer-
able, and taxation in kind unusual, the latter is by
no means unknown or unprecedented in a British
possession. The present Earl Grey, no mean autho-
rity (and one who, by the way, was perfectly aware
that, in semi-civilized communities, “taxation may
be more easily and justly levied in the shape of
tribute from the tribe, than in that of taxes due
from individuals”), once wrote as follows to Sir
Harry Smith: “ The most convenient form of
imposing a land tax in a rude state of society,
I believe to be that of requiring from all who
cultivate the soil, a tithe, or some fixed propor-
tion of the produce, as their contribution towards
the public expenditure. This is a mode of raising a
revenue for public purposes, which seems to have
been the first adopted by mankind in the earliest
stages of civilization, and to have prevailed generally
among all nations in the remotest periods of which
we know anything from history, while in Asia it
continues to the present day to be almost universal.
It is also a mode of taxation which, in any early
stage of civilization, when money is scarce, and when
little capital has been invested in land, seems to be
the least burdensome that can be had recourse to,
though, in a more advanced state of society, it is the
reverse.”


In the soundness of the principle of these
lemarks, 1 entirely concur.
After much consideration, I came to the follow-
ing conclusions :
(1.) That the taxation of natives, to be effective,
must be of the nature of a land tax, or corn rent,
levied on the district or village, rather than on
individuals.
(2.) That while such a tax could not at present
be obtained in money without the exercise of gross
oppression, a tax of produce could be easily raised,
with the best possible pecuniary results, and with
the yet greater advantage of stimulating native
industry, and largely increasing the native trade in
the Group.
(3.) That it would be undesirable that the
Government should take part in any complicated
trading operations or commercial dealings.
To carry out these views, the Native Taxes
Ordinance of 1876, was passed by the unanimous
vote of the Legislative Council of Fiji.
This enactment had both a social and financial
object. That it has been financially successful may
easily be demonstrated, nor will it, I think, be more
difficult to prove that it has equally succeeded as a
social experiment.
Of course the productiveness of a tax is no
guarantee that it may not at the same time be
theoretically objectionable and practically oppressive.
But it is nevertheless of some importance to show
that a measure intended, among other things, to
augment the revenue of the colony, has not in that
respect been the failure which was by some con-
fidently predicted.


This, however, is not the aspect of the question to
which I attach, or which those present at this
meeting will attach, exclusive or indeed primary
importance; and I will, therefore, only say that the
receipts from the native taxes, which in 1875, under
the old system of collection, amounted to but £3,499
2s. sd, reached in 1876, (during only a part of which
year the new scheme was in operation,) the sum of
£9,342 16s. 3d, in 1877 that of £15,149 14s. Bd,
and in 1878 amounted to nearly £19,000. The
exact figures for this last year have not yet reached
me.
The expenses incurred, in 1877, in collecting
and shipping the produce to Levuka, and in pay-
ment of the eighteen persons engaged in these
duties, amounted to £1,341 115. 9d A further
expenditure w 7 as also incurred for the purchase
and gratuitous distribution of seed, tools, bags,
&c., amounting to £386 55. 10 d. I have not yet
received the accounts for 1878, but if the expenses
be assumed as equal to those of 1877, there will be a
clear profit to the Treasury on this tax of over
£17,000, while the expenses of collection will not
have reached £2,000.
Let us turn, however, to the more important
question of the social influence of the new law.
To answer this question, the nature and working
of its machinery must be first described.
The amount of the tax to be paid by each pro-
vince, estimated in pounds sterling, is annually
assessed by the Legislative Council, the assessment
being based, as regards each province, on mixed
considerations of the amount of the population, the


nature and productiveness of the soil, and the degree
of civilization which the province has attained.
There are twelve such provinces, not including
the two highland districts of Viti Levu.
Tenders are called for, for the purchase of the
articles of produce in which the tax may be paid.
These articles have hitherto been —
Copra,
Cotton,
Candlenuts,
Tobacco, and
Maize,
to these, Coffee, which the natives have now begun to
grow largely, will soon be added. Beche de mer has
also been accepted from some places.
The highest tender is accepted in the case of
each article, and to the successful tenderer all the
produce delivered or collected in discharge of the
tax is transferred on its receipt by Government.
The amount of the assessment fixed, and the
prices offered for various articles of produce by the
successful tenderer or tenderers, are intimated to
the Boko Tui or native governor of each province.
The apportionment of the shares to be borne by
each district in the province, and the selection of the
article or articles of produce to be contributed, are
then made, nominally and according to law, by a
Board appointed under the Ordinance, but prac-
tically by the Bose vaka Yasana, or Provincial
Council, which, as I have previously explained, con-
sists of chiefs of districts, styled “ Bulls ” under the
presidency of the Boko Tui, frequently, though not
always, aided by the presence of the Governors
Commissioner.


The next stage is the apportionment of the tax
of each district by the Bose ni Tikina, or District
Council, consisting of the town chiefs of the district,
under the presidency of the Buli. By this body the
share of each several township in the district is
determined.
Lastly, the individual share of produce to be
contributed or work done by each family in each
village is settled by the town chief, aided by the
elders of the township.
The mode in which the articles are raised is left
to the people themselves to determine, and the
methods adopted have been very various. In some
places each village has grown its own tax produce
along with what it grew for sale or domestic use;
in others, several villages have combined to grow
their produce in one large plantation. These latter
are what, by those who wish to discredit the scheme,
are called “ Government gardens,” but, in fact, no such
gardens exist. The soil and the produce both belong
to the people themselves.
This machinery recognizes the primitive commu-
nity system, on which all political and social institu-
tions in Fiji are based, and which, even in the matter
of taxation, I found to be still in use as regarded the
rates for local purposes, such as payment of school-
masters anti village police, which, quite irrespectively
of the Government, (and, as some would say, illegally,)
were imposed by the Provincial Councils in a species
of voluntary assessment.
This species of taxation is, consequently, familiar
to the natives, and thoroughly understood by them ;
a fact which causes the pressure of the impost to


be more lightly felt than it would be if demanded
directly from the individual by the Government. It,
moreover, renders the natives themselves, to a very
large extent, active and responsible agents in the
collection of revenue.
Both of these are, I need hardly say, points of
very considerable importance.
But these were not the only results which the
system was aimed to effect, nor are they the only
objects which have been attained by its adoption.
As was anticipated by the framers of the
Ordinance, the cultivation of articles of export by the
natives has been largely promoted.
Fijians are by no means habitually indolent, as
by many careless observers they are supposed to be;
and they are passionately fond of agriculture ; but
their cultivation, though very neat and careful, is
chiefly that of food plantations and articles for
domestic use.
Sugar, tobacco, and the paper mulberry are, and
have long been, almost universally grown in addition
to root crops and plantains; but they are not, as a
rule, grown with a view to exportation ; although
cocoanuts have been manufactured into copra, and
yams in large quantities have long been sold, or
rather bartered, by the natives, to the white traders.
Under the new system, the area of native culti-
vation is rapidly increasing, and the lesson which it
was desired to inculcate has been already more than
partially learnt.
Another consequence of the adoption of this law
has been that of giving to the people a juster idea of
the value of the produce which they raise.


When a money-tax was insisted on, it was neces-
sary that at certain fixed periods every man should
make a payment in cash to the tax collector.
Very few natives, (except perhaps in the province
of Lau,) hoard or possess coin. Their wealth consists
in the accumulation of masses of property, not in
money; and as the day on which the coin had to be
produced came round, an unscrupulous itinerant trader,
(and such traders are not always remarkable for a
high tone of commercial morality,) could obtain almost
anything, and almost any amount of anything in the
possession or under the control of natives, in exchange
for the coveted and indispensable piece of coin
necessary to pay the tax. That coin the trader sold
as an article of barter on his own terms, and those
terms were usually hard ones.
Even at the best of times, when this pressure did
not exist, the native only received for his produce
about half the price which the very same traders,
with the knowledge they still will obtain a hand-
some profit by their purchase, are now ready to give
to the Government for a similar amount of produce.
This has opened the eyes of the natives, and in
their private trading transactions they now in many
cases ask and obtain prices more nearly resembling
the true market value of the article ; while for the
surplus produce raised by them of those articles in
which the tax is paid, beyond what is required to
meet it, the Government practically obtains for them
a price equal to that which it receives itself from the
contractor for the tax produce ; and that too paid in
cash, and not (as had previously been the case) in
goods which the trader valued at his own discretion.


As 1 have before observed, the details of last year's
operations have not yet reached me, but I know
that several hundred pounds were in this manner
gained by one locality alone in 1877.
Since this paragraph was written, —indeed this
very morning,—l have received letters from Fiji
which inform me that the amount of tax produce
sent in during 1878 in payment of taxes, in excess
of the amount required to meet the demands of the
assessment, and which has been sold for the benefit
of those contributing it, has realized between £1,500
and £2,000.
It may seem strange, when thus speaking of
apparently large transactions between the natives
and white traders, that there should have been any
difficulty on the part of the former in finding money
to pay a money-tax ; but in point of fact hardly
any money was received by them. Objectionable as
it seems to be thought by some to receive produce
instead of money from the natives, these same parties
see no objection to forcing on the natives as payment
for their produce imported goods estimated at a
wholly fictitious value.
A native, we will suppose, makes and wishes to
dispose of copra, which he offers to the white trader
who “ works ” that district. Say he has got half-a-
ton. This, according to present prices paid to the
Government, would be worth £6 10s.
The trader probably offers about £3, (until,
perhaps, very lately, it certainly would not have
been more, and probably less,) and this he pays in
cloth, knives, &c., of which he estimates the value
at perhaps double the proper amount; so that he


obtains £6 10s. worth of produce from the native
for goods worth £1 10s.
The native was often aware that he was imposed
on; but until the new system of taxation was intro-
duced he had no alternative but to take what was
offered, or leave his produce unsold.
He can now sell at the prices which have been
publicly tendered.
The system of making an unduly large profit is
so regularly recognized, that, in most of the shops in
Levuka itself, there was in 1875 a “ native price” on
articles, which was usually double the amount which
would be asked of a European. There is still, lam
informed, a “ native price” ; but whether the dis-
proportion between it and that asked of white
customers is as great as formerly, I am not aware.
The action of the Government affords a most
valuable protection to the native producer, by
ensuring him a market where he will receive cash
for his produce at a fair rate; and, paradoxical as it
may seem, it is, nevertheless, strictly true, that the
reception by the Government of produce in pay-
ment of taxes has been an important step towards
the introduction of cash transactions in the dealings
between the traders and the natives.
Another evil which the new system of taxation
was designed to check, and in respect to which
its operation has been most salutary, is nearly con-
nected with that indicated in the preceding para-
graph. I refer to the entanglement of the natives
in debt to traders.
It is the policy of some of these traders to
encourage the chiefs and people to become involved


in debt to them, on account of the indirect advan-
tages they are able to exact through the control they
thus exercise.
The results of this are most pernicious, both
politically and socially. Politically, it is mischievous,
inasmuch as it tends to render the great chiefs,
holding office under the Government, far less servants
of the Crown than servants of the trader to whom
they are in debt. The Crown could but dismiss
them. The trader could both ruin and imprison
them; and they naturally feared and obeyed him
most who had the greatest power to injure them.
The threat of being “ brought to Court,” if the
trader’s wishes or caprices were not complied with,
has, I have no doubt, led not only to great neglect
of orders from the Government, but to much active
oppression.
Socially, the indebtedness of the common people,
throwing them completely under the control of the
trader, has produced, and still produces, great evils;
reducing them sometimes to a condition which really
does bear some analogy to slavery. I know one
village, the whole population of which, under the
burden of old debts to a trader, was compelled to
work for him gratuitously whenever and as he chose,
with an entire disregard of their own interests or
convenience, and who, to avoid legal proceedings
against them, were ready to take any steps and
make any compliance directed by the creditor. I
have no moral doubt that other similar cases exist.
This is an evil which is, of course, but partially
abated by the new system of taxation ; but its effects
in diminishing it have been nob inconsiderable.
c


It may, therefore, I think, be said, that this
measure has been successful, not only in raising a
considerable revenue, but in stimulating production,
and in securing a fair price for his produce to the
native producer, while it has replaced a mode of
taxation perfectly odious to the native, by one as
little distasteful to him as any system of taxation
can be, and has done much to substitute a system of
cash transactions for barter, and to free the native
population from the incubus of debt, thereby re-
moving very serious obstacles in the way of attempts
on the part of the Government to benefit the native.
I scarcely can bring myself to treat seriously the
accusation that the Ordinance in question has legalized
a system of slavery. No doubt the word “ slavery ”
is often rhetorically employed with great laxity of
meaning. A people living under civil, military, or
social institutions, of which the speaker disapproves,
is often said by an excited orator to be “ enslaved ” ;
and there may be some who in this vague sense hold,
with Ancient Pistol, that “base is the slave who
pays ” taxes at all. But those who are not prepared
to maintain that the people of those States of the
American Union, and of those British Colonies where
statute labour is enforced are, without their knowing
it, slaves, and that the institution of slavery flourishes
in Scotland because old women there pay the rent of
their crofts in hens and bolls of meal, cannot gravely
assert that the system of native taxation in Fiji has
reduced the people to a condition of slavery, or that
it possesses any one of the peculiar distinctive features
of that odious state of servitude.
It may, however, be urged that the system


resembles in some respects that which formerly
existed, and which, though lately modified, is still
to some degree in force in the Island of Java.
There are those who have carefully studied the
Dutch culture system, and whose judgment cannot
be lightly disregarded, who are of opinion that it is
open to objection, rather on account of practical
abuses in its working than from any inherent fault of
principle ; and that, defective as it is, it has on the
whole acted beneficially as a protection to the native
population.
It is, however, useless, and wholly beside the
question, to discuss the merits or demerits of Javanese
taxation ; for, excepting on one point, where there is
a certain superficial resemblance, the two systems are
essentially opposed in principle and in practice. The
point of resemblance is, that in both there is a pay-
ment in kind ; but there the resemblance ends. The
essential principle of the Dutch system is, that the
whole produce of certain kinds of culture is con-
sidered the property of the Government, and a small
remuneration according to its amount paid to the
producers, the Government taking all the profits of
the subsequent sale of the produce.
The essential principle of the Fiji scheme is that
the produce raised remains the property of the indivi-
dual or family of him who raised it; that out of it
he pays his portion of the tax assessed on his pro-
vince or town, and that he then disposes of the
remainder exactly as he pleases, and with the power
of obtaining a fair price for it.
If a Fijian and a Javanese had each raised, say,
10 bags of maize, at a time when the price of maize
c 2


was 10s. a bag, and the share of the provincial tax
falling to the Fijian was 10s., he would pay one bag to
the Government and have nine bags left to dispose
of, which, at 10s. per bag, would equal £4 10s.
The Javanese, on the other hand, would have to
give up the whole of his ten bags to the Government,
which would only return to him a small money pay-
ment, say 3s. for each bag, equal to £1 1 Os., reserving
to itself the remainder of the sale price, equal to
£3 10s.
Again, the profit arising from an increase in
value of the article cultivated would in the one case
accrue to the cultivator, and in the other to the Go-
vernment. If a Fijian village was assessed at £2O,
represented in value by 300 lbs. of coffee, and the
price of coffee were so to rise that 200 lbs. would fetch
£2O, it is manifest that the cultivators would gain
by the addition of 100 lbs. of coffee to the amount
which they had raised to dispose of on their own
account. But no such benefit would accrue to a
Javanese village from such a rise of prices. The
whole of the crop would still have to be surrendered
to the Government, which would appropriate the
entire profit arising therefrom, whilst the cultivators
would only receive the scanty payment originally
agreed on.
The two principles are utterly distinct.
Under the one system, the cultivator is simply a
paid agent who raises produce for the proprietor,—the
State, —which takes and uses such produce, paying
the cultivator scanty wages for his trouble in pro-
ducing it.
Under the other system, the cultivator possesses


and disposes of his produce at will, but pays from
it to the Government a moderate tax or tythe.
Such modes of payment are, I need not say,
known in countries of far more advanced civilization
than Fiji, and were at the beginning of the century
common throughout Europe. Bents are still partly
paid in oatmeal and fowls, and even in the carriage
of fuel and building materials, in some places in
Scotland, and the mere payment of a tax in money s
worth, instead of cash, in no way resembles the Go-
vernment proprietorship of the Java system.
That the system is disliked by the European
traders has also been asserted. This is true, so far
at least as some of the petty traders are concerned;
for it has put a serious check on their opportunities
of making illegitimate profit out of the ignorance and
necessities of the natives, to which I have before re-
ferred. The native is no longer wholly unacquainted
with the value of the commodities he produces, neither
is he under the pressure of an obligation to produce a
certain number of shillings on a given day, to obtain
which he was ready to make the most rash and
inconsiderate bargains with those who knew he was
at their mercy, and that they could exact what
terms they pleased.
I believe, however, that the system is very diffe-
rently regarded by the few larger traders in the
Group; and the observations made by the unofficial
members of the Legislative Council on the intro-
duction of the Ordinance, which will be found at
page 92 of the Slue Book on the Affairs of Fiji,
presented to Parliament in ] 876, show a by no means
unjust appreciation of its objects and spirit.


It may be said, too, tbat the operation of the law
interferes with the supply of labour to the planters.
It is not true that it does so directly. Indirectly, it
may, but only by the operation of influences which
tend to insure the comfort and position of the native,
render it less necessary for him now than formerly
to seek work at a distance from his home and family.
It is true that the poll-tax in money, existing
before 1875, drove men to engage as labourers in
order to procure coin, and that this indirect aid to
the planter has been withdrawn by the substitution
of the present law ; but though I have no doubt
that many of those who object to the present system
of native taxes, are more or less unconsciously under
an impression that, were it abolished, the old poll-
tax system would be restored, they are, on that
point, I think, altogether mistaken; nor without its
restoration would the abolition of the present system,
of itself, materially affect the labour market.
That the natives themselves dislike the system
may perhaps also be said ; but this, I am certain, is
untrue. It is, however, almost a wonder that it
should be so ; for no pains have been spared in some
quarters to prejudice the people against it and against
the Government, but for the most part this has been
attempted vainly.
A few days before I left Fiji, a native of great
intelligence spoke to me of the efforts of certain whites
to excite a prejudice against the Government. He
spoke bitterly of the mischief which might be done
by these intrigues, and added, “We Fijians are great
fools, and there are many of us who are likely to be
ofulled ; but after all we are not such fools as to have


lost all memory of the time when these gentlemen,
who are now so solicitous for our welfare and our
rights, had all things in their own hands; and you
may take it for granted that most of the ignorant
villagers who answer e E din a saJca,’ (‘ Quite true,
Sir/) when it is suggested to them that they are
oppressed, are perfectly aware that a money-tax
would cost them double labour, and laugh secretly,
though respect leads them to yield a seeming assent
to a white man's assertion."
The statement' that the payment of a tax in cash
would require double labour is, though startling, per-
fectly true. Taking the article copra, for example,
it will be found that the mean or average price
offered by the traders to Government in 1877 was
£lO 10s. 6d. per ton (2,240 lbs.). The average prices
given by local traders to natives at the time was
£5 per ton : and, as payment was generally made in
trade sold at a large profit, even that value can only
be regarded as nominal.
It follows, therefore, that if the native under
the present system, had to pay 10 shillings worth
of copra annually by way of taxes, he would have
to provide 106 lbs. weight of that article only; but
if he had to pay 10 shillings in money, he would have
to sell 224 lbs. weight to the trader in order to raise
the amount of money required.
I do not suppose that the people of Fiji, more
than people in other parts of the world, like taxation
in any form ; but, as a general rule, they are quite
aware of the advantage to them of the present system,
as contrasted with that of which it takes the place ;
and that they have at all events thriven under it, not


half an eye is required to perceive. Everywhere the
increased areas of cultivation, the enlarged towns,
the good new houses, the well kept roads, the
cheerful and healthy-looking population, present the
strongest possible contrast to the aspect of the country
in 1875. This was fully admitted to me, not long
before I left Fiji, by a leading planter, who said that
nobody who had eyes in his head could deny that the
natives were very much better off than they were
three years ago ; but he added, (and there was
much significance in the admission), that this was
by no means an advantage to the planter, whose
difficulties in obtaining labour were thereby mate-
rially increased.
Nevertheless, I am far from denying that there
may be cases in which the tax has pressed heavily,
on a village, or on individuals. Considering the
magnitude of the area from which the tax is collected,
the extent to which native agency and native
machinery are employed, and the necessarily small
amount of supervision exercised, it will not cause
me the least surprise to learn that, here and there, a
district council has made a foolish or unfair assess-
ment or that a Boko Tui or Buli has enforced with
undue harshness the cultivation or collection of the
required produce. These errors, if they have been
committed, will undoubtedly be detected, exposed,
and made the most of. But, after all, they are only
faults of detail and execution ; faults which, if they
exist, may, —and shall, —be remedied, but which in
no way affect the principle of the measure itself.
Nothing could be more discouraging than the
circumstances under which the system was initiated.


First of all, the season of the year at which the
Ordinance was passed—loth February, 1876, —was
far too late to enable the scheme to work satis-
factorily daring that year, the proper planting season
having closed in September. Secondly; owing to
the almost total cessation of cotton planting by
settlers, no adequate supply of seed could be
obtained, and many months elapsed before it could
be procured from abroad. Unfortunately, when it did
arrive much of it was bad and failed to germinate.
A third drawback was the outbreak amongst the
hill tribes of Yiti Levu, which, though quickly sup-
pressed, had the effect of unsettling the coast people
upon the north, west, and south sides of that island,
and in return for their personal services, and as a
recognition of their loyalty, necessitated a remission
of nearly the whole of the amount of taxes at which
those districts had been assessed.
One advantage, and that no trifling one, the new
system of taxation has enjoyed. I refer to the ready
apprehension of its object and character, which has
been shown by both Her Majesty’s late, and present,
Secretary of State for the Colonies. But, neverthe-
less, it may be fairly said that few schemes have been
carried out under greater difficulties. With many
of the Europeans it was at first highly unpopular, its
objects being sometimes really and sometimes wilfully
misunderstood. No effort was spared to excite the
doubt and suspicion of the natives as to the effect of
its operations in respect to themselves. From too
many plantations, and from almost every itinerant
trader in the colony, they learned that they were
being made slaves, that the scheme was an un-


English and unlawful one, and that its real object
was spoliation and robbery.
The natives, indeed, were not unfrequently told
that it was their right, as British subjects, and would
be their only salvation, in refusing to pay taxes in
any other way than in money, which, of course,
they could easily obtain by pledging all their produce
to the traders instead of delivering a portion of it
to the Government.
To the above-mentioned difficulties may be added
those arising out of petty jealousies between chiefs,
and between villages, which at times have required
much patience to settle.
In spite of all these obstacles, the system has
been attended with marked success. In recommend-
ing to Her Majesty's Government the policy of this
law, I wrote thus :
“If I have erred in my estimate of its work, it
may then more or less gradually be abandoned. If,
on the other hand, it secures, as I believe it will, an
abundant revenue, and one easily capable of further
augmentation ; if it stimulates the industry, and
doubles the produce of the colony ; if under its
influence the mass of the population are content and
prosperous, it may then trust to its own merits for
its future maintenance, and will stand in no need of
of my feeble advocacy."
Not three years have since passed by, and
already we see that it has secured an ample revenue,
that it has stimulated the industry and has doubled
the produce of the colony ; that under it the popula-
tion are more prosperous than they have been for
a long time, and are, notwithstanding the incessant


efforts of mischief-makers, content and trustful, as
they will, I firmly believe, continue to be.
Long as this paper is, I am painfully aware that
it contains but a very incomplete account of the
varied causes which led to the enactment of which
I have attempted to describe the principles and
working. lam especially desirous that it should
not be forgotten that it is but one in a series of
measures which should be regarded together as a
whole, and which have for their objects the preser-
vation and social development of the native race.
These are objects which we cannot, I fear, as a
nation, boast that we have done more to promote
than others whom we are accustomed to regard as
less careful than ourselves of the interests of a
subject population. I am far from saying that the
instincts of the Englishman are not humane, just,
and even generous, but it is impossible to trust to
the influence of those instincts solely. Something
more is needed, and it will be found, on examination,
that while we have done little, beyond placing them
on a footing of equality with ourselves before the
law, to protect the native races from the influences
to which the contact with civilization exposes them,
or to diminish the inevitable results of friction
between the strong and the weak, other powers
have in no small degree succeeded in accomplishing
what we have left almost unattempted.
I cannot conclude without repeating the ex-
pression of my regret that the limitation of my
subject should have caused any of my hearers dis-
appointment, if it has done so, as I fear has been the
case, or without assuring them of my readiness, at


all times, privately, to give them any information
which it may be in my power to afford, and they
may wish to seek.
One has, perhaps, looked for a sketch of the
political and administrative growth of the new
colony. Another desires to learn something with
regard to eligible openings for the investment of
capital; a third is curious as to the mythology, tra-
ditions and poetry of the native race. Some wish
for statistical details of commercial progress, others
are anxious for an account of the geography,
meteorology, and natural history of the Group.
There will, again, be those who have expected to be
told something of the wonderfully successful work of
the Wesleyan Missionaries in the Group, a work of
which, even in thus cursorily mentioning it, I cannot
speak without honour. I regret that they should
remain unsatisfied, but the very enumeration of such
a multitude of subjects is in itself a sufficient apology
and reason for my not attempting now to deal with
them. I will only say one word on the future
prospects of the Colony; namely, that I believe Fiji
to be an admirable field for the investment of large
capital, whether in sugar or coffee estates. Sugar
grows spontaneously, is of the first quality, and has
a practically boundless market in Australia. As
regards coffee culture, Fiji is now in much the same
position as Ceylon thirty or forty years ago, and I
have no doubt that those who now found estates there
will find them in no long time amply remunerative.
I have never seen finer tobacco than that raised in
Fiji, and the cotton produced there is admitted to
be of the best description. But I will not attempt


to enter on these subjects at the end of an address
which has already, I fear, exceeded all moderate
dimensions.
My thanks are due to all who have done me the
honour to listen with such patience to this long
paper, but they are especially so to those who have
been drawn here by the influence and recollection of
old associations. It is not with indifference that I
find myself once more speaking in public in the
presence of those before whom, (whatever private
relations have been kept up between us,) —I have
not so spoken, since, more than twenty years ago, we
sat together in Parliament. Among them are Secre-
taries of State, under whom I have since served,
as, but for illness, would have been one yet more
distinguished, who, when yet a boy I learned to
regard with admiration and affection, which have but
deepened with the lapse of years.
Among them, too, is the friend* by whose side in
the House of Commons was my habitual seat, whose
conversation gave a charm to hours which, without
it, would have been hours of tedium, and by whose
unconscious teaching my own cast of thought has
been largely moulded. He has realized every expec-
tation which they who knew him in those days
formed. He has reached the foremost place in his
profession. He has filled the highest dignity which
a British subject, not an ecclesiastic, can attain;
and he now enjoys from men of all parties throughout
the country unmingled respect and honour*. —My own
life has been passed in scenes altogether unlike
those of which we then dreamed, and under very
* Lord Selborne.


different conditions from those which we then
anticipated. When thus brought face to face with
the past, it is impossible to avoid asking whether
home and a home career have been uselessly
sacrificed, and the years which yawn between that
time and this, wholly thrown away and wasted. I
venture to hope not.
It is true that much is given up by one who
undertakes the duties of Colonial Government; that
personal ambition finds little field for indulgence;
that the amount of time spent in each place he
governs is usually too small to enable him to leave a
mark there, and that the waste of power involved in
such removes is as wearing to his own energy, as
it is, I think, injurious to the public service. Never-
theless, he has in all cases much opportunity for
unobtrusive usefulness, and, if it be his good fortune,
as it has been mine, to take part in the organization
of a new colony—though no doubt he may have to
encounter the bitter disappointment of living to see
his work undone; —though, in any case, that work
will be unknown to, and unheeded by, the public
here ; —though absence and distance may exclude him
from the high places of even his own chosen walk in
life ; —yet, if he merits and obtains the confidence of
the Home Government; —if he has time to consolidate
his measures and watch their growth, he may do
much to establish upon righteous and lasting founda-
tion the relations between different races, and may
stamp a deeper impression on at least a small corner
of the world than is made by many a man who is
better known, and labours in a wider field. He will
be himself forgotten ; but he may benefit generations


subsequent to his own, and influence the lives
of men long after his bones have mouldered to dust
in their obscure, and, it may be, unmarked grave.
Earl Granville said it was settled by the Council, with the
consent of my right hon. friend, that Mr. Gladstone should pro-
pose a vote of thanks to Sir Arthur Gordon for the paper we have
just heard. But we all know that even Councils propose things
which do not sometimes come to pass. (A laugh.) Your Secre-
tary has had the pleasure of reading to you a letter from Mr.
Gladstone* I have the still higher privilege of having received
a communication from the daughter of the right hon. gentleman
—(laughter)—and, with your permission, I shall proceed at once
to commit the gross indiscretion of confidentially imparting that
communication to you. (Laughter.) Miss Gladstone says:
“ Dear Lord Granville,—My father desires me to write a line
to express the great disappointment which he feels in being unable
to attend the meeting to-night. It would have given him so much
pleasure to propose a vote of thanks to Sir A. Gordon; and, at
the same time, he would have been glad to have had the oppor-
tunity of expressing the regret which he cannot but feel that Sir
Arthur thinks it best to render his service to England at such a
distance as Fiji instead of giving us the more immediate benefit
* 76, Harley Street, March 17, 1879.
Sir, —It is with the utmost regret that I am obliged to excuse
myself from attending to-morrow the dinner of the Colonial In-
stitute and the delivery by Sir Arthur Gordon of an address
relating to the Fiji Islands. I was anxious in availing myself of
the courtesy of the Institute to testify my attachment to Sir
Arthur Gordon (whom I have known from his early boyhood
upwards) and my confidence in his administration. When he was
chosen for the government of the Islands, I considered the selec-
tion to be one which, with reference to the novel and peculiar
nature of the task, it would be difficult to match and impossible
to excel. All that has since passed, so far as my imperfect
knowledge goes, has tended to show how much honour is due to
those who advised the appointment, as well as to the person who
received it. A cold and hoarseness, from which 1 have but
partially recovered, unfortunately compel me to forego my share
of what, I do not doubt, will be on all sides a most happy celebra-
tion.—l have the honour to be, Sir, your very obedient servant,
W. E. Gladstone.


of his presence at home. My father looked forward to this even-
ingl, and nothing short of the doctor’s orders would have prevented
him attending your meeting.” (Applause.) I know myself that
this _ disappointment to Mr. Gladstone is great and sincere.
He is very much affected by the associations of the past, to
which Sir Arthur Gordon has just now alluded with so much feel-
ing. Not only has Sir Arthur Gordon been his intimate friend,
but a son of the high-minded statesman to whom Mr, Gladstone
was devoted, and not only his son, but he also took an active and
important share in all the labours of Lord Aberdeen during the
latter and more important parts of his official life ; and I cannot
help thinking that the experience which Sir Arthur Gordon gained
at the fountain-head of administration of affairs at home has
greatly contributed to the remarkable success which has attended
his Colonial Governorship in different parts of the world. (Ap-
plause.) I think Mr. Gladstone would have had great pleasure in
hearing the remarkable paper just read—the full, clear, historical
statement of the results of the administration in Fiji, giving, it
appears to me, ample proofs of the business-like, practical,
common-sense with which Sir Arthur Gordon has applied those
great, sound, Liberal principles of Colonial administration, and
particularly effected that most difficult problem of dealing with
Colonies of which the populations are of different races, differing
not only in race, but in culture and civilization. (Cheers.) My
agreeable duty under ordinary circumstances would have been to
ask you to give the question a general discussion, which is one of
the characteristics of this Institution, and one of the most useful
attributes for ventilating subjects of Colonial interest; but I have
been requested by Sir Arthur Gordon to state that he hopes you
will remember that he is in a peculiar position before you. He is
a public servant, actually in harness, who, as he has stated, was
impressed to give us the explanations which he has given with
regard to the recently-acquired Colony, in which we all take the
greatest interest, and about which I believe some of us know
very little indeed. For that purpose he obtained the sanction of
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, whom we are so glad to
see has found time amidst all his avocations to be present. But
Sir Arthur Gordon feels that it would not be becoming in him to
enter into any detailed controversy with regard to details to which
he has generally alluded; and, on the other hand, with his know-
ledge of the subject, and the thought he has bestowed on it, it
would be painful to him to remain perfectly silent if much con-
troversy went on. My duty is, therefore, simply to call upon
Lord Cardwell to perform a part, which I am sure will be a real
pleasure to him, to move a vote of thanks to Sir Arthur Gordon.
(Cheers).
Lord Cardwell— l believe I am the oldest member of the
public service present who has had the advantage of knowing the
great services rendered by Sir Arthur Gordon as a Colonial


ministrator. It is now nearly twenty years ago since, when, in
Lord Palmerston’s Government, the Duke of Newcastle appointed
Sir Arthur Gordon to the Governorship of New Brunswick.
Nothing could be more difficult then than the Government of that
Colony, about which we have just heard so interesting account.
It was a government, a self-government of British subjects of a
Colony now, as you know, amalgamated in the great Canadian
Dominion. I refer to that chiefly for this purpose, because my
memory brings before me an anecdote which your heartiness to-
night has abundantly illustrated. Sir A. Gordon was then chiefly
employed, I remember, in assisting the then Government in pre-
paring that great union of the Canadian Dominion which was
afterwards completed in Parliament; through the hands of Lord
Carnarvon he rendered great service to the country, and his ser-
vice was fully appreciated by the people of New Brunswick ; and
I well remember the quaint method in which they expressed the
value of his services when they said to me, “ He is a gentleman
who does all his own thinking for himself.” I think you have had
abundant experience to-night that Sir A. Gordon requires no
prompting from anybody else, but that he does his own thinking
for himself. (Hear, hear.) I have great pleasure in calling upon
you to give that reception to his interesting address, which Mr.
Gladstone would have moved if he had been present here to-night.
(Cheers.) Sir A. Gordon has laid before us the principles of his
policy. They are broad and liberal. They recognise the native
race as entitled to their full share in the administration of the
Colony; and, more than that —they do what so few governments
have the ability and the good sense to do, viz., that when their
great object is to make people happy, they do not try to make
them happy in their own way, but they consider what their way
would be if they had their choice, and they endeavour so far as
circumstances permit to accommodate themselves to that, and
accomplish the object in the only way in which it really can be
done. (Applause.) We have heard not only the broad principles
of his policy, but we have heard details and statistics of the re-
sults of his policy; and those details, I think, have left us nothing
to desire, and we are quite certain that Sir A. Gordon’s principles
are manifestly right. They have received the approval of the
Government, and I am sure they have received yours, and hav-
ing received that approval the results speak for themselves, and
the conclusion follows as a matter of course. It would be, I see
by the clock, quite improper and impossible for me to prolong
any observations of mine, and I shall therefore content myself
with proposing the motion which Mr. Gladstone would have made;
and I shall call upon you heartily to thank Sir A. Gordon for the
interesting and powerful address which he has been good enough
to give us. (Loud cheers).
Mr. Frederick Young— My lords, ladies, and gentlemen,—l
have the pleasure of seconding the motion which has just been
D


proposed to you by the noble lord who last addressed you. I
have asked permission to do so especially, because I feel myself,
as the official representative of the Royal Colonial Institute, in
rather a peculiar position this evening. I confess that it has been
a little embarrassing to me to hear the desire expressed that on
this occasion a departure should be made from the practice which
we are invariably accustomed to follow, viz., that a discussion,
and as full a one as possible, should take place after the reading
of papers. At the same time, I cannot help feeling that what the
noble lord in the chair has said has great force in it, and I, for
one, bow without hesitation to the ruling of his lordship. (Hear,
hear.) I think, for the reasons he has given, it would be manifestly
somewhat objectionable that a discussion such as we have been
accustomed to have hitherto should take place to-night. The
official position which Sir Arthur Gordon occupies, and the very
fact of our having the right hon. gentleman who is the Secretary
of State for the Colonies with us to-night, as well as other official
persons, would perhaps render it a little difficult for us to hold to
our old rule of speeches after papers. (Hear, hear.) I can only
say, in the name of the Institute, that I am quite sure that every-
body who is present this evening has heard with much interest
the masterly address we have listened to from Sir Arthur Gordon.
(Cheers.) I have read the paper myself with great satisfaction.
I think Sir Arthur Gordon has put before the world an admirable
defence of the policy which he has felt it his duty to carry out
in one of the newest dependencies of this great Empire. (Hear,
hear.) I congratulate him, and I congratulate the Fellows also,
that the Royal Colonial Institute has been the means of bringing
this paper before the public. With these few observations—for
I speak without any preparation, and had no intention of taking
part myself in the discussion this evening, if it had not appeared
to me to be necessary to say something in explanation of the
reason for the departure to-night from our usual course of pro-
ceeding—l gladly second the motion which has been proposed by
Lord Cardwell. (Applause.)
The noble Chahoman put the motion to the meeting, and it was
carried with acclamation.
Lord Selborne —My lords, ladies, and gentlemen, —I address
you with some diffidence for two reasons, one because the hour is
certainly late, and if I were to say all that occurs to me, I should
certainly trespass inexcusably upon your indulgence; the other
is, that although I participate in that pride which all Englishmen
feel in our Colonies, and their anxious and hearty desire for their
welfare, and that the name of our country should be honoured by
good deeds in every part of the world, yet I feel I speak in the
presence of many persons who have a much more intimate know-
ledge of our Colonies than I can pretend to myself. _ I see near
me some who have filled the highest seats of justice in the Colony
of New Zealand. I see a prelate equally distinguished by his long


service, ability, and virtue (which could not be surpassed), from
the Colony of Victoria; and many others, both at home and abroad,
distinguished for their knowledge of Colonial life. In their pre-
sence I cannot but speak as one who ought rather to listen than
to be heard; and yet there is one other reason, which, perhaps,
tells both ways, which impells me to speak; while, on the other
hand it makes speaking difficult. Sir A. Gordon did not, indeed,
name me; but I could not but feel that some words which he uttered
were intended to be understood by me more, perhaps, than by any
one else. Sir A. Gordon has been for many years one of my
dearest and most intimate friends; and there is, perhaps, no one
who has a greater right than myself to say that he thoroughly
understands the man, his ability, and his character. (Hear, hear.)
Well, you see, that makes it not easy for me to say all that I
think. Sometimes it does enable me, and it does entitle me, to
bear the testimony of intimate personal knowledge to the absolute
purity, high-mindedness, and disinterestedness of motives and
purpose with which Sir A. Gordon has undertaken all the duties
which he has had to discharge. (Cheers.) He has, in a manner
not very often found amongst statesmen, preferred to serve his
country in a position where he thought he would be able to do
the most good, rather than to receive the higher promotion and
the greater emoluments of home appointments : and wherever he
has gone his object has been to do the public most service, and to
promote the interests of those over whom he was set to govern
without respect to persons, without fear, and without regard to
favour. (Hear, hear.) That is the character which Englishmen
will appreciate, when in regard to details they may differ from the
policy of the man. At the same time, I think, after what we have
heard to-night, you will all be of opinion that Sir A. Gordon has
given reasons for his policy, and has stated facts, as to its motives
and as to its results, which every one ought most seriously and
most carefully to weigh before he would undertake to say that
the policy had been mistaken. For my part, I cannot disguise my
entire and complete conviction that it has been as wise a policy
in practical intention and result as it has been beyond all doubt
benevolent in its purpose. (Hear, hear.) lam sure I speak
the sentiments of all present when I say that the welfare of
native races must be an object of great interest and great anxiety
to all of us. No one could read the history of European coloniza-
tion in that part without blushing, to think that, while the
interests of European Colonies in many parts of the world have
been advanced, the native races who possess those parts of the
world previously had been the sufferers, and not gainers, by our
gain. (Hear, hear.) Well, I hope we have at last found out the
way in which that is to be avoided. Englishmen have distin-
guished themselves, I venture to say, above all others in the
philanthropy with which they have sought to do good in all parts
of the world. Those who were missionaries in Fiji, whom Sir


A. Gordon mentions, such as Bishop Patteson, and Bishop Selwyn
and his son, who have devoted their lives in labouring among the
natives of the islands scattered in the Pacific, and who are certainly
to be numbered amongst the benefactors of mankind; and sad it
would be if we could not, when taking the government of a new
country, inhabited by large populations of most interesting and
docile people, who have already made no slight advances towards
the arts of civilization, and the knowledge and practice of
Christianity, if we could not so establish our government among
them as to prove that we had their welfare at heart as well as
our own material prosperity ; and that we can establish a system
of government really adapted to their circumstances and their
wants. If ever there was a Colony in which it was specially the
duty of this country to make the endeavour, surely it is the Colony
of Fiji, where, I am thankful to say, we are not intruders. W e
have not taken possession of that which others thought to belong
to themselves. We have undertaken and accepted the duty of
giving them a better government than they had before, and they
have hitherto, with the exception of a slight outbreak, which the
population itself were the means of suppressing, not only cheer-
fully submitted to our dominion, but co-operated most usefully in
our government. (Hear, hear.) Well, I cannot but think that it
would be a terrible blot upon the good name of England were the
colonization of such a Colony as Fiji—after we had undertaken
and accepted the duty of giving them better government than
before—if the government was such as to end in the miserable
extermination and destruction of the native race, such as has
disgraced the name of Spain and so many other Christian countries.
(Hear, hear.) I could not help being struck by one particular
allusion which Sir A. Gordon made, when he compared the present
state of Fiji with the condition of Ireland and Scotland in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, and showed to us, as he certainly did,
that Fiji at the present time is much better off than the Irish, and
possibly even the Scotch, people here. Now, of the Scotch I can
say nothing, because it does so happen that in dealing with Scotland
we have learnt at times the lesson that we could not impose
English ideas upon them ; and learning to govern them according
to Scotch ideas, Scotland has become one of the happiest and
most prosperous parts of the British Empire. (Cheers.) Now,
compare Ireland. Looking back, is there an Englishman who
does not wish from the bottom of his heart that in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, and from those days downwards, we had
endeavoured to understand the way in which Irishmen looked at
Irish affairs, Irish habits, Irish ideas, and to govern them as far
as possible according to those, instead of trying to force upon
them English laws, English language, English systems, English
ideas? (Applause.) What is the result? why, there is not one
of us who would not give almost all he possessed in the world if
by so doing he could make Ireland at the present time, relatively


to England, and for its own sake, what Scotland now is. (Hear,
hear.) If there is one cause to which one can trace the miserable
series of misgovernment which took place in Ireland, and has
ended in its being so backward in that feeling of identity with
ourselves which we could wish, it is certainly attempting to
govern Ireland by English and not Irish ideas. Then, 1 deeply
rejoice to think that Sir A. Gordon is endeavouring to lay his
foundation in Fiji by taking up the existing state of civilization
among the natives, by understanding native institutions, by
making them the lever with which he is endeavouring to make
the natives take to a system of governing themselves, especially
by introducing a gradual system of taxation. And if there should
be more reasons than I can possibly see of doubting' the abstract
expediency in such a state of society of that system which he
has described to us, I feel sure that the importance of that prin-
ciple of starting from the native institutions and using them is so
great that it would cover a multitude of errors—if errors had
been committed, which I do not believe. (Hear, hear.) I will
detain you no longer; but will discharge the duty which I rose
to do, which is to ask you to give your most cordial thanks to
the noble Earl Granville for presiding —(great cheers) —a nobleman
whose qualities both in public and private life are much too well
known to everybody in this country to need one word of com-
mendation. (Applause.)
Sir Michael Hicks-Beach said—l rise for the purpose of
seconding the proposal which Lord Selborne has so eloquently
put before you. I have heard it said in the course of this evening’s
discussion, if it can be so called, that it has not been customary
hitherto for those who hold the office I have the honour to occupy
to attend at the meetings of the Royal Colonial Institute. I can
imagine on ordinary occasions good grounds for such a rule. The
place, and I think the only place, where it would appear to be
proper for Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies to
discuss Colonial affairs is in the House of Commons. (Hear,
hear.) If anyone holding my office found himself present here at
one of your ordinary debates, he might naturally hear something
said with which he could not agree, and yet would find himself
in the awkward position of being unable to notice it. Therefore,
so far as my own personal feelings are concerned, I feel myself
deeply indebted to the kindness and courtesy of the members of
the Royal Colonial Institute for making this an exceptional
occasion. I have made it an exceptional occasion, because I felt
so deeply the interest of the subject which was to be brought
before you. I knew it would be brought before you with the
highest ability, and I was anxious to attend as a learner rather
than as a speaker. You must all feel deep interest —perhaps the
deepest interest of all —in those of our Colonies which are, so to
speak, the youngest children of our Empire; and, when we hear
so favourable an account as has been put before us this evening


of one of those youngest children, we cannot but appreciate the
energy and ability of the man to whom this is mainly due that
this account can be given. I feel that in our relative positions
it is difficult for me to say anything of Sir Arthur Gordon; but,
though I have not the privilege of being among those to whom
he so touchingly referred in his address as the friends of his
youth in England, yet I may venture to say this, that in the short
period of our official connection, I think it would be difficult—
perhaps impossible—to find anyone of greater ability and aptitude
for the task that he has to perform than the Governor of Fiji.
He is making, as Lord Selborne has told you, a great experiment,
an experiment which, if successful, will redound highly to the
honour and credit of this country in its dealings with native races.
In the experiment he may find it necessary to take measures, per-
haps, more or less at variance with certain doctrines and ideas
which may be held among us as applicable to our own circum-
stances ; but I think it should be remembered that in this matter
we are dealing with peculiar stages of civilization—that we must
adapt our measures to our ends, and that we must not attempt—
and if we attempt we shall fail —to try to drag persons in the
condition of society that the Fiji Islanders are in, to be measured
by procrustean rules, applicable to our civilization and the Anglo-
Saxon race. I have only to second the proposal which Lord
Selborne has made, and am confident of this, that Sir Arthur
Gordon will stamp his name on the history of Fiji, and although
his work is done at the other side of the globe, he will be remem-
bered in future as one of those who have rendered the highest
service to their country. (Cheers.)
Earl Granville— My lords, ladies and gentlemen, how was it
possible for me to know, after Lord Selborne speaking so touch-
ingly of Sir Arthur Gordon, and pointing out the exact merits
which Sir Arthur Gordon possesses, which he himself has passed
so lightly over, that there should have been the insidious proposal
made which Lord Selborne intended at the conclusion of his
speech, I have the greatest authority in this room for stating that
it is absolutely contrary to the order and precedents hitherto
observed by the Society to permit such a proposal as that made
by Lord Selborne, and seconded by Sir Michael Hicks-Beach, with
the urbanity which distinguishes political opponents whenever
they meet. (Applause.) He had been good enough to suggest
that he should propose this vote, and I informed him that it was
absolutely against the rules; but, as we have had the exceptional
incident of the Secretary of State being present, and some most
judicious remarks made by him, I must conform myself to this
exceptional state of things, and say, which I do most truly, that
I am deeply grateful to you for the kindness with which you
have proposed a vote of thanks to me. (Cheers.)
54


LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY,
ST. martin’s LANE.




ADDRESS
TO THE FRIENDS OF
THE HON. SIR ARTHUR GORDON
GOVERNOR OF THE FIJI ISLANDS
ASSEMBLED IN PREPARATION FOR HIS DEPARTURE
IN KING HENRY Vll.’s CHAPEL, WESTMINSTER ABBEY
On July 4, 1879
BY
ARTHUR PENEHYN STANLEY, D.D.
DEAN OF WESTMINSTER
■jprinteb bg
SPOTTISWOODE & CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE, LONDON
1879




ADDRESS.
Whatever else the first Communion may have been,
it was a parting meal. That supper in the upper
chamber at Jerusalem—what was it but the parting of
friends who were to meet then, and to meet in like
manner no more P Those touching discourses in the
Fourth Gospel which take the place of the description
of the Last Supper in the first Three—what are they
but the long farewells, again and again repeated,
beginning and ending, and yet again begun and ended,
before the last word was finally spoken ? And the
most detailed account of the Communion of the early
Christians, as given in the Acts of the Apostles, when
the disciples came together to break bread in the
upper chamber at Troas—what was it but the solemn
valedictory intercourse with the great Apostle, whose
face perhaps they, like the Ephesians, would see no
more P It was blended inextricably with the conver-
sation, the interchange of question and answer, the
talk prolonged deep into the night, amidst the torches
flickering in their sockets, and the windows open to
the still midnight air, till the dawn broke over the
heights of Ida, and the travellers departed—some by


the ship that lay moored in the harbour, some by
land to join it in the nearest port—with the last
memories of their farewell, in that granite city, en-
deared by the Apostle’s visits once, twice, and thrice
before—endeared possibly, although on this we cannot
insist, by the classic recollections which, partly in history
and partly in legend, connected this latest scene of their
parting with the names of Alexander and of Priam.
Such is the Communion here to-day. Whatever
else it may be in the minds of this or that partaker,
to all it is coloured by one prevailing thought—the
thought of parting, the parting of friend from friend, of
brother from brother, of sister from sister, of father
from son. Not in vain perhaps will it have been
solemnized in this Chapel, to which, as has been said by
one well competent to judge, 6 the world has produced
no equal ’ —not in vain are we surrounded by the tombs
of the dead, some amongst the most famous, some
amongst the dearest in our annals or our experience—
not in vain do the banners of England’s 4 most honour-
able Order ’ wave over our heads—if the scene shall have
deepened in the minds either of those who go, or of
those who remain, the solemnity of such a farewell, or
the nobleness of the mission before us.
You who are on the eve of departure are bound
for those distant regions where all is new. There is
doubtless a stirring thought in places like this, where
the very air is tremulous with antiquity —where the
dust is the historic dust of ages—where the burden
which we have to bear is the burden of long in-
herited tradition, and vast accumulation of glorious


recollections. But that is also a stirring thought which
is expressed in those words of the poet —
We were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.
I remember a striking passage in the journal of one
since departed, when on the voyage to a high post in a
distant colony, and when coming in sight of the constel-
lation of the Southern Cross (I forget the exact words,
but the substance was this), I We have now entered
into skies and under stars which never looked down on
the Nativity or the Crucifixion—never on Holy Land
or classic city. Not the less shall it be our desire that
we may leave our mark on these new regions, which
shall bless and be blessed by those unknown skies and
those unconsecrated stars —some mark that shall con-
tribute towards a future holiness not less sacred in the
sight of God than the hills of Bethlehem or the rocks of
Calvary, a future fame which shall be not unworthy
of the ruins of Athens or the shrines of Westminster.’
Those islands of the south—those isles of the sea
where all is yet plastic and unformed: is it not
as if we were presiding over the very rudiments of
chaos—as if we partook in some measure of the won-
der and awe of Creation P It is not to exalt you or us
above measure—it is rather to humble and solemnize
that in considering such an enterprise we call to mind
the saying of Lord Bacon 4 The true marshalling of
the degrees of honour are these; in the first place are
Conditores Imperiorum , the founders of States and
Commonwealths.’ It is not merely as regards the pos-
sible greatness of such commonwealths that these words


are true. That no doubt is a most inspiring thought.
But we would rather dwell on the responsibilities
with which such founders are charged. Be their sphere
great or small; be the future results of their labours
magnificent or trivial; be they the first settlers of a
small Greek colony, like Thera or Syracuse, or of
an Imperial city like Rome or Carthage; the firm-
ness with which our foot is planted, the atmosphere
which we are able to breathe around us, the mate-
rial and moral resources which we take with us from
the mother-country—these are the inestimable gifts
which we carry with us, and which, even if wasted
there, will not be wasted on ourselves, will not, we
may venture to say, be wasted on our native soil. The
sacred fire from the Prytaneum, the household gods of
Troy, have within themselves a holy spell which blesses
those who bear them as well as those who receive
them. And then, in that new sphere, there is the
hope that we may see the birth of some fresh forma-
tion of human character, some fresh type of national
existence—nay, may we not see some second birth, some
regeneration of our own characters, which will enrich
the whole treasure-house of our experience ? It is one
of the few redeeming features of the present war in
South Africa that it has revealed to us a new nation
—new in its indomitable vigour, its* irresistible cou-
rage, its amazing discipline. Something of the same
kind is suggested by the transformation, within a few
years, of the Fiji Islanders from a race of cannibals
into an orderly, civilized, religious community. And
if this transformation has been wrought by the preach


ing of the Wesleyans, we may hail it as one more
crown added to the glory of John Wesley, the most
apostolic missionary that the Church of England has
produced. To the building up, the consolidation of
what they have begun, each one of you may add some-
thing. In this sense —a larger sense, perhaps, than he
intended—the words of Keble apply, when, in speak-
ing of the widespread influence of the English Church,
he said:—
’Tis true, not winter stays thy growth
Nor torrid summer’s sickly smile;
The flashing billows of the south
Break not upon so lone an isle,
But thou, rich vine, art grafted there
The fruit of death or life to bear.
In those islands it will be the duty of those who hear
me to work. And here one special thought springs to the
mind. It has not hitherto been the happiness of Eng-
lish colonists so to deal with inferior races as to impress
them with the sense of our superior civilization in the
great matters of justice or mercy. Witness our man-
ners of overbearing insult, sometimes our deeds of
violence and oppression, towards the inhabitants of
India, or of our other dependencies. And yet this
ought not so to be, even according to our own tra-
ditions. Amongst all the reminiscences of the founda-
tions of our early colonies in North America, none are
more pleasing than the relations of those first settlers
with the aboriginal tribes, especially as compared with
the faithlessness and cruelty of the Spaniards in the
southern parts of the same continent. Contrast the
cruelties of Cortez and Pizarro with the story, whether


historical or legendary, of the Indian princess Poca-
hontas and the first founder of Virginia—with the
kindly welcome of the Indian chief Samoset to the
Pilgrim colonists on the shores of Massachusetts—with
the interview between William Penn and the Indians
in the neighbouring forests—with the granite rock
which a touching inscription marks as the grave of the
Indians of Stockbridge, 6 the Friends of our Fathers ’ —
with the village of Concord, which derives its name
from the harmonious dwelling of its first Puritan in-
habitants with their rude neighbours the Praying
Indians. There we have some notion of the long-
abiding curse, on the one hand, which follows in the
wake of disdainful perfidy and harshness; and, on the
other hand, of the long-continued blessing which is left
behind by a benevolent attitude towards our weaker
brethren, as worthy at least of our compassion and of
our justice. Great is ! the temptation to forget these
elementary duties when we come to dwell with human
beings of colour, physiognomy, structure, religion, dif-
ferent from our own. 4 ltis a terrible business,’ wrote
one who had much and varied experience of this evil,
and who had a heart to see and to dread it— 4 it is a
terrible business this living amongst inferior races. I
have seldom heard from man or woman since I came
to the East a sentence which was reconcileable with
the hypothesis that Christianity had ever come into
the world. Detestation, contempt, ferocity, vengeance,
whether Chinamen or Indians be the object —a perfect
indifference, treating them, not as dogs, because in that
case we would whistle to them and pat them, but


as machines with which we have no communion or
sympathy—these are the ordinary sentiments. And
when the passions of fear and hatred are engrafted
on this indifference the result is frightful: an abso-
lute callousness as to the sufferiugs of the objects of
those passions—which must be witnessed in order to
be understood and believed.’ Thus wrote Lord Elgin 1
at Calcutta in the year of the Indian Mutiny ; and it
is to be feared that his description still applies in a
measure to the relations of Englishmen towards their
dependents throughout the world. At least be fore-
warned of the temptation; at least be forearmed with
that panoply of Charity which believes all things, en-
dures all things, hopes all things, even of the worst
and vilest of mankind—even of the most widely
estranged and the most deeply incorrigible.
We part—and many hearts will feel for you and
with you—across the long Ocean, athwart mighty
rivers and endless mountains, in the crowded cities
and beside the sounding cataracts of the New World ;
across the Ocean yet again, and to the far-off islands of
what will be for weeks, for months, to some for years,
their future home. You will not forget those whom you
leave behind; nor will they forget you. The illustration
that Fenelon employed to console for the great separa-
tion of Death must be the consolation also for the
lesser separations which supplied the illustration. c God,’
he says, ‘ does not need our bodily presence to the
enjoyment of unions which He has formed—our will
Life and Letters of Lord Elgin , edited by Theodore Walrond, p.
199. v


is sufficient. Such union is sufficient though the sea
divides us. We meet familiarly in His bosom who
knows neither time nor space, and whose immensity
obliterates distance. We can communicate and ex-
change intercourse without seeing or hearing. No-
thing annihilates distance save a union of wills in
God. In this as in a centre we find each other. Such
intercourse is quite unlike that of conversation. Not
unfrequently souls thus knit together meet without
being able to talk—they seem too near for words, too
full of their common interests for external demonstra-
tions. They are as one in God, and He is as one soul
in their separate existences.’
May He keep your going out and your coming in
from this time forth and for evermore.
LONDON : PRINTED BY
BPOTTISWOODB AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET












