

I
j h
PROBLEM.
Sgtoneg:
FIN DE SIECLE
ECONOMIES.
A COMPLETE SOLUTION THE SOCIAL
ANDREW A WALL GENERAL PRINTER, VICTORIA ARCADE.




Preface.
The matter contained in the following pages :s published as an
addition to a very important science, and, as the subjects dealt
with have been attracting universal attention for the last few
years, it is hoped the treatise, which is necessarily brief and
somewhat crude, will nevertheless be interesting and instructive.
The writer having little time to himself has been unable to
look up statistics, &c., but believing he knows what ought to be
is somewhat indifferent to the want of exact knowledge of what
been or is.
Should this effort meet with a good reception, the author
rouhl like to give more valuable information in other fields of
bought.
MTLLENNIUS.




To obviate much, if not all of this defect, the following is
submitted.
Economists are agreed as to the importance of the fact that an
author and the public should attach the same significance to any
and all the terms used by the former to convey his ideas to the
latter, and no doubt a great deal of confusion and misaprehen-
sion arises from the giving of an inadequate or unwarrantable
meaning to one or more words in a treatise.
It is hoped that this will be borne in mind in connection
with this discourse, and that thus the following definitions will
facilitate the conveyance of my ideas to the public.
An important and frequently used word in all treatises on
economics is the term wealth.
Wealth has been defined as “that which enables man to
accomplish his designs,” but as it sometimes happens that that
which prevents man from accomplishing his designs is also
wealth, and that although the definition gives a vague idea of the
nature of wealth, it affords us no criterion or base on which to
calculate the precise value of different forms or quantities of
wealth. For instance, one persons says the Czar of Russia
spends many millions of pounds in the accomplishment of his
designs, whilst the King of the Belgians (if I mistake not) a
short time ago was content with the materials and opportunity
which enabled him to build a nest and sit therein, in imitation
of the stork, counting no doubt that which enabled him to ac-
complish that design as much or more valuable than does the
Czar his millions of money, and as this is only an instance of
the difference of opinion as to relative values which exists, in a
lesser degree no doubt, between almost any two men in the world.
Therefore the definition “ that which enables a man to accomplish
his designs ” gives all of us but a vague and, perhaps each of u s
a different idea of what wealth is.
Wealth is human power, and what conduces to it, Of
course all desirable mental and physical atributes are wealth,
they are indeed wealth in its most concentrated form, for all
kinds of useful commodities are conserved and assimulated in
their production, and they conduce to human power, a fact which
brings them within the scope of the new definition.
This definition affords a basis upon which relative values
may be conveniently computed; thus in the above cited case of
the Czar and the King we have only to ask how much did that
money or those things conduce to the power of each to find the
wealth or power represented by the expenditure of each; or in
the case of a plough, how much does it add to the power of man
in excess of the expenditure of power and intelligence exerted in
the making of it, and as a result we find it gives a valuable profit;
again, how much does the lace, the ribbon, or the pearl necklace


of a woman, the costly ring or pearl scarf pin of the young man
add to the power of the wearers thereof? the answer is nil.
Therefore these things have, practically and intrinsically, but a
microscopical value, and this notwithstanding the fact that they
have what is called a marketable value. Now this is only an
accidental value due to the circumstance that there are some
persons willing to give real wealth for trash.
Now we will take the term labour.
Labour is energy exerted in the adaptation and modification
of natural or acquired wealth.
Capital is concentrated wealth, and is that which sustains
the energy of labour and enables it to bo applied in the most
profitable manner, and to await the fruition of such application.
Happiness consists of appreciating and being appreciated, and
who appreciates most and is most appreciated is happiest. The
definition of Diogenes that he is richest who has least wants,
seems to be open to question ; for instance, is the person under
the influence of a violent toothache the richest because he had
only one want (to be left alone ?) the charms of beauty have no
interest for him ; celestial music he regards not; for food he has
no appetite, and yet if one dared to ask the victim if he were on
this account the richest man, the consequences to many things
handy, whether animate or inanimate, would doubtless be peculiar
if not painful.
From the definition already given of the term wealth, it
may, I think, be reasonably inferred that the cause of depression
in trade and of all human misery is the dissipation of wealth.
Stating the same thing in another, and perhaps more understand-
able, way. Depression and human misery intensify in exact pro-
portion as the extent by which the rate of the increase of popu-
lation exceeds the contemporaneous rate of increase of wealth.
We may state the case in yet another way. When that which
is lived upon (wealth) increases less rapidly than that which
lives upon it (population), each of those individuals which con-
stitute the latter must, on an average, do with less and less
according to the time and extent over which these conditions
prevail.
This contingency would occur, for instance, among the lower
animals. In the following case: say a number of rabbits were
confined to a certain area of grassed land, and that by reason of
climatic or other conditions the rabbits increased more rapidly
than the blades of grass, it would, provided that the difference
in the rates of increase of rabbits and grass were known, be a
comparatively easy arithmetical problem to find the conditions
in which the average rabbit would be at any given time after
those conditions came into operation. So if we substitute the
word men for rabbits and wealth for grass, and follow out the
same process of reasoning, the conclusion it leads to is very
plain.


It might be contended that causes other than the dissipation
of wealth induce depression ; for instance, the locking up of un-
used land, but with intelligent consideration that state of affairs
will be found to induce depression only in so far as it prevents
labour being employed in the "most reproductive and profitable
way, and therefore, with the least waste of energy or power, and
consequently of wealth. For instance, when a man must go a
great distance from market and work upon indifferent soil, while
good soil much closer to market is lying idle, then all the energy
and labour required to overcome the difference or handicap of
having to work under the unfavourable conditions is practically
lost or wasted, both as regards the worker and the community,
and it is only because of the consequent dissipation of wealth or
intelligent labour that the unwarrantable locking up of land is
injurious.
It has been asserted that much more wealth is produced by
the aid of modern appliances than ever was the case before, and
it might be asserted that if ever the rate of the increase of wealth
was in excess of the rate of the increase of population it is so
to-day. Now, though possibly it cannot be denied that the
amount of work performed under present conditions is relatively
much greater than ever it was, most probably it can be shown
that an overwhelming portion of this work is occupied not only
in producing articles which do not constitute wealth, but also in
consuming existing wealth, in the production of articles of but
accidental, and of no real economic value. Where, for instance,
is the economic \alue of such luxuries as ornaments for dwelling
and business premises other than is necessary for their stability
and utility ? ornaments for whimsical men, women, and children
other than is necessary for their health and development. In
the case of war materials other than is necessary for the subju-
gation of nature. You might be inclined to interject that war
materials made and used for the purpose of keeping order are
true wealth. But disorder is usually caused by persons who
have dissipated their own wealth, and wish to do likewise with
that of others, so that it is a case of the dissipation of wealth
being the cause of a further dissipation for the pui’pose of keep-
ing dissipators in check, and all through its operations one dissi-
pation begets another, and is only limited by want of opportunity
from dissipating all wealth, and reducing all men to abject poverty.
No doubt many disturbances have arisen for political
purposes, promoted by persons in good faith for the supposed
benefit of society; but persons advocating and rioting about
imaginary ills are semi-imbeciles, and semi-imbecility is caused
either by the dissipation of persons so afflicted, or by that of
their forefathers and transmitted hereditarily to their unfor-
tunate progeny.
Of course cases have occurred in which agitations and riots
were promoted for just and sufficient reasons, but there would


be no necessity for such riots if those in power were not semi-
imbeciles and had not, by stupid obstinacy, refused salutary re-
forms. Indeed, were it necessary, every instance (since the time
when our first parents dissipated the fair prospects of the human
race), in every instance in which it has been necessary to use
restraining power, the cause might be traced to dissipation.
Many difficulties, no doubt, present themselves in oppo-
sition to the adoption of the theory that the dissipation of wealth
is the sole cause of depression and human misery, therefor it is
well to anticipate one or two of them.
Pride is frequently the motive of aggression as of other
causes of dissipation ; for instance, a person knowing or imagin-
ing himself to be above the average, in some way or other, goes
out of his way to publish the fact. Thus, a warrior king or a
warlike republic dissipates national wealth merely to sustain
personal reputation or national prowess, or to take advantage of
an opportunity to rob a neighbouring nation quite irrespective
of the interest of mankind, and so on through the various grades
down to Mrs. Brown, who bedecks herself in a dress which cost
£50 —and which has no more economic value than a plain article
costing £l. She is led by motives of pride into the larger expen-
diture merely to show lhat she is as well or better off financially
than Mrs. Jones, who possibly has about the same amount of
wealth and conceit. Or, in the case of Mr. B. who pays 10/6
daily for his dinner at a first-class hotel, when he might get as
salutary a meal at a plain house for 1/- or 1/6; but as one fool
makes many, he goes amongst his ideal society, whatever the
cost, and thus encourages the expenditure of wealth in the
creation of the elaborate and practically useless embellishments
of these so-called first-class hotels.
Probably at least 5/- of the 10/6 goes to pay interest on
the unnecessary embellishments and superfluous surroundings
of such places. Doubtless this luxurious ornamentation, &c.,
though unnecessary, creates employment in the execution of it;
so far so good, but an equal or greater amount of useful repro-
ductive work might be given at the same initial cost, and with
this all-important difference in the result that the latter mode of
expenditure would perpetuate and ever increase the true wealth
and capital of the world, whereas the former mode diminishes it.
Reproductive employment alone adds to the wealth of the
world, and enhances the wealth and possibilities of each of its
human inhabitants. This was admirably exemplified in this
colony when wealth in the form of loans and the proceeds of
land sales was flowing into the colony in tens of millions ; then
it w'as comparatively easy to become rich, or at least comfort-
able, and tens of thousands there were who did so, but, alas,
the Governments of the time, though mutually admiring one
another, and pointing to the natural resources of the colonies
as the cause of such phenomenal prosperity, were blundering


egregiously, and with spendthrift recklessness mortgaging the
national patrimony, and they themselves and their deluded con-
stituents were luxuriating and frittering away the principal till
probably not nearly one-half is left to the present generation in
the form of public works wherewith to redeem the pledges of
their forefathers. This is the inevitable result of spending bor-
rowed money to a large extent on ornamentation such, for
instance, as towers, statuary, carvings, and other objects of show.
These, of course, pay no interest, and therefore industry must
be taxed to make up the deficiency, and taxing industrious people
reduces their capital and therefore tends to restrict the develop-
ment of the industries in which they are engaged, thereby
lessening their capabiliites of giving employment.
Now let us consider the hundreds of millions of pounds
worth of wealth entirely dissipated annually throughout the
world in the creation of useless ornamentation and in the pro-
motion of games, races, and swindles, armaments, navies, and in
the maintenance of vast military forces, in strikes, and the
stoppage of production, and frequent dissipation, and wanton
destruction of private and public wealth in connection there-
with.
The City of Sydney alone, it is said, spends £6OOO per week
on theatricals, which means over £300,000 per annum. Taking
this sum as a guide, and reckoning the per capita expenditure
as averaging the same throughout the civilised world, we get the
fact that the world spends about £150,000,000 (.one hundred and
fifty millio i pounds) per annum on theatricals alone. When to
this is added the amount spent in other unnecessarily expensive
pleasures, the sum would doubtless be doubled. Then, adding
the amount spent in pernicious dissipation on wine, women, &c.,
and the amount would be at least quadrupled. Of course the
millions spent in the maintenance of armies and navies, and on
munitions of war, would make a very large addition, probably
increasing the total so as to far exceed £1,000,000,000; but the
list is not yet complete, for gaols and lunatic asylums are only
rendered necessary because of the previous dissipation of their
inmates or of their ancestors who have hereditarily transmitted
such inmates, weak, deranged, or evily-disposed minds, in pur-
suance of the decree of Glod to the effect that the consequences
of their sins would be visited upon men even to the third and
fourth generation, and agreeable with the somewhat modern
theories of science as to the laws of heredity.
On unnecessarily expensive furniture and embellishments
of private houses no doubt hundreds of millions are spent.
We may rest assured that all told, wealth exceeding in value
1,500 millions of pounds is dissipated every year.
Now let us consider what would be the effect of expending
all this money on reproductive works. The cost of building a
city like Sydney and suburbs, as at present, would probably be


about 100 millions, and to give the same amount of accommoda-
tion, bereft of ail useless and unnecessary ornamentation, would
probably require no more than the expenditure of 20 millions.
Now there are only some 30 cities in the world larger than
Sydney, and allowing that each of the thirty cities averaged more
than half as big again as Sydney, then all the great cities in the
world, including those in India and China, might have their house
accommodation doubled for 1000 millions, and the balance of 500
millions would be sufficient to very largely increase the dwelling
accommodation of the smaller cities of the world, and as the
number of tenants would not thereby be simultaneously in-
creased. Then, according to the law of supply and demand,
rents would fall at least 50 per cent. Of course, doubling the
accommodation of an oriental city would be a comparatively in-
expensive matter, and probably they could be quadrupled.
lieducing rent 50 per cent, would be a clear gain on an
average of ss, per week to hand workers, and twice that amount
to brain workers, who now rent dwellings under conditions such
as obtain in the colony of New South Walas at present, and
wages would not be affected in the least, and the soldiers, actors,
betting men, jack-tars, and embellishers displaced by the abstrac-
tion of the 1500 millions from connection with their useless
callings, would easily be kept going at useful work by that same
sum of money, and they would gradually fall into line at what-
ever useful work they were best suited for; some might work at
the building trade, which would receive a tremendous impetus,
and others at other trades, according to their ability.
This instance concerning the doubling of dwelling accommo-
dation is only given as being a most striking example than the
result of a more judicious expenditure would be. No doubt
the best way would be to spread the expenditure over the indus-
tries connected with the production of the various necessaries,
with the result, of course, that all would fall in price. This
might be considered as prejudicial to the interests of the pro-
ducer, but that would not be the case. For instance, the farmer,
though he would possibly receive less money for his one or two
lines of produce he would pay less for all other lines which he
might require. Less, for instance, for the use of railways and
other modes of transportation for agricultural implements,
clothing, medical and legal advice, etc., for all these commodities
and acquirements would be cheapened by the great influx of the
classes and enormous capital above mentioned. Thus it would
be a case of loosing on one or two articles and gaining on many;
no doubt a smaller amount on each of the many, but a larger
amount of gain in the aggregate. In other words, though the
result of his labours might be somewhat less in monetary value,
they would be largely increased in commodity value, and as it is
not upon money men live, but upon what money represents, the
result would be entirely satisfactory.


The importance of this phase of the question, I think,
warrants me dwelling a little longer upon it, for it is just at this
point I anticipate the greatest difficulty in conveying my theories.
It seems to me it is the cardinal principle, a full knowledge of
which will, for others as it has-for me, evolve a train of reason-
ing which will ultimately lead all sensible men to acknowledge
that in the utilization of all wealth for entirely reproductive
purposes lies the only solution of the social problem, and that,
as I have said before, the dissipation of wealth is the only cause
of depression in trade and of all human misery.
That the augmentation of the ranks of the producers of
necessaries by the addition to their numbers of the whole of the
military (land and marine) ; the whole of the men and machinery
employed in the manufacturing of munitions of war; the whole
of the betting and racing men and horses ; all ornament makers
•and imitators of merely natural objects, such as sculptors, pain-
ters, etc. (I say advisedly merely natural objects), for a genius
who can represent semi-supernatural objects is an accession to a
community with whom I should not like to interfere. Now the
accession of all these most able, educated, and intelligent'men to
the ranks of reproductive workers would, at a cursory glance,
seem to warrant a depreciation in the value of labour, whereas
the very opposite would be the result, even judging by the old
and fairly correct standard of supply and demand, inasmuch as
the number of workers would not thereby be increased in the
least degree, for all these men are now paid workers, and the
only change they would experience as workers would be that of
being employed in reproductive instead of non-reproductive
works, and the fact must not be overlooked that simultaneously
with the displacement of labour from the non-reproductive, and
accession to the reproductive occupations, exactly the same
movement would take place with an equivalent amount of capital.
The capital which supports a military officer in his official and
non-reproductive capacity would amply suffice to support him in
an equally responsible but more useful position as manager, say,
of reproductive business, and so on through all the grades of
army and navy.
Of course, as there would probably be double the amount
of production without any increase in the amount of money,
products would fall in less than one year to one half their present
value. Now what would be the result of this. As IJiave already
shown that the amount of money paid in wages would remain
the same as at present by reason of the simultaneous advent of
both capital and labour into the reproductive business, and as I
have also shown that the value of goods would be but one half
what it is now, therefore the money value of labour being the
same, and the value of money being, by reason of the increased
abundance of goods, double what it is now, therefore every wage-
earner would be twice as well off as he is now, viz., his wages for


one week would buy for him as much commodities, including
house accommodation, eatables and clothing, as two weeks’
wages do at the present time.
That would be the effect on the workers, and now how
would it affect the idle capitalist.
It would reduce the money value of his income by one half
within twelve months after the inauguration of the new condi-
tions, and provided the workers perseveringly worked as hard as
they do now, the income of all idle capitalists would, within two
years, be reduced in money value to one-fifth to what they are
at present, because the incomes of capitalists (idle capitalists)
are derived from commodities such as houses, railways, ships,
etc., which, provided that all work was concentrated upon the
creation of reproductive commodities, would be more than quad-
rupled (at least in efficiency if not in number) within that time.
A very important fact now strikes me. Many capitalists do
not derive their incomes directly from commodities; for instance,
mortgagees and persons whose position is practically on the same
footing, viz., debenture holders, investors in foreign and local
loans, etc.; in all such cases where the amount of interest is a
fixed rate for a lengthened period of time, and that interest is
calculated and payable on a gold basis, and the amount of gold
payable as interest on any given amount does not vary with the
value of commodities, it follows that in case the money value of
commodities should fall to one-fifth of the value of what they were
at the time the liability was incurred, that though the interest as
paid in and calculated upon a gold basis would not nominally be
increased, it would actually be five times as great. For instance,
a country incurring a liability to pay interest at the rate of 4 per
cent, at a time when the price of commodities, as compared with
that of gold, was five times as great as it is now (that gold would
then buy only one-fifth of what it will now) would, in paying that
interest in gold, be paying interest calculated on a commodity or
correct basis at the rate of 20 per cent., which is a matter for
immediate and serious consideration for all debtor countries, for
there is good reason to think that it gives a creditor country
or individual undue and unwarrantable power over its or his
debtors, and it is a serious question as to whether that interest
which has already been paid in excess of the stated amount on a
commodity basis should not be considered as a set-off against
further liabilities. But the point is a very debatable one, upon
which it is inconvenient to dwell at present. But that it must be
settled on a commodity basis for the future to insure payment by
merit to every individual and state there can be no doubt. Should
an earthquake swallow up half the gold of the world, the value of
that commodity would at once be doubled, and the actual rate
payable on the 4 per cent, loan borrowed on the conditions above
referred to would be 40 per cent., that is, the country which in-
curred that liability would have to pay, say, 40 tons of wheat per


annum for the use of that which at the time she borrowed it en-
abled her to purchase 100 tons, and in case the loan had a currency
of 20 years, the debtor country would have at the end of that time
paid the creditor 800 tons as interest, and the principle would
mean another 1000 tons. For-the commodity value of the gold
which 20 years before would only buy 100 tons wheat, would have,
by reason of new social conditions and the earthquake (or the -
doubling of the world’s population—a more likely and equally
potent factor) been increased to ten times its original value, pro-
vided that in the meantime no gold mines were discovered so
phenomenally rich that the production of gold would more than
compensate for the ordinary wear and tear of that metal by use, etc.
It might be interjected that land is also a source of revenue
to capitalists, but this is not, in a certain sense, true, for it is not
so much land as the accessability of land which renders it revenue
'producing, for inaccessable or practically inaccessable land is
valueless, and as it is reproductive works which create accessability,
so quadruplicating the means of access, or rather the amount of
accessable land, would reduce the money value of any given area
of land by 75 per cent.
As private ownership of land is held by many to be a source
of trouble in the equitable distribution of wealth, it might be well
to offer an equitable solution of the difficulty-.
The government of any country might, without much injustice,
intimate to all private land holders under its jurisdiction that after
the present year the government would claim the right to resume
any land at any time it thought fit, by paying the present value,
together with compound interest at the 4 per cent, per annum up
to the date of resumption. Then if the land by any reason what-
ever should increase in value at a rate greater than 4 per cent, per
annum, the state would have the right to claim all such excess, or
to resume it advantageously. Of course if the rate 'of increase
was lower than 4 per cent, none but the land owners would have
cause to complain.
But on the whole, though some land owners have unduly
benefited by the present system, it will be found from correct
calculation of monies paid to the state on account of land, and
allowing interest at the rate of 8 per cent, per annum, which is not
much, if anything, too high so far as New South Wales is con-
cerned, considering that a portion of the time during which the
government sold land the rates of interest were very high. About
ten years ago the rate in the leading banks for fixed deposits for
12 months was 6 per cent,, and probably much more in times
more remote.
The total amount paid to government on account of land sold
to date is, I understand, about 45 millions, and the average
amount of time which has elapsed since such sales were effected
19 years. Now money at 8 per cent, compound interest doubles
itself in every nine years, so that the 45 millions, if invested in any


commercial, banking, or other investment at 8 per cent, would
amount to about 190 millions, which may be reckoned as being at
least 60 millions more than the alienated lands of the colony are
worth to-day. Of course rents have been received on account of
some of it, but that from unimproved land, or from the unimproved
value of land must be disassociated from that received from land,
together with improvements, and all things considered, the 60
millions deficiency in money value, and additional costs, such as
rates, taxes, deed fees, survey fees, forfeitures, would probably
more than cover all moneys received as rent.
Thus the great and undoubted gains of some fortunate land
speculators is more than counterbalanced in the case of land
owners, as a class, by the heavy and numerous losses of others.
In almost all fields of speculation this sort of thing happens. A
man, for instance, buys a large quantity of wheat, and a bad season
ensues, he doubles his money in a few weeks. A miner goes to
Coolgardie this week, and within a mile or two of a place where
dozens of miners have worked for months in vain he discovers a
nugget of gold as big as his head, striking it with his pick at the
first blow. Of course he does not earn the money it represents.
So that a more comprehensive method for securing the equitable
distribution of wealth is required than that proposed by the advo-
cates of a land value tax. As a matter of fact, the land owners as
a class are by no means in a better position than other investors.
So much for the manner in which the position of the capitalist
would be affected by making all work reproductive. 1 will mention
another instance w'hich, though a rough and ready way, will per-
haps bring out the effect of the principle more clearly.
Could not the states of the w'orld abolish the military and
war munition manufacturers, &c., and train the men employed
thereat for the purpose of taking the places of the various hard-
working tradesmen through their various countries with a view' to
giving the latter (the tradesmen), say, a three months’ leave of
absence on full pay every year, the employers paying their employees
the usual wages, although the ex-soldiers would be doing the work
for the time being, and the Government, of course, paying them
what they now reserve for the useless purpose of working cannons
about, making and cleaning firearms, and sharpening and polish-
ing swords, and occasionally for hacking and maiming and killing
one another. The alteration suggested, though crude and only
given as a striking instance of what is perfectly practicable amongst
good sensible men, would be a vast improvement upon the present
system which, when in active operation (as in war), frequently
destroys in a few days what well-directed labour has taken years
to create; thus making more work and less pay for the non-
military. As I have hereinbefore proved, the more unreproductive
work the less pay on an average for the workers, and destroying
and then rebuilding, which is the order of the day during and
immediately after war, is certainly unreproductive, the military and


the workers counteracting one another’s efforts, and at best only
leaving things as they were before the war.
Wealth alone it is which creates demand for labour, and the
greater the amount of wealth, be it held by few or many, provided
it be employed in reproductive "works, the higher the rate of wages
will be; and as wealth is comparatively useless unless continually
passing through the hands of labour as wages for the sustenance
of labourers whilst they are engaged modifying and adapting it, it
follows that the more wealth created by labour, no matter into
whose hands it goes from the worker, it must come back to labour
to be remodified and reproduced, which is the case, for instance,
with reproductive machinery which, by being worn out in service,
are indirectly turned into eatables and clothing, which goods in
turn are handled by labour till they reach their final destination.
And workmen loose their hold upon wealth only when it is dissi-
pated, as in the case of making statuary, say, instead of useful
machinery. Statuary, or the wealth it represents (so much time
and food consumed in its construction), never comes back to be
remodified or worn out in service under the control of labour.
The day when workers refuse to bind themselves to the dissi-
pation of wealth by working it into luxuries for the sake of the
temporary employment; the moment they refuse to do that, and
earnestly insist upon the immediate passage of laws compelling
the utilization of wealth for reproductive purposes, from that
moment will their position improve most rapidly, and indeed
wealth would accumulate in such great quantities that interest
would ultimately fall below one-half per cent, per annum, and
labour would have all the difference between the present and the
ultimate rate paid to them in higher wages.
Of course, workmen are just as prone to dissipation when
opportunity offers as are capitalists. In fact, unless, as a class,
they were not more so, they would not be in so bad a condition as
at present. It will be pretty generally admitted that many work-
men earning, say, £ 100 per annum will, when they happen to get
a month or three months’ pay in a “lump,” spend whilst it lasts
at the rate of one or two thousand a year, in fact, have no more
self-restraint upon their appetites than the average blackfellow.
Of course, this always keeps them in the ranks competing for a
job with their fellows when they might, as some few of them do,
save a few pounds and in a few years become employers of, instead
of competitors with, their fellows.
The latter course would be the better both for mind and
body. By persevering, moderation is the only way to reach the
utmost limits of appreciation, and consequently of happiness.
The God who made the world so arranged it, and who goes other-
wise fares worse in every respect.
There is not the slightest reason for “ labour’s” antipathy to
capitalists, for the latter are in their position by reason of a law
which may be called the “enriching of the fittest,” which is just


as necessary for the existence of mankind in large numbers as is
that of the “survival of the fittest" to the perpetuation of the lower
animals, and but for which they would probably degenerate off the
face of the earth.
But capitalists can only abuse their trust through the medium
of the workers (when I say workers, I use it as I do all other terms
in the most comprehensive sense). Let workmen call out and
support all their fellows who are now employed in non-production
and luxury manufacturing occupations; a strike in connection
with such occupations would practically be no stoppage of the
production of wealth, and therefore would do no harm. Instead,
however, of eating the bread of idleness, the strikers should for-
mulate some plan whereby they might make the best use of their
time. For instance, they might, being for the most part men
of more than average intellect, study law and medicine, thus tend-
ing to reduce the price of attendance in connection with these
professions; indeed, such a course would alter the aspect of things
altogether, for there would then really be no strike but a change of
occupation, and all worthy and humane capitalists would heartily
support the movement.
In the next number it is intended to deal with the currency,
the diffusion of wealth, and to propound a comprehensive scheme
dealing with the laws of competition.
All persons reading and noting the importance of the teach-
ings of this treatise are requested to mention it as often as possible
with a view to the dissemination of useful knowledge.
As a rough outline of a solution for the unemployed difficulty
would no doubt be interesting, if not useful, the following hint is
submitted.
All wealth might be taxed, not for the purpose of confiscating
or redistributing it, but rather for the purpose of controlling and
conserving it. The abilities of all men should be assessed
in a manner similar to the following:—A doctor, for instance,
charges a guinea a visit. Let this be the basis of calculation.
How many patients could he attend to on an average per day if
fully employed ? Say twenty, which would mean £2l per day,
or, less expenses, about £6 OOO per annum clear of expenses.
Tax him at the rate of 5 per cent, on this maximum amount of
earnings, the tax he would be called upon to pay would be
Three hundred pounds per annum, a sum which, if he received
no more patronage than the average medico charging high rates,
he would probably be unable to pay —such is the difference
between the average actual earnings and the maximum.
But he should be given no option but to either reduce his fees
or pay the tax —the rate being fixed at what he would earn if fully
employed at his usual rates. Thus, being between the “ devil and
the deep sea,” he would be compelled to reduce his fees, and, as
no matter how low his fees were, he would be unable to see or
attend to any more than the twenty, or whatever the maximum


number was fixed at, his possible earnings would be reduced, and
so would his tax in sympathy. Say he reduced his fees to 10/6,
according to ordinary business matters we know that this would
not necessarily mean less profit, but it would almost for a certainty
mean double the work ; and as' many doctors have so much time
on their hands that they don’t know what to do with themselves,
this latter contingency would not entail any great hardship upon
the doctor, whereas it would double the benefit to the public, and
reduce the tax on the doctor by 50 per cent. ; and further, by the
simultaneous and universal application of the tax to all trades and
occupations, the doctor would get at least twice as much for his
money. The doctor and the lawyer are really on strike when, by
charging excessive fees, they fail to find customers or clients.
The application of this tax would speedily do away with all strikes
jn all classes of society, and everybody would get the same amount
of money in wages, and be enabled to buy twice as much com-
modities and attendance for that money as they can at present.
Capital and stock-in-trade could easily be made to move by the
application of the same principle.
Though intending to deal with the currency in another num-
ber, there is one phase of that question which so little brooks
delay that I am inclined to give it now.
It has been stated that the leading economists of the world
are agreed that the adoption of a bi-metalic currency would solve
the difficulty re the appreciation of gold. Though it must be
admitted that such a course would be a semi-solution, it seems an
exaggeration to say that the solution would be complete. To
great silver-producing countries such as America and Australia
(especially New South Wales) it would no doubt be a great relief,
and although the non silver-producing countries would benefit
considerably by the overthrow of the monopoly in currency hitherto
secured for gold, their share of the benefit would be small com-
pared with that which would fall to the silver-producing countries.
The principle through which the injury in connection with a
monometalic currency works is the same as would operate in—
Africa say —through the circumstance of the king of the most
powerful tribe acquiring all the ivory on that continent —-where
almost all ivory is produced—and issuing a decree that all tribes,
including the particular one over which he was chief, should not
only pay him tribute in ivory, but should use nothing but that
commodity in the construction of their implements of war, etc.
Of course if his benighted dependents quietly submitted to this
the demand for ivory would be enormously increased, and the
despotic king could dispose of his ivory at enormous profit, or
lend it out at enormous interest. But if in a fit of liberality the
king decreed that all might use whatever best suited their circum-
stances, many other materials would instantly be found at least
equal -in efficiency to ivory, and that particular article would
instantly revert to its normal or intrinsic value, and at the same


time the vassals of the king would be relieved of a great incon-
venience.
At present within the limits of the British Empire the decree
is that only gold shall be used as currency, and that only gold
shall be received by the head centre of the empire in discharge of
liabilities, that no bank shall start or do any business without
having a certain amount of gold locked up as a basis. As this
arrangement is quietly accepted by the debtor portions of the
empire where gold is very scarce, it is the cause of great and in-
creasing inconvenience. But should the reigning Sovereign, with
the advice of her ministers, decree that all portions of the empire
might use whatever currency they choose, provided that gold is the
standard of value, in other words, that instead of the banks being
obliged to keep a certain proportion of gold locked up in reserve,
they might keep silver of the same value. This, of course, would
at once release many millions of sovereigns and tons of bullion,
and whilst strengthening the silver market, would reduce gold to
its intrinsic value, which, by reason of the many substitutes for
that metal, furnished by modern discoveries, would be compara-
tively small.
It seems to be a mere arbitrary proceeding to insist on gold
alone being a legal tender, and any quantity of any kind of com-
modity which, at the place where it is delivered, is worth a
sovereign, should be a fair discharge of a liability to the extent of
one pound. Therefore, a bank should be allowed to hold in
reserve a million pounds worth of silver as a full security for a
million one pound notes.
It might be considered that the fact of an arbitrary decree
causing local misery and inconvenience is a proof that causes
other than the dissipation of wealth are provocative of distress.
But inasmuch as it would be a dissipation of wealth to insist on
filling up a hole in a wall with diamonds, which are scarce, when
the same purpose might be effected with the use of glass, which
is plentiful; so also is it to insist on gold being used for a purpose
when silver or silver and gold would be equally effective and
much more convenient.
The Australian colonies do not by any means escape the
injury of the monometalic currency, because they are producers
of gold. Immunity from the effects of it depends on their pro-
ducing more gold annually than their liabilities amount to for the
same period. As the gold production of the colonies does not on
the average amount to one million pounds worth each per annum,
whilst their liabilities, public and private, amount to about four
millions each, .the stage at which immunity is reached is very far
off.




' .
i
0
fS'-*
„ V
V
