

Greenwich Red Cross and
Patriotic Society
COMMITTEE FOR 1918-19.
MRS. W. WALLACE-TURNER, President.
MRS. FRED HOLDSWORTH and MRS. LYONS,
Vice-Presidents.
MRS. BELMAN, Hon. Secretary.
MRS. W. M. MOORE, Hon Treasurer.
MISS MARJORIE WALLER, Asst. Secretary.
J. ROBERTS. F.C.P.A., Hon. Auditor.
MRS. LLOYD (Ex) MRS. STARLING
MISS ROWLEY (Ex) MRS. STODART
MRS. COCKING MRS. CHAPMAN
MISS CHAPMAN MRS. GILFILLAN
MISS THORBURN MRS. MEYER (Ex)
FINAL REPORT.
To be Presented to the Meeting of Members convened for
2nd October, 1918.
This Branch has 84 Members.
On August 13th, 1914, the branch was formed and has
steadily carried on the work for five years.
In 1914. —75 Soldiers’ Hospital Bags, each containing 31
articles, and 7 Medical Bags, were completed, and des-
patched to Headquarters. The first 25 bags for which the
money was collected, the material bought for pyjamas,
shirts, towels, bandages, socks, etc., cut out, made into
garments, washed, ironed, checked and packed in 10 days.
We owe a very great debt of gratitude to the late Lieut*
J. P. Sives, during those days for his valuable assistance
as Hon. Secretary.


In 1915. —The Executive visited the Field Hospital in
the Liverpool Camp and the branch has the proud dis-
tinction of being’ the first to take up the work in the camp.
The Convalescent Ward was furnished and supplied with
comforts until closed. Books and games were also sup-
plied to the Contact Camp and Engineers’ Depot. The
constitution of the N.S.W. Division of the Australian Red
Cross Society was adopted.
In 1916.— The Lane Cove Convalescent Home was opened,
five members being elected as representatives of the
branch on the Home Committee. Five beds were equipped
and expenses shared (in securing comforts) with the three
other River Branches. Support was withdrawn in
accordance with the resolution passed by the Home
General Committee in 1918, and the goods removed to
“Graythwaite.” Toys and baskets made by incapacitated
soldiers found ready sale throughout the district for some
months.
In 1917. —Most of the active work was carried out on
behalf of the “War Chest”—soo pairs of socks being the
result of the appeal to assist in raising 100,000 pairs in
a month. The Junior Circle deserves great credit for their
part in this particular work.
In 1918. —The work increased as so many organisations
appealed for assistance, each “Day” proving a success
beyond expectations. Those assisted were: “Y.M.C.A.,”
“War Chest Day,” “Italy’s Day,” “A.I.F. Day,” “Our Day,”
“A.R.C. Day, ’ “France’s Day,” and a special collection for
the “Battleplane Fund,” making a total of about £771.
The members of the Committee were elected members of
the local Repatriation Committee, the President being
elected one of the five members of the Executive.
| n 1919. —The Branch assisted to fight the Influenza Epi-
demic and the Committee desires to thank those who lent
beds, utensils, etc., cooked food, did patrol work and made
up pneumonia jackets, etc. It is to be hoped the Junior
Circle will carry on the yfork if the occasion arises, profit-
ing by the experience of the senior Branch.
The North Greenwich and Greenwich Point Sewing and
Knitting circles did excellent service, each being supplied
with materials from the depot.
Various members of the Committee took charge of the
departments, each doing a full share of duty.


The Branch has completed 11,833 artitcles and collected
£2,303 during - its five years of existence.
A room in “Graythwaite” Convalescent Home has been
furnished at the cost of £75, and bears a brass plate,
attached to the door, inscribed “Furnished by the Green-
wich Red Cross Society.”
The Committee thanks the Workers, Subscribers, and
all those who did so much to make the work a success dur-
ing the five years, and would thank each one individually
if space permitted. The confidence of the subscribers has
been fully appreciated.
The President wishes to thank the office-bearers and
committee for the loyal assistance in conducting the busi-
ness of the Society. The harmony which existed amongst
t;he members did much to alleviate the strain, which was
felt towards the end of 1918.
For the relatives of the members who have “passed over”
the deepest sympathy is felt, and may those whose dear
ones are lying in a foreign grave be given courage to say:—
Yet the thought comes thrilling through all my pain!
how worthier could he die?
Yea, a loss like that is a glorious gain and pitiful
proud am I.
For Peace must be bought with blood and tears and
the boys of our hearts must pay,
And so in our joy of the after years, let us bless them
every day.”
—Robert Service.
ISABELLE WALLACE-TURNER
25th September, 1919. President.
Shipping Newspapers, Ltd., 16 Bond-street, Sydney.
