

THE FINAL EEPOET
OF THE
DARDANELLES COMMISSION.
(PART lI—CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS, &o.)
WITH APPENDIX OF DOCUMENTS AND MAPS
Presented to Parliament by Command of His Majesty.
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
To bo purchased through any Bookseller or directly from
H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
Imperial House, Kingsway, London, W.C. 2, and 28, Abingdon Street, London, S.W. 1;
37, Peter Street, Manchester; 1, St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
23, Forth Street, Edinburgh ;
or from E. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.


Hydrographical Publications o 11.
Patent Office Publications axe ts> , London, W.C. 2.
Ordnance Survey and Geologii jmj VNWi l ' °1 tiie Ordnance Survey,
Southampton; from the ✓**•& Jl IB I A T Ww\ cIli< f towns in the United
Kingdom. They can also /Wf S [I?! , Wv\\ all Railway Bookstalls.
The Journal of the Board of Ag J ta * na 'I ) l e from 3, St. James's |
The following is a list o 1 | III rices are net, and those in
parentheses include postage) : — | ggytf jjjjM
Royal Commission 1 net °I Operations of War
j'i the Dardanelles and Gallipt n and Equipment of the
Troops and Fleet, the Provisio] Tiff JtRGUSON jartments of Government
whose duty it has been to mil [ill ]N(ATIONAL LlBRARW ) li Var.
Report. Part I. —Origi CANBERRA jj) ;break of War; Higher
Organisation adopted subseqi nX. /I/ ralty—The War Office—
Conclusions ; Narrative of E\ ons ; Conclusions.
Minute of the Eight He Honourable Sir Thomas
Supplement *to First Ri replace the sense of some
°i the excised-from tii« run ncpni u* u UC wm^^vu,
[Cd. 8502] of Session 1917-18'. Price Id. (Ud.)
I :
MESOPOTAMIA COMMISSION.
Report of the Commission appointed to enquire into the Operations of War in Mesopotamia.
(With Map and Diagram.)
Terms of Appointment and Reference. Preface. Procedure, Physical and Climatic Peculiarities of Mesopotamia,
Condition of Indian Army and India’s Overseas Expeditions on Outbreak of War ; Origin of Mesopotamia Ex-
pedition ; Advance from Basra to Kurna ; The Advance to Amara and Kut; Correspondence and Telegrams as to
Advance on Baghdad ; The Advance from Kut to Ctesiphon ; Operations for Relief of Kut; Armament, Equipment,
Reinforcements, &c. ; Transport:—Shortage of River Transport, Railways, Royal Indian Marine ; Medical Break-
down :—The Vinceiit-Bingley Report and its Principal Conclusions, Medical Administrations of Colonel Hehir and
- lr William Babtie, The Misuse of Reticence, Responsibility of Secretary of State, Viceroy, and Commander-in-
Ohief, Supplementary, Medical Findings and Recommendations ; Causes contributing to the Errors of Judgment
a hd Shortcomings of Responsible Authorities : —Division of Responsibility for Campaign, Faulty Organisation of
Indian Military Administration, Relations between the Secretary of State and the Governor-General and their
Respective Councils —Private Telegrams, Atmosphere of Economy up to Date of War, and Effect upon Military
Reparations in India, Sir John Nixon’s Appointment, Instructions and Staff, Secretiveness and Lack of Co-ordination
°1 Staffs ; Findings and Conclusions ; Recommendations. Separate Report by Commander J. Wedgwood, D.S.O.,
M.P. Appendices :—-Yincent-Bingley Report; Memorandum by Sir Beauchamp Duff; Colonel Hehir’s Account
°1 the Siege of Kut-el-Amara; Index.
[Cd. 8610] of Session 1917-18. Price 2 s. (2s. 5 d.)
NAVAL AND MILITARY DESPATCHES RELATING TO OPERATIONS
IN THE WAR.
p. I-—September to November, 1911. Including List of Honours and Rewards conferred. (With Map) (1915.)
II-—November, 1914, to June, 1915. With Names of Officers and Men mentioned, and Awards of the Victoria ?
Cross. . (With Map.) (1915.) Price 6d. (9 d.)
HI-—July to October, 1915. With Names of Officers and Men mentioned, and Awards of the Victoria Cross.
(1915.) Price 3d. (4-|d.)
TV.—December 11, 1915. from General Sir Ian Hamilton, G.C.B., describing the operations in the Gallipoli « •
Ceuinsula, including the Landing at, Suvla Bay. (1915.) Price 2d. (3d.)
., r V-—January to April, 1916. With Names of Officers and Men mentioned, and Awards of the Victoria Cross.
(1516.) Price 6d. (8-|d.)
VI-—May to December, 1916. With Names of Officers and Men awarded the Victoria Cross. (1917.) Price Is.
(Is- 3-|d.)
VII. —December, 1916, to July, 1917. With Names of Officers and Men awarded the Victoria Cross. (1918.)
R'ce 9d. (LUd.) „ , , I
VIII. —-July, 1917, to une, 1918. With Names of Officers and Men awarded the Victoria Cross. (1919.) Price
Is- 6d. (Is. 9|d.)
. IX.—July to December, 1918. With Names of Officers and Men awarded the Victoria Cross. (1919.) Price
ls ■ (Is. 2d.)


THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE
DARDANELLES COMMISSION.
(PART lI—CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS, &c.)
WITH APPENDIX OF DOCUMENTS AND MAPS
Presented to Parliament by Command of His Majesty.
LONDON;
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
To be purchased through any Bookseller or directly from
H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
Imperial House, Kingsway, London, W.C. 2, and 28, Abingdon Street, London, S.W. 1;
37, Peter Street, Manchester; 1, St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
23, Forth Street, Edinburgh;
or from E. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD
New & Secondhand Booksellers
i übiishers to University
89 Castlereagh St. Sydney.
[Cmd. 371.]


CONTENTS,
PART lI. —CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS,
&C.
Introductory ... ... ... 3
List of Witnesses ... ... 3
Origin and Inception of Joint Naval and Military Attack ... ... 6
Preparations for the Landing ... ... 15
The Landing on April 25th ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
The Decision to continue the Operations ... ... ... 22
The Operations in May, June and July ... ... ... ... 28
The Operations in August at Helles and Anzac ... ... 30
The Operations at Suvla ... ... ... 34
The Decision to Evacuate ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53 . 4
The Water Supply ... ... ... 62
Food ... ... ... ... ... 68
Medical Arrangements ... ... ... ... ... ... 69
Postal Arrangements ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 81
The Zion Mule Corps ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
General Review 84
General Conclusions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86
Memorandum by the Rt. Hon, Andrew Fisher 92
Supplementary Report by the Hon. Sir Thomas Mackenzie ... ... ... ... ... 93
Despatches of General Sir lan Hamilton dated— Page
I.—May 20, 1915 97
ll.—August 26, 1915 ... 109
lll.—December 11, 1915 118
Statements of— « «
Surgeon-General Babtie ' 155
Lieutenant-Colonel Percival 166
Lieutenant-Colonel Williamson 167 "* *
Major McClintock ... 170
Captain McCurdy 185
Detailed Map of Gallipoli Peninsula ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 187
Outline Map of Turkish Empire 188


REPORT TO THE KING’S MOST EXCELLENT
MAJESTY.
PART lI.—CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS, &c.
1. On February 12th, 1917, in pursuance of the powers contained in the Specia
Commissions (Dardanelles and Mesopotamia) Act, 1916, Section 6, we presented an interim
report dealing exclusively with the origin and inception of the attack on the Dardanelles.
By Section 1 of that Act we were also charged with the duty of enquiring into the conduct
of operations of war in the Dardanelles and Gallipoli, including the supply of drafts, rein-
forcements, ammunition and equipment to the troops and fleet, the provision for the sick
and wounded, and the responsibility of those departments of the Government whose duty
it had been to minister to the wants of the forces’ employed in that theatre of war, and
we now present our report upon these matters.
2. We deeply regret the death of the Earl of Cromer, who was Chairman of the
Commission during the first part of our enquiry. His ability, judgment and experience
of public affairs, especially those connected with the East, eminently fitted him for such
a position, and we feel that the country suffered a great loss by his death.
We also regret that we have been deprived of the services of Mr. J. A. Clyde, K.C.,
M.P., and Sir Frederick Cawley, Bart., M.P., who retired from the Commission upon their
acceptance of the positions of Lord Advocate and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
3, With the exception of the examination of General Sir Charles Monro, which took
place on the 23rd August, 1916, on the eve of his departure for India, we held our first
meeting on this part of the Inquiry on the 4th January, 1917, and since then we have
held 68 sittings and examined the following witnesses :
Date.
4th January, 1917
sth January, 1917
Bth January, 1917
9th January, 1917
10th January, 1917
11th January, 1917
12th January, 1917
15th January, 1917
16th January, 1917
17th January, 1917
18th January, 1917
19th January, 1917
(C 1851) Wt. TL 376/16 10M
Name
Colonel Sir John Steevens, K.C.B.
Brigadier-General Samuel Henry Winter, C.8., C.M.G.
Lieutenant-General the Right Hon. Sir John Grenfell Maxwell, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.,
C.V.0., D.S.O.
Major-General C. McGrigor, C.8., C.M.G.
General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D.S.O.
General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D.S.O.
Brigadier-General D. G. Prendergast.
Lieutenant-Colonel H. F. P. Percival, D.S.O.
Major-General Sir E. A. Altham, K.C.8., C.M.G.
Brigadier-General Herbert Edward Stockdale, C.M.G., D.S.O.
Major-General Sir Stanley von Donop, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Lieutenant-Colonel D. Brady, R.E.
Lieutenant-Colonel John Henry Patterson.
Surgeon-General Sir W. Babtie, K.C.M.G., C.8., M.8., K.H.S.
Surgeon-General William George Birrell.
Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Forman, R.H.A.
Major-General the Hon. H. A. Laurence, K.C.B.
Lieutenant-General the Hon. Sir Frederick Stopford, K.C.M.G., K.C.Y.0., C.B.
Lieutenant-General the Hon. Sir Frederick Stopford.
Major-General Frederick Hammersley, C.B.
Brigadier-General R. P. Maxwell.
Major-General Frederick Charles Shaw, C.B.
Major-General Frederick Charles Shaw, C.B.
Brigadier-General William H. Sitwell, C.8., D.S.O.
Lieutenant-General Sir Bryan Mahon, K.C.Y.0., C.8., D.S.O.
Brigadier-General the Hon. R. Stuart-Wortley, C.8., D.S.O.
Captain Joseph Trumpeldor.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. H. Patterson.
Colonel Harold Edward Street, C.M.G.
Colonel Cecil Allanson, C.1.E., D.S.O.
Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Merton Stephen, C.M.G.
10/19 H&S A 2


Bate.
23rd January, 1917
21th Jaftuary, 1917
25th January, 1917
26th January, 1917
29th January, 1917
30th January, 1917
31st January, 1917
lit February, 1917
2nd February, 1917
sth February, 1917
6th February, 1917
Bth February, 1917
9th February, 1917
12th February, 1917
15th February, 1917
16th February, 1917 .
19th February, 1917 .
22nd February, 1917.
26th February, 1917 .
27th February, 1917 .
Ist March, 1917
sth March, 1917
6th March, 1917
7th March, 1917
Bth March, 1917
9th March, 1917
12th March, 1917
13th March, 1917
Name ,
Brigadier-General A. Joly de Lotbiniere, C.8., C.5.1., C.I.E.
Major-General G. F. Ellison, C.8., C.M.G.
Brigadier-General A. W. Roper, C.B.
Major-General E. N. Woodward, C.B.
Brigadier-General H. Haggard.
Brigadier-General Gilbert S. McDowell Elliott.
Brigadier-General F. F. Hill, C.8., C.M.G., D.S.O.
Major-General Sir Herbert V. Cox, K.C.M.G., C.8,, C.S.I.
Major-General Walter Braithwaite, C.B.
Major-General Walter Braithwaite, C.B.
Lieutenant-Colonel L. R. Beadon.
Lieutenant-Colonel C. F. Aspinall, C.M.G.
Lieutenant-Colonel John B. Wells, D.S.O.
Lieutenant-Colonel T. H. B. Forster.
Lieutenant-General the Hon. A. G. A. Hore Ruthven, V.C., D.S.O.
Rev. W. Murphy, C.F.
Major-General W. G. B, Western, C.B.
Lieutenant-Colonel Lord Rochdale.
Lieutenant-General Sir Francis Davies, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Major-General W. E. Peyton, C.Y.0., C.8., D.S.O.
General John Edward Lindley.
Lieutenant-General Sir Alexander J. Godley, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Colonel Edward J. Granet, C.B.
Colonel Patrick Rivers Mantell, D.S.O.
Captain H. V. Simpson, R.N.
Major-General Sir Beauvoir de Lisle, K.C.8., D.S.O.
General Sir Archibald Paris, K.C.B,
Mr. Keith Arthur Murdoch.
Commodore Edwin Unwin, V.C., C.M.G.
Mr. G. E. P. Murray, C.B.
Mr. H. Chas. Woods.
Lieutenant-Colonel Frank Romer.
Lieutenant-Colonel F. H. Williamson.
The Dowager Countess of Carnarvon.
Lieutenant-Colonel Bernard Myers.
Staff Sergt.-Majoi’jjK. M. Little.
Lieutenant-Colonel G. St. C. Thom.
Colonel (Salvation Army) Isaac Unsworth.
Captain R. H. A. Newsome, M.C., R.E.
General Sir Aylmer Hunter-Weston, K.C.8,, D.5.0., M.P,
Lord Hindlip.
Major Arthur William Mayo-Robson, C.8., C.Y.O.
Lieutenant-Colonel D. J. Stoney-Archer.
Rev. Canon R. McClean, C.F.
Lieutenant-Colonel Leslie 0. Wilson, C.M.G., D.5.0., M.P.
Major H. F. McClintock.
Lieutenant-General Sir H. Sclater, K.C.B.
Brigadier-General G. E. Matthews, C.8., C.M.G.
Surgeon-General Sir James Porter, K.C.B.
Captain W. Maxwell.
Surgeon-General Sir Alfred Keogh, G.C.B.
Col. Warren Low, C.8., M.8., F.R.C.S., A.M.S.
Captain Henry Percy Douglas, R.N.
Major-General Sir Stanley von Donop, K.C.B.
Surgeon-General Sir Arthur May, K.C.B.
Captain D. A. McCurdy.
Brigadier-General H. L. Reed, V.C., C.M.G.
Major-General Sir Andrew H. Russell, K.C.M.G., C.B.
Mr. Noel Ross.
Captain E. C. Carver, R.N.
Captain 0. L. Martin.
General Sir Julian Byng, K.C.8., K.C.M.G., M.V.O.
Captain Thomas R. Ritchie.
Major-General Sir William Douglas, K.C.M.G., C.8,, D.S.O.
Lieutenant-General Sir William Birdwood, K.C.5.1., K.C.M.G., C.8., C.1.E.,D S O
The Most Hon. the Marquess of Lansdowne, K.G., G.C.B.
The Most Hon. the Marquess of Crewe, K.G.
Mr. Henry Woodds Nevinson.
Major-General J. Poett, C.8., C.M.G.
Lieutenant-General the Hon. Sir Frederick Stopford, K.C.M.G., K.C.V.0., C.B.
Sergeant-Major Arthur Price.
Sergeant-Major Henry Nicholson.
Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Thomas M. Cunninghame, Bt., D.S.O.
The Right Hon. Sir Edward Carson, K.C., M.P.
Brigadier-General D. S. Richardson.


Name
Date
14th March, 1917 ... The Right Hon. Sir Edward Carson, K.C., M.P.
Brigadier-General Gilbert S. McDowell Elliott.
Major-General Charles Call well.
The Right Hon. the Earl Curzon of Kedleston, K.G., G.C.5.1., G.C.I.E.
15th March, 1917 ... The Right Hon. the Earl of Selborne, K.G., G.C.M.G.
20th March, 1917 ... Mr. Graeme Thomson.
21st March, 1917 ... Brigadier-General W. H. Sitwell, C.8., D.S.O.
Mr. George Clerk, C.B.
22' nd March, 1917 ... Surgeon-General William George Birrell.
Colonel Thomas Joseph Kearns, C.B.
Major-General S. S. Long, C.B.
General Sir William Nicholls, K.C.B.
26th March, 1917 ... Major-General Granville G. A. Egerton, C.B.
The Right Hon. Winston Churchill, M.P.
28th March, 1917 ... The Right Hon. Winston Churchill, M.P.
29th March, 1917 ... The Right Hon. H. H. Asquith, K.C., M.P.
General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D.S.O.
30th March, 1917 ... General Sir John Cowans, K.C.8., M.Y.O.
Sir Charles Harris, K.C.B.
2nd April, 1917 ... The Right Hon. David Lloyd George, M.P.
3rd April, 1917 ... Mr. H. J. Greedy, C.B.
Ist May, 1917 Brigadier-General H. C. Frith, C.B. .
Sir George Riddell.
Captain Sir George Arthur, Bt., M.V.O.
Mrs. Walrond.
2nd May, 1917 ... The Rev. Henry A. Hall, C.T.F.
Brigadier-General J. H. Johnston, D.S.O.
3rd Mav. 1917 Mr. Ellis Ashmead-Bartlett.
15th May, 1917 ... Rear-Admiral Roger John Keyes, C.8., C.M.G., M.V.0,, D.S.O.
16th May, 1917 ... Rear-Admiral Roger John Keyes, C.8., C.M.G., M.V.0., D.S.O.
23rd May, 1917 ... Lieutenant-General Sir James Wolfe Murray, K.C.B.
10th July, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel the Earl of Granard, K.P., G.C.V.O.
Surgeon-General Sir Neville Howse, V.C., K.C.B.
16th July, 1917 ... Lieutenant-General the Honourable Sir Frederick Stopford, K.C.M.G.* K.C.V.0.,
C B
Sir Frederick Treves, Bart., G.C.V.0., C.B.
17th July, 1917 .... General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D.S.O.
Major Kent Hughes.
19th July, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel John Corbin.
24th July, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Ryan, C.B.
Lieutenant-Colonel John Gordon.
28th August, 1917 ... Colonel Charles Cooper Reilly, C.B.
Colonel Charles Mackie Begg, C.M.G.
Captain Jacka, V.C., M.C.
Major Ross Cairns McCay, D.S.O.
29th August, 1917 ... Surgeon-General Sir Richard Ford, K.C.M.G., C.B.
Lieutenant-Colonel M. P. Corkery.
Major E. W. Powell, R.A.M.C.
Fleet-Surgeon G. M. Levick, R.N.
Lieutenant-Colonel P. C. Fenwick, C.M.G.
30th August, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel Alfred E. C. Keble, D.S.O.
Lieutenant-General Sir Francis Davies, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Mr. James Balfour, New Zealand Postal Service.
Lieutenant-Colonel F. A. K. White.
31st August, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel Beadon.
Surgeon-General Birrell.
Vice-Admiral Sir Rosslyn Erskine Wemyss, K.C.8., C.M.G., M.V.O.
Ist September, 1917 ... Surgeon-General Birrell.
sth September, 1917 ... Lieutenant-Colonel Alfred E. C. Keble, D.S.O.
Colonel Sir Courtauld Thomson, C.B.
Major Purchas, R.A.M.C.
4. The investigation of the facts connected with this part of the enquiry has been
rendered more difficult than it would otherwise have been by the deaths of Lord Kitchener
and his personal military secretary. Colonel Fitzgerald. As explained more fully in
paragraph 9 of our first report, Lord Kitchener had entire control of military matters,
and was for a long time the sole mouthpiece of War Office opinion in the War Council,
the Dardanelles Committee which replaced the War Council in May, the War Committee
which was substituted for the Dardanelles Committee in November, 1915, and the Cabinet.
He held a strong opinion as to the necessity of secrecy in military matters, and seldom com-
municated his intentions or his reasons for action to anyone.
We have the records of his action and of his communications with those in command
in the Eastern Mediterranean, but we have not and cannotjobtain the reasons sometimes
(C 49—242) A3


arising from affairs in Gallipoli itself, sometimes from events in other theatres of war,
and sometimes from general diplomatic considerations, which moved him to those actions.
This is a great disadvantage, but it is inevitable.
• 5. Our first report, dealing with the origin and inception of the attack on the Dardanelles,
stated our conclusions on the events between October 14th, 1914, and March 23rd,
1915, and we do not propose to repeat them. It is necessary, however, in order to make
this report intelligible, to recapitulate shortly some of the facts existing before the last-
mentioned date.
THE ORIGIN AND INCEPTION OF THE JOINT NAVAL AND MILITARY
ATTACK.
6. When the naval attack was sanctioned by the War Council on January 28th,
1915, there was no question of supporting it with large military forces. Such forces were
not then available, and Lord Kitchener represented that they would not be available for
some considerable time.
During January, 1915, the War Council were occupied in discussing their future
military policy, based on the possibility of a stalemate in the Western theatre of war.
and on the necessity of operations elsewhere.
In the course of these discussions, Lord Kitchener, on January Bth, expressed
an opinion in favour of an attack on the Dardanelles. He then informed the Council
that the Dardanelles appeared to be the most suitable military objective, as an attack
there could be made in co-operation with the Fleet. He estimated that 150,000 men
would be sufficient for the capture of the Dardanelles, but reserved his final opinion until
a close study had been made.
7. These discussions resulted in two general conclusions.
The first conclusion was expressed in a despatch from Lord Kitchener to Sir John
French on January 9th, in which Lord Kitchener wrote with regard to the possibility of
the employment of British Forces in a different theatre of war.
“The Council considered carefully your remarks on this subject in reply to Lord Kitchener’s letter,
and came to the conclusion that, certainly for the present, the main theatre of operations for British
forces should be alongside the French Army, and that this should continue as long as France was
liable to successful invasion and required armed support. It was also realised that should the offensive
operations subsequefttly drive the Germans out of France and back to Germany, British troops should
assist in such operations. It was thought that after another failure by Germany to force the lines of
defence held by the French Army and yours, the military situation in France and Flanders might con-
ceivably develop into one of stalemate, in which it would be impossible for German forces to break
through into France, while at the same time the German defences would be impassable for offensive
movements of the Allies without great loss of life and expenditure of more ammunition than could be
provided. In these circumstances it was considered desirable to find some other theatre where such
obstructions to advance would be less pronounced, and from where operations against the enemy might
lead to more decisive results.
For these reasons the War Council decided that certain of the possible projects for pressing the
war in other theatres should be carefully studied during the next few weeks, sq that as soon as the new
forces are fit for action plans may be ready to meet any eventuality that may be then deemed expe-
dient, either from a political point of view or to enable our forces to act with the best advantage in
concert with the troops of other nations throwing in their lot with the Allies.”
And the second conclusion was embodied in the decision recorded by the War
Council on January 13th :
“ That if the position in the Western theatre of war becomes, in the spring, one of stalemate,
British troops should be dispatched to another theatre and objective, and that adequate investigation
and preparation should be undertaken with that purpose and that a sub-committee of the Committee
of Imperial Defence be appointed to deal with this aspect of the question.”
“ Although this conclusion does not mention the Dardanelles as an objective, and probably
had little influence over the decision to \ise troops against the Dardanelles, which was forced on the
Allies by pressure of circumstances, it is of some importance as an indication that, in the opinion
of the War Council, troops might have to be employed in some theatre of war other than the Western
Front. Even the early investigations which preceded this decision had shown—what those held
subsequently were to confirm—that there were only two alternative theatres of war to the Western
Front at that time in the region of feasibility, namely, the Dardanelles and Serbia.”
Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Maurice Hankey in his statement comments on the second
conclusion as follows :
On January 13th and 28th, 1915, the War Council decided to attempt to force the
Dardanelles by means of the Navy alone. A joint naval and military operation was
not considered in consequence of Lord Kitchener’s statement, accepted by the War Council,


that there were not, and would not for some months be, any troops available for such an
operation. At a meeting of the War Council on May 14th, Mr. Churchill stated that if he
had known three months before that an army of from 80,000 to 100,000 men would be
available in May for an attack on the Dardanelles, the attack by the Navy alone would
never have been undertaken.
8 Towards the end of January, diplomatic efforts were made to secure the co-opera- Sir Maurice
tion of Greece with Serbia, which met with no success. As by February 15th the Memo
negotiations to secure Greek co-operation with Serbia had failed, attention began once Part _ g
more to be directed to the Dardanelles, and on February 16th the War Council decided paras . ig, 20, et
to send the 29th Division, and a force from Egypt, to Lemnos to support the naval attack, seq.
It was also decided that the Admiralty should build special transports and lighters, Parfc IT pag ell,
suitable for the conveyance of a force of 50,000 men and their landing at any point p ara . 39
where they might be required. The despatch of the 29th Division was afterwards
postponed till March 10th. The transports collected for this Division were counter- 23414 23423.
manded by a message, delivered to the Director of Transports by Colonel Fitzgerald on 23437.
behalf of Lord Kitchener. It is right, however, to say that the Director of Transports
did notact on these instructions until he had orders to do so given to him by Lord Fisher,
who was then First Sea Lord.
9. Future military plans were discussed in a series of meetings of the War Council
on February 19th, 24th and 26th. At these meetings there arose an acute difference of
opinion as to whether the 29th Division should be sent at once to the Eastern
Mediterranean, and Lord Kitchener’s anxiety about a possible German offensive on the
Western Front caused him to withhold his consent to the despatch of that Division until
March 10th.
From the record of these discussions it appears that the policy contemplated was .
(a) To support the naval attack with three divisions which Lord Kitchener thought
might be required to secure the passage of the Straits after the fall of the forts.
( b) To concentrate as large a military force as possible in the Eastern Mediterranean
readv to secure control of the Sea of Marmora, the Bosphorus, and Constantinople,
after the Straits had been forced by the Fleet.
(c) As an alternative, to hold these forces ready for any action which might determine
the attitude of the Balkan States, and thus bring into the struggle at least
Rumania and Greece, possibly Bulgaria, and unite the whole of the south-east
of Europe with Britain and France in a combined action against the Central
Powers.
In the course of these discussions, Lord Kitchener informed the Council "that if
the Fleet could not get through the Straits unaided, the Army ought to see the business Memorandurn>
through. The effect of a defeat in the Orient would be very serious. There could be Part n page 25
no going back.” The naval attack on the Dardanelles committed us to offensive para .B4.
action in the Near East. The same view was'expressed by Sir E. Grey, who stated that
failure would be equivalent to a great defeat on land. Mr. Asquith also told us that Q. 25191.
from this time onward Lord Kitchener was determined that the Army should see the
naval attack through.
10. At the War Council on February 19th, Mr. Asquith read out extracts from a Sir Maurice
memorandum of the General Staff prepared on December 19th, 1906, for the Committee
of Imperial Defence, which was afterwards circulated to the members of the Council, and u and 45 ’
in which the possibility of a combined attack, naval and military, upon the Dardanelles
had been considered.
This memorandum pointed out that: —
“5. When the question of dispatching a military expeditionary force to the Gallipoli Peninsula
comes to be passed in review, the first point to be considered is the general one of whether a landing is
possible at all, in face of active opposition under modern conditions.
In regard to this history affords no guide.
The whole conditions of war have been revolutionised since such an operation was last attempted.
Military opinion, however, will certainly lean strongly to the view that no landing could now a-
days be effected in the presence of a enemy, unless the co-operating naval squadron was in a position
to guarantee, with its guns, that the men, horses, and vehicles of the landing force should reach
shore unmolested, and that they should find, after disembarkation, a sufficiently extended area,
free from hostile fire, to enable them to form up for battle on suitable ground.
“ In the opinion of the General Staff, a doubt exists as to whether the co-operating fleet would be
able to give this absolute guarantee."
(C 49—242) A * 4


“ 8. The successful conclusion of a military operation against the Gallipoli Peninsula mftst hinge,
as already stated, upon the ability of the fleet, not only to dominate the Turkish defences with gunfire,
and to crush their field troops during that period of helplessness which exists while an army is in actual
process of disembarkation, but also-to cover the advance of troops once ashore, until they could gain a
firm foothold, and establish themselves upon the high ground in rear of the coast defences of the Dar-
• danelles.
However brilliant as a combination of war, and however fruitful in its consequences, such an
operation would be, were it crowned with success, the General Staff, in view of the risks involved, are
not prepared to recommend its being attempted.”
The Director of Naval Intelligence, while generally in agreement with the General
Staff, and fully concurring as to the great risks involved in a joint naval and military
enterprise against the Gallipoli Peninsula, expressed the view that:—
“ The memorandum somewhat underrates the value of the assistance which might be rendered
by a co-operating fleet by means of a heavy covering fire at the actual point of disembarkation and
during the stages of the advance, immediately succeeding the landing, as well as by feints and diver-
sions along the 45 nautical miles of littoral between the Bulair line and Cape Helles.
The effectiveness of covering fire from men of war, as an adjunct to land forces, was well illus-
trated by the Japanese attack on Kin chow, where the fire of the Japanese gun-boats turned the scale
at the critical moment, and enabled the attackers to force the left of the Russian position, while the
torpedo boats, in rear of the Russian lines, interrupted, by their fire, the passage of trains in either
direction.
In that enterprise, the co-operating vessels were very small, and the fire they were able to develop
was insignificant, compared with what might be brought to bear in the Gallipoli Peninsula, where the
hydrographical conditions are such that any number of vessels of the largest size and power could
be employed to support the land forces.”
Sir Maurice Hankey informed us that it was generally held by the War Council
that the General Staff memorandum of 1906 was not wholly applicable to the conditions
obtaining in 1915. There is no record of the precise reasons for this opinion, but speaking
from memory he thinks that they were somewhat as follows :
(i) Turkey in the Balkan wars had shown herself to be much less formidable as a
military power than had been previously assumed.
(ii) There had been a considerable development of naval ordnance since 1906.
(iii) The fall of the Liege and Namur forts led to the conclusion that permanent
works could easily be dealt with by modern long-range guns.
(iv) By the use of aircraft the value of naval bombardment, especially by indirect
laying, would be enormously increased.
(v) The development of submarines led to the hope that the Turkish communications
to the Gallipoli Peninsula through the Sea of Marmora would be very vulner-
able.
11. On February 24th, the question of the appointment of a military commander
was mentioned at the War Council, and the first to be considered was Lieutenant-General
Sir Wdliam Birdwood. The scope of the military operations, however, gradually became
enlarged, and it was thought advisable to select an officer of greater experience and higher
rank. General Sir lan Hamilton was appointed on March 12th, and sailed on the next day.
12. Following the decisions of the War Council, Lord Kitchener gave orders on
February 20th for two Australasian divisions in Egypt to prepare for service at the Dar-
danelles ; and by the end of February a French Division and the Royal Naval Division
were ready to embark for the same destination. All these were placed under the command
of Sir William Birdwood.
On February 23rd, SirM illiam Birdwood was ordered to proceed to the Dardanelles to
confer with Admiral Carden. He then made a reconnaissance of the position and the
telegrams which subsequently passed between him and Lord Kitchener show : *
(a) That Lord Kitchener still intended troops to be used for minor operations onlv.
( b ) That Sir William Birdwood, on the other hand, did not expect the Navy to force
the Straits unaided ; and
(c) That Sir William Birdwood fully appreciated the formidable character of the
defences of the Peninsula, and anticipated that large military operations
would be necessary.
13. In the course of these preparations Lieutenant-General Sir John Maxwell,
Commanding-in-Chief in Egypt, telegraphed to Lord Kitchener on February 24th that he*
understood that the Gallipoli Peninsula was everywhere heavily fortified and prepared
for defence, and was practically a fort, advance against which from any quarter with out-
heavy guns would seem to be hazardous. Sir John Maxwell was also impressed by the


Naval Division
• • •
• • •
...
...
... 11,000
Australasian Infantry
...
...
... 30,600
Australasian Mounted Troops
...
3,500
29thDivision ...
... 18,000
French Division
• • •
... 18,000
Russian Army Corps
...
...
...
... 47,600
views of Colonel Mancorps, who was a member of the French military mission in Egypt, and
who had been for five years Military Attache at Constantinople. On February 26th he
telegraphed to Lord Kitchener an appreciation by Colonel Maucorps, which recommended an
attack on the Asiatic side of the Peninsula as presenting the least difficulties, and expressed
the opinion that it would be extremely hazardous to land on the Gallipoli Peninsula,
as the Peninsula was very strongly fortified for defence. It was also pointed out that
the garrison of the Peninsula was 30,000 strong, composed of the 9th Division of the
Illrd Army Corps, with reserve formations, under the command of Djevad Pasha, who was
an excellent and very energetic officer ; and that the Bulair lines had been re-made and
re-armed.
14. The object of the operations at the Dardanelles was to gain an entrance to the Sir Maurice
Sea of Marmora and dominate Constantinople. At a meeting on March 10 h Lord Hankey’s Memor
Kitchener announced to the War Council that the “ approximate strength of the forces 18
available against Constantinople ” would be as follows : para. 54 P *
128,700
It should be noted that the despatch of the Russian Corps referred to above was
to follow and be contingent upon our obtaining access to Constantinople through the
Dardanelles and the Sea of Marmora.
15. The facts which have been mentioned show that from an early date in February
a military landing on some scale on the Gallipoli Peninsula was contemplated, and that,
as time went on, a landing in considerable force became increasingly probable. There q. 7255.
was therefore sufficient time for a preliminary plan of operations and plan of landing (23011-3).
to be put forward by the General Staff. Such would be the usual course. In fact, Q- 23007.
among the duties assigned to the department of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff
in the King’s Regulations is the preparation of plans of offensive operations and of
plans of concentration and reinforcement in connection therewith. When asked by
the Prime Minister at the War Council meeting of March 19th whether any general plan
and scheme of disembarkation had been worked out, Lord Kitchener said that, though
the question had been examined in the War Office, sufficient information was not forth- Sir Maurice
coming for the preparation of a detailed scheme of landing, which would be undertaken 8 emor
by Sir lan Hamilton in concert with the Naval Commander-in-Chief. No general plan of 2 i
operations had been prepared by the War Office. We can see no reason why a general para
plan or alternative general plans should not have been worked out, and we think that
the elaboration of such plan or plans by competent officers of the General Staff would have
put the military problem in a clearer light before the War Council.
16. While the concentration of troops in the Eastern Mediterranean was proceeding,
Admiral Sir Henry Jackson, who was writing frequent appreciations of the position in
regard to naval action, presented a minute to Mr. Churchill on March 11th, in which he
stated :
“The position has considerably changed recently; there are now ample military forces ready at Mr. Winston
short notice for co-operation with him {i.e. the Admiral), and I suggest the time has arrived to make use Churchill’s
of them. Statement.
“ To advance further with a rush over unswept mine-fields, and in waters commanded at short Page 30 ;
range by heavy guns, howitzers, and torpedo-tubes, must involve serious losses in ships and men,
and mil not achieve the object of making the Straits a safe water-way for the transports. The
Gallipoli Peninsula must be cleared of the enemy’s artillery before this is achieved, and its occupation
is a practical necessity before the Straits arc safe for the passage of troops as far as the Sea of Marmora.
“ I suggest the Vice-Admiral be* asked if he considers the time has now arrived to make use of
military forces to occupy the Gallipoli Peninsula, and clear away the enemy artillery on that side—
an operation he would support with his squadrons.
“ With the Peninsula in our possession, the concealed batteries on the Asiatic side, which are
less formidable, could be dealt with more easily from the heights on shore than by ships’ guns afloat,
and the troops should be of great assistance in the demolition of the fortress’s guns.”


Mr. Churchill communicated this minute to Lord Kitchener, and asked him for a
“ formal statement of the War Office view as to land operations.” To which Lord Kitchener
replied on March 13th :
“ Most Secret.
In answer to your questions, unless it is found that our estimate of the Ottoman strength on
the Gallipoli Peninsula is exaggerated, and the position on the Kilid Bahr Plateau less strong than
anticipated, no operations on a large scale should be attempted until the 29th Division has arrived
and is ceady to take part in what is likely to prove a difficult undertaking, in which severe fighting
must be anticipated.”
17. On March 12th, Sir lan Hamilton was appointed to command the Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force, and was summoned to the War Office to receive his instructions
from Lord Kitchener. In his evidence Sir lan Hamilton told us that he made full notes
of this interview shortly afterwards, and that Lord Kitchener informed him :
“ That I knew his feelings as to the value of the Near East, He said, rifle for rifle, at that moment
he had made up his mind we could nowhere make as good use of the 29th Division as by sending
them to the Dardanelles. With good luck each of its 12,000 rifles might attract 100 more to our side
of the war.
“ But the diversion of this Division had been opposed.
“ I must clearly understand (1) that the 29th Division was only a loan, to be returned the moment
they could be spared. (2) That every man, gun, rifle, or cartridge sent out to me is looked upon as
sheer waste by powerful interests, both those at home and in France, who have strategical ideas.”
“He said we soldiers were clearly to understand that we were string number 2. The sailors
said they could force the Dardanelles on their own, and we were not to chip in unless the Admiral
definitely chucked up the sponge.
“ Once we started fighting we had to see the enterprise right through at all costs. No Asiatic
adventure was to be countenanced.
“ Lord Kitchener then explained, at some length, that owing to our command of the sea, military
operations on the peninsula itself would be a limited liability . . . meaning thereby that the area
was restricted, and as the numbers of the enemy would be restricted, so the numbers which would have
to be drawn from home would be restricted. His idea was once we began to march about Asia Minor
the liability would become unlimited, and I would very likely have to make demands on him for
reinforcements of all descriptions, which in the present state of affairs would be very difficult to give.”
The only information which Sir lan Hamilton was able to obtain before leaving
consisted of the official handbooks; the outline of a plan which had been worked out
by the Greek General Staff for an attack on the Dardanelles ; and a statement by Lord
Kitchener that the Kilid Bahr plateau had been entrenched and would be sufficiently
held by the Turks, and that south of Achi Baba the point of the Peninsula would be so
swept by the guns of the fleet that no enemy positions would be encountered in that
quarter. This last statement was made on the authority of a map which afterwards proved
inaccurate, and of little use. From Sir lan Hamilton’s evidence it would seem that no
really good maps were available until some were taken from Turkish prisoners.
He was not supplied with the memorandum, prepared by the General Staff in 1906,
for the consideration of the Committee of Imperial Defence, together with the remarks
of the Director of Naval Intelligence thereon, in which the possibility of a joint naval
and military attack upon the Dardanelles was fully discussed ; nor were the views of
Colonel Maucorps, late French Military Attache at Constantinople, reported by Sir J.
Maxwell to Lord Kitchener on February 26th, communicated to him.
Sir lan Hamilton was also informed that Major-General Braithwaite was to be his Chief
of the General Staff. General Braithwaite himself had been informed of his appointment
on the afternoon of March 11th, and told to get a staff together. This he proceeded to
do, and he also obtained such information as was available at the War Office, which was
of a very meagre description.
18. On March 13th Sir lan Hamilton again saw Lord Kitchener, and was given formal
written instructions for his guidance.
These instructions were as follows :
1- The Fleet has undertaken to force the passage of the Dardanelles. The employment of
military forces on any large scale for land operations, at this juncture, is only contemplated in the
event of the Fleet failing to get through after every effort has been exhausted.
“2. Before any serious undertaking is carried out in the Gallipoli Peninsula, all the British
military forces detailed for the expedition should be assembled so that their full weight can be thrown
in.
“ 3. Having entered on the project of forcing the Straits, there can be no idea of abandoning
the scheme. It will require time, patience, and methodical plans of co-operation between the naval
and military commanders. The essential point is to avoid a check, which will jeopardise our chances
of strategical and political success.


“ 4. This does not preclude the probability of minor operations being engaged upon, to clear
areas occupied by the Turks with guns annoying the Fleet, or for the demolition of forts already-
silenced by the Fleet. But such minor operations should be as much as possible restricted to the
forces necessary to achieve the object in view, and should as far as practicable not entail permanent
occupation of positions on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
“ 5. Owing to the lack of any definite information we presume that the Gallipoli Peninsula is
held in strength, and that the Kilid Bahr Plateau has been - fortified and armed for a determined
resistance. In fact we must presuppose that the Turks have taken every measure for the defence
of the Plateau, which is the key to the Western Front at the Narrows, until such time as reconnais-
sance has proved otherwise.
“ 6. Under present conditions it seems undesirable to land any permanent garrison, or hold any
lines on the Gallipoli Peninsula. Probably an entrenched force will be required to retain the Turkish
forces on the Peninsula and prevent reinforcements arriving at Bulair, and this force would naturally
be supported on both flanks by gun-fire from the Fleet. Troops employed on the minor operations
mentioned above (paragraph 4), should be withdrawn as soon as their mission is fulfilled.
“ 7. In order not to reduce forces advancing on Constantinople, the security of the Dardanelles
passage, once it has been forced, is a matter for the Fleet, except as in paragraph 6 with regard to
Bulair.
“ The occupation of the Asiatic side, by military forces, is to be strongly deprecated.
“ 8. When the advance through the Sea of Marmora is undertaken, and the Turkish fleet has been
destroyed, the opening of the Bosphorus, for the passage of Russian forces, will be proceeded with.
“ During this period, the employment of the British and French troops, which will probably have
been brought up to the neighbourhood of Constantinople, should be conducted with caution.
“ As soon as the Russian Corps has joined up with our troops, combined plans of operations
against the Turkish army (if it still remains in European Turkey) will be undertaken, with a view to
obtaining its defeat or surrender.
“ Until this is achieved, landing in the town of Constantinople, which may entail street fighting,
should be avoided.
“ 9. As it is impossible now to foretell what action the Turkish military authorities may decide
upon, as regards holding their European territories, the plan of operations for the landing of the troops
and their employment must be left for subsequent decision.
“ It is, however, important that as soon as possible after the arrival of the Fleet at Constantinople,
all communications from the West to the East across the Bosphorus, including the telegraph cables,
should be stopped.
“ Assuming that the main portion of the Turkish army is prepared to defend European Turkish
territory, it may be necessary to land parties to hold entrenched positions on the East side of the
Bosphorus, and thus assist the Fleet in preventing all communication across the Bosphorus.
“ 10. Should the Turkish army have retired to the East side of the Bosphorus, the occupation
of Constantinople and the Western territories of Turkey may be proceeded with.
“ 11. As in certain contingencies, it may be important to be able to withdraw our troops from this
theatre at an early date, the Allied troops working in conjunction with us should be placed in those
positions which need to be garrisoned, and our troops might, with advantage, be employed principally
in holding the railway line, until a definite decision is come to as to future operations.
“ 12. You will send all communications to the Secretary of State for War, and keep him fully
informed of the operations and your anticipations as to future developments.
“ March 13th, 1915. “ (Signed) KITCHENER."
19. Sir lan Hamilton, General Braithwaite, and the General Staff left on March 13th,
arriving at Mudros on the 17th.
The administrative branches of the Staff did not start until a later date, arriving
at Alexandria on April Ist.
20. Immediately on his arrival Sir lan Hamilton attended a conference with Vice-
Admiral Sir John de Robeck on board the “ Queen Elizabeth/’ This conference was
attended by Admiral de Robeck, Sir lan Hamilton, General d’Amade, Admiral Guepratte,
Admiral Wemyss, General Braithwaite, Commodore Keyes and Captain Pollen.
Sir lan Hamilton told us that in the course of this conference he was informed by
Sir John de Robeck that: —
“ The Peninsula is rapidly being fortified, and thousands of Turks work like beavers all night
on trenches, redoubts, and entanglements.
“Not one living soul has yet been seen, but each morning brings evidence of nocturnal activity.
All landing places are now commanded by lines of trenches, and are effectively ranged by field guns
and howitzers, which so far cannot be located, even approximately, as our naval seaplanes are too
heavy to rise out of rifle range.
“ He said, the Turkish searchlights were fixed and mobile, they were of the latest pattern,
and were run by skilled observers The Germans evidently got hold of the Turks, and all that sort of
work was being done in shipshape style by the Turks. . . .


“ The War Office had taken too sanguine a view in thinking that the ships’ guns would
be able to prevent the Turkish troops lodging themselves on the Peninsula, because de Robeck said
he knew they were there from seeing the trench work increased every morning.
“ Many more troops have come down. The German officers have grappled with the situation,
# and have got their troops scientifically disposed, and heavily entrenched. So much so that they have
not much to fear from the flat-trajectory guns of the Navy. The number of field guns on the Penin-
sula is now many times greater than it was.”
On March 18th the substance of this conference, except as regards the small effect
likely to be produced by the flat-trajectory gun fire of the Navy, was telegraphed by
Sir lan Hamilton to Lord Kitchener.
And in a private letter, Sir lan Hamilton, on the same day, wrote to Lord Kitchener:—
“ Here, at present, Gallipoli looks a much tougher nut to crack than it did over the map in your
office.
“ The increases to the garrison, the new lines of trenches, nightly being excavated, the number of
concealed field guns, the rapidity of the current, are all brought forward when discussing military
operations.
“ My present impression is that, if it eventually becomes necessary to take the Gallipoli Peninsula
by a military force, we shall have to proceed bit by bit.”
It may here be noted that on May 9th Sir John de Kobeck telegraphed to the
Admiralty : “ The Navy has not been able to give the Army as great assistance as was
anticipated. The Navy is of small assistance when it is a matter of trenches and
machine guns, and the check of the Army is due to these factors.”
21. On March 19th the failure of the naval attack on the previous day was discussed
at a meeting of the War Council, and Mr. Churchill was authorised to inform Sir John
de Robeck that he could continue the naval operations if he thought fit. In the course
of the discussion which followed, Sir Maurice Hankey’s notes show that Lord Kitchener
said he had given Sir lan Hamilton as many men as he could use on the ground.
22. On March 18th Sir lan Hamilton made a reconnaissance down the coast, arriving
at Cape Helles to find the naval engagement in “ full blast.”,
On the 19th the result of this reconnaissance was communicated by him to Lord
Kitchener in the following telegram, which was received after the War Council mentioned
in the last paragraph :
“ Yesterday we steamed close along the western shore of the Gallipoli Peninsula. Here and
there landing places were, of course, observed.
“ So near were we that wo could see quite clearly the barbed wire defences covering the
trenches. . , .
“ I have not yet received any report of the naval action, but from what I actually saw of the extra-
ordinary gallant attempt made yesterday, I am being most reluctantly driven towards the conclusion
that the Dardanelles are less likely to be forced by battleships than at one time seemed probable,
and that if the Army is to participate, its operations will not assume the subsidiary form anticipated.
“ The Army’s share will not be a case of landing parties, for the destruction of forts, etc., but
rather a case of a deliberate and progressive military operation, carried out in order to make good the
passage of the Navy.”
This telegram had been dispatched at 2 p.m. At 5.45 p.m. on the same day the
following reply was sent by Lord Kitchener :
“ With reference to the last paragraph of your telegram of to-day. You know my views that the
passage of the Dardanelles must be forced, and that if large military operations on the Gallipoli
Peninsula by the Army are necessary to clear the way, they must be undertaken, after careful con-
sideration of the local defences, and must be carried through.”
War Office tele- On March 20th Sir lan Hamilton intimated to Lord Kitchener that “he understood
gram No. 30t. yiews completely .»
Q 4344. 23. On March 22nd Sir lan Hamilton had another conference with Sir John de
Robeck on board the “ Queen Elizabeth.” This conference was attended by Admiral
de Robeck, Sir lan Hamilton, Admiral Wemyss, General Bra ithwaite, General Birdwood,
and Captain Pollen.
Sir lan Hamilton’s note of this conference is to the following effect:—
“He { i.e . Vice-Admiral de Robeck) is now quite clear and strong that he cannot get through
without the help of all my troops.
“ Wemyss agreed with de Robeck.
“ No voice was raised to question the momentous decision.


The result of this important conference was then communicated by Sir lan Q*
Hamilton to Lord Kitchener, and by Sir John de Robeck to Mr. Churchill, in the
following telegrams ;
(1) Sir lan Hamilton to Lord Kitchener, March 23rd :
“ I have now conferred with the Admiral, and we are equally convinced that to enable the Fleet
effectively to force the passage of the Dardanelles, the co-operation of the whole military force will
be necessary. . , ... ...
“ The strength of the enemy on the Gallipoli Peninsula is estimated at about 40,000, with a reserve
of 30,000 somewhere west of Kodosto. .., , , . , ~ „ 7 ~ ~ , .
“ The unsettled weather prevailing in March introduces a dangerous, incalculable factor into the War Office tele-
operation of landing a large force in face of certain opposition, but the weather next month should be gram No. 347.
more settled, and fam sanguine of the success then of a simple, straightforward scheme, based on
your broad principles. . , ~
“ I have already worked out the main features of my scheme, and I can communicate them, it
you think it safe to do so. , ,
“ Practically the whole of my force will be required to effect what I have planned, and on tne
thoroughness with which I can make the preliminary arrangements, of which the proper allocation
of troops, etc., is not the least important, the success of my plans will largely depend.
“ This is one of the principal reasons why I attach importance to the thorough organisation of
the expedition at a convenient base like Alexandria.
(2) Sir John de Robeck to First Lord, March 23rd :
“ At a meeting to-day with Generals Birdwood and Hamilton was informed by the latter that the
Army will not be readv to commence military operations until the 14th April.
“ All guns of position guarding the Straits must be destroyed, in order to keep up our commum- War Office tele,
cations when the Fleet gets through the Sea of Marmora. These guns are numerous, and not more gram No. 115.
than a small proportion of them can be put out of action by gun-fire.
“ The enemy were obviously surprised by the landing of a demolition party on the 26th February,
“ Judging by the events of the 4th March, future operations of this nature will probably meet
strenuous and well-considered opposition.
“ It does not appear to me practicable to land a sufficient force inside the Dardanelles to carry
out this service. This view is shared by General Hamilton.
_ “On the other hand failure to destroy the guns may well nullify any,success of the Feet, bj
enabling the Straits to be closed up, after the ships have gone through, and there may not then be
ships available to keep the Straits open, as losses may be heavy.
“ Until the Sea of Marmora is reached, the mine menace, which is much greater than we expected,
will remain. This requires careful and thorough treatment, both in respect of mines and floating
mmes. ... . ....
“ Time will be required for this, but arrangements can be made by the time the Army will be
ready. .
“ A decisive operation about the middle of next month, appears to me better than to take great
risks for what may well be only half measures. .
“It now appears to me that there may, possibly, be above the Narrows mine-fields of which we War Office tele
have very little information. giam No 117.
“ Obstacles may be sunk in the Channel by the Germans, and submerged hulks and pontoons
placed there. I have in mind particularly the very large pontoons in the Golden Horn, on which
the old Eoad Bridge from Stambul to Pera was laid.
“ The howitzers, which it is so difficult to spot from the sea, will, of course, remain.
“ I think it will be necessary to take and occupy the Gallipoli Peninsula by land forces before it
will be possible for first-rate ships, capable of'dealing with the Goeben, to be certain of getting
through, and for colliers and other vessels, upon which the usefulness of the big ships largely depends,
to get through.”
(3) Sir John de Robeck to First Lord, March 26th :
“ The check on the 18th March is not, in my opinion, decisive, but on the 22nd March I mot War Office tele
General Hamilton, and heard his views, and I now think that to obtain ipiportant results, and to gram No. 123.
achieve the object of the campaign, a combined operation will be essential
“ For the Fleet to attack the Narrows now would jeopardise the success of a better and bigger
scheme and would, therefore, be a mistake.”
(4) Sir John de Robeck to First Lord, March 27th ;
“ On the 22nd after conference with the General and acquaintance with his views, 1 gathered that
he considered co-operation of the Army and Navy to be a sound operation of war, and that he was
quite prepared to co-operate with the Navy in forcing the Straits, he could not take action until
the 14th April.
“ In my opinion, decisive and overwhelming results will be effected by the plan discussed with
General Hamilton, and now being prepared
“ The assumption underlying the plan originally approved for forcing the Dardanelles, by ships,
was that forts could be destroyed Hy gun-fire alone. As applied to the attacking of open forts, by
high velocity fire, this assumption has been conclusively disproved.
For example, the damage caused to Fort 8 is, possibly, the di ablement of one gnn, though this
fort has frequently been bombarded at long and close range. The destructive power of shells which
hit, was either uselessly expended on the parapet, or only effected the demolition of some unimportant
outwork in the background of the fort.


It has been impracticable, even at ranges of 700 or 800 yards, to obtain direct hits on each gun.
Ibis W as attempted m the case of Forts 3 and 6. In Fort 4, on the 26th February, although the fort
had been heavily shelled for 2 days, at both long and short range, one gun was found loaded and ready
to lire. At the most it is possible for ships to dominate the forts to such an extent that the guns
cannot be fought by their crews.
• more permanent disablement would require an excessive expenditure of ammunition
at point blank range.
Tau ° P * n * on * s lengthened by recently received information on the operations against Tsin
The analogy of the attack on the cupola forts at Antwerp by heavy howitzer fire is quite mis-
leading, when applied to the case I have described.
It is necessary for ships to come under fire at the Narrows, in order to engage Forts 7 and 8 at
c ose range. tis necessary, therefore, to silence these, and this entails expenditure of valuable
ammunition. r
“lam also in some anxiety as to the wear of the old guns. Several premature bursts of common
shell occurred on the 18th and put guns out of action from time to time.
4t bombardment, which could not be carried to a decisive result, would be the worst policy,
u ri 1S ’ theiefore, necessary to land demolition parties to destroy forts.
General Hamilton is not prepared to undertake the task of covering these parties at the Narrows
anc quite agree. tis impracticable to carry out the demolition by surprise. The difficulties of
clearing a passage for the Fleet (and the forts have to be kept silenced bv gun-fire, while it is carried
out) are materially increased by the dangers from mines, which are greater than we anticipated, and
the number of torpedo tubes, which are reported to have increased, and which cannot be destroyed.
„ . consic *er the result of naval action might be either a brilliant success or quite indecisive.
A great factor towards success is the effect that would be produced on the Turkish Army bv the
appearance of the Fleet off Constantinople. '
i • s^ tuat i°ri i n Turkey, at present, appears to be controlled by the Army, but this in itself is
dominated by the Germans. * .
i a( Kent of the hleet into the Sea of Marmora fails to dismay the Turkish Army, and they
close the Straits behind us, ships would only be able to operate as indicated in your 86 and 88', and main-
am emse ves in the Marmora for a length of time that is governed almost entirely bv the number
ot ammunition ships and colliers which can accompany them, and the percentage of unprotected
sfijps which we can expect to get through is small, as the passage will be contested.
While tfie forts are still intact I can see no practical solution to the problem of passing supply
ships for the Fleet through the Dardanelles. 1 5 J
a • v * * n event, for the Peninsula to be occupied by the Army, as the guns on the
Asiatic side can be commanded from the European shore, sufficiently to permit ships to pass through.
This would open the Strait. 1 * 8
The assistance of all naval forces available will, in my judgment, be needed to land the Army of
the size contemplated, in the teeth of strenuous opposition.
Turks would not, necessarily, be induced to abandon the Peninsula by a landing at Bulair,
and there is no doubt that this can better be done by a fleet intact outside the Straits than by the
remnants of a fleet, short of ammunition, inside the Straits.
the Dard 1 SU |j CeSS assur ed when the Army holds the Peninsula and the squadron is through
Co-operation, which would really prove the deciding factor in reducing the length of time neces-
sary forthe completion of the campaign in the Sea of Marmora, and for the occupation of Constantinople,
will be ensured by this delay of perhaps a fortnight.”
24. These telegrams mark the close of the period of consultation between Sir lan
Hamilton and Sir John de Robeck as to the policy to be pursued. Thereafter these officers
were occupied with detailed plans for the landing.
It is only necessary to observe :
(a) That Sir John de Robeck’s views, as expressed in his telegram of March 27th, were
endorsed by Mr. Churchill’s telegram, in reply, of the same date :
m^t h ave b een achieved without involving the Army, according to the original
p an, had been my hope, but I see clearly that a combined operation is now essential for the reasons
you mention.
The date is not distant, for time has passed and the troops are available. The Admiralty tele-
gram, approving all your proposals, will, therefore, be sent.”
an Hamilton s plan of operations was to some extent anticipated by
Cord Kitchener in a telegram to him on April 2nd :
Limpus s report, which I have been reading, and of which the Admiral has a copy, seems to point
to the advisability of effecting the main landing in the neighbourhood of Cape Helles and Morto Bay,
w lie making a feint n considerable force south of Kaba Tepe, with the possibility of landing and of
commanding the ground of Sari Bahr, so that the enemy, on its southern slopes, may be prevented
froin supporting those on the Kilid Bahr Plateau.
I presume that, preparatory to destroying the forts at the Narrows, you will attack in fotce to
occupy this plateau.
“ The most necessary pouts for consideration seem to me, at a distance, to be night attacks and
crossing barbed wire entanglements.
, i.u 8 e “ tan g which artillery fire has not completely cleared, it is worth remembering
ow thorn zaribas were successfully crossed in the Sudan by means of the native angerib bed.


“ Men carrying angeribs are placed immediately behind the baud grenade and attacking lines,
and directly the fire of the defence is dominated, they rush forward and place the angerib on the en-
tanglement. A recrudescence of fire from the trench may ensue, which is again dominated, and the
process continued until men can jump over the last entanglement. If each attacking company does
this, many roads over obstructions can be made.
“ I do not in the least wish to influence your judgment, formed locally, on the situation to be
dealt with in the Gallipoli Peninsula, but only give you all this for what it is worth.
“ I hope that arrangements will be made for adequate bombardments by the Navy of the positions
to be attacked, and for the advance of your troops to be covered by its shell fire.
“ When you have decided on your plans, I shall be glad to have a general idea of them. Secrecy
will be observed here/'
To which Sir lan Hamilton replied on April 4th :
“ Reference concluding sentence there is no need to send you my general idea as you have already \y af Office tele
got it in one, even down to the details, gram No, 451.
“ I have not got enough gun ammunition to destroy barbed wire by field guns, howitzers,
or machine guns, and the entanglements are mostly defiladed from naval guns.
“ I therefore must rely on other methods, including that suggested by you ”
25. After March 19th there was no further meeting of the War Council until May 14th,
and we are unable to ascertain any precise date on which, after the failure of the naval
attack, military operations on the Gallipoli Peninsula were definitely decided on. Mr.
Asquith informed us that between these dates there were thirteen meetings of the Cabinet, q 28189.
at eleven of which the operations at the Dardanelles were brought up for report; and that Q. 28192.
they were on several occasions the subject, not merely of report, but of long and careful
discussion.
It would appear therefore that these operations and the policy they involved were
undertaken with the knowledge of the Cabinet, but we think, as was stated in our previous
Report, that they should have been fully discussed by the War Council.
26. During this period negotiations took place for the intervention of Italy on the side
of the Allies ; and the course of these negotiations made it undesirable to discontinue
operations after the failure of the naval attack. Lord Kitchener had, as we have previously
stated, told the War Council on February 24th that, if the Fleet could not get through the
Straits unaided, the Army ought to see the business through. The same opinion was
expressed in his written instructions to Sir lan Hamilton on March 13th.
In addition, the failure to penetrate the German lines at the battle of Neuve Chapelle
and in the Champagne (Perthes) had strengthened the view that a stalemate had set in
in the West. The need for relieving the pressure in the Caucasus still existed. The urgency
of opening up a line of communications, first to supply Russia with munitions ard military
stores, and secondly, to enable the Russian harvest of 1914 to be exported and thus re-
establish the Russian exchanges, had not diminished. And undoubtedly the fear existed
that to abandon the enterprise might have a bad effect in Russia.
These considerations, together with the .fact that the military difficulties had not
been sufficiently realised, seem to have led to the decision to initiate the joint naval and
military attack on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
THE PREPARATIONS FOR THE LANDING
27. Sir lan Hamilton’s Administrative Staff did not arrive at Alexandria until
April 7th. The preparations for the landing were, therefore, carried out by his General
Staff. With regard to these preparations it is necessary to consider :
(a) The change of the main base from Lemnos to Alexandria.
(b) The necessity for re-loading and re-arranging the transports of the 29th and
the Royal Naval divisions, and
(c) The estimates made of the strength of the Turkish forces to be encountered.
(a) Change of Base, from Lemnos to Alexandria.
28. Lemnos had been originally selected as a base for the naval attack in February
and March. Lemnos was also contemplated as the base when, on February 16th, the
War Council decided to send out the 29th Division. On February 20th, 30,000 Australian
troops under Sir William Birdwood were ordered by Lord Kitchener to get ready to lend War Office tele-
further support to the naval attack, and a brigade of these troops was sent from Egypt to gram No. 84.


Lemnos, arriving there early in March. On February 23rd Vice-Admiral Sir Sackville
Carden telegraphed to Sir John Maxwell that, before the landing on the Gallipoli Peninsula,
the troops sent from Egypt would have to live on board their transports; and on February
26th he sent a similar message, adding that the troops could land for exercise.
• On March 2nd, the War Office telegraphed to Sir William Birdwood :
“ Reports from Athens indicate that there is no water at Mudros Bay. Special arrangements for
distilling and for tank vessels are being made by the Admiralty, but there may be some delay.
“ After consulting the naval authorities on the spot, please report on the subject.”
On March 9th the Royal Naval and the French Divisions began to arrive at Lemnos,
and on that date Sir John Maxwell transmitted to the War Office a telegram from Admiral
Carden to the effect that, since the water supply was not assured, no more troops should
be sent from Egypt for the present. This was followed, on March 12th, by a further
telegram transmitted from Admiral Wemyss, reporting that water supply for 10,000 men
and their horses was available, but that disembarkation was difficult and tedious with
the appliances at their disposal, that embarkation would be still more difficult, and
suggesting that troops coming from Egypt should be held in readiness there. On March
16th, Sir John Maxwell informed the War Office that “ he gathered from Admiral Wemyss
and the officers on the spot that Lemnos could not be a base for a large force.” In
addition to this, it was found necessary to repack the transports, and it was impossible
to do this at Mudros. On March 18th Lord Kitchener sanctioned Alexandria as the main
base, subject to the final decision of Sir lan Hamilton and Sir John de Robeck.
Thereafter Alexandria was used as the main, and Lemnos as the advanced base.
(b) The Re-loading and Re-arrangement of Transports.
29. The allocation of the transports for the 29th and Royal Naval Divisions was
made by the War Office and by the Royal Marine Office of the Admiralty respectively.
When the transports for the 29th Division arrived at Avonmouth, it was found that some
of them had already been partially loaded at another port with fodder for horses, and it
was accordingly impossible to stow on them all the vehicles forming the first line transport
for the units on board. This part of the first line transport was sent on three freight ships
which had been told off to take the Mechanical Transport belonging to the Division, and
these ships arrived ten days later than the transports.
• In addition to this some of the ships were not well or conveniently stowed.
The units of the Royal Naval Division, also, were not embarked complete, the
personnel having been placed in one ship, the transport in another, and the horses in
another. The stores were not packed as they should have been owing to their not having
arrived until a few hours before the ships sailed.
Proposals were made to restow at Malta the transports which were bringing out
the 29th Division, but the accommodation in the harbour did not allow of this.
The transports were, therefore, sent to Alexandria, and some delay was caused by the
fact that they had to await the arrival of the slower ships (presumably the freight ships),
which had essential things on board.
30. No special instructions were given in the first instance as to how the transports
should be packed. The reason for this was that the exact use to be made of the troops
was not decided, and no plan of operations had been prepared. The ordinary principles
which govern embarkation in the absence of special instructions therefore applied. We
were informed by the Director of Movements that these principles are :
(1) To split up units as little as possible.
(2) To ensure that, when units are split up, the ships on which they are embarked
should sail on the same day, or on dates as near each other as possible.
(3) To embark troops in such a way that they should be able to take the field at
once on disembarkation.
He explained, however, that these principles cannot always be adhered to, especially in
the matter of sending men and their transport together. Many transports, especially
the larger ships, some of which were used in this instance, are not fitted to carry
animals or vehicles. Transports are not collected at a port and then loaded simultaneously,
but dealt with as they arrive. It is possible to carry units and their first line transport
together if instructions are given to do so, but it takes a longer time and requires a larger
number of transports, because in that case the transports would have to sail only partly
loaded.


illc In this case no such special instructions were issued. It would have been hardly
la, possible to do so, as the plan of operations was not determined. General Braithwaite,
ir y Sir lan Hamilton’s Chief of the General Staff, says that no one could have given the order
satisfactorily unless he had worked it backwards from the shore on which he wished to Q* 1325 °-
disembark the men, and nothing of that kind was possible here. Indeed the plan was
for so little known that a great deal of transport which was quite useless for the actual expedi-
tion was taken, e.g. } a much larger number of horses than was necessary, and all the
mechanical transport required according to the ordinary war establishments. The
3S Quartermaster-General’s department at the War Office pointed out that the mechanical
ra j transport would not be needed, but it was sent by the direct order of the Secretary of State,
ild When the objects of the expedition became more clearly defined this was discontinued.
ier We think therefore that, in the absence of a scheme of operations, a considerable
en amount of re-stowage would in any case have been necessary. The chief complaint made 11500 ' 11 -
th against the packing was the separation of the men from their first line transport and Q* 11502 -
1( j animals, and this has been explained above. There was some bad stevedoring, but it
must be remembered that at Liverpool, where part of the force embarked, there were
• ss considerable troubles as to dock labour; that this was the first long sea embarkation
[ n that had been undertaken by the officers in charge ; and that the orders were suddenly Q, 11498.
,l e given and had to be carried out at once.
31. On the whole we think that, though there may have been instances of bad stowage,
the real reason for the extensive repacking was the absence of knowledge of the operations
for which the embarkation was required, and that the embarkation officers at the ports
of loading were not to blame.
32. At first sight the delay caused by this repacking and the change of base from
Lemnos to Egypt appears serious, but on examination we think that the effect was very
•? slight. When the transports were ordered to Alexandria and Port Said to repack, no plan
•j. "V/iVy UIUViVU UV J.O* <XUU iWU kJCUU. UU XCJJtIUiV, IIU JJlclll
of operations had been settled, the whole of the Staff had not yet arrived, and there were War o®°® tele
many arrangements to be made. The first mention of repacking is on March 18th, |^ No - 287 -
1915, and the last repacked transport left Alexandria on April 16th, 1915. The T* * 5,
landing was on April. 25th, 1915. We think that plans and arrangements could not J^Q- 12289 "
have been completed until the greater part of this interval had elapsed, and that the Q
Le effective delay did not amount to more than a few days, which was not important.
n 33. The Administrative Staff did not arrive in Alexandria until April Ist.
£ The Commander-in-Chief and General Staff left for Mudros shortly after, leaving
the Administrative Staff behind. Major-General Woodward, the Deputy Adjutant- q. 12288.
General, protested against this decision to the Commander-in-Chief and the Chief of the
General Staff, but did not succeed in getting it reversed. We think that the Chiefs of
the Administrative Staff should have accompanied General Headquarters, it being of
high importance that these officials should be in touch with the Commander-in-Chief and
work in close concert with the Chief of the General Staff.
(c) Estimate of Turkish Forces.
34. Before the landing Sir lan Hamilton estimated the strength of the Turkish
forces on the Gallipoli Peninsula as 40,000 with a reserve of 30,000 west of Eodosto.
This estimate was increased, later, by the addition of the 2nd Army Corps Nizam, which
ha,d been moved in April from the Caucasus to Constantinople, and made available to
reinforce the forces on the Peninsula.
A more detailed and comprehensive estimate was conveyed by the War Office in a
telegram to the General Staff in India on March Ist:
“We appreciate the situation as follows :
“ E is believed that divisions now consist of Nizam brought up to establishment by Rcdif. War Office
“ In European Turkey, including Gallipoli, are nine divisions, totalling 120,000 men. telegram
In Smyrna, Asiatic Dardanelles, and Panderma there are two strong divisions, and depot No. 146.
battalions, totalling 40,000 men.
“ In Caucasus there are 17 divisions, many of which are weak, totalling 190,000 men.
“ In Syria and Palestine there are five divisions, totalling 70,000 men.
In Mesopotamia is a 4th Division (new formation) of Ist Corps of 12 battalions, lately arrived
Baghdad, also 35th and 38th divisions.
It is possible that the 6th Reserve Corps is also in the Caucasus, though its reported existence is
not yet confirmed.”
(C 49—242) B


After the landing had been effected, Sir lan Hamilton presented a revised estimate
in his telegram to Lord Kitchener of April 30th :
“ The Turkish troops are as follows :
“1. 2nd, 7th, Bth and 9th divisions, all of 3rd Army Corps; Pamir Division of 3rd Reserve Corps ;
part of sth division, 2nd Army Corps.
“ Total, say, 44,000.
“ 2. Probably on Peninsula, but not definitely ascertained, 11th Division and part of 10th, both
of 4th Army Corps, and perhaps 44th and 58th Regiments unallotted.
“ Total, say, 26,000.
“ This information has mainly been ascertained from statements by prisoners.
“ Documents obtained locally and found on dead Turks show that two regiments have just come
from Plagak.
“ 3. Not on Peninsula, but available at short notice, part of 6th Army Corps.
“ Say, 20,000.
“ Bulair is watched by the Fleet, and already three demonstrations have been made, but it is im-
possible to stop reinforcements crossing the Isthmus during the night.
“ Generally reinforcements arrive by the sea to Gallipoli, but as the fleet have now two submarines
off that town, I hope this will be rendered very dangerous in future.”
THE LANDING ON APRIL 25th.
35. Two important questions to be considered concurrently in drawing up a plan
of operations were the place or places of landing on the Peninsula, and the objective or
objectives of the troops when landed.
Sir lan As regards the first of these questions, Sir lan Hamilton had, when at Mudros,
Hamilton's made such reconnaissance as could be made from the sea, and states that the dominating
™l P M Ch ’ features i n the southern part of the Peninsula were-(l) Sari Bahr mountain, 970 feet
high ; (2) Kilid Bahr plateau, 700 feet high, a natural fortification artificially fortified,
London covering the Narrows from an attack from the iEgean ; (3) Achi Baba, 600 feet high,
Gazette, commanding the extreme south of the Peninsula near Cape Relies. '
6th July, After considering the other plans open to him he decided to make two main landings,
1915. one, which was divided into several subordinate landings, in the extreme south of the
Peninsula, and the other north of Kaba Tepe and near the south-western foothills of
Sari Bahr.
In his despatch he mentions two other main alternatives which he considered :
1. A landing on the north coast of the Gulf of Xeros, and
2. A landing on the Asiatic shore of the Dardanelles.
He rejected the first on the ground that Bulair would he between him and the Narrows,
and that in attacking Bulair he would be open to attack from the Turkish forces in Thrace.
He had made a reconnaissance of Bulair, and had come to the conclusion that it was
not possible to effect a landing there.
He did not think that he had a sufficient force for operations on the Asiatic shore,
and his instructions from Lord Kitchener were opposed to a landing there.
These are the only alternatives discussed in the despatch, but others were considered,
and Suvla is mentioned in an appreciation signed by Colonel Aspinall and submitted to
Sir lan Hamilton’s Chief of the General Staff. A landing there is dismissed in a few
words, and it does not seem to have been thought to be a place which merited the same
attention as Bulair and the Asiatic Coast. Probably the reason for this was that when
it was decided to land on the European side, but not to attempt a landing at or near
Bulair, it was considered that the best way to help the Fleet was to attack at the southern
QQ. 7365-9. end of the Peninsula. This is the opinion expressed by Sir lan Hamilton and by General
Braith waite.
Q. 13293. The question also must have arisen whether the available force was sufficient for
more than two main landings. In order to make Suvla Bay secure as a base it was
necessary to occupy the northern ridge by the sea, the Karakol Dagh, up to Ejelmer Bay,
and thence the heights running south from Ejelmer Bay to Anafarta Sagir. Sir lan
Hamilton did not consider that he had sufficient force to do this as well as land at Anzac
Q. 7377. and Helles, and Lieutenant-General Sir Aylmer Hunter-Weston also said that the force
QQ. 17900. would not have been strong enough for such an operation.
46 ’ ’ 45, Sir William Birdwood expressed the opinion that, looking at the matter in the light of
QQ. 21627- a^er events an d assuming that there was no greater force defending Suvla at that time
8. than at the later landing, Sir lan Hamilton’s force was sufficient to have landed at. Suvla
with safety, and that it would have been well to do so ; but he added, “ I also think
I should have done what Sir lan Hamilton had done, only in the light of what has
happened since and the inability to force Achi Baba.”


Sir Aylmer Hunter-Weston informed us that, once a landing had been decided upon,
he thought Sir lan Hamilton’s choice of landing places was a perfectly justifiable one.
On the other hand, several witnesses criticised the selection of the landing places,
> 3 . and expressed themselves in favour of other schemes of disembarkation. Whatever weight
may attach to these divergent options, we consider that the choice of landing places
was a matter lying within the discretion of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief,
and Sir lan Hamilton appears to us to have exercised his discretion with reasonable
care and circumspection.
36. As regards the objective or objectives of the troops when landed, we gather
from the instructions issued by General Braithwaite to the General Officers Com-
manding the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps and the 29th Division respec-
tively, and the latter’s Operation Orders based on these instructions, that the following
m- movements were contemplated.
At Anzac the force which landed first, called the covering force, after it had over-
come any resistance at or near the shore which the Turks might offer, was to occupy
the Sari Bahr heights and thus cover the left flank of the force, called the main body,
which was to land shortly afterwards. This body was to advance four miles east of the
landing-place and assault Mai Tepe, a hill overlooking the Straits and three-quarters of a
mile south of Boghali.
in At Helles the troops were similarly divided into a covering force and main body,
or and after overcoming any resistance at or near the shore which the Turks might offer,
they were to occupy Krithia and Ac hi Baba.
>s > When the Anzac and Helles forces had established themselves at Mai Tepe and Achi
ig Baba, the intention was that a converging attack should be made from those points upon
et the Turkish position at Kilid Bahr.
As the Turkish resistance near the shore proved too strong at Anzac and Helles, the
b, proposed advance inland to Sari Bahr, Mai Tepe, Krithia, and Achi Baba did not take
place.
;s,
le 37. It has been already stated that there were several distinct landings at the
r>f extreme southern end of the Peninsula, and this was the subject of considerable comment
by several witnesses. Speaking generally, it is not wise to divide a force, as it is thereby
exposed to the danger of being attacked and beaten in detail. Sir lan Hamilton’s reasons
for doing so in this case are given in his despatch of May 20th, 1915, published in the London
Gazette of July 6th, 1915, where he says : “ Nothing but a thorough and systematic scheme
for flinging the whole of the troops under my command very rapidly ashore-could be
s, expected to meet with success, whereas on the other hand, a tentative or piecemeal pro-
6. gramme was bound to lead to disaster The beaches were either
ls so well defended by works and guns or else so restricted by nature that it did not seem
possible, even by two or three simultaneous landings, to pass the troops ashore quickly
e > enough to enable them to maintain themselves against the rapid concentration and
counter-attack which the enemy was bound in such case to attempt. It became necessary,
b therefore, not only to land simultaneously at as many places as possible, but to threaten
o to land at other points as well. The first of these necessities involved another unavoid-
rV able if awkward contingency—the separation by considerable intervals of the force.”
e I n view of the restricted space on the beaches and the importance of preventing a
n concentration of the Turkish forces against the small numbers which could be landed at
r any one place, we are not prepared to question the propriety of Sir lan Hamilton’s
n dispositions.
-I The landing places selected were S at the north-east corner of Morto Bay, V and
M (called Lancashire landing) on each side of Cape Helles, X (called Implacable landing)
r just above Tekke Burnu, and Y, just above Gurkha bluff, and due west of Krithia.
s There was another beach called Y 2, which was considered, but no landing was made
> there. What afterwards was known as Anzac was beach Z, a little to the north of Kaba
Tepe. The nature of the beaches is fully described in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch,
to which reference has already been made, and the description need not be repeated.
A landing was also made by the French at Kum Kale, on the Asiatic side, but this was
only intended to be temporary, and these troops were soon withdrawn to a position on
the right of the British forces at Helles.
The landings at V, W and X wei;e intended to be the main landings, those at S and
Y being intended mainly Cf to protect the flanks, to disseminate the forces of the enemy,
and to interrupt the arrival of his reinforcements.”
A feint was also made in the neighbourhood of Enos in order to prevent Turkish
troops from being sent from the north of the Peninsula to resist the landings.
(C 49—242) B 2


38. We propose to discuss the arrangements for the provision of water and the care
of the sick and wounded in a separate part of this report, and it is not necessary therefore
to refer to them here except to say that the landing operations at Helles and Anzac were
not checked by a lack of water.
39. The landings, as described in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch, appear to have been
well planned, and were carried out in the face of exceptional difficulties and at the cost
of heavier casualties than had been expected. The conduct of the forces engaged was
exemplary.
An unfortunate sense of unfairness was created by the fact that when Sir John de
Eobeck’s despatch dealing with these operations was published the troops employed at
certain landings were praised by name, whereas those who landed at V Beach, which was
regarded as the most difficult of all to capture, were praised without identifying them.
The explanation is that Sir John de Eobeck’s despatch, as written, contained a detail of
the troops assigned to the several landings, and reference to this showed at once that the
battalions whose successful accomplishment of their task at V Beach “ bordered almost
on the miraculous ” were the Ist Eoyal Dublin Fusiliers, Ist Eoyal Munster Fusiliers,
and 2nd Hampshire Eegiment. But this detailed list was withheld from publication as
likely to give useful information to the enemy, and the troops in question were inadvertently
denied the public tribute of Sir John de Eobeck’s praise.
40. It is not necessary to discuss the landings except in the case of that on “ Y ” beach,
as to which there seems to have been some misunderstanding. The landing on this beach
was made by the Ist King’s Own Scottish Borderers, under Colonel Koe, and the Plymouth
Battalion of the Eoyal Marine Light Infantry, under Colonel Matthews. Colonel
Matthews, as the senior officer, was in command.
The object was to move inland and try to capture a gun which was stated to be in
position there, and make a demonstration so as to draw the enemy in that direction,
and relieve the pressure at the foot of the Peninsula. The force was then to withdraw
and work up towards X beach to join the rest of the 87th Brigade, to which the Eoyal
Marine Light Infantry were attached. This Brigade was to work up past X beach
and join the force from beach Y, and the united force would then move on Krithia.
The landing was made without opposition, and 2,000 men were on the ridge in a very
short time. They advanced in the direction ordered, but were not met by the force
coming from Beach “ X,” which was unable to make its advance as proposed. Colonel
Matthews then withdrew to the head of the gully up which he had advanced, and
entrenched there.
The force was undisturbed by the enemy until between 4 and 5 p.m., when it was
attacked by a large number of Turks coming from the direction of Krithia. After hard
fighting extending over many hours, the force under Colonel Matthews, having suffered
many casualties and exhausted practically all its ammunition, was obliged to retire to the
beach and re-embark.
The decision to withdraw was made by Colonel Matthews.
Immediately after landing, he had reported that there was no opposition, and after-
wards, when attacked by superior forces and in want of ammunition, had sent a message
to say that unless he had more ammunition he must withdraw; but he did not receive
an answer to either message.
If a larger force had been landed at this beach in the first instance, or if it had been
possible, either by diverting some part of the troops from X beach or otherwise, to send
reinforcements before the Turkish troops came up in the evening, a further advance
might have been made, but it is difficult to say wiiether, without the expected
co-operation from X beach, it would have been successful.
41. At Anzac the landing was effected after severe fighting at a place rather further
north than was intended, and in the confusion of landing the tows crossed one another,
and the battalions got mixed, which checked the advance and made delay for reorganisa-
tion necessarv.
The fighting was so severe throughout April 25th and the ground gained so small
that by the evening, Sir William Birdwood feared that it might be necessary to
withdraw the troops and informed Sir lan Hamilton accordingly.
In reply the latter directed him to maintain his position at all costs.


42. Both at Anzac and at the south of the Peninsula the troops by the evening of
the first day after the disembarkation were occupying positions on and near the shore.
At the south, contact had been established across the extreme end of the Peninsula. In
neither case, however, was it found possible to carry the advance beyond a short distance
from the shore.
At Anzac it had been intended to occupy Sari Bahr and Mai Tepe, and at Helles to
occupy Krithia and Achi Baba, within a very short time of the first landing, and ultimately
to have effected a junction of the Anzac-Helles forces. In both cases the difficulties
proved too great to allow of these intentions being carried out, and in fact none of these
objectives was ever attained.
The nature of the ground was a formidable obstacle, but the main difficulty lay in Q. 21272.
the fact that the Turks had been warned of the probability of an attack by the Q. 17816.
bombardment of the forts, followed by the assembling of troops, and consequently had
made preparations by trenches, wire entanglements, etc., protected by artillery, machine-
guns and rifle fire, to resist the attack, that they were in considerable force and well
led (partly by German officers), and that they fought' extremely well both in defence
and counter-attack.
An opinion had prevailed, in consequence of the events of the Balkan wars and some Sir Maurice
recent fighting in Mesopotamia, that the Turkish soldiers had deteriorated as fighting men, Hankey s
but the fighting at Helles and Anzac during the landing and in the following months u e^° ran *
proved this to be a mistaken view. • Part’ll,
p. 14.
43. Heavy and continuous fighting, described in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch, p ar a4s (ii).
followed for several days, with the result that a little more ground was gained and the
positions improved, but very little real progress was made. The force at Helles was * 1
reinforced during May by the arrival of the 29th Indian Brigade, the 42nd (Territorial)
Division, and three Battalions of the Royal Naval Division. If the Indian Brigade and
the 42nd Division had been assembled at Mudros and ready to support the attack of the
29th Division, Brigadier-General Street, senior General Staff Officer with Sir Aylmer
Hunter-Weston, was of opinion that the attack would have been successful.
Sir Aylmer Hunter-Weston was not so confident on this point. Q. 17977.
The evidence does not make it clear why these troops were not sent at once, but
if it were possible, looking to all the circumstances, to send them, we think it would
have been well to do so. On the evidence before us we see no reason why they should
not have been sent. Sir lan Hamilton expressed a wish for the services of a brigade of
Gurkhas, but we cannot find that he definitely applied for the troops mentioned Q. 7856.
above.
Throughout these attacks there was a shortage of artillery and gun ammunition.
44. We must again refer to Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch for the particulars of this
fighting, but it may be useful to quote some of his telegrams. They express an
optimistic opinion of the chances of ultimate success, but they do not disguise the
difficulties.
On April 30th, 1915, he gave as an estimate of the Turkish forces in or about the
Peninsula :
(1) On the Peninsula, 44,000.
(2) Probably on the Peninsula, 26,000.
(3) Not on the Peninsula, but available at short notice, 20,000.
On May 4th he reported that the supply of ammunition was becoming a -v\r ar Office
serious matter owing to the continuous fighting, to which Lord Kitchener replied telegram
that the supply was not calculated on the basis of a prolonged occupation of the No. 732.
Gallipoli Peninsula, and said: “It is important to push on.” On May 7th he War Office
reported that some progress, but not so much as he had hoped, had been made, and that telegram
progress was slow and opposition stubborn. On May 9th, after describing the third No, 768.
consecutive day’s attack on Achi Baba, he said :“ I might represent the battle as a victory, \y ar office
but actually the result has been failure, as the main object remains unachieved. Our troops telegram
have done all that flesh and blood can do against semi-permanent works, and they are not No. 791.
able to carry them. More and more munitions will be needed to do it. I fear this is
a very unpalatable conclusion, but Lsee no way out of it.”
He then estimated the forces engaged in the following manner: —‘‘ I estimate that
the Turks had about 40,000 opposed to our 25,000 rifles. There are 20,000 more in front
of Australian-New Zealand Army Corps, 12,000 rifles at Kaba Tepe. By bringing men
over from the Asiatic side the Turks seem able to keep up their strength. I have only
one more Brigade of the Lancashire Territorial Division to come, and that will not suffice
to make any appreciable difference in the situation as regards pushing through.”
(C 49—242) B 3


W" To this Lord Kitchener replied that the whole situation naturally gave him some
No^TQO 1 anxiet 7» Particularly as the transport service was much hampered by the want of ships.
On May 10th, Sir lan Hamilton reported that the guns of the Navy had not
War Office been able to give him so much help as he had hoped, because of the spoon-shaped
nature the ground from Achi Baba to Cape Helles, which exposed only the outer
edges to direct lire, while the inner slopes consisted of broken ground facilitating concealed
works.
He explained that the 25,000 rifles which he had mentioned the day before had
reference to the number of British rifles actually in the fighting line. The telegram
continues : “ With regard to future operations, the Admiral agrees with me in thinking
that the only sound procedure is to hammer away until the enemy gets demoralised.
Meanwhile grand attacks are impracticable and we must make short advances during the
night and dig in for the day until we get Achi Baba. I then hope to be able to make
progress without this trench method, but Achi Baba is really a fortress. If two fresh
divisions organised as a corps could be spared me I could push on from this end and
from Kaba Tepe with good prospects of success, otherwise I am afraid it will degenerate
into trench warfare with its resultant slowness.”
War Office On May 11th, Lord Kitchener cabled that he was sending out the Lowland
telegram Division and some artillery, and this message was acknowledged on May 12th.
On May 13th, Sir lan Hamilton telegraphed, expressing a hope that the 29th
War Office Division would be made up to strength by drafts.
It was the rule to send out 10 per cent, of an expeditionary force to replace
casualties in the first instance. At the time of this expedition the rule had fallen into
abeyance in the case of units going to France, the distance being short and communi-
cation rapid. Although the troops for the Dardanelles were to operate at a distance from
England, Lord Kitchener would not allow the additional 10 per cent, to be sent with
QQ. 18549- them. The matter was mentioned to him by Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Sclater, the
o^’ Adjutant-General, to whom it had been represented by Brigadier-General Woodward
y. w h o was Director of Mobilization at the War Office at the time of his appointment as
I Deputy Adjutant-General of the Expeditionary Force. Sir Henry Sclater said the reason
given to him by Lord Kitchener for his decision was that the operations in Gallipoli would
so soon be over that to form a base in Egypt would be practically locking up men who
were much more urgently required in France. In Sir Henry Sclater’s opinion, the men
could not have been sent without denuding France of reinforcements, but General
, Woodward dissented from this view.
THE DECISION TO CONTINUE THE OPERATIONS.
45. In these circumstances an important meeting of the War Council was held on
May 14th to discuss the situation.
It was clear that the conditions had materially changed. The landings had been
successfully effected, but the expectation that it would be possible to carry the
important positions of Achi Baba and Sari Bahr in the first rush had definitely failed,
the task having proved far more difficult than, was anticipated. The casualties had
been very heavy ; they amounted to about 14,000, exclusive of the French. This made
the question of drafts and reinforcements very serious. It was now apparent that the
operations would not follow the course which had been expected. Instead of the troops
on landing being able rapidly to drive the Turks out of their posit’ons and to occupy the
heights dominating the defences of the Narrows, they found themselves confronted by
lines of entrenchments and entanglements, possession of which could only be gained by
the deliberate methods of trench warfare
Probably at this time the very large expenditure of ammunition required to reduce
hostile trenches had not been thoroughly realised, but, as already pointed out, Sir lan
Hamilton had informed Lord Kitchener on May 9th, 1915, that more and more
munitions would be needed, and it was known that, as afterwards stated on May 17th
War Office 1915, the advance could probably be made with half the loss of life then reckoned upon
teiegram if there were a liberal supply of gun ammunition, especially of high explosive. The
positions held by the force were unfavourable : they consisted of hardly more than a fringe.
They were, including the beaches, commanded by shell fire, and there were no oppor-
tunities for withdrawing the troops for rest behind the line. At Helles the positions were
exposed also to shell fire from the Asiatic shore, though this was afterwards kept down to a
great extent by the fire of monitors.


The problem of transport was serious. There was a scarcity of ships, and owing to
the necessity of using Mudros as a subsidiary base for troops, munitions, and stores
this scarcity was aggravated. Mudros had practically none of the usual facilities
of a port. Stores not immediately wanted had to be kept on board the transports.
Communication with different ships and different parts of the harbour was much impeded
by want of light craft. Besides, there was always the probability of danger from
submarines. In consequence the transports were detained at Mudros, and great delay
and congestion resulted.
This condition of Mudros as a port was probably not of much importance so
long as the operations were expected to be of short duration, but it was a serious matter
which had to be faced if the operations were materially prolonged in time and enlarged
in extent.
46 The Dardanelles Expedition could not be considered by itself; though great
results were expected from it if successful, it was subsidiary, in the view of the military
authorities in England, to the main operations in France.
The demands from France for both men and munitions were very great, and there
was much difficulty in supplying them. An offensive at Festubert, disappointing in
its result, took place in May, and it was obvious that, the demands of France were likely
to increase rather than decrease. Moreover, there were requirements m Egypt,
Mesopotamia, and elsewhere, which had to be met.
47. There was another matter which had to be considered. As stated in our
interim report, the occurrence which led to action being taken with a view o
forcing the passage of the Dardanelles was an enquiry from the Russian Government on
January 2nd, 1915, as to whether the British Government could do anything to
relieve the Turkish pressure upon their troops in the Caucasus. A reply was sent that
a demonstration would be made in the direction of the Dardanelles; and when this
demonstration took shape, it was arranged that in the event of our gaming access to the
Sea of Marmora the Russians should co-operate with us, if possible, by sea and land in
the vicinity of Constantinople. ,
A Russian Army Corps was designated for the purpose of military co-operation ; but
before the scheme, so far as Constantinople was concerned, had any chance of becoming
operative, the Russian reverse in Galicia had begun, and it seemed possible that this
occurrence, apart from its influence on the Balkan States, might lead to a diversion of e
force which was to be available near Constantinople, should we succeed in forcing the
passage of the Dardanelles.
48 On May 12th the Admiralty ordered the withdrawal of the “ Queen Elizabeth
from the Dardanelles Expedition, this decision being strongly opposed by Lord
Kitchener. It is difficult to say why Lord 'Kitchener should have attached so much
importance to the retention of the “ Queen Elizabeth.” Naval gun fire in support of the
military operations had not hitherto proved to be as valuable as had been anticipated,
and the reduction in naval gun power entailed by the withdrawal of the warship in
question was stated by the Admiralty to be more than made good by the addition ot
monitors and other vessels to the Fleet.
49 The War Council had to determine whether, in the changed circumstances, the
requirements of all the different areas of war could be supplied, and whether it was wise
to continue the operations on the Peninsula. Diplomatic efforts had been made ever
since the beginmng of the Dardanelles Expedition to secure the co-operation of the
Balkan States, the most prominent and powerful being Bulgaria, and these btates were
much influenced not only by the course of current events, but by their appreciation o
the consequences likely to result from the action in the Near East which was being taken
or contemplated by the Central Powers on the one hand and the Entente Allies on the
other. It was important, therefore, not to .do anything which would show weakness
The expedition had been begun in consequence of a communication from Russia, an
the Russians considered that the effect so far had been to hold up lurkish troops an
relieve the pressure on their forces. .It was hoped that, if successful, the expedition
would open the way to Constantinople. ~ •«
Finally, it was anticipated that an abandonment of the expedition would have a
very bad effect upon British prestige in the East.
(C 49—242) B 4


All these matters were taken into consideration, as well as the purely military
question of the prospects of success of the operations in which we were engaged.
The tendency was towards sending out sufficient reinforcements for a further effort,
ffiit no final decision was reached, except that Lord Kitchener should ask Sir lan
Hamilton what force he would require to ensure success at the Dardanelles. '
tdeLm ffiCe tit o ' S resal L of T is decisi on, Lord Kitchener telegraphed to Sir lan Hamilton
N0.°852. ° n ?J a 7 ar Council would like to know what force you consider
would be necessary to carry through the operations on which you are engaged. You
W nax should base this estimate on the supposition that I have adequate forces to place at your
tdeLam v° n MlSir lan Hamilton,answered, pointing out the difficulties
No. 881. °± the position, and concluded :“ If the present condition of affairs were changed by the
entry into the struggle of Bulgaria or Greece or by the landing of the Russians, my present
lorce kept up to strength by the necessary drafts, plus the Army Corps asked for on
May 10th, would probably suffice to finish my task. If, however, the present situation
continues unchanged, and the Turks are still able to devote so much exclusive attention
to us I shall want an additional Army Corps, i.e., two Army Corps additional in all.
1 could not land these reinforcements on the Peninsula until I can advance another 1,000
yards, and so free the beaches from the shelling to which they are subjected on the western
side, and gam more space, but I could land them on the adjacent islands of Tenedos,
Imbros and Lemnos, and take them over later to the Peninsula for battle. This plan
would surmount the difficulties of water and space on the Peninsula, and would perhaps
® nabl ® n . ie to , e ® ect a surprise with the fresh divisions. I believe I could advance with
alt tne loss of life that is now reckoned upon if I had a liberal supply of gun ammunition,
especially of high explosive.”
MLm ffiCe Lor 4 kitchener, on Ma y 18th, replied, expressing his disappointment that his
No 894 preconceived views as to the conquest of positions necessary to support the troops
on land were miscalculated, and his opinion that the question of whether we could long
support two fields of operations draining on our resources, required grave consideration.
He concluded : I know that I can rely on you to bring the present unfortunate state
ot attairs in the Dardanelles to as early a conclusion as possible, so that any consideration
ot a withdrawal with all its dangers in the East may be prevented from entering the field
ot possible solutions.” &
, it} ’ Hn Hamilton s telegram of May 17th afforded the information' called for by
e Wai Council on May 14th, and would, no doubt, have been considered at once, but,
unfortunately, just at this time the political crisis which resulted in the formation of the
Coalition Government took place, and no authoritative conclusion was arrived at until
June 7th.
Between these two dates the War Council had been increased in numbers by the
addition of some members of the Unionist Party, and its name had been changed to that
ot the Dardanelles Committee. Its members were Mr. Asquith, Lord Lansdowne Lord
“ /Urz JJ l > Lord Grey, Lord Crewe, Lord Kitchener, Lord Selborne, Mr. Lloyd George
Mr. Bonar Law, Mr. McKenna, Mr. Balfour and Mr. Winston Churchill. Sir Edward
Carson became a member in August, after the Suvla operations.
Q. 24707, 53. In Mr. Churchill’s opinion this political crisis produced an unfortunate delay by
preventing an “ unbroken and uninterrupted stream of reinforcements.” According
to his evidence Lord Kitchener, before May 14th, had informed him that it was
intended to send two Divisions. Therefore Mr. Churchill had provided the transport for
ir- 6n !’ an( * orme 4 Sir lan Hamilton of the fact, but after May 14th Lord
War Office Kitchener changed his mind and sent one Division only. At the same time Sir lan
NoSl 1 llam '| ton,s telegram of May 17th was held over till’ after the formation of the
Q.2L880. n . ew government, and no action was taken on it. Mr. Asquith agrees that the political
Q 2517. situation was the main, cause of the delay in sending reinforcements, but thinks that
there was a shortage of available troops. Lieutenant-General Sir John Cowans also says
that there was a difficulty in getting and equipping the men. We think that the political
crisis was the main cause of delay. The Government had to decide whether operations
other and larger than were originally contemplated should be undertaken. This was a
question of policy, and some of the new members of the Government had to be satisfied
that the expedition was a justifiable enterprise.


,ry 54. On May 28th, Lord Kitchener prepared a memorandum for the use of the members
of the Dardanelles Committee, describing the objects and progress of the operations up
rt, to that date, and setting out what he considered to be the different courses then open,
an This appreciation shows that the difficulties which had been experienced by Sir lan
Hamilton had been communicated to Lord Kitchener, and that they were brought by him
to the distinct notice of the members of the Committee.
In this document he pointed out that “ the difficulties of the enterprise had proved
more formidable than was at first anticipated, and that a much greater effort than was
originally budgeted for was now required.” After describing the course of events, he
repeated : “ The main advantage of withdrawing from the Dardanelles is to put an end to
j an operation the difficulties of which have been under-estimated, which has already
■ made a considerable inroad on our resources, and which will make a very considerable
drain on both our naval and military resources before it is brought to a successful
conclusion.” He then discussed the advantages of withdrawal, and summarised his
conclusions as follows: —•
“ Three solutions offer themselves—
1. Withdrawal;
2. To seek, if possible, an immediate decision;
3. To continue to push on and make such progress as is possible.
3, “ The disadvantages of withdrawal have been shown above to be so great that
n ‘this course could, in my opinion, only be justified in order to avoid a great disaster,
s “ On the other hand, it has been shown that the military forces and, what is even
b. more important, the necessary supplies of ammunition asked for by the General Officer
, Commanding on the spot cannot be spared to bring the affair to a rapid conclusion,
though I am somewhat in doubt, from the experience of trench warfare in Flanders,
s , whether such increased forces would enable him to carry the position as he anticipates,
s Sir John French’s forces have been increased very greatly, but no such advance as he
I had anticipated has occurred.
“ The third course, however, has much to commend it. It avoids any immediate
i blow to our prestige ; it keeps the door open to Balkan intervention ; it ensures our hold
i on a strategical position of great importance, which rivets the attention of the Turks and
[ in all probability limits active operations on their part against Egypt, or in Mesopotamia,
or the Caucasus.
“ The only thing to be said against it is that it involves certain dangers, viz., the
risk arising from German submarines and of gas, assisted by the prevailing north winds.
There are furthermore, in my opinion, possibilities of the Turks not being able to
maintain resistance on the present scale. This would enable our troops to advance, as
well as to take advantage of any movement that Bulgaria or Greece may take in our
favour.”
55. On June 2nd, Sir lan Hamilton had telegraphed to the effect that, in his opinion,
the change in the Russian military position owing to reverses in Galicia had set free 100,000
Turks ; that there were 80,000 in the Peninsula and that he might have, in all, a quarter
of a million men brought against him. He concluded : “ Taking all these facts into
consideration, it would seem that for an early success some equivalent to the suspended
Russian co-operation is vitally necessary. It is, broadly, my view that we must obtain
the support of a fresh ally in this theatre, or else that there should be got ready British
reinforcements to the full extent mentioned in my No. M.F. 235 (set out in para. 50),
though, as stated above, the disappearance of Russian co-operation was not contemplated
in my estimate.”
In a further message, five days later, Sir lan Hamilton stated that direct progress
would be slow, and that he had been considering another line of operations starting from
Enos, which he had rejected because of the objections of Sir John de Robeck.
56. Lord Kitchener’s memorandum and the whole situation were considered by the
Dardanelles Committee on June 7th, 1915, and the following conclusions were reached :
1. To reinforce Sir lan Hamilton with the three remaining Divisions of the New
Army, with a view to an assault in the second week of July.
2. To send out certain Naval units, which would be much less vulnerable to sub-
marine attack than those under Admiral de Robeck’s command.
There are no Minutes of this meeting, but it is stated by Mr. Churchill that the
intention of the Committee was to authorise a more energetic prosecution of the operations
than that mentioned in Lord Kitchener’s third proposition of May 28th, and


that Lord Kitchener himself said: “Do not let Sir lan Hamilton throw away his strength
in the interval, but let us send out ample reinforcements to carry the thing through.’*
Lord Selborne agrees that the decision of the Committee contemplated a more vigorous
continuation of the operations than the course proposed by Lord Kitchener.
57. Just after midnight of June 7th Sir lan Hamilton sent a telegram reviewing
the situation and emphasising the need for reinforcements.
“ Without additional troops sufficient to provide for reliefs, as well as reinforcements,
the men are undoubtedly getting worn out, and this will end in reducing our forces at
Cape Helles to position of defenders in state of close siege, as is practically the case at
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps already.
“ In the action of June 4th the troops succeeded in breaking through the centre of the
enemy’s line, but were so weakened by the effort that they could not take advantage of
success, nor even retain all the ground gained. The whole position might have been
captured and a great step made in advance, had there been plenty of fresh reserves avail-
able to push through and confirm success.”
Lord Kitchener had in fact a few hours earlier cabled to Sir lan Hamilton assuring
him that the Government intended to make due provision for reinforcements.
The full text of the telegram is as follows :
“ Your difficulties are fully recognised by the Cabinet, who are determined to support
you. We are sending you three Divisions of the New Army. The first of these will
leave about the end of this week, and the other two will be sent as transport is available.
The last of the three Divisions ought to reach you not later than the first fortnight in
July. While steadily pressing the enemy, there seems no reason for running any prema-
ture risks in the meantime.”
As a matter of fact the embarkation of the 13th Division took place from June 16th
to June 23rd ; of the 11th Division from July Ist to July 7th ; and of the 10th Division
from July 7th to July 14th.
58. Another cause contributed at this time to weaken the British troops and make
the requests for reinforcements urgent. The weather had become very hot* and with
the heat there came swarms of flies. On the whole the sanitation of the British camps
and trenches was satisfactorily carried out so far as was possible with the appliances
which could be procured, but the Turkish trenches were very near, and the state of them
was very bad ; there were many unburied bodies, both of men and animals, at no* great
distance, and it was found impossible to keep down the plague of flies. These conveyed,
a great amount of infection, and this was also disseminated by the dust constantly carried
about by the wind. The most common illness which resulted was a kind of dysentery,
though paratyphoid and other complaints prevailed. Apart from reduction in numbers
caused by death, the force was seriously weakened by the number of men always ill and the
lowering of vitality produced in those who were still on duty.
59. On June 9th the Cabinet confirmed the decision of the Dardanelles Committee.
This conclusion was an acknowledgment that the attempt to seize the Peninsula by a
rapid advance had failed ; and that a larger force, more continued operations, and greater
supplies of ammunition would be necessary to obtain success.
60. Another meeting of the Dardanelles Committee was held on June 12th, 1915,
at which the Prime Minister submitted for consideration a memorandum by Mr. Ashmead
Bartlett, who had been on the Peninsula as a War Correspondent. In this memorandum
Mr. Ashmead Bartlett expressed an unfavourable view of the positions then occupied
at Anzac and Helles and of the prospects of success in an advance from those positions,
and advised an attack at or near the isthmus of Bulair. The Committee decided to ask
Sir lan Hamilton for information on the matter, and a telegram was sent accordingly
on June 12th. Sir lan Hamilton answered on June 13th, giving his reasons
against an attack in the neighbourhood of Bulair. He had sent substantially the same
information the day before in answer to an inquiry from the War Office. These reasons
seem to have satisfied the Committee, and an attack at Bulair was not further considered
at that time.


gtlj 61. It should be mentioned here that on June 21st Lord Kitchener had
h.” asked if Sir lan Hamilton required a fourth Division, and he had answered that he did
ous not feel justified in refusing it, and that on June 25th Lord Kitchener had War Office
said that the Cabinet would like to know whether he considered it necessary or desirable
that a fifth Division should be sent. On June 29th Sir lan Hamilton answered 1264,1286,
that, as the fourth and fifth Divisions could not arrive with the first three, he adhered to 1315 ]
in S his original plan of trying to turn the enemy’s right at Anzac with the first three Divisions
and to gain a position from Kaba Tepe to Maidos. He would use the fourth and fifth,
lts ’ in case of non-success at first, to reinforce this wing; and in case of success, possibly to
a push through from Helles, but more probably to effect a landing on the southern shore
at of the Dardanelles. He concluded: “To summarise, I think I have reasonable pros-
pects of success with three Divisions, with four the risk of miscalculation would be
minimised, and "with five, even if the fifth Division had little or no gun ammunition, I
think it would be a much simpler matter to clear the Asiatic shore subsequently of big
guns, i.e., Kilid Bahr would be captured at an earlier date, and success would be generally
'he assured.” In accordance with the views expressed by Sir lan Hamilton, it was decided
to send him a fifth as well as a fourth Division.
iL 62. During July, Sir lan Hamilton further considered the scheme outlined in his
telegram to Lord Kitchener of June 29th and a definite plan of action was elaborated
n £ under his orders.
This plan is described in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch of December 11th, 1915.
In June he had asked for and been promised a reinforcement consisting of three
art Divisions of the New Army, to which the infantry of two Territorial Divisions had been
dll subsequently added. He expected all these troops to arrive between July 10th and
le. August 10th, and this anticipation was realised. After considering several other
in courses, he decided to employ a part of them to strengthen the Australian and New
ia_ Zealand Army Corps at Anzac, and the remainder to efiect a surprise landing in Suvla
Bay. In his despatch Sir lan Hamilton’s objectives are defined as follows :
“ (1) To break out with a rush from Anzac and cut off the bulk of the Turkish Army
from land communication with Constantinople.
“ (2) To gain such a command for my artillery as to cut off the bulk of the Turkish
Army from sea traffic whether with Constantinople or with Asia.
“ (3) Incidentally, to secure Suvla Bay as a winter base for Anzac and all the troops
)S operating in the northern theatre.”
38 Sir lan Hamilton determined that the operations should begin on August 6th, as the
tn moon would then rise at an hour favourable for night landings, and the last of his reinforce-
R merits were due to arrive a day or two before that date. Ihe plan is described in greater
detail in the instructions issued by the Chief of the General Staff, Mediterranean Expedi- Instructions
id tionary Force, to the General Officer Commanding VUlth Corps at Helles, and the A
7, General Officer Commanding IXth Corps at Imbyos, dated July 29th, and to the General ArmyCorpB .
ra Officer Commanding Australian and New Zealand Army Corps at Anzac, dated July 30th July,
Le 30th. These instructions will be found among the Appendices to this Report. 1915.
At Helles the troops of the VUlth Corps were to attack the Turks oh August 4th and Instructions
following days, not so much with a view to gaining ground in the direction of Krithia
0 or Achi Baba as for the purpose of distracting the enemy s attention from the contem- c or p S
a plated operations at Anzac and Suvla, and of preventing him from reinforcing the positions 29th July,
> r which it was intended to seize and occupy. 1915.
The operations at Anzac were held by Sir lan Hamilton to be of primary importance,
those at Helles and Suvla being described as complementary.


THE OPERATIONS IN MAY, JUNE AND JULY.
63. In the meantime, fighting had continued on both the Anzac and Helles fronts.
At Anzac severe fighting took place by reason of very heavy attacks made by the
Turks. These attacks were defeated and some slight ground was gained, but
it did not amount to more than straightening out short lengths of trench here and
there, and, broadly speaking, the force remained in the position which it had occupied
on the day of landing.
At Helles, up to June 4th, only minor operations were undertaken, and small
advances were made in parts of the lines, but on that day a great attack was made along
the whole front from the Straits to the sea.
The attack was partially successful, and the Manchester Brigade and some companies
of the sth Lancashire Fusiliers and part of the 42nd Division, which arrived early in May,
got nearly to Krithia, reaching a position favourable to an attack on Achi Baba.
Unfortunately, the Turks, by a counter-attack, were able to carry a redoubt called
the Haricot, which had been taken from them at the first attack, and this redoubt enfiladed
the positions won by the Naval Division on the right of the Manchester Brigade. It was
obliged to fall back, uncovering the Manchester Brigade, which also had to retire. Sir
lan Hamilton speaks of the day as having promised great things, but ended disappointingly,
and describes the result in the following terms : “ To sum up, a good advance of at least
500 yards, including two lines of Turkish trenches, has been made along a front of nearly
three miles in the centre of our southern section, but we are back to our original right and
left. Making fresh effort now to advance the left to bring it into line with the centre,
though the Turkish position here is extraordinarily strong naturally, with a deep ravine on
one side and the sea on the other. ”
On June 21st the French stormed the Haricot redoubt and repulsed the
Turkish counter-attacks, and on June 28th another great attack was made by the
British force, which had considerable success.
As described by Major-General de Lisle, Commanding the 29th Division, an advance
was made of about a mile, and five lines of trenches were taken. Sir lan Hamilton speaks
of this advance as running up level to Krithia. He says that, if he had had reinforce-
ments and ammunition on the spot, the success could have been made decisive : —“We had
the Turks beaten then.” But, naturally, the result of this continuous fighting had much
exhausted and depleted the British troops, the stocks of ammunition were low, the drafts
were coming forward very slowly, so that all units were much under strength, and no
large reinforcements would arrive for some time. He was, therefore, unable to follow
up the success, and during July only small operations took place. In the meantime
the continuance of Russian reverses in Galicia encouraged the Turks, lessened their
apprehension of a Russian landing near Constantinople, and enabled them to send up
reinforcements.
On June 29th and 30th a heavy attack was made on the Anzac position and
was repulsed.
Details of these operations will be found in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch of August
26th, 1915, published in the London Gazette Supplement of September 20th, 1915.
64. On June 22nd Lord Kitchener sent the following description of the Divisions of
the New Army to Sir lan Hamilton : “ The three Divisions being sent to you are well trained
with fine personnel. From the training point of view, there is not much to choose between
them, but they might be placed in the following order-—llth, 13th, 10th. The infantry
is excellent, and their shooting good. The artillery have fired well. The R.E., R.A.M.C
and A.S.C. are above the average. You will understand that the new officers’ knowledge
is not yet instinctive, and allowance should be made for this by the staff ; if so, in a short
time there will be no finer troops in Europe. Upon the personality of the commander,
of course, will depend the choice of Divisions for any particular operation.”
It will be seen that for new troops a high character was given to them, and possibly
this was the main reason why the landing at Suvla was entrusted to a portion of them
without the help of more experienced troops. A night attack in an unknown country
was a difficult task for inexperienced soldiers, and they would have been much strengthened
by an admixture of more seasoned units. The fourth and fifth Divisions (the 53rd Welsh
and 54th East Anglian) consisted of Territorial troops.


65. At this point it will be convenient to refer to the selection of a commander for
the IXth Corps, which consisted of the 10th, 11th and 13th Divisions, and of commanders
for those Divisions and the two Territorial Divisions.
On June 15th Sir lan Hamilton had submitted to Lord Kitchener his opinion
of the qualities necessary fol a Corps Commander on the Gallipoli Peninsula in these
words : “ In that position only men of good, stiff constitution and nerve will be able to do
any good.” To secure such qualities it would have been advantageous to select some
’ officer who had proved the possession of them in the fighting of the previous ten months.
? Most of these officers, however, were employed on the Western Front, and could not
nd easily replaced. The difficulty Avas increased by the fact that Sir Bryan Mahon, who
• i commanded the 10th Division,-was a Lieutenant-General.
Sir lan Hamilton asked for one of two Lieutenant-Generals then in France, Sir Julian
„ Byng or Sir Henry Bawlinson, but neither could be spared. The former was sent to take
La a over the command of the IXth Corps after the failure at Suvla. There may have been
>I1; ° reasons for allowing him to leave France then which did not exist in June, but had it
been possible it might, perhaps, have been better to appoint him in the first instance.
168 In the result the choice practically lay between Sir Frederick Stopford and another
Lieutenant-General whom Sir lan Hamilton considered for physical reasons to be
i unsuited for trench warfare, and Sir Frederick Stopford was appointed. It is only to this
6 _, extent that Sir lan Hamilton can be said to have asked for Sir Frederick Stopford.
; ea Sir Frederick Stopford was an officer with a good record, but he had not been
3- actively employed for some time.
i The qualifications mentioned by Sir lan Hamilton would apply equally to the
y* Divisional Commanders. As regards these we find little or nothing in the evidence that
f reflects on the capacity for command in the field of Sir Bryan Mahon, who had trained
and commanded the 10th Division in Ireland. Major-General Hammersley had similarly
trained and commanded the 11th Division, upon which the heaviest of the fighting at
Suvla fell, and in ordinary course he took ©ut his Division to the Gallipoli Peninsula. We
think this was unfortunate, as he had suffered from a breakdown some two years before ;
. and although he had apparently recovered, his previous illness may account for the want
of promptitude and decision which, we regret to say, he appears to have shown when
faced by what were, no doubt, exceptional difficulties. The 13th Division was com-
manded by Major-General F. C. Shaw, who proved himself to be well qualified for the
? 6 appointment. Sir lan Hamilton detached this Division from the IXth Corps and placed
it at Sir William Birdwood’s disposal. Major-General the Hon. J. E. Lindley commanded
e ~ the 53rd Territorial Division. The Division was much split up and disintegrated as soon
as it landed at Suvla, and on August 17th he resigned the command, his reason being
7 1 that he understood Sir lan Hamilton to be dissatisfied with him and thought that his
tS Division might have a better chance under another commander. Major-General F. S.
Inglefield, commanding the 54th Territorial Division, was 60 years old when he took
out the Division to the Gallipoli Peninsula, and at this age was, perhaps, hardly equal
to the strain of field service under specially arduous conditions.


THE OPERATIONS IN AUGUST AT HELLES AND ANZAC.
66. The operations in August were, as we have already said, divided into three attacks,
one at Helles, one at Anzac, and one at Suvla. These attacks were made by three
distinct forces not in direct communication with one another. The control of operations
so divided was difficult, and Sir lan Hamilton decided that the best position from which
he could exercise such control was Imbros, where he had his headquarters. He was
then in cable communication with the three Corps Headquarters, and could reach any
one of them in less than an hour. This choice of Imbros has been criticised, but we
think that the reasons given for it are satisfactory.
The attack at Helles was made on the same day as the other attacks —August 6th,
1915. Its scope and form were, as has been said, to be determined solely with reference
to its effects on the main operations, and it was directed against certain Turkish trenches
mentioned in the Instructions to General Officer Commanding, YHlth Corps. Un-
fortunately, when it was made these trenches were found to be occupied by a very
strong force of Turks collected there for the purpose of an attack on the British position.
The British attack on that day failed, but fighting continued for about a week, the
severest taking place round what was called the Vineyard, a plot of ground 200 yards
long by 100 yards wide. No substantial success was obtained by this fighting so far as
an advance was concerned, but the result was to keep the Turkish troops in that part
. engaged and to draw some reinforcements from other parts of the Peninsula which could
otherwise have been employed at Anzac or Sftvla. In view of the fact that the Turks
were in sufficient force to resist, the attacks at Anzac and Suvla, we think the value to
be attached to the subsidiary operations at Helles must remain problematical.
Instructions 67. The operations at Anzac and Suvla were more nearly connected with one another
to G.0.C., than with those at Helles, and the operation orders relating to them will be found in the
jTz Ar Appendix. It will be seen that certain times are specified at which important points
Corps, were to be occupied. We are of opinion that, considering the nature of the country, it
30 July, was impossible to rely upon this time-table being carried out, but we do not think that the
19!5. accurate carrying out of the time-table was vital to the general success of the operations.
Q. 21308. The principal assistance to be given to the Anzac Force by the troops landing at Suvla
£ot GTH? 118 was t^le se i zure °f Yilghin Burnu and Ismail Oglu Tepe, on account of the presence there
IXth Corps artille ry likely to interfere with the Anzac Force, and any other help by moving troops
29 July, ’ U P the slopes of Sari Bahr was only to be given, if possible, after the fulfilment of the
1915. primary mission of the General Officer Commanding IXth Corps, i.e., securing Suvla Bay
as a base. In fact, Ismail Oglu Tepe was never occupied, but we have not any evidence
to show that the presence of artillery on that hill had any material effect on the Anzac
attack.
68. For the purpose of the attack from Anzac General Bird wood’s force had been
reinforced by the 13th Division, the 29th Brigade of the 10th Division, and the 29th
(Indian) Brigade. These had been taken over to the Peninsula at night and concealed
in dug-outs near the shore so that they might escape the notice of the Turks. This
operation seems to have been carried out with credit to those engaged in it, and to the
Dominion troops who prepared the dug-outs.
Sir William Bird wood had under his command 37,000 rifles and 72 guns, and he could
count on naval support from two cruisers, four monitors, and two destroyers. The force was
Q. 11817, 8, divided into two main portions—one (consisting of the Australian Division together with
Sir lan the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades and two Battalions of the 40th Brigade), which was
Hamilton’s to hold the existing position and make frontal attacks from it; the other (consisting of
?I® Decem New Zealand and Australian Division, less the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades,
W 1915. the 13th Division less five Battalions, the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade, and the Indian
(InAppen- Mountain Artillery Brigade), which was to attack the Chunuk Bahr ridge. The 29th
dix.) Brigade of the 10th Division less one Battalion and the 38th Brigade were in reserve.


69. About 5 p.m. on August 6th, the operations began by an attack on the position
known as Lone Pine, its main object being to divert the enemy’s attention and reserves
from the principal attack on the Sari Bahr heights. The position is described by Sir lan
Hamilton as having been strongly entrenched and obstinately held. According to his
despatch it was carried with great gallantry by the Australian troops, and held against
counter-attacks which were continued until August 12th. The assault on Lone Pine
was presumably effective in keeping a considerable Turkish .force from opposing the
main attack on the Sari Bahr heights.
tcks It may be here mentioned that two minor attacks were also made with the same
1 ’ object as the attack on Lone Pine, namely, to distract the enemy’s attention from the
j on G main attack on the Sari Bahr heights. The first of these minor attacks took place at
tiich midnight on the 6th, and was directed on a Turkish trench opposite the extreme right
of the Anzac front; the second took place at 4.30 a.m. on the 7th, and was directed on
an ! a point called Baby 700, just north of Hill 180, opposite the centre of the Anzac front,
g Both these attacks were repulsed with heavy loss.
Beginning at 9.30 p.m. on the 6th, the flanking or encircling movement on the
Chunuk Bahr ridge and Sari Bahr was made in two covering and two attacking columns.
, nC g The constitution of these columns and the tasks assigned to them are thus described
!p es in the despatch :
n- “ It was our object to effect a lodgment along the crest of the high main ridge with
ery two columns of troops, but, seeing the nature of the ground and the dispositions of the
ion. enemy, the effort had to be made by stages. We were bound, in fact, to undertake a
the double subsidiary operation before we could hope to launch these attacks with any real
rds prospect of success.
1 as ££ (i) The right covering force was to seize Table Top, as well as all other enemy
>art positions commanding the foothills between the Chailak Here and the Sazli Beit Dere
uld ravines. If this enterprise succeeded it would open up the ravines for the assaulting
rks columns, whilst at the same time interposing between the right flank of the left covering
to force and the enemy holding the Sari Bahr main ridge.
“ (2) The left covering force was to march northwards along the beach to seize a hill
called Damakjelik Bahr, some 1,400 yards north of Table Top. If successful it would be
able to hold out a hand to the IXth Corps as it landed south of Nebrunesi Point, whilst
at the same time protecting the left flank of the left assaulting column against enemy
+ troops from the Anafarta valley during its climb up the Aghyl Dere ravine.
“ (3) The right assaulting column was to move up the Chailak Dere and Sazli Beit
h Dere.ravines to the storm of the ridge of Chunuk Bahr.
“ (4) The left assaulting column was to work up the Aghyl Dere and prolong the
r j a line of the right assaulting column by storming Hill 305 (Koja Chemen Tepe), the summit
of the whole range of hills.
“ To recapitulate, the two assaulting columns, which were to work up three ravines
k e to the storm of the high ridge, were to be preceded by two covering columns. One of
these was to capture the enemy’s positions commanding the foothills, first to open the
mouths of the ravines, secondly to cover the right flank of another covering force whilst
it marched along the beach. The other covering column was to strike far out to the
north until, from a hill called Damajelik Bahr, it could at the same time facilitate the
landing of the IXth Corps at Nibrunesi Point, and guard the left flank of the column
assaulting Sari Bahr from any forces of the enemy which might be assembled in the
en Anafarta valley.
th “ The whole of this big attack was placed under the command of Major-General
?d Sir Alexander J. Godley, General Officer Commanding New Zealand and Australian
us Division. The two covering and the two assaulting columns were organized as follows :
be “ Bight Covering Column, under Brigadier-General A. H. Bussell. —New Zealand
Mounted Bifles Brigade, the Otago Mounted Bifles Begiment, the Maori Contingent and
New Zealand Field Troop.
“ Bight Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston. —New Zealand
ig Infantry Brigade, Indian Mountain Battery (less one section), one Company New Zealand
u Engineers.
' “ Left Covering Column, under Brigadier-General J. H. Travers. —Headquarters
- ) £ 40th Brigade, half the 72nd Field Company, 4th Battalion South Wales Borderers, and
s sth Battalion Wiltshire Begiment. *
’ “Left Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-General (now Major-General) H. V. Cox.
—29th Indian Infantry Brigade, 4th Australian Infantry Brigade, Indian Mountain
Battery (less one section), one Company New Zealand Engineers.


>i -l ional Beserve. 6th Battalion South Lancashire Regiment and Bth Battalion
Welsh Regiment (Pioneers) at Chailak Dere, and the 39th Infantry Brigade and half
72nd Field Company at Aghyl Dere.”
70. The right covering column took Old No. 3 Post and Table Top, both of them
stated to be positions of great strength, and so opened up the Sazli Beit Dere and also
cleared the Chailak Dere ; in doing so it had to pass a barbed wire obstacle of a formidable
nature. It also occupied Bauchop’s Hill, described as a “ maze of ridge and ravine
everywhere entrenched.”
The left covering column advanced up the Aghyl Dere, rushing the Turkish trenches
on the way, and occupied Damakjelik Bahr, thus protecting the left rear of the whole
Anzac attack.
The right assaulting column advancing over difficult country reached Rhododendron
spur, a point 500 yards west of Chunuk Bahr.
The left assaulting column advanced up the Aghyl Dere, which divides into a northern
and southern branch, and one half of the column followed the northern half and got
across into the northern end of the Azina Dere ravine. The other half followed the
southern branch and reached the lower slopes of Hill Q, a point on the Sari Bahr ridge
a little lower than the highest point—Koja Chemen Tepe—and separated from it by a
deep ravine. J
This was the position on the afternoon of August 7th, and that evening the
~? rce i WaS re " or £ an i ze d for a fresh advance to take place on the early morning of the Bth
Ihe despatch states :
“ The columns were composed as follows :
Right Column, Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston.—26th Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), Auckland Mounted Rifles, New Zealand Infantry Brigade, two Battalions
13th Division, and the Maori Contingent.
“ Centre and Left Columns.—Major-General H. V. Cox.—2lst Indian Mountain
Battery (less one section), 4th Australian Brigade, 39th Infantry Brigade (less one
Battalion), with 6th Battalion South Lancashire Regiment attached, and the 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade.
column was to climb up the Chunuk Bahr ridge; the left column was to
make for the prolongation of the ridge north-east to Koja Chemen Tepe, the topmost
peak of the range.” r
71. On August Bth the only important success was attained by the right column, which
succeeded in occupying Chunuk Bahr, an important position, though it was not one from
which the Straits could be seen. The centre and left columns met with such heavy
opposition that they were unable to make any material advance, and the left suffered
so heavily that it had to be withdrawn to its original position.
On August 9th, 1915, the attack was renewed, with the troops again re-arranged in
whose constitution‘and objectives were thus described
t( The columns for the renewed attack were composed as follows :
No. 1 Column, Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston. —26th Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), the Auckland and Wellington Mounted Rifles Regiments, the New
Zealand Infantry Brigade, and two Battalions of the 13th Division.
‘ N°. 2 Column, Major-General H. V. Cox.—2lst Indian Mountain Battery (less one
J -d™ us^ a^an Brigade, 39th Brigade (less the 7th Gloucesters, relieved), with
6 South Lancashire Regiment attached, and the Indian Infantry Brigade.
T) • -T 0, n? Column, Brigadier-General A. H. Baldwin, Commanding 38th Infantry
Brigade. Iwo Battalions each from the 38th and 29th Brigades and one from the 40th
Brigade.
No. 1 Column was to hold and consolidate the ground gained on the 6th, and, in
co-operation with .the other columns, to gain the whole of Chunuk Bahr, and extend to
the south-east. No. 2 Column was to attack Hill ‘Q ’ on the Chunuk Bahr ridge, and
No. 3 Column was to move from the Chailak Dere, also on Hill ‘ Q.’ This last column
was to make the main attack, and the others were to co-operate with it.”
n 72 i P art 0 * 1 Column, under the command of Major, now Lieutenant-
Colonel Allanson, consisting of a detachment of the 6th Gurkhas and of the 6th South
Lancashire Regiment (450 strong), succeeded in getting to a point on the ridge
from which the Straits and the country on the far side could be seen. The exact
pomt which they reached is not quite clearly ascertained, but it probably was at or near
the tcp of the Chunuk Bahr ridge, near the highest point, which is called Koja Chemen
lepe. rrom this point the Narrows could be seen.


1 * I
L , 1() ] 1 J They were afterwards driven back by artillery fire to the trenches in which they
la * had been the night before, and later in the day were counter-attacked by the Turks in
force and driven down the hill.
. The suggestion has been made that this artillery fire came from the British ships,
and Lieutenant-Colonel Allanson inclined to this view. But Colonel Allanson’s account q. 11758.
a i is that the salvo struck his men when they were pursuing the Turks a short distance down Q. 21301.
i . 6 the reverse slope ; and we accept Sir William Birdwood’s opinion that, if the Gurkhas Q- 15702.
' me were on the reverse slope near the crest, it would have been impossible for naval guns to
, hit them. We do not think it possible to say whether the shells were Turkish or came
' 1 ? s from the high-angle fire of our howitzers putting a barrage on the reverse slopes. As
Sir Alexander Godley remarks, it is often not possible in a modem battle to be quite
certain as to particular facts,
ron r > •
73. No. 3 column, under Brigadier-General Baldwin, which was attacking the same
ern ridge from another direction, was unfortunately deflected to the left, in the direction
of a place called The Farm, and never reached the ridge. In Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch
J ae it is said that Brigadier-General Baldwin, through no fault of his own, owing to the Sir lan
£ 6 darkness and the awful country, lost his way. Sir Alexander Godley thinks it possible 3
T a that General Baldwin did not exactly lose his way, but was driven rather to the left on n Dec. 1915
, to the lower slopes leading to The Farm by the heavy rifle and machine-gun fire (in
!r e which was sweeping the higher ground up which he should have gone. General Baldwin, Appendix.)
tJl * with most of his staff, was killed very soon afterwards, and therefore it is impossible to Q. 11801.
ascertain what actually occurred. . QQ- 15559-
15657.
lT y 74. No progress of any importance had been made from Suvla, and there was
)ns nothing in the operations in that area to divert the Turkish reinforcements from Sari
Bahr. Thus the counter-attacks in that direction, which finally drove the British troops
im from the ridge, could be made in full strength.
ne General Baldwin, on arriving at The Farm, and finding that he could not reach
an the ridge according to the original plan, deployed his attack where he was, and
some of his men charged up their side of the slope. The Turks, who were in over-
whelming numbers, drove them back to The Farm, and then attacked the New Zealand
I troops which were holding Chunuk Bahr; but the New Zealanders, though much
exhausted, continued to hold the position until relieved during the night.
On August 10th, 1915, the Turks, in great strength, attacked Chunuk Bahr and Sir
carried it. They also turned the flank of General Baldwin’s column, and drove it from Hamilton s
' m its position. It was in this fighting that Genera] Baldwin and all his staff were killed. iiiJec 1915
Reserves were sent up and the Turks driven back, but they kept their hold on Chunuk (in
Bahr. Appendix.)
Sir lan Hamilton says that he thought at one time of throwing his reserves into q 21372
111 the Anzac battle, but was prevented from doing so because he feared that the water Q. 21325!
supply at Anzac would not be sufficient for a larger number of troops. Sir William QQ. 13108-
Birdwood told us that he did not think he could have provided water for more troops ; but 13109 >
T it seems doubtful, in any case, if the reserves could have been put into the fighting line 21324>
w in time to save the situation.
Ie .
p 75. The country over which these operations were carried out was extremely difficult,
e. General Cox describes it in this way : “It was an extraordinarily difficult bit of
y country and a confused country. There does not seem to be any reason why the hills q 15559
h should go where they do. It has been done by tremendous rushes of water. It is mad-
looking country and very difficult.” The ground was very steep and ■without paths or qq 13975.
n tracks, broken up into gullies and tangled hollows, and covered with thick scrub. The 13078.
o weather, too, was very hot, and the climate very trying, even to the Australian and New
d Zealand troops, who had been acclimatised for several months; and much more so
q to the British troops, who had not been long out of England. A very hard task was Q. 11784.
therefore set to the troops. Sir William Birdwood, who presumably knew the country
so far as it could be knofrn, thought that the attack ought to succeed, and that
- the difficulties of the country would help him to surprise the Turks; and both he and Q- 21305.
b Lieutenant-General Godley ascribe the failure to the Turks being in too strong force. 1307,
e Sir William Birdwood says “They were too strong for us. They were just too strong, q 15570
t but only just, because we got up there in two places, but we could not maintain
r ourselves.” Sir Alexander Godley says “ The enemy was too strong for us,”
(C 49—242)


THE OPERATIONS AT SUVLA.
70. We think it is necessary to review in some detail the operations at Suvla, as these
have given rise to controversy between the principal officers concerned, and led to the
removal from their commands of the Commander of the IXth Corps, one of the Divisional
Commanders, and one of the Brigade Commanders.
The outline of Sir lan Hamilton’s plans for a landing at Suvla and subsequent operations
is contained in a letter dated July 22nd, 1915, from the Chief of the General Staff of the
Mediterranean Force to the General Officer Commanding the IXth Corps, which is
annexed to this Report. In this letter - the strength of the enemy north of Kilid Bahr
was estimated at 30,000, 12,000 occupying trenches opposite the Anzac position and most
of the remainder being in reserve at Boghali, Kojadere, and Eski-Keui. There were
believed to be three battalions in the Anafarta villages, one battalion at Ismail Oglu
Tepe, one battalion on Chocolate Hill, and outposts at Lala Baba and Ghazi Baba, ihe
ridge of Karakol Dagh and Kiretch Tepe Sirt was understood to be held by gendarmerie.
It was further stated that at or near Chocolate Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe there were
one 9.2 inch gun, one 4.7 inch gun, and three field guns, protected by wire entanglements
and infantry trenches. Three field guns were reported later as having been seen moving
into Anafarta Sagir.
77. On July 29th further instructions, which appear among the appendices to Sir
lan Hamilton’s despatch, were issued to the General Officer Commanding the IXth
Corps. Therein it was laid down that the primary objective would be to secure Suvla
Bay as a base for all forces operating in the northern zone, and that, owing to the
difficult nature of the terrain at Suvla, the attainment of this objective might possibly
require the use of all the troops at Six Frederick Stopford s disposal. If, however,
troops could be spared, his next step should be to assist the General Officer Com-
manding at Anzac in the latter’s attack on Koja Chemen Tepe by an advance on
Buyuk Anafarta. Subject only to his final approval, Sir lan Hamilton gave Sir
Frederick Stopford a free hand in regard to the plan of operations at Suvla, and the
latter was requested to submit a plan for approval as soon as possible. The plan was
submitted in a letter dated July 31st, 1915, and met with Sir lan Hamilton s full approval.
In this letter Sir Frederick Stopford recorded his conviction that to secure the reasonable
immunity of Suvla Bay from shellfire, the occupation of the high ground from Ejelmir
Bay to Anafarta Sagir and thence to Koja Chemen Tepe was essential. He also laid stress
on the improbability of his being able to spare troops to assist the Anzac force in the
attack on Koja Chemen Tepe. On receipt of Sir lan Hamilton’s approval, Sir Frederick
Stopford issued an Operation Order, dated August 3rd, 1915, in which the following task
was assigned to General Hammersley : —-
(а) To safeguard the landing places.
(б) To occupy the enemy posts of Lala Baba and Ghazi Baba, and to establish a
footing along the ridge from Ghazi Baba through Karakol Dagh and Kiretch Tepe
Sirt to Hill 156, immediately overlooking Ejelmer Bay.
(c) To occupy Chocolate Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe.
{ d) To seize Baka Baba and establish connexion northwards between that point
and the troops advancing on Hill 156.
This was an extremely ambitious programme for one division, and only part of
it was carried into effect. It is noticeable in this operation order that, although the two
brigades of the 10th Division were mentioned in the list of available troops, no reference
was made to the divisional commander, Sir Bryan Mahon, a Lieutenant-General of con-
siderable seniority, nor was any duty assigned to these brigades.
78. General Braithwaite’s letter and instructions of July 22nd and 29th, and Sir
Frederick Stopford’s Operation Order of August 3rd, give the following information in
regard to the units detailed for the Suvla operations. According to the letter of July 22nd
the force placed at Sir Frederick Stopford’s disposal for the landing was to consist of the
11th Division under General Hammersley, the 10th Division (less the 29th Brigade) under
Sir Bryan Mahon, two batteries of Highland Mountain Artillery, and the 1 /4th Lowland


Howitzer Brigade. The table appended to the letter includes among the Divisional troops
of the 11th Division two out of three Brigades of Field Artillery and one Heavy Battery,
the third Brigade of Field Artillery having been landed at Helles. No mention is made in
the table of the Divisional Artillery of the 10th Division.
In the instructions of July 29th the Lowland Howitzer Brigade was omitted, and three
squadrons of the R.N. Armoured Car Division, R.N.A.S., each armed with six machine
guns, were added. It was stated that the following units were being despatched from
Alexandria : the three squadrons of the R.N. Armoured Car Division, three Brigades of
Field Artillery belonging to the 10th Division, one Brigade of Field Artillery belonging
to the 11th Division, and two Brigades of Field Artillery belonging to the 13th Division.
As one Brigade of Field Artillery belonging to the 11th Division had been landed at
Helles, it would appear that only one Brigade of Field Artillery was actually attached
at the time to that Division.
In the Operation Order of August 3rd it was stated that one Brigade of Field
Artillery belonging to the 11th Division and one Heavy Battery with their horses would
land at Anzac, and proceed thence along the beach to join the Division on its landing
at Suvla. The two Highland Mountain Batteries and one squadron of the R.N. Armoured
Gar Division (motor cycles) were to land at Suvla. There is no record of the date and
place of landing of the other two squadrons of the R,N. Armoured Car Division, which
consisted of Ford cars and armoured cars. .
The question of the artillery actually available at Suvla is discussed in paragraph 9 of a
“Statement in connection with Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch of 11th December, 1915.”
This statement was drawn up by Sir Frederick Stopford by direction of the Adjutant-
General, and is dated February 16th, 1916. The paragraph is as follows : “As regards
other points in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch which affect the IXth Corps, the description
of the troops at my disposal is incorrectly stated. He states that at my disposal ‘ was
placed the IXth Army Corps, less the 13th Division and the 29th Brigade of the 10th
Division.’ He should have" stated that the 10th Division had no artillery, and that of
the artillery of the 11th Division only one brigade of artillery was available until
12th August, and of it only one battery was available for the fighting of August 7th-Bth.”
Further information on the subject is given in General Braithwaite’s instruc-
tions which were handed to General de Lisle on August 15th, when the latter
called at Imbros on his way to replace Sir Frederick Stopford in the command of the
IXth Corps. It would appear that at that date the artillery actually available at Suvla
consisted’ of two mountain and two heavy batteries, and one brigade of field artillery.
Sir Frederick Stopford’s contention as to the paucity of artillery is in substance
supported by the evidence of General De Lisle.
79. And here it may be convenient to attempt some description of the ground in the
vicinity of Suvla Bay. The area bordering the Salt Lake is low, and doubtless swampy in
wet weather. In the dry season it is bare and open until the ground begins to rise. Then high
grass and bush appear, the bush being mostly a prickly variety of ilex, very hard and tough.
The bush in many cases increases in density and height as the hills get higher. The country
can hardly be described as well watered during the dry season, but a moderate amount of
water is procurable by those who know where to look for it and how to get it.
The following remarks by Sir lan Hamilton on the nature of the ground at and near
Suvla are of interest. In a letter to Lord Kitchener, dated August 12th, 1915, he wrote :
“ The whole of the flattish plain east of Suvla Bay is covered with thick trees up high
above your head, small and big dongas, long grass, etc. In these a very considerable
number of Turkish snipers are concealed, sometimes up in the trees, sometimes down in
hollows among the grass. . . . Supposing the Essex (161 st Brigade of the 54th
Division) make good their footing on the high hills north of Anafarta, will always
remain the problem of getting their mute convoys through this dense bush without being
too much harried .or losing too many mules.” Again, in a letter to Lord Kitchener, dated
September Ist, 1915, he~described the Suvla Bay country as “a jungle ringed round
by high mountains.” Again in his despatch of December 11th, 1915, he referred to
Ismail Oglu Tepe as follows : “ The hill rises 350 feet from the plain with steep spurs
jutting out io the west and south-west, the whole of it covered with dense holly oak scrub,
so nearly impenetrable that it breaks up an attack and forces troops to move in single
file along goat tracks between the bushes.” In the same despatch, describing an attack
on August 12th by the 163 rd Brigade on Kuchuk Anafarta Ova, about 2,000 yards north-
east of the north-east corner of the Salt Lake, he records the mysterious disappearance of
the commanding officer, 16 officers, and 250 men of the l/sth Norfolk Regiment, who
charged into the forest, were lost to sight or sound, and never reappeared.
CC 49—242) c 2


In Ms evidence before us Sir lan Hamilton gave the following description : " The
actual heights to get up were difficult. They were hills very thickly clothed with scrub
and jungle with paths, but rather difficult for a man with his pack on to force his way
thrpugh; but all the background of the bay was too open and too flat. It had one
great advantage, that that was the only part of the Peninsula where the guns of the ships
could really command the ground.”
Taking into consideration this and other evidence bearing on the subject, it may, we
think, be concluded that the country in the vicinity of Suvla Bay must seriously have
impeded military operations, more particularly in the way of breaking up concerted
movements, and rendering night operations hazardous if not almost impracticable.
The ground east of Anzac was more intricate and more broken, but the natural difficulties
at Suvla were of a formidable character.
80. The impression conveyed by the Intelligence reports which were communicated to
Sir Frederick Stopford and Major-General Hammersley was that little opposition would
be met with on landing except perhaps at Lala Baba, until the occupation of Chocolate
Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe was attempted. The time of landing was fixed for the evening
of August 6th, and in drafting his divisional orders Major-General Hammersley had to
consider whether Chocolate Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe should be attacked from the north-
west or south-west. He decided in favour of the former alternative. His orders to
the three brigades of his division were as follows :
The 34th Brigade on the left to land at the original A Beach 800 yards west of
Hill 10; one battalion to move north towards Kiretch Tepe Sirt and occupy Suvla
Point; one battalion to occupy Hill 10 ; the remaining two battalions to concentrate
at Hill 10. These three battalions at Hill 10 then to move to the assault of Chocolate
Hill, and if successful, to the assault of Ismail Oglu Tepe.
The 32nd Brigade in the centre to land at C Beach; to assault and occupy Lala
Baba, and then move north along the sand-spit in support of the 34th Brigade'
The 33rd Brigade on the right to land at B Beach about a mile south-east of Nibru-
nesi Point; two battalions to hold the line from the south-east corner of the Salt
Lake south-westerly to the shore. Two battalions to follow the 32nd Brigade along
the sand-spit to a point 800 yards east of Hill 10, there to form the divisional reserve
with the divisional Pioneer Battalion (6th East Yorkshire Regiment).
The artillery to concentrate at Lala Baba, where the divisional report centre
was to be established.
81. For the transport of the division from Imbros ten destroyers and ten lighters were
allotted three of each for each brigade, and one of each for divisional headquarters, signal
section, cyclists, and engineers. From 500 to 550 men were embarked on each destroyer
and lighter, and there was much congestion, especially on the lighters. The men went
on board on the afternoon of the 6th, and were on board with no room to move about
from six to eight hours before disembarking. Some reserve ammunition and water were
carried on the lighters, but, for reasons mentioned in that portion of our Report
which deals with the water arrangements, the water was not distributed, and on the
disembarkation of the men the lighters at once left the shore. The flotilla was ready
and started at 6.30 p.m. The Pioneer Battalion, one battery Royal Field Artillery, and
the 4th Highland Mountain Brigade of two batteries followed later. At 10.30 p.m. the
flotilla arrived opposite the points of disembarkation. The disembarkation of the 34th
Brigade did not work smoothly. The original “A” beach proved unsuitable for landing
owing to reefs, and the Brigade actually landed towards the south end of the sand spit
instead of opposite Hill 10, the lighters grounding some 100 yards from shore. The
landing was opposed by shrapnel fire from Hill 10 and rifle fire from Lala Baba and the
sand spit. The 11th Manchester Regiment moved along the beach towards Suvla Point
and Karakol Dagh, and carried out the task assigned to it. .
Brigadier-General Sitwell, commanding the 34th Brigade, landed about 3.30 a.m. on
the 7th and directed the 9th Lancashire Fusiliers to assault Hill 10. The battalion
proceeded after some delay and confusion in that direction, and occupied the highest
sand dune north of the Cut, under the impression that this dune was Hill 10. The remaining
two battalions of the 34th Brigade began to land on the sand spit about 2.30 a.m. on the
7th and their landing was completed by 5 a.m.
At 11 p.m. on the 6th the two leading battalions of the 32nd Brigade landed at a point
between B and C beaches, and after considerable resistance Lala Baba was occupied.
The remaining two battalions followed and concentrated at Lala Baba. This Brigade was
commanded by Brigadier-General Haggard.


Immediately after landing on the 7th Brigadier-General Sitwell asked for assistance
from Brigadier-General Haggard, who sent a detachment from Lala Baba along the sand
spit towards the Cut.
The 33rd Brigade, under Brigadier-General Maxwell, landed at B beach without oppo-
sition. Two battalions took up and entrenched a line from the S.E. corner of the Salt Lake
south-westerly to the shore. The remaining two battalions proceeded to Lala Baba
with a view to occupying subsequently their assigned position east of Hill 10 as divisional
reserve.
Shortly before daylight much desultory fighting took place between the Cut and Hill
10. Several isolated attempts to capture Hill 10 failed and the troops engaged fell back
towards the Cut. Meanwhile, General Haggard had joined General Sitwell, the latter
being the senior Brigade Commander in the division. By 6 a.m. a fresh attack on Hill 10
was organised, the force being drawn from the 32nd and 34th Brigades. This attack
succeeded, the Turks retiring in a north-easterly direction.
At 6.30 a.m. General Sitwell reported to the Divisional Commander that his
troops could not move eastward, this message apparently not reaching General Hammersley
before 8 a.m.
82. We must now turn to the landing of the 10th Division, less one brigade detached
to Anzac, this division being commanded by Lt.-General Sir Bryan Mahon.
It was originally intended that the two available brigades, the 30th and 31st, com-
manded respectively by Brigadier-Generals Nicol and Hill, together with the divisional
Pioneer Battalion, should land at A beach due west of Hill 10. This beach proved
impracticable for landing, and a suitable place called New A beach was eventually
found in a cove about a mile east of Suvla Point and about 1,000 yards east of Ghazi
Baba. On the arrival of the 10th Division from England between July 16th and 21st
six battalions, namely, two battalions of the 30th Brigade and the whole of the 31st
Brigade, had been sent to Mitylene under General Hill, the remaining two battalions of the
30th Brigade under General Nicol, plus the divisional Pioneer Battalion, being at Mudros,
where also was the divisional Commander with his head quarters. Sir Bryan Mahon
received instructions about the Suvla landing on July 28th or 29th, but having
failed to obtain a vessel to convey him to Mitylene he was unable to give any personal
orders regarding disembarkation and subsequent action to General Hill, and his
endeavour to communicate orders by cypher telegram failed. None of the artillery of the
10th Divison landed until August 10th. General Hill, followed by his six battalions,
arrived at Suvla from Mitylene at daylight on August 7th, and was at once summoned to
the “ Jonquil,” where he saw Sir Frederick Stopford about 6 a.m. He was directed by
the latter to land at C beach, to get into touch with the General Officer commanding the
11th Division, and to act under his orders. If he failed to get into touch, he was to
advance and support the troops of the 11th Division and also to make good the
occupation of Ghazi Baba and Karakol Dagh. Having selected a place west of Lala Baba
for his troops to form up. General Hill went *to the headquarters of the 11th Division
and saw General Hammersley about 8 a.m., who directed him, as soon as his troops were
landed and concentrated, to move out along the sand-spit to the north-west corner of the
Salt Lake, and thence to make an attack on Chocolate Hill, his right resting on the
Salt Lake and his left being covered by troops of the 32nd and 34th Brigades, which would
operate towards Ismail Oglu Tepe.
It must here be mentioned that only five out of the six battalions from Mitylene actually
landed on August 7th at C Beach. One of the battalions of the 31st Brigade arrived too
late on the 7th to join the force under General Hill and was sent across the bay to New
Beach A, where it landed on the afternoon of the 7th or the morning of the Bth and
came for the time being under the orders of General Nicol commanding the 30th Brigade.
Sir Bryan Mahon with the headquarters of the 10th Division, General Nicol with his
brigade staff, two battalions of the 30th Brigade, and the divisional Pioneer Battalion
landed early on the morning of August*7th at New Beach A. Previous to landing
Sir Bryan Mahon saw Sir Frederick Stopford, who ordered him to push on as far as
possible along the ridge of Karakol Dagh and Kiretch Tepe Sirt in the direction of
Ejelmer Bay. These orders were carried out so far as the small force at Sir Bryan
Mahon’s disposal would permit. The 11th Manchester Regiment, which was a battalion
of the 34th Brigade, and which after occupying Suvla Point had advanced up Karakol
Dagh before Sir Bryan Mahon’s landing, took part in the movement along the ridge.
83. From the foregoing account it will be seen that on the morning of August 7th the
force at Suvla was allocated as follows by the Corps Commander : —At the disposal of
Major-General Hammersley, the whole of the 11th Division, less one battalion of the
(C 49—242) ’ C 3


34th Brigade (11th Manchester Eegiment), plus 5 battalions of the 10th Division under
Brigadier-General Hill. At the disposal of Lieutenant-General Sir Bryan Mahon two
battalions of one of his brigades (the 30th Brigade) plus his divisional Pioneer Battalion,
plu& one battalion of the 34th Brigade of the 11th Division (the 11th Manchester Eegiment).
It will also be observed that the change in the scheme for distributing the troops when
landed at Suvla on August 6th and 7th was largely due to the impracticability of dis-
embarkation at the original Beach A and the unavoidable delay which occurred in finding
the new Beach A.
It will further be noticed that the advance up Karakol Dagh and Kiretch Tepe Sirt,
which had been assigned by the Corps Commander to Major-General Hammersley, was
in fact undertaken by Sir Bryan Mahon.
84. At 8.45 a.m. General Sitwell, whose report centre was south of Hill 10, received
orders from General Hammersley for the 32nd and 34th Brigades to push on towards
Chocolate hill on the arrival of the 31st Brigade, which would operate on the left, moving
with its own right on Ismail Oglu Tepe. This message apparently emanated from the
divisional report centre at Lala Baba, at 8 a.m., at which hour General Hammersley
had seen General Hill and told him to operate on the right of the 32nd and 34th Brigades
with Chocolate Hill as his objective. At 8.55 a.m. General Sitwell communicated the
order he had just received to the commanders of three battalions of his own Brigade, but
gave no instructions to the 32nd Brigade, possibly because General Hammersley’s orders
had been repeated to General Haggard, the commander of that brigade.
Shortly afterwards General Sitwell, on his own initiative, directed two battalions
of the 32nd Brigade to form an entrenchment from Hill 10 to the Cut. Their employment
in this manner seems to us to have been inconsistent with General Hammersley’s order,
and to have shown on General Sitwell’s part a lack of the offensive spirit necessary to
success.
85. Meanwhile about 10 a.m. three battalions out of the five under General Hill’s com-
mand had landed and concentrated near Lala Baba. Having given instructions to the com-
manding officers of these battalions, General Hill preceded them along the sand spit for the
purpose of arranging with General Haggard for the joint advance on Chocolate Hill and
Ismail Oglu Tepe. He met General Haggard, who pointed out that he was under General
Sitwell’s orders and could only act under instructions from that officer. He next met
General Sitwell to whom he explained the orders he had received from General
Hammersley.
General Sitwell replied that he had himself received different orders from General
Hammersley and, according to General Hill’s account, that it was impossible for him
to co-operate in the proposed advance on Chocolate Hill and Ismail Oglu Tepe. General
Sitwell, however, states that he informed General Hill that he could only spare two
battalions out of the 32nd and 34th Brigades in support of General Hill’s three battalions.
Be this as it may, General Hill, believing that he could get no support from General
Sitwell, decided to return to General Hammersley’s headquarters at Lala Baba and report
the situation. About this time General Haggard was severely wounded and General Sitwell
for the time being assumed the direct command of the 32nd Brigade in addition to that of
the 34th Brigade. After General Hill had left, General Sitwell detailed two battalions of
the 32nd Brigade and one battalion of the 34th Brigade to be in readiness to support
General Hill’s battalions as soon as they came up. On his way back to divisional
headquarters General Hill met his three battalions advancing along the sand spit north of
Lala Baba and ordered them to halt and await further orders. On reaching headquarters
he found that General Hammersley was away, but a General Staff Officer of the division
informed him that the instructions previously given him by General Hammersley were
correct, and that General Sitwell would be so informed. General Hill thereupon returned to
his troops and again set them in motion towards and across the Cut and thence to the east
of Hill 10, with a view to an advance on Chocolate Hill. This was about 12.45 p.m. General
Hill did not personally accompany his first three battalions, but followed with his two remain-
ing battalions which by that time had landed and were concentrating near Lala Baba. On
arrival in the vicinity of Hill 10 at about 2.45 p.m. General Hill found that his three
leading battalions had circled round the north-east corner of the Salt Lake and were ready
to move on Chocolate Hill, but that no battalions of the 32nd or 34th Brigade had been
sent to co-operate on his left towards Ismail Oglu Tepe. At 3 p.m. he telephoned to
divisional headquarters to that effect, adding that he had seen General Sitwell, who
told him that two battalions would be sent forward. Just before the despatch of this
message an order, timed 2.40 p.m., was issued from divisional headquarters to the effect
that the advance would be suspended for the present and resumed at 5.30 p.m. Two


battalions of the 33rd Brigade with the Brigade Commander, General Maxwell, would
leave their position near Lala Baba and move with their right flank immediately north of
the Salt Lake, so as to come on the right of General Hill’s troops. The general direction
of the advance was to be on Chocolate Hill. The advance was to be supported by all
the troops of the 32nd and 34th Brigades who had not suffered heavy casualties.
General Sitwell was to command the attack, and these brigades, as well as the troops
under General Hill, would act under General Sitwell’s orders. The divisional artillery near
Lala Baba would cover the attack, their fire beginning at 5.15 p.m. This order which
was addressed to the 31st, 32nd and 34th Brigades, reached General Hill shortly after
3 15pm and was no doubt received by General Sitwell and General Maxwell about the
same time. General Hill states that General Sitwell supported the advance on the
right flank with the two battalions of the 33rd Brigade under General Maxwell about
4 p.m. and that the 32nd and 34th Brigades took no part in the attack on Chocolate q. 12999.
Hill and Hill 70. On the other hand, General Sitwell states that one battalion of the
32nd Brigade and one battalion of the 34th Brigade followed General Hill s tioops in
support and a second battalion of the 32nd Brigade in reserve, and that he saw these
three battalions engaged with the enemy. General Maxwell states that two battalions
of the 34th Brigade operated on the left of General Hill s troops. The advance began
somewhat earlier than had been ordered, but the artillery opened fire at the prescribed
time, 5.15 p.m. Chocolate Hill was captured, but no attempt was made to attack Ismail
Oglu Tepe. It is not clear at what time and by what troops the capture of Chocolate
Hill was effected. In the War Diary of the 31st Brigade it is recorded that Chocolate
Hill was in the possession of that brigade at 5.30 p.m. while General Hill, who
commanded the brigade, states that Chocolate Hill was taken about dusk, and that in Q. 10706.
his opinion there was no reason why Ismail Oglu Tepe should not have been taken also,
had the available battalions of the 32nd and 34th Brigades advanced more promptly on
his left. He describes the Turkish opposition as not being very formidable. general W -
Maxwell, who commanded the 33rd Brigade, ascribes the capture of Chocolate Hill so e y
to the action of his twt> battalions, and gives the time of its being taken as 7.20 p.m. QQ. 10702-
General Sitwell states that he was in telephonic communication with one of the two 3
battalions of the 33rd Brigade, which reported at 11.30 p.m. that Chocolate Hill had been QQ-^ 0706 -
carried at 9.30 p.m.
86. None of the three Brigadier-Generals concerned in the attack on Chocolate Hill,
Generals Sitwell, Hill and Maxwell, accompanied the troops. They established
their report centres to the south of Hill 10, about two miles distant from Chocolate Hill,
and remained there. In view of the distance and the nature of the country they can ha\ e
seen but little of what, was going on, and though no doubt they may occasionally have been
in telephonic communication with some of their battalion commanders, the latter s outlook
was limited and their responsibility was confined to what concerned their respective
battalions. In the absence of superior military control and guidance on the spot, a toice of
inexperienced troops, unacquainted with local conditions and consisting of a number o
battalions drawn from five brigades —namely, two from the 30th, three from the 31st,
two from the 32nd, two from the 33rd and one from the 34th must have been lacking
in cohesion and co-operation, and the evidence discloses the confusion and delay which
resulted from this cause. . , ,
Apparently Brigadier-Generals Sitwell, Hill, and Maxwell remained near each other
at their several report centres until just before midnight on August 7th. Genera
Sitwell then decided that General Hill should proceed to Chocolate Hill in order persona y
to ascertain the situation, and the latter set out at the time mentioned. On his own
initiative General Sitwell directed General Hill to send back the following battalions
which had been employed in the attack on Chocolate Hill with a view to their
rejoining their respective brigades : the two battalions of the 32nd Brigade to the san
dunes south of Hill 10 ; the two battalions of the 33rd Brigade to Lala Baba; and the
one battalion of the 34th Brigade to the brigade reserve south of Hill 10. At 7.30 am.
on August Bth General Hammersley visited General Sitwell at the latter s report centre,
informed him that there was no enemy in the direction of Baka Baba, and sugges e<
his joining General Hill on Chocolate' Hill., The suggestion, however, was not pressed,
and General Sitwell remained where he was. ... ~ ,
It may here be mentioned that in his account of the attack on Chocolate Hill, w uc i
differs in some respects from the accounts of the three brigade comma ndeis concerne ,
General Hammersley states that when he issued his order for the attack at 2.40 p.m.
on August 7th, it was his intention that Ismail Oglu Tepe as well as Chocolate Hill should
be captured, though no reference was made in the order to the former objective. ea so
(C 49—242) ■ C 4


states that the battalion of the 34th Brigade which took part in the operation was seriously ,f
engaged and its commanding officer severely wounded ; that Chocolate Hill was captured b
by 7.30 p.m. ; that up to 700 yards from the Turkish position all the fighting was done p
by /General Hill s troops ; and that in the final stage of the attack the two battalions 0
of the 33rd Brigade advanced with great steadiness. r<
87. On August 7th Sir Frederick Stopford remained with Admiral Christian on board a
the Jonquil,” where he considered himself to be in the best position to communicate 0
with General Headquarters and with his subordinate commanders on shore.
88. The distribution of the troops of the 11th Division on the morning of August Bth d,
is described by General Hammersley as follows. One field battery and two mountain d
batteries were at Lala Baba. The 32nd Brigade was concentrated near Hill 10, except a b
detachment of two companies on the southern slopes of Kiretch Tepe Sirt. Two b
battalions of the 33rd Brigade were south of the Salt Lake and two at Lala Baba. tl
Two battalions of the 34th Brigade were near Hill 10, one battalion was east of Hill 10, h
and one (the 11th Manchester Regiment) was on Kiretch Tepe Sirt. The divisional pioneer e ;
battalion (6th East Yorkshire Regiment) was at Lala Baba. p
At this time the five Irish battalions under General Hill, which had been left in their S (
advanced position when the other troops were withdrawn to the neighbourhood of the
beach, appear to have been still holding Chocolate Hill and the ground in its vicinity. I
The troops generally were much exhausted by the heat, thirst, and fighting of the C
previous day, besides which many men and parties were scattered owing partly to the T
mixing up of brigades and units in the attack on Chocolate Hill, and partly to straying in fi
search of water, carrying and accompanying the wounded to the rear, and so on. We
have, in fact, reason to believe that a considerable number of stragglers had collected at t
or near the shore. ‘ I .
The following movements took place on August Bth. One battalion of the 32nd o
Brigade, the 6th Yorkshire Regiment, owing to the losses which it had sustained was t
replaced by the divisional Pioneer Battalion, the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment, and this c
brigade under the command of Colonel Minogue was ordered to take up a line running I
north and south through Sulajik, so as to get into touch on the north with a battalion of \
the 34th Brigade (the sth Dorset Regiment), and on the south with the troops under t
General Hill. In the course of the afternoon Hill 70 was occupied by the Pioneer a
Battalion, and the huts at Sulajik were put in a state of defence, with trenches surrounding e
them, by the 67th Field Company, R.E. i
The sth Dorset Regiment and the 9th Lancashire Fusiliers, also belonging to the t
34th Brigade, were put under the orders of Sir Bryan Mahon, and so remained until August c
12th, when they rejoined the 11th Division.
The 11th Manchester Regiment of the 34th Brigade, which on the 7th was acting under 1
Sir Bryan Mahon, rejoined its brigade from Kiretch Tepe Sirt. t
The 7th South Staffordshire Regiment of the 33rd Brigade was sent to reinforce the 1
troops under General Hill. \
. 89* On August Bth, Sir Frederick Stopford had been anxious to push on, and had
informed his two divisional -commanders that he regarded it as being of the greatest
importance to forestall the enemy on the high ground north of Anafarta Sagir and on the
spur running thence to Ismail Oglu Tepe. The divisional commanders, however, repre-
sented that, though they would do what they could, they doubted the possibility
of a further advance on that day, the troops being much exhausted by continuous
fighting ana lack of water. Sir Frederick Stopford was also influenced by the fact that the
artillery at his disposal consisted of only one field battery and two mountain
batteries, and that the troops of the 10th and 11th Divisions had been much scattered in
the operations of August 7th. He decided therefore to postpone the attack on Ismail
Oglu Tepe and the Anafarta Sagir ridge until dawn on the 9th. It was arranged to attack
Ismail Oglu Tepe from Chocolate Hill, and the Anafarta Sagir ridge from the north-west
between Baka Baba and Chocolate Hill, the 33rd Brigade with one battalion of the 31st
Brigade on the right, the 32nd Brigade on the left, and two battalions of the 34th Brigade
in reserve. It appears from Sir Frederick Stopford’s report to Sir lan Hamilton of the opera-
tions of the 9th Corps, dated October 26th, 1915, that on August Bth the former informed
his two divisional commanders that, in view of the inadequate artillery support, he did not
want them to let their men make frontal attacks on entrenched positions, but they were
to push on as far as possible and try to turn any trenches they came across. In his despatch
to the Secretary of State for War, dated December 11th, 1915, Sir lan Hamilton drew special
attention to this passage in Sir Frederick Stopford’s report and paraphrased it as follows :


ly * f General Stopford did not wisli them to make frontal attacks on entrenched positions,
3d but desired them, so far as was possible, to try and turn any trenches that were met with.”
11(3 He added : “ Within the terms of this instruction lies the root of our failure to make use
ns of the priceless daylight hours of August Bth.” It is obvious that in one material
respect the paraphrase differs from the instruction, which embodied three injunctions.
First, to abstain from frontal attacks on entrenched positions ; secondly, to push on as far
x\ as possible ; and, thirdly, to try to turn any trenches which were encountered in pushing
te on. The second Injunction is not mentioned by Sir lan Hamilton, and the expression
“ as far as possible,” which formed part of that injunction, is tacked on to the third.
Sir lan Hamilton explains that in writing his despatch he had before him two
;h documents from Sir Frederick Stopford —one, a memorandum to the Military Secretary,
n dated August 28th,* written by Sir Frederick Stopford on board ship after he had
a been relieved of his command ; the other, the report sent to Sir lan Hamilton himself
0 by General Stopford, dated October 26th—and that he inadvertently took up
i. the former instead of the latter and quoted from it this sentence, which occurs textually
), in it as quoted, without the addition of “ push on as far as possible.” But in the
r early part of the paragraph in which the sentence occurs there is emphatic mention
that Sir Frederick Stopford instructed his divisional generals to push on, and the
r sentence itself ends with a reiteration of the supreme importance of forestalling the enemy,
e We think these facts show that there was some misunderstanding on the part of Sir
lan Hamilton as to the purport of the memorandum of August 28th and the report of
2 October 26th, and we are of opinion that his criticism is so worded as to obscure Sir
2 Frederick Stopford’s specific intention and injunction that the troops should push on as
1 far as possible.
J In the despatch Sir lan Hamilton also referred to naval gunfire as compensating for
b the paucity of the available field and mountain artillery. Sir Frederick Stopford appears
to have considered that in the absence of a preparatory bombardment the frontal attack
i of Turkish entrenchments would probably prove fruitless and entail heavy losses, and
> that as the trenches were not continuous the better course would be to push on between
or past them, thus taking them in flank or reverse. As regards naval gunfire, Sir
Frederick Stopford probably concurred with Admiral de Hobeck in regarding such fire
with its low trajectory as being ineffective against the deep trenches of the modern type,
though effective enough against troops in the open or occupying shallow trenches. This
view accords with much of the evidence which has been laid before us, while the import-
ance of preparatory bombardment before making frontal attacks on deep entrenchments
is confirmed not only by what repeatedly occurred on the Gallipoli Peninsula, but by
the experience of our troops on the Western Front, where, the German trenches being
continuous, attacks other than frontal are impossible.
Sir lan Hamilton, who was at Imbros, received telegraphic reports of what was
taking place at Suvla on August 7th from the commander of the 9th Corps. In par-
ticular there was a message despatched at 10 a.m. on August Bth, reporting the
position of the troops of the 11th Division at the time of despatch, and remarking
that Major-General Hammersley and the force under his command deserved great credit
for the results achieved. Presumably the capture of Chocolate Hill had been previously
reported. The following message, despatched from Imbros at noon on August Bth, was sent
by Sir lan Hamilton to Sir Frederick Stopford : —“ You and your troops have indeed done
splendidly. Please tell Hammersley how much we hope from his able and rapid advance.
Lan Hamilton.” With regard to this message, Sir Frederick Stopford informed us that the
result of the operations on the night of the 6th and day of the 7th was not as.satisfactory
as he would have liked, but he gathered from Sir lan Hamilton’s congratulations that his
dispositions and orders had met with the latter’s approval.
90. Reverting to Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch of December 11th, 1915, we find it
stated that the General who had been sent from General Headquarters to Suvla
early in the morning of the Bth reported by telegraph unfavourably as to the failure of our
troops to take full advantage of the opportunities which were presenting themselves.
But before this telegram was received, Sir lan Hamilton had made up his mind from Sir
Frederick Stopford’s reports that all was not 'going Well at Suvla, and he resolved
himself to proceed thither, which he did, starting from Imbros at 4 p.m. and
reaching Suvla an hour later. Sir lan Hamilton’s congratulatory telegram to Sir
Frederick Stopford is hardly consistent with his conviction as recorded in the despatch,
* This document, in the copy furnished to us, is dated August 18th, but we have ascertained from Sir
Frederick Stopford that August 28th is the correct date.


that all was not well at Suvla. It may, perhaps, have been written by Sir lan Hamilton
(as he said in his evidence) late on the 7th, or early on the Bth, as soon as the news of the
capture of Chocolate Hill reached him ; but if so we do not understand why its despatch
from Imbros should have been delayed until noon on the Bth.
It is difficult to be certain as to the true explanation of this, but we do not consider
the matter of great importance, as it is clear that for some reason Sir lan Hamilton
became dissatisfied on August Bth with the progress of operations, and consequently
left Imbros for Suvla in the afternoon.
On arrival at Suvla Sir lan Hamilton at once saw Sir Frederick Stopford on board
H.M.S. “ Jonquil," where, up to that time, the headquarters of the 9th Corps had been
accommodated, pending their establishment on shore near Ghazi Baba. After a brief
interview on the “ Jonquil," Sir lan Hamilton’s account of which is inconsistent with
that of Sir Frederick Stopford, Sir lan Hamilton proceeded to visit Major-General
Hammersley at Lala Baba. Sir Frederick Stopford did not accompany Sir lan Hamilton
to Lala Baba, and a good deal of conflicting evidence has been laid before us by these
two officers with reference to his not doing so. The probable explanation of the incident
is that Sir Frederick Stopford had only just returned from personally giving instructions
to Major-General Hammersley for the proposed operations at dawn on the 9th, and his
attendance on shore not being requested by Sir lan Hamilton, he saw no object in again
visiting Major-General Hammersley
91. Sir lan Hamilton arrived at Major-General Hammersley’s headquarters about 6
p.m,, and in his despatch of December 11th, 1915, he describes the conversation which
took place, and the extent to which he modified the orders previously given by Sir
Frederick Stopford for the attack next morning. Sir Frederick Stopford and Major-General
Hammersley had decided against a night attack, but Sir lan Hamilton thought that the
advantages of such an attack in the matter of forestalling the enemy outweighed its
disadvantages, and hearing that the 32nd Brigade was more or less concentrated and
ready to move he gave General Hammersley a direct order that, even if it were only
with this brigade, the advance should begin at the earliest possible moment instead of at
dawn the next morning as previously arranged. Sir lan Hamilton further directed that
the 32nd Brigade should endeavour to occupy the heights north of Anafarta Sagir,
presumably Tekke Tepe, but beyond giving these orders he states that he did
nothing and said not a word calculated to affect the attack as originally planned. In
his despatch he speaks of the thirteen battalions detailed for the attack, but the correct
number appears to be eleven, namely, four battalions of the 33rd Brigade, together with
one from the 31st Brigade, on the right, with Ismail Oglu Tepe as the objective ; four
battalions of the 32nd Brigade on the left, with Anafarta Sagir as the objective ; and
two battalions of the 34th Brigade in reserve. It will be remembered that the remaining
two battalions of the 34th Brigade had been placed at Sir Bryan Mahon’s disposal on
the morning of August Bth.
92. Sir lan Hamilton’s description of the nature and scope of his intervention is not
fully corroborated by Sir Frederick Stopford and General Hammersley. Thus Sir
Frederick Stopford points out in his report of October 26th, 1915, that his intention had
been to make a concentrated attack upon the front stretching from Ismail Oglu Tepe
to Anafarta Sagir, a distance of 4,100 yards, while under Sir lan Hamilton's direct
orders the front to be attacked w r as extended northward from Anafarta Sagir to Tekke
Tepe, lengthening the front by an additional 2,200 yards. Moreover, the advance on
this northern extension through extremely difficult ground covered with dense bush,
which had not been reconnoitred, and this greatly militated against the success of a night
operation. Sir Frederick Stopford says in his report that, in view 7 of the radical changes
made by Sir lan Hamilton in his plans and dispositions for the attack at dawn on the
9th, he repudiates any responsibility for the results of the action.
General Hammersley states that Sir lan Hamilton’s personal instructions quite
upset the pre-arranged plans, and obliged him to re-issue his divisional orders late
in the evening. Difficulty was experienced in communicating with the battalions of the
32nd Brigade, which were less ’concentrated than General Hammersley had supposed,
and in the result only one battalion together with a section of engineers advanced in the
direction of Tekke Tepe before 4 a.m. on the 9th.
The change in the plan of operations approved by Sir Frederick Stopford w*as not
communicated to him either by Sir lan Hamilton or by General Hammersley. Sir
lan Hamilton states that he thought it would be reported by General Hammersley,
and General Hammersley states that it did not occur to him at the time that he


ought to report it. Later on, he imagines, the change was reported by some member of
his staff to some member of tbe corps staff. We think that this was an unfortunate
Cn omission. Sir Frederick Stopford might have expected to hear from the General
i Officer Commanding-in-Chief, and was entitled to hear from his divisional commander,
on in what respects his scheme of attack had been modified by direction of superior
h l authority. If, however, Sir Frederick Stopford had accompanied Sir Tan Hamilton to
y Lala Baba, and been present at the latter’s interview with General Hammersley, the
ITC [ alteration in the plan dould not have been made without his knowledge.
• 61 J 93. At the end of the interview between Sir lan Hamilton and Major-General Ham-
mersley, the latter sent a General Staff officer to the commander of the 32nd Brigade with
Li instructions to concentrate the brigade at Sulajik as soon as possible, and thence to
occupy the high ground about Tekke Tepe before daybreak, at least one battalion being
used for the purpose —preferably tke 6th East \orkshire Regiment. One battalion of
S ? the brigade was already at Sulajik; a second battalion reached that place without
1 difficulty or delay; the third battalion, the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment, only got its
orders to move from Hill 70 to Sulajik at 11 p.m., and did not arrive until 3 a.m. on the
9th: while the fourth battalion, the 9th West Yorkshire Regiment, had got out of touch
in the thick bush near Abrikja at nightfall, never received the order to concentrate, and
remained where it was. At 3.30 a.m. on the 9th the brigade commander sent on the
r 6th East Yorkshire Regiment with the 67th Field Company, Royal Engineers (less
one section), to secure Tekke Tepe, supporting the advance with another battalion,
and retaining the third at Sulajik. On reaching a point about 1,000 yards south
, of Tekke Tepe, the head of the column was attacked by the Turks in superior
I strength ; the Commanding Officers of the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment and the
I- 67th Field Company, Royal Engineers, were killed ; and many officers and men were killed
. ] or wounded. Shortly afterwards two machine guns were lost. Meanwhile the battalion
i in support, pushing up on the left of the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment, lost its commanding
A officer and suffered heavy loss. Eventually the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment and the
± battalion supporting it, the Bth West Riding Regiment, fell back, and continued their
• retirement until about noon they reached a point about 1,000 yards westward of Sulajik
A near the north-east coiner of the Salt Lake. Here General Sitwell with two battalions
[ n of the 34th Brigade had taken up his position at 6 a.m. and this sened as a rallying
t point for the two retreating battalions of the 32nd Brigade.
The battalion of the 32nd Brigade left at Sulajik was joined at daybreak by the 9th
West Yorkshire Regiment, which during the night had got out of touch near Abrikja.
At 8 a.m the Turks made a strong attack against our left at Sulajik- which was held by
w these two battalions, and continued all day to press this attack, endeavouring to woik
round the left flank. Their attempts were repulsed.
94. It will be remembered that according to the original plan the attack on Ismail Oglu
Tepe was to be carried out by the four battalions of the 33rd Brigade with one battalion
of the 31st Brigade under General Maxwell. *ln General Hammersley s revised written
I] j orders, which issued after the interview with Sir lan Hamilton, certain changes were
c made. One battalion of the 33rd Brigade, the 9th Sheiwvood horesters, was directed to
)e take up the long line from Chocolate Hill to Damakjplik Bahr, so as to connect the
extreme left of the Anzac troops with the force under General Hill. The 33rd Brigade
e being thus reduced to three battalions, General Hill w r as directed to place tw r o instead of
n one of his five battalions at General Maxwell’s disposal, and tne objective of Genera
b Maxwell’s force of five battalions was enlarged so as to include not only Ismail Oglu Tepe
but the ridge running thence to Anafarta Sagir. _ , ,
General Maxwell had reconnoitred the ground during the afternoon ot the Bth,
e ' and observed that Hill 70 was occupied by the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment. He
determined to place three of his battalions in front line, with one battalion in support
e of the centre and one in reserve. About 4.45 a.m. on the 9th the battalions were concen-
e trated, and moved off to their several points of deployment. As soon as this movement
, G began a heavy rifle fire broke out from the direction oi Abrikja, and Chocolate Hill was
’ shelled by the enemy. The right and centre battalions, however, pushed on towards the
e ridge near Ismail Oglu Tepe. The left battalion, on approaching Hill 70, found it occupied
by the Turks instead of our own men, the 6th East Yorkshire not having been replaced
when ordered aw r ay the previous evening. In aggravation of this mishap a considerable
1 Turkish force from the north-east attacked the battalion at close quarters. From Hi
r ’ the centre battalion was taken in enfilade, and lost heavily. General Maxwell s advance
e was brought to a standstill and his left seriously threatened. It now became a question
not of pushing the attack, but of holding on at all costs.


95. A reference must now be made to the 53rd Division, under the command of Major
General Lindley, which on arrival at Mudros had been kept there as a general reserve for or
the combined operations which began on August 6th. This division was ordered to Suvla
om August Bth. It consisted of three brigades—the 158 th under Brigadier-General w
Cowans, the 159 th under Brigadier-General Lloyd, and the 160 th under Brigadier- al
General Hume. It had no artillery, only one Field Company R.E. without
any stores, and only one Field Ambulance. The divisional Signal Company did
not arrive until five or six days after the landing of its division, and when it did 1 a
arrive it was attached to another division. • The headquarters of the division with
one battalion of the 159 th Brigade were the first to arrive at Suvla, and landed,
at 7 p.m. on the Bth. The rest of the division landed during the night of the|
Bth and morning of the 9th. At 8.30 p.m. on the Bth Major-General Lindley received' af
orders that two of his brigades, less one battalion for beach duty, were to be attached
to the 11th Division for operations under General Hammersley on the following day.
As soon as the troops became available they were pushed forward in the following a
order:— v b
At 7 a.m. one battalion, 160 th Brigade, in support of the 33rd Brigade near Chocolate o
Hill. g
At 9 a.m. two battalions, 159 th Brigade, to report to General Sitwell at Hill 10. c
At 9.20 a.m. one battalion, 160 th Brigade, to reinforce the battalion already sent t
to Chocolate Hill. '
At 10.55 a.m. the remaining two battalions, 159 th Brigade, under General Lloyd, to n
report to General Sitwell at Hill 10. 1 t
At 6.35 p.m one battalion of the 158 th Brigade, the 1/1 Hereford Regiment, to
strengthen the right hank of the 9th Sherwood Foresters, who had been pushed back with (
heavy loss to a position between Kazlar Chair and Hetman Chair. I
96. After the reinforcements from the 53rd Division had joined the troops already in
action the fight continued in a somewhat desultory fashion during the rest of the day,
no serious reverse being sustained and no appreciable success being achieved. In the
afternoon the bush caught fire behind three battalions under General Maxwell’s command
near Hill 70, and these battalions had to fall back towards Hill 50 and Sulajik.
At nightfall on the 9th the distribution of the troops was as follows :■ —
The 9th Sherwood Foresters and 1/1 Hereford Regiment near Hetman Chair.
hive battalions of the 10th Division under General Hill, with one field and one
mountain battery on Chocolate Hill and Hill 50.
Ihe 33rd Brigade, less the 9th Sherwood Foresters, plus two battalions of the 160 th
Brigade, under General Maxwell, from Hill 50 to the vicinity of Sulajik.
The 32nd Brigade, less one battalion, plus two battalions of the 159 th Brigade at
and to the north of Sulajik.
r lwo battalions of the 34th Brigade, with one battalion of the 32nd Brigade, further
to the north.
The remaining two battalions of thq. 34th Brigade at point 28, west of Kuchuk
Anafarta Ova under the orders of the General Officer Commanding the 10th Division.
Two battalions of the 159 th Brigade,, presumably under General Lloyd, near the
north-east corner of the Salt Lake.
The 6th East Yorkshire Regiment (the Pioneer Battalion of the 11th Division), two
field batteries and one mountain battery, at Lala Baba.
97. It will be observed that the units were as much mixed up on the evening of the 9th
as they had been on the previous evening, and organisation by brigades was practically
initiated by Sir Frederick Stopford, more or less modified by Sir lan Hamilton, and finallv
elaborated by General Hammersley, no reference was made to the troops of the 53rd
Division, nor was any specific place or duty assigned to them. Yet presumably it
must have been anticipated by each of these officers that the 53rd Division, or part of it,
would have landed by the morning of the 9th, because General Lindley, who was the
first to land, got an order from the 9th Corps at 8.30 p.m. on the Bth that he was to
place two of his brigades, less one battalion, at General Hammersley’s disposal
for the operations on the 9th, Uncertainty as to the exact time of their landing may
perhaps have led to the exclusion of these seven battalions from the plan of operations
for August 9th, while the unfortunate repulse on both flanks on the morning of that
day caused them to be hurried to the scene of action as soon as they could be got ready.
They were much scattered in consequence, and removed from the control of their own
divisional and brigade organisations, and this cannot have conduced to their fighting


• efficiency, especially as hardly any of their officers had been trained in the regular army
for or P ossesse d previous war experience.
v j a On August Bth and 9th Sir Bryan Mahon, commanding the 10th Division, but having
ra j with him of. his own troops only two battalions of the 30th Brigade, one of the 31st Brigade,
er _ and his divisional Pioneer Battalion, supported by two battalions of the 34th Brigade which
)U £ tad been put under his orders, continued to push forward along Karakol Dagh and Kiretch
lid Tepe Sirt, and entrenched a north and south line through a point marked on the map by
a bench mark on the latter. Sir Frederick Stopford states that, taking into account
the small force at his disposal and the lack of artillery support, the progress of Sir Bryan
et | Mahon was as satisfactory as could be expected.
j )e 1 We think that it was unfortunate that the 10th Division had no opportunity of acting
ec j as a division under its own commander at the critical stages of these operations.
.y. ‘ 98. Sir lan Hamilton had spent the night of the Bth on board ship at Suvla
ng and had watched General Hammersley’s attack the next morning. After landing at Gaza
Baba at about 8 a.m. he walked up the Karakol Dagh ridge as far as the headquarters
te of the 30th Brigade. He then appears to have returned to Imbros. About 5 p.m. on the
9th Sir Frederick Stopford received a letter from General Braithwaite expressing the
confident opinion that, if an attack of six or eight battalions could be organised under
nt the command of a selected officer, and directed on Ismail Oglu Tepe and the ridge thence
to Anafarta Sagir, the troops would attain their objective. The letter laid stress on the
to need for Sir Frederick Stopford’s personal influence and driving power to get the opera-
-1 tion driven through.
to Sir Frederick Stopford regarded this letter as tantamount to an order from the General
th Officer Commanding-in-Chief. At the same time he was aware that the troops of the 11th
Division and the seven battalions of the 53rd Division had lost heavily during the day's
fighting and were considerably disorganised. There was, however, one brigade of the 53rd
in Division in reserve at Lala Baba which had not been engaged. Sir Frederick Stopford deter-
y, mined, therefore, to make the attack not with six or eight battalions only, as suggested
ie in General Braithwaite’s letter, but with the whole of the 53rd Division, less one battalion
id which had not yet landed, supported by the whole of the 11th Division.
At 7.50 p.m. on the 9th General Bindley received his orders for the attack which
was to take place at 5 a.m. on the following day. He found great difficulty in collecting
his scattered battalions. . In fact, two battalions of the 160 th Brigade seem to have
ie remained with the 33rd Brigade near Hill 50. There were three battalions of the
Royal Welsh Fusiliers (158 th Brigade) at Lala Baba, and these, with five other battalions
h (four of the 159 th Brigade and one of the 160 th Brigade) were eventually concentrated
as two brigades near the position occupied by the 32nd Brigade at Sulajik. The right
it of this force moved south on Hill 70, but swung round to the west when about
200 yards from the top of the hill. It thus came under flank and reverse fire from
ir the Turkish guns on Ismail Oglu Tepe and retreated, subsequently re-forming behind
the 33rd Brigade. The centre and left of the force were at first more successful, but
k about 10.30 a.m. the left was rapidly driven back, and with the retirement of the
centre the attack came to an end. Under the orders of the Corps Commander the attack
e was renewed, after some artillery preparation, at 5 p.m.. but the opposition being greater
than in the morning no headway was made, and the troops fell back to the alignment held
o the previous evening.
i 99. On August 10th Sir Frederick Stopford received orders from General Headquarters
to take up and entrench a line across the whole front extending from Azmak Dere on the south
3 through the knoll east of Chocolate Hill, to the ground held by the 10th Division on Kiretch
• Tepe Sirt. In giving effect to this order on August 11th he took the opportunity of reorgan-
[ ising his divisions and brigades. The entrenchment of the line from Kazlar Chair to 600
b yards south of Sulajik was assigned to the 11th Division, thence to the west of Kuchuk
Anafarta Ova to the 53rd Division, and thence to Kiretch Tepe Sirt to the 10th Division.
; The length of this line was over 5 miles.
> During this day the 54th Division arrived at Suvla and began to disembark at A beach.
[ It had no artillery, no divisional signal company, no field ambulances, no ammunition, and
no mules. The division was commanded by Major-General F. S. Inglefield, and consisted
; of the 161 st Brigade under Brigadier-General Daniell, the 162 nd Brigade under Brigadier*
General De Winton, and the 163 rd Brigade under Brigadier-General Brunker. Sir
Frederick Stopford was directed not to employ the division without instructions from
General Headquarters.


100. On the morning of August 12th General Stopford received orders from General Head- 54
quarters that the 54th Division was to make a night march that night and at dawn the oi
next day to attack the heights of Kavak Tepe and Tekke Tepe and thence to Anafarta
Sagir. The feasibility of a night march through an intricate and wooded country depends al
upon the absence of opposition along the route to be traversed, but in this case Sir w
Frederick Stopford had reason to believe that from Kuchuk Anafarta Ova eastward the a(
ground was held by the enemy. He therefore decided to send forward the 163 rd Brigade li ]
in the afternoon lor the purpose of occupying Kuchuk Anafarta Ova and securing an a]
unopposed night march for the remainder of the Division, at any rate as far as that place, b<
In spite of serious opposition the 163 rd Brigade succeeded in establishing itself at the 3
desired point in very difficult and enclosed country. It was on this occasion that the C
officer commanding the l/sth Norfolk Regiment with 16 officers and 250 men pursued L
the enemy into the forest, from which none of them ever emerged. tl
In the course of the same afternoon General Headquarters enquired whether Sir tl
Frederick Stopford was satisfied that the 54th Division could be supplied with food, water, h
ammunition, etc., if the troops succeeded in gaining the high ground which was their
objective. Sir Frederick Stopford replied that he foresaw grave difficulty in supplying the b
division, as in such difficult and densely wooded country the convoys would be attacked tl
and the mules shot or stampeded. Thereupon the orders for the night march and the attack a
on the heights were cancelled by General Headquarters. " b
101. On August 13th Sir lan Hamilton informed Sir Frederick Stopford that, as I
soon as Sir William Birdwood was ready to co-operate, a simultaneous attack was to I
be made by the latter on Sari Bahr and by the 11th and 54th Divisions on Ismail Oglu v
Tepe. Sir Frederick Stopford prepared plans accordingly. As it appeared, however, that t.
Sir William Birdwood could not then undertake a fresh attack on Sari Bahr the project t
was abandoned, and Sir Frederick Stopford was directed to confine his attention to b
strengthening the entrenched line across his front, s
To straighten out the left of this line Sir Frederick Stopford on August 14th directed Sir £
Bryan Mahon to advance on the following day and gain possession of the whole of the top
of Kiretch Tepe Sirt. The 54th Division was ordered to co-operate. On the morning of the v
15th the two brigades of the 10th Division, the 30th and 31st, made a frontal attack along I
the ridge, while the 162 nd Brigade of the 54th Division supported on the right. Gunfire from h
two men-of-war in the Gulf of Saros and from one mountain battery, one field bittery, and s
one heavy battery was brought to bear on the Turkish position. At first the attack
succeeded and the top of the ridge was captured by the 6th Dublin Fusiliers. The Turks,
however, made a counter-attack, and after severe fighting and heavy casualties our troops 1
had to fall back to their original alignment. . s
102. On the evening of August 15th Sir Frederick Stopford was relieved of the command ■
of the 9th Corps and replaced for the time being by Maj or-General de Lisle. On his way from x
Cape Helles to Suvla Major-General de Lisle had called at Imbros, seen Sir lan Hamilton, A
and received formal instructions from Major-General Braithwaite. In these instructions he A
was informed that his immediate and most urgent concern was to reorganise the 9th Corps, A
and to prepare as large a proportion of it as possible for a fresh attack on Ismail Oglu
Tepe, and the ridge running thence to Anafarta Sagir. The force placed at his disposal
consisted of the 10th Division, less the 29th Brigade, the 11th, 53rd and 54th Divisions, and 1
the 2nd Mounted Division, composed of about 4,000 dismounted men, which was expected to
reach Suvla from Egypt by August 18th. As regards artillery, two mountain batteries, i
two heavy batteries and one field artillery brigade had been landed at Suvla. One field
artillery brigade and two batteries of 5-inch howitzers had been landed at Anzac and were ’
at the disposal of the General Officer Commanding the 9th Corps as soon as horses could be 1
provided to mobilise them. Three more field artillery brigades and two batteries of j
4-5 inch howitzers were at Mudros, ready to be brought up as soon as they could be landed,
but they would have to be landed without horses and taken into position by the horses of (
other units. <
103. On assuming command of the 9th Corps, Major-General de Lisle investigated the
situation at Suvla and represented to General Headquarters the desirability of strengthening
the force at his disposal by bringing over the 29th Division from Helles. This proposal
commended itself to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief and the 29th Division landed
at Suvla on August 20th. The 2nd Mounted Division under Major-General Peyton had
landed two days before. The attack was fixed for August the 21st and Major-General
de Lisle s plan, which met with Sir lan Hamilton’s approval, was as follows :—The 53rd and


'ad- 54th Divisions to hold the enemy from Sulajik to Kiretch Tepe Sirt; the 11th Division
the on the right and the 29th Division on the left to attack Ismail Oglu Tepe and the ridge
irta running thence to Anafarta Sagir. In support the 2nd Mounted Division of Yeomanry,
nds and i* l I>eserve what remained of the two Brigades of the 10th Division. It was arranged
Sir with Sir William Bird wood that a force of nine battalions should co-operate by
the advancing from Damakjelik Bair so as to connect with the southern end of the outpost
a,de line of the 9th Corps near Kazlar Chair. It had been decided to attack in the afternoon,
an and it so happened that a fog came on which seriously interfered with the preliminary
ice bombardment of the enemy’s position from 2.30 p.m. to 3 p.m. The advance was begun at
the 3 p.m. by the 11th Division, the 34th Brigade rushing the Turkish trenches between Hetman
the Chair and Aire Kevak. In his despatch Sir lan Hamilton states that this was done piac-
ied tically without loss, but Major-General Hammersley does not agree. He has informed us
that one battalion lost five out of its seven officers before reaching the lurkish trenches and
Sir that by the end of the day the losses of this and of another battalion were extremely
- er heavy. The 32nd Brigade, moving direct against Hetman Chair and the communication
L eir trench thence eastward to Ismail Oglu Tepe, lost its proper direction by inclining too much
the to the north and came under a heavy enfilade fire. The brigade swung round to attack
[ed the communication trench from the north, but the attempt failed although successive lines
lc p advanced with conspicuous gallantry. Major - General Hammersley attributes tins
brigade’s loss of direction to the fact that its right battalion lost ail its officeis within the
first few hundred yards. The 33rd Brigade, which was in divisional reserve, started from
as Lala Baba shortly after 3 p.m. towards Hetman Chair in support of the 34th and 32nd
to Brigades. During this movement some confusion arose from the 2nd Mounted Division,
du which was marching from Lala Baba to Chocolate Hill, cutting across the line of advance of
iat the 33rd Brigade and temporarily separating the two battalions in front from the two
3ct battalions in the rear. The confusion was increased by a fierce bush fire which had started
to north of Hetman Chair. In the result the 33rd Brigade lost direction, part of it moving
south-east towards Susak Kuyu and part to the north of the Turkish communication trench.
Sir So far as the 11th Division was concerned the operation had failed. _
on Meanwhile at 3.30 p.m., the 29th Division attacked Hill 70. The trenches on the ml
be were carried by the 87th Brigade on the left, but the 86th Brigade \vas brought to a standstil
n rr by the bush fire. Moreover its right was not supported owing to the 32nd Brigade
>m having deviated from the proper direction. Later on the 86th Brigade fell back to a point
Q d south-west of Hill 70, where a little cover was obtainable, and eventually the division
ck withdrew to its previous position. ,
:s Later on in the afternoon the 2nd South Midland Brigade of the 2nd Mounted
ps Division was sent forward from its position-behind Chocolate Hill in the hope that some
substantial success might yet be achieved. The bush fire and the enemy s opposition
retarded the brigade’s advance and it was almost nightfall before it reached the \ alley
lfl between Hill 70 and Hill 100 on Ismail Oglu Tepe. A knoll near the centre of this valley
was captured by one of the regiments of the brigade as soon as it was dark, but as this knol
was commanded by the enemy’s trenches and could not be held in the day-time u* l^ Bß w |
l ’ were in possession of Ismad Oglu Tepe, the regiment and the brigade to which it belonged
| were ordered back to Chocolate Hill. It appears therefore that so far as the 29th Division
I ’ and 2nd Mounted Division were concerned the operation had failed.
The casualties in the 9th Corps on August 21st were approximately as follows . in
ir) the 11th Division, 58 out of 129 officers and 2,300 other ranks out of 6,400. In the 29th
t Division a little under 5,000 officers and men. In the 2nd Mounted Division which was
Q about 4,000 strong, 1,200 officers and men, or 30 per cent.
I -j The force under Major-General Cox, which had been detailed to co-operate with the
r> 9th Corps on August 21st, advanced in three sections, the left to establish connection with
the outpost line of the 11th Division near Kazlar Chair, the centre on Kabak Kuyu where
r there was a good supply of water, and the right on the Turkish trenches at Kaiajik Agha a.
j The advance of the left and central sections was successful. The right section met with
i obstinate resistance, but effected a lodgment on Kaiajik Aghala before nightfall and he
} on during the night against superior force. The next morning an additional battalion
reinforced this section, and after several attacks and counter-attacks a line from Kaiajik
Aghala northward to Susak Kuyu was taken up and strengthened and subsequently con-
e nected with the right of the 9th Corps. *
, 104. On August 27th, Sir William Birdwood again detailed a under Major-
General Cox to complete the capture of Hill 60, immediately north of Kaiajik Aghala.
The troops consisted of detachments from the 4th and sth Australian Brigades, the JNew
Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade, and the sth Connaught Rangers. The advance was made


at 5 p.m. and after severe fighting lasting through the night, the next day, and up to 1 a.m.
° n fiiH was captured. Our casualties on this occasion amounted to 1,000.
This was the last engagement of any serious importance at or in the vicinity of Suvla
up to its evacuation.
r<k ave alread 7 mentioned that Sir Frederick Stopford vacated the command
°, j l6 Corps on August 15th, and that Major-General Lindley resigned the command
ot the 53rd Division on August 17th. On August 18th Brigadier-General Sitwell was
relieved of the command of the 34th Brigade on account of an adverse report on his
capacity for command by Major-General Hammersley. Under orders from the War
Omce Major-General Hammersley was relieved of the command of the 11th Division
Q. 10467. on August 23rd. He received at the time a telegram from General Headquarters to the
enect that no communication on the subject of his relief had emanated from Sir lan
Hamilton, but that presumably the War Office considered his age a bar. Major-General
Hammersley was then nearly 57. On August 24th Major-General de Lisle vacated the
temporary command of the IXth Corps and reverted to the command of the 29th Division
eing replaced by'Lieutenant-General the Hon. J. Byng. The reason for Lord Kitchener’s
ac 1011 n f 1 egard to Sir Irederick Stopford and Major-General Hammersley appears to be
S" “® ce as ”7 JV tele f an ; , t0 Lord Kitchener, dated August 14th, Sir lan Hamilton
No *lBl4 ™P orted that Jesuit of his visit to the IXth Corps had bitterly disappointed him.
He remarked : There is nothing for it but to allow them (the troops at Suvla) time to
rest and re-organize, unless I force Stopford and his Divisional Commanders to undertake
_ genera a ction for which, in their present frame of mind, they have no heart. In fact,
War Office they are not fit for it.” Lord Kitchener replied on the same date inquiring whether Sir
Na 1815. an Hamilton had any competent Generals to take the place of Sir Frederick Stopford,
fU a n Mahon and Major-General Hammersley. He added : “ From your report I
think Stopford should come home. This is a young man’s war, and we must have com-
manding officers who vail take full advantage of opportunities which occur but seldom,
it, therefore, any Generals fail, do not hesitate to act promptly. ‘Any Generals I have
available 1 will send you.” Sir lan Hamilton answered the foregoing telegram on the
War Office same date to the effect that the one man on the spot who could pull the IXth Corps
No!S. tog6tll ! r ag T 7™ Major-General de Lisle. He remarked : “ Unfortunately Mahon is
senior to de Lisle, but I could not put him in command of the Corps at present, though
as Divisional General he has done better than others, and I would ask him to accept the
Wat Office position I hope you will agree to this and give de Lisle the temporary rank
Llea^ e nant-General. Lord Kitchener again telegraphed on the same date to the
efiect that he was asking Sir John French to supply one Corps Commander and two
Divisional Generals, and had suggested the name of Lieutenant-General Byng for the
Corps Command, and that it was better not to act definitely until he had heard what Sir
John Irench could do.
, H will be observed that this telegraphic correspondence between Sir lan Hamilton
and Lord Kitchener hardly bears out the telegram received by Major-General Hammersley
from General Headquarters when he was relieved of his Divisional Command.
106. Sir lan Hamilton has urged us to investigate and express our opinion on certain
incidents which occurred in connection with Sir Frederick Stopford’s removal from his
command.
i u Sir Frederick Stopford was replaced by Major-General de Lisle on August 15th, and
left forthwith for England. He thereupon ceased to be under Sir lan Hamilton’s orders,
and on his way home he wrote a memorandum, dated August 28th, in which he gave an
account of the operations at Suvla from the landing up to the day of his departure. On
reachin g London he forwarded this memorandum to the Military Secretary at the War
ce tor Lord Kitchener s information. On August 14th the telegraphic correspondence
\v nm paragraph had taken place between Sir lan Hamilton and
telegram 00 was followed by a telegram from Sir lan Hamilton, dated August
No. 1853. i \ 111 Walc “h the operations at Anzac and Suvla were described and commented on.
A telegram, dated August 22nd, was then sent by Lord Kitchener to Sir lan Hamilton,
War Office ami to Hansnut the operation orders and other instructions relating to the Suvla
telegram opera ions, a n an Hamilton replied on the same date that these documents had
No. 7231. been forwarded by the last King’s Messenger, who had left three days before.
On receipt of the documents a synopsis was prepared, and Lord Kitchener decided to
M.F assemble a Committee of senior General Officers at the War Office for the purpose of con-
°. 77. sidering them, together with Sir lan Hamilton’s telegrams of August 14th and 17th and
Sir Frederick Stopford s memorandum.


.m. A copy of the memorandum was forwarded by the War Office to Sir lan Hamilton
00. on his return to England, and he does not appear to have taken exception to it at that
via time.
We understand Sir lan Hamilton’s present contention to be that Sir Frederick Stopford
was not entitled to forward the memorandum of August 28th to the Military Secretary,
,nd except through himself as General Officer Commanding-in-Chief the Mediterranean
,nd Expeditionary Force; and that the memorandum, being an irregular and ex parte statement,
fas should have been debarred from consideration until he had been furnished with a copy
his and given an opportunity of expressing his vievrs thereon.
ar The question raised by Sir lan Hamilton being one of military discipline, and of
on administrative action on the part of Lord Kitchener as Secretary of State for War, its
he consideration appears to us to lie outside the scope of our enquiry.
an > .
ral 107. Sir Beauvoir de Lisle attributes the failure on August 21st chiefly to the want of
he artillery. He states that there was not as much artillery on shore at Suvla as is normally
m, assigned to a single division. About three-quarters of the artillery of one division had
r’s to support the attack of three divisions. Secondly, he is of opinion that the troops landed
be at Suvla before the date of his assuming command of the IXth Corps had gone through
3n a very trying experience, and that hardship, heat and thirst, coupled with futile attacks
n. and repeated failures, had for the time being worn them out, shaken their self-reliance,
to and dulled their fighting spirit. Thirdly, he considers that the staff work generally had
ke been indifferent and that consequently the troops had suffered more than they ought to
;t, have done. Sir Beauvoir de Lisle gives no specific instance of this indifferent staff work
ir as coming under his own observation, while he speaks in high terms of the professional
d, qualifications of the Brigadier-General, General Staff, of the IXth Corps, Brigadier-General
I Reed, V.C. He had no confidence in the fitness of Major-Generals Bindley and Q- 16223.
i- Hammersley for divisional commands in the field, and he thought that Major-General
a. F. S. Inglefield, who at the time was 60, was too old for the command of the
rg 54th Division. He was in favour of the evacuation of Suvla, which he regarded
[e as the only thing to do when we had the factor of surprise no longer in our favour,
>s and for the same reason he would have evacuated Helles and Anzac and abandoned Q.Q. 16185-
is the enterprise in June, as by that time there was no prospect of ultimate success. 16250,
h He described the operations planned by him for August 21st as having a defensive rather Q- 16241.
g than an offensive object. He attacked in order to prevent the Turks from attacking.
108. Sir Beauvoir de Lisle has spoken of the staff work in the IXth Corps as not being
up to the proper standard, and certain incidents have come to our notice which support
this allegation. General Hammersley put forward in his evidence a precis of the Q. 10340.
more important messages received at and issued from the headquarters of the 11th Division
at Lala Baba, from 5 a.m. to 5.40 p.m., on August 7th. A message was sent by
General Sitwell at 6.30 a.m. that his troops were unable to move eastward from the vicinity
of Hill 10, the order having been that they should so move for the capture of Chocolate Hill.
To this message no reply was sent, but at 8 a.m. another order was issued to Q. 11032-7.
General Sitwell that his troops and those of the 32nd Brigade were to advance on Chocolate
Hill, supported on the left by the force under General Hill, which was to advance
on Ismail Oglu Tepe. About the same time General’ Hill was told by General
Hammersley that, when he reached the 32nd and 34th Brigades in the vicinity
of Hill 10, he with the five battalions under his command was to operate on the right
towards Chocolate Hill, the battalions of the 32nd and 34th Brigades operating on the left
towards Ismail Oglu Tepe. Up to this time General Sitwell had shown no
inclination to move forward, and the discrepancy between these orders, so far as concerned
the tasks assigned to the several brigades, led to his neither taking action himself nor co-
operating with General Hill. Again, when the final order for the combined attack
on Chocolate Hill under General Sitwell’s command was issued at 2.40 p.m.,
no mention was made in it of Ismail Oglu Tepe as one of the objectives, though
General Hammersley has informed us that he intended an attack on Ismail Oglu Tepe to General
form part of the operation. So far as we can judge, the orders emanating from Hammers-
General Hammersley’s headquarters on August 7th were lacking in coherence and g^^ ment
precision. ’ p7- '
109. The unfortunate incident of the withdrawal of the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment
from Hill 70 on the evening of August Bth, without its being replaced, also appears to
indicate defective staff work. General Hammersley’s account of this incident is far
from clear. He tells us that he sent the 7th South Staffordshire Regiment belonging to
(C 49—242) T)


the 33rd Brigade to reinforce General Hill at Chocolate Hill on the morning o
the Bth, that General Hill ordered it forward at noon with directions to picket
Hill 70 and entrench, but that Hill 70 was already occupied by the 6th East Yorkshire
Regiment. Later on he tells us that the latter regiment advanced, under considerable fire
to the western slopes of Hill 70, that the fire became so intense that the Commanding
Officer resolved to wait until dusk before occupying the hill, and that after dusk the hil
was carried, and the troops began to entrench themselves. Later on, he tells us that,
after his interview with Sir lan Hamilton, he sent instructions to the Officer Commanding
the 32nd Brigade at Sulajik, nominating the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment for the advance
by night to Tekke Tepe, because he thought the battalion in question had been the least
used so far, and was therefore the freshest. The battalion got orders to move from Hill 7C
to Sulajik at 11 p.m., and owing to the darkness and thick bush did not arrive there
until 3 a.m. No battalion was directed to replace the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment
on its vacating Hill 70, which the Turks promptly re-occupied. In our opinion, Genera]
Hammersley did not know on August Bth that Hill 70 had been occupied, though this
must have been known to Genera] Hill, and is stated in evidence to have been observed
by General Maxwell when he reconnoitred the ground east of Chocolate Hill. It would
seem that these subordinate commanders or their staff took no steps to acquaint the
divisional commander or his staff with what had occurred in regard to Hill 70.
The failure to replace the 6th East Yorkshire Regiment when ordered from Hill 7C
to Sulajik entailed many fruitless attempts to recapture the hill and much unnecessary
loss of life.
110. Again, it will be seen on reference to para. 78 of this Report that on July 29th
the General Officer Commanding IXth Corps was led to expect that he would be supplied
with a considerable force of artillery, including seven brigades of field artillery—namely,
the three brigades belonging to the 10th Division, two out of the three brigades belonging
to the 11th Division, and two out of the three brigades belonging to the 13th Division. Up
to August Bth only one field battery was available at Suvla, from August 9th to August
15th only one brigade of field artillery was available, and for the operations of August 21st
Major-General de Lisle states that he had at his disposal only about three-quarters of the
artillery of a division to support the attack of three divisions.
We think that the absence of the artillery and horses available at Alexandria and
Mudros must have materially contributed to the failure at Suvla.
111. We have already mentioned Sir lan Hamilton’s personal intervention on the
afternoon of August Bth and the consequent alteration in the scheme of attack which Sir
Frederick Stopford had previously decided on. We regard the intervention as well-
intentioned but injudicious. In the modified scheme the scope of the operations was
enlarged so as to include the high ground near Tekke Tepe, but the difficulties of reaching
and holding this ground were not appreciated, and in the result the attack in that
direction was repulsed with heavy loss. Moreover, the withdrawal of troops for the
movement on Tekke Tepe prejudicially affected the attack on Ismail Oglu Tepe, which
also failed. We cannot say whether the original scheme would have succeeded, but we
think that it had more chance of success than the scheme which took its place.
112. The combined operations so carefully planned were a failure, and the losses incurred
at Helles, Anzac, and Suvla had been extremely heavy. As regards Anzac, Sir lan Hamilton
remarks in his despatch : “ The grand coup had not come off. The Narrows were still
out of sight, and beyond field-gun range. But this was not the fault of Sir
William Birdwood, or any of the officers and men under his command.” As regards
Suvla, he remarks that the units of the 10th and 11th Divisions had shown their mettle
in the act of landing, when they stormed Lala Baba, when they tackled Chocolate Hill,
and when they drove the enemy from Hill 10. He continues : “ Then had come hesitation.
The advantage had not been pressed. The senior commanders at Suvla had had no personal
experience of the new trench warfare ; of the Turkish methods ; of the paramount import-
ance of time. Strong, clear leadership had not been promptly enough applied.” He
concludes by stating that for these reasons he had replaced Sir Frederick Stopford by
Major-General de Lisle.
113. It must be remembered that a great part of the fighting at both Anzac
and Suvla was not trench warfare, but hill warfare. Hill warfare is not an easy
business for troops unaccustomed to it, even when the hills are bare and the slopes normal,
but its difficulties are greatly increased when the hills are covered with forest or dense


g oi bush, and the slopes are precipitous. The difficulties are further intensified if the opera-
ickel Rons’ are undertaken at night. Certain general principles for the guidance of com-
shire manders who may propose to undertake night operations have been authoritatively
fire set forth in Field Service Regulations, 1914, Part I, Chapter IX, particular stress being
dinj laid on the importance of a complete preliminary reconnaissance. Local conditions at
s hif Anzac and Suvla did not admit of the thorough reconnaissance prescribed in this Chapter,
hat Exceptional conditions may justify a departure from established tactical rules, and we
ding do not doubt that Sir lan Hamilton carefully balanced the advantages of surprise and
ance immunity from hostile fire against the risk of misdirection, confusion, and delay. In
east the opinion of Sir William Bird wood and Sir Frederick Stopford night attacks were
11 70 justified by the special circumstances. Still, having regard to the results, the history
here of the operations at Anzac and Suvla seems to us to substantiate the soundness of the
lent Regulations on this subject. . ' ,
Lera] It may be mentioned, that in the telegram set out in para. 24 of this Report, Lord
this! Kitchener had referred to night attacks without confessing any opinion thereon.
nild Jn his despatch, Sir lan Hamilton describes Koja Chemen Tepe as the dominating
the point, the acquisition of which would necessarily lead to the capture of Maidos and Kaba
Tepe,’would enable the bulk of the Turkish Army to be cut off from land communication
170 with ’ Constantinople, and would give our artillery such a command as to stop all sea
iar y traffic between the Turkish Army and Constantinople or Asia. We suggest that these
objects would not have been attained without a protracted struggle, the result of
which cannot confidently be predicted.
!9th
115. After the failure at Suvla on August 6th and following days, the same question
e }y> presented itself to the Dardanelles Committee and the Cabinet as in May, i.e., whether
the Dardanelles operations were to be continued or abandoned, and, if continued, in
’ The question was raised in a memorandum prepared by Colonel Swinton, the Assistant-
Secretary to the Committee of Imperial Defence, and laid before the meeting of the
Dardanelles Committee on the 19th August, 1915.
I “ There appear to be only two alternative courses to be adopted :
(a) Not to send out the additional troops asked for by the Commander-in-Chief,
and, therefore, to abandon the attempt to force the Straits, for there appears to
q ie be no prospect of success in a further offensive if the troops out in Gallipoli are
g- r t. not so increased, and without advancing it appears to be impracticable to
a jj_ continue to occupy the portions of the Peninsula already gained,
ras ( h ) To send out the troops asked for and to dispatch them with the least possible
ng delay so that the attempt which has just failed may be renewed. These rem-
iat forcements should be sent out at the earliest possible moment in view of t e
he broken weather to be expected in the last half of September, which wi
ch render landing and supply impossible fot considerable periods.”
0 This was not quite exhaustive, for it was possible to send put smaller reinforce-
ments which would enable Sir lan Hamilton to maintain his position till a final decision
1 was reached, and this was the plan adopted. Q . T
eci The reinforcements asked for were those which had been mentioned bv Sir lan
Hamilton in a telegram of August 17th in which he stated that the lurks had
v 110,000 rifles on the Peninsula to his 95,000 ; that his British Divisions were 45,000 under
s j r establishment, exclusive of about 9,000 promised or on the way, and that he required to
( j s give him the necessary superiority if the Turks were not largely reinforced, that this
j, i deficit should be made up and that new formations, totalling 50,000 rifles, should be sent.
The matter was discussed at many meetings of the Dardanelles Committee, bir
n : lan Hamilton’s views were considered, and appreciations were submitted by the General
Staff, which had been reconstituted under Sir Archibald Murray, and afterwards under
r Sir William Robertson. The final decision was not reached until December, 1915.
le
>y 116. The position when Sir lan Hamilton’s telegram of August 17th was received was
broadly this. It had been agreed at a joint Conference between the French and British
authorities held at Calais in July, 1915, that no important offensive should be under-
,v taken in the West until the Spring of 1916. This would reduce the demands irom e
I Western front for men and munitions and might make it possible to move troops thence
ie to the East.
(C 49 —242) 1)2


It had become clear that no help could be looked for from Bulgaria, and that that
country had become definitely hostile, and would probably join the Central Powers, as in
fact she did very soon. It was likely that if Bulgaria joined the Central Powers an attack nc
would be made on Serbia with the object of crushing that country and opening up com- i* l
inundation with Constantinople. If this were done, the Turks could be supplied with
guns and ammunition which they were known to want. The Russian reverses were still P 1
continuing. co
It seemed to be agreed that it would not be wise to abandon the operations in the
Dardanelles unless some operations in the Balkans or other operations against Turkey P 1
in some direction were undertaken, and there was undoubtedly a difference of opinion as
to the course to be adopted.
On August 20th, Lord Kitchener pointed out that, owing to the situation
in Russia, he could no longer maintain the attitude which was agreed upon in conjunction
with the French at Calais (in July), viz., that a real serious offensive on a large scale in
the West should be postponed until all the Allies were quite ready; and that the large f r
divisional reinforcements asked for could not be sent to the Dardanelles, as they had been
promised to France and could not be diverted. He said his inclination was to help Sir lan ca
Hamilton as far as was possible without interfering with the operations in France, at any
rate till after the contemplated offensive there had taken place.
War Office This was agreed to, and Sir lan Hamilton was so informed. He replied that he would w
best he could with the forces at his disposal; and after giving an account of some w
fighting that had taken place, and pointing out that casualties, both from wounds and
sickness, were very large, he said : “ Keeping these conditions in view, it appears inevit-
War Office able that within the next fortnight I shall be compelled to relinquish either Suvla Bay
telegram or Anzac Cove, and must further envisage the possibility of a still further reduction of
°* ' r p7 I ron t in the near future.” Later on, he reported that if Suvla or Anzac had to be
given up, he thought it must be Suvla. i ll
War Office In answer, Lord Kitchener desired him to discuss the matter with his Corps Com-
telegram manders, and referred to 47,000 drafts and reinforcements which had been sent since
No. 1940. August 6th. d<
War Office 117. Sir lan Hamilton replied that he did not understand the allusion to 47,000, as he n
telegram had not been advised of any such number, and, in answer, Lord Kitchener said that he
°‘ ' WaS sen(^n 8 On this, Sir lan Hamilton telegraphed that the welcome news
Sf ram ° f 47 ’ 000 reinforcements altered the whole situation, and that such a number would do
No. 8 1950. to complete his diminished cadres, and should materially lessen the sickness rate by
War Office more c h ance of taking tired troops out of the trenches. In fact, Sir lan Hamilton
telegrams, a PP ears to have received reinforcements amounting to 29,000, but of these 9,000 were not
No. 7337 ; sufficiently trained for active service and had to be sent to Egypt, reducing the effective C
1954. total to 20,000. tl
118. On August 27th, the Dardanelles Committee, after discussion, decided *
that no line of future policy could be framed for the present, but that Sir lan Hamilton 0
should do his best to hold the ground which he had gained, and be asked for his appre- t
ciation as to future policy and the requirements to carry it out. On the same date Lord l]
Kitchener telegraphed to Sir lan Hamilton accordingly.
War Office Sir lan Hamilton’s appreciation was sent on Sept. 2nd, and in it he pointed out that
No 2024 , drafts an( * reinforcements promised did not make up his deficit, and that he could a
not launch any grand attack unless or until his divisions could be brought up to establish- e
ment and new formations up to 50,000 were sent out. He also asked for reinforcements *
up to 20 per cent, to be available in the theatre of operations to meet wastage. He
concluded :“ To sum up, there is, in my opinion, no better alternative than to make fresh c
effort at Suvla and Anzac. You will understand that any appreciation I can send must ' f
inevitably alter from day to day, and that it must be again modified by any accession
to my strength in the shape of fresh Allied troops or an alteration in the political situation f
in the Balkans. Meanwhile, ail preparations are Being made for a winter campaign.” - c
When this came before the Dardanelles Committee on September 3rd a
they were informed by Lord Kitchener that the French Government had decided to 8
send four Divisions against Turkey to the Asiatic side of the Dardanelles and wished *
their two Divisions on the European side to be replaced by British troops. Lord
Kitchener said that he proposed to instruct Sir John French to send two Divisions 8
from France for the purpose. This enterprise, if carried out by the French, might have s
materially assisted the operations in the Dardanelles, and in any case was inconsistent c
with the abandonment of the Gallipoli Expedition. J


s Preparations were made for carrying out this scheme, hut the French troops could
ick n °k sent from the Western Front until the result of the contemplated offensive
>m- i n theatre was known. This offensive began on September 25th, and in
jf-p the meantime the Bulgarians had mobilized, and evidently an attack on Serbia was
till probable. Another element was thus introduced into the problem, namely, the
consideration whether an Allied force should be sent to Salonica or elsewhere to help
-h e the Serbians. On September 23rd the Secretary of State for War was directed to
:e y prepare a military appreciation of the situation to be placed before the Dardanelles
as Committee on the morning of September 24th on the following lines :
“The possibility of sending a British or Allied force to Salonica or farther in order
on to support Greece, if Greece should go to the assistance of Serbia in resisting an attack
on by the Austro-Germans and possibly the Bulgarians.” , ■
j n On September 24th Sir lan Hamilton was asked what force could be spared
■g e from Gallipoli for Salonica. At the same time the attention of the Admiralty and AVar
en Office was to be drawn to the importance of pushing on arrangements for a winter
an campaign, in the Gallipoli Peninsula.
ay .
119. The circumstances which led to the despatch of forces to Salonica do not come
within the scope of our enquiry. It is sufficient to say that for a long time questions
tie were ra, i sec l an d discussions took place about the matter, and eventually the British
1( j Government was committed to sending a large force to co-operate with the French in that
■£_ theatre. The possibility of having to send this force again raised the question of the
lv evacuation of Gallipoli.
0 £ There was a considerable division of opinion on the subject among the members
}e of the Dardanelles Committee, and on October 11th, it was decided that immediate
instructions should be given for the despatch, as soon as the pending operations on the
a _ Western Front were over, of an adequate force from France to Egypt, without prejudice
, e to its ultimate destination, and that a specially selected General should proceed without
delay to the Near East to consider and report as to the particular sphere and the
particular objective to which we should direct our attention. Sir Charles Monro was the
General selected, and he left England on October 22nd, and arrived at Gallipoli on
Le October 31st.
Ie
THE DECISION TO EVACUATE
120. On October 14th the Government - decided to recall Sir lan Hamilton, and on
October 20th General Sir Charles Monro was ordered to take over the command of
the forces in the Mediterranean, and received written instructions from Lord Kitchener
to report “ fully and frankly ”on the military position. He was instructed to consider
the best means of removing the existing deadlock, and to report “ whether, in his opinion,
on purely military grounds, it was better to evacuate Gallipoli or to make another attempt
to carry it.” He was also asked to give his estimate of the loss which would be incurred
in the course of an evacuation.
• ?
121. Sir Charles Monro left on October 22nd, arriving at Mudros on the 27th. After
an inspection of the Peninsula he came to the conclusion that the forces should be with-
drawn. He never swerved from this opinion, which he communicated to Lord Kitchener
in the following telegram on October 31st: —
“ With the exception of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps the troops
on the Peninsula are not equal to a sustained effort, owing to inexperienced officers,
the want of training of the men, and the depleted condition of many of the units.
“ We merely hold the fringe of the shore, and are confronted by the Turks in very
formidable entrenchments, with all advantages of position and power of observation of
our movements. The beaches are exposed to observed artillery fire, and in the restricted
areas all stores are equally exposed. We can no longer count upon any action by surprise
as the Turks are in considerably stronger force than they were, and have had ample
time to provide against surprise landings. -
“ Since the flanks of the Turks cannot be attacked, only a frontal attack is possible,
and no room is afforded on any of the beaches for the distribution of additional divisions
should they be sent, nor is there sufficient space for the deployment of an adequate force
of artillery, the action of which would be impaired by poverty of observation and good
positions for searching or counter battery effects. Naval guns could only assist to a
partial degree.
(C 49—242) D 3


" In fact an attack could only be prosecuted under the disadvantages of serious lack
of depth, and of absence of power of surprise, seeing that our line is throughout dominated
by the Turks’ position. The uncertainty of weather might also seriously hinder the
landing of reinforcements and regularity in providing the artillery ammunition to the
amount which would be required.
“It is therefore my opinion that another attempt to carry the Turkish lines would
not offer any hope of success; the Turkish positions are being actively strengthened daily.
Our information leads to the belief that heavy guns and ammunition are being sent to the
Peninsula from Constantinople. Consequently by the time fresh divisions, if available,
could arrive, the task of breaking the Turkish line would be considerably more formidable
than it is at present.
“ On purely military grounds, therefore, in consequence of the grave daily wastage
of officers and men which occurs, and owing to the lack of prospect of being able to draw
the Turks from their entrenched positions, I recommend the evacuation of the Peninsula.”
After adding that he was unable at that moment to give any definite estimate of the
losses which would be incurred in a withdrawal, Sir Charles Monro concluded his -telegram
by saying :
“ I have endeavoured in the expression of my opinion to give full weight to the effect
which will be created in the East by our evacuation, and I consider that the force now
in the Peninsula, or such portion of it as we may be able to evacuate, would be more
favourably placed in Egypt. This force stands in need of rest, re-organisation, and
especially of training, before it can be usefully employed. The Corps and Divisional
Commanders have done splendid work in the Peninsula, but they do not possess the
opportunity or time, as they now stand, to create the force into a reliable fighting
machine. Hence I think loss of prestige caused by withdrawal would be compensated
for in a few months by increased efficiency.”
QQ. 87 and 92. 122. Sir Charles Monro told us that his opinion was strengthened by the state of health
War Office of the troops. The rate of sickness had been alarmingly high in the hot months of August
telegram and September. On August 23rd Sir lan Hamilton had reported to Lord Kitchener that
No. 1915. the average net wastage, even when there were no serious engagements, amounted, owing
Sir lan to sickness, to 24 per cent, a month. In September the medical officers had reported that
Hamilton’s letters 50 per cent, of the men in seven battalions of the old troops examined at Anzac had feeble
to Lord Kitchener, hearts with shortness of breath, that 78 per cent, of these had diarrhoea, and 64 per cent.
1915 September ’ had sores on the skin. On the first three days of October over 1,800 sick were evacuated
’ from the IXth Corps at Suvla, and at times the number of such evacuations from Suvla,
telegram Ce Anzac, and Cape Helles amounted to 1,000 a day. In August, September and October,
No. 2331. the number of sick evacuated from the Peninsula amounted to [*].
In addition the troops were continuously under fire, the beaches and rest trenches
being shelled as much as the front lines. The men in reserve had to spend the night in
getting up stores to the front and in making communications. Fatigue parties had to
be constantly occupied in unloading the contents of the transports into lighters and from
the lighters to the shore. Although there was a notable decline in the sick rate shortly
after Sir Charles Monro’s arrival, Sir William Birdwood on November 4th telegraphed to
Lord Kitchener as follows :
War Office “ Byng and Davies and all their Divisional Commanders have very little faith in their
telegram troops’ present power of endurance, and reply that with few exceptions none are at
No. 2675 ( d ). present capable of more than 24 hours of sustained offensive effort. The same applies
to most of the Australians owing to amount of sickness we have had, from which they
have by no means recovered.”
War Office 123. On November Ist General Monro was asked by Lord Kitchener if his Corps
telegrams Commanders were of the same opinion as himself. Sir Charles Monro accordingly consulted
No. 2633 (a), gi r William Birdwood, Sir Julian Byng and Sir Francis Davies, and asked them to submit
No. 2647 (a). their views in writing. He urged them “ earnestly to give their opinions without paying
any heed to his.”
General Birdwood wrote :
“ I agree with General Monro regarding the grave disadvantages of our position and
the extreme difficulty of making any progress. But I consider that the Turks would look
upon our evacuation as a complete victory. From Indian experience I fear the result
on Mahometan world in India, Egypt, Persia. lam therefore opposed to evacuation.
I am of opinion that, if we leave the Peninsula, it is essential that the whole force must
be launched immediately against the Turks elsewhere, and I fail to see where this can
be done with confident hope of success. lam adverse to withdrawal which would enable
* This figure was not available at the time the Report was signed.


Turkish forces to proceed to Caucasus or Mesopotamia ; landing elsewhere than in Turkey
would not have the same effect. I also fear that the moral effect on our troops of with-
drawal would be bad, while the Turkish morale would proportionately rise. Season
being so late and bad weather at hand, I think actual withdrawal fraught with difficulty
and danger, as ample time and continuous fine weather essential. All embarkations
must be done at night, and only four or five nights a week can now be counted on.
Heavy loss might be caused by the advent of any continuous bad weather after with-
drawal has been partially carried out.”
General Byng replied :
“ I consider evacuation desirable. As regards Suvla, a voluntary and not very
costly retirement is feasible at the present time, but it seems possible that with German
help to the enemy a compulsory and therefore costly retreat may be necessitated.”
General Davies replied :
“ I agree with General Monro.”
The opinions of these three officers were then fully communicated to Lord Kitchener
by Sir Charles Monro in a'telegram on November 2nd, in which he repeated his opinion
as to the necessity of evacuating, and as a “ rough estimate ” stated that Admiral de
Robeck and his corps commanders thought a loss of 30 to 40 per cent, in personnel and
material might be incurred, and that he was “ inclined to agree with their estimate.
124. Sir Charles Monro’s opinion in favour of evacuation made it necessary for the L°rd Ourzon s
authorities at home to come to a decision of great gravity. On October 7th the War p e ™ oran
Committee had replaced the Dardanelles Committee, and on November 3rd both the
War Committee and the Cabinet invited Lord Kitchener to go out to the Mediterranean
in order to assist them in arriving at a final decision.
On the same day Lord Kitchener telegraphed to Sir William BhxLvood : War Office
KJLL uue artiiic > * Telegram
Very secret. . No. 2656 (a).
<£ You know the report sent in by Monro. I shall come out to , am leaving
to-morrow night. I have seen Captain Keyes, and I believe the Admiralty will agree to
making naval attempt to force the passage of the Straits. We must do what we can to
assist them, and I think that as soon as our ships are in the Sea of Marmora w r e should
seize the Bulair isthmus and hold it so as to supply the Navy if the Turks still hold out.
“ Examine very carefully the best position for landing near the marsh at the head of
the Gulf of Xeros, so that we could get a line across the isthmus, with ships at both sides.
In order to find the troops for this undertaking we should have to reduce the numbers
in the trenches to the lowest possible, and perhaps evacuate positions at Suvla. All the
best fighting men that could be spared, including your boys from Anzac and everyone
I can sweep up in Egypt, might be concentrated at Mudros ready for this enterprise.
“ There will probably be a change in the naval command, Wemyss being appointed
in command to carry through the naval part of the work.
“ As regards the military command, you would have the wdiole force, and should care-
fully select your commanders and troops. I w T ould suggest Maude, Fanshawe, Marshall,
Peyton, Godley, Cox, leaving others to hold the lilies. Please work out plans for this,
or alternative pGns as you may think best. We must do it right this time.
“ I absolutely refuse to sign orders 'for evacuation, which I think would be the
gravest disaster and would condemn a large percentage of our men to death or imprison-
mciit
“ Monro will be appointed to the command of the Salonika force.”
125. In order to explain the telegram quoted in the last paragraph, it is necessary to Q. 27339.
state that after the failure of the military operations in August, a section of responsible
naval officers, foremost among whom were Admiral Wemyss and Sir John de Robeck s
Chief of the Staff, Commodore Keyes, held very strongly that the fleet should renew the
attempt to force the Straits in order to relieve the army. A plan of operations had been
worked out, with the assent of Sir John de Robeck. It was thought by these officers
that, if three or four battleships and six or eight destroyers could pass through the Straits,
they would be able, in combination with the submarines, to dominate the Sea of Marmora,
thus cutting the main Turkish lines of communication and supply, which ran from the
Asiatic side of the Peninsula. - AnTQ
Sir John de Robeck was not in favour of this project, which he thought under- Com
estimated the dangers and difficulties of the operation, and overrated the effect that a p p
successful naval attack would produce. But he felt, nevertheless that the contrary
view should be fully put before the Admiralty, and towards the end of October he allowed QQ. 2734 .
Commodore Keyes to return home to do this. On arriving in England, Commodore
Keyes discussed his plan of operations fully with Mr. Balfour and the Sea Lords. He
(C 49—242) D 4


also had two interviews with Lord Kitchener on November 3rd and 4th. When he left
for the Mediterranean on November 4th Commodore Keyes told us he was under the
impression that his suggestion had been regarded with favour.
Between November the 3rd and 4th Lord Kitchener’s proposal to seize the Bulair
Isthmus had been considered and adversely criticised by the Admiralty, by Sir William
Birdwood, and by Commodore Keyes. On November 4th Lord Kitchener again
telegraphed to Sir William Birdwood, intimating that a renewal of the naval attack
might not be approved, and adding :
“ I am coming as arranged, and shall be at Alexandria Monday night or Tuesday
morning. Shall stay there one day without landing and without my presence being
known. After seeing Maxwell and Macmahon, shall come on to you, leaving in the
evening.
“ The more I look at the problem the less I see my way through, so you had better
very quietly and secretly work out any scheme for getting the troops off the Peninsula.”
Lord Kitchener left for the Mediterranean on the evening of November 4th. In
the course of the following days he discussed the position with Sir John Maxwell, Sir
Henry Macmahon and Sir Charles Monro, at Alexandria and Mudros. The telegrams
which then passed between him and the Prime Minister show that Lord Kitchener was
greatly concerned as to the difficulty of defending Egypt, in the event of an evacuation
of the Peninsula ; and that he advocated a landing at Ayas Bay, in the neighbourhood of
Alexandretta, with the object of cutting the Turkish railway communications. This
project necessitated the withdrawal of forces from both Salonica and France,-and the
diversion of Indian Divisions then on their way to Mesopotamia. It did not commend
itself to the General Staff at the War Office, and was ultimately rejected at a joint
conference between representatives of the British and French Governments held at Paris
on November 17th.
126. On November 15th Lord Kitchener reported to the Prime Minister the result
of his personal inspection of the positions on the Peninsula in the following telegram :
“To gain what we hold has been a most remarkable feat of arms. The country is much more
difficult than I imagined, and the Turkish positions at Achi Baba and Kilid Bahr are natural fortresses
of the most formidable nature, which, if not taken by surprise at first, could be held against very
serious attack by larger forces than have been engaged, even if these forces had proper lines of com-
munication to support them. This latter want is the main difficulty in carrying out successful
operations on the Peninsula.
“ The landings are precarious and often impossible through rough sea and want of harbours,
and the enemy’s positions are peculiarly suitable for making our communications more dangerous
and difficult. The base at Mudros is too far detached from our forces in the field, and the proper
co-ordination of the administrative services of a line of communications is prevented by distance
and sea voyages dependable on the weather. This state of things, in my judgment, is the main cause
of our troops not having been able to do better, and to attain really strategic points on Peninsula, which
would have turned Kilid Bahr, and unless this were done I do not consider that the Fleet ever could
have passed the Straits, Everyone has done wonders, both on sea and land, when the natural
difficulties that have had to be surmounted are considered. Our present positions, in my opinion,
can be held against the Turks even if they received increased ammunition.
“ The trenches have been well dug, and bomb-proof covering has been afforded for the men ;
supplies and water are on shore, and officers and men are confident that they can hold out against
the Turks, but they are somewhat depressed at ijot being able to get through. I consider, however
the lines are not deep enough, if Germany sent a German force to attack, to allow of proper arrange-
ments for supports, and if the front line trenches were taken, these difficulties would increase. I
consider that advances from our present positions are very difficult, particularly from Helles and
Anzac. Suvla gives some opportunity for improving our positions, but it seems very doubtful whether
this would enable us to push through.
“ About 125,000 Turks are immobilised by our occupation of the Peninsula, and they are caused
considerable loss, and, until the recent German operations in Serbia opened communications with
Turkey and changed the situation, practically the whole Turkish Army had to be held in readiness
to defend the capital if we succeeded on the Peninsula. In present circumstances the raison d’etre
of our forces on the Gallipoli Peninsula is no longer as important as it has been hitherto, and if another
position in the neighbourhood of Alexandretta were occupied, where Turkish movements eastward
could be effectively stopped, the realisation of the German objective against Egypt and the East
would be prevented.
“ Careful and secret preparations for the evacuation of the Peninsula are being made. If under-
taken it would be an operation of extreme military difficulty and danger; but I have hopes that,
given time and weather, which may be expected to be suitable until about the end of December, the
troops will carry out this task with less loss than was previously estimated. My reason for this is that
the distance they had to go to embark, and the contraction of the lines of defence to be held by a
smaller force, gives them a better chance than I thought previously.
“ The Admiral and Generals Monro and Birdwood, to whom I have read the above, all agree.”
Later in the same day Lord Kitchener telegraphed further to the Prime Minister
that Admiral de Robeck would like to retain Cape Helles, even if Suvla and Anzac were
evacuated.


sft 127. On November 19th the Prime Minister telegraphed to Lord Kitchener that “ His
ie Majesty’s Government had decided against the proposed expedition to Ayas Bay as a
result of their conference in Paris with the French Government, and Naval and Military
ir authorities, and after consideration of the maritime position in the Mediterranean,” and
m requested Lord Kitchener to give his “ considered opinion as to the evacuation of the
fn Peninsula, in whole or in part,” on the basis of the Ayas Bay scheme having been with-
>k drawn.
In reply, Lord Kitchener telegraphed on November 22nd to the effect that, while
>y our offensive had up to the present held up the Turkish Army, German assistance
tg was now practically available, that this assistance would make our positions untenable,
lc and that evacuation, therefore, seemed inevitable. He therefore recommended that
the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac should be proceeded with, while Cape Helles should
sr be held for the present. The retention of Cape Helles would enable the Navy to maintain
the advantages already gained, still threaten the seizure of the Straits, and also give
n greater facilities for the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac.
s 128. On November 23rd the War Committee came to the decision that:—
,s “ Having regard to the opinions expressed by Lord Kitchener in his telegram dated
n November 22nd, 1915, and by the General Staff in their memorandum dated November
if 22nd, 1915, the War Committee feel bound to advise the evacuation of the Gallipoli
s Peninsula on military grounds, notwithstanding the grave political disadvantages which
e may result from the decision. They have carefully examined the naval considerations
I in favour of the retention of Cape Helles as stated in a note by the Chief of the Admiralty
t War Staff, printed with the General Staff Memorandum referred to above. They are of
s opinion, however, that the naval advantages to be gained by this course are not com-
mensurate with the military disadvantages involved.”
k The proposal to evacuate then discussed at a Cabinet Council on the following
day. At this Council Lord Curzon told us that he “ and several of his colleagues, anxious
at least that the opposite side should be heard, and fearful of a decision fraught with such
fearful possibilities, pleaded for a few hours’ consideration,” and that he “ undertook to
. state the case to the best of his abilitv.”
r # # J
The case against evacuation was then elaborated by Lord Curzon in two memoranda
I dited November 25th and 30th, in which the military and political reasons in favour of and
against evacuation were fully discussed. Lord Curzon’s arguments were replied to by
1 Mr. Bonar Law in a memorandum circulated on December 4th, which ended as follows :
“ So far I have considered the question from a military point of view, and my con-
clusions may be disputed, but there is another aspect of it which is not military, and
which is not open to dispute. Kecognising the seriousness of the position at the Dar-
danelles, the Government decided to send a military expert to report on the question of
evacuation. For this purpose Sir Charles Monro was chosen. On the 31st October he
reported in the strongest possible terms in favour of evacuation. He sent us also the
opinions of three of the Generals on the spot —Generals Birdwocd, Byng and Davies.
Of these three General Birdwood alone was opposed to evacuation, but the reasons given
by him for his opposition were entirely political, and he agreed with General Monro
regarding the ‘ great disadvantages of. our position and extreme difficulty of making any
progress.’ Afterwards he concurred in a telegram sent by Lord Kitchener on the
22nd November which contained these words : ‘ Our offensive on the Peninsula has, up
to the present, held up the Turkish Army, but with German assistance, which is now
practically available, our positions there cannot be maintained, and evacuation seems
inevitable.’ Not satisfied with General Monro’s report, the Government decided to send
Lord Kitchener. In a telegram sent from Paris, on his way, Lord Kitchener showed
clearly that he was entirely opposed to evacuation, and he has since told us that he held
that view when he started for the Dardanelles. The actual examination of the situation,
on the spot, however, changed his opinion, and he telegraphed to the Prime Minister in
favour of evacuation in words which I have just quoted. We also consulted our General
Staff on the subject. They gave us an opinion as definite as that of the other Generals
in favour of evacuation. It is the fact, therefore, that every military authority, without
a single exception, whom we have consulted, has reported in favour of evacuation.
“ But this is not all. Some time ago the Cabinet unanimously came to the conclusion
that the war could not be carried on by a body so large as the Cabinet. A War Com-
mittee was therefore appointed. The views of the military authorities came before this
Committee, two of whose members, the Prime Minister and the First Lord of the
Admiralty, were opposed in the strongest possible way to evacuation ; yet this Com-
mittee reported unanimously in favour of acting upon the advice of our military advisers.


Their recommendation was brought before the Cabinet, with the result that on a matter
in regard to which delay must be dangerous and may be fatal, no decision has been
reached.
“ I hope that my colleagues will agree with me that the war cannot be carried to a
successful issue by methods such as these.”
129. Meanwhile the condition of the forces on the Peninsula was aggravated by a
blizzard of exceptional severity which raged on November 26th, 27th, 28th and 29th.
Two hundred and eighty men were drowned in the trenches at Suvla and many were frozen
to death as tliey stood. Sixteen thousand cases of frost bite and exposure had to be
evacuated, 12,000 from Suvla, where the positions were most exposed, and 2,700 and 1,200
from Anzac and Helles respectively. On December Ist Sir Charles Monro telegraphed to
Lord Kitchener pressing for a decision and adding :
“ There is, however, much to be done, and late season makes time a matter of great urgency. Detailed
plans approach completion, but intricate arrangements have still to be made with regard to collection
and clearing of shipping, distribution of small craft, embarkation and disposition of troops and
material, accommodation on islands, disposal of reinforcements, etc., to say nothing of tactical
arrangements. Experience of recent storms indicates that there is no time to lose. General Birdwood
telegraphed yesterday that if evacuation is to be made possible it is essential to take advantage of
every fine day from now. If decision cannot be reached very shortly, it may be equivalent to
deciding against evacuation.”
130. It must here be mentioned that on November 25th Sir John de Robeck
left the Mediterranean on sick leave, and his command was taken over by Vice-Admiral
Wemyss. From November 25th to December Bth Vice-Admiral Wemyss, with remark-
able pertinacity, advocated a renewal of the naval attack in a series of telegrams to the
First Lord of the Admiralty.
On his return home Sir John de Robeck attended a meeting of the War Council
on December 2nd, and his views as to the difficulties of a naval attack were placed
before the members of the Council. The decision as to the policy to be pursued was
then reserved for the Cabinet which met on the same day. Lord Kitchener, as the
result of this Cabinet meeting, telegraphed to Sir Charles Monro :
“ Private and secret. —The Cabinet has been considering the Gallipoli situation all to-day.
Owing to the political consequences there is a strong feeling against evacuation, even of a partial
character. It is the general opinion that we should retain Cape Helles.
“ If the Salonika troops are placed at your disposal up to four divisions for an offensive operation
to improve the position at Suvla, could such operations be carried out in time with a view to making
Suvla retainable by obtaining higher positions and greater depth 1 The Navy will also take the
offensive in co-operation.”
131. On December 3rd Sir Charles Monro telegraphed in reply to this proposal as
follows: —
“ I fully recognise the complexity of the situation which has arisen. Ido not, however, think
that the proposal to employ four fresh divisions in order to gain a more secure position at Suvla
can be regarded as an operation offering a reasonable chance of success. We cannot expect the
element of surprise which is so essential to make up for the disadvantages of position under which
we labour. The Salonika Divisions could not be ready for active operations on the Peninsula until
storm weather sets in. . . .
“ In respect of naval co-operation, the character of the terrain on the Peninsula is such that
naval guns cannot search the Turkish positions. The fire of howitzers would be needed to do so
effectively. The many deep ravines and gullies are very favourable for the concealment and pro-
tection of the Turkish reserves, and for their rapid transference in case of bombardment. Nor do I
think the supply of the Turks on the Peninsula by the two lines of supply available to them could
be prevented by naval action.”
132. On December 7tb the Cabinet decided to evacuate the positions at Suvla and
Anzac only and to retain that at Cape Helles. This decision, Lord Curzon told us, was
taken mainly on the advice of Lord Kitchener, who had then returned.
133. The decision of the Cabinet was communicated to Sir Charles Monro on
December 7th, and to Vice-Admiral Wemyss on December Bth. The Vice-Admiral, in
reply, persisted in recommending that the naval attack should be attempted, and in the
course of his telegram to the First Lord of the Admiralty on December Bth stated : —-
“ The Navy is prepared to force the Straits and control them for an indefinite period, cutting off
all Turkish supplies which now find their way to the Peninsula either by sea from the Marmora or
across the Dardanelles from Asiatic to European shore. The only line of communications left would
be the road along the Isthmus of Bulair, which can be controlled almost entirely from the Sea of
Marmora and the Gulf of Xeros. What is offered the Army, therefore, is the practical, complete
severance of all Turkish lines of communication, accompanied by the destruction of the large supply
depdts on the shore of the Dardanelles.


“ In the first instance I strongly advocated that the naval attack should synchronize with an
army ofiensive, and if the Army will be prepared to attack in the event of a favourable opportunity
presenting itself, nothing more need be required of them. The Navy here is prepared to undertake
this operation with every assurance of success. If the units as described in your letter of 24th
November can be provided, these hopes of success are greatly increased, and the possible losses greatly
diminished. _ t .
The unanimous military opinion referred to in Admiralty telegram iso. 422, has, I feel certain,
been greatly influenced, and naturally so, by the military appreciations of Sir Charles Monro. These
I have not seen, but their purport I have gathered in course of conversations. The Corps Com-
manders, I know, view the evacuation with the greatest misgiving. The forcing of the Dardanelles,
as outlined in my telegrams, has never been put before them, and I am convinced that, after con-
sidering the certain results which would follow a naval success, they would favour an attack on the
lines indicated, especially in view of the undoubted low morale of the Turkish Peninsula army, of
which we have ample evidence.
* . * * * * *
“ The very extensive German propaganda being pursued all over the Near East, accompanied
by the expenditure of vast sums of money, is not, I feel convinced, being undertaken merely as a side
issue to the European war. .
“ A position of stalemate on both fronts of the principal theatres of war appears the natural
outcome of present situation. ‘ This opinion is freely expressed in the higher military circles in Greece,
and would therefore appear to be fostered by the Germans a significant point.
“ By surrendering our position here, when within sight of victory, we are aiding enemy to obtain
markets the possession of which may enable her to outlast the Allies in the war of exhaustion now
commencing. • . , f
“ A successful attack would once and for all disperse those clouds of doubt, a large amount of
shipping would be released, and the question of Greece and Egypt settled.
“ X do not know what has been decided about Constantinople, but if the Turks could be told that
we were in the Marmora to prevent its occupation by the Germans, such a course would inevitably
lead to disruption, and therefore weakness amongst them.
“ I fear the effect on the Navy would be bad.
“ Although no word of attack has passed my lips except to my immediate staff and admirals,
I feel sure that every ofiicer and man would feel that the campaign had been abandoned without
sufficient use having been made of our greatest force, viz., the Navy.
“ The position is so critical that there is no time for standing on ceremony, and I suggest that
General Birdwood, the officer who would now have to carry out the attack or evacuation which is
now ordered, be asked for his appreciation.
“ The logical conclusion, therefore, is the choice of evacuation or forcing the Straits. 1 consider
the former disastrous tactically and strategically, and the latter feasible, and, so long as troops remain
Anzac decisive.
« I am convinced that the time is ripe for a vigorous ofiensive, and I am confident of success.'’
134. To this strongly worded representation Mr. Balfour, then First Lord of the Q, 2.302.
Admiralty, replied on December 10th that, as the Admiralty were not prepared to authorise
the Navy, single-handed, attempting to force the Narrows and acting in Sea of Marmora, cut
off from supplies, the decision of the Government to evacuate Suvla and Anzac would not
be further questioned by the Admiralty in view of the individual and combined apprecia-
tion of the responsible Generals, and the great strain thrown on naval and military
resources by the operations in Greece. The retention of Cape Helles and the mouth of the
Straits would enable another attack to be started later, working on a different plan, should
the Government decide to undertake it. And on the same day the then First Sea Lord,
Sir Henry Jackson, telegraphed to Vice-Admiral Wemyss as follows
“ Your telegram has been very carefully considered. I personally agree with your appreciation
of German designs in the East, and I view with deepest regret the abandonment of Suvla and Anzac.
But the military authorities, including Birdwood, are clear that they cannot be made tenable against
an increased artillery fire, while the Admiralty hold that the naval arguments against forcing the
Straits are overwhelming. Naval authorities here are convinced that, while success is most doubtful,
very heavy losses are certain, and it must be remembered nothing would have a worse effect
on our Eastern position than a serious check to the Government.”
135 The evacuation of Suvla and Anzac was at once proceeded with, men, guns, and Sir Charles
stores being gradually withdrawn. The final embarkation was fixed for Saturday and Monro. despatch.
Sunday December 18th and 19th. On the Sunday a covering attack was made by the
forces at Cape Helles, at a cost of 283 casualties. By 5.30 a.m. on Monday, December 20th,
the last man had quitted the trenches. That night the weather broke. A heavy gale
blew from the south, accompanied by torrents of rain. Water rushed through the trenches
at Suvla and Anzac, and the landing stages at Suvla, Anzac, and Cape Helles were washed
away by heavy seas.
136. On December 20th Sir Charles Monro telegraphed to Lord Kitchener urging
the evacuation of Cape Helles on the ground that this “ would greatly facilitate the w p u p ßam Eobert .
reorganisation of the Dardanelles army, would lead immediately to reduced expenditure, son j 8 Memoran-
and would liberate a large quantity of freight ” ; and that this army, “ when rested and re- dura of December
organised, would constitute a valuable asset in a central position, ready to strike either in 23rd, 1915.


France or wherever demanded by the situation.’’ On December 22nd evacuation was
also recommended by the General Staff in a memorandum, in which they pointed out that:
The arrival of gun ammunition and of fresh guns to help the enemy will, moreover,
greatly add to the difficulties in the way of holding on to Helles at all. Not only have
munitions arrived from Germany, but artillery which had been previously opposed to
Suvla and Anzac will be moved to act against our forces cooped up in the thoroughly bad
position they now occupy at the southern end of the Peninsula. Wastage, heavy before,
will become greater. The troops, furthermore, are perfectly well aware that the Dar-
danelles undertaking has definitely failed, and, realising that they have no hope of advancin'?
or of causing the enemy any serious injury, will become dispirited. There will be serious
risk that the enemy will make a successful attack, and may, under the circumstances
cause us a disaster. The necessity of concentration of effort, if this war is to be brought
to a successful conclusion, has been drawn attention to in recent papers prepared by the
General Staff, and there is no object in labouring this point afresh ; retention of Helles
means dispersion, not concentration of effort. The General Staff therefore “ recommend
that the Gallipoli Peninsula should be entirely evacuated, and with the least possible delay.”
We have indicated that the retention of Cape Helles had been advocated mainly on naval
grounds. Vice-Admiral Wemyss and Commodore Keyes held a different opinion, which
was strengthened after the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac by the consideration of the
heavy wastage occurring daily in the VUlth Army Corps. From December 20th to
January 7th the casualties incurred amounted to 345 killed and 1,178 wounded, a total
of 1,523, oi a daily average of 18 killed and 62 wounded. \ ice-Admiral Wemyss therefore
advised evacuation unless the Achi Baba position could be captured, and this Sir Charles
Monro considered impracticable.
.9 n December 23rd the War Committee decided to evacuate Cape Helles, and their
decision was approved by the Cabinet on the 27th. The evacuation was completed on
January Bth.
137. It is not, we think, necessary to give details of the evacuation, these bein'?
embodied in Sir Charles Monro’s despatch of March 6th, 1916.
In the course of this despatch Sir Charles Monro wrote :
The entire evacuation of the Peninsula had now been completed. It demanded for its successful
realisation two important military essentials, viz., good luck and skilled disciplined organisation;
and they were both forthcoming to a marked degree at the hour needed. Our luck was in the ascendant
by the marvellous spell of calm weather which prevailed. But we were able to turn to the fullest
advantage these accidents of fortune.
“ Lieutenant-General Sir Wm. Birdwood and his Corps Commanders elaborated and prepared
the orders m reference to the evacuation with a skill, competence, and courage which could not have
been surpassed, and we had a further stroke of good fortune in being associated with Vice-Admiral
Sir J. de Robeck, K.C.8., Vice-Admiral Wemyss, and a body of naval officers whose work remained
throughout this anxious period at that standard of accuracy and professional ability which is beyond
the power of criticism or cavil. * J
“ The lin3 of communication staff, both military and naval, represented respectively bv
Lieutenant-General E. A. Altham, C.8., C.M.G.. Commodore M. S. Fitzmaurice, R.N., principal
Naval Transport Officer, and Captain H. V. Simpson, R.N., Superintending Transport Officer,
contributed to the success of the operation by their untiring zeal and conspicuous abilitv.
“ Tlie members of the Headquarters Staff showed themselves, without exception,Jo be officers
with whom it was a privilege to be associated ; their competence, zeal, and devotion to duty were
uniform and unbroken.” J
In these words of well-deserved commendation of officers and men the name of Sir
Charles Monro himself should be included.
138. Our narrative of events would be incomplete without a reference to the important
part taken by the French troops in the operations on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
On the afternoon of April 24th a regiment of the French division was disembarked at
Kum Kale under the guns of the French fleet, and remained ashore till the morning of the
the 26th, when it re-embarked. The French captured 500 prisoners, and their landin'?
diverted the fire of the Asiatic guns from Morto Bay and V Beach to Kum Kale, thus
contributing to the success of the British landings. On the evening of April 26th the main
disembarkation of the French division was begun at V Beach, our Allies occupving the
right of the Helles front. Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch, dated May 20th, 1915, describes
the landings and subsequent operations up to May 6th. Therein he referred to the loyal
and energetic support afforded him by General d’Amade, who commanded the French
force, and added:—“ During the fighting which followed the landing of the French
division at Sedd-el-Bahr no troops could have acquitted themselves more creditably under
very trying circumstances and under very heavy losses than those working under the
orders of M. le General d’Amade.”


In May a second French division reinforced the first, (General Gouraud relieving
General d’Amade on May 14th and assuming command of the whole of the French force.
One brigade of this second division arrived at Helles on May Bth, and the other on May
12th. On the latter date Sir lan Hamilton telegraphed to Lord Kitchener that the French
casualties from April 25th to date amounted to 246 officers and 12,364 men out of a total
strength engaged of 334 officers and 22,116 men.
There was severe fighting at Helles from June 4th to the end of the month, during
which the French troops were conspicuous for their dash and gallantry. In one action
on June 21st their losses amounted to 2,500. On June 30th General Gouraud was wounded,
and the command of the French force devolved upon General Bailloud. In his despatch
of August 26th, 1915, Sir lan Hamilton referred to General Gouraud in the following
terms :—“ General Gouraud brought a great reputation to our help from the battlefields
of the Argonne, and in so doing has added to its lustre. A happy mixture of daring in
danger and of calm in crisis, full of energy and resource, he has worked hand in glove with
his British comrades in arms, and has earned their respect and affection.”
On July 12th and 13th the French troops again distinguished themselves in an attack
on the enemy’s trenches, capturing a machine gun and 200 prisoners. At this time General
Masnou, commanding the First Division, was mortally wounded.
During the operations early in August the French troops do not appear to have been
seriously engaged.
In October one French division was transferred from the Peninsula to Salonika, the
other division being withdrawn soon afterwards.
While we do not think that the conduct of these troops comes within the scope of
our enquiry, we feel bound to record their loyal and generous co-operation, their heavy
losses, and their conspicuous gallantry.


WATER SUPPLY.
139. The importance of sea-borne water was recognised by the authorities early in
March, when it was known there was little or no water for the troops at Mudros, and
provision was then made for supplying it, and also for providing distilling apparatus.
1. The Headquarters Staff were responsible for providing the tanks to be placed
on the beaches to receive the water; also for the necessary pumps and hoses
for pumping out the lighters and for providing mules and water receptacles for
carrying the water to the troops.
2. Naval and Military Officers were appointed in charge of the beaches, responsible for
the landing of all stores, including the water.
Sir William Bird wood had from the first realised the importance of water, and in
March he sent Brigadier-General de Lotbiniere from Egypt to Mudros to investigate the
question of supply at that place. General de Lotbiniere, who was the Chief Engineer of the
Australian and New Zealand Division in Egypt, came to the conclusion, when the idea of
the military expedition was contemplated in March, that sea-borne water would be a
necessity. He also realised that piers would be required for landing on the Peninsula at
Anzac, and made arrangements, with the approval of Sir lan Hamilton, to hire in Egypt
four special steel pontoons to form a pier, and these were ballasted with water stowed
in petrol tins.
Unfortunately three of these pontoons were lost on the voyage from Alexandria to
Mudros. They were placed in charge of Commander Mitchell, R.N., who was attached
to the Australian forces, and he arranged to have them towed by the transports carrying
the troops. The weather was bad, and the pontoons, which were difficult to tow,
broke adrift, and only one arrived at Mudros. This upset the arrangement so far as a
landing pier was concerned, but as regards water supply General de Lotbiniere, with the
assistance of Admiral Wemyss, obtained at Mudros two large wooden lighters and had
them filled with fresh water from the ships.
140. The arrangements for the supply of water during the operations of April 25th for
the troops at Helles and Anzac were organised by General Headquarters in concert with
the Generals commanding at Helles and Anzac.
At Helles a moderate supply of water was found on landing and subsequently there
does not appear to have been any difficulty with the supply.
At Anzac the supply seems to have been barely sufficient. Surgeon-General Howse,
V.C., the Assistant Director of Medical Services of the 2nd Australian Division, gave
evidence that the health of the men was very greatly impaired by the shortage of water.
He thought that a great deal of the illness was attributable to the fact that the average
ration of water, for many months at least, was not more than half a gallon a day. His
evidence that there was a scarcity of water is corroborated by Lieutenant-Colonel Begg,
commanding the New Zealand Field Ambulance, but he differs from General Howse as
to the effect on the men’s health. Sir William Birdwood had a special officer told off
to look after the water, Major Williams, of the Australian forces, as well as General de
Lotbiniere. Search on shore was started immediately on landing, and by the evening
three wells were found, yielding a small supply. Elaborate arrangements had to be
made at Anzac for the supply of sea-borne water, as shore water was scarce. We think
’it may be stated that the actual operations at Anzac did not fail for want of water ; but
during the fighting early in August it is stated in Sir lan Hamilton’s despatch of
December 11th, 1915, that all ranks were reduced to one pint a day, which is obviously
an inadequate allowance for troops operating in a hot climate and difficult country.
After the failure to take the heights at Sari Bahr, when Sir lan Hamilton thought of
sending his reserve troops to Sir William Birdwood, to make a second attempt, he had
to give up the idea on account of the shortage of water.
The water for the use of the troops at the first landing at Helles and Anzac was brought
to the beaches by the Royal Navy. When it had been discharged on the beaches the
responsibility for its storage and distribution rested with the military authorities. •


141. For the landing at Suvla detailed orders concerning the arrangements for water
were issued by General Headquarters. The following additional information and directions
were given to Sir Frederick Stopford, IXth Army Corps :
“ Water is plentiful throughout the Anafarta Valley, but pending the disembarkation General Staff
of water carts, a number of mules with special 8-gallon water bags will be attached to lme 0
the units of your command.” . pan, . . .
“ G.O.C. IXth Army Corps will arrange for parties to pump water on shore from General Staff
water lighters. Copy of the Director of Works memo, on this subject is attached.” 1.8.15.
n “ Two military landing officers and their assistant military landing officers will be
d placed at your disposal from units other than those under your command.”
“ The strictest economy must be exercised in regard to drinking water. Under
i arrangements made by G.H.Q. receptacles filled with water will be landed as early as
possible from the ships carrying the mule corps, and will be conveyed to the troops as
transport becomes available.”
)r “ Waterproof tanks of 2,300 gallons capacity, lift and force pumps, will he available on
the ‘ Prah ’ —R.E. Store Ship —in Kephalos Harbour, and will be forwarded by D.Q.M.G.,
)r G.H.Q., on request of G.O.C. Corps.”
In his despatch of December 11th, 1915, Sir lan Hamilton mentions that the War
n Office were asked to send with each Division of the IXth Corps and with the 53rd and 54th
e Territorial Divisions water receptacles for pack transport at the rate of half a gallon
e per man. He also states that 3,700 mules, together with 1,750 water carts, were provided
)f for the August operations at Anzac and Suvla —this in addition to 950 mules already
a at Anzac. We understand that no water carts were landed at Suvla, the ground being
unsuitable for their use. No pack mules with water bags appear in the landing tables,
but some mules were in fact sent.
142. In Sir Frederick Stopford’s operation order of August 3rd the water question was
dealt with as follows : —“ It is anticipated that sufficient water for drinking purposes
will be found throughout the Anafarta Valley. This will be supplemented by tanks
on shore, and water bags, but supply by these methods is limited. The General Officers
commanding will issue instructions as regards the picketing of wells and springs, as may
be found, the prevention of waste of w T ater therefrom, and for the examination by Medical
Officers before its issue. Too much stress cannot be laid on the importance of warning all
ranks to observe the greatest care against waste of ammunition, food, or water.”
For the landing at Suvla on the night of August 6th-7th provision was made for
450 tons of sea-borne fresh water to arrive during the early hours of August 7th as follows :
(a) The steam water tank “ Krini ” with a naval water lighter in tow .. 250 tons.
( h ) Four wooden water lighters equipped with small wooden troughs, pumps
and hoses provided by the Army and handed over to the Navy for
transport to Suvla, 50 to 60 tons each .. .. .. .. .. 200 tons.
450 tons.
The motor lighters in which the troops landed had also a certain amount of
water on board in bulk, supplemented by water in petrol tins, with the idea that the
troops should on landing, if necessary, refill their water bottles.
The troops, before embarking in the destroyers and motor lighters at Imbros on the
evening of the 6th, had their water bottles (I \ pints) filled, and were told to husband the
water.
QQ. 16643-6,
QQ. 16652,
16758.
Arrangements were made for the troops to have tea from the destroyers before landing.
143. The failure of the troops to attain their objectives on August 7th, and especially on
the Bth, is thought by some witnesses to be due to a large extent to the exhaustion of
the troops from want of water, and on the 9th and 10th there was still difficulty
in supplying sufficient water.
But the failure to obtain Hill 112, Ismail Oglu Tepe, on the 7th, the most favourable
day for a surprise attack, was not primarily due to want of water, but is attributable to
other causes, and is dealt with in another-portion of the Report.
General Hammersley, commanding The 11th Division, states: ‘‘The first water
obtained from the water lighters was about 3 p.m. on the Bth. The want of water added
very much to the exhaustion of the troops. They had nothing but their water bottles
with them. A certain quantity of water was found, but nothing like enough to assuage
their thirst, and the troops were badly exhausted.”
QQ. 9731, 9744.
QQ. 10330 -2.


General Hammersley states lie realised the great importance of water before the opera-
tions began, but did not take any steps to see where water was to be obtained. He knew
that water was being sent ashore in lighters, but he was not informed and did not enquire
as to the system of distribution of water when landed. He gathered that the men would
have 4o depend on their water bottles for 24 hours and upon any local supplies he might
find.
General Sitwell, commanding 34th Brigade, stated that before he left Imbros on the
evening of the 6th he did not know what the arrangements were for providing water.
He informed us that he discovered two wells on August 7th and Bth, from which he
watered his Brigade, and a considerable number after that date. From these a good
supply of water was forthcoming. The position of the wells and springs seemed to him
to be accurately marked on the map issued to the troops.
General Sitwell expressed the opinion that if proper search had been made for water,
sufficient would have been found to enable the attack to be pushed forward on the Bth.
General B. P. Maxwell, commanding 33rd Brigade, in his evidence states : “ The want
of water did not interfere with the operations up to the night of the 7th. The water-bottles
were not touched before midday on the 7th.” On the Bth, even with a proper supply of
water, he does not think his brigade could have done more, because they were so scattered.
“ My own men wanted water to recuperate, nothing worse than that.”
General Haggard, commanding 32nd Brigade, states: “I have read Sir lan
Hamilton’s dispatch about the wonderful arrangements made for water, but nothing was
ever communicated to me. The only thing on the subject of water that I remember is that
either the Divisional Commander or his Chief Staff Officer told me I must particularly
warn the men that they must husband the water in their water-bottles, because they
probably would not get any for 48 hours.” He further stated there was no shortage up
to the time he was wounded, which appears to have been in the forenoon of the 7th. He
did not know whose duty it was to see that water was supplied.
Sir Bryan Mahon, commanding 10th Division, stated that the men had their water
bottles full when they started. On the morning of the 7th they tried without success to
get a further supply. Some was given to them by a destroyer which came inshore on the
afternoon of that day. On the morning of the Bth they obtained a further quantity. A
good well was discovered on the Bth about halfway down to the sea, but there was a
difficulty in distributing it owing to the want of mules. The troops could not have
operated on the Bth, but after that they could have gone on so far as water was concerned.
General Hill, commanding 31st Brigade, states that his men got no water except
what they had had in their water-bottles from the time that they landed about 8 a.m.
on the 7th until 3 p.m. on the Bth, and they suffered very badly, and they could not advance
on the Bth owing to that. The Dublin Fusiliers brought them up some water, about half
a bottle per man. They found two wells, but the Turks were sniping most of the time.
They had to get water under fire, and could not organise any good system of getting it.
It was impossible to do more on the Bth, but they could have done more on the 7th. The
men went out at night to the two wells and got a certain amount of water, enough to
enable them to do some cooking, but it was not a big supply. If they had pushed on on
the 7th they might very likely have reduced the sniping.
144. We think that want of water was not the sole cause of the failure of the troops
to advance further on the 7th; but on the Bth, with the exception of the 34th Brigade, the
troops had been so long without water that they could hardly have been expected to
undertake any serious operation. There is some reason to suppose that if the objectives
had been gained on the 7th more water would have been obtainable from wells and springs,
and the sniping of the known wells would have been much reduced, if not stopped
altogether.
145. The failure of the supply of sea-borne water, for the troops is attributed by Sir
Frederick Stopford and other military officers to the fact that only two of the five water
lighters arrived on August 7th, that they grounded on a sandbank between eighty to one
hundred yards from the shore, and that the hoses provided not being long enough to
reach the beach no water was available for use from them until the morning of the Bth.
Colonel Western, the Principal Military Landing Officer, at 5.30 p.m. on August 7th,
sent the following telegram to Sir Frederick Stopford : “ Water for troops essential to
success of undertaking. None has been landed. Can you arrange with the Admiral that
this be landed at *A ’ Beach ?” “ G.H.Q. directs 1,000 water bags containing 8 gallons
each be sent to Anzac. Suggest help (sic) (half ?) be sent here and ship’s balance be sent
to Anzac. Casualty clearing station now at ‘C ’ Beach.” “ I would add nothing has


a . yet been landed except small arm ammunition.” In a statement produced by Admiral
, w Keyes, Commander Ashby, Naval Transport Officer, informed us that the last water
re lighter left Kephalos at 4 a.m. on the 7th, and should have arrived by 7 a.m. Further,
Rear-Admiral Keyes stated, “ I cannot exactly say when the' lighters reached the Admiral Keyes’
lt beaches, and I can produce no evidence to show that they were beached before the written answer
afternoon of the 7th. I can state quite definitely from my own observation that water to Q-Q- 1 and 2
ie lighters were delivering water to the shore at three different places on the afternoon of
r the 7th —namely, at one of the northern beaches (probably A west), under Mount
Le Falcon (Lala Baba) in the south-east corner of Suvla Bay, and at C Beach, south of
q Nebrunesi Point.” This evidence is confirmed by statements by Captain Lambart,
n R.N., and other Naval officers. No doubt one lighter stranded on a rocky ledge under
Lala Baba, as Admiral Keyes states : “ The water lighter was some little distance
r from the shore, which its hose would not reach. I boarded it and used the picket
’ boat I was in to tow it into a position from which its hose would reach the shore. I
remarked that the water was being wasted, as water bottles were being filled'direct from
ig the hose, and there was no proper control over the shore end of the hose.” Probably
this stranded lighter may account for part of the evidence on this subject given by military
witnesses, but we think the evidence of the naval officers is correct, and that on the after- Q.Q. 14717-8.
noon of the 7th water was being discharged from three lighters to the beaches. This
tl is confirmed by Colonel Western, Principal Military Landing Officer, who states : “ I
g think the supply was fairly right, but it was getting the water from the beach to the troops
t where the block occurred. There were not sufficient receptacles.”
' From the evidence of Major White, commanding the 68th Field Company Royal
y Engineers, which was detailed to receive the water lighters, it appears possible that some
„ of the lighters discharging water on August 7th were supplied by the Navy. Q.Q 30280-1.
• 146. The original project as described by Sir Frederick Stopford was to use water
carts as receptacles on the beach, but as none of these were landed this could not be done.
Wooden tanks were provided by General de Lotbiniere in each of the four water lighters.
They were too small and leaked badly ; eventually, naval carpenters made them water-
tight, and the Navy supplied tanks and baths. In one instance the Commander of a Q. 27152.
Destroyer, “ The Foxhound,” ordered one of his tanks to be cut out and taken ashore
and it was used for the storage of water.
The evidence shows there was a great deal of confusion on the beaches. The men
not being able to get water quickly enough, owing to the absence of receptacles, took out
their knives and pricked holes in the hoses. Colonel Western considers there was a serious
want of discipline, and a lack of power of command on the part of the regimental com-
manders and officers, and this is confirmed by naval officers, especially by Captain Carver, Q.Q. 14761-2.
R.N., who acted for. a time as beachmaster. Q.Q 20457.
147. Major-General Poett, as Deputy Adjutant and Quartermaster-General, had the
general responsibility for provision of water to the troops, but he states that with regard
to sea-borne water he had no responsibility until it reached the beaches, because General
Headquarters were, with the Navy, responsible for landing water and mules. He should
have ascertained when the water was likely to be landed, and made arrangements for its
reception and distribution. Sir Frederick Stopford states that General Poett did not
write any appreciation in detail as to how the water was to be distributed and that he
did not discuss the question verbally with General Poett. He said: “ I find it difficult to say
exactly what was in my mind, knowing what has happened since, but my impression is
that the water there did not cause me any anxiety because I was informed there was
plenty of water. I was informed there were four lighters and mules coming, and I rather Q.Q 22222-3.
thought the mules would be wanted for getting it up country. When I found that water
had failed, and had not been landed, to my great astonishment, I sent for General Poett
and asked : ‘ How do we stand with regard to food ? ’ He said : ‘We have one day
to go on with,’ and I said : ‘ Very well, we must stop everything else for water.’ My
anxiety till then was more in connection with food, because I did not anticipate there
would be any difficulty about water.” With regard to the distribution of water he said :
“ I did not go into it personally; perhaps I ought to have done.” Water carts were
brought by the ships which carried the mules, but they were not landed and Sir Frederick
Stopford, in his evidence, stated that they could not have been used by reason of the
nature of the country.
148. The arrangements made by General Headquarters for landing mules with water
bags for the supply of troops in the first instance were impeded by the delay in landing
(0 49—242) E


the I Oth Division and by the necessity of sending mules to Anzac owing to the urgent signal
received from General Headqiiarters on the afternoon of August 7th. Sir Frederick Stopford
and Admiral Christian think this was the chief cause for the want of mules on that day.
According to Admiral Christian’s evidence, only one ship with pack mules and 8-gallon
water bags on board —the “ Dundrennan ” —arrived at Suvla Bay on August 7th. Admiral
Keyes gives as the reason for this that big ships had to be berthed near the net to avoid
the risk of being torpedoed. Consequently, as the protected area was limited, it was
arranged not to have at Suvla more ships than could be unloaded at the time.
The result was that sufficient mules were not landed, but Captain Unwin, K.N., Y.C.,
who was in charge, states that they commenced to land mules about 10 a.m. on the 7th
at A (New Beach), and they were hard at it the whole time ; he was not able to give an
estimate of the total number of mules landed on the 7th, but Sir Frederick Stopford says
that 500 were landed. No effort, apparently, was made to organise fatigue parties to
supplement the paucity of mules.
149. Water in bulk and in petrol tins was provided in the motor lighters, but we have
been unable to ascertain whether orders were issued by the battalion and company officers
to the men to refill their water bottles before landing. In some cases the naval officers
in the lighters warned the N.C.O.’s to have the water bottles filled, but apparently nothing
was done. There is no evidence, however, that the water bottles were not full when the
men landed.
Sir Frederick Stopford said that the lighters were ordered a way at once before the
water could be used for refilling the bottles. He said: “ The water, I think, in those
lighters was not intended to be used on shore, but was intended for the troops while they
were on board. It was never intended for a shore supply, that is my impression, or I never
heard of it.”
150. The steps to be taken to explore the local resources for water were entrusted to
the Chief Engineer of the Corps. General Painter informed us in a telegram that he detailed
parties to search and dig for water in the neighbourhood of the beaches, but we have
no evidence as to what was done on August 7th by these parties.
Sir Beauvoir de Lisle, who relieved Sir Frederick Stopford on the 15th, states that
there he experienced no trouble about water. “ There were wells within a quarter of a
mile of the shore, which I had opened out. On the hill Keritch Tepe Sirt, there were two
wells 400 feet higher than the sea. But on this side, between Keritch Tepe Sirt and the
Salt Lake, there were as many wells as you liked to dig. You had not to go more than
15 feet before you got as much water as you wanted. Inside the area which they occupied
on the first day they had only to scratch the sand to get as much water as they wanted.
On the shore, within 100 yards of high-water mark, you had only to dig the sand 4 feet
down to get water. All that means bad staff work, because the Eoyal Engineers could
have found that out as easily as I could. At one place, if they had only taken a mess tin
and scraped it with their hands they would have come to water. The difficulties about
water were very much exaggerated.”
This is confirmed also by General Sitwell, who found sufficient water for his brigade
(the 34th).
The discovery of water was, however, a gradual process, and we doubt whether on
August 7th and Bth sufficient water could have been found from local resources alone
to make good the deficiency of the sea-borne supply.
151. The failure to supply sea-borne water to the troops is attributable to the fact
that (1) the landing of the mules which were to supply the troops with water was much
delayed. (2) No arrangements had been made for the distribution of water in case of the
failure of the mules to land in time. (3) Suitable receptacles had not been provided on the
beaches to receive the water from the lighters. (4) No fatigue parties were organised
to distribute such water as might be available in case of scarcity of mules.
152. We think that the Corps Commander and his Administrative Staff did not suffi-
ciently realise the absolute importance of water, until Colonel Western sent a telegram to Sir
Frederick Stopford at 5.15 p.m. on the 7th to say troops were short of water. This is
Q Q 9643 corroborated by General Poett, who states : “ When I left Sir Frederick Stopford about
22034. * 11 o’clock in the morning of the 7th he was not anxious about water, because he had been
told definitely that water was plentiful, but he was most anxious that I should get the
munitions on shore.” Possibly they may have been misled by the information they had
received from the Headquarters Staff.


General Stopford says : “As regards the supply of water which came, till it Q.Q. 10126
was landed I had nothing to do with it, and I assumed that the necessary arrangements 10129,
had been made by the Commander-in-Chief, who was responsible for the plans.” He J QI34 ’
explains that when at Imbros he made enquiries about the water, and found the Head- ioi36’
quarters Staff was responsible for the water coming to Imbros and the Navy was responsible 10140,
for getting it ashore. “ The General Officer who made the plan of the campaign was respon- 10185,
sible for telling the Navy when and where the water was required. If I had been told it JJJ2O9,
was a matter of duty to know what water I required, and get the mules and lighters, I
should have done so, but I understood it was to be done by the Headquarters Staff.”
He said that two lighters left Imbros with the troops and that lie did not know whether
Admiral Christian had any orders as to when he was to land the water, and did not talk
it over with him. In another answer he said : “ According to my recollection the sole
instructions I received about the water supply were in the secret instructions, 22nd July,
that water is plentiful throughout the Anafarta Valley. I was never informed that water
would be scarce, and the responsibility, according to the paper and instructions you get
for such a supply of water as came from the sea, rested with the General Headquarters Staff.”
General Poett stated : “ The orders for the landing of the personnel, the ammunition, q.q. 21946
the supplies, and the arrangement for providing sea-borne water were made by the General 22120,
Headquarters Staff, presumably after consultation with the Admiral, and with his full 22121,
approval. These orders were in great detail, and appear to cover the ground, assuming 22123’.
them to be carried out. Not only did General Headquarters assume all responsibility
for the landing orders, but they appointed a special staff to assist in carrying them out.
I am inclined to think the inaccurate information in General Headquarters’ Orders that water
was plentiful misled everybody. It must not be lost sight of that the food and ammunition
had also to be considered. To the best of my recollection I received the detailed Orders,
I think, on the sth, but I will not be sure. We got them some days before the landing.”
General Poett understood that the Navy were responsible for bringing the water to the
beaches, but he did not take any steps before the landing to get into communication with
the Naval authorities in order to ascertain exactly what was going to be done. He took
it for granted that as the orders were drafted by General Headquarters in concert with
the Navy, and as they had their own Principal Military Landing Officer and the Beach
Master, all details would be arranged between those two officers. He considered that his
responsibility would begin with the distribution of the water.
153. We think that Sir Frederick Stopford and his staff failed to realise the importance
of having sea-borne water ready for issue to the troops early on the 7th ; they may have
been misled by General Headquarters saying that water was plentiful in the Anafarta
Valley, but it was evident that until the valley was captured water would not be obtainable
there. .
The supply of sea-borne water was, however, specifically undertaken by General
Headquarters in concert with the Navy, and it rested with them to place the lighters in
positions from which water could be delivered on to the beaches and to land the pack
mules and filled water bags as required by the Officer Commanding the IXth Corps.
E 2
(C 49—242)


FOOD.
QQ. 24515-6 154. The circumstances in which the supply had to be made are described by Sir
John Cowans, the Quartermaster-Gleneral to the Forces, as abnormal and peculiar. The
details of the arrangements for the supply of stores, the amount shipped and the scale of
daily rations are set out in the statement of Lieutenant-Colonel H. F. P. Percival, Assistant
Director of Supplies. This will be found among the Appendices. A large proportion of
the meat supplied was preserved or tinned, and the precautions taken to secure that it was
Q. 24374. of good quality are described by Brigadier-General Long, then Director of Supplies and
Transport.
These provided for an inspection of the meat before being shipped, and in order to
secure a proper examination by competent persons it was arranged, with the consent of
the Local Government Board, that it should be made by or with the assistance of the
local authorities and their medical staff.
In the case of purchases from South America, the Local Government Board sent out
Q. 24376. some of their inspectors, who were at the factories during the whole of the time at the
War Office expense, supervising the packing of meat and satisfying themselves as to its
quality.
155. The only serious complaints which were brought to our notice are with regard
to the absence of canteens, the deficient supply of condiments, and the quality of a certain
brand of South American tinned meat.
When the hot weather began in Gallipoli there was a great deal of sickness, chiefly
of the type of diarrhoea or dysentery, and a continued diet of tinned meat, even if of
good quality, became distasteful. If it were salt and stringy, as was the case with some
of the meat, it was still more distasteful, and, if eaten, made the men more liable to these
diseases. As will be seen by the scale of rations set out in Appendix Eto Lieutenant-
Colonel Percival’s statement, provision was made for the variation of the ration by giving
equivalents, and these equivalents were, provided. But this could only be done within
limits, and a wider variation of the diet could only be attained by the establishment of
canteens. If canteens had been established and this variation obtained at an earlier
date there would have been a reduction of the sickness.
Q. 25446. The request for canteens was made on May 27th, and it was suggested that they
should be provided by the Canteen and Mess Co-operative Society.
It was proposed to finance them by using some money of the South African Garrison
Institute Fund. Any money used would only be a loan, as it would be recouped from the
sum paid by the men for supplies. It was alleged in evidence before us that obstacles
were put in the way of supplying canteens by Sir Charles Harris, the Assistant Financial
Secretary at the War Office, but we find there was no foundation for such statement.
At first Lord Kitchener was disinclined to send canteens, but after pressure
from Sir John Cowans he consented to the use of £lO,OOO. The Treasury later on
advanced £50,000 for the same purpose. In the result ten ships carrying canteen stores
to the value of about £90,000 went out to the Peninsula between the 16th July and the 4th
November, 1915. Sir John Cowans also told us that the troops were not getting the ordinary
Q. 25546. but a varied ration. He said :“ It was a very good ration, and we had in addition fresh
vegetables from Bulgaria and Greece and Egypt.” There was also a complaint that
more condiments and sauces were not supplied for the use of the Australian and New
Zealand troops. Colonel Percival gave evidence that these articles would have been
supplied if asked for by the Deputy Quartermaster-General of the force. They were not
asked for, and we have no evidence that any request for them was ever conveyed to him.
156. The only complaint of the quality of food that we have had before us is in respect
of a certain brand of South American tinned meat spoken of as “ Fray Bentos.” Two
other brands of tinned meat were mentioned as not satisfactory, but there was not sufficient
evidence about them to enable us to come to a conclusion.
The “ Fray Bentos ” meat is described by Sir Alexander Godley in the following
terms : “It was very, very salt, and very stringy bully. I think it was of inferior quality.
I have eaten very much worse bully beef than that in previous campaigns. I have been
QQ. 15606-9 campaigning and I have eaten much worse beef. Still it was not good, and certainly
the men did not like it.” This agrees with all the other evidence in describing the meat
as salt and stringy. When the weather was hot and the men inclined to suffer from
Q.Q.26733- diarrhoea and dysentery such meat was very distasteful, and they would not eat it.
9 - Many of them, while in hospital in England, stated that they could trace an increase of
illness on the days when this brand and the other two mentioned were served out, and a
decrease when they got other meat. No evidence except this was given as to the


quality of the other two brands. Lieutenant-Colonel Myers, the Assistant Director
of Medical Services to the New Zealand forces, who took these statements from the
men, was of opinion that they would be able to trace such increase and diminution. Sir Q. 15610.
Alexander Godley, speaking, not, of course, as a medical witness, said that he did not notice
any difference in the health of the men if they had Fray Bentos one day and fresh meat the
next; and Captain Ritchie, a medical officer with the New Zealand force, on being asked
if he had noticed the change, said “ the only marked change that I saw in that way was at Q- 17336 *
Headquarters. Everyone of us had diarrhoea very bad the day after we were given fresh
meat for the first time.” When asked if he had noticed anything of the ill-effects to the
men’s health from the Fray Bentos, he said : “ No, it may not have been due to the meat 20986 . 7
that the men had diarrhoea, it may have been the combination of the meat, the method of
living, and water; but the meat was not nice, it was a bit salt.” He was serving as a Letter
sanitary officer and had not to attend to the medical treatment of the men. Fray Bentos from CoL
is a well-known brand, and we have ascertained from Colonel Percival that it has been Percival,
issued to all troops in all theatres of war (including France) since the beginning of the 20th April,
AIT 1915.
War.
157. We think the result of this to be that there was nothing actively injurious to
health in the meat; but it was of poor quality, and from being salt and stringy it caused
some intestinal irritation, and so conduced to diarrhoea. .
It must be remembered that the Australian and New Zealand troops had been some
months at Anzac when the hot weather began, continually in the trenches, and without
proper opportunities of rest, and that their energy and activity had been overtaxed.
They were, therefore, probably very liable to ill-effects from food unsuitable to such
weather.
158. We have no evidence that any complaint was made by the responsible military
or medical authorities in Gallipoli while the meat was being issued, but a complaint was
made to the Quartermaster-General’s department in November, 1915, by the High Com-
missioner for New Zealand, and samples of that brand of meat were examined by experts,
including the Principal Medical Officer of the inspection department of the Local Govern-
ment Board, and found satisfactory.
In December, 1915,’ the complaint was renewed from the office of the High Com-
missioner for New Zealand, and it was stated that when preserved meat from New Zealand
or Australia was supplied the health of the men improved. The Quartermaster-General’s
department agreed to consider offers of New Zealand meat, and also proposed a conference
between representatives of the New Zealand Government, the Food inspection department
of the Local Government Board, and representatives of the War Office to examine all
brands of meat and discuss the whole question. In reply the War Office were informed
by the High Commissioner for New Zealand that the only form of conference which could
serve any useful purpose would be one at which actual samples of the meat buried by the
troops or thrown overboard from the transports could be examined. It was, of course,
impossible to get these samples, and so no conference was held.
After the examination in November, 1915, an alteration was made in the specification
of the meat and the percentage of salt reduced.
These were the only complaints received about this meat, and since the alteration
in the specification no complaints have been received by the Quartermaster-General’s
department.
MEDICAL ARRANGEMENTS.
159. The medical arrangements for the Dardanelles expedition were at first under
the control of Surgeon-General Birrell, who was selected for the position by Sir Alfred
Keogh, the Director-General of the Army Medical Service. Sir Alfred Keogh described
the course adopted in such appointments as follows : When it became necessary to appoint
a Director of Medical Services for a foreign expedition he examined the list of officers
eligible for the position, and from his knowledge of their qualifications selected the one
whom he considered most fitted for the position. This was the course adopted in the
case of Surgeon-General Birrell, who had considerable experience of active service.
He was appointed Director of Medical Services on the 15th March, 1915, and arrived
at Alexandria on April Ist, 1915. The Commander-in-Chief and the General Staff
left in two or three days for Mudros, but the Director of Medical Services together with
the rest of the Administrative Staff who were then at Alexandria were left behind.
Lieutenant-Colonel Keble, one of Surgeon-General Birrell’s subordinates, went with the
General Staff to Mudros. There were matters connected with the provision of hospital
(C 49—242) E 3


accommodation in Egypt which had to be settled between Surgeon-General Birrell and
Q.Q. 23983- Surgeon-General Ford, the Director of Medical Services in Egypt, under whose control
they were to be.
Q. 23949. the whole we think it would have been better if Surgeon-General Birrell had
Q. 25336. g one Mudros with the General Staff and left a subordinate to deal with hospital
questions in Alexandria ; but Colonel Keble, who went to Mudros, and from whose notes
the scheme tor dealing with the casualties was drafted, is spoken of by Sir lan Hamilton
as a very competent officer.
Before the Deputy Adjutant-General and Director of Medical Services arrived at
Mudros a scheme prepared by one of the officers of the General Staff, based upon an estimate
of 3,000 casualties, was shown to Lieutenant-Colonel Keble, who declined to consider it,
as he thought that it was the duty of the Director of Medical Services and his Staff to
prepare such a scheme and not that of the General Staff. He prepared notes of a scheme
of evacuation based upon an estimate of 10,000 casualties. He had not been able before
the arrival of the Administrative Staff to submit these notes to the Chief of the
General Staff; and he handed them to the Deputy Adjutant-General and Director of
Medical Services as soon as they arrived. There is some conflict of evidence as to
whether the estimate of 10,000 was made in the first instance by the General Staff or by
Lieutenant-Colonel Keble. We do not think that this is material, as the estimate was
accepted by both the General and the Administrative Staffs, and Surgeon-General
Birrell was so informed by an officer of the General Staff.
160. The Director of Medical Services arrived on April 18th, and Colonel Keble’s
Q. 23949. notes were examined by him and the Deputy Adjutant-General. From these notes a
draft scheme was made out and passed by the Chief of the General Staff on April 19th.
This document is as follows :
C.G.S.
The medical arrangements in connection with the landing of the British Force are
at present as follows :
1. With each covering force the bearer sub-division of a field ambulance and one tent
sub-division, with as much medical and surgical material as can be manhandled by the
personnel; giving a total of 150 medical personnel with each covering force.
2. At 2 p.m. on the day of landing the personnel of the casualty clearing station
(one for the 29th Division, one for the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps) will be
landed with as much medical and surgical material as can be manhandled.
3. When the remainder of the Division lands the rest of the field ambulance and the
equipment of the casualty clearing station will be put on shore as soon as it can be dis-
embarked.
4. Two hospital ships will be available :
With the 29th Division, “ Sicilia ” ; accommodation, 400 serious cases.
With the Australian and New Zealand A.C., “ Gascon ” ; accommodation, 300
serious cases. The latter ship is expected here on Tuesday.
5. I understand from the Senior Naval Transport Officer that the Navy will commence
the transport of wounded from the shore to the ships about 2 p.m. The means of evacua-
tion are as follows :
Three launches, each capable of holding 12 cots, are available for the 29th Division,
and the same number for the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps. These
launches are to be towed to the hospital ships and other ships in which the
men are to be accommodated.
6, This provision for the evacuation of casualties from the Force appears to be
altogether inadequate, and I would strongly urge that the following proposals should be
sanctioned :
(i) B 2 “ Caledonia ” .. .. ~ .. .. .. 470 serious cases
B7 “ Aragon ” . ; .. 200 „ „
B9“ Dongola ” 200 „ „
should be allotted to the 29th Division for the accommodation of their wounded.


I recommend :
(ii) That the A 25 " Lutzow ” 200 serious cases
A 1 “ lonian ” ... .. .. •. • • 100 ~ „
some other ship (“ Southland ” . .. .. •. 420 ~ ~
be allotted to the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps.
(iii) That two more tows of three launches each —equals 72 additional cots should
be provided for the 29th Division and a similar number for the Australian
and New Zealand Army Corps.
7. It has previously been proposed to provide the personnel and medical and surgical
equipment for the above transports of the 29th Division from Nos. 15 and 16 Stationary
Hospitals, and the personnel for the transports of the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps from No. 2 Australian Stationary Hospital. These Stationary Hospitals have
been wired for.
(Sd.) E. M. WOODWARD,
G.H.Q., M.E.F., D.A.G.
19/ A April , 1915.
161. This scheme, which was signed by General Woodward, mentions only one
hospital ship, the “ Sicilia,” for Helles, and one, the “ Gascon, for Anzac ; and it will be
observed that the number of serious cases for which’ accommodation was provided
amounted to 2,290. No mention is made of the provision for slight cases. Surgeon-
General Birrell, in a report to Sir Alfred Keogh, dated April 22nd, gives a fuller account
of the arrangements.
Report on Medical Arrangements Impending Operations, Gallipoli Peninsula.
Hospital Ships.
(a) With Naval Division which at the outset is not undertaking serious operations
is the “ Somali.” (t
(b) With the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps is the H.S. Gascon.
(c) With the 29th Division is the H.S. “ Sicilia.”
This does not provide accommodation for anything like the expected casualties, and
as for many days it may be impossible to open stationary hospitals ashore, I have, for
the 29th Division, caused to be taken over, after evacuation by the fighting troops, the
transports “Caledonia,” “Aragon” and “ Dongola,” and have staffed them from the
personnel of the 15th Stationary Hospital. The medical and surgical equipment has been
divided equally between these three ships additional to the normal equipment carried.
For the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps I have caused the “ Lutzow, lonian,
“ Clan McGillivray,” and “ Seang-Chung ”to be taken over. They will be staffed by the
personnel of the 2nd Australian Stationary Hospital when it arrives. It sailed from
Alexandria on board the “ Hindu ” on the 20th inst.
All these ships can make Alexandria in 48 hours and Malta in four days.
They can accommodate together with the regular hospital ships 1,995 serious cases,
and at a pinch an additional 414 cases, or in all 2,409 cases, and 7,300 slightly wounded
cases, or a grand total of 9,709 wounded.
If more transports are needed they are available and can be staffed by the 16th
Stationary Hospital which sailed on 20th inst. on “ Hindu,” and which is being held in
reserve. , , . , ,
The hospital ship “ Guildford Castle ” has been wired for to Alexandria, and she
sailed on 21st inst. ; on arrival she will be used to evacuate the No. 1 Australian Stationary
Hospital which is opened at Lemnos, and which is filled to overflowing.
Medical Stores. —No. 4 advanced depot of medical stores goes with the A. and N.Z.
Corps on the “ Hymettus,” which, however, is ashore and may not be got off.
No. 5 advanced depot of medical stores sailed from Alexandria on 20th inst. on
“ Hindu,” and is for the supply of the 29th Division.
Evacuation. —Evacuation of casualties will be direct to Egypt and Malta.
Casualty Clearing Stations. —No. 11 Casualty Clearing Station goes ashore with the
29th Division, and operates near the beach, as does the Australian C.C.S. with the A. and
N.Z.A. Corps.
Future proposals. —After the initial operations the three hospital ships, Sicilia,
“ Gascon,” “ Guildford Castle ” and one other which is asked for, will act as ferry boats
for sick and wounded between the three stationary hospitals which will be established
(C 49—242) E 4


according to regiments on the Gallipoli Peninsula and the bases at Alexandria and Malta.
It is impossible to move the No. 1 Australian Stationary Hospital at Lemnos owing to the
number of infectious cases therein, viz., small pox, 2; scarlet fever, 3 ; diphtheria, 1 ;
measles, 14; mumps, 2.
Evacuation as affected by Military operations. — During the landing and the actions
immediately subsequent thereto, the wounded may have to suffer hardships as it will be
impossible to evacuate from shore to ships till the fighting troops have been landed, and
even when they have been got aboard it may not be expedient to send the ships away
to the bases till our foothold is secure, as during the first two or more days no wheeled
transport can go ashore, the strain on the whole medical personnel will be exceedingly
great.
Requirements.
1. I think the supply of dressings will not prove to be adequate if fighting is sustained,
and therefore recommend that 100 boxes of reserve dressings be sent out.
2. As the water on the Gallipoli Peninsula is not above suspicion filter water carts
should be provided for the stationary hospitals at the rate of two per hospital. Eight will
be required. r * 6
3. One more hospital ship will be required to maintain the ferry service.
4. To provide for casualties and to meet unexpected requirements, at least six Medical
Officers should be sent here for attachment to the stationary hospitals.
(Signed) W. G. BIRRELL,
Surgeon-General,
D.M.S., M.E. Force.
Lemnos, April 22nd, 1915.
This report mentions a larger number of hospital ships as available in the first two
• or three days and states the accommodation provided in all the ships mentioned to be :
i. serious cases, 2,409 ; slight cases, 7,300 ; making a total of 9,709.
According to Surgeon-General BirrelTs evidence the “ Somali ” and the “ Sudan ” were
available at or immediately after the landing ; while the “ Guildford Castle ” arrived on
April 26th and the “ Delta ” on April 27th, making six hospital ships in all. In addition
to these hospital ships, there were seven transports which were allotted, four to Anzac
and three to Helles. If any further accommodation were required for the wounded, it had
to be obtained by using other transports which had brought the troops to the Peninsula.
This report states that the transports mentioned therein were taken up because it
might be impossible to open stationary hospitals ashore for many days, and specifies the
accommodation on the transports for serious cases. Both Surgeon-General Birrell and
Lieutenant-Colonel Keble, however, gave evidence that, although there was accommoda-
tion for the estimated number of serious cases, the transports were not provided with the
appliances necessary for the treatment of such cases, and also that such appliances could
not be obtained at the time. It seems clear that, although this accommodation was
provided, it was not expected that it would be required, as the Medical Staff shared the
anticipation of all the military authorities that, if the landing were successfully effected,
a rapid advance would be made and hospitals would soon be established on land.
In the actual circumstances of the landing the supply of hospital ships was insufficient,
and if a landing in force on the Peninsula had been contemplated when the Expedition
left England we think it would have been the duty of the Director of Medical Services
to have arranged for a more ample supply. It has, however, been already pointed out
that the instructions given to Sir lan Hamilton by the Secretary of State for War did not
contemplate such a landing, and the Director of Medical Services had no information
before leaving England upon which he could base his requirements. In his evidence he
stated that, if he had received earlier information that heavier casualties were expected,
he could have made better preparation. We think that, if the Administrative Staff had
accompanied General Headquarters to Mudros, the Director of Medical Services would
have been in a better position to inform himself of the probable operations and to estimate
the consequent requirements.
The Director of Medical Services, however, did make arrangements in Egypt for the
provision of hospital accommodation for a large number of casualties, and we think that
with a little more forethought he might have arranged for the supply of some of the
equipment which was afterwards found to be wanting on the transports.
According to Lieutenant-Colonel Keble’s evidence, each of the transports which
were sent to Helles for the evacuation of the woun led was provided with at least four
medical officers, ihose which were sent to Anzac were not so provided on their leaving


;a. Mudros because the medical personnel intended for them was not available at tbe time,
tie This personnel came to Mudros on a ship called the “ Hindu,” which was unfortunately
I ; delayed. When she arrived a request was sent for a boat to transfer the Medical Staff
to the transports, but one could not be obtained, and the transports left without the
as intended provision of medical officers. Colonel Keble said, however, that there was no
)e reason why the number should not have been made up at Anzac, as the “ Hindu ” followed
id them there ; and there were also medical officers of the units which could not be landed
ty available for service on the transports.
Jd
1y , 162. At the time of the landing the bearer divisions and the field ambulances landed
with the troops, and later the casualty clearing stations and a part of the tent divisions of
the field ambulance. With the covering division one tent sub-division landed with the
bearer divisions. The intention was that the stationary hospitals should be landed as soon
as possible, and that from the first the cases should be sorted, the serious- ones going
B to the hospital ships and the slighter ones to the seven allotted transports and the other
transports which it was found necessary to employ.
163. Three classes of ships were employed for transporting the wounded to the main
bases, Alexandria, Malta and England, viz. :
I Hospital ships.
Hospital carriers.
Transports, generally called black ships
In addition, sweepers and other craft were used to convey the wounded from the
beaches to the ships.
The hospital ships were well equipped and gave every satisfaction, and took about
five weeks to fit out.
The hospital carriers were hastily improvised ; they were used because there was not
time to fit them properly as hospital ships. Undoubtedly they were not adapted for the
s conveyance of serious cases for long distances, but they were fairly satisfactory for short
distances. None of these vessels were available at the first landing. *
The transports (black ships) which were only intended for the conveyance of light
cases, were not properly equipped for serious cases. Many of them were used immediately
after the troops had disembarked, and in some cases the horses were left on board. As
a rule there were four Medical Officers on board, with some attendants and stores, but
they had, no arrangements for dealing with serious cases and were not meant to carry
them. Unfortunately, owing to the difficulty of sorting the light from the serious cases,
many of the latter were put on board these ships, and this entailed a great deal of suffering.
164. On the first days of the landing, April 25th, 26th and 27th, the Adminis-
trative Staff were again separated from the General Staff. The Commander-in-Chief
and the greater part of the General Staff were on board the “ Queen Elizabeth,” and the
Administrative Staff, including the Director of Medical Services, were left on board the
“ Arcadian.” According to the evidence this was done because there was not room for
the whole Staff on board the “ Queen Elizabeth,” but the result was that the Director of
Medical Services, who was on the “ Arcadian,” and was not allowed to use her wireless
installation, was unable to give any directions as to the operations for evacuating the
wounded. These directions were in consequence given by the General Staff. We think
that this was unfortunate and should have been avoided, but we do not attach much
importance to the incident, as Surgeon-General Birrell and Colonel Keble say that the
General Staff were carrying out Surgeon-General Birrell’s scheme, and that the fact of its
being carried out by them, and not by himself, did not substantially interfere with the
evacuation and the comfort of the wounded, or prejudicially affect the situation.
165. Hardly any advance was made after the landing, and it was found impossible to
carry out the evacuation as intended. It therefore became necessary that all casualties should
be evacuated by sea as soon as possible. The casualties began at the very outset of the
landing, and many of them occurred in the boats before the men had disembarked. It was
impossible to sort the cases as had been intended, and they could not be left on the
beaches, which were under shell fire. The selection of serious cases for tbe hospital ships
and lighter cases for the transports could not be carried out. The hospital ships received
many slight cases, and what was more serious, many severe cases had, in consequence,
to be taken to the transports.
According to General Woodward and Surgeon-General Birrell there were at one
time 300 slight cases on the “ Gascon,” a hospital ship intended for serious cases, and


this probably occurred in other instances. The result was that much suffering
was occasioned to the severely wounded men, who were carried on the partially fitted
transports. These ships were not fitted or staffed for such cases, and there were no
appliances for the surgical treatment or attendance required. Additional hardship
sometimes was occasioned by reason of delay in transferring wounded men from the
small craft which took them from the beach into a transport. Surgeon-General Howse
said that he was informed that in one case the wounded were taken to four or five
transports before one was found which could receive them, and a similar instance was
mentioned by Admiral Keyes on the report of Admiral Phillimore.
166. There is a conflict of evidence as to whether the number of casualties
was greater than was* expected. Sir lan Hamilton and General Braithwaite say
they were much greater, although the latter gave evidence that the General Staff estimated
them at 10,000. Sir John Maxwell, speaking of course from hearsay, expresses the same
opinion, and there is other evidence to the same effect. On the other hand, Surgeon-
General Birrell says that in the first few days the casualties were not more than he had
expected, and the estimate contained in his report to Sir Alfred Keogh bears out this
statement. It may be that it was not the number of the casualties alone which was
important, but that the number combined with the necessity of transporting them by
sea, and the impossibility of sorting them into slight and serious cases, caused an
unexpected confusion and crowding of the hospital ships and transports.
The conditions stated above prevailed at both Helles and Anzac during the early
days following the landing. Throughout the months of May, June and July the evacuation ’
of casualties continued, though, except in the attacks of May sth and 6th, and June 4th
and 28th, the number evacuated was much fewer, and the use of the transports much
less. According to the evidence matters began to improve after the first ten days.
There is no doubt that great difficulties were experienced in the first few days of
the operations, and that the wounded suffered in consequence. To what extent this
was due to bad arrangements and to what extent it was unavoidable is a difficult question
to determine, the evidence being contradictory and too voluminous to be set out in full.
The real substance of the complaints, in our opinion, is the want of medical and nursing
attendance and equipment upon the transports. There is evidence as to the want of
boats and barges in which to take the wounded from the beach and of tugs or pinnaces
to tow these craft when loaded to the hospital ships and transports, and also as to a want
of organisation in ordering them*to different hospital ships ; but the real complaint seems
to us to be the broad fact that men wounded on the Peninsula were often many hours
or days before their wounds were re-dressed, and did not receive proper medical attention
in the meantime.
We think that during the first few days after the landing in April difficulty and
confusion in collecting the wounded and removing them from the beaches were
unavoidable, owing to the failure to push inland and the fact that the beaches and the
small craft approaching or leaving the shore were under the enemy’s fire. At Anzac,
where the confusion appears to have been more pronounced than at Helles, the military
situation immediately after the landing was so unfavourable that the withdrawal of the
force at nightfall was contemplated by Sir William Birdwood and consequently orders
were given to get every wounded man away at once. Surgeon-General Birrell and
Lieutenant-Colonel Keble think that some of the confusion might have been avoided if
the senior medical officers of the Australian and New Zealand Corps had remained with
the headquarters of their Divisions, leaving their subordinates to land and do the work
on the beaches ; and Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick, D.A.D.M.S. of the Australian and
New Zealand Division, expresses that opinion in regard to his Division. Possibly if they
had done so they might have been able to exercise better control by being more in touch
with the hospital ships, but we do not think that this would have materially affected
the situation. In our opinion, the circumstances made contusion inevitable.
The difficulty and confusion mentioned above rapidly decreased after the first few
days, and in the operations in August there were few complaints of the arrange-
ments for the removal of the wounded from the beaches and their conveyance to the
hospital ships, except on the first day of the fighting at Anzac, when, according to
Lieutenant-Colonel Corbin, Medical Officer of the Ist Australian Clearing Station, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Begg, Officer Commanding the New Zealand Field Ambulance, there
were difficulties from want of transport from the beaches and from the delay in the
arrival of two clearing stations which had been provided for that service. This delay
was explained by Lieutenant-Colonel Corkery, Officer Commanding the 16th Casualty
Clearing Station, one of the two under reference. It does not seem to have been
occasioned by any fault in the arrangements of the Medical Staff.


rn 167. At the end of May, Surgeon-General Sir William Babtie was appointed
Principal Director of Medical Services in the Mediterranean, and exercised a general
l 0 supervision over all the medical arrangements for the Mediterranean Expeditionary
ip Force, as well as for Egypt and Malta, Surgeon-General Birrell continuing in the position
of Director of Medical Services of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force until the latter
■ e I part of August, when he was relieved by Surgeon-General Bedford.
ls r ' 168. In July, Surgeon-General Sir James Porter was sent out by the Admiralty Q.Q.19444-
to superintend the naval and military resources in respect of the sea hospital transport 8.
jin the Mediterranean, under the title of Principal Hospital Transport Officer (Mediter- iy ° 7 ®'
38 i ranean). Up to this time this duty had been performed by Surgeon-General Birrell and q q.8853-8.
7 ! Surgeon-General Ford, under the supervision of Surgeon-Genera I Babtie, though all the q. 19450.
d movements of the vessels and other craft at sea were under the control of the Naval W.O. tele-
Le Authorities. In consequence of complaints received by Sir Arthur May, the Medical arr | s ’
L " j Director-General of the Navy, as to the condition of the wounded afloat and the defective
arrangements for the direction of the transports, he represented to Sir Alfred Keogh q q 19386-
Ls i that it would be well if a naval medical officer were sent out to supervise the shipping 9.
LS j arrangements for the sick and wounded. Sir Alfred Keogh agreed to this, and Sir James
7 Porter was accordingly sent out. Sir lan Hamilton considered that the result would
n I be a dual control and consequent confusion, and represented his views to the War Office.
Surgeon-General Babtie considered the appointment unnecessary, but he and Sir James
7 Porter worked very well together. Sir James Porter remained there until December,
n ' w 1915, when his appointment was terminated at the request of the War Office. There
k is a difference of opinion as to whether any benefit resulted from the appointment. Sir
h Arthur May thinks that there was an improvement. Sir Alfred Keogh thinks there
> was not. Vice-Admiral Wemyss told us that from the naval point of view there was a
great improvement.
Q 169. The question of dealing with casualties became very important in July, in view W.O. tele-
of the contemplated operations at Helles, Anzac and Suvla, and on July 13th Sir §5 am >
0 lan Hamilton informed the War Office that he would need more medical assistance. "° -
* j He pointed out that 20,000 casualties was not an extravagant estimate judging from
s | the results of fighting in the Dardanelles up to that date, and that such a number would
require thirty transports converted into temporary hospital ships and 200 extra medical
8 officers, with E.A.M.C. rank and file and nurses in proportion. The contemplated
3 ! operations first came to the notice of the Director of Medical Services and General Q- 24059.
1 Woodward and General Winter about the same time. Surgeon-General Birrell explained QQ. 9149-
that it was only by an accident that he heard of the operations, and that he repeated
what he had heard to the other two officers. From another part of his evidence it seems g ram 6 e
that the telegram above mentioned was sent by Sir lan Hamilton at his request; and as m.F.A.2052
it did not entirely express what he wanted, another telegram, increasing the demand for Q. 9151.
> orderlies and nurses, was sent. This demand was complied with.
7 There is the same conflict of evidence as to whether the estimate of the casualties on
this occasion was made in the first instance by the General or by the Administrative
Staff, but we do not think it necessary to investigate the matter.
170. Surgeon-General Birrell informed us that his final scheme for the evacuation of Surg.-Gen.
casualties from Helles, Anzac, and Suvla w r as based upon an estimate of 30,000 casualties ; t
and this was also the estimate of Sir lan Hamilton, after further considering the question. JsMarch *
The scheme provided for the use of six hospital ships and thirty transports used as 1917.
temporary hospital ships. The hospital ships were to take the serious cases and, when Q. 13496.
full, carry them to the bases and return to the Peninsula. Sir James Porter disapproved of
sending the hospital ships away from the battle area, and made out a plan of his own Appendix
for the movement of the ships and other craft which is set out in his statement,
This plan aimed at reserving the hospital ships more exclusively for serious cases and -poTtet? 8
providing greater facilities for separating the light from the serious cases. The cases statement,
were then transferred from the hospital ships into transports for carriage to the bases 13 Feb.,
and the hospital ships returned to the beaches. 1917 «
The evacuation was carried out in accordance with Sir James Porter’s dispositions and,
on the whole, the cases were better sorted than in the original landing, but there was still Q- 18864.
considerable confusion. This was increased, not only during these operations but through-
out the whole time, by the difficulty of communication with, and inspection of, the hospital
ships and transports when they arrived at Mudros. The Lines of Communication Staff, Q 18091-


including the Deputy Director of Medical Services, were with the Naval Staff upon the
ss. “ Aragon,” and for the purpose of communication with the shore or with any vessel
in th£ bay, steam or motor launches or boats of some kind were necessary. Of these there
was a great deficiency. The Military Staff on board the “ Aragon ” were in close touch
with the naval authorities, and this advantage would have been lost without any
compensating improvement in their means of communication with the vessels in harbour,
had their headquarters been established on shore. Evidence to this effect was given by f q (
Major-General Altham, the Inspector-General of Communications, and we accept it.
Sir Frederick Treves in his evidence stated that great difficulty was occasioned
because the Deputy Director of Medical Services at Mudros had no means of communica-
tion with Alexandria or Malta, and therefore did not know what accommodation thero t j
was at each place for the wounded, with the> result that ships were sent to Alexandria, oJ
and then, finding no accommodation there, had to go on to Malta. We think that there is
some misunderstanding about this. The statement is inconsistent with the evidence
of Vice-Admiral Wemyss, Surgeon-General Birrell, Colonel Reble, Colonel Ryan, and other
officers, and with the information given to us by Colonel Maher. Surgeon-General Ford
also stated that he could at all times accommodate the wounded sent to him, though at
times he sent on slight cases to Malta in order to keep beds available for serious cases.
171. In addition to the casualties arising from wounds, there was much sickness, a
chiefly a form of dysentery and diarrhoea, and large numbers of men had to be removed * * c
from the Peninsula to hospital. .This was especially the case in the height of the si
summer. At the end of November, 1915, a very severe blizzard occurred, producing
numerous cases of frost-bite, and also gangrene from the men's clothing being frozen to 1
their bodies. There was much suffering during this time, and the storm came so suddenly I
and was so exceptional that no special provision had been made for it. 1
172. We have had much evidence as to the treatment of the sick and wounded during q
the operations on the Gallipoli Peninsula. Some of it favourable to the medical organisa-
tion and arrangements, and some the reverse. The main complaints related to the con-
dition of the wounded on the black ships, and the evidence as to them is contradictory. ■
Evidence as to the deficiencies of these ships and the consequent suffering of the
wounded was given to us by many witnesses, amongst them Rear-Admiral Keyes, Surgeon-
General Howse, Lieutenant-Colonel Begg, Fleet-Surgeon Levick, Lieutenant-Colonel
Fenwick, Major Kent Hughes, Lieutenant-Colonel Corbin and Lieutenant-Colonel Ryan.
Some of the information given to us by these witnesses was given from personal
observation and some from reports and communications received by them. It is a
subject on which hearsay information should be received with caution, as a natural
sympathy with the sufferings of the wounded may lead to some exaggeration. j
We think, too, that some of the witnesses have not made sufficient allowance for ~
the inevitable hardships that must attend the evacuation and treatment of casualties £
under conditions such as existed at Gallipoli. r<
Colonel Warren Low said that in four or five days at Mudros and Anzac rtiore big q
operations were performed than the total number performed in the twelve large hospitals
in London in a week, and added :“ If you are going to expect to have at a place like a
Anzac all the arrangements one expects at St. Thomas’s Hospital, you will not get v
them,, and I cannot understand anyone expecting them.” Sir Arthur May also said
that where there is a very large number of casualties hospital ships cannot be provided a
for all, and black ships or carriers must be used to a certain extent, and that whenever t * g .
these are used there must be a large amount of unnecessary suffering. The word
“ unnecessary ” seems to mean suffering which would not result from the wound if v
treated under favourable conditions.
We think that great importance is to be attached to the evidence of Lieutenant-Colonel *
Ryan as to the condition of the transports, both because he had had experience of war £
before this campaign, and because he was Consulting Surgeon and Principal Medical 0
Adviser to General Birdwood at Anzac, and for about a month, from April 25th, was e .
constantly at work on the transports. This is the time during which the state of the u
transports was at its worst. According to his evidence, he was on board about ten trans-
ports, and in half of them the supply of medical officers was insufficient and there was a
want of equipment, such as bed pans, dressings, and clothing for the men. He also r)
describes many of the transports as very dirty, because they had been carrying troops


to the Peninsula and there was not time to clean them properly. Great difficulty and Q. 28790.
discomfort was caused in some transports by the fact of horses having been carried on Q* 28739.
them to Gallipoli. When these ships were selected for the accommodation of wounded Q*
it was expected that the horses would have been disembarked before the wounded
were put on board, but it was found impossible to disembark them, and on some
occasions they were taken several times between Alexandria and Gallipoli. To carry
horses and wounded on the same ship must occasion suffering to the latter. Lieutenant-
Colonel Ryan stated that he did not think there was much loss of life, but that if all q. 28702.
these transports had been fitted up as hospital ships more lives, but not a great many,
would have been saved. q. 28767.
We think that this is in substance a fair account of the condition of the transports
in the first days of the operations. Lieutenant-Colonel Ryan was only' on board one
of these transports for a second time and in that case he found a distinct improvement. Q. 28811.
Lieutenant-Colonel Ryan also agrees with the evidence of many other witnesses
that there was no possibility of separating the wounded into different classes on the
beach, and that the cases had to be evacuated as they came without being sorted,
according to the nature of their wounds. Q-Q- 28781-2.
Sir John Maxwell and Sir Charles McGrigor described the state of the wounded when
they arrived at Alexandria as most distressing, and ascribed it to want of medical and Q-Q- 6973-6.
nursing attendance; and Lady Carnarvon, who was working amongst the sick at Alexandria, Q-Q- 7146-50.
said that the black ships were deficient in nursing staff, and, she believed, in medical staff Q.Q. 17141-50
all the time. General Haggard and Corporal Ross speak to the want of attention and Q.Q. 12551-5.
consequent hardships they themselves experienced, and there was other evidence to the q.q. 20487-90,
same effect.
On the other hand, in answer to a telegram from the War Office of May 10th, w.O. tele-
-1915 : —“ Representations made here regarding inadequacy of arrangements for wounded, gram, 8593,
Insufficient doctors, nurses and dressings,” Sir John Maxwell answered, on May 11th, A.M.D.
1915 : —“ Please state the source of representations, which I believe to be unfounded.
The rush of wounded could not be dealt with in fitted hospital ships, well supplied with
everything, and, therefore, we had to use, and will have to use, ordinary transports. w j
Under most difficult circumstances, the best possible surgical arrangements were made. gram
Of course, as troops had to disembark, and the wounded embark on the same day, the 1072 E.
transports could not be cleaned. More than 11,000 cases have been brought from the
Dardanelles, all with their wounds dressed. With the exception of 2,000 sent to Malta
all of these were made comfortable in hospital, and within 80 hours of being wounded
they were all attended to. The wounded arrived under circumstances well attended
to, according to the report of the surgeons in all the hospitals.” Again, on May 23rd, 1915,
he telegraphed :— “ The wounded were all dressed on being put on board, and on arrival w.O. tele-
were reported by all the Medical Officers in charge of the hospitals as in a satisfactory gram,
condition, taking into consideration the military circumstances under which they were 1141 E-
embarked.”
This telegram was, apparently, sent after inquiry had been made by Surgeon-General Q.Q. 8843-4,
Ford. Surgeon-General Birrell and Surgeon-General Babtie told us that adequate staffs Q. 8843.
were provided, and, so far as they knew, were on board the ships, though Surgeon-
General Birrell admitted that in May the staffs were not sufficient at one time. It is
remarkable that this is the time covered by Sir John Maxwell’s telegrams. Lieutenant-
Colonel Thom, speaking of the time after July Ist, 1915, when he took over the office
work of attending to the staffing of the hospital ships and black ships, said that there were Q.Q. 17565
always sufficient staffs available at Mudros, and that, so far as he knew, they were on
board. Colonel Mayo Robson explained the deficiency of medical and nursing staffs by
the fact that serious cases intended for hospital ships were put on the black ships, and he
also explained some evidence which was given as to men arriving practically naked by Q, 18091.
saying that in the summer they fought in that way, and that the sunburnt condition q q 18142
in which they arrived was due to that cause and not to their having been exposed after -4.
being wounded, as was supposed by some of the witnesses. Colonel Warren Low also ascribed
the condition of the black ships to the difficulties under which the work was done, but he Q- 19558
had not much practical experience of those ships. Colonel Sir Courtauld Thomson, Chief Q. 19567.
Commissioner of the Red Cross Society for Malta, Egypt and the Near East, had the
opportunity of seeing many of the black ships, and travelled in some of them. He
expressed the opinion that under the exceptional conditions the available resources were -
utilised to the best advantage.
173. In some instances transports were used as temporary hospital ships for the
reception of wounded at Mudros when the hospital accommodation on shore was fully


occupied. This occurred in the case of the “ Saturnia,” described by Rear-Admiral
Keyes, Fieet-Surgeon Levick and Major Purchas. * thi
According to the evidence given by Major Purchas, Royal Army Medical Corps, 80 1
he h*eard on June 29th, soon after his arrival at Mudros from Egypt, that there were a th
large number of wounded on board the “ Saturnia ” without sufficient medical attendance, th
He obtained this information from overhearing a conversation between the Captain of esi
the “ Minnewaska,” the vessel on which he had come from Egypt, and the Captain of
another transport. He at once asked for a boat and boarded the “ Saturnia, ” which on
he found filled with wounded. At this time, according to his evidence, the only medical E;
officers on board were an Australian medical officer, who had arrived just before him, m
and Fleet-Surgeon Levick. The latter officer had boarded the “ Saturnia ” in conse- ar
quence of a report made to him by a Roman Catholic Chaplain that there were a large as
number of wounded on board the “ Saturnia ” and only one medical officer. Soon a
after Fleet-Surgeon Levick went on board, surgeons from all the ships of the Fleet then m
lying in harbour were sent to the “ Saturnia ”in consequence of a general signal. Rear- pi
Admiral Keyes, who took his information from a statement made by Naval Surgeon B
Lorimer and Fleet-Surgeon Levick, were under the impression that the £< Saturnia ” had ol
brought these wounded men into Mudros and that the state of their wounds as te
described by them resulted from neglect on board of her. We see no reason to it
doubt the evidence of Fleet-Surgeon Levick and Major Purchas that there were a sc
large number of wounded on board the “ Saturnia ” whose bandages had not been ol
removed since the first dressing and were putrid, and that many of the wounds were in si
a very foul state and needed prompt attention. < ► SI
It was not the fact that the “ Saturnia ” brought the wounded to Mudros from n
Helles. She was one of four transports taken up in anticipation of the fighting at Helles oj
on June 28th to receive such wounded as could not be accommodated on shore. The sl
other transports were the “ Seeang Bee,” the “ Minnewaska ” and the “ Nile.” The h
“ Saturnia ” was partly laden with ammunition and could not be used to carry wounded
to Egypt, but only for their temporary accommodation at Mudros. The condition of C
the men’s wounds was not produced by neglect on the “ Saturnia,” but according to g<
the evidence of Major Purchas was the result of the impossibility of bringing them to \
the dressing stations for some time after they were wounded and their consequent a
exposure. Major Purchas, however, stated that the condition was aggravated by the I
want of attention on the “ Saturnia,” which he said was quite unprepared and unfitted s
for their reception. Major Purchas also stated in his evidence that he was informed that a
the wounded were put on board the “ Saturnia ” in consequence of a mistaken signal. i
On June 30th Colonel Aspinall, who was serving on the General Staff under General c
Braithwaite, happened to be at Mudros and reported to General Headquarters at Imbros c
as follows :—“ I was informed at Mudros yesterday that 1,350 wounded, including a large i
proportion of stretcher cases, had arrived there in fleet sweepers and trawlers, including s
Isle of Man paddle steamers. 250 additional cases arrived during the day in similar ships. 1
There was insufficient accommodation for these men on arrival, with the result that 600
cases were yesterday morning transferred to the ammunition ship “ Saturnia.” Yesterday 1
afternoon it was reported to the naval authorities by the Roman Catholic Chaplain that <:
there were 800 sick and wounded on the “ Saturnia ” and only two doctors to look after £
them. Admiral Wemyss accordingly ordered each man-of-war in harbour to send a surgeon (
on board.” ,
This report on receipt at General Headquarters was referred to Surgeon-General
Birrell, who the next day, July Ist, sent Colonel Keble to Mudros to enquire into the
matter. Colonel Maher was at that time Deputy Director of Medical Services on the
Lines of Communication at Mudros, and was responsible under the Director of Medical
Services, who was at Imbros, for the medical arrangements at Mudros. Colonel Keble
stated in evidence that on reaching Mudros he was informed by Colonel Maher that the
wounded had been put on board the <f Saturnia ” by the mistake of the master of a fleet
sweeper, and that they had been removed as soon as Colonel Maher heard of it. Colonel
Keble did not make any further enquiry. Having regard to the specific allegations in
Colonel AspinalTs report it appears to us that Colonel Keble’s enquiry was perfunctory
and insufficient.
We think that the evidence establishes that the wounded were put on board at
some time on June 29th and that they were removed, some on June 30th to the
“ Nile ” and the remainder on July Ist to the “ Minnewaska,” both of which were
properly fitted to receive them.
Major Purchas stated that on June 30th he was not in want of more medical
assistance.


It is difficult to be certain as to the number of wounded on the “ Saturnia,” but we
think Major Purchas’s evidence is probably correct. He stated the number as about
800, and as he was in charge of their Removal from the “ Saturnia ” to the “ Nile ” and
Minnewaska,” and was afterwards in charge of the “ Minnewaska ” while taking
those transferred to that ship from Mudros to Alexandria, he had good opportunities of
estimating the number.
After hearing the evidence of Fleet Surgeon Levick and Major Purchas we at
once communicated with Colonel Maher. He is at present on duty with the Egyptian
Expeditionary Force and has not given evidence before us, but we caused enquiries to be
made from him by cable as to circumstances connected with the “ Saturnia.” His
answer is in direct contradiction of most of the evidence stated above. It is in substance
as follows : —When the fighting on June 28th was anticipated he was told to expect
a certain number of wounded, and took up and got ready the transports already
mentioned for their reception. It was intended that the more serious cases should be
put on board the hospital ships at Helles, only the less serious being brought to Mudros.
By some mistake at Helles, many cases intended for the hospital ships were not put on board
of them, but were brought to Mudros, and more accommodation than had been con-
templated was required at that place. When the accommodation on shore was exhausted
it was necessary to put the wounded on board the transports mentioned, and he ordered
some of them to be put on board the “ Saturnia.” Only 300 cases were put on board
of her, and eight military medical officers and other medical personnel with medical and
surgical equipments were put on board at once. The wounded were not left without
► sufficient medical attention, and help was given on this, as on many other occasion, by
naval surgeons. On June 30th all the serious cases were transferred to the ‘‘Nile,” and
on July Ist the remainder were transferred to the “ Minnewaska.” Colonel Maher also
stated that on June 29th and 30th he went on board the “ Saturnia ” and satisfied
himself that the sick were well cared for.
Towards the end of August, 1915, in consequence of a complaint made to the War
Office about the treatment of the wounded on board the “ Saturnia,” Colonel Maher
sent a report to Surgeon-General Babtie, the Principal Director of Medical Services in the
Mediterranean, in which he gave substantially the same account of the circumstances
as that contained in his cable sent in answer to our enquiry. He also stated that Major
Purchas, an Australian surgeon of wide experience, was in charge and was assisted by
several other competent surgeons. Major Purchas, in fact, comes from New Zealand
and not irom Australia. It appears from War Office records that Surgeon-General Batbie
informed the War Office on August 31st that he had personally visited the “ Saturnia ”
on July Ist, and that on that day there were-eight medical officers on board, while a number
of naval medical officers were also assisting as voluntary helpers. He stated that the
number of wounded on board was about 500 and that the Saturnia was quite a suitable
ship for the purpose to which she was put, but could not be used as a carrier, as she was
loaded with ammunition.
We must point out, however, that on July Ist' all the more serious cases had been
removed to the “ Nile ” and medical and other assistance had been obtained, so that
Surgeon-General Babtie’s statement is no guide to the state of things on June 29th. His
statement of the number of cases then on board as 500 is more consistent with Major Pur-
chas’s estimate of number than with Colonel Maher’s statement that only 300 were put
on board.
We are of opinion that no definite conclusion can be formed on this matter in the
absence of the evidence of Colonel Maher and any witnesses whom he might wish to be
called. Colonel Maher is at present on active service with the Egyptian Expeditionary
Force. We have communicated with the War Office and are informed that for military
reasons the Army Council strongly deprecate the recall of Colonel Maher to England at
the present time. Under these circumstances, in order fully to investigate the matter,
it would be necessary to postpone the presentation of our report for an indefinite period.
We do not feel justified in taking such a course, as a decision upon this particular
incident would not affect the general conclusions at which we have arrived on the
medical arrangements.
In view, however, of the serious nature of the evidence recorded in the present case,
especially as affecting the conduct and capacity of Colonel Maher, we recommend that,
as soon as the exigencies of the public service permit, steps should be taken by the Army
Council definitely to ascertain with whom the responsibility rests for the deplorable state
of things which has been represented to us as existing on board the £ Saturnia ” on June
29th.


174. As regards the medical arrangements generally, although the evidence -in
several material respects is conflicting, we consider that a fair inference to be drawn
from it is that much suffering was caused to ths wounded during their evacuation
from the Peninsula, and that some part of it might have been avoided. Much of
this suffering and discomfort was occasioned by the use of the black ships for serious
cases. This, in our opinion, arose not so much from a miscalculation of the actual
number of casualties as from a miscalculation of the circumstances under which they
would be handled. All arrangements were made on the assumption that much more
ground would be gained, that the hospitals would be landed, and that there would be
an opportunity of sorting the casualties which did not exist on beaches constantly
under fire. The difficulties which arose in evacuating the wounded were largely due to
an under-estimate of the opposition which would be encountered, and too confident an
anticipation of rapid and substantial success. The conditions on shore were, as we
have said, aggravated by the impossibility of any proper inspection and regulation of
the ships at Mudros by reason of the want of facilities of communication.
Though a great deal of discomfort, amounting in many cases to actual suffering,
was occasioned to the wounded by the deficiency in medical attendance and the want
of proper appliances on board the transports, we think that the result of the evidence
is that the loss of life in consequence was small.
In our opinion, most of the suffering was due to the causes here mentioned, but we
also think that there was, in some instances, a lack of organisation and supervision.
Evidence of this was given by Admiral Keyes, Major Kent Hughes, and Surgeon-General
Howse. The last-named witness described, the conditions as “ extremely difficult ” and
exceptional, and said : “We were in the unfortunate position of having no history to
guide us of a previous landing on such a large scale in modern times, so that we could
get no idea of what medical arrangements should have been made.” We think that
many of the difficulties might have been avoided if a general plan of the operations had
been carefully worked out before the expedition was undertaken.
175. Many of the wounded after evacuation were taken to hospitals in Egypt and at
Malta, and others were sent to England, Australia, New Zealand, or India. We consider
the hospitals in England, Australia, New Zealand, and India to be outside the scope of our
enquiry. We had some evidence laid before us as to the condition of the hospitals in
Egypt and Malta, but we do not propose to discuss it at any length. Our conclusion is
that, though there may have been some difficulties at first, especially in Egypt, which
were the inevitable result of the large development of hospital accommodation, the
provision and management of the hospitals were, under the circumstances, satisfactory.
At times stores were not readily obtainable, but this resulted from the general difficulties
of transport, and not from anything specially connected with the medical arrangements.
There were also hospitals for the lighter cases established at Mudros and Imbros.
At Mudros their establishment was hampered by the want of piers and roads and other
facilities of a port,- and at one time, in order to be near the landing places and
the water supply, the hospitals were placed too near to the general camp, but this was
afterwards rectified. There was also evidence that the ground on which the hospitals
stood became infected, and that they should have been moved on that account. On this
subject there seems to be a difference of opinion. On the whole, we think that
the position of the hospitals at Mudros is fairly described by Surgeon-General
Babtie. The effect of his evidence is that at first there was not sufficient accommodation,
and, owing to the absence of water, roads and piers, its provision was very difficult;
but that, as the size of the force increased, the supply of medical officers and attendants
increased in proportion. It is possible that from time to time there was a shortage of
medical attendance, but we do not think it existed to any serious extent.
176. When the weather became hot, there was a great increase of sickness, chiefly dysen-
tery, diarrhoea, and para-typhoid, and these diseases were carried by the enormous number
of flies. It was, therefore, very important that the sanitation of the camps and trenches
should be properly carried out. On the whole, so far as conditions permitted, we think
this was done. Surgeon-General Babtie states that the difficulties in remedying defects
were almost insuperable owing to the cramped positions held and the lack of materials,
such as wood and corrugated iron to enclose the latrines and make them fly-proof and
to provide fly-proof kitchen-shelters. Some materials sent for the purpose were lost or
damaged by accident of war, but one of the main causes of the deficiency was the
anticipation that the operations would be very short, and the consequent omission to
make provision for a long occupation of the Peninsula.


Effective sanitation of the whole area was made impossible by the fact that our
trenches were very near to those of the Turks, who took no sanitary measures at all.
In July, a Sanitary Advisory Committee was appointed, which arrived in the Peninsula
after the fighting in August. The members of this Committee were-all men of acknow-
ledged scientific position, and their reports were of great service. A bacteriological Q. 19616.
laboratory was established at Mudros, and did good work.
We attach a copy of Surgeon-General Babtie’s statement, which we consider to be
accurate. It gives more details than we think necessary to embody in this report.
172. There does not seem to be any complaint as to the supply of medicine, except in
the case of Australian and New Zealand troops, who were said to have been short of the
ordinary medicines, especially castor oil, and of the variety of food required for men oiaooa
suffering from illness. There is no dispute as to the fact that, at one time, the supply
of castor oil ran short, the explanation put forward being that the supply was sufficient Q- %768
to meet ordinary demands, but that for some reason these troops required and consumed q'q* 2 i
more drugs than the normal supply. This is probably correct, for there are no complaints 17338-93
of a lack of drugs in any other quarter. q gl
POSTAL ARRANGEMENTS.
178. The postal arrangements for letters and parcels sent to the Mediterranean Expedi-
tionary Force were complicated, and increased in difficulty as the number of troops increased.
The arrangements also changed from time to time. The statements of Lieutenant-Colonel
Williamson, Director of Army Postal Service, Major McClintock, Director Army Postal
Service Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, and Captain McCurdy, Officer Commanding
New Zealand Base Post Office, set out all the details of the system, and will be found in
the Appendix.
179. Various complaints as to the service were brought before us. They were chiefly
concerned with the non-delivery or late delivery of latters and parcels to the New Zealand
troops, but we think what happened with regard to them may be taken as fairly representing
the facts as to the whole of the force. The only material difference is that the mails for
the New Zealand troops were passed through a very efficient New Zealand Post Office
under Captain McCurdy, but they remained always under the control of the General Post
Office.
Complaints were made by General R, P. Maxwell, General Cox and Colonel Mayo
Robson.
The two former complained that parcels regularly despatched from England were
only delivered in rare instances, and the latter that letters addressed to him were delivered
on board the ‘"Aragon,” where the Naval and part of the Administrative Staff were
quartered. Colonel Mayo Robson on more than one occasion went on board and asked
for his letters, and was told there were none for him, and eventually they were all found
in the hold in another part of the “ Aragon.” He said they consisted of letters and news-
papers extending over a period from July to October, 1915, and contained several orders
which had been sent to him by Surgeon-General'Bab tie and others. We have not been
able to get any explanation of this incident. The letters had been carried and delivered
at the place to which they were addressed and, in the absence of explanation, we can only
conclude that it was owing to the negligence or stupidity of some postal clerk on board
the “ Aragon ” that they were not given to Colonel Mayo Robson.
180. It must be remembered that the Post Office was not the only agency by which
parcels were sent to the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force. A great many were sent
by the Army Service Corps Parcels Transit Service, and the Post Office was sometimes
held responsible for the delay or non-delivery of parcels which were not entrusted to them.
Speaking generally, parcels up to 11 lbs. were sent by post and parcels above that weight
by the Military forwarding office. There was a good deal of looting of parcels sent by
the Military forwarding office, probably because they were not sent in sealed bags, as the
Post Office parcels were.
181. Still it cannot be doubted that there were delays and failures in the delivery of
letters and parcels which were sent by the Post Office. In considering the amount of
blame, if any, to be attached to the department, it is necessary not to lose sight of two
main considerations.
(1) The number of letters and parcels was, as shown by the annexed statements
of Lieutenant-Colonel Williamson, Major McClintock and Captain McCurdy,
very large, and increased very rapidly, and a failure to deliver a very small
percentage of the letters and parcels would amount to a formidable figure
percentage or tne letters and parcels would amount to a loriuidaoie ngure q
(C 49—242) ' ■ F


and give rise to many complaints. The amount of letters is stated to have grown
to 1,000,000 a week, and the parcels are variously stated as from 40,000 or
90,000 a week. The difference is probably accounted for by a difference in
the estimate of the number of parcels to a bag.
(2) The service was performed under circumstances of great difficulty, which are
also described in those statements, and for this reason the delivery of mails
cannot fairly be compared with delivery in ordinary circumstances or to the
troops in France.
The system of checking the bags was elaborate and efficient, as is shown by the
fact that every bag except one could be traced and accounted for, and that cases in which
the bags had been tampered with were also discovered. This checking continued up to
the time when the mails were delivered to the Post Orderlies of the different units. After
they had been so delivered the responsibility of the Post Office ceased.
182. In consequence of complaints as to the postal service, Colonel Williamson was
sent out specially to make inquiries and report, which he did in October, 1915. His report,
which he confirmed in evidence before us, will be found in the Appendices to this Report.
It is substantially in accordance with the evidence of the other witnesses mentioned above.
From this report it appears that the Post Office probably had to bear some of the
responsibility which properly attached to the Army Service Corps Parcels Transit Service
as well as its own.
The Post Office sent the letters via Marseilles and the parcels by P. & 0. packets from
the Thames. The result was that a letter advising the despatch of a parcel often arrived
a considerable time before the parcel, and complaints were made of its non-arrival because
the addressee of the letter did not appreciate that they were not sent together.
183. In cases where the addressee had become a casualty or for some other reason was
not with his unit, there were great difficulties in finding where he was and in delivering
his letters or parcels, even if they arrived safe and were not distributed to other men.
The names of several men whose letters were not delivered were supplied to us by the
Office of the High Commissioner of New Zealand. These cases were investigated so far
as was possible by Captain McCurdy, and the result is given by him in his statement.
They illustrate the difficulty experienced in delivering mails when the addressees were
not with their unit.
184. Many parcels were destroyed through insufficient packing. The bags were handled
and transhipped several times, and could not always be carefully handled, the result being
that parcels were burst open and their contents crushed so as to be quite indistinguishable.
Colonel Williamson described in his evidence the state of a large number of bags of parcels
which had been sent up to the front and returned to Alexandria because they could not
be delivered.
He says : “ The state in which these parcels arrived was absolutely deplorable. It
was a deplorable sight. There was hardly a vestige of a resemblance to a parcel left. The
contents were often ground to powder. The packing was all gone, the address was
illegible, and one would simply get a bagful of disjecta membra of a parcel which it was
impossible to reassemble and send on. That must have accounted for a very large
proportion.” It is improbable that all this damage was done on their return from the
front to Alexandria, and it may therefore be concluded that many parcels arrived at the
front in the state described by Colonel Williamson.
185. In many cases where the addressee was not present with his unit, the parcels
rightly or wrongly, were treated as common property, and distributed amongst his comrades.
180. In the case of letters which arrived at intervals over a considerable period
and were not delivered as they arrived, but all together at a later date, the fault may
have been that of the unit to which the addressee belonged and not that of the Post
Office, whose duty was discharged when the letter was delivered to the Post Orderly.
In one case that was investigated by Captain McCurdy this proved to have been the case.
It does not seem to have been so in the case of Colonel Mayo Robson.
187. Parcels sent to General Cox were packed by the Army and Navy Stores and
forwarded by Parcel Post. Presumably, they would be properly packed. We have not
been able to ascertain anything further with regard to this case or that of General Maxwell.
188. The causes mentioned above account for a very large proportion of the com-
plaints, but they do not explain them all. There must have been cases in which the Post
Office was at fault. Considering the difficulties of the service and the amount of letters
and parcels which had to be handled, we think that some miscarriage was inevitable,
and we are of opinion that, on the whole, no blame attaches to those who had the organiza-
tion and conduct of the service.


THE ZION MULE CORPS.
189. The Zion Mule Corps was raised in Alexandria from a number of Jewish refugees
from Syria. They or their fathers had gone to Syria following the principle of Zionism
and at the outbreak of war they came to Egypt and were under the charge of a Mr.
Hornblower, Inspector of Refugees in the Ministry of the Interior, Egypt. Thecorps,
when raised, was put under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson, and did g
work in Gallipoli as a transport corps.
190 The only question raised before us was as to the terms of service and pension on
which they were engaged. We doubt if this question is strictly within our reference,
but we think it well to represent the facts as stated to us. Evidence was given to us y
Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson and Captain Trumpeldor. Lieutenant-Colonel J at t® rso “
spoke in a great measure from hearsay, and the important evidence was that of Captain
Trumpeldor. We consider him quite a trustworthy witness. , • , fi- :,],, q. 8686.
Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson said that there were two meetings held at which officials
of the British Government addressed the men and told them that they would be tr ® at
in all respects in the same way as British soldiers and would receive the same pay and
everything else, and that the men agreed to serve in the corps on those terms.
191. Captain Trumpeldor said that they wished to raise a fighting unit to fight for Q- 11579 -
Palestine and the Zion ideal, and did not want to serve as a e hto
did not t.bmk it so honourable. He said that he and a committee of prominent l» rae utes
saw Sir John Maxwell and discussed the question of forming a fighting or a transpoit
unit, and that after wards a meeting of men was held at .whichthey were.addressed
by Mi-. Hornblower and a stafi officer who spoke m Sir John Maxwell s name. Ih
staff officer was Captain (now Lieutenant-Colonel) H. V. Holdlc^’. Hornblower
According to Captain Trumpeldor s evidence the men were told by Mr. Hornb
and Captain Holdich that a transport and a fighting unit in the British Army were equally
honourable* l and served on the same conditions. Some of the men who were married and
had families asked what would happen to their famdies if they were killed or wounded,
and in answer they were told that like the families of soldiers they would receive a pens.on
Zt afiowlnceCaptain Trumpeldor said that he did not remember the expression
“ pensions ” being used, as Mr. Hornblower and Captain Holdich spoke m English and e
did not miderstaifd it very well, but that what they said was translated into Hebrew by
Mr. Gordon, a clerk in m/kohi blower’s office. Captain Trumpeldor spoke English fairly
well and gave his evidence in English.
192. Lieutenant-Colonel Holdich is on active service in Egypt. We made inquiries from
him by telegraph, and received an answer that to the best of his recollection no men ion wu
snecifically was made of any gratuities or pensions, as it was understood that any ques
r t o them would be settled later by the General Officer Commanding m Chief of the
Mediterranean Force, according to the nature of the work on
and that he believes an agreement was made between Sir J. Maxwell and tUe general
Officer Commanding in Chief of the Mediterranean Force. He also stated that the terms,
so far as them, were defined in writing to the War Office in a letter at thebegmmng
of April 1915, as Is. a day and khaki uniform, without any otherconditwns. T
mentioned is one from Sir John Maxwell, of April 10, 1916. The War Office have not
been able to find it, but we are informed by General Headquarters in Egypt that it con
* aine^g o r^eCTed Jn Captain U Tr^p r eldoFs o effidence to Sir John Maxwell and received in
answer a letter in which he stated : “ My staff officer was Captain (now Lieutenant-Colonel)
Holdich D 5.0., and drew up the terms of service. As far as my recollection goes Co one
Patterson has correctly stated the case. The terms of service of the men must be
in Egypt; they accepted the conditions and were taken on the strength
ranefn Expeditionary^Force.” On receiving this letter we communicated with Lieutenant-
Colonel Holdich, and received the answer mentioned above.
193 Some of the corps were killed and wounded, and a question as to the payment of Statement
pensions a 7ol ln August, 1915, Sir John Maxwell wrote to the War Office : AUhough -
no nromise or agreement of any sort was made regarding pensions the men were eviden 1 Harri3j
ouite < that in case of their death, pensions or compensation of some 16 Aprll ,
would be granted to their widows.” He recommended the payment of a gratuity 19 „.
in lieu of a pension, owing to the difficulties that might arise in the payment of pens ons.
(C 49—242) 2


In September, 1915, he again wrote to the War Office and explained that the men
were not attested, but had entered into a voluntary agreement to serve at the pay of Is.
a day, their families being maintained in refuge camps during their absence. He concluded:
No authorised mention of pension was made to them before joining, but they un-
doubtedly consider themselves eligible for the same consideration as soldiers,” —and again
recommended gratuities rather than pensions.
Sir 194. Authority has been obtained from the Treasury to issue gratuities to the Zion
Reginald Mule Corps men if disabled or to their dependants if they die.
letter 0 § Some of the men sent a petition to Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson complaining that
20 June, they only received gratuities instead of pensions, and said that it was not fair after what
1917 5 had been said to them when they joined.
195. We suggest for the favourable consideration of the War Office the question
whether, under the circumstances, the men of this corps should not be treated as to pensions
similarly to British soldiers regularly enlisted.
GENERAL REVIEW.
196. Before setting out the conclusions to which we have come, it seems desirable
briefly to review the salient features of the Dardanelles Expedition in their broad military
aspect. We would first refer-to the paper on the possibility of a joint naval and military
attack upon the Dardanelles, drawn up by the General Staff at the War Office for
the consideration of the Committee of Imperial Defence and dated December 19th,
1906, in paragraph 8 of which the following statement appears:—“ The successful
conclusion of a military enterprise directed against the Gallipoli Peninsula must hinge
upon the ability of the fleet not only to dominate the Turkish defences with gun fire,
and crush their field troops during that period of helplessness which exists while an
army is in actual process of disembarkation, but also to cover the advance of the troops
once ashore until they could gain a firm foothold, and establish themselves upon the
high ground in rear of the coast defences of the Dardanelles. However brilliant as a
combination of war and, however fruitful in its consequences such an operation would be,
were it crowned with success, the General Staff, in view of the risks involved, are not
prepared to recommend its being attempted.”
These words were written before the recent development of deep trenches flanked by
hidden machine guns, concealed howitzer batteries, and the other appliances of modern
defensive warfare. Sir John de Robeck pointed out to Sir lan Hamilton at their first
interview on March 17th, 1915, that the peninsula was rapidly being fortified, that all the
Q 4337. landing places were now defended by lines of trenches and effectively commanded by field
guns and howitzers which could not be located from the sea, that the Turks possessed
searchlights of the latest pattern which were skilfully handled, and that their troops were
so ably disposed and heavily entrenched that they had not much to fear from the flat
Admiralt I ra J e ctory guns of the Navy. Sir John de Robeck subsequently sent a telegram on May 9th,
Telegrams Admiralty, in which he remarked : “ The Navy is of small assistance "when
No. 211. it is a matter of trenches and machine guns, and the check of the Army is due to these
factors.” It will be seen that the condition which the General Staff had laid down in 1906
as being essential to the success of a military enterprise on the Gallipoli Peninsula was
incapable of fulfilment; and though Sir John de Robeck’s views about naval gunfire were
of great importance, we cannot find that they were taken into serious consideration or
communicated to the War Office.
197. Landings took place at Helles and Anzac with disappointing results. The
troops not only suffered heavy loss during disembarkation, but subsequently were
unable to advance beyond a short distance from the beach, or to establish them-
selves on the high ground which the Turks had occupied and entrenched. Our
forces on the Peninsula were in the position of isolated garrisons confined to small
areas on the fringe of the shore, and engaged in trench warfare against an enemy
possessing freedom of movement, advantages of ground, and the power of concen-
tration and rapid reinforcement. Our garrisons fought bravely and lost heavily, but were
unable to make any substantial advance.
198. Sir lan Hamilton made an effort to extricate his troops from the trench warfare
in which they were entangled by means of the combined operations at the beginning of
August. These operations failed, partly because the Turks were too strong, partly


because some of our troops and their leaders were unequal to the task assigned them,
partly through shortage of water, and partly because the plan was defective.
The descriptions of the ground on the northern and north-western slopes of Sari Bahr,
and of the hills to the north and east of Suvla Bay, lead us to the conclusion
that in the plan of operations too little importance was attached to natural difficulties.
We doubt whether it was prudent or advantageous to order night advances through so
difficult a country, especially when no complete preliminary reconnaissance had been
or could have been made. In hardly any case either at Anzac or Suvla were the troops
able to reach the specified objectives at or near the time mentioned in the plan. Thus from
the beginning the execution of the plan was delayed, and this delay caused a loss of
cohesion and co-operation among the attacking units. In spite of heat, want of water
and difficulties of ground, the troops with very few exceptions appear to have fought well
and in some instances heroically ; but after successive nights and days of strenuous effort
they became exhausted and in urgent need of rest and reorganisation. The losses, too,
had been so heavy that without large reinforcements nothing further could be attempted.
Even with large reinforcements it had become increasingly evident that no substantial
success could be achieved without an overwhelming preponderance of high angle and high ex-
plosive fire upon the Turkish entrenchments which confronted our positions on the shore.
199. Viewed as a military enterprise which was undertaken not as a surprise, but after
ample warning had been given to the enemy of the probability of a land attack, we are
of opinion that from the outset the risks of failure attending the expedition outweighed its
chances of success. The conditions of the problem, so far as we can judge, were not fully
investigated in the first instance by competent experts, and no correct appreciation of
the nature and difficulties of the task involved was arrived at. In the absence of such
appreciation the authorities responsible for the expedition confidently expected that military
action on the Peninsula would be short and decisive, and that after the Turkish defences
had been destroyed and the Turkish guns dismounted the force which had been landed
would be available for such operations in the vicinity of Constantinople as might then
seem appropriate. The strength of the opposition to our landing on the Peninsula and
the failure of our troops to make any material impression on the Turkish entrenchments
which hemmed them in came, therefore, as a surprise. The heavy losses and the
repeated checks that were experienced up to the end of July caused the authorities
considerable anxiety, but they were naturally reluctant to abandon a project, the realisation
of which would have had such far-reaching effects. The failure of the combined attack
early in August, from which much had been hoped and for which large reinforcements had
been despatched from England, was a severe disappointment to the Government and the
country. Doubts arose as to the ultimate success of the expedition, and alternative
courses of action came under consideration. It was open to the Government, if the
requisite resources in the way of men, guns, and munitions were forthcoming, promptly
to strengthen the Expeditionary Force to such an extent as would enable it to
drive the Turks out of the Peninsula, or at least to attempt to do so. Or our garrisons
on the shore of the Peninsula might be * maintained in the positions they were then
occupying until the spring of 1916, provided that the Turks did not bring heavy
guns into play and render these positions untenable; or steps might be taken
for the evacuation of the Peninsula before the winter set in. There was much
divergence of opinion in regard to these different courses, the General Staff at the War
Office, which by this time was in process of resuscitation, being strongly in favour of
evacuation. To Sir lan Hamilton such a step as evacuation was unthinkable, and he
informed Lord Kitchener accordingly. On October 11th Lord Kitchener also told the
Dardanelles Committee that in his opinion the abandonment of the Gallipoli Peninsula
would be disastrous. On the other hand, Sir Charles Monro strongly urged its expediency
and feasibility, and this view, though at first distasteful to Lord Kitchener, after-
wards accepted by him. At last the Government resolved to withdraw from the Peninsula.
We think that this was a wise and courageous decision. It was generally recognised that
the evacuation would in all probability involve heavy loss in men and material. Besides
this, stress had been laid on the irreparable damage to our prestige in the Eastern world
which would attend our abandonment of the expedition. Fortunately, however, in the
result our losses proved to be inappreciable and hitherto our prestige appears to have
remained unimpaired.
200. It has been represented in some of the evidence which has come before us that
from a military point of view the Dardanelles Expedition, even if unsuccessful, was justified
by the fact that it neutralised or contained a large number of Turkish troops who otherwise
(C 49—242) . F 3


would have been free to operate elsewhere. Lord Kitchener estimated this number as
being nearly 300,000. But in containing the Turkish force we employed on the Peninsula
and at Lemnos and Imbros 385.700 officers and soldiers, beside Indian soldiers—a total
of at least 400,000. Our casualties amounted to 31,389 killed, 78,749 wounded and 9,708
missing, making a total of 119,846. The expedition also involved heavy financial
expenditure and the employment of a considerable naval force and of a large amount of
merchant shipping.
Taking these factors into consideration, we do not think that from a military stand-
point our' gain in one direction compensated for our losses in other directions. On the
other hand, as stated in our Interim Report, certain important political advantages were
secured.
201. Our attention has been called to the fact that in paragraph 83 of our First
Report, we quoted an extract from a statement made to us by Mr. Churchill in which he
referred to the changed attitude of Lord Fisher towards the operations at the Dardanelles.
Mr. Churchill’s statement was in fact given as relating not to the period “ shortly after
January 13th” but to a much later period.
While we gladly make this correction, .we wish to add that the conclusions stated in
the paragraph are in our opinion established by the evidence and are in no way vitiated
by this correction.
202. We regret that the official duties of Mr. Fisher as High Commissioner of
Australia became latterly so exacting as to deprive us to a large extent of his help. For
this reason, as explained in his separate memorandum, he considers it inadvisable to sign
the Report.
It will be noticed that Sir Thomas Mackenzie has added a memorandum dealing with
certain aspects of the Enquiry on which he takes a stronger view than the general body of
the Commissioners.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.
1. We think that, when it was decided to undertake an important military expedition
to the Gallipoli Peninsula, sufficient consideration was not given to the measures necessary
to carry out such an expedition with success. We have already pointed out in paragraph 15
that it had been apparent in February, 1915, that serious military operations might be
necessary. Under these circumstances we think that the conditions of a military attack
on the Peninsula should have been studied and a general plan prepared by the Chief of
the Imperial General Staff, Sir James Wolfe Murray, special attention being paid to the
probable effect of naval gun fire in support of the troops ; and that it was the duty of the
Secretary of State for War to ensure that this was done.
2. We think that the difficulties of the operations were much underestimated. At the
outset all decisions were taken and all provisions based on the assumption that, if a landing
were the resistance would be slight and the advance rapid. We can see no
sufficient ground for this assumption. The short naval bombardment in November,
1914, had given the Turks warning of a possible attack, and the naval operations in
February and March of 1915 led naturally to a great strengthening of the Turkish defences.
The Turks were known to be led by German officers, and there was no reason to think
that they would not fight well, especially in defensive positions. These facts had been
reported by Admiral de Robeck and Sir lan Hamilton.
3. We think that the position which, in fact, existed after the first attacks in April
and the early days of May should have been regarded from the outset as possible and the
requisite means of meeting it considered. This would have made it necessary to examine
and decide whether the demands of such extended operations could be met consistently with
our obligations in other theatres of war. In fact those obligations made it impossible in
May, June, and July to supply the forces with the necessary drafts, gun ammunition, high
explosives and other modern appliances of war.
4. We are of opinion that, with the resources then available, success in the Dardanelles,
if possible, was only possible upon condition that the Government concentrated their
efforts upon the enterprise and limited their expenditure of men and material in the
Western theatre of war. This condition was never fulfilled.
5. After the failure of the attacks which followed the first landing there was
undue delay in deciding upon the course to be pursued in the future. Sir lan Hamilton’s


appreciation was forwarded on May 17th, 1915. It was not considered by the War Council
or the Cabinet until June 7th. The reconstruction of the Government which took place
at this most critical period was the main cause of the delay. As a consequence the
despatch of the reinforcements asked for by Sir lan Hamilton m his appreciation was
postponed for six weeks.
6. We think that the plan of attack from Anzac and Suvla in the beginning of August
was open to criticism. The country over which the attack had to be made was very
difficult, especially at Anzac. In order to obtain if possible the element of surprise, the
main advance of the Anzac force up the north-western spurs of Sari Bahr was undertaken
at night, the risk of misdirection and failure being much increased thereby. Ihe plan,
however, was decided upon after a consideration of other plans, and with the concurrence
of the commander of the Anzac Corps, who had been in command since the first landing.
7 The operations at Suvla were a severe trial for a force consisting of troops who
had never been under fire, but we think that after taking into consideration and making
every allowance for the difficulties of the attack and the inexperience of the troops, the
attack was not pressed as it should have been at Suvla on the 7th and Bth August, and
we attribute this in a great measure to a want of determination and competence m e
Divisional Commander and one of his Brigadiers. The leading of the 11th Division and
the attached battalions of the 10th Division, which constituted the mam body of the attack,
was not satisfactory. As explained in paragraphs 108 and 109, the orders given by Genera
Hammers! ey were confused and the work of his staff defective Major-General
Hammersley’s health had in the past been such that it was dangerous to selectfor
divisional command in the field, although he seemed to have
the defects that we have mentioned in his leading probably arose from this cause. Genera*
Sitwell, the senior Brigade Commander, did not, in our opinion, show sufficient energy and
decision.
8. Sir Frederick Stopford was hampered by the want of effective leading above referred
to, and the inexperience of his troops, but we do not think he took sufficient means to mfom
himself of the progress of operations. On August 7th when he became aware that the
troops had not advanced as rapidly as had been intended, we think that lie should have
asked for some explanation from General Hammersley. In that case he wouldl have been
informed of the difference which had arisen between Sint his
of General Sitwell’s lack of vigour and energy m leading. We think that at this point his
mter We thffik his staff were partly responsible for the failure to supply the
troops with water on August 7th and Bth. Our detailed conclusions on the water supply
W We cannot endorse Sir lan Hamilton’s condemnation of the orders given by Sir Frederick
Stopford on the morning of August Bth, 1915, whether the account of them given in n
lan^Hamilton’s despatch or that in Sir Frederick Stopford s report to him be accepted.
According to the evidence of Sir Bryan Mahon and General Hammersley they were not
deterred from advancing by those orders. . . , ~ i. •
On the evening of August Bth we think that Sir Frederick Stopford s difficulties were
increased bv the intervention of Sir lan Hamilton. Sir lan Hamilton seems to have
considered Sir Frederick Stopford lacking in energy m the operations Between August 9th
and August 15th. As this opinion is based more upon general conduct than upon any
specific acts or omissions, we are not in a position to pronounce upon it. We realise,
however, that importance attaches to the impressions of a Commander-m-Chiet on such
a subject.
9. As regards Sir lan Hamilton it is inevitable that the capabilities of a
commander in war should be judged by the results he achieves, even though, if these
results are disappointing, his failure may be due to causes for which he is only partially
j an Hamilton succeeded in landing his troops at the places which
he had chosen ; but the operations that were intended immediately to follow the landing
were abruptly checked owing to a miscalculation of the strength of the Turkish defences
and the fighting qualities of the Turkish troops. This rebuff should have convinced
Sir lan Hamilton that the Turkish entrenchments were skilfully disposed and well armed,
and that naval gun fire was ineffective against trenches and entanglements of the modern
type. We doubt, however, whether the failure of these operations sufficiently impressed
(C 49—242) F 4


Sir lan Hamilton, and the military authorities at home with the serious nature of the
opposition likely to be encountered.
During # May, June, and July severe fighting took place, but its results were not com-
mensurate with the efforts made and the losses incurred.
During July a plan of combined operations was elaborated, which was carried into
effect early in August. Sir Tan Hamilton was confident'of success, but was again baffled
by the obstinacy of the Turkish resistance. Moreover, the failure of night advances
in a difficult and unexplored country, which formed part of the plan, led to heavy casualties
and temporarily disorganised the forces employed.
Sir lan Hamilton was relieved of his command on October 15th.
We recognise Sir lan Hamilton’s personal gallantry and energy, his sanguine dis-
position, and his determination to win at all costs. We recognise also that the task
entrusted to him was one of extreme difficulty, the more so as the authorities at
home at first misconceived the nature and duration of the operations, and afterwards
were slow to realise that to drive the Turks out of their entrenchments and occupy
the heights commanding the Straits was a formidable and hazardous enterprise which
demanded a concentration of force and effort. It must further be borne in mind that Lord
Kitchener, whom Sir lan Hamilton appears to have regarded as a Commander-in-Chief
rather than as a Secretary of State, pressed upon him the paramount importance, if it
were by any means possible, of carrying out the task assigned to him.
though from time to time Sir Tan Hamilton represented the need of drafts, reinforce-
ments, guns and munitions, which the Government found it impossible to supply, he was
nevertheless always ready to renew the struggle with the resources at his disposal, and to
the last was confident of success. For this it would be hard to blame him ; but viewing
the Expedition in the light of events it would, in our opinion, have been well had he
examined the situation as disclosed by the first landings in a more critical spirit, impartially
weighed the probabilities of success and failure, having regard to the resources in men
and material which could be placed at his disposal, and submitted to the Secretary of State
for War a comprehensive statement of the arguments for and against a continuance of
the operations.
10. The failure at Anzac was due mainly to the difficulties of the country and the
S re S?T -°f V lB T* 16 failure at Suvla also prevented any pressure being put upon
the iurkish force in that direction, and success at Suvla might have lessened the resistance
at Anzac.
11. We think that after the attacks ending on August 9th had failed, the operatioi s
contemplated could not have been successfully carried out without large reinforcements.
The fighting after General de Lisle replaced Sir Frederick Stopford was really of a
defensive character. J
12. We think that after the advice of Sir Charles Monro had been confirmed by
Lord Kitchener the decision to evacuate should have been taken at once. We recognise
however, that the question of evacuation was connected with other questions of high
policy which do not appear to us to come within the scope of our enquiry.
13. We think that the decision to evacuate when taken was right.
14. We think that the operations were hampered throughout by the failure to supply
sufficient artillery and munitions, and to keep the original formations up to strength by
the provision of adequate drafts as well as reinforcements. In our opinion this was
not owing to any neglect on the part of the Heads of Departments charged with such
provision, but to the demands proving much larger than was expected when the operations
were undertaken and to demands which had to be met in other theatres of war.
On the other hand, a considerable amount of artillery was available in* Egypt and
at Mudros for the Suvla operations, but it was not utilised.
15. Many minor frontal attacks were made without adequate artillery preparation
which produced little or no material advantage. Evidence was given that these attacks
entailed an unnecessary loss of life. Without a more intimate knowledge of the locality
and conditions than it is possible for us to obtain, we cannot express an opinion as to
whether it was right to undertake such attacks. We think that the evidence disproves
the allegation made before us that useless attacks were made because of the neglect on
the part of superior Commanders and Staff Officers to visit and inspect the trenches and
positions.
16. There was full co-operation between the Navy and Armv and the two services
worked w§ll and harmoniously together.


CONCLUSIONS AS REGARDS WATER SUPPLY.
17. As regards the landings at Helles and Anzac in April, 1915, and the subsequent
operations up to the end of July, we consider that the water arrangements at Helles were
satisfactory, but that the daily allowance at Anzac was barely sufficient.
18. As regards the operations at Anzac in August, 1915, we find that, owing in some
measure to the breakdown of a pumping engine and the collision of a vessel carrying 80,000
gallons of water with another vessel, there was a serious shortage of water, the allowance
to each man being restricted to one pint a day. This may not have checked the action
of the troops, but, as stated in paragraph 140 of the Report, it precluded the sending of
reserves when the attack was brought to a standstill.
19. As regards the landing at Suvla in August, 1915, we consider that:—
1. General Headquarters undertook the responsibility of arranging for the supply of
sea-borne water and for the necessary equipment for its storage and distribution
2. Sufficient attention was not paid by Sir Frederick Stopford and his Administrative
Staff to these arrangements, which shoul*d have been more thoroughly discussed
between the Administrative Staff at General Headquarters and the Corps
Administrative Staff before the landing. For the absence of such adequate
consultation neither Staff can be exonerated from responsibility.
3. Besides the foregoing arrangements the questions which demanded special consider-
ation on the part of Sir Frederick Stopford and his Administrative Staff were the
action to be taken on the spot for the reception, storage and distribution of sea-
borne water, including the provision of working parties to pump the water from
the lighters ; the expedients to be adopted in the event of delay in the landing of
the pack mules, together with the filled water bags which they were to carry;
and the instructions to be given for the discovery and development of local
sources ot supply.
It appears to us that these questions were not sufficiently considered, and that
Major-General Poett, Deputy Adjutant and Quartermaster-General of the IXth
Corps, must be held to be primarily responsible for the lack of due consideration.
4. The water shortage at Suvla abated after August Bth, but this fact does not excuse
the want of organisation and prevision which was apparent during the first two
days, and which largely contributed to the inaction of the troops on the second
day, and to the failure of the operations.
20. We are of opinion that throughout the operations the Navy carried out their
duties with regard to the supply of sea-borne water in an efficient manner, and were
always ready to render any assistance in their power.
21. As regards the operations generally, and having in view the vital importance of
water on the Gallipoli Peninsula, we consider that the question of water supply would have
been more efficiently handled throughout if, following the analogy of food supply, a staff
officer with the requisite qualifications had been appointed Director of Water Supply under
the Quartermaster-General at General Headquarters, with a Deputy Director on the
staff of each Corps Commander and an Assistant Director on the staff of each Divisional
Commander.
FOOD.
22. We think that, on the whole, the supply of food to the troops in Gallipoli was
satisfactory.
MEDICAL.
23. The provision for the evacuation of the wounded, especially in the matter of
hospital ships, proved insufficient to meet the emergencies which actually arose. We
think that, if the operations to be undertaken in landing on the Peninsula had been con-
sidered before the Expedition started and a general plan prepared, further provision
of hospital ships might, and probably would, have been made.


24. We do not think that the Director of Medical Services, Surgeon-General Birrell,
before leaving England had any opportunity of estimating the number of hospital ships
required, % s he did not know what operations were contemplated.
25. We think that the separation of the Administrative Staff, including the Deputy
Adjutant-General and Director of Medical Services, from the rest of the Headquarters
Staff during the time immediately preceding the landing was a mistake, and that it
would have been better if the Director of Medical Services had been kept more fully
informed of the operations which were proposed. The time was very short in which
to make preparations, and we doubt if it was then possible to obtain a sufficient
number of hospital ships to accommodate the casualties which actually occurred. If
Surgeon-General Birrell had been able to discuss matters with the General Staff he might
have seen the necessity of, and been able to obtain, a fuller supply of appliances and
equipment for the transports.
We think, however, that it would have been well if while in Egypt, where he
was arranging for hospital accommodation on a large he had made requisition
for appliances such as would probably be required for even the less serious cases on the
transports, such as bed pans, pillows, and clothing. We recognise, however,
that at that time he was separated from General Headquarters, and therefore not possessed
of adequate information as to the intended operations.
26. The scheme of evacuation drawn up by the Director of Medical Services was
based on an estimate of casualties which was approximately correct, and would probably
have worked satisfactorily if the anticipation of a rapid advance after the landing had
been fulfilled. The failure of the scheme was mainly due to the fact that no substantial
advance was effected, and that no hospitals could therefore be established on the land.
This necessitated the immediate evacuation by sea of all casualties without any possibility
of separating the serious cases from those of a slighter nature. The transports or black
ships were therefore used for cases for which they were not intended, and for which they
were not adequately* staffed or equipped.
In these circumstances the greater part of the sufferings of the wounded in the first
days after the landing seem to us to have been inevitable, but there appears to have been
some want of organisation in the control of the boats and barges carrying wounded to
the hospital ships and transports, which occasioned delay in their embarkation.
27. For the dislocation of the arrangements for evacuation, owing to the non-fulfil-
ment of the expectations of the military authorities, the Director of Medical Services
cannot be held responsible. He could not do otherwise than be guided by the views
entertained by the Commander-in-Chief, and conveyed to the latter’s subordinates in the
operation orders and instructions for the landings issued by General Headquarters. It
may indeed be contended that a prudent administrator, even though assured by superior
military authority of the probability of success, would do well not to leave out of account
the possibility of failure ; but to be prepared alike for either contingency demands a
flexibility of organisation and an adaptability of resources, which in war are seldom
attainable.
28. After the first two or three weeks, until the heavy fighting in August, there was
an improvement in the condition of the transports, though some of them continued to
be unsatisfactory. The transports required close supervision, which was, however,
much hampered by the want of means of communication between the several ships and
the ships and shore.
29. The scheme for the evacuation of the wounded in the August operations was
based upon an approximately correct estimate of casualties, and the supply of hospital
ships was much larger than at the first landing. On the whole, this scheme worked
well, though again there were cases in which the transports were not satisfactory and
the organisation for transferring the wounded to the ships was imperfect.
30. After the middle of May the evacuation was made more difficult by the presence
of enemy submarines. The transports were then unable to come to the beaches, the
wounded being conveyed to them on trawlers and mine-sweepers, some of which were not
suitable for their accommodation.


31. The field ambulances and clearing-stations were, on the whole, efficient, con-
sidering the great difficulties under which the work in them had to be done.
32. The executive work of the medical officers and staff of the Royal Army Medical
Corps and the Dominion Forces, and of the physicians and surgeons who placed their
services at the disposal of the War Office, was performed with great energy, courage, and
skill under very trying conditions.
33. The supply of medicines and other medical requisites was, on the whole, adequate,
though at times there was a shortage of some drugs at some places. The food also was
on the whole satisfactory, but at times it was not possible to give'the sick and wounded
all the variety of food which was desired, and at times the supply of water was insuffi-
cient.
34. The difficulties under which the evacuation of the wounded was carried out,
especially in the early part of the operations, were exceptional and not easily surmount-
able. We think that in some cases there was a want of organisation and supervision.
The Director of Medical Services, Surgeon-General Birrell, did his best; we are of
opinion, however, that he was not equal to the task of grappling with the exceptional
conditions which arose.
35. Great help was given by the naval surgeons on the transports as well as on the
trawlers and sweepers, and they were always ready to do everything in their power.
It was not, however, possible to employ them on the transports during their voyage
to Alexandria or Malta, as they could not leave their ships for an indefinite time. The
naval officers concerned in the evacuation of the wounded gave every assistance and
rendered excellent service.
We have pleasure in recording our obligations to the Foreign Office, the Admiralty,
the War Office, and the Secretarial staff of the Committee of Imperial Defence, who
have given us full information and every assistance in their power.
Finally we wish to express our high appreciation of the services our
Secretary, Sir Grimwood Mears, to whom we are greatly indebted for the ability, tact,
and industry which he has displayed throughout the course of the enquiry.
W. PICKFORD.
NICHOLSON.
W. H. MAY.
THOMAS MACKENZIE.
STEPHEN L. GWYNN.
WALTER ROCHE.
GRIMWOOD MEARS,
Secretary.
December 4 th, 1917.


MEMORANDUM OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ANDREW FISHER.
I regret that the increasing demands of my official duties here made it impossible
for me to give to the daily sittings of the Commission the attention demanded by the
subject of the inquiry. lam unwilling to pass judgment without having seen, or heard
the evidence of the witnesses. This I regret has been impracticable. Under these circum-
stances, I feel I would not be justified in attaching my name to the Report.
I am grateful to my fellow Commissioners for carrying out the work to which I was
unable to attend.
ANDREW FISHER.


SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT
THE HONOURABLE SIR THOMAS MACKENZIE, K.C.M.G.
It is to be regretted that, for diplomatic reasons, a full report of the evidence cannot
be given to the public, as the narrative must necessarily be inadequate. For this reason,
although I am substantially in agreement with the findings of the Commission, I desire
to supplement some of the conclusions reached by my colleagues, and in addition I hold
stronger views upon certain of the findings which I feel it my duty to put forward.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE CAMPAIGN.
In my opinion, which I express with all deference, the forcing of the Dardanelles
was a practicable proposition had the Authorities approached the problem with a recogni-
tion of the nature and extent of the difficulties which confronted them, and made adequate
provision and exhibited the necessary strength of purpose to carry the operations through
to the desired end. History has demonstrated, and expert opinion supported, the view
that a combined naval and military attack would ultimately offer the only chance of a
favourable issue. The Authorities should, I consider, have launched this combined
attack only after thorough preparation, and I regard the preliminary bombardment of
the outer forts on November 3rd, 1914 —ordered by the Admiralty without consultation
with the War Council —as an almost irreparable mistake. Its effect was to draw the
attention of the Turks to the possibility of an attack in force on the Peninsula, and there
is no doubt it prompted them to make good use of the time which intervened between
the November bombardment and the military landing on April 25th, 1915, in the way
of improving their defences, &c.
Regarding the conduct of the military operations as a whole, it will be asked;
“ Was Sir lan Hamilton the right man to command the expedition ? ” This question, in
my opinion, we shall never be able to answer because he was hurriedly despatched,
imperfectly instructed, and inadequately provided with men, artillery and munitions.
Later on the deficiency in men was rectified, but although Lord Kitchener had
said this was a young man’s war, some Generals were sent out to Sir lan Hamilton
who were unequal to the task. In this connection, let us glance for a moment at
the methods of the War Office. General Sir James Wolfe Murray was the Chief
of the Imperial General Staff. He was also a member of the War Council, and
though he attended their meetings he expressed no opinions and tendered no advice, nor
did he clearly understand that a decision was arrived at on January 13th to prepare for
a Naval attack on the Dardanelles in February.
Questioned later on as to whether it was not his duty, when the amphibious attack
was decided on, to instruct the General Staff as to the preparation of plans, he admitted
that under ordinary circumstances it was; and when asked to account for not doing so,
he said in effect that he was overshadowed by Lord Kitchener.
Such a state of affairs at Headquarters did not presage a favourable inauguration
or effective prosecution of the campaign, and the following statement of the position
appears to me to be unassailable :
The Cabinet having determined upon amphibious operations against Constantinople,
necessarily left the preparations for and conduct of the Military attack to the War
Department. That system seems to be at fault which permitted :
{a) The outbreak of war to find the Imperial General Staff unprepared for operations
against the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus—always of vital strategic interest
for the British Empire in the East.
(6) The General Staff to remain inactive in that respect after August 4th, 1914.
(c) The General Staff to allow Sir lan Hamilton to proceed to the Mediterranean
without either a worked-out plan of attack or such primary requirements
as verified or complete maps of Peninsula.
(d) The General Staff, notwithstanding their knowledge of the difficulties and lack
of preparation, to silently acquiesce in this state of affairs.
To this breakdown of the War Office system on the testing ground of war may, in
my opinion, be traced some of the vital factors of the Gallipoli disaster.


THE ATTACK AT SUVLA.
The Jjrief period from August 6th to 10th was, to my mind, the vital time in the
history of the later Dardanelles operations, for on the wise and determined use of those
few days depended the success or failure of the campaign. The objective was the range
of hills controlling the Straits and the Narrows, the highest point of which was about
1,000 feet, three miles distant from the disembarkation point, the first two miles being
easy, open country, the last mile rough and scrub-covered. Few Turks were then in the
locality—estimates varied from 2,000 to 4,000 —and prompt, decisive action was
absolutely essential. By daylight on the 7th General Stopford had landed over 13,000
men, and by the evening of that day 26,750 men. But the golden opportunity was
thrown away by him and some of his officers, and the necessary swift advance —which
military and naval witnesses thought quite possible—was not delivered so that the Turks
had time to bring up their reinforcements. During the first four days, but mainly on the
9th and 10th August, General Stopford suffered 400 officer casualties and about 8,000 men
killed and wounded. The failure at Suvla he attributes, not to the initial opposition of the
Turks, but largely to the lack of water. He maintains that he relied on arrangements made
by General Headquarters for the supply of water ; but while that might have relieved him of
the administrative work, it did not, to my mind, free him from the responsibility of seeing
that the arrangements were carried out, and there is no doubt that the responsibility of
distributing the water to his troops, if not of having it landed, rested with General
Stopford and his subordinates. Nevertheless, until August Bth he took no active personal
interest in this all-important question. Captain Carver, of the Royal Navy, did his best
to encourage prompt action, but this was regarded by the Military as undue interference,
and he was withdrawn. No one seems to have been immediately answerable for supplying
water, though undoubtedly General Poett’s duties included its distribution. Except for
General Sitwell’s men, the troops were suffering severely from thirst, which impeded
their operations. At the same time a barge of water was lying stranded within 100 yards
of the beach, and the maps captured from the Turks showed that there were wells and
springs within a quarter of a mile. We have General De Lisle’s statement that: “ There
were wells within a quarter of mile of the shore, which I had opened out. On the hill
Kiretch Tepe Sirt there were two wells 400 feet higher than the sea, but on this side,
between Kiretch Tepe Sirt and the Salt Lake, there were as many wells as you liked to
dig. Colonel Aspinall, too, states that he saw “ a tremendous lot of water trickling
down from the cliffs,” and other witnesses declare that water was to be found. Yet
General Poett neither made an attempt to procure water from the barge, nor to institute
any search for water ashore. Wh.en questioned as to why he took no action, he disclaimed
responsibility, contending that it was the duty of the Navy to get the water ashore, and
of the Divisional Commanders to find it on land.
It is true that Sir lan Hamilton cabled to General Stopford on the evening of
August 7th-Bth an appreciation of his work, but, as he afterwards explained, this cable
was despatched before he visited Suvla, and when he was under the impression that
everything was going well in connection with the operations.
OPERATIONS AT HELLES.
In reference to Helles, attention should, I think, be directed to the evidence of some
of the witnesses as to the frittering away of life through frontal attacks repeatedly carried
out by General Hunter-Weston, in spite, it is alleged, of the absence of adequate artillery
preparation and the lack of promise of substantial results. Lord Nicholson questioned
Lieutenant-Colonel Wilson upon this matter, saying, “ I suggest that in order to evade,
so to speak, the necessity for an adequate artillery preparation, or the provision of artillery
and ammunition, lives had to be sacrificed.” Colonel Wilson answered, “ Yes.” Lord
Nicholson continued, “ In order to make good the deficiency of artillery and ammunition
—that is the upshot of it ? ” Colonel Wilson replied, “ Yes, lives had to be sacrificed.”
Lord Nicholson asked, “ And almost with futility ? ” —“ Yes, that is what I mean,” said
Colonel Wilson,
General Cox, too, considered that these frontal attacks fulfilled no useful function
whatever, as at Helles the situation was hopeless tactically; but in reply to this, General
Hunter-Weston stated that such attacks as were made were made for some reason which
may not have been known to General Cox.


General Sir lan Hamilton admitted to Lord Nicholson that lives were used instead of
shells. He said, “ The vital thing was to make good, and to make good we ought to have
had ample artillery, especially howitzers. We had not, and there was nothing for it but
to try and get on, as you say, by a sacrifice of human life.”
This matter is so serious that it seems to me to call for further inquiry, and this I
recommend should be carried out by Military experts.
EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES.
With reference to the evidence tendered, whilst undoubtedly it was, in many
respects, full and complete, yet one felt that some of the officers called as witnesses could
have disclosed a great deal more than they did. Probably their reticence arose from a
sense of loyalty to the Service and a disinclination to say anything against their comrades.
As a consequence of this and the natural desire of the Commission to give those chiefly
concerned the benefit of any doubt, some of the conclusions arrived at may be somewhat
different from what they otherwise might have been.
TREATMENT OF WOUNDED.
Until August, 1915, the arrangements for dealing with the transport of the wounded
were in a very unsatisfactory state, and, indeed, the medical side of the campaign does
not seem to have ever been thoroughly thought out. The treatment of the wounded
ashore on the Peninsula appears to have been as satisfactory as circumstances would
permit, but in the transport of men to the ships and overseas many of the complaints
were justifiable. The Medical Authorities contend that from the information supplied
by the Military Commanders, they expected the Turks would be driven back and room
would be made for establishing hospitals ashore. This, however, presupposed success,
but better provision ought also to have been made for the contingency of failure. A
great strain was imposed on the arrangements —hospital ships were insufficient, and
troopships had to be rapidly converted into carriers and ambulance vessels; during the
early days of the campaign undoubtedly a great deal of acute suffering resulted to the
wounded from this cause. The extemporised hospital ships were insufficiently staffed,
and there were not nearly enough medical officers of junior ranks, or female nurses, to
attend to the patients.. Although the medical personnel did their utmost, we hear of
cases where men had to shift for themselves as best they could, and in fact some were
left during the voyage to Alexandria in their first field dressings. General Maxwell
testified that on some of the black ships the wounded were exposed to the sun and heat,
with nothing to eat or drink, for 60 or 70 hours. Sir Frederick Treves gave evidence as
to the absence of arrangements for the despatch of hospital ships, and the want of decision
as to their destination.
There was also a general shortage of pillows, mattresses, fresh clothing, &c., and
in some instances medical supplies and appliances were sadly lacking. In addition, the
sanitary arrangements on the converted trawlers were lamentably deficient: the almost
entire absence of such conveniences as bed-pans, for instance, reduced the wounded to a
deplorable condition. .
That the medical arrangements must have been lamentably inadequate and the
organisation seriously defective is confirmed by the fact that Surgeon-General Howse,
Y.C., was impelled to give the following matured opinion : “ That he personally would
recommend his Government when this war is over, under no conceivable conditions to
trust to the medical arrangements that may be made by the Imperial Authorities for the
care of the Australian sick and wounded.” ... .
This is doubtless a strongly expressed view, and I think it is beyond question that a
great improvement has been brought about since that time ; but it is impossible to hold
Surgeon-General Birrell free from a great deal of the responsibility for the serious
condition of affairs to which Surgeon-General Howse and other witnesses drew attention.
THE “SATURNIA” CASE.
Then we have the terrible story of the *' Saturnia ” —a most extraordinary indication
of the absence of organisation. Father Barry first drew attention to the fact that 800
wounded men had been placed on that vessel, and the conditions which he brought
to light as existing for a time, approximate to some of the revelations in connection with
the Mesopotamian Medical Service. As the evidence stands lam unable to accept Colonel
Maher’s statement, sent by cable to the Committee, as giving an accurate description of


the circumstances surrounding the case. I believe that Admiral Keyes, Fleet-Surgeon
Levick, and Major Purchas gave the Commission the correct account of the conditions
prevailing, and I concur in the suggestion that this matter should be further investigated.
In this* connection I should like to refer to the excellent work done by Fleet-Surgeon
Levick and Major Purchas, and to the straightforward manner in which the evidence of
all these officers was tendered.
THE WORK OF THE ARMY.
Coming now to the work of the troops, I endorse the Majority Report that the men
fought bravely and often heroically; and although there were certain phases of the
conduct of the operations which led to misfortune and entailed great suffering, it is
gratifying to know that there were in the Army on the Peninsula men whose actions
have not been surpassed by any deeds performed by the British Army. This applies to
officers, N.C.Os. and men. In my opinion, the outstanding figure in the campaign is
General Birdwood, although many approached him in the excellence of their work, and
shared with him in patient endurance the long and trying period of the Gallipoli opera-
tions. I should like to draw attention to the concluding work of General Birdwood and of
those serving under him, in connection with the evacuation. The opinion of experts
who had studied the situation was that the evacuation might cost anything from 20 to
40 per cent, in personnel and materiel. The total number of the force evacuated was
125,000 men, and the whole operation was successfully carried out without the loss of
a single life, and with only three men wounded—an achievement surely unsurpassed in the
annals of history.
CONCLUSION.
The Dardanelles campaign with all its distressing circumstances and disappointments
is now past history, and, without doubt, under the vigorous direction of Sir William
Robertson, the haphazard, uncertain methods have largely disappeared and a good
deal of the inefficiency which formerly prevailed has been swept away. If, however, the
result of our investigations should assist in the bringing about of such an improvement
in organisation and management as will render impossible a recurrence of events as sad
as those with which we have had to deal, the work of the Commission will not have been
in vain.
THOS. MACKENZIE.


APPENDIX.
DESPATCH OF SIR lAN HAMILTON, 20th MAY, 1915.
From the General Commanding the Mediter-
ranean Expeditionary Force.
To the Secretary of State for War, War Office,
London, S.IF.
General Headquarters,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force,
20 th May, 1915.
My Lord, —
I have the honour to submit my report on the
operations in the Gallipoli Peninsula up to and
including the sth May.
In accordance with your Lordship’s instruc-
tions I left London on 13th March with my General
Staff by special train to Marseilles, and thence in
H.M.S. “ Phaeton ” to the scene of the naval
operations in the Eastern Mediterranean, reaching
Tenedos on the 17th March shortly after noon.
Immediately on arrival I conferred with Vice-
Admiral de Eobeck, Commanding the Eastern
Mediterranean Fleet; General d’Amade, Com-
manding the French Corps Expeditionaire ; and
Contre Amiral Guepratte, in command of the
French Squadron. At this conference past diffi-
culties were explained to me, and the intention to
make a fresh attack on the morrow was announced.
The amphibious battle between warships and land
fortresses took place next day, the 18th of March.
I witnessed these stupendous events, and there-
upon cabled your Lordship my reluctant deduc-
tion that the co-operation of the whole of the force
under my command would be required to enable
the Fleet effectively to force the Dardanelles.
By that time I had already carried out a pre-
liminary reconnaissance of the north-w T estern
shore of the Gallipoli Peninsula, from its isthmus,
where it is spanned by the Bulair fortified lines,
to Cape Helles, at its extremest point. From
Bulair this singular feature runs in a south-westerly
direction for 52 miles, attaining near its centre
a breadth of 12 miles. The northern coast of the
northern half of the promontory slopes downwards
steeply to the Gulf of Xeros, in a chain of hills,
which extend as far as Cape Suvla. The pre-
cipitous fall of these hills precludes landing, except
at a few narrow gullies, far too restricted for any
serious military movements. The southern half
of the peninsula is shaped like a badly-worn boot.
The ankle lies between Kaba Tepe and Kalkmaz
Dagh ; beneath the heel lie the cluster of forts
at Kilid Bahr, whilst the toe is that promontory,
five miles in width, stretching from Tekke Burnu
to Sedd-el-Bahr.
The three dominating features in this southern
section seemed to me to be :
(1) Saribair Mountain, running up in a suc-
cession of almost perpendicular escarpments to
970 feet. The whole mountain seemed to be
a network of ravines and covered with thick
jungle.
(2) Kilid Bahr plateau, which rises, a natural
fortification artificially fortified, to a height of
700 feet to cover the forts of the Narrows from
an attack from the iEgean.
(3) Achi Babi, a hill 600 feet in height, domi-
nating at long field gun range what I have de-
scribed as being the toe of the peninsula.
(C 49—242)
A peculiarity to be noted as regards this last
southern sector is that from Achi Babi to Cape
Helles the ground is hollowed out like a spoon,
presenting only its outer edges to direct fire from
the sea. The inside of the spoon appears to be
open and undulating, but actually it is full of
spurs, nullahs and confused under-features.
Generally speaking the coast is precipitous, and
gdod landing places are few. Just south of Tekke
Burnu is a small sandy bay (W), and half a mile
north of it is another small break in the cliffs (X).
Two miles further up the coast the mouth of a
stream indents these same cliffs (Y 2), and yet
another mile and a half up a scrub-covered gully
looked as if active infantry might be able to
scramble up it on to heights not altogether dis-
similar to those of Abraham, by Quebec (Y).
Inside Sedd-el-Bahr is a sandy beach (V), about
300 yards across, facing a semi-circle of steeply
rising ground, as the flat bottom of a half-saucer
faces the rim, a rim flanked on one side by an old
castle, on the other by a modern fort. By Eski
Hissarlik, on the East of Morto Bay (S) was another
small beach, which was however dominated by
the big guns from Asia. Turning northwards
again, there are two good landing places on either
side of Kaba Tepe. Further to the north of that
promontory the beach was supposed to be dangerous
and difficult. In most of these landing-places
the trenches and lines of wire entanglements were
plainly visible from on board ship. What seemed
to be gun emplacements and infantry redoubts
could also be made out through a telescope, but
of the full extent of these defences and of the
forces available to man them there was no pos-
sibility of judging except by practical test.
Altogether the result of this and subsequent
reconnaissances was to convince me that nothing
but a thorough and systematic scheme for flinging
the whole of the troops under my command very
rapidly ashore could be expected to meet with
success ; whereas, on the other hand, a tentative
or piecemeal programme was bound to lead to
disaster. The landing of an army upon the theatre
of operations I have described —a theatre strongly
garrisoned throughout, and prepared for any such
attempt —involved difficulties for which no prece-
dent was forthcoming in military history except
possibly in the sinister legends of Xerxes. The
beaches were either so well defended by works and
guns, or else so restricted by nature that it did
not seem possible, even by two or three simul-
taneous landings, to pass the troops ashore quickly
enough to enable them to maintain themselves
against the rapid concentration and counter-attack
which the enemy was bound in such case to
attempt. It became necessary, therefore, not
only to land simultaneously at as many points as
possible, but to threaten to land at other points
as well. The first of these necessities involved
another unavoidable if awkward contingency,
the separation by considerable intervals of the
force.
The weather was also bound to play a vital part
in my landing. Had it been British weatheftheie
would have been no alternative but instantly to
give up the adventure. To land two or three


thousand men, and then to have to break off and
leave them exposed for a week to the attacks of
34,000 regular troops, with a hundred guns at their
back, wag not an eventuality to be lightly envisaged.
Whatever happened the weather must always
remain an incalculable factor, but at least by
delay till the end of April we had a fair chance of
several days of consecutive calm.
Before doing anything else I had to redistribute
the troops on the transports to suit the order of
their disembarkation. The bulk of the forces at
my disposal had, perforce, been embarked without
its having been possible to pay due attention to the
operation upon which I now proposed that they
should be launched.
Owing to lack of facilities at Mudros redistribu-
tion in that harbour was out of the question.
With your Lordship’s approval, therefore, I
ordered all the transports, except those of the
Australian Infantry Brigade and the details en-
camped at Lemnos Island, to the Egyptian ports.
On the 24th March I myself, together with the
General Staff, proceeded to Alexandria, where I
remained until 7th April, working out the alloca-
tion of troops to transports in minutest detail as a
prelude to the forthcoming disembarkation.
General d’Amade did likewise.
On the Ist April the remainder of the General
Headquarters, which had not been mobilised when
I left England, arrived at Alexandria.
Apart from the rearrangements of the troops,
my visit to Egypt was not without profit, since
it afforded me opportunities of conferring with
the G.O.C. Egypt and of making myself acquainted
with the troops, drawn from all parts of the French
Republic and of the British Empire, which it was
to be my privilege to command.
By the 7th April my preparations were suffi-
ciently advanced to enable me to return with my
General Staff to Lemnos, so as to put the finishing
touches to my plan in close co-ordination with the
Vice-Admiral Commanding the Eastern Mediter-
ranean Fleet.
Here, if I may, I will pause to indicate to your
Lordship the nature of the reflections which gradu-
ally shaped themselves into a definite plan of
campaign.
The primary object of the expedition being the
forcing of the Dardanelles by the Fleet, the opera-
tions should have as their essence the reduction
of the batteries at the Narrows. To achieve such
an object three courses were open to me :—•
(1) A landing on the north coast of the Gulf
of Xeros.
(2) A landing on the Asiatic shore.
(3) A landing upon the southern half of the
peninsula.
The first of these courses carried with it two
very tempting advantages ; the initial landing was
unlikely to be seriously opposed ; at Enos I would
be able to disembark the whole of my force simul-
taneously and easily. But against this must be
set the fact that Bui air would lie between my
army and its advance against the Narrows,
and that during my operations against these lines,
the rear of my force would be exposed to attack
from the main Turkish forces in Thrace.
As to (2). a landing on the Asiatic shore of the
Dardanelles outside the area of mines and beyond
the range of the Turkish forts was only possible
at Kum Kale, and from this point my advance
towards the Narrows would be impeded by the
network of rivers which here enter the sea from
the Plain of Troy. My right must have stretched
into a difficult, mountainous country lending itself
admirably to the guerilla tactics of the enemy,
whilst my centre and left would have constantly
worked under the shell of the big guns at Kilid
Bahr. Indeed the capture of the forts on the
Asiatic shore of the Dardanelles would not of
itself solve the problem with which I was faced.
The European shore completely dominates the
neighbourhood of Chanak, and with the Kalid
Bahr plateau still in the enemy’s hands my position
on the southern bank of the Narrows would be
untenable.
To disembark farther south on the coast of
Asia Minor would entail a land campaign on a
continental scale as well as the forfeiture of all
assistance which I expected to obtain from the
Fleet, and I was of opinion that the limited size
of my force, as well as your Lordship’s views,
debarred me from undertaking operations so far
from the coast.
As to (3), a landing in the southern half of the
peninsula, the main objection lay in the fact that
here, manifestly, a much more complete prepara-
tion had been made to resist my disembarkation
than elsewhere. To strike where the enemy was
so ready for us was to take the bull by the horns,
but here always I could count on the close
co-operation of the Fleet; here my flanks would
rest upon a friendly element, even if all the armies
of the Sultan converged upon my modest force ;
here I was near (at least in mere distance) to the
Kilid Bahr plateau which stood for my primary
objective.
I resolved then to take this third alternative ;
to land the whole of my force in the southern half
of the peninsula, and to concentrate all the resources
at my disposal on the capture of Kilid Bahr.
I have referred already to the beach immediately
south of Kaba Tepe. It was quite the best
adapted to my requirements, but the whole of
this portion of the coast was so heavily entrenched
and so closely dominated by the batteries on
Kilid Bahr that I had no option but to eliminate
it from my plan.
There remained seven other possible landing
places, namely, the five small beaches in the neigh-
bourhood of Cape Helles, to which I have already
briefly referred ; (S, W, X, V, Y, 2.), the beach
Y, three miles up the coast and one other beach
to the north of Kaba Tepe, apparently of fair
extent, but possessing no road, outlet or natural
facility for penetration into the peninsula.
Undoubtedly the most favourable of these land-
ings as regards their inland communications, their
immunity from close range artillery fire and as
regards also the support to be given by the Fleet,
were the Cape Helles landings. On the other
hand, so limited were the areas that no more than
one division in all could be landed upon them in
three days, during which time the enemy might
mass very superior forces against us. Also the
landings in the neighbourhood of Cape Helles were
too far from the vitals of the peninsula to threaten
the equanimity of the enemy’s higher command.
The broken cliff at Y seemed to offer a pivotal
point whence Krithia might be taken and the Achi


Baba position be turned. The capture of the
great mountain of Saribair (just above the ankle of
the boot), threatened Maidos, dominated Kojadere
as well as all the roads from the mainland and from
the Straits, and, if fully successful would in itself go
a very long way towards securing our main objec-
tive the Kilid Bahr Plateau.
I resolved therefore first upon using the whole
group of beaches at the toe of the peninsula ;
secondly, upon landing a force at (Y) instead of
(Y 2), which latter was neither in close support
of the other attacks nor sufficiently far to the
north to threaten the enemy’s flank; thirdly, to
disembark two divisions on the beach north of
Kaba Tepe at the same time as I struck at the
Achi Baba sector.
By means of this last landing I hoped to treble
the number of troops thrown ashore in the initial
stages and cause the enemy to disperse his forces.
I had hopes also that, by landing an army corps
to the north of Kilid Bahr, I should be ready to
strike at the communications of the enemy at
their most vital point. True, I should thus be
dividing the main body of my force into two por-
tions, ten miles apart, but my command of the
seas assured my communications in fair weather
and gave me the power of re-inforcing or diminish-
ing the Saribair forces at will.
An important factor in the success of my opera-
tions would have been surprise. Owing, however,
to the numerous and repeated references to the
expedition and to its destination, which had
appeared in the Egyptian press, this advantage
had been denied to me, and the most that could
be hoped for was to keep the enemy as long as
possible in doubt as to the actual time and place
of landing. Reports were accordingly spread of
intending disembarkations at various points on
the mainland, and it was arranged between the
Vice-Admiral and myself that on the actual day
of landing elaborate feints should be made in the
neighbourhood of Bulair and in Besika Bay.
The Vice-Admiral found himself in complete
agreement with my plans, and on the 13th April
the naval and mi] it ary orders and the instructions
for the landing were communicated confidentially
to subordinate commanders. The date fixed for
the first day of landing was 23rd April, this being
the earliest day on which the necessary naval and
military staff work could be completed in that
minute detail so essential for the success of the
operation, and the earliest day on which the trans-
ports, tugs, lighters, horseboats and other small
craft could be assembled at their respective
rendezvous. For reasons of secrecy the actual
date was not mentioned in orders, but was to be
communicated to commanders 24 hours before the
forward movement took place. None the less
as was subsequently discovered by the enemy’s
orders, this date was duly cabled from Vienna to
Constantinople and thence to the Turkish Com-
mander at the Dardanelles.
Meanwhile, the redistribution of troops in their
transports at Alexandria was rapidly nearing
completion, and from now onwards the harbour at
Mudros became daily more crowded with ships.
Some fifty transports conveying the 29th Division
and the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps,
together with the British and French men-of-war,
colliers, water, and ammunition ships, completely
(C 49—242)
filled all the available anchorage, and the naval
authorities were obliged therefore to order the
French Corps and the Royal Naval Division to
rendezvous elsewhere.
This unavoidable dispersion increased the diffi-
culties of inter-communication and of collecting
the various divisions of transports at their allotted
stations on the actual days of landing. Yet so
carefully were all the arrangements worked out
by the naval transport officers, and so close was
the co-operation of the masters of the various
transports, that no hitch of any kind occurred.
I would submit that the successful marshalling
of nearly 100 merchant ships without mishap or
accident and strictly in accordance with the time-
table, reflects very high credit on the combined
Naval and Military Staffs.
The last days spent in Mudros harbour were of
great value to the troops. No opportunity was
lost of practising the men in getting in and out of
boats and in landing with celerity and silence.
During all this pericd the weather was causing
serious anxiety. As I have already informed
your Lordship, a succession of calm days was
essential for our success, as with even a moderate
wand from any other quarter than the north the
whole of our landing operations would have been
brought to a standstill. Yet, since the Fleet
arrived in these waters in February, there had
scarcely been two consecutive calm days, and
since leaving Egypt a week previously I had twice
seen a flat calm at daybreak lashed into a tumbling
sea by 10 a.m. When it is considered that, under
the provisions of my scheme, it was necessary to
begin the forward movement from Mudros two
days antecedent to the landing, it will be under-
stood that the whole edifice of my calculations
was being based upon the most capricious of the
elements.
On the 21st April my worst fears seemed about
to be realised, for the state of the weather made
it necessary for the Vice-Admiral to postpone
the operation, first for 24 hours, and then for 48.
On the morning of the 23rd, however, the day
broke fine and clear, and though it was not without
acute misgiving that we watched the first ships
leave their anchorage, I am glad to report that
from that day to the present time the weather
has been more favourable than I had any right to
expect.
In formulating my plan of disembarkation, one
of the first questions to be decided was whether
it should take place by day or by night. Person-
ally I favoured the night, seeing that, although
we should lose the backing of the guns of the
Fleet, troops would run less danger of having to
sit helpless in their boats under a well directed
fire from the shore. Three considerations brought
forward by the Naval authorities forced me to a
partial departure from this principle. First, the
difficulty of transferring heavily laden troops from
transports into boats in the dark. Secondly, the
difficulty of making the beaches in the dark,
owing to their limited areas, which could not be
marked out beforehand, especially as the strong
current setting out of the Dardanelles was likely
to carry the tows out of their course. Thirdly,
the danger of uncharted rocks.
Weighing the pros against the cons, I decided
to effect the Cape Helles disembarkation about


an hour after daybreak. But, north of Kaba Tepe,
where the beach was extensive, the current weaker,
and the rocks less likely, I hoped that it might be
possible to throw the covering force ashore so that
it might gain a firm footing before the break of
dawn, and orders were issued accordingly.
As a result of all these cogitations, the following
detailed plan took shape and was approved by
the Vice-Admiral and myself.
(1) At 5.30 a.m., after a short bombardment of
the beaches by the covering ships, the 29th Division
was to land a covering force of seven-and-a-half
battalions, with attached troops, on the five beaches
in the neighbourhood of Cape Helles. For the
sake of clearances and convenience I again enume-
rate these beaches :
S. Beach. —A narrow strip of sand near Eski
Hissarlik Point. At first it had been
hoped to land a number of men near this
point in Morto Bay, but reefs and the
fact that the anchorage was under fire
from the batteries on the Asiatic shore,
restricted my attempt to one battalion,
V Beach. —A small bay some 300 yards long,
immediately west of Sedd-el-Bahr fort.
W Beach. —A small bay also about 350 yards
long, between Cape Helles and Tekke
Burnu.
X Beach. —A narrow strip of sand, about
200 yards by 10 yards at the foot of a
low cliff, about one mile north of Tekke
Burnu.
Y Beach. —A similar strip of sand at the foot
of a cliff some 200 feet high, immediately
west of Krithia. This cliff was, with
difficulty, climable by infantry, and was
naturally quite impracticable for horses.
(2) The Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps were, silently, to land a covering force of
4,000 men before daybreak on the same day, on
the beach north of Kaba Tepe, known in operation
orders as Beach Z.
(3) Simultaneously, the transports of the Royal
Naval Division were to appear in the neighbourhood
of Bulair and make a feint of landing on the
northern coast of the Gulf of Xeros, whilst their
escorting ships bombarded the Bulair forts.
(4) Simultaneously, also the French were to
land a brigade of infantry, with guns, at Kum Kale,
thus, it was hoped, neutralising the mobile batteries
on the Asiatic shore in the neighbourhood of In
Tepe. The remainder of their transports, escorted
by French men-of-war, were to make a demon-
stration in Besika Bay. The French occupation
of Kum Kale was from the first intended to be
temporary. As soon as the 29th Division had
completed its disembarkation, the whole Corps
Expeditionnaire was to land on V or W as might
seem most expedient, in support of the British
troops.
No animals or vehicles were to accompany any
of the covering forces. All ranks were to carry
three days’ rations. Infantry were to land with
200 rounds S.A.A. per rifle, and extra ammunition
and seven days’ rations for every man disembarked
were to be dumped ashore during the first day to
meet the dangers of stormy weather.
As soon as the covering forces of the 29th Division
and the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps
had made good their footing on terra firma, the
disembarkation of the remainder of these forma-
tions was to proceed with all possible despatch.
Owing, the danger of transports being sunk by
hostile shell fire if they approached too close to
the shore, owing also to the great delay that would
occur if the men took to the boats beyond the range
of the hostile guns, it was decided that the infantry
of the covering force should be transferred to
battleships, cruisers, destroyers, and fleet-sweepers
on the previous evening. This class of vessel
could take the risk of standing close in to shore
at daybreak ; the time taken to fill the ships boats
would be far less than from the high sides of a
transport, and the distance to be traversed be-
tween ship and shore would be comparatively
small. Finally, to make as sure as was humanly
possible, that at least one weighty mass of men
should reach the Turkish litoral, 2,000 infantry
were concealed below decks of an apparently harm-
less collier, the “ River Clyde,” which was to be
run ashore on V beach as if we were making the
enemy a gift of it. This device, borrowed from
the Iliad, was predestined to save my force from
losses which hardly bear thinking about.
On the 24th, with some of my General Staff,
I transferred from H.M.T. “ Arcadian ” to H.M.S.
“ Queen Elizabeth,” the flagship of the Vice-
Admiral, and established my headquarters there
until the 30th April, when, the success of the land-
ing being assured, I re-embarked on board the
“ Arcadian,” which had, in the interim, been in
attendance on the flagship.
Having given the intention and the preparation
I now pass to the execution.
The covering force of the 29th Division left
Mudros Harbour on the evening of 23rd April for
the five beaches, S, V, W, X, and Y. Of these,
V, W, and X were to be main landings, the land-
ings at S and Y being made mainly to protect the
flanks, to disseminate the forces of the enemy and
to interrupt the arrival of his reinforcements.
The landing at S. and Y. were to take place at dawn,
whilst it was planned that the first troops for V, W,
and Xbeaches should reach the shore simultaneously
at 5.30 a.m. after half an hour’s bombardment
from the fleet.
The transports conveying the covering force
arrived off Tenedos on the morning of the 24th,
and during the afternoon the troops were trans-
ferred to the warships and fleet-sweepers in which
they were to approach the shore. About mid-
night these ships, each towing a number of cutters
and other small boats, silently slipped their cables
and, escorted by the 3rd Squadron of the Fleet,
steamed slowly towards their final rendezvous at
Cape Helles. The rendezvous was reached just
before dawn on the 25th. The morning was
absolutely still; there was no sign of life on the
shore ; a thin veil of mist hung over the promontory,
the surface of the sea was as smooth as glass.
The four battleships and four cruisers which formed
the 3rd Squadron at once took up the positions
that had been allotted to them, and at 5 a.m., it
being then light enough to fire, a violent bombard-
ment of the enemy’s defences was begun. Mean-
while the troops were being rapidly transferred
to the small boats in which they were to be towed
ashore. Not a move on the part of the enemy ;
except for shells thrown from the Asiatic side of


the Straits the guns of the Fleet remained un-
answered.
The detachment detailed for S beach (Eski
Hissarlik Point) consisted of the 2nd South
Wales Borderers (less one company) under
Lieut.-Colonel Casson. Their landing was de-
layed by the current, but by 7.30 a.m. it had
been successfully effected at the cost of some 50
casualties, and Lieut.-Colonel Casson was able
to establish his small force on the high ground
near De Totts Battery. Here he maintained
himself until the general advance on the 27th
brought him into touch with the main body.
The landing on Y beach was entrusted to the
King’s Own Scottish Borderers and the Ply-
mouth (Marine) Battalion, Royal Naval Divi-
sion, specially attached to the 29th Division for
this task, the whole under command of Lieut.-
Colonel Koe, The beach at this point con-
sisted merely of a narrow strip of sand at the
foot of a crumbling scrub-covered cliff some 200
feet high immediately to the west of Krithia.
A number of small gullies running down the
face of the cliff facilitated the climb to the
summit, and so impracticable had these pre-
cipices appeared to the Turks that no steps had
Ken taken to defend them. Very different
would it have, been had we, as was at one time
intended, taken Y 2 for this landing. There
a large force of infantry, entrenched up to
their necks, and supported by machine and
Hotchkiss guns, were awaiting an attempt
which could hardly have, made good its footing.
But at Y both battalions were able in the first
instance to establish themselves on the heights,
reserves of food, water and ammunition were
hauled up to the top of the cliff, and, in
accordance with the plan of operations, an
endeavour was immediately made to gain touch
with the troops landing at X beach. Unfor-
tunately, the enemy’s strong detachment from
Y 2 interposed, our troops landing at X were
fully occupied in attacking the Turks imme-
diately to their front, and the attempt to join
hands was not persevered with.
Later in the day a large force of Turks were
seen to be advancing upon the cliffs above Y
beach from the direction of Krithia, and
Colonel Koe was obliged to entrench. From
this time onward his small force was subjected
to strong and repeated attacks, supported by
field artillery, and owing to the configuration
of the ground, which here drops inland from
the edge of the cliff, the guns of the supporting
ships could render him little assistance.
Throughout the afternoon and all through the
night the Turks made assault after assault upon
the British line. They threw bombs into the
trenches, and, favoured by darkness, actually
led a pony with a machine gun on its back
over the defences and were proceeding to come
into action in the middle of our position when
they were bayonetted. The British repeatedly
counter-charged with the bayonet, and always
drove off the enemy for the moment, but the
Turks were in a vast superiority and fresh
troops took the place of those who temporarily
fell back. Colonel Koe (since died of wounds)
had become a casualty early in the day, and the
number of officers and men killed and wounded
(C 49—242)
during the incessant fighting was very heavy.
By 7 a.m. on the 26th only about half of the
King’s Own Scottish Borderers remained to
man the entrenchment made for four times
their number. These brave fellows were abso-
lutely worn out with continuous fighting; it
was doubtful if reinforcements could reach them
in time, and orders were issued for them to be
re-embarked. Thanks to H.M.S. “ Goliath,”
“ Dublin,” “ Amethyst,” and “ Sapphire,” thanks
also to the devotion of a small rearguard of the
King’s Own Scottish Borderers, which kept off the
enemy from lining the cliff, the re-embarkation of
the whole of the troops, together with the wounded,
stores and ammunition, was safely accom-
plished, and both battalions were brought
round the southern end of the peninsula. De-
plorable as the heavy losses had been, and un-
fortunate as was the tactical failure to make
good sC much ground at the outset, yet, taking
the operation as it stood, there can be no doubt
it has contributed greatly to the success of the
main attack, seeing that the plucky stand made
at Y beach had detained heavy columns of the
enemy from arriving at the southern end of
the peninsula during what it will be seen was
a very touch-and-go struggle.
The landing place known as X beach con-
sists of a strip of sand some 200 yards long by
8 yards wide at the foot of a low cliff. The
troops to be landed here were the Ist Royal
Fusiliers, who were to be towed ashore from
H.M.S. “ Implacable ” in two parties, half a
battalion at a time, together with a beach
working party found by the Anson Battalion,
Royal Naval Division. About 6 a.m. H.M.S.
“ Implacable,” with a boldness much admired
by the Army, stood quite close in to the beach,
firing very rapidly with every gun she could
bring to bear. Thus seconded, the Royal
Fusiliers made good their landing with but
little loss. The battalion then advanced to
attack the Turkish trenches on the Hill 114,
situated between V and W beaches, but were
heavily counter-attacked and forced to give
ground. Two more battalions of the 87th
Brigade soon followed them, and by evening
the troops had established themselves in an en-
trenched position extending from half a mile
round the landing-place and as far south as
Hill 114. Here they were in touch with the
Lancashire Fusiliers, who had landed on W
beach. Brigadier-General Marshall, commanding
the 87th Brigade, had been wounded during the
day’s fighting, but continued in command of the
brigade.
The landing on V beach was planned to take
place on the following lines :
As soon as the enemy’s defences had been
heavily bombarded by the fleet, three com-
panies of the Dublin Fusiliers were to be towed
ashore. They were to be closely followed by
the collier “ River Clyde ” (Commander Unwin,
R.N.), carrying between decks the balance of the
Dublin Fusiliers, the Munster Fusiliers, half a bat-
talion of the Hampshire Regiment, the West
Riding Field Company, and other details.
The “ River Clyde ” had been specially pre-
pared for the rapid disembarkation of her com-
plement, and large openings for the exit of the


troops had been cut in her sides, giving on to
a wide gang-plank by which the men could
pass rapidly into lighters which she had in tow.
As soon as the first tows had reached land the
“ River Clyde ” was to be run straight ashore.
Her lighters were to be placed in position to
form a gangway between the ship and the
beach, and by this means it was hoped that
2,000 men could be thrown ashore with the
utmost rapidity. Further, to assist in covering the
landing, a battery of machine guns, protected by
sandbags, had been mounted in her bows.
The remainder of the covering force detailed
for this beach was then to follow in tows from
the attendant battleships.
V beach is situated immediately to the west
of Sedd-el-Bahr. Between the bluff on which
stands Sedd-el-Bahr village and that which is
crowned by No. 1 Fort the ground forms a
very regular amphitheatre of three or four
hundred yards radius. The slopes down to the
beach are slightly concave, so that the whole
area contained within the limits of this natural
amphitheatre, whose grassy terraces rise gently
to a height of a hundred feet above the shore,
can be swept by the fire of a defender. The
beach itself is a sandy strip some 10 yards wide
and 350 yards long, backed along almost the
whole of its extent by a low sandy escarpment
about 4 feet high, where the ground falls
nearly sheer down to the beach. The slight
shelter afforded by this escarpment played no
small part in the operations of the succeeding
thirty-two hours.
At the south-eastern extremity of the beach,
between the shore and the village, stands the
old fort of Sedd-el-Bahr, a battered ruin with
wide breaches in its walls and mounds of fallen
masonry within and around it. On the ridge
to the north, overlooking the amphitheatre,
stands a ruined barrack. Both of these build-
ings, as well as No. 1 Fort, had been long bom-
barded by the fleet, and the guns of the forts
had been put out of action; but their crumbled
walls and the ruined outskirts of the village
afforded cover for riflemen, while from the ter-
raced slopes already described the defenders
were able to command the open beach, as a stage
is overlooked from the balconies of a theatre.
On the yvery margin of the beach a strong
barbed-wire entanglement, made of heavier
metal and longer barbs than I have ever seen
elsewhere, ran right across from the old fort
of Sedd-el-Bahr to the foot of the north-
western headland. Two-thirds of the way up
the ridge a second and even stronger entangle-
ment crossed the amphitheatre, passing in front
of the old barrack and ending in the outskirts
of the village. A third transverse entangle-
ment, joining these two, ran up the hill near
the eastern end of the beach, and almost at
right angles to it. Above the upper entangle-
men the ground was, scored with the enemy’s
trenches, in one of which four pom-poms were
emplaced; in others were dummy pom-poms to
draw fire, while the debris of the shattered
buildings on either flank afforded cover and
concealment for a number of machine guns,
which brought a cross-fire to bear on the ground
already swept by rifle fire from the ridge.
Needless to say, the difficulties in the way
of previous reconnaissance had rendered it im-
possible to obtain detailed information with re-
gard either to the locality or to the enemy’s
preparations.
As often happens in war, the actual course of
events did not quite correspond with the inten-
tions of the Commander. The “ River Clyde ”
came into position off Sedd-el-Bahr in advance
of the towns, and, just as the latter reached the
shore, Commander Unwin beached his ship
also. Whilst the boats and the collier were
approaching the landing place the Turks made
no sign. Up to the very last moment it ap-
peared as if the landing was to be unopposed.
But the moment the first boat touched bottom
the storm broke. A tornado of fire swept over
the beach, the incoming boats, and the collier.
The Dublin Fusiliers and the naval boats’
crews suffered exceedingly heavy losses while
still in the boats. Those who succeeded in
landing and in crossing the strip of sand
managed to gain some cover when they reached
the low escarpment on the further side. None
of the boats, however, were able to get off
again, and they and their crews were destroyed
upo*i the beach.
Now came the moment for the “ River
Clyde ” to pour forth her living freight ; but
grievous delay was caused here by the difficulty
of placing the lighters in position between the
ship and the shore. A strong current hindered
the work and the enemy’s fire was so intense
that almost every man engaged upon it was im-
mediately shot. Owing, however, to the
splendid gallantry of the naval working party,
the lighters were eventually placed in position,
and then the disembarkation began.
A company of the Munster Fusiliers led the
way; but, short as was the distance, few of the
men ever reached the farther side of the beach
through the hail of bullets which poured down
upon them from both flanks and the front. As
the second company followed, the extemporised
pier of lighters gave way in the current. The
end nearest to the shore drifted into deep water,
and many men who had escaped being shot were
drowned by the weight of their equipment in
trying to swim from the lighter to the beach.
Undaunted workers were still forthcoming,
the lighters were again brought into position,
and the third company of the Munster Fusiliers
rushed ashore, suffering heaviest loss this time
from shrapnel as well as from rifle, pom-pom,
and machine-gun fire.
For a space the attempt to land was discon-
tinued. When it was resumed the lighters
again drifted into deep water, with Brigadier-
General Napier, Captain Costeker, his Brigade-
Major, and a number of men of the Hampshire
Regiment on board. There was nothing for
them all but to lie down on the lighters, and it
was here that General Napier and Captain
Costeker were killed. At this time, between
10 and 11 a.m., about 1,000 men had left the
collier, and of these nearly half had been killed
or wounded before they could reach the little
cover afforded by the steep, sandy bank at the
top of the beach. Further attempts to dis-
embark were now given up. Had the troops all


been in open boats but few of them would have
lived to tell the tale. But, most fortunately,
the collier was so constructed as to afford fairly
efficient protection to the men who were still on
board, and, so long as they made no attempt
to land, they suffered comparatively little loss.
Throughout the remainder of the day there
was practically no change in the position of
affairs. The situation was probably saved by
the machine guns on the “ River Clyde,” which
did valuable service in keeping down the
enemy’s fire and in preventing any attempt on
their part to launch a counter-attack. One
half-company of the Dublin Fusiliers, which
had been landed at a camber just east of Sedd-
el-Bahr village, was unable to work its way
across to V beach, and by midday had only-
twenty-five men left. It was proposed to divert
to Y beach that part of the main body which
had been intended to land on Y beach; but this
would have involved considerable delay owing
to the distance, and the main body was diverted
to W beach, where the Lancashire Fusiliers had
already effected a landing.
Late in the afternoon part of the Worcester-
shire Regiment and the Lancashire Fusiliers
worked across the high ground from W beach,
and seemed likely to relieve the situation by
taking the defenders of V beach in flank.
The pressure on their own front, however, and
the numerous barbed-wire entanglements which
intervened, checked this advance, and at night-
fall the Turkish garrison still held their ground.
Just before dark some small parties of our men
made their way along the shore to the outer
walls of the Old Fort, and when night had
fallen the remainder of the infantry from the
collier were landed. A good force was now
available for attack, but our troops were at such
a cruel disadvantage as to position, and the fire
of the enemy was still so accurate in the bright
moonlight that all attempts to clear the fort
and the outskirts of the village during the night
failed one after the other. The wounded who
were able to do so without support returned to
the collier under cover of darkness ; but other-
wise the situation at daybreak on the 26th was
the same as it had been on the previous day,
except that the troops first landed were becoming
very exhausted.
Twenty-four hours after the disembarkation
began there were ashore on V beach the sur-
vivors of the Dublin and Munster Fusiliers and
of two companies of the Hampshire Regiment.
The Brigadier and his Brigade-Major had been
killed; Lieutenant-Colonel Carrington Smith,
commanding the Hampshire Regiment, had
been killed and the adjutant had been wounded.
The Adjutant of the Munster Fusiliers was
wounded, and the great majority of the senior
officers were either wounded or killed. The
remnant of the landing-party still crouched on
the beach beneath the shelter of the sandy
escarpment which had saved so many lives.
With them were two officers of my General
Staff —Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-Wylie and
Lieutenant Colonel Williams. These two
officers, who had landed from the “ River
Clyde,” had been striving, with conspicuous
contempt for danger, to keep all their comrades
(C 49—242)
in good heart during this day and night of
ceaseless, imminent peril.
Now that it was daylight once more, Lieu-
tenant-Colonels Doughty-Wylie and Williams
set to work to organise an attack on the hill
above the beach. Any soldier who has endea-
voured to pull scattered units together after
they have dominated for many consecutive
hours by close and continuous fire will be able
to take the measure of their difficulties. Fortu-
nately, General Hunter Weston had arranged
with Rear-Admiral Wemyss about this same
time for a heavy bombardment to be opened by
the ships upon the Old Fort, Sedd-el-Bahr
Village, the Old Castle north of the village, and
on the ground leading up from the beach.
Under cover of this bombardment, and led by
Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-Wylie and Cap-
tain Walford, Brigade-Major, R.A., the troops
gained, a footing in the village by 10 a.m. They
encountered a most stubborn opposition and
suffered heavy losses from the fire of well-con-
cealed riflemen and machine guns. Undeterred
by the resistance, and supported by the naval
gunfire, they pushed forward, and soon after
midday they penetrated to the northern edge
of the village, whence they were in a position to
attack the Old Castle and Hill 141. During
this advance Captain Walford was killed.
Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-Wylie had most
gallantly led the attack all the way up from
the beach through the west side of the village,
under a galling fire. And now, when, owing
so largely to his own inspiring example and
intrepid courage, the position had almost been
gained, he was killed while leading the last
assault. But the attack was pushed forward
without wavering, and, fighting their way
across the open with great dash, the troops
gained the summit and occupied the Old Castle
and Hill 141 before 2 p.m.
W beach consists of a strip of deep, powdery
sand some 350 yards long and from 15 to 40
yards wide, situated immediately south of
Tekke Burnu, where a small gully running
down to the sea opens out a break in the cliffs.
On either flank of the beach the ground rises
precipitously, but, in the centre, a number of
sand dunes afford a more gradual access to the
ridge overlooking the sea. Much time and in-
genuity had been employed by the Turks in
turning this landing-place into a death trap.
Close to the water’s edge a broad wire entangle-
ment extended the whole length of the shore,
and a supplementary barbed network lay con-
cealed under the surface of the sea in the
shallows. Land mines and sea mines had been
laid. The high ground overlooking the beach
was strongly fortified with trenches to which
the gully afforded a natural covered approach.
A number of machine guns also were cunningly
tucked away into holes in the cliff so as to be
immune from a naval bombardment whilst
they were converging their fire on the wiie en-
tanglements. The crest of the hill overlooking
the beach was in its turn commanded by high
ground to the north-west and south-east, and
especially by two strong infantry redoubts near
point 138. Both these redoubts were pro-
tected by wire entanglements about 20 feet


broad, and could be approached only by a
bare glacis-like slope leading up from the high
ground above W beach or from the Cape
Helles lighthouse. In addition, another
separate Entanglement ran down from these
two redoubts to the edge of the cliff near the
lighthouse, making intercommunication be-
tween V and W beaches impossible until these
redoubts had been captured. •
So strong, in fact, were the defences of W
beach that the Turks may well have considered
them impregnable, and it is my firm conviction
that no finer feat of arms has ever been
achieved by the British soldier—or any other
soldier—than the storming of thesfe trenches
from open boats on the morning of 25th April,
The landing at W had been entrusted to the
Ist Battalion Lancashire Fusiliers (Major
Bishop), and it was to the complete lack of the
senses of danger or of fear of this daring batta-
lion that we owed our astonishing success. As
in the case of the landing at X, the disem-
barkation had been delayed for half an hour,
but at 6 a.m. the whole battalion approached
the shore together, towed by eight picket boats
in line abreast, each picket boat pulling four
ship’s cutters. As soon as shallow water was
reached, the tows were cast cff and the boats
were at once rowed to the shore. Three com-
panies headed for the beach, and a company on
the left of the line made for a small ledge of
rock immediately under the cliff at Tekke
Burnu. Brigadier-General Hare, commanding
the 88th Brigade, accompanied this latter party,
which escaped the cross fire brought to bear
upon the beach, and was also in a better
position than the rest of the battalion to turn
the wire entanglements.
While the troops were approaching the shore
no shot had been fired from the enemy’s
trenches, but as soon as the first boat touched
the ground a hurricane of lead swept over the
battalion. Gallantly led by their officers, the
Fusiliers literally hurled themselves ashore
and, fired at from right, left and centre, com-
menced hacking their way through the wire.
A long line of men was at once mown down as
by a scythe, but the remainder were not to be
denied. Covered by the fire of the warships,
which had now closed right in to shore,
and helped by the flanking fire of the company
on the extreme left, they broke through the
entanglements and collected under the cliffs on
either side of the beach. Here the companies
were rapidly reformed, and set forth to storm
the enemy’s entrenchments wherever they
could find them.
In making these attacks the bulk of the
battalion moved up towards Hill 114, whilst a
small party worked down towards the 'trenches
on the Cape Helles side of the landing-place.
Several land mines were exploded by the
Turks during the advance, but the determination
of the troops was in no way affected. By
10 a.m. three lines of hostile trenches were in our
hands, and our hold on the beach was assured.
About 9.30 a.m. more infantry had begun
to disembark, and two hours later a junction
was effected on Hill 114 with the troops who
had landed on X beach.
On the right, owing to the strength of the
redoubt on Hill 138, little progress could be
made. The small party of Lancashire Fusiliers
which had advanced in this direction succeeded
in reaching the edge of the wire entanglements,
but were not strong enough to do more, and it
was here that Major Frankland, Brigade Major
of the 86th Infantry Brigade, who had gone
forward to make a personal reconnaissance, was
unfortunately killed. Brigadier-General Hare
had been wounded earlier in the day, and
Colonel Woolly-Dod, General Staff 29th Divi-
sion, was now sent ashore to take command at
W beach and organise a further advance.
At 2 p.m., after the ground near Hill 138
had been subjected to a heavy bombardment,
the Worcester Regiment advanced to the
assault. S'everal men of this battalion rushed
forward with great spirit to cut passages
through the entanglement; some wore killed,
others persevered, and by 4 p.m. the hill and
redoubt were captured.
An attempt was now made to join hands with
the troops on Y beach, who could make no
headway at all against the dominating defences
of the enemy. To help them out the 86th
Brigade pushed forward in an easterly direc-
tion along the cliff. There is a limit however
to the storming of barbed-wire entanglements.
More of these barred the way. Again the
heroic wire-cutters came out. Through glasses
they could be seen quietly snipping away under
a hellish fire as if they were pinning a vine-
yard. Again some of them fell. The fire pour-
ing out of No, 1 fort grew hotter and hotter,
until the troops, now thoroughly exhausted by
a sleepless night and by the long day’s fighting
under a hot sun, had to rest on their laurels for
a while.
When night fell, the British position in
front of W beach extended from just east of
Cape Helles lighthouse through Hill 138, to
Hill 114. Practically every man had to be
thrown into the trenches to hold this line, and
the only available reserves on this part of our
front were the 2nd London Field Company
R.E, and a platoon of the Anson Battalion,
which had been landed as a beach working
party.
During the night several strong and determined
counter-attacks were made, all success-
fully repulsed without loss of ground. Mean-
while the disembarkation of the remainder of
the division was proceeding on W and X
beaches.
The Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps sailed out of Mudros Bay on the after-
noon of April 24th, escorted by the 2nd Squad-
ron of the Fleet, under Rear-Admiral Thursby.
The rendezvous was reached just after half-past
one in the morning of the 25th, and there the
1,500 men who had been placed on board H.M.
ships before leaving Mudros were transferred
to their boats. This operation was carried out
with remarkable expedition, and in absolute
silence. Simultaneously the remaining 2,500
men of the covering force were transferred
from their transports to six destroyers. At
2.30 a.m. H.M. ships, together with the tows
and the destroyers, proceeded to within some


four miles of the coast, H.M.S. “ Queen ” (fly-
ing Rear-Admiral’s Thursby’s flag) directing on
a point about a mile north of Kaba Tepe. At
3.30 a.m. orders to go ahead and land were
given to the tows, and at 4.10 a.m. the de-
stroyers were ordered to follow.
All these arrangements worked without a
hitch, and were carried out in complete orderli-
ness and silence. No breath of wind ruffled
the surface of the sea, and every condition was
favourable save for the moon, which, sinking
behind the ships, may have silhouetted them
against its orb, betraying them thus to watchers
on the shore.
A rugged and difficult part of the coast had
been selected for the landing, so difficult and
rugged that I considered the Turks were not
at all likely to anticipate such a descent. In-
deed, owing to the tows having failed to main-
tain their exact direction the actual point of
disembarkation was rather more than a mile
north of that which I had selected, and was
more closely overhung by steeper cliffs. Al-
though this accident increased the initial
difficulty of driving the enemy off the heights
inland, it has since proved itself to have been
a blessing in disguise inasmuch as the actual
base of the force of occupation has been much
better defilated from shell fire.
The beach on which the landing was actually
effected is a very narrow strip of sand, about
1,000 yards in length, bounded on the north and the
south by two small promontories. At its southern
extremity a deep ravine, with exceedingly steep
scrub-clad sides, runs inland in a north-easterly
direction. Near the northern end of the beach
a small but steep gully runs up into the hills at
right angles to the shore. Between the ravine
and the gully the whole of the beach is backed by
the seaward face of the spur which forms the north-
western side of the ravine. From the top of the
spur the ground falls almost sheer, except near
the southern limit of the beach, where gentler
slopes give access to the mouth of the ravine
behind. Further inland lie in a tangled knot
the under-features of Saribair, separated by deep
ravines, which take a most confusing diversity of
direction. Sharp spurs, covered with dense scrub,
and falling away in many places in precipitous
sandy cliffs, radiate from the principal mass of
the mountain, from which they run north-west,
west, south-west, and south to the coast.
The boats approached the land in the silence and
the darkness, and they were close to the shore
before the enemy stirred. Then about one battalion
of Turks was seen running along the beach to
intercept the lines of the boats. At this so critical
a moment the conduct of all ranks was most praise-
worthy. Not a word was spoken—everyone
remained perfectly orderly and qu : et awaiting the
enemy’s fire, which sure enough opened, causing
many casualties. The moment the boats touched
land the Australians’ turn had come. Like light-
ning they leapt ashore, and each man as ‘he did
so went straight as his bayonet at the enemy. So
vigorous was the onslaught that the Turks made no
attempt to withstand it and fled from ridge to
ridge pursued by the Australian infantry.
This attack was carried out by the 3rd Australian
Brigade, under Major (temporary Colonel) Sinclair
Maclagan, D.S.O. The Ist and 2nd Brigades
followed promptly, and were all disembarked by
2 p.m., by which time 12,000 men and two batteries
of Indian Mountain Artillery had been landed.
The disembarkation of further artillery was delayed
owing to the fact that the enemy’s heavy guns
opened on the anchorage and forced the trans-
ports, which had been subjected to continuous
shelling from his field guns, to stand further out
to sea.
The broken ground, the thick scrub, the neces-
sity for sending any formed detachments post
haste as they landed to the critical point of the
moment, the headlong valour of scattered groups of
the men who had pressed far further into the penin-
sula than had been intended—all these led to con-
fusion and mixing up of units. Eventually the
mixed crowd of fighting men, some advancing
from the beach, others falling back before the on-
coming .Turkish supports, solidified into a semi-
circular position with its right about a mile north
of Kaba Tepe and its left on the high ground over
Fisherman’s Hut. During this period parties of
the 9th and 10th Battalions charged and put
out of action three of the enemy’s Krupp guns.
During this period also the disembarkation of the
Australian Division was being followed by that
of the New Zealand and Australian Division (two
brigades only).
From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. the enemy,now reinforced
to a strength of 20,000 men, attacked the whole
line, making a specially strong effort against the
3rd Brigade and the left of the 2nd Brigade. This
counter-attack was, however, handsomely repulsed
with the help of the guns of H.M. ships. Between
5 and 6.30 p.m. a third most determined counter-
attack was made against the 3rd Brigade, who
held their ground with more than equivalent
stubbornness. During the night again the Turks
made constant attacks, and the Bth Battalion
repelled a bayonet charge ; but in spite of all the
line held firm. The troops had had practically
no rest on the night of the 24/25 th ; they had
been fighting hard all day over most difficult
'country, and they had been subjected to heavy
shrapnel fire in the open. Their casualties had
been deplorably heavy. But, despite their losses
and in spite of their fatigue, the morning of the
26th found them still in good heart and as full of
fight as ever.
It is a consolation to know that the Turks
suffered still more seriously. Several times our
machines guns got on to them in close formation,
and the whole surrounding country is still strewn
with their dead of this date.
The reorganisation of units and formations was
impossible during the 26th and 27th owing to
persistent attacks. An advance was impossible
until a reorganisation could be effected, snd it
only remained to entrench the position gained and
to perfect the arrangements for bringing up
ammunition, water and supplies to the ridges—
in itself a most difficult undertrking. Four
battalions of the Royal Naval Division were sent
up to reinforce the Army Corps on the 28th and
29th April.
On the night of May 2nd a bold effort was made
to seize a commanding knoll in front of the centre
of the line. The enemy’s enfilading machine guns
scientifically posted, and 800 men were


lost without advantage beyond the infliction of
a corresponding loss to the enemy. On May 4th
an attempt to seize Kaba Tepe was also unsuccess-
ful, the barbed-wire here being something beyond
belief. But a number of minor operations have
been carried out, such as the taking of a Turkish
observing station ; the strengthening of entrench-
ments ; the re-organisation of units ; and the
perfecting of communication with the landing
place. Also a constant strain has been placed
upon some of the best troops of the enemy who,
to the number of 24,000, are constantly kept
fighting and being killed and wounded freely, as
the Turkish sniper is no match for the Kangaroo
shooter, even at his own game.
The assistance of the Royal Navy, here as else-
where, has been invaluable. The whole of the
arrangements have been in Admiral Thursby’s
hands, and I trust I may be permitted to say what
a trusty and powerful friend he has proved him-
self to be to the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps.
Concurrently with the British landings a regi-
ment of the French Corps was successfully dis-
embarked at Kum Kale under the guns of the.
French Fleet, and remained ashore till the morning
of the 26th, when they were re-embarked, 500
prisoners were captured by the French on this day.
This operation drew the fire of the Asiatic guns
from Morto Bay and Y beach on to Kum Kale,
and contributed largely to the success of the
British landings.
On the evening of the 26th the main disembarka-
tion of the French Corps was begun, V beach
being allotted to our Allies for this purpose, and
it was arranged that the French should hold the
portion of the front between the telegraph wire
and the sea.
The following day I ordered a general advance
to a line stretching from Hill 236 nearEski Hissarlik
Point to the mouth of the stream two miles north
of Tekke Burnu. This advance, which was com-
menced at midday, was completed without opposi-
tion, and the troops at once consolidated their
new line. The forward movement relieved the
growing congestion on the beaches, and by giving
us possession of several new wells afforded a tem-
porary solution to the water problem, which had
hitherto been causing me much anxiety.
By the evening of the 27th the Allied forces had
established themselves on a line some three miles
long, which stretched from the mouth of the nullah,
3,200 yards north-east of Tekke Burnu, to Eski
Hissarlik Point, the three Brigades of the 29th
Division less two battalions on the left and in the
centre, with four French Battalions on the right,
and beyond them again the South Wales Borderers
on the extreme right.
Owing to casualties this line was somewhat
thinly held. Still, it was so vital to make what
headway we could before the enemy recovered
himself and received fresh reinforcements that
it was decided to push on as quickly as possible.
Orders were therefore issued for a general advance
to commence at 8 a.m. next day.
The 29th Division were to march on Krithia,
with their left brigade leading, the French were
directed to extend their left in conformity with
the British movements and to retain their right
on the coast-lim? south of the Kereves Dere. -
The advance commenced at 8 a.m. on the 28th,
and was carried out with commendable vigour,
despite the fact that from the moment of landing
the troops had been unable to obtain any proper
rest*
Trie 87th Brigade, with which had been incor-
porated the Drake Battalion, Koyal Naval Divi-
sion, in the place of the King’s Own Scottish
Borderers and South Wales Borderers, pushed on
rapidly, and by 10 a.m. had advanced some.two
miles. Here the further progress of the Border regi-
ment was barred by a strong work on the left flank.
They halted to concentrate and make dispositions
to attack it, and at that moment had to with-
stand a determined counter-attack by the Turks.
Aided by heavy gun fire from H.M.S. “ Queen
Elizabeth,” they succeeded in beating off the
attack, but they made no further progress that day,
and when night fell entrenched themselves on the
ground they had gained in the morning.
The Inniskilling Fusiliers, who advanced with
their right on the Krithia ravine, reached a point
about three-quarters of a mile south-west of
Krithia, This was, however, the farthest limit
attained, and later on in the day they fell back
into line with other corps.
The 88th Brigade on the right of the 87th pro-
gressed steadily until about 11.30 a.m., when the
stubbornness of the opposition, coupled with a
dearth of ammunition, brought their advance to
a standstill. The 86th Brigade, under Lieutenant-
Colonel Casson, which had been held in reserve,
were thereupon ordered to push forward through
the 88th Brigade in the direction of Krithia.
The movement commenced at about 1 p.m.,
but though small reconnoitring parties got to
within a few hundred yards of Krithia, the main
body of the brigade did not get beyond the line
held by the 88th Brigade. Meanwhile, the French
had also pushed on in the face of strong opposition
along the spurs on the western bank of the Kereves
Dere, and had got to within a mile of Krithia with
their right thrown back and their left in touch
with the 88th Brigade. Here they were unable
to make further progress ; gradually the strength
of the resistance made itself felt, and our Allies
were forced during the afternoon to give ground.
By 2 p.m. the whole of the troops with the
exception of the Drake Battalion had been absorbed
into the firing line. The men were exhausted, and
the few guns landed at the time were unable to
afford them adequate artillery support. The small
amount of transport available did not suffice to
maintain the supply of munitions, and cartridges
were running short despite all efforts to push them
up from the landing places.
Hopes of getting a footing on Achi Babi had
now perforce to be abandoned—at least for this
occasion. The best that could be expected was
that we should be able to maintain what we had
won, and when at 3 p.m. the Turks made a deter-
mined counter-attack with the bayonet against
the centre and right of our line, even this seemed
exceedingly doubtful. Actually a partial retire-
ment did take place. The French were also forced
back, and at 6 p.m. orders were issued for our
troops to entrench themselves as best they could
in the positions they then held, with their right
flank thrown back so as to maintain connection
with our Allies. In this retirement the right


flank of the 88th Brigade was temporarily un-
covered, and the Worcester Regiment suffered
severely.
Had it been possible to push in reinforcements
in men, artillery and munitions during the day,
Krithia should have fallen, and much subsequent
fighting for its capture would have been avoided.
Two days later this would have been feasible,
but I had to reckon with the certainty that the
enemy would, in that same time, have received
proportionately greater support. I was faced
by the usual choice of evils, and although the result
was not what I had hoped, I have no reason to
believe that hesitation and delay would better
have answered my purpose.
For, after all, we had pushed forward quite
appreciably on the whole. The line eventually
held by our troops on the night of the 28th ran
from a point on the coast three miles north-west
of Tekke Burnu to a point one mile noth of Eski
Hissarlik, whence it was continued by the French
south-east to the coast.
Much inevitable mixing of units of the 86th
and 88th Brigades had occurred during the day’s
fighting, and there was a dangerous re-entrant
in the line at the junction of the 87th and 88th
Brigades near the Krithia nullah. The French
had lost heavily, especially in officers, and required
time to re-organise.
The 29bh April was consequently spent in
straightening the line, and in consolidating and
strengthening the positions gained. There was
a certain amount of artillery and musketry fire,
but nothing serious.
Similarly, on the 30th, no advance was made,
nor was any attack delivered by the enemy.
The landing of the bulk of the artillery was com-
pleted, and a readjustment of the line took place,
the portion held by the French being somewhat
increased.
Two more battalions of the Royal Naval
Division had been disembarked, and these, to-
gether with three battalions of the 88th Brigade
withdrawn from the line, were formed into a
reserve.
This reserve was increased on the Ist May
by the addition of the 29th Indian Infantry
Brigade, which released the three battalions of
the 88th Brigade to return to the trenches.
The Corps Expeditionnaire d’Orient had dis-
embarked the whole of their infantry and all
but two of their batteries by the same evening.
At 10 p.m. the Turks opened a hot shell fire
upon our position, and half an hour later, just
before the rise of the moon, they delivered a
series of desperate attacks. Their formation
was in three solid lines, the men in the front
rank being deprived of ammunition to make
them rely only upon the bayonet. The officers
were served out with coloured Bengal lights to
fire from their pistols, red indicating to the
Turkish guns that they were to lengthen their
range ; white that our front trenches had been
stormed; green that our main position had been
carried. The Turkish attack was to crawl on
hands and knees until the time came for the
final rush to be made. An eloquent hortative
was signed Von Zowenstern and addressed to
the Turkish rank and file who were called upon.
by one mighty effort, to fling us all back into
the sea.
“ Attack the enemy with the bayonet and
utterly destroy him!
“We shall not retire one step ; for if we do,
our religion, our country and our nation will
perish!
“ Soldiers! The world is looking at you!
Your only hope of salvation is to bring this
battle to a successful issue or gloriously to give
up your life in the attempt! ”
The first momentum of this ponderous on-
slaught fell upon the right of the 86th Brigade,
an unlucky spot, seeing all the officers there-
abouts had already been killed or wounded.
So when the Turks came right on without firing
and charged into the trenches with the bayonet
they made an ugly gap in the line. This gap
was instantly filled by the sth Royal Scots
(Territorials), who faced to their flank and
executed a brilliant bayonet charge against the
enemy, and by the Essex Regiment detached
for the. purpose by the Officer Commanding
88th Brigade. The rest of the British line held
its own with comparative ease, and it was not
found necessary to employ any portion of the
reserve. The storm next broke in fullest vio-
lence against the French left, which was held
by the Senegalese. Behind them were two
British Field Artillery Brigades and a Howitzer
Battery. After several charges and counter-
charges the Senegalese began to give ground
and a company of the Worcester Regiment
and some gunners were sent forward to
hold the gap. Later, a second company of the
Worcester Regiment was also sent up, and the
position was then maintained for the remainder
of the night, although, about 2 a.m., it was
found necessary to despatch one battalion
Royal Naval Division to strengthen the extreme
right of the French.
About 5 a.m. a counter-offensive was ordered,
and the whole line began to *advance. By
7.30 a.m. the British left had gained some
500 yards, and the centre had pushed the
enemy back and inflicted heavy losses. The
right also had gained some ground in conjunc-
tion with the French left, but the remainder
of the French line was unable to progress. As
the British centre and left were now subjected
to heavy cross fire from concealed machine
guns, it was found impossible to maintain the
ground gained, and therefore, about 11 a.m.,
the whole line withdrew to its former trenches.
The net result of the operations was the
repulse of the Turks and the infliction upon
them of very heavy losses. At first we had
them fairly on the run, and had it not been
for those inventions of the devil—machine guns
and barbed wire—which suit the Turkish
character and tactics to perfection, we should
not have stopped short of the crest of Achi
Babi. As it was, all brigades reported great
numbers of dead Turks in front of their lines,
and 350 prisoners were left in our hands.
On the 2nd, during the day, the enemy
remained quiet, burying his dead under a red
crescent flag, a work with which we did not
interfere. Shortly after 9 p.m., however, they
made another attack against the whole allied


line, their chief effort being made against the
French front, where the ground favoured their
approach. The attack was repulsed with loss.
During the night 3rd/4th the French front
was again subjected to a heavy attack, which
they were to repulse without assistance
from my general reserve.
The day of the 4th was spent in reorganisa-
tion, and a portion of the line held by the
French, who had lost heavily during the pre-
vious night’s fighting, was taken over by the
2nd Naval Brigade. The night passed quietly.
During the sth the Lancashire Fusilier Bri-
gade of the East Lancashire Division was
disembarked and placed in reserve behind the
British left. *
Orders were issued for an advance to be
carried out next day, and these and the three
days’ battle which ensued, will be dealt with
in my next despatch.
The losses, exclusive of the French, during
the period covered by this despatch were, I
regret to say, very severe, numbering:—
177 Officers and 1,990 other ranks killed,
412 Officers and 7,807 other ranks wounded,
13 Officers and 3,580 other ranks missing.
From a technical point of view it is interest-
ing to note that my Administrative Staff had
not reached Mudros by the time when the land-
ings were finally arranged. All the highly
elaborate work involved by these landings was
put through by my General Staff working in
collaboration with Commodore Roger Keyes,
C.8., M.Y.0., and the Naval Transport Officers
allotted for the purpose by Vice-Admiral de
Robeck. Navy and Army carried out these
combined duties with that perfect harmony
which was indeed absolutely essential to
success.
Throughout the events I have chronicled the
Royal Navy has been father and mother to the
Army. Not one of us but realises how much
he owes to Vice-Admiral de Robcck; to the
warships, French and British ; to the destroyers,
mine sweepers, picket boats, and to all their
dauntless crews, who took no thought
of themselves, but risked everything to give
their soldier comrades a fair run in at the
enemy.
Throughout these preparations and opera-
tions Monsieur le General d’Amade has given
me the benefit of his wide experiences of war,
and has afforded me, always, the most loyal
and energetic support. The landing of Kum Kale
planned by me as a mere diversion to distract
the attention of the enemy was transformed by
the Commander of the Corps Expediticnnaire
de I’Orient into a brilliant operation, which
secured some substantial results. During the
fighting which followed the landing of the
French Division at Sedd-el-Bahr no troops
could have acquitted themselves more credit-
ably under very trying circumstances, and
under very heavy losses, than those working
under the orders of Monsieur le General
d’Amade.
Lieutenant - General Sir W. R. Birdwood,
K.C.5.1., C.8., C.1.E., D.5.0., was in com-
mand of the detached landing of the Aus-
tralian and New Zealand Army Corps above
Kaba Tepe, as well as during the subsequent
fighting. The fact of his having been respon-
sible for the execution of these difficult and
hazardous operations —operations which were
crowned with a very remarkable success—•
speaks, I think, for itself.
Major-General A. G. Hunter-Weston, C.8.,
D.5.0., was tried very highly, not only during
the landings, but more especially in the day
and night attacks and counter attacks which
ensued. Untiring, resourceful and ever more
cheerful as the outlook (on occasion) grew
darker, he possesses, in my opinion, very special
qualifications as a Commander of troops in the
field.
Major-General W. P. Braithwaite, C.8., is
the best Chief of the General Staff it has ever
been my fortune to encounter in war, I will
not pile epithets upon him. I can say no more
than what I have said, and I can certainly say
no less.
I have many other names to bring to notice
for the period under review, and these will form
the subject of a separate report at an early
date.
I have the honour to be
Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant,
Lan Hamilton, General,
Commanding Mediterranean Expeditionary
Force.


DESPATCH OF SIR lAN HAMILTON, 26th AUGUST, 1015.
From the General Commanding, Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force,
To the Secretary of State for War, War Office, London,
S.W.
General Headquarters,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force,
2 Qth August, 1915.
My Lord, —
At the close of the-ten days and ten nights
described in my first despatch our troops had
forced their way forward for some 5,000 yards
from the landing places at the point of the
Peninsula. Opposite them lay the Turks, who
since their -last repulse had fallen back about
half a mile upon previously prepared redoubts
and entrenchments. Both sides had drawn
heavily upon their stock of energy and muni-
tions, but it seemed clear that whichever could
first summon up spirit to make another push
must secure at least several hundreds of yards
of the debatable ground between the two fronts.
And several hundred yards, whatever it might mean
to the enemy, was a matter of life or death to a
force crowded together under gun fire on so
narrow a tongue of land. Such was the situation
on the sth of May, the date last mentioned in my
despatch of the 20th of that month.
On that day I determined to continue my
advance, feeling certain that even if my tired
troops could not carry the formidable opposing
lines they would at least secure the use of the
intervening ground. Orders were forthwith issued
for an attack.
* The many urgent calls for reinforcements made
during the previous critical fighting had foiced
me to disorganise and mix together several of the
formations in the southern group, to the extent even
of the French on our right having a British battalion
holding their own extremest right. For the pur-
poses of the impending fight it became therefore
necessary to create temporarily a Composite
Division, consisting of the 2nd Australian and New
Zealand Infantry Brigades (withdrawn for the
purpose from the northern section), together with a
Naval Brigade formed of the Plymouth and Drake
battalions. The 29th Division was reconstituted
into four brigades, i.e., the 87th and 88th Brigades,
the Lancashire Fusilier Brigade (T.F.), and the
29th Indian Infantry Brigade. The French Corps
Expeditionnaire was reinforced by the 2nd Naval
Brigade, and the new Composite Division formed
my General Reserve.
The 29th Division, whose left rested on the coast
about three miles north-east of Cape Tekke, was
ordered to direct, its right moving on the south-
east edge of Krithia, while the Corps Expedition-
naire with the 2nd Naval Brigade had assigned
to them for their first point of attack the command-
ing ridge running from north to south above the
Kereves Dere. A foothold upon this ridge was
essential, as its capture would ensure a safe pivot
on which the 29th Division could swing in making
any further advance. Communication between
these two sections of the attack was to be main-
tained by the Plymouth and Drake battalions.
During the three days (6th-Bth May) our troops
were destined to be very severely tried. They
were about to attack a series of positions scientific-
ally selected in advance which, although not yet
joined up into one line of entrenchment, were
already strengthened by works on their more
important tactical features.
The 29th Division led off at 11 a.m., the French
Corps followed suit at 11.30 a.m.; every yard
was stubbonly contested; some Brigades were
able to advance, others could do no more than
maintain themselves. Positions were carried and
held, other positions were carried and lost; but,
broadly, our gunners kept lengthening the fuzes
of their shrapnel, and by 1.30 p.m. the line had
been pushed forward two to three hundred yards.
Here and there this advance included a Turkish
trench, but generally speaking the main enemy
position still lay some distance ahead of our
leading companies.
By 4.30 p.m, it became clear that we should
make no more progress that day. The French
Corps were held up by a strong field work. They
had made good a point upon the crest line of the
lower slope of the Kereves Dere ridge, but there
they had come under a fire so galling that they
were unable, as it turned out, to entrench Antil
nightfall. The 88th Brigade could not carry a
clump of fir.trees to their front; company after
company made the perilous essay, but the wood
swept by hidden machine-guns proved a veritable
deathtrap. The Lancashire Fusiliers Brigade also
were only just barely holding on and were suffering
heavy losses from these same concealed machine-
guns. The troops were ordered to entrench them-
selves in line and link up their flanks on either
side.
At night, save for rifle fire, there was quiet
along the whole British line. On the right a
determined bayonet charge was made upon the
French, who gave ground for the moment, but
recovered it again at dawn.
Next morning (the 7th May) we opened with
shrapnel upon the enemy’s trenches opposite our
extreme left, and at 10 a.m., the Lancashire
Fusiliers Brigade began the attack. But our
artillery had not been able to locate the cleverly
sited German machine-gun batteries, whose fire
rendered it physically impossible to cross that
smooth glacis. Next to the right the 88th Brigade
swept forward, and the 115 th Royal Scots, well
supported by artillery fire, carried the fir trees
with a rush. This time it was discovered that not
only the enfilading machine-guns had made the
wood so difficult to hold. Amongst the branches
of the trees Turkish snipers were perched, some-
times upon small wooden platforms. When these
were brought down the surroundings became much
healthier. The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, of
the 87th Brigade, were pushed up to support the
left of the 88th, and all seemed well, when, at 1.20
p.m., a strong Turkish counter-attack drove us
back out of the fir clamp. As an off-set to this
check the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers captured


three Turkish trenches and a second battalion of
the 87th Brigade, the King’s Own Scottish
Borderers, was sent forward on the left to make
these good.
At 3 p.m, the Lancashire Fusiliers Brigade
again reported they were definitely held up by
the accurate cross-fire of batteries of machine-guns
concealed in the scrub on the ridge between the
ravine and the sea, batteries which also enfiladed
the left flank of the 88th Brigade as it endeavoured
to advance in the centre. Unless we were to
acquiesce in a stalemate the moment for our
effort had arrived, and a general attack was ordered
for 4.45 p.m., the whole of the 87th Brigade to
reinforce the 88th Brigade, and the New Zealand
Brigade to support it.
Despite their exhaustion and their losses the
men responded with a will. The whole force,
French and British, rose simultaneously and made
a rush forward. All along the front we made
good a certain amount of ground, excepting only
on our extreme left. For the third time British
bayonets carried the fir clump in our centre, and
when darkness fell the whole line (excepting always
the left) had gained from 200 to 300 yards, and
had occupied or passed over the first line of
Turkish trenches.
The troops were now worn out; the new lines
needed consolidating, and it was certain that fresh
reinforcements were reaching the Turks. Balancing
the actual state of my own troops against the pro-
bable condition of the Turks, I decided to call upon
the men to make one more push before the new
enemy forces could get into touch with their
surroundings.
Orders were therefore issued to dig in at sun-
down on the line gained ; to maintain that line
against counter-attack, and to prepare to advance
again next morning. The Lancashire Fusiliers
Brigade was withdrawn into reserve, and its place
on the left was taken by the Brigade of New
Zealanders.
General Headquarters were shifted to an en-
trenchment on a hill in rear of the left of our line.
Under my plan for the fresh attack the New
Zealand Brigade was to advance through the line
held during the night by the 88th Brigade and
press on towards Krithia. Simultaneously the
87th Brigade was to threaten the works on the
west of the ravine, whilst endeavouring, by means
of parties of scouts and volunteers, to steal patches
of ground from the areas dominated by the German
machine-guns.
At 10.15 a.m. heavy fire from ships and batteries
was opened on the whole front, and at 10.30 a.m.
the New Zealand Brigade began to move, meeting
with strenuous opposition from the enemy, who
had received his reinforcements. Supported by
the fire of the batteries and the machine-guns of the
88th Brigade, they pushed forward on the right
and advanced their centre beyond the fir trees, but
could make little further progress. By 1.30 p.m.
about 200 yards had been gained beyond the
previously most advanced trenches of the 88th
Brigade.
At this hour the French Corps reported they
could not advance up the crest of the spur west of
Kereves Dere till further progress was made by
the British.
At 4 p.m. I gave orders that the whole line,
reinforced by the 2nd Australian Brigade, would
fix bayonets, slope arms, and move on Krithia
precisely at 5.30 p.m.
At 5.15 p.m., the ships’ guns and our heavy
artillery bombarded the enemy’s position for a
quarter of an hour, and at 5.30 p.m, the filed
guns opened a hot shrapnel fire to cover the
infantry advance.
The co-operation of artillery and infantry in
this attack was perfect, the timing of the move-
ment being carried out with great precision.
Some of the companies of the New Zealand regi-
ments did not get their orders in time, but acting
on their own initiative they pushed on as soon
as the heavy howitzers ceased firing, thus making
the wfliole advance simultaneous.
The steady advance of the British could be
followed by the sparkle of their bayonets until the
long lines entered the smoke clouds. The French
at first made no move, then, their drums beating
and bugles sounding the charge, they suddenly
darted forward in a swarm of skirmishers, which
seemed in one moment to cover the whole southern
face of the ridge of the Kereves Dere. Against
these the Turkish gunners now turned their
heaviest pieces, and as the leading groups stormed
the first Turkish redoubt the ink-black bursts
of high-explosive shells blotted out both assailant
and assailed. The trial was too severe for the
Senegalese tirailleurs. They recoiled. They were
rallied. Another rush forward, another repulse,
and then a small supporting column of French
soldiers was seen silhouetted against the sky as
they charged upwards along the crest of the ridge
of the Kereves Dere, whilst elsewhere it grew so
dark that the whole of the battlefield became a
blank.
Not .until next morning did any reliable detail
come to hand of what had happened. The New
Zealanders’ firing line had marched over the
cunningly concealed enemy’s machine-guns without
seeing them, and these, re-opgiing on our supports
as they came up, caused them heavy losses. But
the first line pressed on and arrived within a few
yards of the Turkish trenches which had been
holding up our advance beyond the fir wood. There
they dug themselves in.
The Australian Brigade had advanced through
the Composite Brigade, and, in spite of heavy losses
from shrapnel, machine-gun, and rifle fire, had
progressed from 300 to 400 yards.
The determined valour shown by these two
brigades, the New Zealand Brigade, under Brigadier-
General F. E. Johnston, and the 2nd Australian
Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-General the
Hon. J. W. McCay, are worthy of particular praise.
Their losses were correspondingly heavy, but in
spite of fierce counter-attacks by numerous fresh
troops they stuck to what they had won with
admirable tenacity.
On the extreme left the 87th Brigade, under
Major-General W. R. Marshall, made a final and
especially gallant effort to advance across the
smooth, bullet-swept area between the ravine and
the sea, but once more the enemy machine-guns
thinned the ranks of the leading companies of the
South Wales Borderers, and again there was
nothing for it but to give ground. But when
night closed in the men of the 87th Brigade of their


own accord asked to be led forward, and achieved
progress to the extent of just about 200 yards.
During the darkness the British troops everywhere
entrenched themselves on the line gained.
On the right the French column, last seen as
it grew dark, had stormed and still held the redoubt
round which the fighting had centred until then.
Both General d’Amade and General Si monin had
been present in person with this detachment and
had rallied the Senegalese and encouraged the
white troops in their exploit. With their bayonets
these brave fellows of the Bth Colonials had inflicted
exceedingly heavy losses upon the enemy.
The French troops whose actions have hitherto
been followed belonged, all of them, to the 2nd
Division. But beyond the crest of the ridge the
valley of the Kereves Dere lies dead to anyone
occupying my post of command. And in this
area the newly arrived Brigade of the French
Ist Division had been also fighting hard. Here
they had advanced simultaneously with the 2nd
Division and achieved a fine success in their first
rush, which was jeopardised when a battalion of
Zouaves was forced to give way under a heavy
bombardment. But, as in the case of the 2nd
Division, the other battalions of the Ist Regiment
de Marche d’Afrique, under Lieutenant-Colonel
Nieger, restored the situation, and in the end the
Division carried and held two complete lines of
Turkish redoubts and trenches.
The net result of the three days’ fighting had
been a gain of 600 yards on the right of the British
line and 400 yards on the left and centre. The
French had captured all the ground in front of the
Farm Zjimmerman, as well as a redoubt, for the
possession of which there had been obstinate
fighting during the whole of the past three days.
This may not seem very much, but actually
more had been won that at first meets the eye. The
German leaders of the Turks were quick to realise
the fact. From nightfall till dawn on the 9th-10th
efforts were made everywhere to push us back.
A specially heavy attack was made upon the French
supported by a hot cannonade and culminating in
a violent hand-to-hand conflict in front of the
Brigade Simonin. Everywhere the assailants were
repulsed, and now for the first time I felt that we
had planted a fairly firm foothold upon the point
of the Gallipoli Peninsula.
Meanwhile in the Northern Zone also, the
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps had
strengthened their grip on Turkish soil. Whilst
in the south we had been attacking and advancing
they had been defending and digging themselves
more and more firmly into those cliffs on which
it had seemed at first that their foothold was so
precarious.
On the 11th May, the first time for eighteen
days and nights, it was found possible to withdraw
the 29th Division from the actual firing line and
to replace it by the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade
and by the 42nd Division, which had completed
its disembarkation two days previously. The
withdrawal gave no respite from shells, but at least
the men were, most nights, enabled to sleep.
The moment lent itself to reflection, and during
this breathing space I was able to realise we had
now nearly reached the limit of what could be
attained by mingling initiative with surprise.
The enemy was as much in possession of my numbers
and dispositions as I was in possession of their
first line of defence ; the opposing fortified fronts
stretched parallel from sea to straits ; there was
little scope left now, either at Achi Baba or at
Kaba Tepe, for tactics which would fling flesh
and blood b ttalions against lines of unbroken
barbed wire. Advances 'must more and more tend
to take the shape of concentrated attacks on small
sections of the enemy’s line after full artillery
preparation. Siege warfare was soon bound to
supersede manoeuvre battles in the open. Con-
solidation and fortification of our front, improve-
ment of approaches, selection of machine-gun
emplacements and scientific grouping of our
artillery under a centralised control must ere long
form the tactical basis of our plans.
So soon, then, as the troops had enjoyed a day
or two of comparative rest I divided my front
into four sections. On the left was the 29th
Division, to which the 29th Indian Infantry
Brigade was attached. In the left centre came
the 42nd (East Lancashire) Division, on the right
centre stood the Royal Naval Division, and at my
right was the Corps Expeditionnaire. Thus I
secured organisation in depth as well as front,
enabling each division to arrange for its own
reliefs, supports, and reserves, and giving strength
for defence as well as attack. Hitherto the piece-
meal arrival of reinforcements had forced a hand-
to-mouth procedure upon headquarters ; now the
control became more decentralised.
Already, before the new system of local efforts
had come into working order, the 29th Indian
Brigade had led the way towards it by a brilliant
little affair on the night, of the lOth/llth May.
The Turkish right rested upon the steep cliff north-
east of “ Y ” Beach, where the King’s Own Scottish
Borderers and the Plymouth Battalion, Royal
Naval Division, had made their first landing.
Since those days the enemy had converted the
bluff into a powerful bastion, from which the fire
of machine-guns had held up the left of our attacks.
Two gallant attempts by the Royal Munster
Fusiliers and the Royal Dublin Fusiliers to establish
a footing on this cliff on the Bth and 9th May had
both of them failed.
During the night of the lOth/llth May the
6th Gurkhas started off to seize this bluff. Their
scouts descended to the sea, worked their way for
some distance through the broken ground along
the shore, and crawled hands and knees up the
precipitous face of the cliff. On reaching the top
they were heavily fired on. As a surprise the
enterprise had failed, but as a reconnaissance it
proved very useful. On the following day Major-
General H. Y. Cox, commanding 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade, submitted proposals for a
concerted attack on the bluff (now called Gurkha
Bluff), and arrangements were made with the
Navy for co-operation. These arrangements were
completed on 12th May ; they included a demon-
stration by the Manchester Brigade of the 42nd
Division and by our artillery and the support of the
attack from the sea by the guns of H.M.S. “Dublin ”
and H.M.S. “Talbot.” At 6.30 p.m. on the
12th May the Manchester Brigade and the 29th
Divisional artillery opened fire on the Turkish
trenches, and under cover of this fire a double
company of the l/6th Gurkhas once more crept
along the shore and assembled below the bluff.


Then, the attention of the Turks being taken up
with the bombardment, they swiftly scaled the
cliffs and carried the work with a rush. The
machine-gun section of the Gurkhas was hurried
forward, and at 4.30 a.m. a second double company
was pushed up to join the first.
An hofir later these' two double companies
extended and began to entrench to join up their
new advanced left diagonally with the right of the
trenches previously held by their battalion.
At 6 a.m. a third double company advanced
across the open from their former front line of
trenches under a heavy rifle and machine-gun fire
and established themselves on this diagonal line
between the main ravine on their right and the
newly captured redoubt. The fourth double com-
pany moved up as a support, and held the former
firing line.
Our left flank, which had been firmly held up
against all attempts on the 6th-Bth was now, by
stratagem, advanced nearly 500 yards. Purchased
as it was with comparatively slight losses (21 killed,
92 wounded) this success was due to careful
preparation and organisation by Major-General
H. V. Cox, commanding 29th Indian Infantry
Brigade, Lieutenant-Colonel Hon. C. G. Bruce,
commanding 1 /6th Gurkhas, and Major (temporary
Lieutenant-Colonel) F, A. Wynter, R.G.A., com-
manding the Artillery Group supporting the attack.
The co-operation of the two cruisers was excellent,
and affords another instance of the admirable
support by the Navy to cur troops.
On May 14th General Gouraud arrived and
took over from General d’Amade the command
of the Corps Expeditionnaire. As General d’Amade
quitted the shores of the Peninsula he received
a spontaneous ovation from the British soldiers
at work upon the beaches.
The second division of the Corps Expedition-
naire, commanded by General Bailloud, had now
completed disembarkation.
From the time of the small local push forward
made by the 6th Gurkhas on the night of the
10th-l Ith May until the 4th of June the troops
under my command pressed against the enemy
continuously by sapping, reconnaissance and local
advances, whilst, to do them justice, they (the
enemy) did what they could to repay us in like
coin. I have given the escalade of Gurkha Bluff
as a sample ; no 48 hours passed without something
of the sort being attempted or achieved either by
the French or ourselves.
Turning now to where the Australian and New
Zealand Army Corps were perched upon the cliffs
of Sari Bair, I must begin by explaining that their
rsle at this stage of the operations was—first,
to keep open a door leading to the vitals of the
Turkish position ; secondly, to hold up as large a
body as possible of the enemy in front of them, so
as to lessen the strain at Cape Helles, Anzac, in
fact, was cast to play second fiddle to Cape Helles,
a part out of harmony with the dare-devil spirit
animating those warriers from the South, and so
it has come about that, as your Lordship will now
see, the defensive of the Australians and New
Zealanders has always tended to take on the
character of an attack.
The line held during the period under review
by the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps
formed a rough semi-circle inland from the beach
of Anzac Cove, with a diameter of about 1,100
yards. The firing line is everywhere close to the
enemy’s trenches, and in all sections of the position
sapping, counter-sapping and bomb attacks have
been incessant. The shelling both of the trenches
and beaches has been impartial and liberal. As
many as 1,400 shells have fallen on Anzac within
the hour, and these of all calibres, from 11 inches
to field shrapnel. Around Quinn’s Post, both
above and below ground, the contest has been
particularly severe. This section of the line is
situated on the circumference of the Anzac semi-
circle at the furthest point from its diameter.
Here our fire trenches are mere ledges on the brink
of a sheer precipice falling 200 feet into the valley
below. The enemy’s trenches are only a few feet
distant.
On 9th May a night assault, supported by
enfilade fire, was delivered on the enemy’s trenches
in front of Quinn’s Post, The trenches were
carried at the point of the bayonet, troops estab-
lished in them, and reinforcements sent up.
At dawn on the 10th May a strong counter-
attack forced our troops to evacuate the trenches
and fall back on Quinn’s Post. In opposing this
counter-attack our guns did great execution, as we
discovered later from a Turkish officer’s diary that
two Turkish regiments on this date lost 600 killed
and 2,000 'wounded.
On the night of 14th-15th May a sortie was
made from Quinn’s Post with the object of filling
in Turkish trenches in which bomb-throwers were
active. The sortie, which cost us some seventy
casualties, was not successful.
On May 14th Lieutenant-General Sir W. R.
Birdwood was slightly wounded, but, I am glad
to say, he was not obliged to relinquish the command
of his Corps.
On 15th May I deeply regret to say Major-
General W. T. Bridges, commanding the Australian
Division, received a severe wound, which proved
fatal a few days later. Sincere and single-minded
in his devotion, to Australia and to duty, his loss
still stands out even amidst the hundreds of other
brave officers who have gone.
On the 18th May Anzac was subjected to a
heavy bombardment from large calibre guns and
howitzers. At midnight of the 18th-19th the most
violent rifle and machine-gun fire yet experienced
broke out along the front. Slackening from 3 a.m.
to 4 a.m. it then broke out again, and a heavy
Turkish column assaulted the left of No, 2 section.
This assault was beaten with loss. Another
attack was delivered before daylight on the centre
of this section ; it was repeated four times and
repulsed each time with very serious losses to
the enemy. Simultaneously a heavy attack was
delivered on the north-east salient of No. 4 section,
which was repulsed and followed up, but the
pressing of the counter-attack was prevented by
shrapnel. Attacks were also delivered on Quinn’s
Post, Courtney’s Post, and along the front of our
right section. At about 5 a.m. the battle was
fairly joined, and a furious cannonade was begun
by a large number of enemy guns, including
12-inch and 9'2-inch, and other artillery that had
not till then opened. By 9.30 a.m. the Turks
were pressing hard against the left of Courtney’s
and the right of Quinn’s Post. At 10 a.m, this
attack, unable to face fire from the right, swung


round to the left, where it was severely handled
by our guns and the machine-guns of our left
section. By 11 a.m. the enemy, who were crowded
together in the trenches beyond Quinn’s Post,
were giving way under their heavy losses.
According to prisoners’ reports 30,000 troops,
including five fresh regiments, were used against
us. General Liman Yon Sanders was himself in
command.
The enemy’s casualties were heavy, as may
be judged from the fact that over 3,000 dead were
lying in the open in view of our trenches. A large
proportion of these losses were due to our artillery
fire. Our casualties amounted to about 100 killed
and 500 wounded, including 9 officers wounded.
The next four days were chiefly remarkable for
the carrying through of the negotiations for the
suspension of arms, which actually took place on
24th May. About 5 p.m. on 20th May white flags
and Red Crescents began to appear all along the
line. In No. 2 section a Turkish staff officer, two
medical officers, and a company commander came
out and were met by Major-General H. B. Walker,
commanding the Australian Division, half-way
between the trenches. The staff officer explained
that he was instructed to arrange a suspension of
arms for the removal of dead and wounded. He
had no written credentials, and was informed
that neither he nor the General Officer Commanding
Australian Division had the power to arrange such
a suspension of arms, but that at 8 p.m. an oppor-
tunity would be given of exchanging letters on the
subject, and that meanwhile hostilities would
recommence after 10 minutes’ grace. .At this time
some stretcher parties on both sides were collecting
wounded, and the Turkish trenches opposite ours
were packed with men standing shoulder to
shoulder two deep. Matters were less regular in
front of other sections, where men with white flags
came out to collect bounded. Meanwhile it was
observed that columns were on the march in the
valley up which the Turks were accustomed to
bring up their reinforcements.
On hearing the report of these movements,
General Sir W. R. Birdwood, commanding Aus-
tralian and New Zealand Army Corps, ordered his
trenches to be manned against a possible attack.
As the evening drew in the enemy’s concentration
continued, and everything pointed to their intention
of making use of the last of the daylight to get their
troops into position without being shelled by our
artillery. A message was therefore sent across
to say that no clearing of dead or wounded could be
allowed during the night, and that any negotiations
for such a purpose should be opened through the
proper channel and initiated before noon on the
following day.
Stretcher and other parties fell back, and
immediately fire broke out. In front of our right
section masses of men advanced behind lines of
unarmed men holding up their hands. Firing
became general all along the line, accompanied by
a heavy bombardment of the whole position, so
that evidently this attack must have been pre-
arranged. Musketry and machine-gun fire con-
tinued without interruption till after dark, and
from then up to about 4 a.m. next day.
Except for a half-hearted attack in front of
Courtney’s Post, no assault was made till 1.20 a.m.,
when the enemy left their trenches and advanced
(C 49—242)
on Quinn’s Post. Our guns drove the Turks back
to their trenches, and beat back all other attempts
to assault. By 4.30 a.m. on 21st May musketry
fire had died down to normal dimensions.
As the Turks seemed anxious to bury their dead,
and as human sentiment and medical science were
both of one accord in favour of such a course, I sent
Major-General W. P. Braithwaite, my Chief of the
General Staff, on 22nd May to assist Lieutenant-
General Sir W. R. Birdwood, commanding the
Army Corps, in coming to some suitable arrange-
ments with 'the representative sent by Essad
Pasha. The negotiations resulted in a suspension
of arms from 7.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. on 24th May.
The procedure laid down for this suspension of
arms was, I am glad to inform your Lordship,
correctly observed on both sides.
The burial of the dead was finished about 3 p.m.
Some 3,000 Turkish dead were removed or buried
in the area between the opposing lines. The
whole of these were killed on or since the 18th of
May. Many bodies of men killed earlier were also
buried.
On the 25th May, with the assistance of two
destroyers of the Royal Navy, a raid was carried
out on Nibrunesi Point. A fresh telephone line
was destroyed and an observing station demolished.
On 28th May, at 9 p.m., a raid was made on a
Turkish post overlooking the beach 1,200 yards
north of Kaba Tepe, H.M.S, “ Rattlesnake ”
co-operating. A party of 50 rifles rushed the post,
killing or capturing the occupants. A similar raid
was made against an enemy trench to the left of
our line which cost the Turks 200 casualties, as
was afterwards ascertained.
From 28th May till sth June the fighting seemed
to concentrate itself around Quinn’s Post. Three
enemy galleries had been detected there, and
work on them stopped by counter-mines, which
killed 20 Turks and injured 30. One gallery had,
however, been overlooked, and at 3.30 a.m, on
29th May a mine was sprung in or near the centre
of Quinn’s Post, The explosion was followed by
a very heavy bomb attack, before which our left
centre subsection fell back, letting in a storming
party of Turks. This isolated one subsection on the
left from the two other subsections on the right.
, At 5.30 a.m. our counter-attack was launched,
and by 6 a.m. the position had been retaken with
the bayonet by the 15th Australian Infantry
Battalion, led by Major Quinn, who was_ unfor-
tunately killed. All the enemy in the trench were
killed or captured, and the work of restoration
was begun.
At 6.30 a.m. the Turks again attacked, supported
by artillery, rifle and machine-gun fire and by
showers of bombs from the trenches. The fine
shooting of our guns and the steadiness of the
Infantry enabled us to inflict upon the enemy
a bloody repulse, demoralising them to such an
extent that the bomb throwers of their second
line flung the missiles into the middle of their
own first line.
At 8.15 a.m. the attack slackened, and by
8.45 a.m. the enemy’s attacks had practically
ceased.
Our casualties in this affair amounted to 2 officers,
31 other ranks killed, 12 officers and 176 other
ranks wounded. The enemy’s losses must have
been serious, and were probably equal to those


sustained on 9th/10th May. Except for the first
withdrawal in the confusion of the mine explosion,
all ranks fought with the greatest tenacity and
courage.
On 30th May preparations were made in Quinn’s
Post to attack and destroy two enemy saps, the
heads of which had reached within 5 yards of our
fire trench. Two storming parties of 35 men went
forward at 1 p.m., cleared the sap heads and
penetrated into the trenches beyond, but they were
gradually driven back by Turkish counter-attacks,
in spite of our heavy supporting fire, our casualties
being chiefly caused by bombs, of which the enemy
seem to have an unlimited supply.
During 31st May close fighting continued in
front of Quinn’s Post.
On Ist June, an hour after dark, two sappers
of the New Zealand Engineers courageously crept
out and laid a charge of guncotton against a timber
and sandbag bomb-proof. The structure was
completely demolished.
After sunset on the 4th of June three separate
enterprises were carried out by the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps. These were undertaken
in compliance with an order which I had issued that
the enemy’s attention should be distracted during
an attack I was about to deliver in the southern
zone.
(1) A demonstration in the direction of Kaba
Tepe the Navy co-operating by bombarding the
Turkish trenches.
(2) A sortie at 11 p.m. towards a trench 200
yards from Quinn’s. Post. This failed, but a
second sortie by 100 men took place at 2.55 a.m.
on sth June and penetrated to the Turkish trench ;
demolished a machine-gun emplacement which
enfiladed Quinn’s Post, and withdrew in good
order.
(3) At Quinn’s Post an assault was delivered at
11 p.m. A party of 60 men, accompanied by a
bomb-throwing party on either flank, stormed the
enemy’s trench. In the assault many Turks were
bayonetted and 28 captured. A working party
followed up the attack and at once set to work.
Meanwhile the Turkish trenches on the left of the
post were heavily assailed with machine-gun fire
and grenades, which drew from them a very
heavy fire. After daybreak a strong bomb attack
developed on the captured trench, the enemy
using a heavier type of bomb than hitherto.
At 6.30 a.m, the trench had to be abandoned,
and it was found necessary to retire to the original
fire trench of the post and the bomb-proof in front
of its left. Our casualties were 80 ; those of the
enemy considerably greater.
On sth June a sortie was made from Quinn’s
Post by 2 officers and 100 men of the Ist Australian
Infantry, the objective being the destruction of a
machine-gun in a trench known as German Officer’s
Trench. A special party of 10 men with the officer
commanding the party (lieutenant E. E. L. Lloyd,
Ist Battalion (New South Wales) Australian
Imperial Force) made a dash for the machine-
gun ; one of the 10 men managed to fire three
rounds into the gun at a range of 5 feet and another
three at the same range through a loophole. The
darkness of the trench and its overhead cover
prevented the Use of the bayonet, but some damage
was done by shooting down over the parapet. As
much of the trench as possible was dismantled.
The party suffered some casualties from bombs,
and was enfiladed all the time by machine-guns
from either flank. The aim of this gallant assault
being attained the party withdrew in good order
with their wounded. Casualties in all were 36.
I now return to the southern zone and to the
battle of the 4th of June.
From 25th May onwards the troops had been
trying to work up within rushing distance of the
enemy’s front trenches. On the 25th May the
Royal Naval and 42nd Divisions crept 100 yards
nearer to the Turks, and on the night of 28th/29th
May the whole of the British line made a further
small advance. On that same night the French
Corps Expeditionnaire was successful in capturing
a small redoubt on the extreme Turkish left west
of the Kereves Dere.
All Turkish counter-attacks during 29th May
were repulsed. On the night of 30th May two of
their many assaults effected temporary lodgment.
But on both occasions they were driven out again
with the bayonet.
On every subsequent night up to that of the
3rd /4th June assaults were made upon the redoubt
and upon our line, but at the end of that period our
position remained intact.
This brings the narrative up to the day of the
general attack upon the enemy’s front line of
trenches which ran from the west of the Kereves
Dere in a northerly direction to the sea.
Taking our line of battle from right to left the
troops were deployed in the following order:—
The Corps Expeditionnaire, the Royal Naval
Division, the-42nd (East Lancs) Division and the
29th Division.
The length of the front, so far as the British
troops were concerned, was rather over 4,000
yards, and the total infantry available amounted
to 24,000 men, which permitted the General Officer
Commanding Bth Army Corps to form a corps
reserve of 7,000 men.
My General Headquarters for the day were
at the command post on the Peninsula.
At 8 a.m. on 4th June our heavy artillery opened
with a deliberate bombardment which continued
till 10.30 a.m. At IP a.m. the bombardment
recommenced and continued till 11.20 a.m., when
a feint attack was made which successfully drew
heavy fire from the enemy’s guns and rifles. At
11.30 a.m. all our guns opened fire and continued
with increasing intensity till noon.
On the stroke of noon the artillery increased
their range and along the whole line the infantry
fixed bayonets and advanced.
The assault was immediately successful. On the
extreme right the French Ist Division carried a line
of trench, whilst the French 2nd Division, with the
greatest dash and gallantry captured a strong
redoubt called the “ Haricot,” from which they had
already had three desperate contests. Only the
extreme left of the Frencli was unable to gain any
ground, a feature destined to have an unfortunate
effect upon the final issue.
The 2nd Naval Brigade of the Royal Naval
Division rushed forward with great dash; the
“ Anson ” Battalion captured the southern face
of a Turkish redoubt which formed a salient in the
enemy’s line, the “ Howe ” and “ Hood ” Battalions
captured trenches fronting them, and by 12.15 p.m.
the whole Turkish line forming their first objective


was in their hands. Their consolidating party went
forward at 12.25 p.m.
The Manchester Brigade of the 42nd Division
advanced magnificently. In five minutes the
first line of Turkish trenches were captured, and
by 12.30 p.m. the Brigade had carried with a rush
the line forming their second objective, having
made an advance of 600 yards in all. The working
parties got to work without incident, and the
position here could not possibly have been better.
On the left the 29th Division met with more
difficulty. All along the section of the 88th Brigade
the troops jumped out of their trenches at noon
and charged across the open at the nearest Turkish
trench. In most places the enemy crossed
bayonets with our men and inflicted severe loss
upon us. But the 88th Brigade was not to be
denied. The Worcester Regiment was the first
to capture trenches, and the remainder of the
88th Brigade, though at first held up by flanking
as well as fronting fire, also pushed on doggedly
until they had fairly made good the whole of the
Turkish first line.
Only on the extreme left did we sustain a check.
Here the Turkish front trench was so sited as to
have escaped damage from our artillery bombard-
ment-, and the barbed wire obstacle was intact.
The result was that, though the 14th Sikhs on the
right flank pushed on despite losses amounting to
three-fourths of their effectives, the centre of the
Brigade could make no headway. A company
of the 6th Gurkhas on the left, skilfully led along
the cliffs by its commander, actually forced its
way into a Turkish work, but the failure of the rest
of the Brigade threatened isolation, and it was as
skilfully withdrawn under fire. Reinforcements were
therefore sent to the left so that, if possible, a fresh
attack might be organised.
Meanwhile, on the right of the line, the gains
of the morning were being compromised. A very
heavy counter-attack had developed against the
“ Haricot.” The Turks poured in masses of men
through prepared communication trenches, and,
under cover of accurate shell fire, were able to
recapture that redoubt. The French, forced to
fall back,* uncovered in doing so the right flank
of the Royal Naval Division. Shortly before
1 p.m. the right of the 2nd Naval Brigade had to
retire with very heavy loss from the redoubt they
had captured, thus exposing in their turn the
“ Howe ” and “ Hood ” Battalions to enfilade,
that they, too, had nothing for it but to retreat
across the open under exceedingly heavy machine-
gun and musketry fire.
By 1.30 p.m. the whole of the captured trenches
in this section had been lost again, and the Brigade
was back in its original position, the “ Colling-
wood ” Battalion, which had gone forward in
support, having been practically destroyed.
The question was now whether this rolling up
of the newly captured line from the right would
continue until the whole of our gains were wiped
out. It looked very like it, for now the enfilade
fire of the Turks began to fall upon the Manchester
Brigade of the 42nd Division, which was firmly
consolidating the furthest distant line of-trenches
it had so brilliantly won. After 1.30 p.m. it
became increasingly difficult for this gallant
Brigade to hold its ground. Heavy casualties
occurred ; the Brigadier and many other officers
(C 49—242)
were wounded or killed ; yet it continued to hold
out with the greatest tenacity and grit. Every
effort was made to sustain the Brigade in its
position. Its right flank was thrown back to make
face against the enfilade fire and reinforcements
were sent to try to fill the diagonal gap between
it and the Royal Naval Division. But, ere long,
it became clear that unless the right of our line
could advance again it would be impossible for
the Manchesters to maintain the very pronounced
salient in which they now found themselves.
Orders were issued, therefore, that the Royal
Naval Division should co-operate with the French
Corps in a fresh attack, and reinforcements were
despatched to this end. The attack, timed for
3 p.m., was twice postponed at the request of
General Gouraud, who finally reported that he
would be unable to advance again that day with
any prospect of success. By 6.30 p.m., therefore,
the 42nd Division had to be extricated with loss
from the second line Turkish trenches, and had to
content themselves with consolidating on the
first line which they had captured within five
minutes of commencing the attack. Such was the
spirit displayed by this Brigade that there was
great difficulty in persuading the men to fall back.
Had their flanks been covered nothing would
have made them loosen their grip.
No further progress had been found possible in
front of the 88th Brigade and Indian Brigade.
Attempts were inade by their reserve battalions
to advance on the right and left flanks respectively,
but in both cases heavy fire drove them back.
At 4 p.m. under support of our artillery the
Royal Fusiliers were able to advance beyond the
first line of captured trenches, but the fact that the
left flank was held back made the attempt to hold
any isolated position in advance inadvisable.
As the reserves had been largely depleted by
the despatch of reinforcements to various parts
of the line, and information was to hand of the
approach of strong reinforcements of fresh troops
to the enemy, orders were issued for the con-
solidation of the line then held.
Although we had been forced to abandon so
much of the ground gained in the first rush, the
net result of the day’s operations was considerable
—namely, an advance of 200 to 400 yards along
the whole of our centre, a front of nearly 3 miles.
That the enemy suffered severely was indicated,
not only by subsequent information, but by the
fact of his attempting no counter-attack during the
night, except upon the trench captured by the
French Ist Division on the extreme right. Here
two counter-attacks were repulsed with loss.
The prisoners taken during the day amounted
to 400, including 11 officers : amongst these were
5 Germans, the remains of a volunteer machine-
gun detachment from the “ Goeben.” Their
commanding officer was killed and the machine-
gun destroyed. The majority of these captures
were made by the 42nd Division under Major-
General W. Douglas.
From the date of this battle to the end of the
month of June the incessant attacks and counter-
attacks which have so grievously swelled our lists
of casualties have been caused by the determination
of the Turks to regain ground they had lost, a
determination clashing against our firm resolve to
continue to increase our holding. Several of these
H 2


daily encounters would have been the subject of a
separate despatch in the campaigns of my youth
and middle age, but, with due regard to proportion,
they cannot even be so much as mentioned here.
Only one example each from the French, British
and Australian and New Zealand spheres of action
will be most* briefly set down so that your Lordship
may understand the nature of the demands made
upon the energies and fortitude of the troops.
(1) At 4.30 a.m. on June the 21st the French
Corps Expeditionnaire attacked the formidable
works that flank the Kereves Dere. By noon
their 2nd Division had stormed all the Turkish
first and second line trenches to their front, and
had captured the “Haricot” redoubt. On their
right the Ist Division took the first line of trenches,
but were counter-attacked and driven out. Fresh
troops were brought up and launched upon another
assault, but the Turks were just as obstinate and
drove out the second party before they had time
to consolidate. At 2.45 p.m. General Gouraud
issued an order that full use must be made of
the remaining five hours of daylight, and that,
before dark, these trenches must be taken and
held, otherwise the gains of the 2nd Division would
be sacrificed. At 6 p.m. the third assault suc-
ceeded : 600 yards of trenches remained in our
hands, despite all the heavy counter-attacks made
through the night by the enemy. In this attack
the striplings belonging to the latest French drafts
specially distinguished themselves by their forward-
ness and contempt of danger. Fifty prisoners were
taken, and the enemy’s casualties (mostly incurred
during counter-attacks) were estimated at 7,000.
The losses of the Corps Expeditionnaire was 2,500.
(2) The Turkish right had hitherto rooted itself
with special tenacity into the coast. In the
scheme of attack submitted by Lieutenant-
General A. G. Hunter Weston, commanding
VUlth Army Corps, our left, pivoting upon a
point in our line about one mile from the sea, was to
push forward until its outer flank advanced about
1,000 yards. If the operation was successful then,
at its close, we should have driven the enemy back
for a thousand yards along the coast, and the
trenches of this left section of our line would be
facing east instead of, as previously, north-east.
Obviously the ground to be gained lessened as
our line drew back from the sea towards its fixed
or pivotal right. Five Turkish trenches must be
carried in the section nearest the sea ; only two
Turkish trenches in the section furthest from the
sea. At 10.20 a.m. on the 28th June our bom-
bardment began. At 10.45 a.m. a small redoubt
known as the Boomerang was rushed by the Border
Regiment. At 11 a.m. the 87th Brigade, under
Major-General W. R. Marshall, captured three
lines of Turkish trenches. On their right the 4th
and 7th Royal Scots captured the two Turkish
trenches allotted to them, but further to the
east; near the pivotal point the remainder of the
156 th Brigade were unable to get on. Precisely
at 11.30 a.m. the second attack took place. The
86th Brigade, led by the 2nd Royal Fusiliers,
dashed over the trenches already captured by their
comrades of the 87th Brigade, and, pushing on
with great steadiness, took two more lines of
trenches, thus achieving the five successive lines
along the coast. This success was further im-
proved upon by the Indian Brigade, who managed
to secure, and to place into a state of defence, a
spur running from the west of the furthest captured
Turkish trench to the sea. Our casualties were
small; 1,750 in all. The enemy suffered heavily,
especially in the repeated counter-attacks, which
for many days and nights afterwards they launched
aganist the trenches they had lost.
(3) On the night of the 29th/30th June the Turks
acting, as we afterwards ascertained, under the
direct personal order of Enver Pasha, to drive
us all into the sea, made a big attack on the Aus-
tralian and New Zealand Army Corps, principally
on that portion of the line which was under the
command of Major-General Sir A. J. Godley.
From midnight till 1.30 a.m. a fire of musketry
and guns of greatest intensity was poured upon our
trenches. A heavy column then advanced to the
assault, and was completely crumpled up by the
musketry and machine-guns of the 7th and Bth
Light Horse. An hour later another grand attack
took place against our left and left centre, and was
equally cut to pieces by our artillery and rifle fire.
The enemy’s casualties may be judged by the fact
that in areas directly exposed to view between
400 and 500 were actually seen to fall.
On the evening of this day, the 30th of June,
the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force suffered
grevious loss owing to the wounding of General
Gouraud by a shell. This calamity, for I count it
nothing less, brings us down to the beginning of
the month of July.
The command of the Corps Expeditionnaire
francais d’Orient was then taken over by General
Bailloud, at which point I shall close my despatch.
During the whole period under review the efforts
and expedients whereby a great army has had its
wants supplied upon a wilderness have, I believe,
been breaking world records.
The country is broken, mountainous, arid and
void of supplies ; the water found in the areas
occupied by our forces is quite inadequate for their
needs ; the only practicable beaches are small,
cramped breaks in impracticable lines of cliffs ; with
the wind in certain quarters no sort of landing is
possible; the wastage, by bombardment and
wreckage, of lighters and small craft has led to
crisis after crisis in our carrying capacity, whilst
over every single beach plays fitfully through-
out each day a devastating shell fire at medium
ranges.
Upon such a situation appeared quite suddenly
the enemy submarines. On 22nd May all trans-
ports had to be despatched to Mudros for safety.
Thenceforth men, stores, guns, horses, etc., etc.,
had to be brought from Mudros —a distance of
40 miles —in fleet sweepers and other small and
shallow craft less vulnerable to submarine attack.
Every danger and every difficulty was doubled.
But the Navy and the Royal Engineers were not
to be thwarted in their landing operations either
by nature or by the enemy, whilst the Army
Service Corps, under Brigadier-General F. W. B.
Koe, and the Army Ordnance Corps, under Brigadier
General R. W. M. Jackson, have made it a point of
honour to feed men, animals, guns and rifles in the
fighting line as regularly as if they were only out for
manoeuvres on Salisbury Plain.
I desire, therefore, to record my admiration for
the cool courage and unfailing efficiency with
which the Royal Navy, the beach personnel, the


engineers and the administrative services have
carried out these arduous duties.
Li addition to its normal duties the Signal Service,
under the direction of Lieutenant-Colonel M. G. E,
Bowman-Manifold, Director of Army Signals, has
provided the connecting link between the Royal
Navy and the Army in their combined operations,
and has rapidly readjusted itself to amphibious
methods. All demands made on it by sudden
expansion of the fighting forces or by the move-
ments of General Headquarters have been rapidly
and effectively met. The working of the tele-
graphs, telephones and repair of lines, often under
heavy fire, has been beyond praise. Casualties
have been unusually high, but the best traditions
of the Corps of Royal Engineers have inspired the
whole of their work. As an instance, the central
telegraph office at Cape Helles (a dug-out) was
recently struck by a high explosive shell. The
officer on duty and 12 other ranks were killed or
wounded and the office entirely demolished.
But No. 72003 Corporal G. A. Walker, Royal
Engineers, although much shaken, repaired the
damage, collected men, and within 39 minutes
reopened communication by apologising for the
incident and by saying he required no assistance.
The Royal Army Medical Service have had to
face unusual and very trying conditions. There
are no roads, and the wounded who are unable to
walk must be carried from the firing line to the
shore. They and their attendants may be shelled
on their way to the beaches, at the beaches, on the
jetties, and again, though I believe by inadvertence,
on their way out in lighters to the hospital ships.
Under shell fire it is not as easy as some of the
critically disposed seem to imagine to keep all
arrangements in apple-pie order. Here I can only
express my own opinion that efficiency, method and
even a certain quiet heroism have characterised
the evacuations of the many thousands of our
wounded.
In my three Commanders of Corps I have indeed
been thrice fortunate.
General Gouraud brought a great reputation
to our help from the battlefields of the Argonne,
and in so doing he has added to its lustre. A
happy mixture of daring in danger and of calm in
(C 49—242)
crisis, full of energy and resource, he has worked
hand in glove with his British comrades in arms,
and has earned their affection and respect.
Lieutenant-General Sir W. R. Birdwood has been
the soul of Anzac. Not for one single day has he
ever quitted his post. Cheery and full of human
sympathy, he has spent many hours of each 24
inspiring the defenders of the front trenches, and
if he does not know every soldier in his force, at
least every soldier in the force believes he is known
to his Chief.
Lieutenant-General A. G. Hunter Weston
possesses a genius for war. I know no more
resolute Commander. Calls for reinforcements,
appeals based on exhaustion or upon imminent
counter-attack are powerless to divert him from
his aim. And this aim, in so far as he may be
responsible for it, is worked out with insight,
accuracy, and that wisdom which comes from close
study in peace combined with long experience in
the field.
Li my first despatch I tried to express my in-
debtedness to Major-General W. P. Braithwaite,
and I must now again, however inadequately,
place on record the untiring, loyal assistance he
has continued to render me ever since.
The thanks of every one serving in the Peninsula
are due to Lieutenant-General Sir John Maxwell.
All the resources of Egypt and all of his own
remarkable administrative abilities have been
ungrudgingly placed at our disposal.
Finally, if my despatch is in any way to reflect
the feelings of the force, I must refer to the shadow
cast over the whole of our adventure by the loss
of so many of our gallant and true-hearted comrades.
Some of them we shall never see again ; some have
had the mark of the Dardanelles set upon them
for life, but others, and, thank God, by far the
greater proportion, will be back in due course at
the front.
I have the honour to be
Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant,
LAN HAMILTON,
General , Commanding Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force .


DESPATCH OF SIR lAN HAMILTON, 11th DECEMBER, 1915.
From the Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Ex-
peditionary Force,
To the Secretary of State for War, War Office,
London, S.lf.
1, Hyde Park Gardens,
London, W,
1 Ith December, 1915.
My Lord, —
For the understanding of the operations about
to be described I must first set forth the situation
as it appeared to me early in July.
The three days’ battle of the 6th—Bth May had
shown that neither of my forces, northern or
southern, were strong enough to fight their way
to the Narrows. On the 10th of May I had
cabled asking that two fresh divisions might be
sent me to enable me to press on and so prevent
my attack degenerating into trench warfare. On
the 17th of May I again cabled, saying that if we
were going to be left to face Turkey on our own
resources we should require two Army Corps addi-
tional to my existing forces at the Dardanelles.
The 52nd (Lowland) Division had been sent me,
but between their dates of despatch and arrival
Russia had given up the idea of co-operating from
the coast of the Black Sea. Thereby several
Turkish divisions were set free for the Dardanelles,
and the battle of the 4th June, locally successful
as it was, found us just as weak, relatively, as we
had been a month earlier.
During June Your Lordship became persuaded
of the bearing of these facts, and I was promised
three regular divisions plus the infantry of two
Territorial divisions. The advance guard of these
troops was due to reach Mudros by the 10th of July ;
by the 10th of August their concentration was to be
complete.
Eliminating the impracticable, I had already
narrowed down the methods of employing these
fresh forces to one of the following four
(a) Every man to be thrown on to the southern
• sector of the Peninsula to force a way
forward to the Narrows.
(6) Disembarkation on the Asiatic side of the
Straits, followed by a march on Chanak.
(c) A landing at Enos or Ebrije for the purpose
of seizing the neck of the isthmus at
Buiair.
{d) Reinforcement of the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps, combined with
a landing in Suvla Bay. Then with one
strong push to capture Hill 305, and,
working from that dominating point, to
grip the waist of the Peninsula.
As to (a) I rejected that course —
(1) Because there were limits to the numbers
which could be landed and deployed in one confined
area.
(2) Because the capture of Krithia could no
longer be counted upon to give us Achi Baba, an
entirely new system of works having lately appeared
upon the slopes of that mountain —works so
planned that even if the enemy’s western flank was
turned and driven back from the coast the central
and eastern portions of the mountain couffi still
be maintained as a bastion to Kilid Bahr.
(3) Because, if I tried to disengage myself both
from Krithia and Achi Baba by landing due west
of Kilid Bahr, my troops would be exposed to
artillery fire from Achi Baba, the Olive Grove, and
Kilid Bahr itself; the enemy’s large reserves
were too handy ; there were not fair chances of
success.
As to (6), although much of the Asiatic coast
had now been wired and entrenched, the project
was still attractive. Thereby the Turkish forces
on the Peninsula would be weakened ; our beaches
at Cape Helles would be freed from Asiatic shells ;
the threat to the enemy’s sea communications was
obvious. But when I descended into detail I found
that the expected reinforcements would not run
to a double operation. I mean that, unless I
could make a thorough, whole-hearted attack on
the enemy in the Peninsula I should reap no
advantage in that theatre from the transference
of the Turkish Peninsula troops to reinforce Asia,
whereas, if the British forces landed in Asia were
not strong enough in themselves seriously to
threaten Chanak, the Turks for their part would
not seriously relax their grip upon the Peninsula.
To cut the land communications of the whole
of the Turkish Peninsula army, as in (c), was a
better scheme on paper than on the spot. The
naval objections appeared to my coadjutor, Vice-
Admiral de Robeck, well-nigh insurmountable.
Already, owing to submarine dangers, all reinforce-
ments, ammunition and supplies had to be brought
up from Mudros to Helles or Anzac by night in
fleet-sweepers and trawlers. A new landing near
Buiair would have added another 50 miles to the
course such small craft must cover, thus placing
too severe a strain upon the capacities of the
flotilla. The landing promised special hazards
owing to the difficulty of securing the transports and
covering ships from submarine attack. Ibrije has
a bad beach, and the distance to Enos, the only
point suitable to a disembarkation on a large scale,
was so great that the enemy would have had time
to organise a formidable opposition from his
garrisons in Thrace. Four divisions at least would
be required to overcome such opposition. These
might now be found; but, even so, and presupposing
every other obstacle overcome, it was by no manner
of means certain that the Turkish army on the
Peninsula would thereby be brought to sue for
terms, or that the Narrows would thereby be
opened to the Fleet. The enemy would, still be
able to work supplies across the Straits from
Chanak. The swiftness of the current, the shallow
draft of the Turkish lighters, the guns of the forts,
made it too difficult even for our dauntless sub-
marine commanders to paralyse movements across
these land-locked waters. To achieve that pur-
pose I must bring my artillery fire to bear both
on the land and water communications of the
enemy.


This brings me to ( d ), the storming of that
dominating height, Hill 305, with the capture of
Maidos and Gaba Tepe as its sequel.
From the very first I had hoped that by landing 1
a force under the heights of Sari Bair we should be x
able to strangle the Turkish communications to
the southwards, whether by land or sea, and so 5
clear the Narrows for the Fleet. Owing to the
enemy’s superiority, both in numbers and in
position ; owing to under-estimates of the strength
of the original entrenchments prepared and sited
under German direction ; owing to the constant .
dwindling of the units of my force through wastage ; ■
owing also to the intricacy and difficulty of the
terrain, these hopes had not hitherto borne fruit.
But they were well founded. So much at least had
clearly enough been demonstrated by the desperate
and costly nature of the Turkish attacks. The
Australians and New Zealanders had rooted them-
selves in very near to the vitals of the enemy. By
their tenacity and courage they still held open the
doorway from which one strong thrust forward
might give us command of the Narrows.
From the naval point of view the auspices were
also favourable. Suvla Bay was but one mile
further from Mudros than Anzac, and its possession
would ensure us a submarine-proof base and a
harbour good against gales, excepting those from
the south-west. There were, as might be expected,
some special difficulties to be overcome. The broken,
intricate country —the lack of water the con-
sequent anxious supply questions. Of these it
can only be said that a bad country is better than
an entrenched country, and that supply and water
problems may be countered by careful preparation.
Before a man of the reinforcements had arrived
my mind was made up as to their employment,
and by means of a vigorous offensive from Anzac,
combined with a surprise landing to the north of it,
I meant to try and win through to Maidos, leaving
behind me a well-protected line of communications
starting from the bay of Suvla.
Another point which had to be fixed in advance
was the date. The new troops would gain in
fighting value if they could first be given a turn
in the trenches. So much was clear. But tjie
relief of the troops already holding those trenches
would have been a long and difficult task for the
Navy, and time was everything, seeing that every-
where the enemy was digging in as fast as he
possibly could dig. Also, where large numbers
of troops were to be smuggled into Anzac and
another large force was to land by surprise at
Suvla, it was essential to eliminate the moon.
Unless the plunge could be taken by the second
week in August the whole venture must be post-
poned for a month. The dangers of such delay
were clear. To realise them I had only to consider
how notably my prospects would have been
bettered had these same reinforcements arrived
in time to enable me to anticipate the moon of
July.
Place and date having shaped themselves-, the
intervening period had to be filled in with as much
fighting as possible. First, to gain ground;
secondly, to maintain the moral ascendency which
my troops had by this time established ; thirdly, to
keep the enemy’s eyes fixed rather upon Helles
than Anzac.
(C 49—242)
Working out my ammunition allowance, I found
I could accumulate just enough high explosive
shell to enable me to deliver one serious attack
per each period of three weeks. I was thus limited
to a single effort on the large scale, plus a prescribed
unceasing offensive routine, with bombing, sniping
and mining as its methods.
The action of the 12th and 13th of July was
meant to be a sequel to the action of the 28th
June. That advance had driven back the Turkish
right on to their second main system of defence
just south of Krithia. But, on my centre and
right, the enemy still held their forward system of
trenches, and it was my intention on the 12th July
to seize the remaining trenches of this foremost
system from the sea at the mouth of the Kereves
Here to the main Sedd-el-Bahr —Krithia road,
along a front of some 2,000 yards.
On our right the attack was to be entrusted to
the French Corps ; on the right centre to the 52nd
(Lowland) Division. On the 52nd Division’s front
the operation was planned to take place in two
phases ; our right was to attack in the morning,
our left in the afternoon. Diversions by the 29th
Division on the left of the southern section and at
Anzac were to take place on the same day, so as
to prevent the enemy’s reserves from reinforcing
the real point of attack.
At 7.35 a.m., after a heavy bombardment, the
troops, French and Scottish, dashed out of their
trenches and at once captured two lines of enemy
trenches. Pushing forward with fine elan the Ist
Division of the French Corps completed the task
assigned to it by carrying the whole of the Turkish
forward system of works, namely, the line of
trenches skirting the lower part of the Kereves
Dere. Further to the left the 2nd French Division
and our 155 th Brigade maintained the two lines
of trenches they had gained. But on the left of the
155 th Brigade the 4th Battalion, King’s Own
Scottish Borderers, pressed on too eagerly. They
not only carried the third line of trenches, but
charged on up the hill and beyond the third line,
then advanced indeed until they came under the
“ feu de barrage ” of the French artillery. Nothing
could live under so cruel a cross fire from friend
and foe, so the King’s Own Scottish Borderers were
forced to fall back with heavy losses to the second
line of enemy trenches which they had captured
in their first rush. .
During this fighting telephone wires from
1 forward positions were cut by enemy’s shell fire,
and here and there in the elaborate network of
i trenches numbers of Turks were desperately
• resisting to the last. Thus though the second
line of captured trenches continued to be held as
a whole, much confused fighting ensued , there
r were retirements in parts of the line, reserves were
- rapidly being used up, and generally the situation
i was anxious and uncertain. But the best way of
I clearing it up seemed to be to deliver the second
f phase of the attack by the 157 th Brigade just as
it had originally been arranged. Accordingly,
B after a preliminary bombardment, the 157 th
i Brigade rushed forward under heayy machine-gun
; and rifle fire, and splendidly carried the whole of
4 the enemy trenches allotted as their objective.
3 Here, then, our line had advanced some 400 yards,
s while the 155 th Brigade and the 2nd French
Division had advanced between 200 and 300 yards.
H 4


At 6 p.m. the 52nd Division was ordered to make
the line good ; it seemed to be fairly in our grasp.
All night long determined counter-attacks, one
after another, were repulsed by the French and the
155 th Brigade, but about 7.30 a.m. the right of the
157 th Brigbde gave way before a party of bombers,
and our grip upon the enemy began to weaken.
I therefore decided that three battalions of the
Royal Naval Division should reinforce a fresh
attack to be made that afternoon, 13th July, on
such portions of our original objectives as remained
in the enemy’s hands. This second attack was a
success. The Ist French Division pushed their
right down to the mouth of the Kereves Derc ; the
2nd French Division attacked the trenches they
had failed to take on the preceding day; the
Nelson Battalion, on the left of the Royal Naval
Division attack, valiantly advanced and made good,
well supported by the artillery of the French.
The Portsmouth Battalion, pressing on too far, fell
into precisely the same error at precisely the same
spot as did the 4th King’s Own Scottish Borderers
on the 12th, an over-impetuosity which cost them
heavy losses.
The 1 /sth Royal Scots Fusiliers, commanded by
Lieutenant-Colonel J, B. Pollok-McCall; the
l/7th Royal Scots, commanded by Lieutenant-
Colonel W. C. Peebles ; the 1 /sth King’s Own
Scottish Borderers, commanded by Lieutenant-
Colonel W. J. Millar ; and the 1 /6th Highland
Light Infantry, commanded by Major J. Anderson,
are mentioned as having specially distinguished
themselves in this engagement.
Generally, the upshot of the attack was this.
On our right and on the French left two lines had
been captured, but in neither case was the third,
or last, line of the system in their hands. Else-
where a fine feat of arms had been accomplished,
and a solid and enduring advance had been achieved,
giving us far the best sited line for defence with
much the best field for machine-gun and rifle fire
we had hitherto obtained upon the Peninsula,
A machine-gun and 200 prisoners were captured
by the French; the British took a machine-gun
and 329 prisoners. The casualties in the French
Corps were not heavy, though it is with sorrow
that I have to report the mortal wound of General
Masnou, commanding the Ist Division. Our own
casualties were a little over 3,000 ; those of the
enemy about 5,000.
On 17th July Lieutenant-General Hunter Weston,
commanding the Bth Corps, left the Peninsula
for a few days’ rest, and, to my very deep regret,
was subsequently invalided home. I have already
drawn attention to his invincible self-confidence ;
untiring energy and trained ability.
As I was anxious to give the Commander of the
new troops all the local experience possible I
appointed Lieutenant-General Hon. Sir Frederick
Stopford, whose own Corps were now assembling
at Mudros, temporarily to succeed Lieutenant-
General Hunter Weston, but on July 24th, when
General Stopford had to set to work with his own
Corps, Major-General W. Douglas, General Officer
Commanding 42nd Division, took over temporary
command of the Bth Corps ; while Major-General
W. R. Marshall, General Officer Commanding
87th Brigade, assumed temporary command of
the 42nd Division.
Only one other action need be mentioned before
coming to the big operations of August. On the
extreme right of Anzac the flank of a work
called Tasmania Post was threatened by the
extension of a Turkish trench. The task of captur-
ing this trench was entrusted to the 3rd Australian
Brigade. After an artillery bombardment, mines
were to be fired, whereupon four columns of 50
men each were to assault and occupy specified
lengths of the trench. The regiment supplying the
assaulting columns was the 11th Australian
Infantry Battalion.
At 10.15 p.m. on 31st July the bombardment
was opened. Ten minutes later and the mines
were duly fired. The four assaulting parties dashed
forward at once, crossed our own barbed wire on
planks, and were into the craters before the whole
of the debris had fallen. Total casualties : 11 killed
and 74 wounded ; Turkish killed, 100.
By the time this action was fought a large pro-
portion of my reinforcements had arrived, and, on
the same principle which induced me to put General
Stopford in temporary command at Helles, I
relieved the war-worn 29th Division at the same
place by the 13th Division under Major-General
Shaw. The experiences here gained, in looking
after themselves, in forgetting the thousand and
one details of peace soldiering and in grasping the
two or three elementary rules of conduct in war
soldiering, were, it turned out, to be of priceless
advantage to the 13th Division throughout the
heavy fighting of the following month.
And now it was time to determine a date for
the great venture. The moon would rise on the
morning of the 7th at about 2 a.m. A day or two
previously the last reinforcements, the 53rd and
54th Divisions, were due to arrive. The first day
of the attack was fixed for the 6th of August.
Once the date was decided a certain amount of
ingenuity had to be called into play so as to divert
the attention of the enemy from my main strategical
conception. This—l repeat for the sake of clear-
ness—was :
(1) To break out with a rush from Anzac
and cut of! the bulk of the Turkish Army from
land communication with Constantinople.
(2) To gain such a command for my artillery
as to cut off the bulk of the Turkish Army from
sea traffic whether with Constantinople or with
Asia.
(3) Incidentally, to secure Suvla Bay as a
winter base for Anzac and all the troops operating
in the northern theatre.
My schemes for hoodwinking the Turks fell
under two heads; First, strategical diversions,
meant to draw away enemy reserves not yet
committed to the Peninsula. Secondly, tactical
diversons meant to hold up enemy reserves already
on the Peninsula. Under the first heading came
a surprise landing by a force of 300 men on the
northern shore of the Gulf of Xeros ; demonstra-
tions by French ships opposite Mitylene along the
Syrian coast; concentration at Mitylene ; inspec-
tions at Mitylene by the Admiral and myself;
making to order of a whole set of maps of Ajsia in
Egypt, as well as secret service work, most of
which bore fruit. Amongst the tactical diversions
were a big containing attack at Helles. Soundings,
registration of guns, etc., by Monitors between


Gaba Tepe and Kum Tepe. An attack to be
carried out by Anzac on Lone Pine trenches, which
lay in front of their right wing and as far distant
as the local terrain would admit from the scene
of the real battle. Thanks entirely to the reality
and vigour which the Navy and the troops threw
into them, each one of these ruses was, it so turned
out, entirely successful, with the result that the
Turks, despite their excellent spy system, were
caught completely off their guard at dawn on the
7th of August.
Having settled upon the manner and time of
the diversions, orders had to be issued for the
main operation. And here I must pause a moment
to draw your Lordship’s attention to the extra-
ordinary complexity of the staff work caused by
the unique distribution of my forces. Within the
narrow confines 'of the positions I held on the
Peninsula it was impossible to concentrate even
as much as one-third of the fresh troops about to
be launched to the attack. Nor could Mudros and
Imbros combined absorb the whole of the re-
mainder. The strategic concentration which pre-
cedes a normal battle had in my case to be a very
wide dispersion. Thus of the forces destined
for my offensive, on the day before the battle, part
were at Anzac, part at Imbros, part at Mudros,
and part at Mitylene. These last three detach-
ments were separated respectively by 14, 60 and
120 miles of sea from the arena into which they
were simultaneously to appear. To ensure the
punctual arrival of all these masses of inexperienced
troops at the right moment and spot, together with
their material, munitions, stores, supplies, water,
animals and vehicles, was a prodigious undertaking
demanding not only competence, but self-con-
fidence ; and I will say for my General Staff that I
believe the clearness and completeness of their
orders for this concentration and landing will
■hereafter be studied as models in military academies.
The need for economy in sea transport, the awk-
wardness and restriction of open beaches, the
impossibility of landing guns, animals or vehicles
rapidly—all these made it essential to create a
special, separate organisation for every single unit
taking part in the adventure. A pack mule corps
to supply 80,000 men had also to be organised for
that specific purpose until such time as other
transport could be landed.
As to water, that element of itself was re-
sponsible for a whole chapter of preparations. An
enormous quantity had to be collected secretly,
and as secretly stowed away at Anzac, where a
high-level reservoir had to be built, having a
holding capacity of 30,000 gallons, and fitted out
with a regular system of pipes and distribution
tanks. A stationary engine was brought over
from Egypt to fill that reservoir. Petroleum tins,
with a carrying capacity of 80,000 gallons, were
got together, and fixed up with handles, etc.,
but the collision of the “ Moorgate ” with another
vessel delayed the arrival of large numbers of these
just as a breakdown in the stationary engine
upset for a while the well-laid plan of the high-level
reservoir. But Anzac was ever resourceful in
face of misadventures, and when the inevitable
accidents arose it was not with folded hands that
they were met.
Turning to Suvla Bay, it was believed that good
wells and springs existed both in the Biyuk Ana-
farta Valley and in Suvla Plain. But nothing bo
vital could possibly be left to hearsay, and although,
as it turned out, our information was perfectly
correct, yet the War Office were asked to despatch
with each reinforcing division water receptacles
for pack transport at the rate of half a gallon per
man.
The sheet-anchor on which hung the whole of
these elaborate schemes was the Navy. One tiny
flaw in the perfect mutual trust and confidence
animating the two services would have wrecked
the whole enterprise. Experts at a distance may
have guessed as much; it was self-evident to the
rawest private on the spot. But with men like Vice-
Admiral de Robeck, Commodore Roger Keyes,
Rear-Admiral Christain and Captain E. H; Mitchell
at our backs, we soldiers were secured against any
such risk, and it will be seen how perfect was the
precision the sailors put into their job.
The hour was now approaching, and I waited
for it with as much confidence as is possible when
to the inevitable uncertainties of war are to be
added those of the weather. Apart from feints,
the first blow was to be dealt in the southern zone.
In that theatre I had my own Poste de Com-
mandement. But upon the 6th of August attacks
in the south were only to form a subsidiary part
of one great concerted attack. Anzac was to
deliver the knock-down blow; Helles and Suvla
were complementary operations. Were Ito commit
myself at the outset to any one of these three
theatres I must lose my sense of proportion.
Worse, there being no lateral communication
between them, as soon as I landed at one I was
cut off from present touch with both of the others.
At Imbros I was 45 minutes from Helles, 40
minutes from Anzac, and 50 minutes from Suvla.
Imbros was the centre of the cable system, and
thence I could follow each phase of the triple attack
and be ready with my two divisions of reserve to
throw in reinforcements where they seemed most
to be required. Therefore I decided to follow the
opening moves from General Headquarters.
At Helles the attack of the 6th was directed
against 1,200 yards of the Turkish front opposite
our own right and right centre, and was to be carried
out by the 88th Brigade of the 29th Division.
Two small Turkish trenches enfilading the main
advance had, if possible, to be captured simul-
taneously, an affair which was entrusted to the
42nd Division.
After bombardment the infantry assaulted at
3.50 p.m. On the left large sections of the enemy’s
line were carried, but on our centre and right the
Turks were encountered in masses, and the attack,
pluckily and perseveringly as it was pressed, never
had any real success. The Ist Battalion, Essex
Regiment, in particular forced their way into the
crowded enemy trench opposite them, despite the
most determined resistance, but, once in, were
subjected to the heaviest musketry fire from both
flanks, as well as in reverse, and were shattered by
showers of bombs. Two separate resolute attacks
were made by the 42nd Division, but both of
them recoiled in face of the unexpected volume
of fire developed by the Turks.
After dark officer’s patrols were sent up to ascer-
tain the exact position of affairs. Heavy Turkish
counter-attacks were being pressed against such
portions of the line we still retained. Many of our


men fought it out where they stood to the last,
but by nightfall none of the enemy’s line remained
in our possession.
Our set-back was in no wise the fault of the
troops. That ardour which only dashed itself to
pieces against the enemy’s strong entrenchments
and numerous, stubborn defenders on the 6th of
August would, a month earlier, have achieved
notable success. Such was the opinion of all.
But the moral , as well as the strength of the Turks,
had had time to rise to great heights since our last
serious encounters with them on the 21st and 28th
of June and on the 12th of July. On those dates
all ranks had felt, as an army feels, instinctively,
yet with certitude, that they had fairly got the
upper hand of the enemy, and that, given the
wherewithal, they could have gone on steadily
advancing. Now that self-same, half-beaten enemy
were again making as stout a resistance as they
had offered us at our original landing !
For this recovery of the Turks there were three
reasons: one moral, one material, and one
fortuitous.
(1) The news of the Russian reverses had
come to hand and had been advertised to us on
posters from the Turkish trenches long before
we heard anything about them from home.
(2) Two new divisions had come down south
to Helles to replace those we had most severely
handled.
(3) The enemy trenches selected for our attack
were found to be packed with troops and so were
their communication trenches, the reason being,
as explained to us by prisoners, that the Turkish
Commander had meant to launch from them an
attack upon us. We had, in fact, by a coincidence
as strange as it was unlucky, anticipated a
Turkish offensive by an hour or two at most!
Sure enough, next morning, the enemy in their
turn attacked the left of the line from which our
own troops had advanced to the assault. A few
of them gained a footing in our trenches and were
all killed or captured. The remainder were driven
back by fire.
As the aim of my action in this southern zone
was to advance if I could, but in any case to contain
the enemy and prevent him reinforcing to the
northwards, I persevered on the 7th with my
plans, notwithstanding the counter-attack of the
Turks which was actually in progress. My
objective this time was a double line of Turkish
trenches on a front of about 800 yards between
the Mai Tepe Dere and the west branch of the Kanli
Dere. After a preliminary bombardment the
troops of the 125 th Brigade on the right and the
129 th on the left made the assault at 9.40 a.m.
From the outset it was evident that the enemy
were full of fight and in great force, and that
success would only be gained after a severe struggle.
On the right and on the centre the first enemy line
was captured, and small parties pushed on to the
second line, where they were unable to maintain
themselves for long. On the left but little ground
was gained, and by 11 a.m. what little had been
taken had been relinquished. But in the centre
a stiff battle raged all day up and down a vineyard
some 200 yards long by 100 yards broad on the
west of the Krithia road. A large portion of the
vineyard had been captured in the first dash, and the
East Lancashire men in this part of the field
gallantly stood their ground here against a succes-
sion of vigorous counter-attacks. The enemy
suffered very severely in these counter-attacks,
which were launched in strength and at short
intervals. Both our Brigades had also lost heavily
during the advance and in repelling the fierce
onslaughts of the enemy, but, owing to the fine
endurance of the 6th and 7th Battalions of the
Lancashire Fusiliers, it was found possible to hold
the vineyard through the night, and a massive
column of the enemy which strove to overwhelm
their thinned ranks was shattered to pieces in the
attempt.
On Bth August Lieutenant-General Sir F. J.
Davies took over command of the Bth Army Corps,
and Major-General W. Douglas reverted to the
command of the 42nd Division. For two more
days his troops were called upon to show their
qualities of vigilance and power of determined
resistance, for the enemy had by no means yet
lost hope of wresting from us the ground we had
won in the vineyard. This unceasing struggle
was a supreme test for battalions already exhausted
by 48 hours’ desperate fighting and weakened by
the loss of so many good leaders and men ; but
the peculiar grit of the Lancastrians was equal
to the strain, and they did not fail. Two specially
furious counter-attacks were delivered by the
Turks on the Bth August, one at 4.40 a.m. and
another at 8.30 p.m., where again our bayonets
were too much for them; Throughout the night
they made continuous bomb attacks, but the
6th Lancashire Fusiliers and the 4th East Lan-
cashire Regiment stuck gamely to their task at the
eastern comer of the vineyard. There was des-
perate fighting also at the northern corner, where
the personal bravery of Lieutenant W. T. Forshaw,
1 /9th Manchester Regiment who stuck to his post
after his detachment had been relieved (an act for
which he has since been awarded the Y.C.), was
largely instrumental in the repulse of three very
determined onslaughts.
By the morning of the 9th August things were
quieter, and the sorely tried troops were relieved.
On the night of the 12th/13th the enemy made one
more sudden, desperate dash for their vineyard—
and got it! But, on the 13th, our bombers took
the matter in hand. The Turks were finally driven
out; the new fire trenches were wired and loop-
holed, and have since become part of our line.
These two attacks had served their main purpose.
If the local successes were not all that had been
hoped for, yet a useful advance had been achieved,
and not only had they given a fresh, hard fighting
enemy more than he had bargained for, but they
had actually drawn down Turkish reinforcements
to their area. And how can a Commander say
enough for the troops who, aware that their task
was only a subsidiary one, fought with just as much
vim and resolution as if they were storming the
battlements of Constantinople.
I will now proceed to tell of the assault on
Chunuk Bair by the forces under General Bird-
wood, and of the landing of the 9th Corps in the
neighbourhood of Suvla Bay. The entire details
of the operations allotted to the troops to be
employed in the Anzac area were formulated by
Lieutenant-General Birdwood, subject only to my
final approval. So excellently was this vital
business worked out on the lines of the instructions


issued that I had no modifications to suggest, and
all these local preparations were completed by
August 6th in a way which reflects the greatest
credit, not only on the Corps Commander and his
staff, but also upon the troops themselves, who
had to toil like slaves to accumulate food, drink
and munitions of war. Alone the accommodation
for the extra troops to be landed necessitated an
immense amount of work in preparing new con-
cealed bivouacs, in making interior communica-
tions, and in storing water and supplies, for I was
determined to put on shore as many fighting men
as our modest holding at Anzac could possib y
accommodate or provision. All the work was
done by Australian and New Zealand soldiers
almost entirely by night, and the uncomplaining
efforts of these much-tried troops in preparation
are in a sense as much to their credit as their
heroism in the battles that followed. Above all,
the water problem caused anxiety to the Admiral,
to Lieutenant-General Birdwood and to myself.
The troops to advance from Suvla Bay across the
Anafarta valley might reckon on finding some
wells —it was certain, at least, that no water was
waiting for us on the crests of the ridges of Sari
Bair! Therefore, first, several days’ supply had
to be stocked into tanks along the beach and thence
pumped up into other tanks half-way up the
mountains ; secondly, a system of mule transport
had to be worked out, so that in so far as was
humanly possible, thirst should not be allowed
to overcome the troops after they had overcome
the difficulties of the country and the resistance
of the enemy.
On the nights of the 4th, sth and 6th August
the reinforcing troops were shipped into Anzac
very silently at the darkest hours. Then, still
silently, they were tucked away from enemy
aeroplanes or observatories in their prepared hiding
places. The whole sea route lay open to the view
of the Turks upon Achi Baba’s summit and Battle-
ship Hill. Aeroplanes could count every tent
and every ship at Mudros or at Imbros. Within
rifle fire of Anzac’s open beach hostile riflemen
were looking out across the iEgean no more than
20 ft. from our opposing lines. Every modern
appliance of telescope, telegraph, wireless was at
the disposal of the enemy. Yet the instructions
worked out at General Headquarters in the
minutest detail (the result of conferences with the
Royal Navy, which were attended by Brigadier-
General Skeen, of General Birdwood’s Staff) were
such that the scheme was carried through without
a hitch. The preparation of the ambush was
treated as a simple matter by the services therein
engaged, and yet I much doubt whether any more
pregnant enterprise than this of landing so large
a force under the very eyes of the enemy, and of
keeping them concealed there three days, is recorded
in the annals of war.
The troops now at the disposal of General
Birdwood amounted in round numbers to 37,000
rifles and 72 guns, with naval support from two
cruisers, four monitors and two destroyers. Under
the scheme these troops were to be divided into
two main portions. The task of holding the
existing Anzac position, and of making frontal
assaults therefrom, was assigned to the Australian
Division (plus the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades
and two battalions of the 40th Brigade); that of
assaulting the Chunuk Bair ridge was entrusted
to the New Zealand and Australian Division (less
the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades), to the 13th
Division (less five battalions), and to the 29th
Indian Infantry Brigade and to the Indian Mountain
Artillery Brigade. The 29th Brigade of the 10th
Division (less one battalion) and the 38th Brigade
were held in reserve.
The most simple method of developing this
complicated series of operations will be first to
take the frontal attacks from the existing Anzac
position, and afterwards to go on to the assault
on the more distant ridges. During the 4th, sth
and 6th of August the works on the enemy’s left
and centre were subjected to a slow bombardment,
and on the afternoon of the 6th August an assault
was made upon the formidable Lone Pme
entrenchment. Although, in its essence, a diver-
sion to draw the enemy’s attention and reserves
from the grand attack impending upon his right,
yet, in itself, Lone Pine was a distinct step on the
way across to Maidos. It commanded one of the
main sources of the Turkish water supply, and was
a work, or, rather, a series of works, for the safety
of which the enemy had always evinced a certain
nervousness. The attack was designed to heighten
this impression. .
The work consisted of a strong point dapput
on the south-western end of a plateau, where it
confronted, at distances varying from 60 to 120
yards, the salient in the line of our trenches named
by us the Pimble. The entrenchment was evi-
dently very strong; it was entangled with wire,
and provided with overhead cover, and it was
connected by numerous communication trenches
with another point d'appui known as Johnston’s
Jolly on the north, as well as with two other
works on the east and south. The frontage for
attack amounted at most to some 220 yards, and
the approaches lay open to heavy enfilade fire,
both from the north and from the south.
The detailed scheme of attack was worked out
with care and forethought by Major-General H. B.
Walker, commanding Ist Australian Division, and
his thoroughness contributed, I consider, largely to
the success of the enterprise. #
The action commenced at 4.30 p.m. with a
continuous and heavy bombardment of the Lone
Pine and adjacent trenches, H.M.S. “ Bacchante
assisting by searching the valleys to the north-east,
and east, and the Monitors by shelling the enemy s
batteries south of Gaba Tepe. The assault had
been entrusted to the Ist Australian Brigade
(Brigadier-General N. M. Smyth), and punctually
at 5.30 p.m. it was carried out by the 2nd, 3rd
and 4th Australian Battalions, the Ist Battalion
forming the Brigade reserve. Two lines left their
trenches simultaneously, and were closely followed
up by a third. The rush across the open was a
regular race against death, which came in the
shape of a hail of shell and rifle bullets from front
and from either flank. But the Australians had
firmly resolved to reach the enemy s trenches, and
in this determination they became for the moment
invincible. The barbed wire entanglement was
reached and was surmounted. Then came a
terrible moment, when it seemed as though it
would be physically impossible to penetrate into the
i trenches. The overhead cover of stout pine beams
resisted all individual efforts to move it, and the


loopholes continued to spit fire. Groups of our
men then bodily lifted up the beams and individual
soldiers leaped down into the semi-darkened
galleries amongst the Turks. By 5.47 p.m. the
3rd and 4th Battalions were well into the enemy’s
vitals, anfl a few minutes later the reserves of the
2nd Battalion advanced over their parados, and
driving out, killing or capturing the occupants,
made good the whole of the trenches. The reserve
companies of the 3rd and 4th Battalions followed,
and at 6.20 p.m. the Ist Battalion (in reserve)
was launched to consolidate the position.
At once the Turks made it plain, as they have
never ceased to do since, that they had no intention
of acquiescing in the capture of this capital work.
At 7.0 p.m. a determined and violent counter-
attack began, both from the north and from the
south. Wave upon wave the enemy swept for-
ward with the bayonet. Here and there a well-
directed salvo of bombs emptied a section of a
trench, but whenever this occurred the gap was
quickly filled by the initiative of the officers and
the gallantry of the men.
The enemy allowed small respite. At 1.30 that
night the battle broke out afresh. Strong parties
of Turks swarmed out of the communication
trenches, preceded by showers of bombs. For
seven hours these counter-attacks continued. All
this time consolidation was being attempted,
although the presence of so many Turkish prisoners
hampered movement and constituted an actual
danger. In beating off these desperate counter-
attacks very heavy casualties were suffered by
the Australians. Part of the 12th Battalion, the
reserve of the 3rd Brigade, had therefore to be
thrown into the meUe.
Twelve hours later, at 1.30 p.m. on the 7th,
another effort was made by the enemy, lasting
uninterruptedly at closest quarters till 5 p.m.,
then being resumed at midnight and proceeding
intermittently till dawn. At an early period of
this last counter-attack the 4th Battalion were
forced by bombs to relinquish portion of a trench,
but later on, led by their commanding officer,
Lieutenant-Colonel McNaghten, they killed every
Turk who had got in.
During the Bth of August advantage was taken
of every cessation in the enemy’s bombing to con-
solidate. The 2nd Battalion, which had lost its
commanding officer and suffered especially severely,
was withdrawn and replaced by the 7th Battalion,
the reserve to the 2nd Infantry Brigade.
At 5 a.m. on 9th August the enemy made a
sudden attempt to storm from the east and south-
east after a feint of fire attack from the north.
The 7th Battalion bore the brunt of the shock, and
handled the attack so vigorously that by 7.45 a.m.
there were clear signs of demoralisation in the
enemy’s ranks. But, although this marked the
end of counter-attacks on the large scale, the
bombing and sniping continued, though in less
volume, throughout this day and night, and lasted
till 12th August, when it at last became manifest
that we had gained complete ascendency. During
the final grand assault our losses from artillery
fire were large, and ever since the work has passed
into our hands it has been a favourite daily and
nightly mark for heavy shells and bombs.
Thus was Lone Pine taken and held. The Turks
were in great force and very full of fight, yet one
• weak Australian brigade, numbering at the outset
[ but 2,000 rifles, and supported only by two weak
battalions, carried the work under the eyes of a
whole enemy division, and maintained their grip
upon it like a vice during six days’ successive
counter-attacks. High praise is due to Brigadier-
General N. M. Smyth and to his battalion com-
manders. The irresistible dash and daring of
officers and men in the initial charge were a glory
to Australia. The stout-heartedness with which
they clung to the captured ground in spite of
fatigue, severe losses, and the continual strain of
shell fire and bomb attacks may seem less striking
to the civilian ; it is even more admirable to the
soldier. From start to finish the artillery support
was untiring and vigilant. Owing to the rapid,
accurate fire of the 2nd New Zealand Battery,
under Major Sykes, several of the Turkish onslaughts
were altogether defeated in their attempts to get
to grips with the Australians. Not a chance was
lost by these gunners, although time and again the
enemy’s artillery made direct hits on their shields.
The hand-to-hand fighting in the semi-obscurity
of the trenches was prolonged and very bitterly
contested. In one comer eight Turks and six
Australians were found lying as they had bayon-
etted one another. To make room for the fighting
men the dead were ranged in rows on either side
of the gangway. After the first violence of the
counter-attacks had abated, 1,000 corpses—our own
and Turkish —were dragged out from the trenches.
For the severity of our own casualties some
partial consolation may be found in the facts,
first, that those of the enemy were much heavier,
our guns and machine-guns having taken toll
of them as they advanced in mass formation
along the reverse slopes ; secondly, that the Lone
Pine attack drew all the local enemy reserves
towards it, and may be held, more than any other
cause, to have been the reason that the Suvla Bay
landing was so lightly opposed, and that com-
paratively few of the enemy were available at
first to reinforce against our attack on Sari Bair.
Our captures in this feat of arms amounted to 134
prisoners, seven machine-guns and a large quantity
of ammunition and equipment.
Other frontal attacks from the existing Anzac
positions were not so fortunate. They fulfilled
their object in so far as they prevented the enemy
from reinforcing against the attack upon the high
ridges, but they failed to make good any ground.
Taken in sequence of time, they included an attack
upon the work known as German Officer’s Trench,
on the extreme right of our line, at midnight on
August 6th-7th, also assaults on the Nek and
Baby 700 trenches opposite the centre of our line,
delivered at 4.30 a.m. on the 7th. The 2nd
Australian Brigade did all that men could do ; the
Bth Light Horse only accepted their repulse after
losing three-fourths of that devoted band who so
bravely sallied forth from Russell’s Top. Some
of the works were carried, but in these cases the
enemy’s concealed machine-guns made it im-
possible to hold on. But all that day, as the result
of these most gallant attacks, Turkish reserves
on Battleship Hill were being held back to meet
any dangerous development along the front of the
old Anzac line, and so were not available to meet
our main enterprise, which I will now endeavour
to describe.


The first step in the real push —the step which
above all others was to count —was the night attack
on the summits of the Sari Bair ridge. The crest
line of this lofty mountain range runs parallel to the
sea, dominating the underfeatures contained within
the Anzac position, although these fortunately
defilade the actual landing-place. From the main
ridge a series of spurs run down towards the level
beach, and are separated from one another by deep,
jagged gullies choked up with dense jungle. Two
of these leading up to Chunuk Bair are called
Chailak Dere and Sazli Beit Dere ; another deep
ravine runs up to Koja Chemen Tepe (Hill 305),
the topmost peak of the whole ridge, and is called
the Aghyl Dere.
It was our object to effect a lodgment along the
crest of the high main ridge with two columns of
troops, but, seeing the nature of the ground and
the dispositions of the enemy, the effort had to be
made by stages. We were bound, in fact, to under-
take a double subsidiary operation before we could
hope to launch these attacks with any real prospect
of success.
1. The right covering force was to seize Table
Top, as well as all other enemy positions command-
ing the foothills between the Chailak Dere and the
Sazli Beit Dere ravines. If this enterprise succeeded
it would open up the ravines for the assaulting
columns, whilst at the same time interposing
between the right flank of the left covering force
and the enemy holding the Sari Bair main ridge.
2. The left covering force was to march north-
wards along the beach to seize a hill called Damak-
jelik Bair, some 1,400 yards north of Table Top.
If successful it would be able to hold out a hand
to the 9th Corps as it landed south of Nibrunesi
Point, whilst at the same time protecting the left
flank of the left assaulting column against enemy
troops from the Anafarta valley during its climb up
the Aghyl Dere ravine.
* 3. The right assaulting column was to move up
the Chailak Dere and Sazli Beit Dere ravines to the
storm of the ridge of Chunuk Bair.
4. The left assaulting column was to work up
the Aghyl Dere and prolong the line of the right
assaulting column by storming Hill 305 (Koja
Chemen Tepe), the summit of the whole range of
hills.
To recapitulate, the two assaulting columns,
which were to work up three ravines to the storm
of the high ridge, were to be preceded by two
covering columns. One of these was to capture
the enemy’s positions commanding the foothills,
first to open the mouths of the ravines, secondly
to cover the right flank of another covering force
whilst it marched along the beach. The other
covering column was to strike far out to the north
until, from a hill called Damajelik Bair, it could
at the same time facilitate the landing of the
9th Corps at Nibrunesi Point, and guard the left
flank of the column assaulting Sari Bair from ally
forces of the enemy which might be assembled
in the Anafarta valley.
The whole of this big attack was placed under
the command of Major-General Sir A. Godley,
Brigade, the Otago Mounted Rifles Regiment, the
Maori Contingent and New Zealand Field Troop.
Right Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-
General F. E. Johnston. —New Zealand Infantry
Brigade, Indian Mountain Battery (less one
section), one Company New Zealand Engineers.
Left Covering Column, under Brigadier-General
J. H. Travers—Headquarters 40th Brigade, half
the 72nd Field Company, 4th Battalion, South
Wales Borderers, and sth Battalion, Wiltshire
Regiment.
Left Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-General
(now Major-General) H. V. Cox.—29th Indian
Infantry Brigade, 4th Australian Infantry Brigade,
Indian Mountain Battery (less one section), one
Company New Zealand Engineers.
Divisional Reserve. —6th Battalion, South Lanca-
shire Regiment, and Bth Battalion, Welsh Regiment
(Pioneers) at Chailak Dere, and the 39th Infantry
Brigade and half 72nd Field Company at Aghyl
Dere.
The right covering column, it will be remembered,
had to gain command of the Sazli Beit Dere apd
the Agyhl Dere ravines, so as to let the assaulting
column arrive intact within striking distance of
the Chunuk Bair ridge. To achieve this object
it had to clear the Turks off from their right flank
positions upon Old No. 3 Post and Table Top.
Old No. 3 Post, connected with Table Top by a
razor back, formed the apex of a triangular piece
of hill sloping gradually down to our No. 2 and No. 3
outposts. Since its recapture from us by the Turks
on 30th May working parties had done their best
with unstinted material to convert this command-
ing point into an impregnable redoubt. Two lines
of fire trench, very heavily entangled, protected
its southern face —the only one accessible to us —
and, with its head cover of solid timber baulks
and its strongly revetted outworks, it dominated
the approaches of both the Chailak Dere and the
Sazli Beit Dere.
Table Top is a steep sided, flat-topped hill, close
on 400 feet above sea level. The sides of the hill
are mostly sheer and quite impracticable, but here
and there a ravine, choked with scrub, and under
fire of enemy trenches, gives precarious foothold up
the precipitous cliffs. The small plateau on the
summit was honeycombed with trenches, which
were connected by a communication alley with that
underfeature of Sari Bair, known as Rhododendron
Spur.
Amongst other stratagems the Anzac troops,
assisted by H.M.S. “ Colne,” had long and carefully
been educating the Turks how they should lose
Old No. 3 Post, which could hardly have been
rushed by simple force of arms. Every night,
exactly at 9 p.m., H.M.S. “ Colne ” threw the beam
of her searchlight on to the redoubt, and opened
fire upon it for exactly 10 minutes. Then, after a
10 minutes’ interval, came a second illumination
and bombardment, commencing always at 9.20
and ending precisely at 9.30 p.m.
The idea was that, after successive nights of such
practice, the enemy would get into the habit of
taking the searchlight as a hint to clear out until
tlip shp.llinf? was at an end. But on the eventful
General Officer Commanding New Zealand and the shelling was at an end. But on the eventful
Australian Division. The two covering and the night of the 6th, the sound of their footsteps
two assaulting columns were organized as follows:- drowned by the loud cannonade, unseen as they
Right Covering Column, under Brigadier-General crept along in that darkest shadow which fringes
A. 11. Russell. —New Zealand Mounted Rifles a searchlight’s beam—came the right covering


column. At 9.30 the light switched off, and
instantly our men poured out of the scrub jungle
and into the empty redoubt. By 11 p.m. the
whole series of surrounding entrenchments were
ours !
Once the capture of Old No. 3 Post was fairly
under w£y, the remainder of the right covering
column carried on with their attack upon Bauchop’s
Hill and the Chailak Dere. By 10 p.m. the northern-
most point, with its machine-gun, was captured,
and by 1 o’clock in the morning the whole of
Bauchop’s Hill, a maze of ridge and ravine, every-
where entrenched, was fairly in our hands.
The attack along the Chailak Dere was not so
cleanly carried out—made, indeed, just about as
ugly a start as any enemy could wish. Pressing
eagerly forward through the night, the little
column of stormers found themselves held up by
a barbed-wire erection of unexampled height,
depth and solidity, which completely closed the
river bed—that is to say, the only practicable
entrance to the ravine. The entanglement was
flanked by a strongly-held enemy trench running
right across the opening of the Chailak Dere, Here
that splendid body of men, the Otago Mounted
Rifles, lost some of their bravest and their best,
but in the end, when things were beginning to seem
desperate, a passage was forced through the
stubborn obstacle with most conspicuous and cool
courage by Captain Shera and a party of New
Zealand Engineers, supported by the Maoris, who
showed themselves worthy descendants of the
warriors of the Gate Pah. Thus was the mouth
of the Chailak Dire opened in time to admit of
the unopposed entry of the right assaulting column.
Simultaneously the attack on Table Top had
been launched under cover of a heavy bombard-
ment from H.M.S. “ Colne.” No General on
peace manoeuvres would ask troops to attempt
so break-neck an enterprise. The flanks of Table
Top are so steep that the height gives an impression
of a mushroom shape—of the summit bulging out
over its stem. But just as faith moves mountains,
so valour can carry them. The Turks fought
bravely. The angle of Table Top’s ascent is
recognised in our regulations as “impracticable
for infantry.” But neither Turks nor angles of
ascent were destined to stop Russell or his New
Zealanders that night. There are moments during
battle when life becomes intensified, when men
become supermen, when the impossible becomes
simple—and this was one of those moments. The
scarped heights were scaled, the plateau was
carried by midnight. With this brilliant feat the
task of the right covering force was at an end.
Its attacks had been made with the bayonet and
bomb only ; magazines were empty by order;
hardly a rifle shot had been fired. Some 150
prisoners were captured as well as many rifles
and much equipment, ammunition and stores.
No words can do justice to the achievement of
Brigadier-General Russell and his men. There
are exploits which must be seen to be realised.
The right assaulting column had entered the
two southerly ravines—Sazli Beit Dere and Chailak
Dere—by midnight. At 1.30 a.m. began a hotly-
contested fight for the trenches on the lower part
of Rhododendron Spur, whilst the Chailak Dere
column pressed steadily up the valley against
the enemy.
The left covering column, under Brigadier-General
Travers, after marching along the beach to No. 3
Outpost, resumed its northerly advance as soon
as the attack on Bauchop’s Hill had developed.
Once the Chailak Dere was cleared the column
moved by the mouth of the Aghyl Dere, disregarding
the enfilade fire from sections of Bauchop’s Hill
still uncaptured. The rapid success of this move-
ment was largely due to Lieutenant - Colonel
Gillespie, a very fine man, who commanded the
advance guard consisting of his own regiment,
the 4th South Wales Borderers, a corps worthy
of such a leader. Every trench encountered was
instantly rushed by the Borderers until, having
reached the predetermined spot, the whole column
was unhesitatingly launched at Damakjelik Bair.
Several Turkish trenches were captured at the
bayonet’s point, and by 1.30 a.m. the whole of the
hill was occupied, thus safeguarding the left rear
of the whole of the Anzac attack.
Here was an encouraging sample of what the
New Army, under good auspices, could accomplish.
Nothing more trying to inexperienced troops can
be imagined than a long night march exposed to
flanking fire, through a strange country, winding up
at the end with a bayonet charge against a height,
formless and still in the starlight, garrisoned by
those spectres of the imagination, worst enemies of
the soldier.
The left assaulting column crossed the Chailak
Dere at 12.30 a.m., and entered the Aghyl Dere
at the heels of the left covering column. The
surprise, on this side, was complete. Two Turkish
officers were caught in their pyjamas; enemy
arms and ammunition were scattered in every
direction.
The grand attack was now in full swing, but the
country gave new sensations in cliff climbing
even to officers and men who had graduated over
the goat tracks of Anzac. The darkness of the
night, the density of the scrub, hands and knees
progress up the spurs, sheer physical fatigue,
exhaustion of the spirit caused by repeated hair-
breadth escapes from the hail of random bullets—
all these combined to take the edge off the energies
of our troops. At last, after advancing some
distance up the Aghyl Dere, the column split up
into two parts. The 4th Australian Brigade
struggled, fighting hard as they went, up to the
north of the northern fork of the Aghyl Dere,
making for Hill 305 (Koja Chemen Tepe). The
29th Indian Infantry Brigade scrambled up the
southern fork of the Aghyl Dere and the spurs
north of it to the attack of a portion of the Sari
Bair ridge known as Hill Q.
Dawn broke and the crest line was not yet in
our hands, although, considering all things, the left
assaulting column had made a marvellous advance.
The 4th Australian Infantry Brigade was on the
line of the Asma Dere (the next ravine north of the
A'ghyl Dere) and the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade
held the ridge west of the Farm below Chunuk
Bair and along the spurs to the north-east. The
enemy had been flung back from ridge to ridge ;
an excellent line for the renewal of the attack had
been secured, and (except for the exhaustion of the
troops) the auspices were propitious.
Turning to the right assaulting column, one
battalion, the Canterbury Infantry Battalion,
clambered slowly up the Sazli Beit Dere, The


remainder of the force, led by the Otago Battalion, sa
wound their way amongst the pitfalls and forced is
their passage through scrub of the Ghana '
Here, where fierce opposition forced them ere ai
long to deploy. Here, too, the hopeless country
was the main hindrance, and it was not until le
5 45 a.m. that the bulk of the column joined the
Canterbury Battalion on the lower slopes of tl
Rhododendron Spur. The whole force then moved ti
up the spur, gaining touch with the left assaulting (<
column by means of the 10th Gurkhas, in face of
very heavy fire and frequent bayonet charges, fc
Eventually they entrenched on the top of Rhode- o
dendron Spur, a quarter of a mile short of Chunuk
Bair — i.e., of victory. 1
At seven a.m. the sth and 6th Gurkhas, belonging t
to the left assaulting column, had approached the i
main ridge north-east of Chunuk Bair, whilst,
on their left, the 14th Sikhs had got into touch
with the 4th Australian Brigade on the southern .
watershed of the Asma Dere. The 4th Australian
Brigade now received orders to leave half a bat-
talion to hold the spur, and, with the rest of its
strength, plus the 14th Sikhs, to assault Hill 305
(Koja Chemen Tepe). But by this time the
enemy’s opposition had hardened, and his reserves
were moving up from the direction of Battleship
Hill. Artillery support was asked for and given,
yet by 9 a.m. the attack of the right assaulting
column on Chunuk Bair was checked, and any
idea of a further advance on Koja Chemen Tepe
had to be, for the moment, suspended. The most
that could be done was to hold fast to the Asmak
Here watershed whilst attacking the ridge north-
east of Chunuk Bair, an attack to be supported
by a fresh assault launched against Chunuk Bair
itself.
At 9.30 a.m. the two assaulting columns pressed
forward whilst our guns pounded the enemy movmg
along the Battleship Hill spurs. But in spite of all
their efforts their increasing exhaustion as opposed
to the gathering strength of the enemy’s fresh
troops began to tell—they had shot their bolt
So all day they clung to what they had captured
and strove to make ready for the night. At 11 a.m.
three battalions of the 39th Infantry Brigade were
sent up from the general reserve to be at hand when *
needed, and, at the same hour, one more battalion
of the reserve was dispatched to the Ist Australian
Division to meet the drain caused by all the
desperate Lone Pine fighting.
By the afternoon the position of the two assault-
ing columns was unchanged. The right covering
force were in occupation of Table Top, Old No. 3
Post and Bauchop Hill, which General Russell had
been ordered to maintain with two regiments of
Mounted Rifles, so that he might have two other
regiments and the Maori Contingent available to
move as required. The left covering force held
Damakjelik Bair. The forces which had attacked
along the front of the original Anzac line were back
again in their own trenches. The Lone Pine work
was being furiously disputed. All had suffered
heavily and all were very tired.
So ended the first phase of the fighting for the
Chunuk Bair ridge. Our aims had not fully been
attained, and the help we had hoped for from
Suvla had not been forthcoming. Yet 1 fully
endorse the words of General Birdwood when he
says ; “ The troops had performed a feat which
is without parallel.”
Great kudos is due to Major-Generals Godley
and Shaw for their arrangements; to Generals
Russell, Johnston, Cox, and Travers for their
leading; but most of all, as every one of these
officers will gladly admit, to the rank and hie for
their fighting. Nor may I omit to add that the
true destroyer spirit with which H.M.S. Colne
(Commander Claude Seymour, E.N.) and HJLS
“ Chelmer ” (Commander Hugh T. England, K.N.)
backed us up will live in the grateful memories
of the Army.
In the course of this afternoon (7th August)
reconnaissances of Sari Bair were carried out and
the troops were got into shape for a fresh advance
in three columns, to take place in the early morning.
The columns were composed as follows :
Right Column, Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston.
—26 th Indian Mountain Battery (less one section),
Auckland Mounted Rifles, New Zealand Infantry
Brigade-, two battalions. 13th Division, and the
Maori Contingent.
Centre and Left Columns— Major-General H. V.
q ox 21st Indian Mountain Battery (less one
section), 4th Australian Brigade, 39th Infantry
Brigade (less one battalion), with 6th Battalion
South Lancashire Regiment attached, and the
29th Indian Infantry Brigade. ,
The right column was to climb up the Chunuk
Bair ridge ; the left column was to make for the
prolongation of the ridge north-east to Koja
Chemen Tepe, -the topmost peak of the range.
The attack was timed for 4.15 a.m. At the first
faint glimmer of dawn observers saw figures moving
against the sky-line of Chunuk Bair. Were they
our own men, or were they Turks 1 Telescopes
were anxiously adjusted ; the light grew stronger ;
men were seen climbing up from our side of the
ridge ; they were our own fellows—the topmost
summit was ours !
On the right General Johnston’s column, headed
by the Wellington Battalion and supported by
the 7th Battalion, Gloucestershire Regiment, the
Auckland Mounted Rifles Regiment, the Bth
Welsh Pioneers, and the Maori Contingent, the
' whole most gallantly led by Lieutenant-Colonel
W. G. Malone, had raced one another up the steep.
Nothing could check them. On they went, until,
with a last determined rush, they fixed themselves
firmly on the south-western slopes and crest of the
main knoll known as the height of Chunuk Bair.
With deep regret I have to add that the brave
Lieutenant-Colonel Malone fell mortally wounded
as he was marking out the Ime to be held. Ihe
7th Gloucester suffered terrible losses here, ihe
fire was so hot that they never got a chance to dig
their trenches deeper than some six inches, and
there they had to withstand attack after attack.
In the course of these fights every single officer,
company serjeant-major, or company quarter-
master-serjeant, was either killed or wounded, and
the battalion by midday consisted of small groups of
* men commanded by junior non-commissioned
officers or privates. Chapter and verse may be
quoted for the view that the rank-and-file of an
army cannot long endure the strain of close hand -
- to-hand fighting unless they are given confidence
, by the example of good officers, Yet here is at


least one instance where a battalion of the New
Army fought right on, from midday till sunset,
without any officers.
In the centre the 39th Infantry Brigade and the
29th Indian Brigade moved along the gullies
leading up to the Sari Bair ridge—the right moving
south of *the Farm on Chunuk Bair, the left up the
spurs to the north-east of the Farm against a portion
of the main ridge north-east of Chunuk Bair, and
the col to the north of it. So murderous was the
enemy’s fire that little progress could be made,
though some ground was gained on the spurs to
the north-east of the farm.
On the left the 4th Australian Brigade advanced
from the Asmak Dere against the lower slopes of
Abdul Rahman Bair (a spur running due north
from Koja Chemen Tepe) with the intention of
wheeling to its right and advancing up the spur.
Cunningly placed Turkish machine-guns and a
strong entrenched body of infantry were ready for
this move, and the Brigade were unable to get on.
At last, on the approach of heavy columns of the
enemy, the Australians, virtually surrounded, and
having already suffered losses of over 1,000, were
withdrawn to their original position. Here they
stood at bay, and, though the men were by now
half dead with thirst and with fatigue, they
bloodily repulsed attack after attack delivered by
heavy columns of Turks.
So stood matters at noon. Enough had been
done for honour and much ground had everywhere
been gained. The expected support from Suvla
hung fire, but the capture of Chunuk Bair was a
presage of victory ; even the troops who had been
repulsed were quite undefeated —quite full of
fight—and so it was decided to hold hard as we were
till nightfall, and then to essay one more grand
attack, wherein the footing gained on Chunuk Bair
would this time be used as a pivot.
In the afternoon the battle slackened, excepting
always at Lone Pine, where the enemy were still
coming on in mass, and being mown down by our
fire. Elsewhere the troops were busy digging and
getting up water and food, no child’s play, with
their wretched lines of communication running
within musketry range of the enemy.
That evening the New Zealand Brigade, with
two regiments of New Zealand Mounted Rifles and
the Maoris, held Rhododendron Spur and the
south-western slopes of the main knoll of Chunuk
Bair. The front line was prolonged by the columns
of General Cox and General Monash (with the 4th
Australian Brigade). Behind the New Zealanders
were the 38th Brigade in reserve, and in rear of
General Monash two battalions of the 40th Brigade.
The inner line was held as before, and the 29th
Brigade (less two battalions), had been sent up from
the general reserve, and remained still further in
rear.
The columns for the renewed attack were com-
posed as follows :
No. 1 Column, Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston.
—26 th Indian Mountain Battery (less one section),
the Auckland and Wellington Mounted Rifles
Regiments, the New Zealand Infantry Brigade,
and two battalions of the 13th Division.
No. 2 Column, Major-General H. V. Cox.—2lst
Indian Mountain Battery (less one section), 4th
Australian Brigade, 39th Brigade (less the 7th
Gloucester, relieved), with the 6th Battalion
South Lancashire Regiment attached, and the
Indian Infantry Brigade.
No, 3 Column, Brigadier-General A. H. Baldwin,
Commanding 38th Infantry Brigade.—Two bat-
talions each from the 38th and 29th Brigades and
one from the 40th Brigade.
No. 1 column was to hold and consolidate the
ground gained on the 6th, and, in co-operation
with the other columns, to gain the whole of
Chunuk Bair, and extend to the south-east. No. 2
column was to attack Hill Q on the Chunuk Bair
ridge, and No. 3 column was to move from the
Chailak Dere, also on Hill Q. This last column
was to make the main attack, and the others were
to co-operate with it.
At 4.30 a.m. on August 9th the Chunuk Bair
ridge and Hill Q were heavily shelled. The naval
guns, all the guns on the left flank, and as many
as possible from the right flank (whence the enemy’s
advance could be enfiladed), took part in this can-
nonade, which rose to its climax at 5.15 a.m.,
when the whole ridge seemed a mass of flame and
smoke, whence huge clouds of dust drifted slowly
upwards in strange patterns on to the sky. At
5.16 a.m. this tremendous bombardment was
to be switched off on to the flanks and reverse
slopes of the heights.
General Baldwin’s column had assembled in the
Chailak Dere, and was moving up towards General
Johnstone’s headquarters. Our plan contem-
plated the massing of this column immediately
behind the trenches held by the New Zealand
Infantry Brigade. Thence it was intended to
launch the battalions in successive lines, keeping
them as much as possible on the high ground.
Infinite trouble had been taken to ensure that
the narrow track should be kept clear, guides also
were provided ; but in spite of all precautions the
darkness, the rough scrub-covered country, its
sheer steepness, so delayed the column that they
were unable to take full advantage of the con-
figuration of the ground, and, inclining to the left,
did not reach the line of the Farm—Chunuk Bair
till 5.15 a.m. In plain English, Baldwin, owing
to the darkness and the awful country, lost his way
—through no fault of his own. The mischance
was due to the fact that time did not admit of the
detailed careful reconnaissance of routes which is
so essential where operations are to be carried out
by night.
And now, under that fine leader, Major C. G. L,
Allanson, the 6th Gurkhas of the 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade pressed up the slopes of Sari Bair,
crowned the heights of the col between Chunuk
Bair and Hill Q, viewed far beneath them the
waters of the Hellespont, viewed the Asiatic shores
along which motor transport was bringing supplies
to the lighters. Not only did this battalion, as
well as some of the 6th South Lancashire Regiment,
reach the crest, but they began to attack down the
far side of it, firing as they went at the fast retreating
enemy. But the fortune of war was against us.
At this supreme moment Baldwin’s column was
still a long way from our trenches on the crest
of Chunuk Bair, whence they should even now
have been sweeping out towards Q along the whole
ridge of the mountain. And instead of Baldwin’s
support came suddenly a salvo of heavy shell.
These falling so unexpectedly among the stormers
threw them into terrible confusion. The Turkish


commander saw his chance ; instantly his troops
were rallied and brought back in a counter-charge,
and the South Lancashires and Gurkhas, who had
seen the promised land and had seemed for a
moment to have held victory in their grasp, were
forced backwards over the crest and on to the
lower slopes whence they had first started.
But where was the main attack —where was
Baldwin? When that bold but unlucky com-
mander found he could not possibly reach our
trenches on the top of Chunuk Bair in time to
take effective part in the fight he deployed for
attack where he stood, i.e., at the farm to the
left of the New Zealand Brigade’s trenches on
Rhododendron Spur. Now his men were coming
on in fine style and, just as the Turks topped the
ridge with shouts of elation, two companies of the
6th East Lancashire Regiment, together with the
10th Hampshire Regiment, charged up our side
of the slope with the bayonet. They had gained
the high ground immediately below the command-
ing knoll on Chunuk Bair, and a few minutes earlier
would have joined hands with the Gurkhas and
South Lancashires, and, combined with them, would
have carried all before them. But the Turks
by this time were lining the whole of the high
crest in overwhelming numbers. The New Army
troops attacked with a fine audacity, but they were
flung back from the height and then pressed still
further down the slope, until General Baldwin
had to withdraw his command to the vicinity of
the Farm, whilst the enemy, much encouraged,
turned their attention to the New Zealand troops
and the two New Army battalions of No. 1 Column
still holding the south-west half of the main knoll of
Chunuk Bair. Constant attacks, urged with
fanatical persistence, were met here with a sterner
resolution, and although, at the end of the day,
our troops were greatly exhausted, they still kept
‘their footing on the summit. And if that summit
meant much to us, it meant even more to the
Turks. For the ridge covered our landing places, it
is true, but it covered not only the Turkish beaches
at Kilia Leman and Maidos, but also the Narrows
themselves and the roads leading northward to
Bulair and Constantinople.
That evening our line ran along Rhododendron
Spur up to the crest of Chunuk Bair, where about
200 yards were occupied and held by some 800 men.
Slight trenches had hastily been dug, but the
fatigue of the New Zealanders and the fire of the
enemy had prevented solid work being done.
The trenches in many places were not more than a
few inches deep. They were not protected by wire.
Also many officers are of opinion that they had
not been well sited in the first instance. On the
South African system the main line was withdrawn
some 25 yards from the crest instead of being
actually on the Crestline itself, and there were not
even look-out posts along the summit. Boer
skirmishers would thus have had to show them-
selves against the skyline before they could annoy.
But here we were faced by regulars taught to
attack in mass with bayonet or bomb. And the
power of collecting overwhelming numbers at very
close quarters rested with whichever side held the
true skyline in force. From Chunuk Bair the line
ran down to. the Farm and almost due north to
the Asma Dere southern watershed, whence it
continued westward to the sea near Asmak Kuyu,
(C 49—242)
On the right the Australian Division was still
holding its line and Lone Pine was still being
furiously attacked. The Ist Australian Brigade
was now reduced from 2,900 to 1,000, and the total
casualties up to 8 p.m. on the 9th amounted to
about 8,500. But the troops were still in extra-
ordinarily good heart, and nothing could damp their
keenness. The only discontent shown was by
men who were kept in reserve.
During the night of the 9th—loth, the New
Zealand and New Army troops on Chunuk Bair
were relieved. For three days and three nights
they had been ceaselessly fighting. They were
half dead with fatigue. Their lines of communica-
tion, started from sea level, ran across trackless
ridges and ravines to an altitude of 800 ft., and
were exposed all the way to snipers’ fire and
artillery bombardment. It had become imperative,
therefore, to get them enough food, water and rest;
and for this purpose it was imperative also to
withdraw them. Chunuk Bair, which they had
so magnificently held, was now handed over to
two battalions of the 13th Division, which were
connected by the 10th Hampshire Regiment with
the troops at the farm. General Sir William
Birdwood is emphatic on the point that the nature
of the ground is such that there was no room on
•the crest for more than this body of 800 to 1,000
rifles.
The two battalions of the New Army chosen to
hold Chunuk Bair were the 6th Loyal North
Lancashire Regiment and the sth Wiltshire Regi-
ment. The first of these arrived in good time and
occupied the trenches. Even in the darkness their
commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Levinge,
recognised how dangerously these trenches were
sited, and he began at once to dig observation
posts on the actual crest and to strengthen the
defences where he could. But he had not time
given him to do much. The second battalion, the
Wiltshires, were delayed by the intricate country.
They did not reach the edge of the entrenchment
until 4 a.m., and were then told to lie down in what
was believed, erroneously, to be a covered position.
At daybreak on Tuesday, 10th August, the
Turks delivered a grand attack from the line
Chunuk Bair-Hill Q against these two battalions,
already weakened in numbers, though not in spirit,
by previous fighting. First our men were shelled
by every enemy gun, and then, at 5.30 a.m., were
assaulted by a huge column, consisting of no less
than a full division plus a regiment of three
battalions. The North Lancashire men were
simply overwhelmed in their shallow trenches by
sheer weight of numbers, whilst the Wilts, who were
caught out in the open, were literally almost
annihilated. The ponderous mass of the enemy
swept over the crest, turned the right flank of our
line below, swarmed round the Hampshires and
General Baldwin’s column, which had to give
ground, and were only extricated with great
difficulty and very heavy losses.
Now it was our turn. The warships and the
New Zealand and Australian Artillery, the Indian
Mountain Artillery Brigade, and the 69th Brigade
Royal Field Artillery were getting the chance of a
lifetime. As the successive solid lines of Turks
topped the crest of the ridge gaps were torn
through their formation, and an iron rain fell on
them as they tried to re-form in the gullies.


Not here only did the Turks pay dearly for their
recapture of the vital crest. Enemy reinforce-
ments continued to move up Battleship Hill under
heavy and accurate fire from our guns, and still
they kept topping the ridges and pouring down
the western slopes of the Chunuk Bair as if deter-
mined to regain everything they had lost. But
once they were over the crest they became exposed
not only to the full blast of the guns, naval and
military, but also to a battery of 10 machine-guns
belonging to the New Zealand Infantry Brigade,
which played upon their serried ranks at close
range until the barrels were red hot. Enormous
losses were inflicted, especially by these 10 machine-
guns ; and, of the swarms which had once fairly
crossed the crest line, only the merest handful ever
straggled back to their own side of Chunuk Bair.
At this same time strong forces of the enemy
(forces which I had reckoned would have been
held back to meet our advance from Suvla Bay)
were hurled against the Farm and the spurs to the
north-east, where there arose a conflict so deadly
that it may be considered as the climax of the
four days’ fighting for the ridge. Portions of our
line w r ere pierced, and the troops driven clean down
the hill. At the foot of the hill the men were
rallied by Staff Captain Street, who was there
supervising the transport of food and water.
Without a word, unhesitating, they followed him
back to the Farm, where they plunged again into
the midst of that series of struggles in which
generals fought in the ranks and men dropped
their scientific weapons and caught one another by
the throat. So desperate a battle cannot be
described. The Turks came on again and again,
fighting magnificently, calling upon the name of
God. Our men stood to it, and maintained, by
many a deed of daring, the old traditions of their
race. There was no flinching. They died in the
ranks where they stood. Here Generals Cayley,
Baldwin and Cooper, and all their gallant men
achieved great glory. On this bloody field fell
Brigadier-General Baldwin, who earned his first
laurels on Caesar’s Camp at Ladysmith. There,
too, fell Brigadier-General Cooper, badly w r ounded ;
and there, too, fell Lieutenant-Colonel M. H.
Nunn, commanding the 9th Worcestershire Regi-
ment ; Lieutenant-Colonel H. 6. Levinge, com-
manding the 6th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment;
and Lieutenant-Colonel J. Carden, commanding
the sth Wiltshire Regiment,
Towards this supreme struggle the absolute last
two battalions from the General Reserve w r ere now
hurried, but by 10 a.m. the effort of the enemy was
spent. Soon their shattered remnants began to
trickle back, leaving a track of corpses behind
them, and by night, except prisoners or wounded,
no live Turk w r as left upon our side of the slope.
That same day, 10th August, two attacks, one
in the morning and the other in the afternoon,
were delivered on our positions along the Asmak
Here and Damakjelik Bair. Both were repulsed
with heavy loss by the 4th Australian Brigade
and the 4th South Wales Borderers, the men of
the New Army showing all the steadiness of
veterans. Sad to say, the Borderers lost their
intrepid leader, Lieutenant-Colonel Gillespie, in
the course of this affair.
By evening the total casualties of General
force had reached 12.000, and included
a very large proportion of officers. The 13th
Division of the New Army, under Major-General
Shaw, had alone lost 6,000 out of a grand total
of 10,500. Baldwin was gone, and all his staff.
Ten commanding officers out of 13 had disappeared
from the fighting effectives. The Warwicks and
the Worcesters had lost literally every single officer.
The old German notion that no unit would stand
a loss of more than 25 per cent, had been com-
pletely falsified. The 13th Division and the 29th
Brigade of the 10th (Irish) Division had lost more
than twice that proportion, and, in spirit, were
game for as much more fighting as might be
required. But physically, though Birdwood’s
forces were prepared to hold all they had got, they
were now too exhausted to attack—at least until
they had rested and reorganised. So far they
had held on to all they had gained, excepting only
the footholds on the ridge between Chunuk Bair
and Hill Q, momentarily carried by the Gurkhas,
and the salient of Chunuk Bair itself, which they
had retained for 48 hours. Unfortunately, these
two pieces of ground, small and worthless as they
seemed, were worth, according to the ethics of
war, 10,000 lives, for by their loss or retention they
just marked the difference between an important
success and a signal victory.
At times I had thought of throwing my reserves
into this stubborn central battle, where probably
they would have turned the scale. But each time
the water troubles made me give up the idea, all
ranks at Anzac being reduced to one pint a day.
True thirst is a sensation unknown to the dwellers
in cool, well-watered England. But at Anzac,
when mules with w r ater “ pakhals ” arrived at the
front, the men would rush up to them in swarms,
just to lick the moisture that had exuded through
the canvas bags. It will be understood, then, that
until wells had been discovered under the freshly-
w T on hills, the reinforcing of Anzac by even so
much as a brigade was unthinkable.
The grand coup had not come off. The Narrows
were still out of sight and beyond field gun range.
But this was not the fault of Lieutenant-General
Birdwood or any of the officers and men under
his command. No mortal can command success ;
Lieutenant-General Birdwood had done all that
mortal man can do to deserve it. The way in
which he worked out his instructions into practical
arrangements and dispositions upon the terrain
reflect high credit upon his military capacity. I
also wish to bring to your Lordship’s notice the
valuable services of Major-General Godley, com-
manding the New Zealand and Australian Division.
He had under him at one time a force amounting to
two divisions, which he handled with conspicuous
ability. Major-General F. C. Shaw, commanding
13th Division, also rose superior to all the trials
and tests of these trying days. His calm and
sound judgment proved to be of the greatest value
throughout the arduous fighting I have recorded.
As for the troops, the joyous alacrity with which
they faced danger, wounds and death, as if they
were some new form of exciting recreation, has
astonished me—old campaigner as I am. I will
say no more, leaving Major-General Godley to
speak for what happened under his -eyes “ I
cannot close my report,” he says, “without
placing on record my unbounded admiration of the
work performed, and the gallantry displayed by


the troops and their leaders during the severe
fighting involved in these operations. Though the
Australian, New Zealand, and Indian units had
been confined to trench duty in a cramped space
for some four months, and though the troops of
the New Armies had only just landed from a sea
voyage, and many of them had not been previously
under fire, I do not believe that any troops in the
world could have accomplished more. All ranks
vied with one another in the performance of
gallant deeds, and more than worthily upheld the
best traditions of the British Army.”
Although the Sari Bair ridge was the key to the
whole of my tactical conception, and although the
temptation to view this vital Anzac battle at
closer quarters was very hard to resist, there was
nothing in its course or conduct to call for my
personal intervention.
The conduct of the operations which were to be
based upon Suvla Bay was entrusted to Lieutenant-
General the Hon. Sir F, Stopford. At his disposal
was placed the 9th Army Corps, less the 13th
Division and the 29th Brigade of the 10th Division.
We believed that the Turks were still unsus-
picious about Suvla and that their only defences
near that part of the coast were a girdle of trenches
round Lala Baba and a few unconnected lengths
of fire trench on Hill 10 and on the hills forming
the northern arm of the bay. There was no wire.
Inland a small work had been constructed on
Yilghin Burnu (locally known as Chocolate Hills),
and a few guns had been placed upon these hills,
as well as upon Ismail Oglu Tepe, whence they could
be brought into action either against the beaches
of Suvla Bay or against any attempt from Anzac
to break out northwards and attack Chunuk Bair.
The numbers of the enemy allotted for the defence
of the Suvla and Ejelmer areas (including the
troops in the Anafarta villages, but exclusive of the
general reserves in rear of the Sari Bair) were sup-
posed to be under 4,000. Until the Turkish ver-
sion of these events is in our hands it is not possible
to be certain of the accuracy of this estimate.
All that can be said at present is that my Intelli-
gence Department w r ere wonderfully exact in their
figures as a rule and that, in the case in question,
events, the reports made by prisoners, etc., etc.,
seem to show that the forecast was correct.
Arrangements for the landing of the 9th Corps
at Suvla were worked out in minute detail by my
General Headquarters Staff in collaboration with
the staff of Vice-Admiral de Robeck, and every
precaution was taken to ensure that the destina-
tion of the troops was kept secret up to the last
moment.
Whilst concentrated at the island of Imbros
the spirit and physique of the 11th Division had
impressed me very favourably. They were to
lead off the landing. From Imbros they were to
be ferried over to the Peninsula in destroyers and
motor-lighters. Disembarkation was to begin at
10.30 p.m., half an hour later than the attack
on the Turkish outposts on the northern flank at
Anzac, and I was sanguine enough to hope that
the elaborate plan we had worked out would enable
three complete brigades of infantry to be set
ashore by daylight. Originally it had been
intended that all three brigades should land on the
bnach immediately south of Nibrunesi Point, but in
deference to the representations of the Corps
(C 49—242)
Commander I agreed, unfortunately, as it turned
out, to one brigade being landed inside the bay.
The first task of the 9th Corps was to seize and
hold the Chocolate and Ismail Oglu Hills, together
with the high ground on the north and esst of
Suvla Bay. If the landing went off smoothly,
and if my information regarding the strength of
the enemy were correct, I hoped that these hills,
with their guns, might be well in our possession
before daybreak. In that case I hoped, further,
that the first division which landed would be
strong enough to picket and hold all the important
heights within artillery range 'of the bay, when
General Stopford would be able to direct the
remainder of his force, as it became available,
through the Anafartas to the east of the Sari Bair,
where it should soon smash the mainspring of the
Turkish opposition to Anzacs.
On the 22nd July I issued secret instructions and
tables showing the number of craft available for
the 9th Corps commander, their capacity, and the
points whereat the troops could be disembarked ;
also what numbers of troops, animals, vehicles,
and stores could be landed simultaneously. The
allocation of troops to the ships and boats was
left to General Stopford’s own discretion, subject
only to naval exigencies, otherwise the order of
the disembarkation might not have tallied with
the order of his operations.
The factors governing the hour of landing were :
First, that no craft could quit Kephalos Bay
before dark (about 9 p.m.); secondly, that nothing
could be done which would attract the attention of
the enemy before 10 p.m., the moment when the
outposts on the left* flank of the Anzac position
were to be rushed.
General Stopford next framed his orders on these
secret instructions, and after they had received
my complete approval he proceeded to expound
them to the general officer commanding 11th
Division and general officer commanding 10th
Division, who came over from Mudros for the
purpose.
As in the original landing, the luck of calm
weather favoured us, and all the embarkation
arrangements of Kephalos were carried out by
the Royal Navy in their usual ship-shape style.
The 11th Division was to be landed at three places,
designated and shown on the map as A, B and C.
Destroyers were told off for these landing-places,
each destroyer towing a steam lighter and picket-
boat. Every light was to be dowsed, and as they
neared the shore the destroyers were to slip their
motor-lighters and picket-boats, which would
then take the beach and discharge direct on to it.
The motor-lighters were new acquisitions since
the first landing, and were to prove the greatest
possible assistance. They moved five knots an
hour under their own engines, and carried 500
men, as well as stores of ammunition and water.
After landing their passengers they were to return
to the destroyers, and in one trip would empty
them also. Ketches wuth service launches and
transport lifeboats were to follow the destroyers
and anchor at the entrance of the bay, so that in
case of accidents or delays to any one of the motor-
lighters a picket-boat could be sent at once to a
ketch to pick up a tow of lifeboats and take thfl
place of a disabled motor-lighter. These ketches


and tows were afterwards to be used for evacuating
the wounded.
H.M.S. “ ” and H.M.S. “ Theseus,”
each carrying a thousand men, were also to sail
from Imbros after the destroyers, and, lying off
the beach, were to discharge their troops directly
the motor-lighters—three to each ship—were ready
to convey the men to the shore, i.e., after they had
finished disembarking their own loads and those
of the destroyers. When this was done — i.e., after
three trips—the motor lighters would be free to
go on transporting guns, stores, mules, etc.
The following crafts brought up the rear :
(1) Two ketches, each towing four horse-boats
carrying four 18-pounder guns and 24 horses.
(2) (hie ketch, towing horse-boats with 40
horses.
(3) The sloop “ Aster,” with 500 men, towing a
lighter containing eight mountain guns.
(4) Three ketches, towing horse-boats containing
eight 18-pounder guns and 76 horses.
Water-lighters, towed by a tank steamer, were
also timed to arrive at A beach at daylight. When
they had been emptied they were to return at
once to Kephalos to refill from the parent water-
ship.
A specially fitted-out steamer, the “ Prah,”
with stores (shown by our experience of 25th
April to be most necessary)— i.e., water-pumps,
hose, tanks, troughs, entrenching tools, and all
ordnance stores requisite for the prompt develop-
ment of wells or springs—was also sent to Suvla.
So much detail I have felt bound, for the sake of
clearness, to give in the body of my despatch. The
further detail, showing numbers landed, etc., etc.,
will be found in the appendix and tables attached.
When originally I conceived the idea of these
operations, one of the first points to be weighed
was that of the water supply in the Biyuk Anafarta
valley and the Suvla plain. Experience at Anzac
had shown quite clearly that the whole plan must
be given up unless a certain amount of water could
be counted upon, and, fortunately, the information
I received was reassuring. But, in case of accidents,
and to be on the safe side, so long ago as June I had
begun to take steps to counter the chance that we
might, from one cause or another, find difficulty in
developing the wells. Having got from the War
Office all that they could give me, I addressed
myself to India and Egypt, and eventually from
these three sources I managed to secure portable
receptacles for 100,000 gallons, including petrol
tins, milk cans, camel tanks, water bags and
pakhals.
Supplementing these were lighters and water-
ships, all under naval control. Indeed, by arrange-
ment with the Admiral, the responsibility of the
Army was confined to the emptying of the lighters
and the distribution of the water to the troops,
the Navy undertaking to bring the full lighters to
the shore to replace the empty ones, thus providing
a continuous supply.
Finally 3,700 mules, together with 1,750 water
carts, were provided for Anzac and Suvla—this
in addition to 950 mules already at Anzac. Repre-
sentatives of the Director of Supplies and Transport
at Suvla and Anzac were sent to allot the transport
which was to be used for carrying up whatever
was most needed by units ashore, whether water,
food or ammunition.
This statement, though necessarily brief, will,
I hope, suffice to throw some light upon the com-
plexity of the arrangements thought out before-
hand in order, so far as was humanly possible, to
combat the disorganisation, the hunger and the
thirst which lie in wait for troops landing on a
hostile beach.
On the evening of 6th August the 11th Division
sailed on its short journey from Imbros (Kephalos)
to Suvla Bay and, meeting with no mischance,
the landing took place, the brigades of the 11th
Division getting ashore practically simultaneously ;
the 32nd and 33rd Brigades at B and C beaches,
the 34th at A beach.
The surprise of the Turks was complete. At
B and C the beaches were found to be admirably
suited to their purpose, and there was no opposition.
The landing at A was more difficult, both because
of the shoal water and because there the Turkish
pickets and sentries —the normal guardians of
the coast —were on the alert and active. Some
of the lighters grounded a good way from the shore,
and men had to struggle towards the beach in as
much as 4 feet 6 inches of water. Ropes in
several instances were carried from the lighters
to the shore to help to sustain the heavily accoutred
infantry. To add to the difficulties of the 34th
Brigade the lighters came under flanking rifle fire
from the Turkish outposts at La la Baba and
Ghazi Baba. The enemy even, knowing every
inch of the ground, crept down in the very dark
night on to the beach itself, mingling with our
troops and getting between our firing line and its
supports. Fortunately the number of these enter-
prising foes was but few, and an end was soon put
to their activity on the actual beaches by the
sudden storming of Lala Baba from the south.
This attack was carried out by the 9th West
Yorkshire Regiment and the 6th Yorkshire Regi-
ment, both of the 32nd Brigade, which had landed at
B beach and marched up along the coast. The
assault succeeded at once and without much loss,
but both battalions deserve great credit for the
way it was delivered in the inky darkness of the
night.
The 32nd Brigade was now pushed on to the
support of the 34th Brigade, which was held up
by another outpost of the enemy on Hill 10 (117 R
and S), and it is feared that some of the losses
incurred here were due to misdirected fire. While this
fighting was still in progress the 11th Battalion,
Manchester Regiment, of the 34th Brigade, was
advancing northwards in very fine style, driving the
enemy opposed to them back along the ridge of the
Karakol Dagh towards the Kiretch Tepe Sirt.
Beyond doubt these Lancashire men earned much
distinction, fighting with great pluck and grit
against an enemy not very numerous perhaps, but
having an immense advantage in knowledge of the
ground. As they got level with Hill 10 it grew
light enough to see, and the enemy began to shell.
No one seems to have been present who could take
hold of the two brigades, the 32nJ and 34th,
and launch them in a concerted and cohesive
attack. Consequently there was confusion and
hesitation, increased by gorse fires lit by hostile
shell, but redeemed, I am proud to report, by the
conspicuously fine, soldierly conduct of several
individual battalions. The whole of the Turks
locally available were by now in the field, and they


were encouraged to counter-attack by the signs of
hesitation, but the 9th Lancashire Fusiliers and the
11th Manchester Regiment took them on with the
bayonet, and fairly drove them back in disorder
over the flaming Hill 10.
As the infantry were thus making good, the
two Highland Mountain batteries and one battery,
59th Brigade,’ Royal Field Artillery, were landed
at B beach. Day was now breaking, and with the
dawn sailed into the bay six battalions of the 10th
Division, under Brigadier-General Hill, from
Mitylene.
Here perhaps I may be allowed to express my
gratitude to the Royal Navy for their share in this
remarkable achievement, as well as a very natural
pride at staff arrangements, which resulted in the
infantry of a whole division and three batteries
being landed during a single night on a hostile
shore, whilst the arrival of the first troops of the
supporting division, from another base distant
120 miles, took place at the very psychological
moment when support was most needed, namely,
at break of dawn.
The intention of the Corps Commander was to
keep the 10th Division on the left, and with it to
push on as far forward as possible along the Kiretch
Tepe Sirt towards the heights above Ejelmer Bay.
He wished, therefore, to land these six battalions
of the 10th Division at A beach and, seeing
Brigadier-General Hill, he told him that as the left
of the 34th Brigade was being hard pressed he
should get into touch with General Officer Com-
manding 11th Division, and work in support of
his left until the arrival of his own Divisional
General. But the Naval authorities, so General
Stopford reports, were unwilling, for some reason
not specified, to land these troops at A beach, so
that they had to be sent in lighters to C beach,
whence they marched by Lala Baba to Hill 10,
under fire. Hence were caused loss, delay and
fatigue. Also the angle of direction from which
these fresh troops entered the fight was not nearly
bo effective.
The remainder of the 10th Division, three
battalions (from Mudros), and with them the
G.O.C. Lieutenant-General Sir B. Mahon, began
to arrive, and the Naval authorities having dis-
covered a suitable landing place near Ghazi Baba,
these battalions were landed there together with
one battalion of the 31st Brigade which had not
yet been sent round to C beach. By this means
it was hoped that both the brigades of the 10th
Division would be able to rendezvous about half
a mile to the north-west of Hill 10.
After the defeat of the enemy round and about
Hill 10, they retreated in an easterly direction
towards Sulajik and Kuckuk Anafarta Ova,
followed by the 34th and 32nd Brigades of the 11th
Division and by the 31st Brigade of the 10th Divi-
sion, which had entered into the fight, not, as the
Corps Commander had intended, on the left of. the
11th Division, but between Hill 10 and the ,Salt
Lake. I have been frustrated in my endeavours
to get some live human detail about the fighting
which followed, but I understand from the Corps
Commander that the brunt of it fell upon the 31st
Brigade of the 10th (Irish) Division, which con-
sisted of the 6th Royal Inniskilling Fusilers, the
6th Royal Irish Fusiliers, and the 6th Royal Dublin
(C 49—242)
Fusiliers, the last-named battalion being attached
to the 31st Brigade.
By the evening General Hammersley had seized
Yilghin Burnu (Chocolate Hills) after a fight for
which he specially commends the 6th Lincoln
Regiment and the 6th Border Regiment. At the
same time he reported that he was unable to make
any further progress towards the vital point,
Ismail Oglu Tepe. At nightfall his brigade and
the 31st Brigade were extended from about Hetman
Chair through Chocolate Hills, Sulajik, to near
Kuckuk Anafarta Ova.
This same day Sir B. Mahon delivered a spirited
attack along the Kiretch Tepe Sirt ridge, in
support of the 11th Battalion Manchester Regi-
ment, and, taking some small trenches en route,
secured and established himself on a position
extending from the sea about 135 p., through the
high ground about the p, of Kiretch Tepe Sirt, to
about 135 Z. 8. In front of him, on the ridge, he
reported the enemy to be strongly entrenched.
The 6th Royal Munster Fusiliers have been named
as winning special distinction here. The whole
advance was well carried out by the Irishmen over
difficult ground against an enemy —500 to 700
Gendarmerie —favoured by the lie of the land.
The weather was very hot, and the new troops
suffered much from want of water. Except at
the southernmost extremity of the Kiretch Tepe
Sirt ridge there was no water in that part of the
field, and although it existed in some abundance
throughout the area over which the 11th Division
was operating, the Corps Commander reports that
there was no time to develop its resources. Partly
this seems to have been owing to the enemy’s fire ;
partly to a want of that nous which stands by as
second nature to the old campaigner ; partly it
was inevitable. Anyway, for as long as such a
state of things lasted, the troops became dependent
on the lighters and upon the water brought to the
beaches in tins, pakhals, etc.
Undoubtedly the distribution of this water to
the advancing troops was a matter of great diffi-
culty, and one which required not only well-
worked-out schemes from Corps and Divisional
Staffs, but also energy and experience on the part of
those who had to put them into practice. As it
turned out, and judging merely by results, I regret
to say that the measures actually taken in regard
to the distribution proved to be inadequate, and
that suffering and disorganisation ensued. The
disembarkation of artillery horses was therefore
at once, and rightly, postponed by the Corps
Commander, in order that mules might be landed
to carry up water.
And now General Stopford, recollecting the vast
issues which hung upon his success in forestalling
the enemy, urged his Divisional commanders to
push on. Otherwise, as he saw, all the advantages
of the surprise landing must be nullified. But the
Divisional Commanders believed themselves, it
seems, to be unable to move. Their men, they
said, were exhausted by their efforts of the night
of the 6th-7th and by the action of the 7th. The
want of water had told on the new troops. Ihe
distribution from the beaches had not worked
smoothly. In some cases the hose had been pierced
by individuals wishing to fill their own bottles ; in
others lighters had grounded so far from the beach


that men sWam out to fill batches of water-bottles.
All this had added to the disorganisation inevitable
after a night landing, following by fights here and
there with an enemy scattered over a country to us
unknown. These pleas for delay were perfectly
well founded. But it seems to have been over-
looked that the half-defeated Turks in front of us
were equally exhausted and disorganised, and that
an advance was the simplest and swiftest method
of solving the water trouble and every other sort
of trouble. Be this as it may, the objections over-
bore the Corps Commander’s resolution. He had
now got. ashore three batteries (two of them
mountain batteries), and the great guns of the ships
were ready to speak at his request. But it was
lack of artillery support which finally decided him
to acquiesce in a policy of going slow which, by
the time it reached the troops, became translated
into a period of inaction. The Divisional Generals
were, in fact, informed that, “in view of the in-
adequate artillery support,” General Stopford did
not wish them to make frontal attacks on en-
trenched positions, but desired them, so far as was
possible, to try and turn any trenches which were
met with. Within the terms of this instruction lies
the root of our failure to make use of the priceless
daylight hours of the Bth of August.
Normally, it may be correct to say that in modern
warfare infantry cannot be expected to advance
without artillery preparation. But in a landing on
a hostile shore the order has to be inverted. The
infantry must advance and seize a suitable position
to cover the landing, and to provide artillery
positions for the main thrust. The very existence
of the force, its water supply, its facilities for
munitions and supplies, its power to reinforce,
must absolutely depend on the infantry being able
instantly to make good sufficient ground without
the aid of the artillery other than can be supplied
for the purpose b y floating batteries.
This is not a condition that should take the
commander of a covering force by surprise. It is
one already foreseen. Driving power was required,
and even a certain ruthlessness, to brush aside
pleas for a respite for tired troops. The one fatal
error was inertia. And inertia prevailed.
Late in the evening of the 7th the enemy had
withdrawn the few guns which had been in action
during the day. Beyond half a dozen shells dropped
from very long range into the bay in the early morn-
ing of the Bth, no enemy artillery fired that day
in the Suvla area. The guns had evidently been .
moved back, lest they should be captured w r hen
we pushed forward. As for the entrenched
positions, these in the ordinary acceptance of the
term, were non-existent. The General Staff.
Officer whom I had sent on to Suvla early in the
morning of the Bth reported by telegraph the
absence of hostile gun-fire, the small amount of
rifle fire, and the enemy’s apparent weakness. He
also drew attention to the inaction of our own
troops, and to the fact that golden opportunities
were being missed. Before this message arrived at
general headquarters I had made up my mind,
from the Corps Commander’s own reports, that all
was not well at Suvla. There was risk in cutting
myself adrift, even temporarily, from touch with
the operations at Anzac and Helles ; but I did
my best to provide against any sudden call by
leaving Major-General W. P. Braithwaite, my
Chief of the General Staff, in charge, with, instruc-
tions to keep me closely informed of events at the
other two fronts ; and, having done this, I took
ship and set out for Suvla.
On arrival at about 5 p.m. I boarded H.M.S.
“ Jonquil,” where I found corps headquarters,
and where General Stopford informed me that
the General Officer commanding 11th Division
was confident of success in an attack he was to make
at dawn next morning (the 9th). I felt no such
confidence. Beyond a small advance by a part
of the 11th Division between the Chocolate Hills
and Ismail Oglu Tepe, and some further progress
along the Kiretch Tepe Sirt ridge by the 10th
Division, the day of the Bth had been lost. The
commander of the 11th Division had, it seems,
ordered strong patrols to be pushed forward so
as to make good all the strong positions in advance
which could be occupied without serious fighting ;
but, as he afterwards reported, “little was done
in this respect.” Thus a priceless 12 hours had
already gone to help the chances of the Turkish
reinforcements which were, I knew, both from
naval and aerial sources, actually on the march for
Suvla. But when I urged that even now, at the
11th hour, the 11th Division should make a con-
certed attack upon the hills, I was met by a non
possumus. The objections of the morning were
no longer valid ; the men were now well rested,
watered and fed. But the divisional commanders
disliked the idea of an advance by night, and
General Stopford did not care, it seemed, to force
their hands.
So it came about that I was driven to see whether
I could not, myself, put concentration of effort
and purpose into the direction of the large number
of men ashore. The Corps Commander made no
objection. He declared himself to be as eager as
I could be to advance. The representations made
by the Divisional Commanders had seemed to
him insuperable. If I could see my way to get over
them no one would be more pleased than himself.
Accompanied by Commodore Roger Keyes and
Lieutenant-Colonel Aspinall, of the Headquarters
General Staff, I landed on the beach, where all
seemed quiet and peaceful, and saw the Commander
of the 11th Division, Major-General Hammersley.
I warned him the sands were running out fast,
and that by dawn the high ground to his front might
very likely be occupied in force by the enemy.
He saw the danger, but declared that it was a
physical impossibility, at so late an hour (6 p.m.),
to get out orders for a night attack, the troops
being very much scattered. There was no other
difficulty now, but this was insuperable; he
could not recast his orders or get them round to his
troops in time. But one brigade, the 32nd, was,
so General Hammersley admitted, more or less
concentrated and ready to move. The General
Staff Officer of the division, Colonel Neil Malcolm,
a soldier of experience, on whose opinion I set
much value, was consulted. He agreed that the
32nd Brigade was now in a position to act. I,
therefore, issued a direct order that, even if it were
only with this 32nd Brigade, the advance should
begin at the earliest possible moment, so that a
portion at least of the 11th Division should antici-
pate the Turkish reinforcements on the heights and
dig themselves in there upon some good tactical
point.


In taking upon myself the serious responsibility
of thus dealing with a detail of divisional tactics
I was careful to limit the scope of the interference.
Beyond directing that the one brigade which was
reported ready to move at once should try and
make good the heights before the enemy got on
to them I did nothing, and said not a word calcu-
lated to modify or in any way affect the attack
already planned for the morning. Out of the 13
battalions which were to have advanced against the
heights at dawn four were now to anticipate that
movement by trying to make good the key of the
enemy’s position at once and under cover of dark-
ness.
I have not been able to get a clear and coherent
account of the doings of the 32nd Brigade ; but
I have established the fact that it did not actually
commence its advance till 4 a.m. on the 9th of
August. The reason given is that the units of
the brigade were scattered. In General Stopford’s
despatch he says that, “ One company of the
Bth Welsh Pioneer Battalion succeeded in getting
to the top of the hill north of Anafarta Sagir, but
the rest of the battalion and the 32nd Brigade
were attacked from both flanks during their
advance, and fell back to a line north and south of
Sulajik. Very few of the leading company or
the Royal Engineers who accompanied it got
back, and that evening the strength of the battalion
was nine officers and 380 men.”
After their retirement from the hill north of
Anafarta Sagir (which commanded the whole
battlefield) this 32nd Brigade then still marked the
high-water level of the advance made at dawn
by the rest of the division. When their first
retirement was completed they had to fall back
further, so as to come into line with the most
forward of their comrades. The inference seems
clear. Just as the 32nd Brigade in their advance
met with markedly less opposition than the troops
who attacked an hour and a half later, so, had
they themselves started earlier, they would
probably have experienced less opposition. Further,
it seems reasonable to suppose that had the com-
plete division started at 4 a.m. on the 9th, or,
better still, at 10 p.m. on the Bth, they would have
made good the whole of the heights in front of
them.
That night I stayed at Suvla, preferring to drop
direct cable contact with my operations as a
•whole to losing touch with a corps battle which
seemed to be going wrong.
At dawn on the 9th I watched General Ham-
mersley’s attack, and very soon realised, by the
well-sustained artillery fire of the enemy (so silent
the previous day), and by the volume of the
musketry, that Turkish reinforcements had arrived;
that with the renewed confidence caused by our
long delay the guns had been brought back; and
that, after all, we were forestalled. This was a
bad moment. Our attack failed; our losses
were very serious. The enemy’s enfilading shrap-
nel fire seemed to be especially destructive and
demoralising, the shell bursting low and all along
our line. Time after time it threw back our attack
just as it seemed upon the point of making good.
The 33rd Brigade at first made most hopeful
progress in its attempt to seize Ismail Oglu Tepe.
Some of the leading troops gained the summit,
and were able to look over on to the other side.
(C 49—242)
Many Turks were killed here. Then the centre
seemed to give way. Whether this was the result
of the shrapnel fire or whether, as some say, an
order to retire came up from the rear, the result
was equally fatal to success. As the centre fell
back the steady, gallant behaviour of the 6th
Battalion, Border Regiment, and the 6th Battalion,
Lincoln Regiment, on either flank was especially
noteworthy. Scrub fires on Hill 70 did much to
harass and hamper our troops. When the 32nd
Brigade fell back before attacks from the slopes
of the hill north of Anafarta Sagir and from the
direction of Abrijka they took up the line north
and south through Sulajik. Here their left was
protected by two battalions of the 34th Brigade,
which came up to their support. The line was
later on prolonged by the remainder of the 34th
Brigade and two battalions of the 159 th Brigade
of the 53rd Division. Their right was connected
with the Chocolate Hills by the 33rd Brigade on
the position to which they had returned after their
repulse from the upper slopes of Ismail Oglu Tepe.
Some of the units which took part in this
engagement acquitted themselves very bravely.
I regret I have not had sufficient detail given
me to enable me to mention them by name.
The Divisional Commander speaks with appre-
ciation of one freshly-landed battalion of the
53rd Division, a Hereford battalion, presumably
the 1 /Ist Herefordshire, which attacked with
impetuosity and courage between Hetman Chair
and Kaslar Chair, about Azmak Dere, on the
extreme right of his line.
During the night of the Bth-9th and early
morning of the 9th the whole of the 53rd (Ter-
ritorial Division) (my general reserve) had arrived
and disembarked. I had ordered it up to Suvla,
hoping that by adding its strength to the 9th Corps
General Stopford might still be enabled to secure
the commanding ground round the bay. The
infantry brigades of the 53rd Division (no artillery
had accompanied it from England) reinforced the
11th Division.
On August 10th the Corps Commander decided
to make another attempt to take the Anafarta
ridge. The 11th Division were not sufficiently
rested to play a prominent part in the operation,
but the 53rd Division, under General Bindley, was
to attack, supported by General Hammersley.
On the 10th there were one brigade of Royal Field
Artillery ashore, with two mountain batteries,
and all the ships’ guns were available to co-operate.
But the attack failed, though the Corps Com-
mander considers that seasoned troops would have
succeeded, especially as the enemy were showing
signs of being shaken by our artillery fire. General
Stopford points out, however, and rightly so,
that the attack was delivered over very difficult
country, and that it was a high trial for troops
who had never been in action before, and with no
regulars to set a standard. Many of the battalions
fought with great gallantry, and were led forward
with much devotion by their officers. At a moment
when things were looking dangerous two battalions
of the 11th Division (not specified by the Corps
Commander) rendered very good service on the
left of the Territorials. At the end of the day our
troops occupied the line Hill east of Chocolate
Hill-Sulajik, whilst the enemy—who had been
ably commanded throughout —were still receiving


reinforcements, and, apart from their artillery,
were three times as strong as they had been on the
7th August.
Orders were i,4ued to the General Officer Com-
manding 9th Corps to take up and entrench a line
across the whole front from near the Azmak Dere,
through the knoll east of the Chocolate Hill, to
the ground held by the 10th Division about
Kiretch Tepe Sirt. General Stopford took advan-
tage of this opportunity to reorganise the divisions,
and, as there was a gap in the line between the left
of the 53rd Division and the right of the 10th
Division, gave orders for the preparation of certain
strong points to enable it to be held.
The 54th Division (infantry only) arrived, and
were disembarked on August 11th and placed in
reserve. On the following day—August 12th—
I proposed that the 54th Division should make a
night march in order to attack, at dawn on the
13th, the heights Kavak Tepe-Teke Tepe. The
Corps Commander having reason to believe that
the enclosed country about Kuchuk Anafarta Ova
and the north of it was held by the enemy, ordered
one brigade to move forward in advance, and
make good Kuchuk Anafarta Ova, so as to ensure
an unopposed march for the remainder of the
division as far as that place. So that afternoon
the 163 rd Brigade moved off, and, in spite of serious
opposition, established itself about the A of
Anafarta (118 m. 4 and 7), in difficult and enclosed
country. In the course of the fight, creditable in
all respects to the 163 rd Brigade, there happened
a very mysterious thing. The 1 /sth Norfolks were
on the right of the line, and found themselves for
a moment less strongly opposed than the rest of the
brigade. Against the yielding forces of the enemy,
Colonel Sir H. Beauchamp, a bold, self-confident
officer, eagerly pressed forward, followed by the
best part of the battalion. The fighting grew
hotter, and the ground became more wooded and
broken. At this stage many men were wounded
or grew exhausted with thirst. These found their
way back to camp during the night. But the
Colonel, with 16 officers and 250 men, still kept
pushing on, driving the enemy before him. Amongst
these ardent souls was part of a fine company
enlisted from the King’s Sandringham estates.
Nothing more was ever seen or heard of any of
them. They charged into the forest, and were lost
to sight or sound. Not one of them ever came back.
The night march and projected attack were
now abandoned, owing to the Corps Commander’s
representations as to the difficulties of keeping
the division supplied with food, water, &c., even
should they gain the height. General Birdwood
had hoped he would soon be able to make a fresh
attack on Sari Bair, provided that he might
reckon on a corresponding vigorous advance to be
made by the 11th and 54th Divisions on Ismail
Oglu Tepe. On August 13th I so informed General
Stopford. But when it came to business, General
Birdwood found he could not yet carry out his
new attack on Sari Bair—and, indeed, could only
help the 9th Corps with one brigade from Damak-
jelik Bair. I was obliged, therefore, to abandon
this project for the nonce, and directed General
Stopford to confine his attention of strengthening
his line across his present front. To straighten out
the left of this line General Stopford ordered the
General Officer Commanding the 10th Division
to advance on the following day (15th August),
so as to gain possession of the crest of the Kiretch
Tepe Sirt, the 54th Division to co-operate.
The 30th and 31st Infantry Brigades of the
10th Irish Division were to attack frontally along
the high ridge. The 162 nd Infantry Brigade of
the 54th Division were to support on the right.
The infantry were to be seconded by a machine-gun
detachment of the Royal Naval Air Service, by
the guns of H.M.S. “ Grampus ” and H.M.S.
“ Foxhound ” from the Gulf of Saros, by the
Argyll Mountain Battery, the 15th Heavy Battery,
and the 58th Field Battery. After several hours of
indecisive artillery and musketry fighting, the 6th
Royal Dublin Fusiliers charged forward with loud
cheers, and captured the whole ridge, together
with eighteen prisoners. The vigorous support
rendered by the naval guns was a feature of this
operation. Unfortunately, the point of the ridge
was hard to hold, and means for maintaining the
forward trenches had not been well thought out.
Casualties became very heavy, the sth Royal
Irish Fusiliers having only one officer left, and
the sth Inniskilling Fusiliers also losing heavily
in officers. Reinforcements were promised, but
before they could arrive the officer left in command
decided to evacuate the front trenches. The
strength of the Turks opposed to us was steadily
rising, and had now reached 20,000.
On the evening of the Isth August General
Stopford handed over command of the 9th Corps.
The units of the 10th and 11th Divisions had
shown their mettle when they leaped into the
water to get more quickly to close quarters, or
when they stormed Lala Baba in the darkness,
They had shown their resolution later when they
tackled the Chocolate Hills and drove the enemy
from Hill 10 right back out of rifle range from the
beaches.
Then had come hesitation. The advantage had
not been pressed. The senior Commanders at
Suvla had had no personal experience of the new
trench warfare ; of the Turkish methods ; of the
paramount importance of time. Strong, clear
leadership had not been promptly enough applied.
These were the reasons which induced me, with
your Lordship’s approval, to appoint Major-
General H. de B. De Lisle to take over temporary
command.
I had already seen General De Lisle on his
way from Cape Helles, and my formal instructions
—full copy in Appendix—were handed to him by
my Chief of the General Staff. Under these he was
to make it his most pressing business to get the
Corps into fighting trim again, so that as big a
proportion of it as possible might be told off for a
fresh attack upon Ismail Oglu Tepe and the
Anafarta spur. At his disposal were placed the
10th Division {less one brigade), the 11th Division,
the 53rd and 54th Divisions—a force imposing
enough on paper, but totalling, owing to casualties,
under 30,000 rifles.
The fighting strength of ourselves and of our
adversaries stood at this time at about the follow-
ing figures :—Lieutenant-General Birdwood com-
manded 25,000 rifles, at Anzac ; Lieutenant-General
Davies, in the southern zone, commanded 23,000
rifles; whilst the French corps alongside of
him consisted of some 17,000 rifles. The Turks
had been very active in the south, doubtless to


prevent us reinforcing Anzac or Suvla , but it is
doubtful if there were more than 35,000 of them
in that region. The bulk of the enemy were engaged
against Anzac or were in reserve in the valleys
east and north of Sari Bair. Their strength was
estimated at 75,000 rifles.
The Turks then, I reckoned, had 110,000 rifles A
to our 95,000, and held all the vantages of ground ; fi
they had plenty of ammunition, also drafts where-
with to refill ranks depleted in action within two t
or three days. My hopes that these drafts would i
be of poor quality had been every time disappointed, r
After weighing all these points, I sent your Lordship
a long cable. In it I urged that if the campaign J
was to be brought to a quick, victorious decision, a
large reinforcements must at once be sent out. •-
Autumn, I pointed out, was already upon us, and (
there was not a moment to be lost. At that time i
(16th August) my British divisions alone were 1
45,000 under establishment, and some of my fine <
battalions had been allowed to dwindle down to <
the strength of a company. Our most vital need
was the replenishment of these sadly depleted
ranks. When that was done I wanted 50,000 fresh :
rifles. From what I knew of the Turkish situation,
both in its local and general aspects, it seemed,
humanly speaking, a certainty that if this help
could be sent to me at once we could still clear a
passage for our fleet to Constantinople.
It may be judged, then, how deep was my
disappointment when I learnt that the essential
drafts, reinforcements and munitions could not
be sent to me, the reason given being one which
prevented me from any further insistence. So I
resolved to do my very best with the means at my
disposal, and forthwith reinforced the northern
wing with the 2nd Mounted Division (organised as
dismounted troops) from Egypt and the 29th
Division from the southern area. These move-
ments, and the work of getting the 9th Corps and
attached divisions into battle array took time,
and it was not until the 21st that I was ready to
renew the attack —an attack to be carried out
under very different conditions from those of the
7th and Bth August.
The enemy’s positions were now being rapidly
entrenched, and, as I could not depend on receiving
reinforcing drafts, I was faced with the danger
that if I could not drive the Turks back I might
lose so many men that I would find myself unable
to hold the very extensive new area of ground
which had been gained. I therefore decided to
mass every available man against Ismail Oglu
Tepe, a sine qua non to my plans whether as a
first step towards clearing the valley, or, if this
proved impossible, towards securing Suvla Bay
and Anzac Cove from shell fire.
The scheme for this attack was well planned
by General De Lisle. The 53rd and 54th Divisions
were to hold the enemy from Sulajik to Kiretch
Tepe Sirt while the 29th Division and 11th Division
stormed Ismail Oglu Tepe. Two brigades, 10th
Division, and the 2nd Mounted Division ’ were
retained in Corps Deserve, I arranged that General
Birdwood should co-operate by swinging forward
his left flank to Susuk Kuyu and Kaiajik Aghala.
Naturally, I should have liked still further to
extend the scope of my attack by ordering an
advance of the 9th Corps all along their line, but
many of the battalions had been too highly tried,
and I felt it was unwise to call upon them for
another effort so soon. The attack would only be
partial, but it was an essential attack if any real
progress was to be made. Also, once the Anafarta
ridge was in my hands the enemy would be unable
to reinforce through the gap between the two
Anafartas, and then, so I believed, my left would
find no difficulty in getting on.
My special objective was the hill which forms
the south-west comer of the Anafarta Sagir spur.
Ismail Oglu Tepe, as it is called, forms a strong
natural barrier against an inyader from the iEgean
who might wish to march direct against the
Anafartas. The hill rises 350 feet from the plain,,
with steep spurs jutting out to the west and
south-west, the whole of it covered with dense holly
oak scrub, so nearly impenetrable that it breaks
up an attack and forces troops to move in single
file along goat tracks between the bushes. The
comparatively small number of guns landed up to
date was a weakness, seeing we had now to storm
trenches, but the battleships were there to back us,
and as the bombardment was limited to a narrow
front of a mile it was hoped the troops would find
themselves able to carry the trenches and that the
impetus of the charge would carry them up to the
top of the crest. Our chief difficulty lay in the
open nature and shallow depth of the ground avail-
able for the concentration for attack. The only
cover we possessed was the hill Lala Baba,2oo yards
from the sea, and Yilghin Bumu, half a mile from
the Turkish front, the ground between these two
being an exposed plain. The 29th Division, which
was to make the attack on the left, occupied the
front trenches during the preceding night; the
11th Division, which was to attack on the right,
occupied the front trenches on the right of Yilghin
Bumu.
By some freak of nature Suvla Bay and plain
were wrapped in a strange mist on the afternoon
of the 21st of August. This was sheer bad luck,
as we had reckoned on the enemy s gunners being
blinded by the declining sun and upon the Turkish
trenches being shown up by the evening light with
singular clearness, as would have been the case on
ninety-nine days out of a hundred. Actually we
could hardly see the enemy lines this afternoon,
whereas out to the westward targets stood out in
strong relief against the luminous mist. I wished to
postpone the attack, but for various reasons this
was not possible, and so, from 2.30 p.m. to 3 p.m. a
heavy but none too accurate artillery bombard-
ment from land and sea was directed against the
Turkish first line of trenches, whilst twenty-four
machine guns in position on Yilghin Bumu did
what they could to lend a hand.
At 3 p.m. an advance was begun by the infantry
on the right of the line. The 34th Brigade of the
11th Division rushed the Turkish trenches between
Hetman Chair and Aire Kavak, practically without
loss, but the 32nd Brigade, directed agamst
Hetman Chair and the communication trench con-
necting that point with the south-west comer of
the Ismail Oglu Tepe spur, failed to make good its
point. The brigade had lost direction in the first
instance, moving north-east instead of east, and
though it attempted to carry the communication
trench from the north-east with great bravery and
great disregard of life, it never succeeded in
rectifying the original mistake. The 33rd Brigade,


sent up in haste with orders to capture this com-
munication trench at all costs, fell into precisely
the same error, part of it marching north-east and
part south-east# to Susuk Kuyu.
Meanwhile the 29th Division, whose attack had
been planned for 3.30 p.m., had attacked Scimitar
Hill (Hill 70) with groat dash. The 87th Brigade,
on the left, carried the trenches on Scimitar Hill,
but the 86th Brigade were checked and upset by a
raging forest fire across their front. Eventually
pressing on, they found themselves unable to ad-
■ vance up the valley between the two spurs owing
to the failure of the 32nd Brigade of the 11th Divi-
sion on their right. The brigade then tried to
attack eastwards, but were decimated by a cross
fire of shell and musketry from the north and south-
east. The leading troops were simply swept off
the top of the spur, and had to fall back to a ledge
south-west of Scimitar Hill, where they found a
little cover. Whilst this fighting was in progress
the 2nd Mounted Division moved out from Lala
Baba in open formation to take up a position of
readiness behind Yilghin Bumu. During this
march they came under a remarkably steady and
accurate artillery fire. The advance of these
English Yeomen was a sight calculated to send a
thrill of pride through anyone with a drop of
English blood running in their veins. Such superb
martial spectacles are rare in modem war. Ordi-
narily it should always be possible to bring up
reserves under some sort of cover from shrapnel
fire. Here, for a mile and a half, there was nothing
to conceal a mouse, much less some of the most
stalwart soldiers England has ever sent from her
shores. Despite the critical events in other parts
of the field, I could hardly take my glasses from
the Yeomen ; they moved like men marching on
parade. Here and there a shell would take toll of
a cluster ; there they lay ; there was no straggling ;
the others moved steadily on ; not a man was
there who hung back or hurried. But such an
ordeal must consume some of the battle-winning
fighting energy of those subjected to it, and it is
lucky indeed for the Turks that the terrain, as well
as the lack of trenches, forbade us from letting the
2nd Mounted Division loose at close quarters to the
enemy without undergoing this previous too heavy
baptism of fire. J ’
Now that the 11th Division had made their effort I
and failed, the 2nd South Midland Brigade (com- i
manded by Brigadier-General Earl of Longford) .
was sent forward from its position of readiness (
behind Yilghin Bumu, in the hope that they might ]
yet restore the fortunes of the day. This brigade, t
in action for the first time, encountered both bush 1
fires and musketry without flinching, but the ad- a
vance had in places to be almost by inches, and the e
actual close attack by the Yeomen did not take 5
place until night was fast falling. On the left they c
reached the foremost line of the 29th Division, and 8
on the right also they got as far as the leading b
battalions. But, as soon as it was dark, one li
regiment pushed up the valley between Scimitar g
Hill and Hill 100 (on Ismail Oglu Tepe), and t<
carried the trenches on a small knoll near the n
centre of this horseshoe. The regiment imagined tl
it had captured Hill 100, which would have been ir
a very notable success, enabling as it would the K
whole of our line to hang on and dig in. But when a
the report came in some doubt was felt as to its d<
accuracy, and a reconnaissance by staff officers
showed that the knoll was a good way from Hill 100,
and that a strongly-held semi-circle of Turkish
trenches (the enemy having been heavily rein-
forced) still denied us access to the top of the hill.
As the men were too done, and had lost too heavily
to admit of a second immediate assault, and as the
knoll actually held would have been swept by fire
at daybreak, there was nothing for it but to fall
back under cover of darkness to our original line.
The losses in this attack fell most heavily on the
29th Division. They were just under 5,000.
I am sorry not to be able to give more detail as
to the conduct of individuals and units during this
battle. But the 2nd South Midland Brigade has
been brought to my notice, and it consisted of the
Bucks Yeomanry, the Berks Yeomanry, and the
Dorset Yeomanry. The Yeomanry fought very
bravely, and on personal, as well as public, grounds
I specially deplore the loss of Brigadier-General
Bail of Longford, K.P., M.Y.0., and Brigadier-
General P. A. Kenna, V.C., D.5.0., A.D.C.
The same day, as pre-arranged with General
Bird wood, a force consisting of two battalions of
Jsew Zealand Mounted Rifles, two battalions of the
29th Irish Brigade, the 4th South Wales Borderers,
and 29th Indian Infantry Brigade, the whole under
the command of Major-General H. V. Cox, was
working independently to support the main
attack.
General Cox divided his force into three sections :
the left section to press forward and establish a
permanent hold on the existing lightly held out-
post line covering the junction of the 11th Division
with the Anzac front; the centre section to seize
the well at Kabak Kuyu, an asset of utmost value,
whether to ourselves or the enemy; the right
section to attack and capture the Turkish trenches
on the north-east side of the Kaiajik Aghala.
The advance of the left section was a success.
After a brisk engagement the well at Kabak Kuyu
was seized by the Indian Brigade, and, by 4.30,
the right column, under Brigadier-General Russell,’
under heavy fire, effected a lodgment on the
Kaiajik Aghala, where our men entrenched, and
began to dig communications across the Kaiajik
Dere towards the lines of the 4th Australian Brigade
south of the Dere. A pretty stiff bomb fight
ensued, in which General Russell’s troops held
their own through the night against superior force.
At 6 a.m. on the morning of the 22nd August,'
General Russell, reinforced by the newly arrived
18th Australian Battalion, attacked the summit of
the Kaiajik Aghala, The Australians carried
150 yards of the trenches, losing heavily in so doing,
and weie then forced to fall back again owing to
enfilade fire, though in the meantime the New
Zealand Mounted Rifles managed, in spite of
constant counter-attacks, to make good another
80 yards. A counter-attack in strength launched
by the Turks at 10 a.m. was repulsed ; the new
line from the Kaiajik Aghala to Susak Kuyu wais
gradually strengthened, and eventually joined on
to the right of the 9th Army Corps, thereby
materially improving the whole situation. During
this action the 4th Australian Brigade, which rc-
mained facing the Turks on the upper part of the
Kaiajik Aghala, was able to inflict several hundred
casualties on the enemy as they retreated or en-
deavoured to reinforce.


On the 21st of August we had carried the
Turkish entrenchments at several points, but had
been unable to hold what we had gained except
along the section where Major-General Cox had
made a good advance with Anzac and Indian
troops. To be repulsed is not to be defeated, as
long as the commander and his troops are game to
renew the attack. All were eager for such a re-
newal of the offensive ; but clearly we would have
for some time to possess our souls in patience,
seeing that reinforcements and munitions - were
short, that we were already outnumbered by the
enemy, and that a serious outbreak of sickness
showed how it had become imperative to give a
spell of rest to the men who had been fighting so
magnificently and so continuously. To calculate
on rest, it may be suggested, was to calculate
without the enemy. Such an idea has no true
bearing on the feelings of the garrison of the
Peninsula. That the Turks should attack had
always been the earnest prayer of all of us, just as
much after the 21st August as before it. And now
that we had to suspend progress for a bit, work
was put in hand upon the line from Suvla to Anzac,
a minor offensive.routine of sniping and bombing
was organised, and, in a word, trench warfare set
in on both sides.
On 24th August Lieutenant-General the Hon.
J. H. G. Byng, K.C.M.G., C.8., M.V.0., assumed
command of the 9th Army Corps.
The last days of the month were illumined by a
brilliant affair carried through by the troops under
General Birdwood’s command. Our object was to
complete the capture of Hill 60 north of the
Kaiajik Aghala, commenced by Major-General Cox
on the 21st August. Hill 60 overlooked the Biyuk
Anafarta Valley, and was therefore tactically a
very important feature.
The conduct of the attack was again entrusted
to Major-General Cox, at whose disposal were
placed detachments from the 4th and sth Australian
Brigades, the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade,
and the sth Connaught Rangers. The advance
was timed to take place at 5 p.m. on the 27th of
August, after the heaviest artillery bombardment
we could afford. This bombardment seemed
effective ; but the moment the assailants broke
cover they were greeted by an exceeding hot fire
from the enemy field guns, rifles and machine guns,
followed after a brief interval by a shower of heavy
shell, some of which, most happily, pitched into
the trenches of the Turks. On the right the
detachment from the 4th and sth Australian
Brigades could make no headway against a battery
of machine guns which confronted them. In the
centre the New Zealanders made a most deter-
mined onslaught, and carried one side of the top-
most knoll. Hand-to-hand fighting continued
here till 9.30 p.m., when it was reported that nine-
tenths of the summit had been gained. On the
left the 250 men of the sth Connaught Rangers
excited the admiration of all beholders by .the
swiftness and cohesion of their charge. In five
minutes they had carried their objective, the
northern Turkish communications, when they at
once set to and began a lively bomb fight along
the trenches against strong parties which came
hurrying up from the enemy supports and
afterwards from their reserves. At midnight fresh
troops were to have strengthened our grip upon the
hill, but before that hour the Irishmen had been
out-bombed, and the 9th Australian Light Horae,
who had made a most plucky attempt to recapture
the lost communication trench, had been repulsed.
Luckily, the New Zealand Mounted Rifles refused
to recognise that they were worsted. Nothing
would shift them. All that night and all next day,
through bombing, bayonet charges, musketry,
shrapnel and heavy shell, they hung on to their
150 yards of trench. At 1 a.m. on August 29th
the 10th Light Horse made another attack on tho
lost communication trenches to the left, carried
them, and finally held them. This gave us com-
plete command of the underfeature, an outlook
over the Anafarta Sagir Valley, and safer lateral
communications between Anzac and Suvla Bay.
Our casualties in this hotly contested affair
amounted to 1,000. The Turks lost out of all
proportion more. Their line of retreat was com-
manded from our Kaiajik Dere trenches, whence
our observers were able to direct artillery fire
equally upon their fugitives and their reinforce-
ments. The same observers estimated the Turkish
casualties at no less than 5,000. Three Turkish
machine guns and 46 prisoners were taken, as
well as three trench mortars, 300 Turkish rifles,
60,000 rounds of ammunition, and 500 bombs.
Four hundred acres were added to the territories
of Anzac. Major-General Cox showed his usual
forethought and wisdom. Brigadier-General
Russell fought his men splendidly.
My narrative of battle incidents must end here.
From this date onwards up to the date of my
departure on October 17th the flow of munitions
and drafts dried up. Sickness, the legacy of a
desperately trying summer, took heavy toll of the
survivors of so many arduous conflicts. No longer
was there any question of operations on the grand
scale, but with such troops it was difficult to be
downhearted. All ranks were cheerful, all re-
mained confident that, so long as they stuck to
their guns, their country would stick to them, and
see them victoriously through the last and greatest
of the crusades.
On the 11th October your Lordship cabled
asking me for an estimate of the losses which
would be involved in an evacuation of the
Peninsula. On the 12th October I replied in
terms showing that such a step was to me un-
thinkable. On the 16th October I received a
cable recalling me to London for the reason, as
I was informed by your Lordship on my arrival,
that His Majesty’s Government desired a fresh,
unbiassed opinion, from a responsible Commander,
upon the question of early evacuation.
In bringing this dispatch to a close I wish to
refer gratefully to the services rendered by certain
formations, whose work has so far only been
recognised by a sprinkling of individual rewards.
Much might be written on the exploits of the
Royal Naval Air Service, but these bold flyers
are laconic, and their feats will mostly pass un-
recorded. Yet let me here thank them, with their
Commander, Colonel F. H. Sykes, of the Royal
Marines, for the nonchalance with which they
appear to affront danger and death, when and
where they can. So doing, they quicken the
hearts of their friends on land and sea —an asset
of greater military value even than their bombs or


aerial reconnaissances, admirable in all respects
as these were.
With them I also couple the Service de VAviation
of the Corps Eppeditionnaire £Or ient, who daily
wing their way in and out of the shrapnel under
the distinguished leadership of M. le Capitaine
Cesari.
The Armoured Car Division (Royal Naval Air
Service) have never failed to respond to any call
which might be made upon them. Their organisa-
tion was broken up ; their work had to be carried
out under strange conditions—from the bows of
the “ River Clyde,” as independent batteries at-
tached to infantry divisions, &c., &c.—and yet they
were always cheerful, always ready to lend a
hand in any sort of fighting that might give them
a chance of settling old scores with the enemy.
Next I come to the Royal Artillery. By their
constant vigilance, by their quick grasp of the key
to every emergency, by their thundering good
shooting, by hundreds of deeds of daring, they have
earned the unstinted admiration of all their com-
rade services. Where all fought so remarkably
the junior officers deserve a little niche of their
own in the Dardanelles record of fame. Their
audacity in reconnaissance, their insouciance under
the hottest of fires, stand as a fine example not
only to the Army, but to the nation at large.
A feature of every report, narrative or diary I
have read has been a tribute to the stretcher
bearers. All ranks, from Generals in command
to wounded men in hospital, are unanimous in
their praise. I have watched a party from the
moment when the telephone summoned them
from their dug-out to the time when they returned
with their wounded. To see them run light-
heartedly across fire-swept slopes is to be privileged
to witness a superb example of the hero in man.
No braver corps exists, and I believe the reason
to be that all thought of self is instinctively flung
aside when the saving of others is the motive.
The services rendered by Major-General (tem-
porary Lieutenant-General) E. A. Altham, C.8.,
C.M.G., Inspector-General of Communications,
and all the Departments and Services of the Lines
of Communication assured us a life-giving flow of
drafts, munitions and supplies. The work was “
carried out under unprecedented conditions, and
is deserving, I submit, of handsome recognition.
With General Altham were associated Brigadier-
General (temporary Major-General) C. R. R,
McGrigor, C.8., at first Commandant of the Base
at Alexandria and later Deputy Inspector-General
of Communications, and Colonel T. E. O’Leary,
Deputy Adjutant-General, 3rd Echelon. Both of
these officers carried out their difficult duties to
my entire satisfaction.
My Military Secretary, Lieutenant-Colonel S. H.
Pollen, has displayed first-class ability in the
conduct of his delicate and responsible duties.
Also I take the opportunity of my last dispatch
to mention two of my Aides-de-Camp—Major
F- L. Magkill-Crichton-Maitland, Gordon High-
landers, Lieutenant Hon. G. St. J. Brodrick,
Surrey Yeomanry.
I have many other names to bring to notice for
distinguished and gallant service during the
operations under review, and these will form the
subject of a separate communication.
And now, before affixing to this dispatch my
final signature as Commander-in-Chief of the
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, let me first
pay tribute to the everlasting memory of my dear
comrades who will return no more. Next, let me
thank each and all, Generals, Staff, Regimental
Leaders, and rank and file, for their wonderful
loyalty, patience, and self-sacrifice. Our progress
was constant, and if it was painfully slow—they
know the truth. So I bid them all farewell with
a special God-speed to the campaigners who have
served with me right through from the terrible
yet most glorious earlier days—the incomparable
29th Division; the young veterans of the Naval
Division; the ever-victorious Australians and
New Zealanders ; the stout East Lancs, and my
own brave fellow-countrymen of the Lowland
Division of Scotland.
I have the honour to be,
Your Lordship s most obedient servant,
LAN HAMILTON,
General, Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
APPENDICES TO DISPATCH OP GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON, DATED
1 Ith DECEMBER, 1915
Vice-Admiral, Commanding
Eastern Mediterranean Squadron,
llth July, 1915.
Sir, - I have the honour to forward a series of
tables drawn up to show in detail the men, animals,
vehicles, stores, &c., which it will be required to
land in connection with the forthcoming opera-
tions. 1 shall be grateful if you will let me know
as early as possible if you consider that any part
of the programme indicated presents especially
serious difficulties or is likely to require modifica-
tion.
In informing me of the results of your con-
sideration, I shall be obliged if you will let me
know what craft you intend to use in carrying
out the disembarkations referred to in tables
B, C, D and E, so that detailed arrangements
with regard to embarkation and to the allocation
of troops, &c., to boats may be prepared.
2. Immediately after the disembarkation of the
details referred to in the attached tables it will be
necessary, if the operations are successful, to land
5,000 to 7,000 horses in order to render the force
sufficiently mobile to carry the operations to a
conclusion. Details as to disembarkation of these


Unit From To Per ' Vehicles. Animals. Stores. Remarks.
‘ sonnel.
69th Howitzer Mudros ... Anzac 312 16 guns, 16 Nil
Bde. R.F.A. Cove wagons, 4
water carts
1 /3rd City of Helles ... Anzac 78 4 guns, 4 Nil
Glasgow 5" Cove wagons, 1
Howr. Battery water cart
10th Heavy Bat- On board Anzac 11 4 guns, 4 Nil
tery R.G.A. ship at Cove wagons, 1
Mudros water cart,
2 G.S.
wagons
One F.A. Bde. On board Anzac 33 16 guns, 32 Nil
(11th Division, ship at Cove wagons,
“ A ” Bde.) Mudros telegraph
cart,4water move.
carts
Reinforcements Alexandria Anzac 7,0C0 Nil Nil
for Units of Cove to
Mulftorpa 0 ' ...Helles ... Atzac Nil 200 By August 1st.
Ammunition Mudros ... Anzac 60 Nil Nil
Park C ° Ve (225 tons), 760,000
rounds Mk. VI (30
tons)
Gun Ammunition (6)
10 pr. 2,700 (19
tons), 18 pr. 5,500
(70 tons), 4 • 5" How.
1,600 (45 tons), 5"
How. 10,000 (330
tons), 6" How 1,200
(70 tons), 60 pr.
1,000 (30 tons)
horses will be forwarded to you later. In the transport. It will not be required to land any of
meantime the horses will be collected at Alexandria, the above until after August 7th, and details as
and should subsequently be brought up to Mudros to numbers, order of disembarkation, &c., will be
or Imbros, to begin arriving on August 6th. forwarded to you later.
It will also be necessary to land the remaining j have the honour to be, Sir,
portions of the units referred to in the tables Your obedient Servant,
(first line transport, &c.), and, further, the remain- (Signed) lAN HAMILTON,
ing units of the formations to which they belong. v b in
Z this latter category will be included throe General Commanding
batteries of heavy artillery with mechanical Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
TABLE A.
Table showing units and details which it is required to land gradually at Anzac Cove before t
morning of the 3rd August. It will be necessary to carry out these disembarkations by night, an
movements can begin as soon as it is convenient to the Naval Transport authorities.
69th Howitzer
Bde. R.F.A.
I.G.C. has already
been instructed to
arrange for this
move.
I.G.C. has already
been instructed to
arrange for this
(o) If possible, an additional 3,000,600 S.A.A. should be landed, so that half the reserve for the whole Northern
Force may be ashore before operations begin (see Table “ C ” Remarks).
(6) If possible, the following additional gun ammunition should also be landed, so that the full reserve for the
whole Northern Force may be ashore before operations begin :
]opr . ... 3,000 rounds ■)
] B p r . - ... 10,000 „ VSee Table “0 ” Remarks.
6" Howitzer * ••• 1,000 „ j
18 pr '
6" Howitzer >


Umt - From Date, | Personnel. Vehicles. Remarks.
i ' " —
Mudros ... 4,650 Nil Machine guns and other equipment
, August 3rd/4th, carried by hand.
Mudros ... Night, 100 Nil
August 3rd/4th
Mudros... 5,425 Nil Machine guns and other equipment
August 4th/5th carried by hand,
Mudros ... Night, 125 Nil
August 4th/5th
Mudros ... 3,100 Nil Machine guns and other equipment
T August 5th/6th carried by hand.
Imbros ... Night, 2,000 Nil * Ditto.
August 5th/6th
Mudros ... Night, 255 Nil
August 5th/6th
Mudros... 525 Nil Machine guns and other equipment
August 5th ,6th carried by hand. All tools carried
by hand.
300 Nil
62 Nil
350 :j2
) (c) ... 550 251
TABLE B.
o A /S bl ! sLo ™g units and details which it is required to land at Anzac Cove on the nights of August
3rd/4th, August,4th/sth and August sth/6th. b
6 Battalions (o), 13th
Division
Machine guns and other equipment
carried by hand.
Bearer Sub - Division,
personnel Anzac
7 Battalions (a), 13th
Division
Machine guns and other equipment
carried by hand.
Bearer Sub - Division,
1 Field Ambulance,
13 th Division
4 Battalions, 10th Divi
sion
29th Indian Brigade
and Field Ambulance
Bearer Sub-Divisions,
2 Field Ambulance,
13th Division
3 Field Companies
R.E. (a), 13th Divi-
sion
(a) These units to move from Helles to Mudros as follows
1 Brigade 1 Night, 1 Brigade i Night, 1 Brigade x--
1 Field Company/28th/29th July. 1 Field Company } 29th/30th July. 1 Field Company July.
TABLE C.
. UmtS and details which it is required to land at New Beach during the night of
August 6th/7th, beginning one hour after dark (9.30 p.m.). All troops will come from Imbros, but
horses will come direct except where otherwise stated.
Unit.
Personnel. Horses.
Vehicles.
Remarks.
1 Inf. Bde. and Sig. Sec. (a)
3,050
Personnel only to be disembarked
in the order shown. Animals of
Mountain Batteries as soon as
there is sufficient light, followed
by horses of one 18-pr. Battery
(82) and of H.Q. F.A. Brigade (10).
Animals of remaining units to
follow in the order shown. Sup-
plies and forage for 7 days for
these troops and animals to be
dumped on the beach as soon as
possible, will amount to about
250 tons. S.A.A. 4,000,000 will
also have to be landed besides that
carried by the troops, say, 150
tons.
1 Bearer Sub-Div.
1 Inf. Bde. and Sig. Sec. and
1 W/T Station
3,065
1 Bearer Sub-Div.
Field Co. R.E.
4 tool carts
2 Mountain Batts. (6)
Div. H.Q. and Sig. Co.
2 cable wagons, 1 water
cart, 2 Jimbd. R.E.
wagons
1 Inf. Bde. and Pioneer Bn.
and Sig. Sec. and 1 W/T
Station
3,840
Artillery reserve ammunition will
also be required as follows :
To come by trawler from Mudros
10 pr. 3,000 rds. (20 tons)
18 „ 10,000 „ (130 „ )
60 „ 1,000 „ (30 „ )
(See notes to Table A.) If reserve
S.A.A. and gun ammunition can
be put ashore at Anzac Cove
before operations begin this will
also be done. But the above-
7 Bearer Sub-Diva.
2 Platoons Div. Cycl. Co
2 Field Cos. R.E.
62 bicycles
8 tool carts
1 F.A. Bde. (“L*'Bde.)'(c)
16 guns, 44 wagons, 1
telephone wagon, 5
water carts
mentioned reserves must also be
landed at New Beach in case the
congestion on the road from
Anzac makes its forwarding a
matter of great difficulty.
(а) Helles to Imbros, night July 31st/August Ist,
(б) Helles to Imbros, night August lst/2nd.
Animals in remarks columns (82 and
10) come from Imbros, remainder from Mudros in horse-ships.


143
TABLE C — continued.
* ’
Unit,
Personnel.
Horses.
V chicles.
Remarks.
Ammn. Park Personnel (11 Div.)
65
Nil
Nil
.
9 Tent Sub-Divs,
350
84 horses
30 ambulance wagons,
•
or
144 mules
9 water carts, 3 Mal-
tese carts
.. ■ ■: :
4 Casualty Clearing Stations ...
360
Nil
Nil
I
Bde. Ammn. Col.
60
62
8 ammunition wagons,
1 water cart, 4 S.A.A.
wagons
-
2 Bus. for Beach Parties
1,000
Nil
Nil
Mule Corps
150
300
150 mule carts
‘
Wireless Sec.
18
16
2 two-horse vehicles
TABLE D.
•
Table showing: units and details which it is required to land at
Anzac Cove beginning at dawn
August 7th. Order of landing as shown. All these troops will come from Mudros.
Animals. Vehicles- | Remarks.
the men.
Horses. Vehicles.
Remarks.
Unit.
Personnel.
Medical personnel, tent sub-divisions A.
and N.Z.A.C. Field Ambulance
Bearer Sub-Divisions of 1 Field Ambulance,
10th Division
One 18-pr. Battery and H.Q. F.A. Bde.
(“A” Bde.)
10th Heavy Battery R.G.A.
Three 18-pr. Batteries (“A” Brigade)
Mules of Mule Corps
All spare stretchers to be carried by
hand.
Guns and personnel already ashore.
(See Tables A and B.)
* Sufficient personnel to look after
mules.
TABLE E.
Table showing units to be ready to land immediately after those shown in Tables A, B, C and D.
Units will probably be required in the order shown either at New Beach or Anzac Cove as circumstances
may dictate.
Unit.
From
Personnel.
2 limbered R.E. wagons,
1 water cart, 2 cable
wagons
Divl. H.Q. 10th Divn.
Mudros ..
S.A.A. 2,600,000 rounds
besides that carried on
Mudros ..
2,325
6 water carts
3 Battalions 10th Divn.
12 water carts.
6 Battalions 10th Divn
Port lero
4,650
12 tool carts, 3 water
carts
H.Q. Divl. R.E.
Mudros ..
3 Field Cos. R.E. 10th Division
Bearer Sub-Divisions of 2 Field
Ambulances, 10th Divn.
15th Heavy Battery R.G.A. ..
Mudros .
On board
ship
4 guns, 4 wagons, 1
water cart, 2 G.S.
wagons
Mudros
Mudros .
15 ambulance wagons,
12 carts
Tent Sub-Divisions of 10th Divn
54 horses
or
84 mules
Mudros .
150 carts.
Mule Corps
*
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
70
02
Nil
Nil
110
120
125
900


10 pr. ..
5,700 rounds
18 pr, (probably 15 por cent.
H.E.)
15,.500 „
4.5" Howitzer probably half
H.E
1,600 „
5" Howitzer majority H.E. ..
10,000
6" „ majority H.E. ..
1,200 „
60 pr. probably two-thirds
H.E
1,000 „
General Officer Commanding
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps.
With reference to your G. 288 of 15th July,
the Navy is being asked to provide transport for
the following ammunition to be landed at Anzac
by the 3rd August:—
For A. and N.Z.A.C. —Sufficient S.A.A. to bring
the amount on shore up to 500 rounds per rifle
and 27,500 per machine-gun.
For other Troops.— 3oo rounds per rifle and 24,000
rounds per machine-gun (in addition to what the
troops will carry on landing).
These will come to 10,000,000 rounds in all, and
arrangements are being made to begin landing this
ammunition as soon as possible.
2, The following artillery ammunition will also
have to be gradually landed and stored, and should
all be ashore, if possible, by August 3rd :
All of this ammunition is not yet arrived, and
the proportion of H.E. shell is not yet ascertainable
from England. The arrangements suggested in
your paragraph 2 (iii.) of your letter are noted, and
yrill be followed as far as possible.
3, With regard to the marking of ammunition-
boxes, the necessary arrangements are being pre-
pared. \ou will be informed of the arrangements
and of the system of marking in due course.
Consignments of Mark VI. and Mark VII. will be
sent separately as you suggest.
4. The above figures do not include the periodical
replenishment referred to in para. 2 (iv.) of your
letter. Despatch of consignments on this account
and consignments for the reserve will be notified
to you separately.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General, C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
Enclosed a copy of tables forwarded to Vice-
Admiral showing troops, animals, stores, &c., which
the Navy is being asked to land at Anzac.
22 nd July, 1915.
General Officer Commanding,
9th Corps.
The General Commanding wishes me to send
you the following outline of his plans for the next
general attack, for the exclusive information of
yourself, your divisional Generals, and such Officers
of your Corps Headquarters and Divisional Head-
quarters as you may consider it necessary to take
into your confidence. lam to add that it is Sir
lan’s wish that as few officers as possible should be
made acquainted with it.
2. The general plan is, while holding as many of
the enemy as possible in the southern theatre, to
throw the weight of our attack on the Turkish
forces now opposite the Australian and New Zealand
Army Corps. It is hoped, by means of an attack
on the front and right flank of these forces, to deal
them a crushing blow, and to drive the remnants
south towards Kilid Bahr. It will then be the
object of the General Commanding to seize a posi-
tion across the peninsula from Kaba Tepe to Maidos
with a protected line of supply from Suvla Bay.
3. The strength of the enemy north of Kilid
Bahr at the present time is about 30,000 men. Of
these some 12,000 are permanently maintained in
the trenches opposite the Anzac position, and the
majority of the remainder are held in reserve at
Boghali, Kojadere and Eski-Keui. It is believed
that there are about three battalions in the Ana-
farta villages, a battalion at Ismail Oglu Tepe (New
map 1/20,000), a battalion near Yilghin Bumu, and
small parties of outposts at Lala Baba (Sq. 104.L.)
and Ghazi Baba (Sq. 106. N.). The hills due east
of Suvla Bay towards Aji Liman are believed to be
held only by a few Gendarmerie, but information
on this point is at present not precise. The hills
near Yilghin Burnu and Ismail Oglu Tepe are
known to contain one 4.7" gun, one 9.2" gun, and
three field guns, protected by wire entanglements
and infantry trenches, but it is believed that the
main defences are against attack from the south or
west, and that there is no wire on the northern
slopes of the hills ; also that the guns can only be
fired in a southerly direction.
4. The success of the plan outlined in para-
graph 2 will depend on two main factors :
(а) The capture of Hill 305 (Sq. 93. W.).
(б) The capture and retention of Suvla Bay as
a base of operations for the northern
army.
5. The operations from within the present
Anzac position against the enemy on Hill 305 will
be carried out by the Australian and New Zealand
Corps, temporarily reinforced by the following units
of the 9th Army Corps :
13th Division (less 66th, 67th and 68th
Brigades, R.F.A.).
29th Infantry Brigade (10th Division).
29th Indian Brigade.
69th Howitzer Brigade, R.F.A.
6. The landing near Suvla will be entrusted to
you, and you will have at your disposal:—
11th Division,
10th Division (less 29th Brigade).
Highland Mountain Artillery Brigade.
lst/4th Lowland Howitzer Brigade.
The disembarkation of your command, which
may be expected to be opposed, though not in
great strength, will be after dark at a point imme-
diately south of Lala Baba. The first troops to
disembark will be the 11th Division, which will
have been concentrated at Imbros previously to the
attack, and will be brought across under cover of
darkness in destroyers and motor-lighters. It is
expected that approximately 4,000 men will be
disembarked simultaneously, and that three
infantry brigades and the mountain artillery
brigade will be ashore before daylight.
Your first objectives will be the high ground at
Lala Baba and Ghazi Baba, and the hills near
Yilghin Burnu and Ismail Oglu Tepe. It will also
be necessary to send a small force to secure a foot-
ing on the hills due east of Suvla Bay. It is of


TABLE.
Animals.
... ... 28
108
8
506
45
48
Nil
144
'I
*
first importance that Yilghin Bumu and Ismail
Oglu Tepe should be captured by a coup-de-main
before daylight in order to prevent the guns which
they contain being used against oifr troops on
Hill 305 and to safeguard our hold on Suvla Bay.
It is hoped that one division will be sufficient for
the attainment of these objectives.
Your subsequent moves will depend on circum-
stances which cannot at present be gauged, but it
is hoped that the remainder of your force will be
available on the morning of the 7th August to
advance on Biyuk Anafarta with the object of
moving up the eastern spurs of Hill 305, so as to
assist General Birdwood’s attack.
7. The operations from • within the present
Anzac position will begin during the day imme-
diately preceding your disembarkation (the rein-
forcements for General Birdwood’s force having
been dribbled ashore in detachments at Anzac
Cove on the three previous nights). The opera-
tions will begin with a determined attack on the
Turkish left centre, Lonesome Pine and Johnston’s
Jolly (see enlarged map of Anzac position), with
the object of attracting the enemy’s reserves to
this portion of the line. The Turks have for long
been apprehensive of our landing in the neighbour-
hood of Kaba Tepe, and it is hoped that an attack
in force in this quarter will confirm their appre-
hensions. At nightfall the Turkish outposts on the
extreme right of the enemy’s line will be rushed,
and a force of 20,000 men will advance in three or
more columns up the ravines running down from
Chunuk Bair. This advance, which will begin
about the same time as your first troops reach the
shore, will be so timed as to reach the summit of
the main ridge near Chunuk Bair about 2.30 a.m.
(soon after moon-rise).
Latest photographs show that the Turkish
trenches on this ridge do not extend further north
than Chunuk Bair, and it is unlikely that the
higher portions of the ridge are held in great
strength.
As soon as a lodgement has been effected on this
ridge a portion of the attacking force will be left
to consolidate the position gained and the re-
mainder will advance south-west against the
enemy’s trenches near Baby 700, which will be
attacked simultaneously by a special detachment
from within the Anzac position.
An advance by your force from the east will, as
already indicated in paragraph 6, be of great assist-
ance in the event of this attack being checked.
8. The landing of sufficient transport to secure
the mobility of your force will be a matter of con-
siderable difficulty. No animals or vehicles of any
kind will be able to land in the first instance, and
machine-guns, tools and necessary medical and
signalling equipment must be carried by hand.
All men will land with two iron rations (one day’s
meat ration only is advised); infantry will carry
200 rounds S.A.A. and machine-gun sections 3,500
rounds in belt boxes. Packs and greatcoats will
not be taken ashore. Before dawn it is hoped to
land enough horses to secure the mobility of the
mountain artillery brigade and one battery R.F.A.,
and it is hoped that within the first 24 hours the
disembarkation of all the personnel, horses and
vehicles enumerated in the attached table will be
complete.
One brigade R.F.A. 11th Division, 1 /4th Low-
land sth Howitzer Brigade (two batteries) and
the 10th Heavy Battery, will be landed at Anzac
before the operations commence, and their per-
sonnel and horses will disembark on the morning
following your disembarkation, and will then be
directed along the beach to join your command.
Water is plentiful throughout the Anafarta
Valley, but pending the disembarkation of water
carts a number of mules with special 8-gallon
water bags will be attached to the units of your
command.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General, C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
P.S.—This letter is never to be out of an officer’s
possession, and if, as is probable, you require to
send it to your Brig.-Gen. G.S., it must be sent to
Mudros in charge of an officer.
11th Division.
Divl. H.Q. and Signal Co.
3 Infantry Brigades
Pioneer Battalion
2 F.A. Brigades
1 Heavy Battery R.G.A.
3 Field Coys. R.E.
2 Platoons Divl. Cyclist Co.
3 Field Ambulances
10th Division.
Divl. H.Q. and Signal Co.l
1 \ Infantry Brigades
Pioneer Battalion r*
3 Field Cos. R.E.
3 Field Ambulances J
29th Indian Brigade and Indian Field Ambulance.
2 Mountain Batteries (80 mules).
2 Battalions (of 500 men each) for Beach parties.
Mule Corps with 300 mules and 150 carts.
3 Casualty Clearing Stations.
Vehicles.
1 cart, 2 cable wagons.
Nil.
NiL
32 guns, 88 wagons, 2 telegraph wagons,
10 carts.
4 guns, 4 wagons, 2 G.S. wagons, 1 cart.
12 tool carts.
62 bicycles.
30 ambulances, 12 carts.
Transport on approximately the same scale
as that for 11th Division.


Organisation Orders for Troops Landing at
Anzac.
1. Troops landing at Anzac are to land equipped
as follows;
F.S. equipment, including respirator ;
Pack and waterproof sheet;
No blanket.
Officers’ kit reduced to what they can carry.
No transport of any kind will be available to
move baggage or equipment.
Ammunition S.A.A. 200 rounds per rifle or
person. 3,500 rounds per machine-gun in belt
boxes.
No regimental reserve S.A.A.
Gun, limbers and wagons filled with fuzed
shell.
Water bottles—filled.
Rations—iron rations one day meat and
biscuit, tw'O days’ groceries.
Sufficient to provide breakfasts.
(Fuel will be issued on shore.)
Tools—infantry. Regimental reserve distri-
buted to individuals and carried on person ;
Brigade reserve entrenching tools distributed to
units, by them to individuals and carried on
person.
Engineers—tools for road making and en-
trenching work—carried on person.
Other arms—usual allotment.
Signal company cable and equipment usually
carried in carts to be transferred to barrows.
Ambulances—all available stretchers and
equipment of dressing stations-only. Tent sub-
divisions in readiness to rejoin early.
A.S.C.—Small allowance of distributing equip-
ment, to be brought by advance parties of
S. and T. personnel.
Establishments.
2. No horses, attendants or drivers are to land.
Brigade Sections of Signal Companies are to land
with the brigades they serve.
Tent sub-divisions of field ambulances are not to
land.
Equipment carried in technical vehicles is to bo
transferred to vehicles which can be hand-propelled
or else carried on person.
3. Troops should disembark into lighters, &c.,
in complete units, companies, platoons, and so on,
unless much space is sacrificed in so doing.
4. All troops should land wearing two white
6-inch armlets and a white patch on back of right
shoulder.
5. No lights or noise are to be permitted while
disembarking; troops will move into the lighters
or horse-boats as quickly as possible.
6. On disembarking troops will be met by staff
officers and guides, and will be marched off direct
to the ground allotted to them—in no case more
than 1,200 yards from the beach. All kit brought
must be removed by the troops, and must be taken
out of the lighters at the same time as the troops
leave.
Special parties to assist with the machine-gun
and other loads are to be detailed in the load of
each lighter.
7. No lights or talking are permitted on the
beach or till the troops reach their allotted area.
Fires are not to be lit in any area till 4.15 a.m.,
and must be‘extinguished by 8 p.m. Green wood
is not to be used * the smoke it causes will draw
shell fire.
8. No troops are to leave the area allotted to
them between 4 a.m. and 8 p.m. except on special
duty with the authority of the Brigade Com-
mander. Piquets will be placed under area
arrangements at intervals round the area to
prevent men straying independently.
9. Troops may be exposed to desultory shelling
during the day or night. This is never aimed,
and the best protection against it is to move into
the bottom of the gully in which the troops are
bivouacked.
10. Troops are not to use any portion of the
iron ration with which they land. Issues will
be made under brigade arrangements of rations
and extras to last the period of their stay.
11. Water is issued on ration at one gallon
fresh water per day. This includes water for all
purposes. For bathing, the sea is available, but
may only be visited after 9 p.m. daily.
12. Latrines for immediate use are dug and
marked in each area ; additional latrines are to
be prepared by units and the strictest orders
issued to prevent fouling the ground. Latrines
are to be made very deep, as space is much
restricted.
13. Casualties of any kind after treatment in
the field ambulance affiliated to the brigade will
be taken to the casualty clearing station in Anzac
Cove for removal to Hospital Ship.
Urgent cases at any time ; others as far as
possible between 7.30 and 8.30 p.m. and between
6 and 9 a.m.
14, The following is to be practised by all
troops after landing :
Falling in once during the night in any close
formation, and to remain so closed up for a
period of at least half an hour, during which
passing of commands (messages from front to
rear and back again and to the flanks) is to be
practised.
The troops must be accustomed to the star-
light, which may be expected during night
operations.
15. If aeroplanes pass overhead troops are not
to look up, as this will give away the position of
bodies of troops and probably draw shell fire,
16. Troops landing should be provided with
Maps 1/20,000 of the area in which operations
are to take place. These maps to be in bulk,
and not issued till after landing.
Maps 1/10,000 of the Anzac area showing roads
and bivouacs will be issued to unit commanders
on arrival.
17. Telephone lines will be found laid from
Anzac Headquarters to points suitable for Brigade
or higher Headquarters, On arrival brigades will
join up these points to Anzac.
An officer and two orderlies per brigade will
also be detailed to remain at Anzac Head-
quarters.
Staffs of formations higher than brigades will
be located within easy reach of Anzac Head-
quarters.


G.S.R.Z. 18/2.
Instructions for G.O.C. 9th Army Corps.
Reference Sheet Ariafarta Sagir Gallipoli
Map 1/20,000.
1. The intentions of the General Commanding
for the impending operations, and a rough outline
of the task which he has allotted to the troops
under your command, were communicated to you
in my G.S.R.Z. 18, dated 22nd instant.
2. In addition to the information contained in
paragraph 3 of the above quoted letter, small
numbers of Turkish mounted troops and Gendar-
merie have been reported in the country north of
Anzac, and three guns with limbers, each drawn
by six oxen, have been seen moving into Anafarta
Sagir. An aeroplane photograph has also dis-
closed the presence of a few trenches on Lala Baba.
A sketch of these trenches, which have apparently
been constructed for some months, is attached.
It is believed that the channel connecting the Salt
Lake with Suvla Bay is now dry.
3. Your landing will begin on the night 6th/
7th August. Your primary objective will be to
secure Suvla Bay as a base for all the forces
operating in the northern zone. Owing to the
difficult nature of the terrain, it is possible that the
attainment of this objective will, in the first
instance, require the use of the whole of the
troops at your disposal. Should, however, you
find it possible to achieve this object with only a
portion of your force, your next step will be to
give such direct assistance as is in your power
to the G.O.C. Anzac in his attack on Hill 305, by
an advance on Biyuk Anafarta, with the object
of moving up the eastern spurs of that hill.
4. Subject only to his final approval, the General
Commanding gives you an entirely free hand in
the selection of your plan of operations.
He, however, directs your special attention to
the fact that the hills Yilghin and Ismail Oglu
Tepe are knowm to contain guns which can bring
fire to bear on the flank and rear of an attack on
Hill 305, and that on this account they assume
an even greater importance in the first instance
than if they were considered merely part of a
position covering Suvla Bay. If, therefore, it is
possible, without prejudice to the attainment of
your primary objective, to gain possession of
these hills at an early period of your attack, it
will greatly facilitate the capture and retention
of Hill 305. It would also appear almost certain
that until these hills are in your possession it will
be impossible to land either troops or stores in
the neighbourhood of Suvla Bay by day.
5. The troops at your disposal will be :
11th Division (less one Brigade R.F.A., at
Helles).
10th Division (less 29th Infantry Brigade).
Three squadrons R.N. Armoured Car Division,
R.N.A.S. (one squadron motor cycles, six
machine guns ; one squadron Ford cars, six
machine guns; one squadron armoured cars,
six machine guns).
Two Highland Mountain Artillery batteries.
An endeavour will be made to release for your
force one or more 5-in. howitzer batteries, now
at Anzac, during the day following your initial
disembarkation.
(C 49—242)
6. In order that you may be able to arrange
for the disembarkation of your force to agree,
so far as Naval exigencies will admit, with the
plan of operations on which you decide, the
allocation of troops to the ships and boats to
be provided by the Navy is left to your decision.
With this object, tables have been drawn up,
and are enclosed with these instructions, showing
the craft which can be placed at your disposal by
the Navy, their capacity, and the points at which
the troops can be disembarked. The tables also
show what numbers of troops, animals, vehicles,
and stores can be landed simultaneously.
The beaches available for your landing on the
first night are (1) a frontage of 600 yards in Suvla
Bay (sq. 117 Q.V.); (2) a frontage of 1,800 yards
S. of Kuchuk Kemikli (sq. 9, 103 z, 101 V; 91
A.8.), called “ New Beach ” in the tables. It will
not be possible in the first instance to land more
than one brigade of your force in Suvla Bay,
though other vessels can simultaneously be dis-
charging their passengers on New Beach.
7. As regards the time at which the disembarka-
tion may be expected to commence, no craft will
be allowed to leave Kephalos Harbour till after
dark, and the passage across will take from one
and a half to two hours. It is unsafe, therefore,
to count on any troops being ashore before 10.30
p.m., and in no case must your approach be dis-
closed to the enemy till 10 p.m., the hour at which
the outposts on the left flank of the Anzac position
are to be rushed.
8. No allowance has been made in the tables
for the disembarkation of your headquarters, as
it is not known at what period of the operations
you will wish them to land.
9. Special attention is directed to paragraph 8
of my letter G.S.R. Z. 18, dated 22nd July.
10. The infantry of the 53rd Division will be
available as Army Reserve, and will be at the
disposal of the General Commanding.
11. Special instructions regarding signal com-
munications will be issued later. In general terms
the arrangements will be as follows :
There is a submarine cable between Imbros and
Anzac, and a cable will be laid as soon as practic-
able from Imbros to Suvla Bay. A submarine
cable and a land cable will also be laid between
Anzac and Suvla Bay as soon as circumstances
permit, probably before dawn. Pending the com-
pletion of this work inter-communication between
Anzac and Suvla Bay will be carried out by lamp,
and, subject to Naval approval, between Suvla
Bay and Imbros by wireless telegraphy.
* Two military pack W.T. stations and one
R.M. Base W.T. station will be provided at Suvla
Bay, 4 naval ratings will be attached to each
station as visual signalling personnel. One of these
military pack W.T. stations will be disembarked
with the second brigade to land, and will act as a
base.station pending the arrival of the R.N. Base
wireless station. The second military pack W.T.
station will be disembarked with the third brigade
to land ; it will be placed on a flank and used
mainly for fire control under the B.G.R.A.
A wagon wireless station at G.H.Q., Imbros,
will be in communication with both these pack
W.T. stations.
* All W.T. arrangements are subject to alteration, as
they have not yet been confirmed by the Vice-Admiral.


One officer and 23 other ranks, with two pack
animals from the Brigade Signal Section, will be
landed with eacii Infantry Brigade.
These parties will lay their cable by hand and
establish telephone and vibrator communication
from the beach forward. No vehicles will be landed
in the first instance, all necessary stores being
man-handled.
Three officers, 74 other ranks, 28 animals and’
five vehicles will be landed with Divisional Head-
quarters.
The advance parties will release the brigade
sections from the beach and be prepared to lay
cable lines by hand.
Two cable wagons will be included in the five,
vehicles, and should be the first of those vehicles
to be disembarked.
As soon as possible after Corps Headquarters
go ashore, the personnel of the Divisional Signal
Companies will be released from work at the
beach.
Arrangements will be made subsequently to
disembark an air line detachment and a cable
section to provide and pole local lines.
The remainder of the Corps Headquarters
Signal Company will be kept in readiness to be
forwarded as soon as Corps Headquarters reports
that circumstances admit of its disembarkation.
12. Two Military Landing Officers and their
assistant military landing officers will be placed
at your disposal from units other than those under
your command.
13. In addition to the units mentioned in
Tables A-E fonvarded to you with my letter
G.S.R. Z. 18, dated 23rd July, the following
are being dispatched from Alexandria in this
order:—
Three Squadrons Armoured Car Division
R.N.A.S. (These will be available to land on
the morning after your disembarkation begins,
if you so desire.)
(1) H.Q.R.A. 10th Division.
Two F.A. Brigades 10th Division (modified
scale of horses).
R.A. personnel and ammunition of 10th
Divisional Ammunition Park.
(2) One F.A. Brigade 11th Division (modified
scale of horses).
One F.A. Brigade 10th Division (modified
scale of horses).
(3) Two F.A. Brigades 13th Division.
(4) Horses for 11th Division.
and the following will be assembled at Imbros to
land when required :
11th Divisional Cyclist Company (less two
Platoons).
10th Divisional Cyclist Company.
13th Divisional Cyclist Company.
14. You are requested to submit your proposed
plan of operations to G-.H.Q. for approval at the
earliest possible date.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General , C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
2sth July, 1915.
Time of Arrival
off Coast.
Landing
Place.
Method of
Disembarkation.
Craft.
Capacity.
Remarks.
In time to dis-
embark all
troops, vehicles,
horses, stores,
&c., by night
10 mo tor lighters
(10 steamboats
accompanying)
10 destroyers
1 sloop, towing
1 motor lighter
and 4 horse-
boats (1 steam-
boat accom-
panying)
1 sloop, towing
4 horseboats (1
steamboat ac-
companying)
1 trawler, tow-
ing 4 horse-
boats (1 steam-
boat accom-
panying)
H.M.S.
“ Endymion ”
H.M.S.
“ Theseus ”
500 infantry
each (and
400,000 rds.
S.A.A. if ne-
cessary)
530 infantry
each
600 men
88 horses
8 mtn. guns
30 bicycles
500 men
24 horses
4 18-pr. guns
or wagons
250 men
24 horses
4 18-pr. guns
or wagons
1,000 men
1,000 men
7 lighters at
New Beach,
3 lighters at
Suvla Bay
One attending
each motor
lighter
New Beach
New Beach
New Beach
New Beach
or Suv 1 a
Bay, as may
be conven-
ient
Land direct on beach
Motor lighters take
off troops and land
them on beach
Motor lighters and
horseboats loaded
with guns, horses of
mountain and 18-pr.
batteries. Sloop
loaded with men and
bicycles
Horseboats loaded
with guns, vehicles,
and horses of 18-pr.
battery. Sloop
loaded with men
and bicycles
Horseboats loaded
with guns, vehicles,
and horses of 18-pr.
battery. Trawder
available to carry
men.
Landed either from
cutters towed by
steamboats, or from
motor lighters
Ammunition if necessary
may be left on motor
lighters until conven-
ient to land it, accord-
ing to circumstances.
The disembarkation
from the destroyers
cannot begin until the
10 motor lighters have
landed their comple-
ment and returned.
The sloops and trawler,
after casting off their
tows, will return to
Kephalos. Other horse
boats will be there,
ready filled with the
remainder of the horses
required in the first
instance for the two
Mountain Batteries,
the 18-pr. Battery, and
the Signal Company.
They will pick up these
horseboats and tow
them over to the beach
immediately.


Time of Arrival Landing Method of
off Coast. Craft. Capacity. Place. Disembarkation. Remarks.
At or immediately 1 horse transport All horses enu- Suvla Bay ... Six of the horseboats Transport comes fro
after dawn - merated in from which the 18- Mudros.
Table C ap- pr. and mountain
pended to batteries will pre-
letter G.S.R. viously have been
Z. 18 of 23rd landed
July, except
those already
provided for.
Water bags
and pumps
1 mule transport All mules and Suvla Bay ... Six of the horseboats Transport
mule carts from which the 18- Alexandr
provided for pr. and mountain
in Tables C batteries will pre-
and E ap- viously have been
pended to landed
G.S.R. Z. 18
of 23rd July .
6 small transports 5,000 Infantry Suvla Bay (or Landed from motor Six
• New Beach if lighters as soon as s
necessary) they have finished lero.
clearing the de-
stroyers and (if ne-
cessary) H.M.S.
“ Endymion ” and
“ Theseus ”
Called up from 1 supply ship ... 7 days’supplies Suvla Bay ... Landed from motor
Kephalos as for troops and ' lighters as soon as
soon after dawn animals in the Port lero troops
as circumstances Tables C and are cleared
permit E appended
* to G.S.R. Z.
18 of 23rd
July
Called up from 4 small transports 2,700 Infantry Suvla Bay (or Landed from motor
Kenhalos as * New Beach if lighters as soon as
soon after dawn necessary) the Port lero troops
as circumstances . are cleared
1 horse transport All horses and Suvla Bay ... Landed from horse
vehicles enu- boats brought up on
merated in second trip by the
' Table E, ap- trawler and two
nended to sloops, as soon as
G.S.R. Z. 18 the horseboats have
of 23rd July been emptied
The above would admit of the disembarkation before dawn at and in the neighbourhood of Suvla
Bay of:—
Divisional Headquarters.
Signal Co. with 40 horses.
1 W.T. Section and 2 W.T. Stations.
H.Q. F.A. Bde. (18-pr.) with 10 horses.
1 F.A. Battery (18-pr.) with 82 horses.
2 Mountain Batteries with 80 horses.
3 Field Companies R.E.
3 Infantry Brigades and part of remainder
of F.A. Bde. (personnel).
1 Pioneer Battalion.
2 Battalions for Beach parties and part of Ammn. Park
personnel.
2 Platoons Divl. Cyclist Co. and part of Tent Subdivisions
of Field Ambulances.
Bearer Subdivisions of 3 Field Ambulances and part of
Casualty Clearing Stations.
The 10 motor lighters will land their complements first, and then the troops from the 10 Destroyers the
two sloops and their tows, and the trawler and her tows, can proceed simultaneously on a front of about
600 yards in Suvla Bay and 1,800 on the beach south of Suvla Bay, directly beach secured. The two landing
places are about 2 miles apart. The landing of the troops from H.M.S. “ Endymion ” apd “ Theseus may
be able to take place simultaneously, or may have to be deferred until the motor lighters have cleared the
destroyers.
Transport comes from
Mudros.
Transport comes from
Alexandria.
Six battalions 10th Divi-
sion coming from Port
Three battalions 10 th
Division from Mudros.
The above will provide for the disembarkation of the remainder of the troops, &c., enumerated
in Tables C and E, appended to letter G.S.R. Z. 18 of 23rd July, that is those not already detailed to
be landed before dawn, viz.:—
Remainder of F.A. Brigade (18-pr.) Also 4,000,000 rds. S.A.A. Reserve
~ Ammunition Park Personnel. Gun Ammunition (by spe ia^
15th Heavy Battery R.G.A. trawlers from Mudros) 7 days
Brigade Ammunition Column. supplies for the above troops and
Remainder of Tent Subdivisions of field ambulances. animals.
„ Casualty Clearing Stations.
Mule Corps. -
(C 49—242) , K3


18 pr. ..
.. 36,000"|
4-5" ..
.. 2,000 Plus any amounts
5"
4,000 f saved from normal
6"
545 I daily expenditure.
60 pr. ..
.. 3,000 J
G.S.R. Z.lB/2.
July 29 th
General Officer Commanding,
Bth Corps?
The General Commanding has decided that his
next main attack shall be made in the vicinity of
Anzac with the object of placing ourselves astride
the Peninsula to the north of Kilid Bahr.
2. The Bth Corps with attached troops is to
assist this main operation by offensive action in
the south, the scope and form of this action being
determined solely with reference to its effects on
the main operation.
As the decisive point will be in the neighbour-
hood of Anzac, all reinforcements will be utilised
in that theatre, and it is improbable that any will
be available for the southern zone before the middle
of August, except such drafts for the Bth Corps
and the Corps Exp. Orient as may reach the
Peninsula in the next ten days.
3. In order to free sufficient troops to enable
the Bth Corps to take the offensive, the French
will take over part of the line as defined in Force
Order No. 22.
4. In addition to the troops of the Bth Corps
and E.N.D. at present at your disposal, the follow-
ing reinforcements may be expected:—
29th Division .. 280 due 29th July.
29th Division .. 900 due 4th August.
42nd Division .. 100 due 29th July.
Total .. 1,280
which, allowing for normal wastage, should give
an effective total of 24,780 on sth August. These
numbers, with the shorter line you will be called
upon to hold, should leave you with sufficient
troops to undertake a limited offensive operation
on or about that day.
5. Assuming that you are not attacked in the
meanwhile, the total amount of ammunition which
should be available at Helles early in August for
offensive action, and to maintain a reserve is :
but it must be borne in mind that no replace-
ments can be looked for before August 16th.
6. The scope of your offensive action must be
based upon these figures, and it is thought that
the most suitable objective will be the capture of
the Turkish trenches up to the line F. 13, G. 13,
H. 13, and H. 12. Plans for this operation should,
therefore, be undertaken at once.
7. Pre-supposing that this attack is successful,
and that the numbers at your disposal admit of
a further advance, the capture of the trenches on
the line H. 14 to H. J5, followed perhaps by the
capture of Krithia could then be undertaken, and
plans for this action should be prepared before-
hand. But as the launching of this further attack
must be entirely dependent on unknown factors,
a definite decision on this point cannot be arrived
at beforehand. It is, moreover, essential that the
plan of your first attack should not definitely com-
mit your troops to a further advance unless the
trend of events should render such a course
desirable.
8. As regards the date for launching your first
attack, it is thought that the most favourable time
would be shortly before the main operations at
Anzac begin, and you should therefore arrange
for your first attack to take place on the 4th
August.
'9. Beyond holding the enemy in front of them
to their positions and assisting you with artillery
fire, the French will not be asked to take part in
your first attack, but, in Jhe event of your reach-
ing Krithia, they will be directed to conform to
your movements and to establish themselves on
the spurs leading up to Achi Baba.
I will ascertain the amount of artillery support
and lean you can expect from the C.E.0., and if
the information arrives in time will attach it as
an appendix to this letter.
10. The possibility of the southern force being
able to capture Achi Baba has not been dealt
with in this memorandum, as*the attempt should
only be made in the event of large reinforcements
being available for the southern zone, and these
must depend on the course of events in the main
theatre.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General , C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
It will be apparent to you how necessary it is
not to allow any suspicion of the reason for the
date mentioned in paragraph 8 being told to
any person other than your Brigadier-General
G.S.
(Intd.) W. P. B.
APPENDIX.
French Artillery Support for Mi Corps.
1. One Brigade of 75’s will be placed at the
disposal of the Bth Corps for the attack on 4th-sth
August.
Of these
(a) One battery will be moved to support
closely the attack on Krithia.
(6) One battery will fire up the Nullah E. of
Krithia.
2. In addition, six French howitzers will be so
disposed as to open fire upon Turkish artillery
north of the ridge 150—Achi Baba peak.
Instructions for G.O.C. A. & N.Z.
Army Corps,
Reference Map Anafarta Sagir Gallipoli '
Map 1/20,000.
1. The General Commanding has decided to
mass the whole of his reinforcements in and
immediately north of the area occupied by the
corps under your command, with a view to secur
ing Suvla Bay as a base of operations, driving the
enemy off the Sari Bair, and eventually securing
a position astride the Gallipoli Peninsula from the
neighbourhood of Gaba Tepe to the straits north
of Maidos.
2. The general outline for your proposals for
the action of the A. and N.Z. Army Corps contained
in your G a 89 of Ist July are approved.


3. (a) The General Commanding wishes your
operations to begin on August 6th with a strong
and sustained attack on Hill 125 (Plateau 400),
every effort being made to deceive the enemy as
to the locality against which our main effort is to
be made, and to induce him to believe that it will
be directed against his lines opposite the southern
portion of your position. In pursuance of this
object the Vice-Admiral has arranged that H.M.
ships shall in the meantime display increased
activity off the coast between Gaba Tepe and Kum
Tepe. It has been arranged that soundings shall
be taken by night off the coast south of Gaba Tepe ;
and, on the evening of August 6th, a naval demon-
stration will be made off this part of the coast,
H.M. ships being accompanied by a number of
trawlers as if a landing were to be undertaken.
(6) The General Commanding further concurs
in the subsequent sequence of the operations out-
lined by you, namely :—•
(i) The clearing of the enemy’s outposts
from the ridges facing Nos. 2 and 3
posts, to be undertaken after nightfall.
(ii) An attack in as great strength as possible
up the Sazli Beit Dere, the Chailak
Dere and the Aghyl Dere, against the
Chunuk Bair ridge, by night.
(iii) When the Chunuk Bair ridge is gained,
a converging attack from that ridge,
and from the north-eastern section of
your present position, against Hill 180
(Baby 700).
4. (a) For the above operations the following
troops will be at your disposal:—•
A. & N.Z. Army Corps.
13th Division, less all artillery except 69th
F.A. (Howitzer) Brigade.
29th Brigade (10th Division).
29th Indian Brigade.
(b) At the date of commencement of the opera-
tions the following troops belonging to or attached
to the 9th Army Corps will be at Anzac, but will
not, except so far as is stated hereunder, be at
your disposal:—
One F.A. Brigade, 11th Division : To rejoin
9th Army Corps as soon as horses are
landed.
10th Heavy Battery, R.G.A.: Ditto.
14th Lowland (Howitzer) Brigade (two
Batteries) : Arrangements must be made
so that these batteries may be free to
rejoin the 9th Army Corps before night-
fall on August 7th.
5. The operations carried out by the Corps
under your command will form part of a general
combined offensive undertaken by the whole of the
forces of the Gallipoli Peninsula and by the 9th
Army Corps, which will be disembarked in the
neighbourhood of Suvla Bay, beginning on the
night of August 6th-7th.
{a) The Bth Army Corps, in conjunction with
the Corps Expeditionnaire, will attack the Turkish
lines south of Krithia on August 4th and sth.
The attack will be made on a large scale, and will
be vigorously pressed, and it is hoped that by its
means the enemy will be induced to move part
of his central reserves southward into the Cape
Holies zone during the sth and 6th, so that they
(C 49—242)
may not be available in the northern zone on the
6th and 7th.
(6) The 9th Army Corps will begin landing in
and close to Suvla Bay during the night of August
6th-7th. Three infantry brigades, with one field
and two mountain batteries, engineers and medical
services, should be ashore before dawn, and will
be closely followed by two more infantry brigades
and additional artillery and engineers.
The G.O.C. 9th Army Corps has been informed :
(i) That his mission is to secure Suvla Bay
as a base of operation for all the forces
in the northern zone-.
(ii) That the seizure of Yilghin Burnu and
Ismail Oglu Tepe (“ W ” and Chocolate
Hills), on account of the presence there
of artillery which may interfere with
your operations, must be considered as
of very special importance.
(iii) That so far as is possible after the fulfil-
ment of his primary mission, he is to
render you such direct assistance as
may be practicable by moving any
available troops via Biyuk Anafarta
up the eastern slopes of the Sari Bair.
(c) At the commencement of these operations
the infantry of the 53rd Division will be available
as Army Reserve and will be at the disposal of
the General Commanding.
6. The Vice-Admiral has agreed provisionally
to the following allotment of ships affording naval
support to the operations :
In Suvla Bay : One 6" monitor.
South of Kuchuk : H.M.S. “ Endymion.”
Kemliki (Nibrunesi Point): H.M.S. “ Edgar,’
H.M.S. “Talbot,” one 6" monitor, one
9.2" monitor.
These ships would be in position at daylight on
August 7th, and would mainly be required to
support the operations of the 9th Army Corps.
West of Gaba Tepe: H.M.S. “ Baccanto,”
H.M.S. “ Humber,” H.M.S. “ Havelock,”
one 6" monitor.
These ships would be in position at 3 p.m. on
August 6th, except H.M.S. “ Havelock, which
would be in position at daylight on August 7th.
They would be detailed for support of the right
flank of the A. and N.Z. Army Corps.
Off Kum Tepe : One 6" monitor.
A separate communication is being sent to you
with regard to the final settlement of details as
to the support of the operations by naval guns,
allocation of targets, &c.
7. Special instructions regarding signal com-
munication will be issued later. In general terms
the arrangements will be as follows :
A submarine cable and a land cable will be
laid between Anzac and Suvla Bay as
soon as circumstances permit.
A submarine cable will also be laid as soon
as practicable between Imbros and Suvla
Bay. Pending the completion of connec-
tion between Anzac and Sulva Bay, inter-
communication will be carried out by
lamp. t __
Two military pack W/T stations and a K.JN.
Base W/T station will be established in


the vicinity of Suvla Bay. The W/T
station at Anzac will be able to intercept
from seaplanes, but must not
attempt to reply.
W/T via the ships will be an alternative means
of communication between G.H.Q. and the
troops ashore in case of interruption of
cable communication.
A system of flares will be arranged for employ-
ment on the left flank of your position
at dawn on August 7th to indicate to
the ships the positions reached by the
troops.
8. G.H.Q. will in the first instance be at Imbros
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General, C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
G.H.Q., 30 th July, 1915.
FORCE ORDER No. 25.
General Headquarters,
2nd August, 1915.
1. The total forces of the enemy in the Gallipoli
Peninsula are estimated at 100,000.
Of these, 27,000 are in the neighbourhood of
Anzac (sth, 19th, 16th Divisions, and 18th and
64th Regiments); 36,000 are in the Southern zone
(Ist, 4th, 6th Division less one regiment, 7th
Division, 11th Division less one regiment, and one
regiment each of the 12th, 25th and 3rd Divisions);
and 37,000 are in Reserve (9th Division less one
regiment, 12th less one regiment, 13th, 14th, and
25th less one regiment, and 10th Divisions). Of
this reserve force two Divisions are in the Bulair
district and one Division in the Eyerli Tepe zone.
There are 12,000 on the Asiatic shore of the
Dandanelles (2nd Division and Bth Division less
one regiment). There are believed to be five
Divisions (45,000 men) in the Keshan area belong-
ing to the sth and 6th Corps.
All reports tend to show that though the enemy
may be expected to fight well in trenches, their
moral has suffered considerably as a result of their
recent heavy casualties, and that their stock of
ammunition is low.
2. The General Commanding intends to carry
.out a combined and simultaneous attack on the
enemy in the northern and southern zone commenc-
ing on 6th August, in accordance with the special
instructions already issued to the Corps Com-
manders concerned.
During the first phase of these operations the
13th Division (less three 18-pdr. Bdes. R.F.A.),
the 29th Infantry Brigade will be attached to the
A. and N.Z. Army Corps. Three squadrons R.N.
Armoured Car Division and two batteries Highland
Mounted Artillery will be attached to 9th Corps.
86th Brigade R.F.A. and 91st Heavy Battery
R.G.A. will be attached to Bth Corps.
3. Special instructions regarding embarkation
and disembarkation are issued to G.O.C. 9th Corps,
G.0.C., A. and N.Z. Corps, and 1.G.C., as appended
to this order.
4. The 53rd Division will remain at the disposal
of the General Commanding as general reserve.
5. G.H.Q. will remain in the first instance in its
present situation.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General, C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
Issued to : G.O.C. Corps Expeditionnaire ; G.O.C.
A. and N.Z. Army Corps ; G.O.C, Bth Army
Corps ; G.O.C. 9th Army Corps ; G.O.C. 53rd
Division ; 1.G.C.; Vice-Admiral.
Appendix to Force Order No. 25.
Embarkations.
1. The embarkation of units of the 9th Corps
concentrated at Imbros will be carried out under
the orders of G.O.C. 9th Corps, commencing for
personnel on 6th August, for vehicles and stores
at such earlier date as may be convenient. The
necessary ships and boats (lists of which have
already been handed to the G.O.C. Corps) will be
assembled in the harbour beforehand ; and the
embarkation programme will be worked out in
consultation with Commander Ashby, R.N., who
has been detailed by the Vice-Admiral for this
purpose, and who will arrange for the various
vessels to be in their allotted positions at the
hours arranged.
G.O.C. 9th Corps will also be responsible for the
allocation to ships or lighters, and for the embarka-
tion of the following units :
At Imbros ; One W.T Section (Nos. W. 10
and W. 11 Pack Wireless Stations); Two
Anson Battalions R.N.D, (for duties on
the beach); No. 16 Casualty Clearing
Station.
In transit from Mudros to Imbros: One
Casualty Clearing Station.
Units and formations concentrated at Mudros
and Mitylene will be embarked for their various
destinations under the orders of I.G.C. in accord-
ance with the programme already issued to that
officer.
Military Transport Officers.
2. G.O.C. 9th Corps and I.G.C. respectively will
ensure that an officer is appointed Military Trans-
port Officer on every ship for the embarkation of
which they are severally responsible {vide para. 1).
Landing Places.
3. The landings of the 9th Corps will be referred
to as “ A,” “ B,” and “ C ” Beaches.
“ A ” Beach —Square 117.q. and v.
“ C ” Beach—Square 103.u.z.
B ” Beach—Square 91.b, i, o.
“ C ” and “ B ” beaches are practically con-
tiguous.
Beach Control Personnel.
4. The following naval and military beach con-
trol personnel have been appointed for the landing
places of the 9th Corps :
Principal Beach Master: Captain H. F. G.
Talbot, R.N.
Beach Masters : Commander I. W. Gibson,
M.V.O. (“A” Beach), Captain C. P.
Metcalfe, R.N. (“ B ” Beach), Commander
C. Tindal-Carril-Worsley (“ C ” Beach).


Assistant Beach Masters and Beach Lieu-
tenants : Four Lieutenant Commanders,
ten Lieutenants, R.N.
Principal Mil. L.0.: Colonel W. G. B. Western,
C.B.
Mil. L.O.’s : Major F. W. Pencock, Derbyshire
Yeomanry, Major Sir R. Baker, Dorset
Yeomanry, Captain Tylsen Wright, A.S.C.
Assistant Mil. L.O.s : Captain Wade Palmer,
Derbyshire Yeomanry, Captain B. A.
Smith, South Notts Hussars, Lieutenant
H. V. Browne, Dorset Yeomanry, Lieu-
tenant Krabbe, Berks Yeomanry.
The allocation of the above military officers to
the various landing places will be detailed by the
P.M.L.O. in consultation with the P.B.M.
Special instructions with regard to beach fatigue
parties have already been issued to the G.O.C.
9th Corps,
G.0.C., A. and N.Z. Army Corps will detail such
military landing officers, assistant military landing
officers, and beach parties for A.N.Z.A.C. as he may
consider necessary. The names of officers so
appointed will be reported as early as possible to
V.A. and to G.H.Q.
The following special service officers are attached
to H.Q., A. and N.Z. Army Corps, for such duties
in connection with the landing as the G.O.C. may
direct: —
Major P. R. Bruce, S. Notts Hussars.
Captain C. R. Higgens, County of London
Yeomanry.
Captain Sir E. Pauncefort Duncombe, Royal
Bucks Hussars.
General Instructions for Landing.
5. All troops will land with two iron rations
(one day’s meat only in case of troops disem-
barking at Anzac). Infantry will carry 200'
rounds of S.A.A., machine-gun sections 3,500
rounds. Packs will not be worn. A proportion
of heavy entrenching tools, signalling and medical
gear will be carried by hand. Camp kettles will
be handed to the Ordnance Officer of the camp
at which units concentrate before embarkation.
They will be forwarded and reissued at the first
opportunity.
6. Horses will be landed harnessed, and with
nosebags filled to their full capacity.
Poles of G.S. wagons will be removed before
slinging and made fast to the body of the wagon.
Poles of carts, limbers, and limbered wagons will
not be removed ; these vehicles should be so
placed in the boats that they can be landed pole
leading.
Ammunition.
7. The G.O.C. 9th Corps will depute an officer
to arrange, in consultation with the P.M.L.0.,
for the storing of reserve ammunition in con-
venient localities near the beach. Guards for
these stores may be found from the beach fatigue
parties.
Water.
8. The strictest economy must be exercised with
regard to drinking water. Under arrangements
already made by G.H.Q., receptacles filled with
water will be landed as early as possible from the
ships carrying the mule corps, and will be conveyed
to the troops as transport becomes available.
Waterproof tanks (2,300 gallon capacity) and lift
and force pumps will be available on the ‘ Prah
RE. Storeship—in Kephalos Harbour, and will
be forwarded by D.Q.M.G., G.H.Q., on request of
G.O.C. Corps.
Transport.
9. Transport to supplement that in possession
of units will be provided for the 9th Corps and
the A.N.Z. Corps by the Indian Mule Corps.
The amount of transport fqr such formation has
been calculated to carry rations, water, and
S.A.A., making one or two trips a day, according
to the anticipated distance of the various units
from the beach.
This transport will be handed over, as it is
landed, by an officer appointed by the D.S.T., to
transport officers of Brigades and divisional troops
for allotment as circumstances may require.
Senior transport officers of Divisions will be
ordered to report to the following representatives
of the D.S.T. immediately on landing
At Anzac i Lieutenant-Colonel Streidinger,
A.D.T.
At “A ” Beach ; Major Badcock, D.A.D.T.
Supplies.
10. A supply depot has been formed at Anzac,
and it is in charge of Major Izod, A.S.C. A supply
depot will be formed by D.S.T. at “ A ” beach
as soon as supplies can be landed, and will be in
charge of Major Huskisson, A.S.C. Senior supply
officers of Divisions will be ordered to place them-
selves in communication with the officer in charge
of the nearest supply depot and to keep him
informed of their daily requirements. Supplies
will, so far as possible, be handed over to them
in bulk at the depot. Owing to the difficulty in
landing sufficient animals in the first instance it
is possible that only half rations may be available
on the third and fourth days after the operations
begin. All units should be specially ordered to
husband their rations.
Medical.
11. Arrangements have been made to establish
on the beach at Anzac two casualty clearing
stations, which will be embarked by 1.G.C., and
two at “ A ’’ Beach, which will be embarked under
orders of G.O.C. 9th Corps (see paragraph 1).
Medical officers will be appointed by G.H.Q. to
control these units, and to take charge of the
arrangements for evacuation of the wounded
from the beach.
(Signed) C. F. ASPINALL,
Lieutenant-Colonel,
For Major-General, C.G.S.,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
APPENDIX.
Instructions to Major-General H. de Lisle,
C.8., D.S.O.
1. The operations of the northern wing of the
Army have only been partially successful.
[a) The Australian and New Zealand Array
Corps, with the 13th Division and the 29th
Brigade of 10th Division attached has greatly


extended the area occupied, and now holds a
position under the Chunuk Bair Ridge, which
the G.O.C. considers a favourable one from
which to launch the final attack on the ridge.
The necessity for reorganisation after the recent
operations, and for establishing a satisfactory
system of forwarding water, ammunition and
supplies, will involve a delay of some days
before the attack on the main ridge can be
made.
(6) The 9th Army Corps, less the 13th Division
and 29th Brigade, but with the 53rd and 54th
Divisions attached, holds the Yilghin Burnu
hills, and a line northwards from the eastern-
most of these two hills roughly straight across
the Kuchuk Anafarta Ova to the highest point
of the Kiretch Tepe Sirt. Attacks by the 11th
Division against the Ismail Oglu Tepe and the
Anafarta spur from the north-west have been
made without any success. In the course of
the operations the 9th Corps became very much
disorganised, and since August 11th the work
of reorganisation and consolidation has been
proceeding.
2. At present the enemy has shown no great
strength north of an east and west line through
Anafarta Sagir. He has a force operating on and
near the Kiretch Tepe Sirt, the strength of which
cannot yet be accurately estimated. From present
indications this appears to be a detachment which
is known to have guarded the coast from Ejelmer
Bay to Suvla Bay ; it does not appear to have
been reinforced to any extent. Across the Kuchuk
Anafarta Ova there appear to be no more than
snipers. In the region Anafarta Sagir-Ismail Oglu
Tepe and the Biyuk Anafarta Valley the enemy
has developed considerable strength—his intention
being, no doubt, to protect the right of his main
force which opposes the Australian and New
Zealand Array Corps, and to prevent our advance
on the Anafarta gap.
3. The General Commanding has decided to
strike as quickly and in as great strength as
possible against the enemy’s on the line Ismail
Oglu Tepe-Anafarta Sagir with the objects, first,
of driving in this flank and preparing a further
enveloping advance ; and, secondly, by clearing
the Anafarta spur to deny to the enemy the gun
positions and facilities for observation therefrom,
which would otherwise endanger Suvla Bay. He
considers it imperative to effect this with the
least possible delay. In his view the left flank of
this advance will require comparatively little
protection, at all events in the first instance, in
view of the difficulty which the enemy may be
expected to find in throwing any considerable
force round our left over the high and difficult
country north of Anafarta Sagir. It appears that
the double purpose of defeating the enemy and
securing Suvla Bay as a port for the northern
wing of the Army can best be served by an attack
on the enemy’s right on the Anafarta spur, made
with all the strength at our command, while
leaving a comparatively small force as left flank
guard to clear the enemy’s snipers out of the
Kuchuk Anafarta Ova and to occupy and press
back his detachment in the Ejelmer Bay region.
4. You will have at your disposal the following
troops:—
11th Division,
10th Division (less 29th Brigade),
53rd Division,
54th Division,
and there is on its way from Egypt to join you
the 2nd Mounted Division (5,000 men dismounted),
which should be available by August 18th. The
10th, 11th and 53rd Divisions are considerably
depleted, and the moral of the latter at present
leaves much to be desired. There are at present
ashore, belonging to the above two F.A. Brigades
(three batteries of which are awaiting horses to
bring them up from Ajizac) and two Heavy Bat-
teries. In addition, two Highland Mountain
Batteries, attached to the 9th Corps, are ashore,
and the 1 /4th Lowland Brigade (two batteries
5-inch howitzers) are at your disposal when they
can be brought up from Anzac. It has only been
possible to land a bare minimum of horses owing
to difficulties in respect of water and the landing
of forage.
Three further E.A. Brigades and the 57th
Brigade (two batteries) 4'5-inch howitzers are at
Mudros ready to be brought up as soon as it is
possible to land them. These Brigades will
probably have to be landed without any horses
in the first instance, and taken into position by
the artillery horses already ashore.
5. For the purpose of an early attack in accord-
ance with the plan indicated in paragraph 3, the
A. and N.Z. Army Corps will probably not be able
to co-operate directly with more than one Infantry
Brigade, and it is possible that it may be able to
do no more than swing up its left into line with
the right of your advance. It is improbable that
the Bth Corps and the C.E.O. will be in a position
to do more than undertake vigorous demonstra-
tions.
6. With the above in view, you will proceed at
once to Suvla Bay and take over command of the
9th Corps. Your immediate and most urgent
concern will be to complete the reorganisation of
the Corps and to prepare as large a force as possible
for the offensive against Ismail Oglu Tepe and the
Anafarta, spur, bearing in mind that time is of
vital importance. You will then consider and
report at the earliest moment:—
(a) What force you consider that you will
be able to employ for this purpose.
( b ) The date on which you will be ready to
undertake the offensive.
(c) The method by which you purpose to carry
out your task.
(Signed) W. P. BRAITHWAITE,
Major-General ,
Chief of the General Staff,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.


STATEMENT BY SURGEON-GEN. SIR W. BABTIE, V.C., K.C.M.G.,
C.8., M.8., K.H.S.
1. At the outbreak of war I was Director of
Medical Services in India, and at the end of May,
1915, I was, at the request of the Secretary of
State for War, appointed Principal Director cf
Medical Services, Mediterranean Expeditionary
Force, Malta and Egypt, landing at Suez on
15th June, 1915, and continuing to hold that
appointment until I left for England on the
10th March, 1916. I had some previous knowledge
of Egypt, as I had been sent there on special duty
in February and March, 1915, to inspect the
medical arrangements, and was thus familiar with
the hospital arrangements at that time.
2. My duties were defined in a War Office
telegram. I was to assume command of the
Medical Services and be responsible for their co-
ordination in the three Commands concerned.
3. I was thus directly responsible to the Army
Council for the general working of the Medical
Services in the Eastern Mediterranean, but I was
also responsible to the different Commanders-in-
Chief for any advice or action taken in respect to
their Commands.
4. My. responsibility was general in character,
and except when I intervened did not relieve the
Directors of Medical Services of the Commands
of their responsibility for the administration of
the Medical Services in their respective spheres.
My position was therefore, qua medical services,
analogous to that laid down in Field Service
Regulations, Part 11, Section 22, para. 3, for
a Commander-in-Chief or Inspector-General of
Communications in connection with administra-
tive services.
5. My appointment was in that respect ex-
ceptional and my principal duty was that of
co-ordinating the work between the three Com-
mands ; I had to arrange for the reception of
the sick and wounded from the Dardanelles in
Egypt and Malta, and for the equitable distribu-
tion of personnel, &c., between the Dardanelles
and Egypt and Malta. It was also my duty to
tender advice when necessary with regard to sani-
tary and other matters connected with the troops
and, until a Hospital Transport Officer was
appointed to arrange in co-operation with Q.M.G.'s
Branch of the Staff and the Naval Transport
Officers, for the working of the Hospital Ships.
6. When troops were sent to Salonika my
responsibility included that Force.
7. I was in direct communication with the
different Commanders-in-Chief and in close touch
with the Directors of Medical Services and the
Staffs concerned.
8. My first duty, after satisfying myself as to the
immediate sufficiency of the hospital arrange-
ments in Egypt, was to proceed to the Dardanelles
to investigate the situation there as regards the
organisation of the hospitals and the arrangements
for the evacuation of the sick and wounded to
Egypt, Malta and the United Kingdom.
9. The situation in Egypt was, that owing to the
very large influx of wounded resulting from the
initial operations in the Dardanelles, the strain on
the hospital accommodation had been very great,
and large numbers of hospitals' had to be im-
provised to deal with the wounded that had
been brought down. I was able to make a hasty
survey of the hospital accommodation, and within
two days of my arrival I reported to the War Office
that consequent on the recent arrival of reinforce-
ments of medical officers and nurses the situation
was no longer acute. At this date (middle of
June) there was hospital or convalescent accom-
modation in Egypt for 445 officers and 13,712 other
ranks.
A train service had been established and the
wounded were moved from the port to Cairo or
the provinces in comfortable well-equipped am-
bulance trains, which were also used for the transfer
of Indian invalids across Egypt to Suez.
10. As regards sea transport, the position at
this date (20th June, 1915) was
(a) A ferry service of five hospital ships
between England and Egypt, these
vessels bringing Indian sick and wounded
from England to Egypt and being available
to take back British sick and wounded to
the United Kingdom.
{h) Sir lan Hamilton had decided that 12
hospital ships were required for the
evacuation of the sick and wounded from
the Dardanelles, and with regard to these
the position was that there were two
* hospital ships fitted and in use, two more
were being got ready at home and two
were being fitted out in Egypt. It was
proposed that another pair be fitted up in
the United Kingdom and two for British
and two for Indian troops at Alexandria ;
with these it was proposed to institute a
weekly service between the Dardanelles
and United Kingdom via Egypt and Malta.
This was estimated to take six ships and
would leave four British hospital ships
and one of the two special Indian vessels
always at the Dardanelles. At this
stage, therefore, many of the sick and
wounded were of necessity carried in
transports.
On 24th June the War Office wired out proposals
for services between {a) Dardanelles and United
Kingdom direct; (6) Alexandria and Marseilles or
United Kingdom ; (c) Dardanelles and Alexandria ;
{d) Suez and Bombay ; (e) Suez and Australia and
New Zealand ; the total number of ships involved
being 27. Five ships were to be employed for the
Dardanelles and United Kingdom service, four
for the Alexandria and United Kingdom service,
and 12 for the ferry between Dardanelles and
Egypt.
I then proposed a programme of pre-determmed


sailings from the Dardanelles in a Memorandum,
of which I attach a copy.
Briefly, it allowed of seven hospital ships being
always present at the Dardanelles and would
permit of the evacuation of 12,700 men per month,
1,500 British going direct to the United Kingdom,
and 10,000 British and 1,200 Indians to Egypt or
Malta. At this date some of the ships allotted
had not been fitted or painted in accordance with
the Hague Convention, and my first care was to
hasten matters in regard to these vital con-
siderations.
11. Within a week of my arrival in Egypt I
proceeded to the Dardanelles, first visiting the
intermediate Base at Mudros, afterwards going
to Anzac and Helles and to General Headquarters
at Imbros. I found the I.G.C. and his Staff had
their headquarters on a ship in Mudros Harbour,
an arrangement that, as far as the Medical Ad-
ministration of the port was concerned, was a not
unreasonable one,for it minimised the inconvenience
that the Deputy Director of Medical Services, in
common with other Staff officers, suffered through
the lack of a sufficient number of launches.
Much of the duty of the Deputy Director of
Medical Services was connected with the inspection
and preparation of transports required for the
conveyance of the sick and wounded, and it was
impossible for him or his Staff to get about from
ship to ship and from ship to shore as freely as was
necessary without launches of his own. This was
a striking defect in the arrangements and one it w T as
impossible to remedy on the spot. I was in
frequent telegraphic communication with the War
Office on the subject, and I know that this defect
was appreciated at home, for, in one of the first
telegrams I received from the War Office, the
question was referred to. I replied that launches
were not avilable at Mudros nor could I obtain
them in Egypt. Until the late Autumn, when the
Scottish Red Cross sent out special launches
earmarked for the Medical Services, this difficulty
continued, but was lessened as time went on
through the goodwill of the British Red Cross,
who lent their launches whenever it was possible to
do so. I lay stress on these facts as they were
a very serious handicap to the work of the medical
service at Mudros in connection with the inspection
of transports and hospital ships.
On shore, the conditions were extremely primitive,
due to the. difficulty that was experienced in landing
stores and material.
The camps at Mudros were poor and some of the
hospitals were not sufficient or satisfactory either as
regards their accommodation or their sites, w T hich
were limited to East Mudros owing to the lack of
piers and water on the west side of the Harbour.
In particular, the sites of the Australian Stationary
Hospitals were bad, bordering the road through
which much traffic passed but convenient to the
“ Australian ” pier.
The sites of the two British Stationary Hospitals
were better but there was an absence of considered
plans of encampments for the troops, with the result
that hospital and camp sites were cheek by jowl, to
the obvious disadvantage of the former.
The hospital accommodation was insufficient for
the number of wounded that were arriving from
the beaches and patients were in consequence
transferred direct to hired transports in the Bay,
with the result that the proper sorting out of cases
was often impossible, and a man, once he got on a
hired transport, was pretty certain to be sent away
whether this was really necessary or not. There
was, however, little disadvantage in this, as the
vast majority were cases of wounds and as the
main consideration w r as evacuation. In order to
remedy this, the accommodation in the hospitals
was increased and Casualty Clearing Stations
utilised as Convalescent Depots.
One of my first cares was to secure the appoint-
ment of an Administrative Medical Officer on shore
at Mudros East.
As a result of the action at Helles, in the last
week in June I saw a good deal of the conditions
under which the wounded were dealt with. The
wounded -were brought from the beaches in hospital
ships or “ sweepers ”to Mudros. In the former
case they either went on in the hospital ship to
Alexandria or when hospital ships could not be
spared for the voyage, were transferred to trans-
ports or the shore hospitals at Mudros. Cases
arriving at Mudros in sweepers were landed there
in ordinary circumstances, or when battle casualties
were numerous were transferred direct to a carrier
which, when filled, was despatched to Egypt.
Some of these carriers were partially fitted for sick ;
the Staffs were comparatively small, but were
supplemented from the ships* companies. There
were no women nurses, the supply of clothing
and utensils was sometimes insufficient to meet
demands, but the Red Cross was able, as a rule, to
make good deficiencies and supplement the official
provision. There was not, so far as I know, any
shortage in medical supplies or comforts. These
carriers were often crowded and many cases had
to be treated on deck; but this was not a dis-
advantage, for, thanks to the climate, these deck
cases did so well that I gave instructions that all
serious septic cases should be treated on deck.
Although I was not satisfied as to the conditions
under which the wounded were being moved at this
period, I was thoroughly satisfied that the best
possible was being done through the energy of the
D.D.M.S., L. of C., who spared no effort to ensure
that the sick and wounded suffered no avoidable
hardship.
The Medical Units at Mudros at this date were
2 British and 2 Australian Stationary Hospitals,
2 Casualty Clearing Stations, 1 Indian Field
Ambulance, 1 Section British Indian Field Ambu-
lance and 1 Base Depot Medical Stores.
12. From Mudros I proceeded to visit the posi-
tions occupied by the troops at Gaba Tepe and
Helles. I found the conditions far from being
sanitarily satisfactory—the terrain held was limited,
and the space that could be used for hospital pur-
poses very small and without protection from the
enemy’s fire. There was much difficulty in
making adequate sanitary arrangements, for the
ground available for trenching was insufficient.
There were also constant difficulties as to the
supply of water, rations and material.
The Medical Units at the beaches consisted of
the bearer divisions of the Divisional Field Ambu-
lances with at each a Casualty Clearing Station, a
Sanitary Section and an Advanced Depot of
Medical Stores.


The hospitals (Casualty Clearing Stations) at
Anzac and Helles were alike exposed to fire, but
the space available at Helles was much larger,
and No. 11 Casualty Clearing Station there was,
in fact, an excellent hospital, where, at the time of
my visit, 23,000 wounded had been dealt with.
At both places, through the energy of those in
authority, everything possible—with the limited
means available —was being done to make adequate
sanitary and hospital arrangements and provide
shelter for the troops.
A hospital ship was stationed off each beach and
was used for the reception of the serious cases, but
the more lightly wounded were taken straight to
Mudros in sweepers or transferred to them from
the hospital ships, where they had to be retained
until the arrival of the sweepers, for at neither
beach was it possible to keep many cases on shore
for any length of time.
It was necessary to employ sweepers, as, owing
to the number of cases requiring evacuation (about
150 from Anzac and 300 from Helles daily) they
could not all be accommodated on hospital ships.
These sweepers were steamers of the cross-
Channel type, and could each take 150 patients,
for about half of whom there was lying-down
accommodation. Each sweeper carried 2 medical
officers and 7 to 20 orderlies, with medical supplies,
comforts and three days’ provisions. These
vessels, which generally brought up reinforcements,
had good saloons and cabins, were reasonably well
equipped, and suitable for this duty.
13. I then went to General Headquarters and
saw the Commander-in-Chief and his Staff. I
should have mentioned that the Director of Medical
Services, Mediterranean Expeditionary Force (at
that time Surgeon-General Birrell) had met me in
Egypt and came back with me to the Dardanelles,
and that we discussed the many sanitary and
administrative problems that had arisen and were
likely to arise during the voyage from Egypt.
I discussed with Sir lan Hamilton questions such
as canteens, sanitary requirements, the provision
of additional hospitals and improvement of those
at Mudros, and the question of evacuation of the
sick and wounded.
The Commander-in-Chief told me that it was
proposed to send out Surgeon-General Sir James
Porter, Royal Navy, as Principal Hospital Trans-
port Officer, and that he would be responsible for
all sea transport arrangements, I said that I
thought the effect of such an arrangement would be
an unfortunate division of responsibility, and Sir
lan then told me that he had already wired to the
War Office deprecating an appointment of the sort.
While I was at General Headquarters it was
settled that it would be necessary to provide a
hutted General Hospital of 1,000 beds at Mudros,
and the War Office was so informed. I also dis-
cussed with the Staff concerned water supplies,
condensing plant, piers, hutting for the Casualty
Clearing Station at Helles, and the introduction of
the pail system of latrines on the Peninsula, and
with the Quartermaster-General, the programme
of evacuation by hospital ships to which I have
already referred, I also asked the War Office to
appoint a special Sanitary Officer to General Head-
quarters.
14. On my return to Mudros suggested sites for
additional hospitals on the west side of the harbour
were examined with the representative of the
D. of W., and I arranged with the Deputy-Director
of Medical Services and D. of W. as to hutting for
the Stationary Hospitals and for dining shelters
for existing hospitals.
The provision of medical stores, the supply of
equipment and staffs for transports, and of a
reserve staff for transport duty, were discussed
with the Deputy-Director of Medical Services.
I arranged with the D.O.S. as to the provision of
new pattern hospital marquees,' of hospital cloth-
ing and other requirements for hospitals and trans-
ports, and for a very large supply of stretchers.
With the I.G.C. I discussed the arrangements
to be made for evacuation of the wounded by
transport in the event of heavy casualties occur-
ring, and embodied my views in a memorandum,
of which I attach a copy.
15. On my-return to Egypt (9th July) I took up
the question of improving the disembarkation
arrangements at Alexandria, arranged for emer-
gency staffs for transports on the principle of each
hospital providingthe staff for one ship. I asked the
War Office for 50 additional motor ambulances and
3.000 naval cots, and ordered through the Ordnance
10.000 mattresses to be made up locally for use in
transports carrying wounded.
I wired to the Wa,r Office as to the unsuitability
of the “ Gian McGillwray ” and “ Seeangchoon ”
as hospital ships.
I arranged for the establishment of special
bacteriological laboratories at Mudros, Anzac and
Helles, and asked the War Office for additional
supplies of cholera vaccine and for special officers
to inoculate the troops where this became desirable.
Following on this, I devoted much time to the
inspection and improvement of the hospitals in
Eygpt and their expansion on emergency. A
convalescent depot for enteric fever cases at Port
Said and convalescent camps for other cases at
Montaza and at Mustapha, near Alexandria, were
arranged for.
The appointment of the following officers as
Consulting Surgeons to the troops in the Dar-
danelles, Malta and Egypt was approved at this
time: —
Colonels Mayo Robson, Sir V. Horsley, Warren
Low, Tubby, Bird, Stoneham, Ryan, Charters-
Symonds, Thorburn and Ballance,
The following Consulting Physicians were also
appointed about this period :
Colonels Purves-Stewart and Gulland, Lieutenant-
Colonels Sir Ronald Ross and Willcox.
These officers were some of them employed on
hospital ships and some in hospitals on shore.
It was so arranged that the hospital ships off the
beaches always had Consulting Surgeons, these
officers transferring from ship to ship when
necessary.
16. About the middle of July I began to prepare
for the battles expected in connection with the
landing at Suvla.
It became essential to increase very largely the
hospital accommodation in Egypt and Malta, as it
was estimated that accommodation for 20,000
wounded would be required. On the 21st July
1 wired to Director-General, Army Medical Service,
an appreciation of the situation as to hospital


accommodation. There were then about 18,000
beds in Egypt, of which 10,000 were occupied,
Malta was prepaijng 10,000 beds, of which 5,600
were then occupied, in addition to which 400 beds
were available at Gibraltar ; at this time, therefore,
I could arrange for between 12,000 and 13,000
wounded, but by the 12th August the number of
beds in Egypt had grown to 24,000 and in Malta
to 13,700, and I was able to provide for 18,000
wounded in these Commands, while considerable
numbers could be dealt with in the expanded
hospitals at Mudros itself. Some of the extra
accommodation was obtained by the despatch of
certain hospitals to the Mediterranean from
England, some by clearing hospital patients either
to United Kingdom or to convalescent camps and
barracks,as well as by arranging for the temporary
expansion of the hospitals themselves.
Reinforcements of medical personnel were asked
for, and the War Office arranged to send out 70
medical officers, 100 nurses, and 425 other ranks
to Malta, and 270 medical officers, 394 nurses and
1,250 other ranks to Egypt and the Dardanelles,
the latter figures including provision for the large
number of transports that would be required.
The strain on the hospital accommodation w r as
likely to be great, especially as it was impossible,
owing to the number of ships necessarily locked up
in the Mediterranean at this j uncture, to evacuate
cases to the United Kingdom to the extent that
would have been desirable. Evacuation was the
crux of the medical situation, for without very large
clearances the hospital population was bound to
increase.
I wish to acknowledge my deep obligations to
Field-Marshal Lord Methuen and General Sir John
Maxwell in this connection, for it is to the efforts
of these officers, backed by their Directors of
Medical Services, Surgeon-Generals Whitehead and
Ford, that a situation that developed unanticipated
proportions was met as it was.
In the 26 days between 10th August and sth
September about 50,000 sick and wounded, were
evacuated from the Dardanelles, of whom 20,000
were sick and 30,000 wounded. Some of these were
accommodated in the hospitals and camps at
Mudros, very large numbers were sent to Egypt,
and a proportion to Malta and Gibraltar, while
the pressure on the hospitals at Mudros, Egypt
and Malta was kept down by sending considerable
numbers of both sick and wounded direct to the
United Kingdom from the Dardanelles.
17. Great as were the difficulties on shore, the
provision of adequate sea transport was just as
difficult. There were, it is true, a large number of
transports in the Dardanelles that had brought
stores and reinforcements, but the tale of hospital
ships was not yet complete. Of these transports
25 had to be used for the conveyance of sick and
wounded, staffed with medical officers, nurses and
orderlies, and provided with equipment, medical
and ordnance. Unfortunately it was not possible
to bring the ships down to Alexandria to be staffed
and fitted, and there was delay or uncertainty
about the arrival of staffs and equipment from
home and in getting what had been prepared in
Egypt sent up to the Dardanelles in time. In the
end these difficulties were overcome and the trans-
ports were reasonably equipped and staffed.
I think there was only one ship that came down
to Egypt without nurses, that being due to the ship
having been hastily filled and despatched before
the nurses could reach her.
Transports were sent to Egypt or Malta according
to the amount of vacant accommodation at these
places, and towards the end a number of transports,
including the “ Aquitania,” were despatched direct
to the United Kingdom.
18. The arrangements for these vessels and the
hospital ships were by this time in the hands of
Sir James Porter, the Principal Naval Transport
Officer, who had arrived in the Mediterranean late
in July and was responsible for all sick transport
arrangements from the beaches to the bases in the
Mediterranean and at home.
19. I cannot speak as to the detailed medical
arrangements made in connection with the opera-
tions at Suvla, as I was not in the Dardanelles at
the time of the landing, but I attach a copy of a
letter I wrote to the Commander-in-Chief on the
subject,and of a memorandum in which I addressed
the Director of Medical Services on the scope and
nature of the preparations I thought desirable.
20, The sanitary and epidemiological problems
likely to be encountered during the campaign had
occupied my attention from the time of my appoint-
ment, and before I arrived in Egypt I had tele-
graphed and written to the Director-General, Army
Medical Service, as to the necessity for a special
sanitary staff, military or civil.
In response to my appeal a Sanitary Advisory
Committee, consisting of Colonel Hunter of the
London Fever Hospital, Lieutenant-Colonel
Buchanan of the Local Government Board, Balfour
of Khartoum and Dudgeon of St.Thomas’sHospital,
arrived in Egypt in July, and after making a
survey of the cases in hospital and sanitary con-
ditions there, proceeded as soon as the August
fighting permitted to the Dardanelles, where they
carefully investigated the sanitary conditions at
Suvla, Anzac, Helles and Mudros. This com-
mittee did not in any way supersede the established
sanitary organisation of the troops, and was able
to devote its whole time to special investigations
and inspections, while the acknowledged scientific
position of its members lent great weight to its
reports.
The reports of this committee, which were made
to me, were of the utmost value, and immediate
action was taken on them through the Staff of the
Command concerned, while copies, with notes of
what had been done and other comments, were sent
to the War Office.
Investigation showed that the sanitary con-
ditions under which the troops had to live on the
beaches left much to be desired, but the difficulties
in remedying defects were almost insuperable
owing to the cramped positions held and the lack of
sanitary materials such as wood and corrugated
iron. Apart from suggestions for the remedy of
gross sanitary defects the Committee was able to
give most valuable advice in connection with
inoculation and protection of the troops from
cholera, the differentiation of enteric and para-
typhoid fevers and of the dysenteries met with on
the peninsula and the many problems that beset
a force operating in a trying climate.
After my first visit to the Dardanelles I had
arranged for the establishment of bacteriological-
laboratories at Mudros and on the beaches, while,


later, special laboratories were arranged in Egypt
and Malta, where work, much of it of permanent
value, has been carried out.
The striking sanitary defect throughout was the
lack of sufficient supplies of timber, which rendered
it impossible to protect latrines and cooking places to
an adequate extent, and thereby render innocuous
the flies and infected dust which were the most
potent agents in the dissemination of disease.
21. I arrived at Mudros on 20th August, where
I was met by the Director of Medical Services,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, with whom
and the Deputy-Director of Medical Services, Lines
of Communications, I inspected the new hospital
units that had just arrived from home. These
comprised Lo. 3 Australian General Hospital
(1,040 beds), No. 18 British and Nos. 1 and 3
Canadian Stationary Hospitals (400 beds each), the
Lowland Divisional Casualty Clearing Station and,
No. 7 Base Depot Medical Stores. All were
encamped at West Mudros on good sites, and
although not fully established, were already taking
in patients.
In addition, No. 2 Australian Stationary Hospital
had been moved over from East Mudros, piers were
being built, a special gas laboratory erected and
condensing plant installed. Much remained to be
done in connection with road making, water supplies,
erecting of bathing and drying establishments, etc.,
but progress was being made.
An Assistant Director of Medical Services had been
appointed for East Mudros where there was a notable
improvement in the efficiency of the hospitals and
in the general sanitary conditions of the camps.
An excellent Convalescent Camp had been estab-
lished well inland on good ground. I inspected some
ambulance carriers (“ black ” ships) about to leave
for England and found them reasonably staffed and
equipped, but the nmnber of patients was large, being
in one case 1,000.
I saw the Sanitary Committee who had examined
the camps at Mudros and who brought to my notice
certain sanitary defects and requirements, of which
the chief was the lack of sufficient protection to the
water supply and the need for special attention to
the chlorination of all water used whether from
water tank vessels or local sources.
I conferred with the Principal Hospital Transport
Officer regarding evacuation from Mudros and from
Egypt and Malta, and after arranging for the estab-
lishment of a central bacteriological laboratory
at West Mudros and for the Sanitary Committee to
visit Anzac, Helles and Suvla, I proceeded to General
Headquarters at Imbros to see the Commander-in-
Chief.
I had gathered that there had been some difficulties
as to Surgeon-General Bin ell’s proposals for the
evacuation of the wounded, and I feared from what
1 bad heard that he Avas not working Avell Avith the
Principal Staff Officers of the Force. I consulted
the 1.G.C., the C.G.S., A.G. and Q.M.G. as to this,
and as all agreed that he was not a success, the A.G.
and I saw the Commander-in-Chief on the subject.
I said that although I had little fault to find with his
A\ r ork it Avas an impossible position if he had not the
full confidence of the Staff, and that I thought that he
had better go home. The Commander-in-Chief agreed.
I spoke to the Commander-in-Chief as to the
health of the troops and as to their future require-
rnents.
During my visit arrangements were completed for
hospital huts for 7,000 sick, and for the preparation
of the hutted hospitals for the peninsula when it
became possible to put them there.
I inspected the Casualty Clearing Station that had
been established at Imbros because of the recent
battles, and which had done admirable work; its
accommodation had been expanded and it could take
2,000 patients. The number of sick in the force
at this time was growing rapidly, and the troops
were suffering from bowel complaints; to this
question the special attention of the Military Sanitary
Staff and of the Sanitary Committee was directed.
An additional sanitary officer (Lieutenant-Colonel
Aldridge, C.5.1.) who had exceptional experience in
India arrived from home and was appointed Assistant
Director of Medical Services (Sanitary) at General
Headquarters.
22. On my return to Egypt (4th September) I had
with the General Officer Commanding and Director
of Medical Services, to consider the alterations and
variations in Hospital and Convalescent Establish-
ments that would be necessary during the winter
months, including a 1 arge Convalescent Depot at Luxor.
The staffing of carriers taking invalids to England,
the provision of a central laboratory, and of a splint
factory, the improvement of the X-Ray outfits, and
the supply of reinforcing drafts had to be arranged;
and with Sir Courtauld Thomson, the Red Cross
Commissioner, the enlargement of the Montaza
Convalescent Camp and the provision of special
invalid diet kitchens in the hospitals was agreed to.
23. On the 15th September I sailed for Malta.
En route I had the opportunity, which I took on
all voyages, of carefully inspecting the hospital ship
in which I travelled.
After seeing Field-Marshal Lord Methuen, the
Commander-in-Chief, I visited, with the Director of
Medical Services, Surgeon-General Whitehead, the
hospitals and convalescent establishments on the
Island. Briefly, owing to the diminution of the
number of troops many of the barracks in Malta
were available for hospital purposes, and in addition
many excellent schools and other institutions had
been placed at the disposal of the medical authorities.
I reported to the Director-General that I was much
delighted with what I had seen, and that accom-
modation for 14,000 patients in hospital, and con-
valescent camps as good as hospitals, had been
provided through the vigour and energy of the
Commander-in-Chief and his Director of Medical
Services.
There was some difficulties in getting recovered
men back to the Front, and various points as to
scientific work and administrative details to be settled
but the general arrangements were of the highest
standard.
24. Leaving Malta, I sailed for Mudros, arriving on
29th September, to meet and consult with the new
Director of Medical Sendees, Surgeon-General Bedford,
C.M.G., Avho had arrived a fcAV days before. There
Avas a good deal to be done in connection with the
arrangements for the despatch of troops from the
Dardanelles to Salonika, and I had a special confer-
ence with the I.G.C. and P.H.T.O. as to evacuation,
when it was agreed to send two hospital ships with
the troops to Salonika. The Medical Units of the
10th Division had to be inspected and arrangement
made to bring them up to strength ; there were
discussions as to fly destruction with an expert from


the British Museum sent out by the War Office, as
to the provision of spectacles for the troops and
surgical work in sie hospitals; matters of admin-
istration and reinforcements connected with the
Australian Troops had to be decided with Colonel
Howse, Y.C., the senior Australian Medical Officer
in the Dardanelles, and sanitary questions decided
with the Sanitary Committee, which, as the result of
visits to the beaches, had made a number of important
recommendations’which I did all I could to get given
effect to. The principal were the boxing of latrines
and protection of cooking places, but the giving
effect to these recommendations was necessarily
dependent on the supply of wood, and wood was very
scarce.
Meanwhile, the number of sick and wounded to be
evacuated continued to grow, and as the 10,000
vacant beds I had left in Malta and Egypt had been
filled, it was necessary for me to return to Egypt and
see what could be done to meet the pressure.
Lieutenant - Colonel Stammers, my A.D.M.S.
(Sanitary), was left at Mudros to accompany the
troops going to Salonika, and Bt.-Colonel Gibbard was
appointed A.D.M.S. at West Mudros where camps for
hospitals and troops were rapidly extending.
25. On 7th October I disembarked at Alexandria
and met Colonel Fetherston, the Director-General
of the Australian Army Medical Service, as to
Australian Medical matters.
The next question was the despatch of Medical
Units at Salonika. It had been arranged at Mudros
that two Stationary Hospitals (one New Zealand
from Port Said and one British from Mudros)
should go in the first instance, and the War Office
had arranged to send out two General Hospitals.
A few days later I went to Cairo and Port Said
on a visit of inspection and on my return arranged
for invalids for England to be taken up to Mudros
and transferred to the “ Aquitania ” there. I
might explain that the “Aquitania,” “Mauretania”
or‘“ Britannic ” could not come into any harbour
at Egypt or Malta, and therefore they had either
to be filled up with cases from Mudros or cases
sent to them and transferred there. In the event,
both procedures were adopted, as Mudros itself
could not fill these great ships without sending
home cases for whom change to England was not
necessary.
At this time a consulting ophthalmologist and
X-Ray expert joined the Force, their services
being available throughout the Mediterranean.
The Sanitary Committee returned to Egypt and
I met it from time to time as to the many pending
sanitary questions in the Mediterranean Expedi-
tionary Force and in Egypt.
My responsibility as to the Salonika Force was
confirmed by the War Office and a Royal Army
Medical Corps Base Depot was established at
Alexandria.
Special Committees were convened to work out
a simple system of statistical returns and reports
for infectious diseases, the co-ordination of bacterio-
logical work in connection with the enteric fevers
and dysentery, and the consulting surgeons met
and discussed a suggested appendix (dealing with
local conditions) to the War Office Memorandum
on “ Injuries in War.”
Early in November I directed the Sanitary
Committee to return to the peninsula to report
on the progress made in sanitary matters.
26. On 6th November I embarked for Salonika,
No. 4 Canadian General Hospital being on board.
My first duty was to inspect sites for the hospitals,
and excellent positions to the west of the town were
selected subject to the approval of Lieutenant-
Colonel Sir Ronald Ross as to their suitability for
occupation in the summer months when malaria
was reported to be very prevalent. I also inspected
the Medical Units there, the positions occupied by
our troops near Salonika, and on the Doiran front.
Surgeon-General Macpherson arrived at Salonika
a few days after my departure and assumed
duty as Director of Medical Services, Salonika
Force, which was under the Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
27. On 16th November I returned to Mudros.
Field-Marshal Lord Kitchener was in Mudros at
this time and I had an interview with him, reporting
what had been and what remained to be done.
I attended a special conference with 1.G.C.,
P.H.T.0., and Q.M.G. and D.D.M.S. Lines of
Communication as to the number of hospital ships
likely to be required in the future, and also with
reference to the evacuation of 10,000 casualties
from the peninsula in four days.
I saw General Sir C. Munro, who had assumed
command, as to the sanitary requirements of the
troops and explained how it was proposed to clear
12,000 beds in Egypt and Malta for the emergency,
which latter question was also discussed with
P.H.T.O.
Colonel Melville and Major LeLean joined my
Staff for duty as sanitary officers and I arranged
with the latter for special classes of instruction
in sanitation for medical officers.
During this visit the weather was extremely
cold and stormy, with snow showers, and I was
storm-bound on board ship for some days. The
troops on the peninsula suffered greatly during
the blizzard and about 16,000 cases of frost-bite
and exposure were 'evacuated from the peninsula,
12,000 of these being from Suvla, 2,700 from Anzac
and 1,200 from Helles. This imposed a great strain
on the hospital accommodation at Mudros and the
Bases, especially in view of the casualties antici-
pated in connection with the evacuation of Suvla
and Anzac.
What had happened was, firstly, a southerly gale
with deluges of rain which flooded the trenches
and dug-outs, especially at Suvla and then the
wind veered round suddenly to the north with icy
snow showers. There was no shelter for the men
and wet through as they were they were literally
frozen as they stood. Fortunately many of the
cases were slight and the men recovered within a
few hours ; but many were serious and resulted in
the loss of toes and feet in a large number of
instances. The suffering was not due to lack of
warm clothing as the men were reported to be on
the whole well clad, having great coats and good
under-clothes.
This blizzard also affected the troops at Salonika
but to a much less extent, and from the rough
figures I have given it will be seen that at Anzac
and Helles things were very .much better than at
Suvla.
About the end of November the War Office
determined to revert to the ordinary arrangements
as to sea transport and Sir James Porter the
P.H.T.O. left for England.


More than once the suggestion had been made
that one of the great hospital ships should be kept
at Mudros as a floating hospital. I consulted the
I.G.C. as to the feasibility of the suggestion, having
in view the difficulties of coaling and watering.
The I.G.C. was of opinion that while these difficul-
ties were not insuperable they would cause great
discomfort to the patients and that there were
other general objections.
I agreed; especially as during bad weather
when a ship would be most in request it would
often be impossible to put patients on board, and
the smaller vessels could if necessary be used when
the weather conditions would permit.
28. On Ist December I returned to Egypt and
was very fully occupied arranging for the additional
hospital accommodation required there and in
Malta. With the energetic assistance of the
Directors of Medical Services I was able to raise
between 6,000 and 7,000 additional beds in Egypt
and 2,000 at Malta. Hospitals were cleared to
convalescent camps and the latter to Base Details
Camps, and in this way it was hoped to meet the
constant influx of sick and wounded and to provide
for the casualties to be anticipated on the evacua-
tion of Suvla and Anzac. For this evacuation
every possible hospital ship was concentrated at
the Dardanelles, and at the time of evacuation
there were 15 of these vessels actually present
while further assistance was assured by the arrival
of the “ Aquitania ” and other big ships, and by
the speedy return of the ships sent to Egypt and
Malta.
As the ships were not required for the wounded,
a proportion was utilised to take invalids home
from Egypt and Malta while the big ships took
cases direct from Mudros, being partly filled by
transfers sent from Egypt and Malta.
For the evacuation of Helles similar arrange-
ments were made.
A little later it was determined to establish a
General Base for the supply of all Forces in the
Levant and through which all questions of hospital
ships and carriers would be arranged. I became
Director of Medical Services of the Levant Base in
addition to my duties as Principal Director of
Medical Services, Mediterranean, and the working
of the hospital ships as carried out from my
office, under the authority of the General Officer
Commanding, Levant Base.
The hospital and convalescent accommodation
available in the Mediterranean about this time
amounted to some 70,000 beds, of which 35,000
were in Egypt, 20,000 in Malta, 10,000 in Mudros,
and 5,000 in Salonika.
29. I have not in these notes referred to, or only
referred incidentally, to certain special questions
affected or may have affected the health of
the troops, and I might conveniently summarise
my remarks on these points here.
Rations. —The field service ration was the liberal
one sanctioned just before the outbreak of war;
there were great difficulties in the supply -of
vegetables, and sometimes of bread which was sent
up in sweepers and must often have arrived in bad
condition. Then there were difficulties as to fuel,
one result of which was that tinned meat was
sometimes preferred to fresh as the boxes could be
used for fuel and many other purposes. Again,
there was an entire absence of canteens for many
(C 49—242)
months, and in consequence the men were con-
fined to their regulation rations. In the autumn
a revised and specially liberal scale of rations was
sanctioned for use during the winter months.
Water Supply. —The local supplies were poor, and
though many efforts were made to improve them
they were not particularly successful. The beaches
were largely dependent on water brought in barges
and the water so provided was brought in tank
ships from England or the Mediterranean ports,
with consequent danger of contamination en route
and when delivered to the shore. Later a large
condensing plant was installed at Mudros and dis-
tributed by pipes to the camps there, but for the
major portion of the campaign there was constant
handling of water with all its attendant difficulties
and dangers. Chlorination was relied upon as the
general means of purification, but with raw troops
and inexperienced officers (military and medical) it
was by no means as carefully and universally
carried out as it should have been. The investiga-
tions made as to the water supplies did not, how-
ever, result in tracing the dysentery, from which
the troops suffered to such a large extent, to water
pollution, and I think I may say that there was
little evidence that enteric and paratyphoid fevers
were water-borne.
Clothing. —ln August, 1915, a special scale of
clothing for use during the winter months was
sanctioned; it was most liberal and suitable, and
as good, if not better, than had ever been issued
to an army in the field.
Rest. —The troops on the peninsula suffered
from the absence of places where they could rest
in the intervals when not on duty in the trenches,
for when relieved from these they were still
subject to fire. Rest camps were established in
Mudros and Imbros, but for a long time the men
remained unrelieved on the peninsula, and the
strain that resulted plus the difficulties as to
rations and water undoubtedly exercised an
unfavourable influence on their health, and power
of resisting disease.
Timber and Corrugated Iron. —I have already
referred to the scarcity of wood, but I wish to
emphasise that the shortage in wood and corru-
gated iron was perhaps the most important factor
in the dissemination of disease. It was foreseen
at a comparatively early period that disease was
spread through the agency of flies, and that the
remedy was, first to prevent these pests breeding
in or about latrines, second to deny them access
to latrines, and third to protect food and kitchens
from infected flies. The first could under certain
circumstances be achieved by a careful conserv-
ancy, but it was often impossible in and about the
trenches ; the second was dependent on the supply
of wood whereby the latrines could be boxed in
and made fly-proof, and the third only by the
erection of fly-proof kitchen shelters.
The accidents of war led to the loss of ships carry-
ing iron and wood, and there was never anything
like adequate supplies available either for the
hospitals or the troops, who not only suffered from
the absence of protected latrines and kitchens but
from insufficient shelter from the weather. I had
large numbers of box latrines prepared in Egypt,
but only a small proportion reached the troops
owing to their bulk and difficulties of carriage.
Inoculation. —The troops were carefully pro-


tected by inoculation against enteric fever, but not
until a late stage was a paratyphoid vaccine avail-
able. The relative incidence of these two groups
was carefully investigated in the different labora-
tories at Mudros and in Egypt, and the proportion
of true enteric fever to paratyphoid was about
1 to 19, so that of the total of between 8,000 or
9,000 cases of the enteric group under 500 were
genuine enteric fever. Inoculation against cholera
was also carried out on an extensive scale by a
special staff, and a large proportion of the men
protected, but as the disease did not appear the
efficacy of the protection afforded was not demon-
strated.
Red Cross. —The sick and wounded are under
particular obligations to the work of the British
Red Cross Society and Order of St. John of
Jerusalem, which never failed to meet the demands
for supplies required to supplement the official
equipment of hospitals and hospital ships. This
work of the joint societies was most ably directed
by Colonel Sir Courtauld Thomson, the Chief
Commissioner in the Near East, whose aim was not
to supplant but to' supplement official resources,
and to utilise and direct to the best advantage all
offers of help. In addition, special hospitals, con-
valescent homes, and camps were provided by the
Red Cross.
W. BABTIE, Surg.-General.
War Office,
30$ November, 1916.
Office of P.D.M.S.,
Alexandria.
July , 1915.
D.M.S., M.E.F.
There are some points I want to write to you
about in regard to the arrangements for battle
casualties:—
1. The special personnel being sent is for the use
of both Egypt and M.E.F. at my discretion, and I
hope that you shall have (over and above staffed
hospital ships) 200 M.Os. and 240 nurses for the
special transports. As to the N.C.Os. and men, the
War Office telegrams are not clear, but you may be
able to supply any shortage of R.A.M.C. from field
units not engaged. You shall have every man I
can send you.
2. As to supplies, Egypt has already arranged for
medical stores for a dozen ships, and mattresses,
pillows, blankets, sheets, can be supplied in large
numbers. Regarding this you must look ahead as
I am not clear that you will be provided with all
you want from home in time.
3. One of my chief anxieties is the getting of the
wounded to the transports, which presumably will
be at Mudros, but by using all available and suitable
craft this may be overcome.
4. Another difficulty will be getting wounded
from the shore to the hospital ships and sweepers, and
great delay can only be avoided by the most careful
organisation and active co-operation of Army and
Navy.
5. Wounded waiting on the beaches must be well
looked after and exceptional arrangements for at-
tending to them and feeding them will be essential.
As to how this can best be done I am, of course,
unable to advise, but there should be ao difficulty
in conjunction with D. of S. in providing ample
supplies of food.
As to the character of that food, my experience is
that most men who have been lying out require sub-
stantial food, such as good stews, and cannot be
satisfied with bovril and that sort of thing. Stews,
cocoa or tea, biscuits or bread, bovril, etc., should all
be available in every C.C.S. and at every embarkation
place or collecting station. *-
Much must depend on the military situation, but
a high standard in this respect is essential.
6. The cases on the shore must be sorted, however
roughly, into those for hospital ships and those for
sweepers; the hospital ships should take serious cases,
and as large numbers as are possible of cases requiring
early attention and operation. I fear it will not be
possible to discriminate much further—possibly not
so far.
7. I presume that you will have the hospital ships
available as close up to the scene of action as possible,
and I know that you will have much difficulty in
preventing cases getting to the wrong ships—very
serious cases being put on sweepers and light cases
getting to the hospital ships ; but if the rough sorting
I have suggested can be carried out it may be possible
to minimise this. It is a matter of organisation—
if only the opportunity of applying the organisation
is not lacking.
8. Similarly the organisation of the embarkations
at Mudros will require to be carefully worked out.
If I were personally responsible I should arrange
that sweepers as they arrived should come alongside
the “Aragon” or a medical ship conveniently an-
chored to intercept them, and get definite orders
as to what they are to do with their human freight.
If this can be done the D.D.M.S. L. of C. or whoever
represents him can learn exactly what is on board
the sweeper and issue his orders accordingly—to ship
or hospital on shore, or whatever it is,
9. I don’t know if the Red Cross or other launches
for the Medical Service have arrived or not, but special
facilities for the D.D.M.S. and his staff getting about
at a time like that contemplated are imperative.
He must move about and see many transports.
Every one of them must be visited by him, or by
some responsible officer on his staff, who must see
that the ship does not go to sea till she has sufficient
M.O’s., nurses, orderlies, and supplies, medical, Red
Cross and other. The inspecting officer must be
generally responsible that the cases are prima
fade suitable for the ship.
10. The equipping and staffing of the transports
will fall on the over-burdened D.D.M.S. at Mudros,
and his staff must be augmented to the extent
necessary, and he should have a Naval transport
representative to help him. It is a matter of regret
that the ships and staff cannot be assembled here,
en route, where we would have had the assistance
of the principal matron in selecting nurses for charge—
a very important point—and been able more or
less deliberately to select M.O’s. for their special
duties. lam asking War Office to name from the
special staff of M.O’s. and nurses a sufficient number
suitable for charge of ships—they know them; we
do not.
11. Report to me by letter or wire if you can do so
with due regard to military considerations, what
arrangements you propose. I should like to know
how you are going to utilise your Casualty Clearing
Stations, and what are your plans for receiving,


dressing and feeding the wounded, on shore and on
sweepers.
12. The sweepers will require special attention,
and M.O's. must see that they are fully provided
with food, Red Cross sweeper-boxes of comforts,
dressings, and all else possible. Written instructions
as to these things must be issued to each M.O. on a
sweeper and nothing left to chance. It is just
there that default and sins of omission are most
likely to occur.
13. The reception of wounded in transports and
hospital ships also requires watching; patients
must be fed on arrival, that is to say, food in
plenty must always be ready.
14. I am not going into the surgical treatment
of cases, because the consultants with you will
no doubt frame for you any necessary rules for
general guidance. One thing I cannot however
omit, and that is the necessity of treating severe
sepsis and gangrene on deck—never in a ward.
15. Are your supplies of peroxide, anti-tetanic
serum, etc., sufficient ?
16. Are gas respirators available for use if
wanted ?
17. Where are you going to put No. 3 A.G.H. ?
It is a good unit, and it should be of the very
greatest assistance. The site selected at Mudros
for the hut hospital would do, I think, or better
still one near that would leave the chosen site
unpolluted. The hospital has sisters, remember.
18. The ships cannot all go to Egypt or Malta.
It is very unlikely that Egypt and Malta will be
able together to take more than 12,000 or 13,000
cases. Therefore some must go straight home,
and of course one would prefer to send well filled
hospital ships home, but if one battle is to be
succeeded by another you cannot deplete yourself
of hospital ships which are in effect your field
hospitals, so it will be wise to select some of the
best transports to send direct to the United
Kingdom if necessary. Another point of im-
portance is not to send ships to Alexandria, or
Malta in such quick succession as to block these
ports, or overtax the ambulance train capacity
of Egypt. Alternate, Alexandria, Malta, and
possibly England so long as vacant accommodation
allows. As to that Egypt will keep D.D.M.S.
L. of C. informed from day to day, and Malta
should be asked to do the same.
19. The housing on ships of the special medical
and nursing staff at Mudros may present difficulties,
but the aim there should be to get them allocated
and on board their ships as soon as possible after
arrival.
20. Would “stretcher carriages” be useful to
you on the beaches ? I could collect some, I think.
21. I have remarked, I am sure, on many very
obvious points, and I am just as sure that I have
forgotten or omitted many others of equal im-
portance, but your experience will correct the
omissions and you will I know forgive the
obvious. (Sd.) W. BABTIE.
MEMORANDUM on the Medical Provisions
that would be required in the event of a Battle on
the Peninsula, involving say, 15,000 casualties.
The principal consideration is that owing to the
military conditions on the beaches at Anzac and
Helles,'the immediate embarkation of all wounded
is necessary.
(C 49 —24i)
2. As transports cannot lie off the beaches it is
necessary in order to effect this to have sufficient
(a) shore boats ; (6) hospital ships for bad cases;
and (c) sweepers to take the lightly wounded to
transports.
3. Hospital ships and transports will also be
required for the movement of cases to the base
and to the United Kingdom.
4. The number of hospital ships and transports
that are generally available would be insufficient
to meet requirements. Of the first we can calculate
on nine at present, and although all would not be
on the station at any one time, with warning we
might concentrate five or six. These cannot
accommodate more than 500 wounded each (200
serious, 300 light), their maximum capacity being
therefore some 3,000 cases of all sorts.
5. There remains hospitals on shore at Mudros,
practically always full of patients but not generally
of men seriously ill. These hospitals can take
about 2,500 and, if they can be cleared into
convalescent camps, and to Egypt, of a proportion
of light cases, accommodation for a maximum
of 1,500 womided might be available on shore.
But here again a question of ships is likely to arise
at a time when ships may be very precious.
6. Taken together (4) and (5) may be taken as
accounting for 4,500 cases. There remains 10,500
to be dealt with in transports. I do not know the
number of transports generally available, but
assuming that six could be found with an average
capacity of 600, 3,600 can be accounted for, a
grand total of, say, 8,000.
7. For the balance (7,000) transports must be
found from outside the theatre of operations.
8. With the assistance of the Navy and the
presence of spare field ambulances at Mudros as
at present, staff for five ships might be found here.
The other transports must bring staffs with them.
9. To assemble and keep together transports
capable of dealing with 7,000 casualties is the initial
difficulty, and it is in this respect that the problem
differs from that of the original landing when the
transports carrying soldiers up could be and were
used to bring wounded down. To allow some
margin the number of additional transports
required may be taken as 14 and they must bring
their staffs with them. It will be agreed that 14
transports cannot be assembled without ample
warning.
10. The only alternative is the establishment of
a sufficient number of large hospitals on shore at
Mudros and possibly at Imbros. Even if this was
possible it would not avoid, it might
postpone, the necessity for the assistance of
transports, and the time taken to establish these
hospitals would be much greater than that required
to assemble transports, .
11. The number of sweepers and other similar
vessels required for the conveyance of the wounded
from the beaches to the transports is another
important consideration. A sweeper can only
make one voyage a day to Mudros, but two voyages
would be possible to Imbros if transports could go
there and if hospitals were available there.
After making allowance for the number embarked
on the hospital ships, upwards of 50 trips would
be necessary. I do not know the number of
sweepers available in a great but this
aspect of the matter is very important indeed if
delay on the exposed beaches is to be avoided.


The disposal of the wounded after leaving the
Dardanelles must also be considered, for the re-
sources of Egypt anfl Malta are limited ; transports
if sufficiently fitted for the voyage might go to the
United Kingdom direct but only a proportion of
hospital ships could be spared to do this. The
hospitals in Egypt and Malta must be kept as clear
as possible by a system of liberal evacuation which
in itself would probably prevent the diversion of
hospital ships from the Egypt-United Kingdom,
and other lines of evacuation to India and
Australasia.
Mudros, (Sd.) W. BABTIE.
3 July, 1915.
MEMORANDUM on the evacuation of the sick
and wounded of the Mediterranean Expedi-
tionary Force.
d.m.s.' G ’ } Med - Force -
In War Office Telegram No. 57.38 Q.M.G. 2 of
24th June, 1915, certain arrangements are proposed
for the service of hospital ships not only for the
Mediterranean Force to Egypt and the United
Kingdom, but also for the services between Suez
and Bombay, Suez and Australia and New
Zealand, and Egypt and Malta and the United
Kingdom.
For the Mediterranean Force there are two
suggested services—(1) From the Dardanelles to
the United Kingdom direct, to which five vessels
are allotted; (2) a ferry service to Alexandria,
for which 12 ships are allowed. The first will allow
of a ship sailing every 10 days and the patients to
be put on these vessels must, as a rule, all be cases
regularly invalided to England. These ships will
provide, taking the average as 500 per vessel, for
] ,500 invalids a month. (2) Of the 12 vessels under
this category, I understand two are to be ear-
marked for Indians and wounded Turkish prisoners,
and 10 for British and Colonial sick and wounded.
The latter number should be sufficient to permit
of two vessels sailing every three days, say 20
sailings per month,- and taking each vessel as
carrying about 500, the number of British sick and
wounded that can be evacuated to Alexandria by
this means may be 10,000.
The two ships for Indians are less suitable, but
each could easily take 300 cases and make two
voyages per mensem; this will provide for 1,200
cases per mensem, a number in excess of probable
requirements, but this camiot be helped, as an
Indian ship will always be required at Mudros.
Allowing seven days for the voyage to Alexandria
and back, and 40 days for the round voyage to
England, there will always be one ship on the
station for the reception of invalids for England,
five for sick and wounded for Alexandria, and one
for Indians—a total of seven.
Of this seven, two will be off Anzac and Helles ;
one (reserved for Indians) and three (for Alex-
andria) and one (for England) for British in
Mudros Bay. In ordinary circumstances the
Alexandria ships for British sick and wounded at
Mudros will fill up one by one ; this will permit
of a constant reserve for battle casualties, and as
the ships will sail in quick succession, no serious
dislocation need result after an ordinary engage-
ment; for as ships become filled others will become
available,
An adequate supply of suitable launches, capable
of taking cases, serious and other, to and from
ship to shore and ship to ship is necessary. These
launches should be marked with a Red Cross and
reserved for the medical service. Similarly, it is
most desirable that each hospital ship should be
provided with a steam launch or motor boat for the
use of medical staff.
It is of prime importance that the hospital ships
should in ordinary circumstances run and adhere
to a pre-arranged programme of sailings and
arrivals. It is obvious that the stress of war may
upset any predetermined plan, but adherence to
this principle is essential to success. The pro-
gramme must be one of “ sailings,” not of indi-
vidual ships, for it will be necessary to fit in the
ships at the beaches as they fill up.
The programme must also be observed even if
ships have to sail with less than their full com-
plement of patients. On punctuality in this
respect the maintenance of the reserve on the
station is entirely dependent.
General Headquarters, (Sd.) W. BABTIE.
29 th June, 1915.
Sir lan Hamilton.
Alexandria,
27 th July, 1915.
Dear General,
I had hoped to be with G.H.Q. at this time,
but I am unfortunately in bed with dysentery,
and fear that I may not be able to come up until
too late.
There is, however, a very great deal I can do
here, even now, in assisting to clear the hospitals
and in adding to the accommodation in them.
The difficulty is that the automatic requirements
of the Force is, owing to its increasing strength,
growing to such an extent that it is not easy to
keep the hospital population within bounds.
Lord Methuen and Sir John Maxwell are doing
everything possible to provide additional beds
and to facilitate the clearing of the hospitals of
convalescent patients. The Red Cross, too, is very
active and helpful, and their work requires atten-
tion, as do the arrangements for the disembarka-
tion and distribution of the wounded here. Ever
since I received your telegram as to the number of
possible casualties I have been in constant com-
munication with the War Office as to the additional
hospitals, M.O s.. nurses and other ranks to be
sent from home. That has now been settled on a
very liberal scale, and I do not think there will
be any deficiency in personnel. I hope all may
arrive in time. I have also discussed with Birrell
how best to meet the extraordinary circumstances
of the medical situation.
The chief difficulties to be anticipated are :
1. The man-handling of large numbers of
wounded to the beaches. This will impose a very
severe strain on the field ambulances, who may
require such assistance as is possible from the
troops and from the fleet in the provision of
bearers.
2. The caring for the wounded awaiting em-
barkation ; exceptional arrangements for attending
to and feeding the waiting wounded will be required,
and I have asked D.M.S. to make special provision
as regards food with the D. of S. What is wanted
is plentiful supplies of substantial food, such as


stews supplemented by tea, cocoa and medical
comforts.
3. The sorting out of the cases into those requir-
ing early attention on hospital ships and those
that can be sent to transports. The boat services
for these two classes of cases should be distinct,
cases for hospital ships being collected and em-
barked at different places from those for tran-
sports. If only mixing can be avoided the scandal
of serious cases being carried long distances on
sweepers while the hospital ships get filled up
with lightly wounded men may be averted.
With the help of the Navy and careful organisa-
tion I feel certain that serious trouble in this
important respect may be avoided. The difficulty
will be the provision of a sufficient number of
boats for shore work and of sweepers, and I hope
it may be possible to supplement the latter by
using tugs and swift paddle-steamers.
4. The Red Cross have provided special boxes
of utensils, clothing and comforts for the wounded
on the sweepers, and I have impressed on D.M.S.
the necessity for very careful medical arrange-
ments on board these craft.
5. The arrangements for the embarkation, recep-
tion and feeding of the wounded on the transports
is a matter of importance.
6. The staffs arranged for the transports carry-
ing wounded are liberal and include nurses who, I
hope, will do much to diminish suffering.
7. The number of beds available in Egypt and
Malta is not likely to exceed 12,000 or 13,000, and
even after allowing for the possibility of treating
large numbers of the lighter cases on the shore at
Mudros, I fear it may be necessary to send con-
siderable numbers of wounded direct to England.
If hospital ships can be spared for this well and
good, but these ships are really the field hospitals
of the Force, and if battle is likely to succeed battle
then it would be unwise to detach them (they
cannot be back under a month), and it may be
necessary to use transports for this purpose. I
have therefore asked D.M.S. to select suitable
ships, and these should be specially staffed and
equipped.
Sir James Porter, the H.T.O.', who has gone
up to Mudros to take up his appointment, will be
a great help in these respects, and I have promised
him every possible help and assistance in his new
duties. I have learnt that at our interview here
there was a misunderstanding, Sir James thinking
I was reluctant to hand over to him while I was
endeavouring to explain that his was an appoint-
ment that involved taking over duties performed
not by me but by the Q.M.G/s staffs of the G.O.C s.
concerned and the Naval Transport authorities.
I hope that has now been made clear and that all
will be well, but I mention the matter as I repeated
a telegram on the subject to G.H.Q.
With many apologies for writing at this time.
Believe me, dear Sir lan Hamilton,
Yours sincerely,
(3d.) W. BABTIE.
“ Note.— Though transports and other vessels were used for the purpose of carrying wounded, these were not
marked or distinguished as hospital ships, nor was any immunity claimed for them, and their use in this way involved
no breach of The Hague Convention.”
(C 49—242)


166
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL PERCIVAL’S STATEMENT (APPENDIX E).
SCALE OF
APPENDIX E.
MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITIONARY FORCE.
SCALE OF DAILY RATIONS FOR BRITISH
TROOPS. FIELD SERVICE SCALE (OVER-
SEAS).
1 lb. fresh or frozen meat, or 1 lb. (nominal) preserved
meat.
If lbs. bread, or 1 lb. biscuit, or 1 lb. flour.
4 ozs. bacon.
3 ozs. cheese.
2 ozs. peas, beans, or dried potatoes.
| oz. tea.
4 ozs. jam, or 4 ozs. dried fruits.
3 ozs. sugar,
f oz. salt
JqOZ. mustard.
£g oz. pepper,
f tin of condensed milk.
30 B i]l (320 gallon) lime juice.
I giU (a’i gallon) rum. 1 At the discretion of the
Tobacco, or cigarettes. Not l G.0.C., on the recom-
exceeding 2 ozs. per week, | mendation of the Medical
for those who smoke. J Officer.
Fresh vegetables, whenever obtainable, issued at the rate
of f lb. per ration, and when these are supplied peas,
beans or dried potatoes and lime juice are not issued.
2 ozs. butter twice a week, f For soldiers in the trenches
additional to above. *1 or at the immediate front
I- of the field of operations.
GENERAL ROUTINE ORDER, DATED
17th MAY, 1915.
164. Scale, of Rations for Greek Labour Corps. —
Biscuits 1J lb. Pepper A. oz.
jjiov.ua vo Jfiia. i OZ.
Cheese J „ Beans, rice or
Jam I „ lentils J lb.
Dried vegetables ... | „ Olives 2 ozs.
Sugar 3 ozs. Olive oil 2
wugm ... ... kj Uno, VUVC Ull ... ... £
Tea ... ... | oz. Meat ... ' ... 411
| oz. Meat ... ... j lb. -December
i „ Dried fish 1 iozs. use: —
Salt I „ Dried fish 1 fozs.
165. Tobacco. —Cigarettes, tobacco and matches may be
issued to Gurkha soldiers of the Indian Brigade at the scale
laid down for British troops.
GENERAL ROUTINE ORDER, DATED
30th JUNE, 1916.
322. Lime juice will be issued at the rate of four issues
& week ; this issue will be made even when there is a daily
issue of fresh vegetables.
GENERAL ROUTINE ORDER, DATED
4th JULY, 1915.
338. Rations and Forage. —(a) Cigarettes will be issued
at the scale laid down for British troops to ail Indian troops,
including transport drivers.
(6) An issue of \ lb. grain and 2 lbs. hay per head daily
is authorised for slaughter live-stock.
GENERAL ROUTINE ORDER, DATED
6th JULY, 1915.
339. Supplies. —When available the following scale of
equivalents may be followed; this cancels all former
scales of equivalents published :
Flour 1 lb. = Biscuit 1 lb, = Bread If lbs.
Rice ... ... ... 4 ozs.'j
Jam 4 I
Golden syrup ... 4 „ j All equivalents
Cheese 3 „ J> of
Preserved meat ... 6 „ | each other.
Fresh meat ... ... 10 „ j
Dried fruits 4 M
It is hoped that dried fruits and rice will be available bv
25th July. J
Cheese will shortly cease to be issued and condensed
milk will be issued in lieu at the rate of one tin condensed
milk = 8 rations cheese, but condensed milk will not be
issued as an equivalent for anything else.
EXTRACT FROM MEDITERRANEAN EXPE-
DITIONARY FORCE LETTER, DATED 20th
OCTOBER, 1915.
Winter Scale of Rations.—D.QMG. has written to sav
that he has gone carefully into the matter with the
RATIONS.
D.M.S., who is of opinion thatdried fruit should be given for
special anti-scorbutic purposes. If, however, potatoes or
green vegetables become available, he is quite willing
that the dried fruit shall be discontinued. D.Q.M.G.
says ; “ the Commander-in-Chief himself has expressed
a desire that dried fruit shall be given.” D.Q.M.G. goes
on to say : “ the net result is that the scale for the winter
ration shall be as follows
Fresh meat 1 lb.
Preserved meat 1 ration.
Bread 1 lb.
Biscuit or flour | lb.
Bacon ... ... ... ... 4 ozs.
Milk ... ... f tin.
Rice 4 ozs.
Jam 3 „
Sugar 3
Cheese 3
Dried fruit 3
Dried vegetables 2
Tea ... ... ... ... ... | oz.
Salt f „
Mustard „
Pepper J*
Lime juice (2 weekly issues) ... GUI,
Tobacco or cigarettes (weekly) ... 2 ozs.
Fresh vegetables, when available,
at the rate of f lb. f
Rum \ gill. J”
* When fresh vegetables are not available,
t Instead, of dried vegetables and dried fruit.
% At the discretion of corps commanders, on the recom-
mendation of the medical officer.
SCALE OF FIELD SERVICE RATION AUTHORISED
by G.R.O. 650, DATED 16th NOVEMBER, 1915.
The following scale of rations will be issued from Ist
December, 1915, and will replace the scales that are now
Fresh meat 1 lb.
Preserved meat ... 1 ration.
Bread 1 lb.
Biscuit or Flour ... fib.
Bacon ... ... 4 ozs.
Milk f tin.
Rice 4 ozs. (5 issues a week).
Oatmeal 4 ~
Jam 3 „
Sugar 3 „
Cheese 3 „
Dried fruit 3 ..
Dried fruit 3 „ (when fresh vegetables
are not issued).
Dried Vegetables ... 2 ~ (when fresh vegetables
are ndf issued).
Tea ... ... ... f oz.
Salt \ „
Mustard A, oz. (6 issues a week).
Pe PPe r & „
Curry Powder ... f „ (1 issue a week).
Lime Juice gill. (2 issues a week).
Tobacco or Cigarettes 2 ozs. weekly.
Fresh vegetables, when available, at the rate of \ lb.
instead of Dried Vegetables and Dried Fruit.
Rum, f gill (at the discretion of corps commanders.
who may delegate their authority as they may
consider desirable).
Cocoa or Chocolate, If ozs. may be issued instead of
Rum for those who prefer it.
Extras for Troops on the Peninsula.
Daily.
1 oz. Pea Soup or Oxo.
f oz. Tea.
f oz. Sugar.
G.R.O. 715, dated 27/12/15. —These extras may now,
with the exception of Pea Soup or Oxo, be drawn by all
British Troops at Mudros and Imbros.
Twice a Week.
2 ozs. Butter or Margarine.
(Signed) Walter Campbell, Major-General ,
Deputy Quartermaster-General, MJS.F,


STATEMENT OF EVIDENCE OF LIEUT.-COL. F. H. WILLIAMSON,
R.E., Director of Army
The Army Postal Service is a section of the
Royal Engineers, Special Reserve, and is recruited
entirely from the staff of the Civil Post Office. In
this country it consists of a Home Depot or General
Base Post Office, which collects from the Civil
Post Office all letters and parcels addressed to the
Expeditionary Forces, sorts them into separate
unit bags for almost every separate unit in the
overseas forces, and controls their conveyance from
this country to the port of disembarkation in the
theatre of operations. Overseas, each Expeditionary
Force has its own Army Post Office, under a
Director of Postal Services, which, through its
system of Base, Stationary and Field Post Offices,
controls the actual delivery arrangements in the
field, arranges all local transport, collects and
despatches all correspondence posted in the field
and disposes of undelivered correspondence for
the killed and wounded.
The Army Postal System differs in one important
point from the civil —it does not deliver letters and
parcels to the addressee personally, but hands over
the correspondence for each military unit to the
authorised Post Orderly of that Unit. When a bag
of letters and parcels or a registered letter has been
handed over to a Post Orderly and a discharge
obtained, the responsibility of the Army Post Office
ceases.
This general system was applied to the Mediter-
ranean Expeditionary Force ; but the conditions
attending the despatch of that Force made it a
matter of some difficulty to organise the postal
service" at the outset on any satisfactory basis,
and it was some little time before the conditions
were sufficiently stable to permit of the establish-
ment of anything approaching a regular service.
An Assistant Director of Postal Services with
15 N.C.Os. and men was despatched from England
on 24th February, 1915, and arrived at Mudros
early in March ; but the military situation did
not at that time admit of the formation of a Postal
Base at Mudros, and after a stay of a fortnight he
was despatched to Alexandria, where he proceeded
to establish a Base Post Office.
A second officer with a small postal force left
England on 20th March, proceeded to Alexandria,
and was despatched thence to Mudros, arriving
there in April, when the troops were beginning to re-
assemble. Considerable inconvenience was caused
at the outset by the absence of proper postal per-
sonnel from certain formations. The 29th Division
had the personnel provided under War Establish-
ments, and the New Zealand troops also were
properly equipped. But the Naval Division and the
Australians had arrived without any postal force,
and their service in the field had to be extemporised.
This proved a somewhat slow and difficult task,
and some time elapsed before their arrangements
could be said to be satisfactory.
Meanwhile, the problem of despatching the mails
to the Force presented many difficulties. The
Army Post Office at Home, whose province it is,
as above explained, to make up the mails for the
troops, and to arrange for their overseas conveyance
(C 49-242)
Postal Service, Home.
to the Base of the Expeditionary Force, was unable
to obtain sufficient information to enable it to
consider what were the best means to adopt.
Mails were first despatched on 18th March, 1915,
when 17 bags of letters and 27 bags of parcels were
sent to the new Base * c Z.” The first instructions
from the War Office were to send all mails to
Malta, whence they were sent on by the Naval
authorities. At the outset, an attempt was made
to separate mails for Lemnos from those for Egypt.
This was soon abandoned, and all mails were
despatched to Lemnos, whether intended for the
troops there or for the Base in Egypt. But this
circulation naturally led to a good deal of delay
to correspondence for the Base in Egypt, and early
in May the Home Post Office was asked to separate
mails for Egypt from those for Lemnos, a small
postal staff being stationed at Malta to superintend
their onward transmission. This arrangement, how-
ever, only lasted for three weeks. Finally, at the
end of May the service vid Malta, which, owing to
inadequate communications, was not a very satis-
factory centre, was discontinued, and all mails
were despatched to Alexandria. The Advanced
Base Post Office had by that time been definitely
established on the Aragon at Mudros, and arrange-
ments had been made for all transports to call in
Mudros Bay and deliver their mails, while stationary
and field Post Offices had been got into working
order on the Peninsula and a service to the landings
organised. This service to Alexandria continued
up 3 to the time when a direct service to Mudros was
organised at the end of the year.
In the meantime, the postal personnel had been
considerably augmented, Major H. F. McClintock
having been sent out in April as Director of 1 ostal
Services with four Officers and 80 men. The
numbers sent out were based on the probable
requirements of the Force under normal conditions ;
but the work at the Base at Alexandria was soon
increased beyond all expectations by the large
number of casualties, which resulted in the return
to the Base Post Office of an enormous number
of letters and parcels from the Front. Attempts
, were made to deal with these by reference to Base
records, but as the records were incomplete and
• the staff very fully occupied, this soon proved
! impracticable, and it was found necessary m order
l to provide a satisfactory system of re-direction to
- organise in co-operation with the Hospitals a
i complete list of patients in hospital, and to keep
- this constantly up to date. At one period, an
- attempt was made to examine mails going through
3 Alexandria to the Front with a view to intercepting
correspondence for casualties, but this procedure
both delayed the mails, and also used up staff
1 which was urgently required for other purposes,
s and had to be abandoned. On the whole, the
treatment of casualty correspondence, though
s hampered by shortage of staff, which made it
e impossible to treat it as expeditiously as was desu-
able, worked fairly satisfactorily; m October
e about 25 per cent, of the returned letters, and 40
e per cent, of the parcels were being delivered to the


addressees in hospital; and it is understood that
there was a substantial improvement later.
In July and August, complaints of the defects of
the service became frequent, and it was alleged
that letters and parcels were delayed, lost or
stolen on a considerable scale. Very little was
known at home of the actual working of the service
and the Postmaster-General, who accepted general
responsibility for the Army Postal Service, sent out
the Witness to make a special inquiry on the spot.
A copy of the Witness’s report, which describes in
detail the working of the mail service to Gallipoli,
has been supplied to the Commission.
About this time also the question of accelerating
the service from England began to be raised. The
letter mail service to Gallipoli via Alexandria and
Mudros took about three weeks, and was liable,
owing to irregularities in the transport service, to
take considerably longer; the parcel service was
much slower, and might take up to 5 to 6 weeks,
according to the connections made at Alexandria.
It was suggested by the Inspector-General of
Communications that the service should be
improved by the establishment of a direct service
by two special ships between Marseilles and Mudros
and Imbros, two additional ships being employed
to give a, regular service between Adexandria and
Mudros, which was important because of the official
correspondence with the Base and the Australian,
Indian and New Zealand mails. The adoption of
these suggestions would have effected a great
improvement in the service; but unfortunately it
was quite impossible at the time to procure ships
which could be devoted entirely to the mail service ;
and after full discussion between the War Office,
Admiralty and Post Office, the scheme was found
to be impracticable.
The French Post Office and War Office were
approached with a view to the use of the French
direct supply ships from Marseilles, and agreed to
take all the letter mails for Mudros. Although the
frequency of the service was cut down from thrice
to once a week after the landing of the Salonika
Force, this scheme was the best alternative possible,
particularly in view of the diversion of transport
services from Egypt to Salonika. It was accord-
ingly brought into force in November, was supple-
mented in December by a service via Malta, and
continued until the withdrawal of the Expedition.
The result of the change was an average reduction
of nearly a week in the letter post service from
England. If the Home authorities had been in
possession of fuller information, it is probable that
the service could have been improved much earlier
than it was.
In order to improve the Parcel Post, arrangements
were made with the Admiralty to use the weekly
Fleet messenger despatched from Malta to Mudros.
This service was actually established, and gave an
acceleration of about a fortnight as compared with
the service via Egypt; but owing to difficulties at
Mudros, and to the prolonged suspension of the
despatches from Malta during the evacuation (which
began immediately after the establishment of the
service), the full effect of the improvement was
never realised.
The evacuation naturally made it impossible to
carry out the postal service satisfactorily during
the transitional period before the troops settled
down in their new locations. There were heavy
accumulations of mails, particularly of parcels, of
which 20,000 bags were at one time stored at Alex-
andria and several thousand at Malta ; but all
mails were in time delivered to the various units
and a regular service was established as soon as the
troops had returned to Egypt.
It is not contended that the organisation of the
Army Postal Service could not have been better,
and that a more adequate service could not have
been furnished with the means available. But the
principal defects were due to causes which the
Army Post Office could not control, viz., defective
communications and shortage of staff.
The establishment of a special mailship service,
whether from Alexandria or from Marseilles,
though it could have been justified by the great
volume of correspondence—some 8,000 to 10,000
bags a week—and the reduction in the time of
transit, proved impossible because of the shortage
of ships. The Admiralty could not allocate any
of their transports solely to the Mail Service, and to
charter suitable ships in the open market was out
of the question. There was no alternative but to use
services already established for other purposes—
first, the regular Peninsular and Oriental Mail
boats to Egypt and the supply ships from Egypt
onwards, in spite of the delay, irregularity, and
uncertainty .of such a service, and later on French
ships already running from Marseilles. A serious
obstacle to schemes of improvement was the
difficulty of obtaining any satisfactory information
as to the services actually running.
The service was also badly hampered by the very
insufficient transport allocated to the Army Post
Office at Mudros. All mails for the Peninsula,
whether arriving from Egypt, Malta or Marseilles,
had to be transhipped at Mudros ; but in spite
of the great volume of the mails the Post Office had
only one lighter and one motor launch with which
to load and unload all transports and ferry ships
and to carry out the local services at Mudros
itself.
As regards shortage of staff, there was great delay,
due apparently to transport difficulties, in sending
out drafts, who were urgently needed, first, to meet
the great increase of work which was entailed by the
heavy casualties, and then to deal with the addi-
tional mails which followed the despatch of several
new Divisions in June and July. For example, a
draft applied for on 13th May and authorised
within a few days only reached Alexandria on
15th June ; another applied for on 30th July
arrived in the middle of September ; while a large
draft requisitioned on sth November only reached
Alexandria on Ist February. In fact the Army
Post Office only received a fully adequate staff •
after the evacuation of the Peninsula.
The Postal Service after the withdrawal from
Gallipoli and the return of the troops to Egypt
presented no special difficulties, and does not seem
to call for detailed comment.
The dates on which the various reinforcements
were applied for, were authorised, and arrived in
Egypt are given in Appendix “ A.”
Appendix “ B ” contains statistics of the volume
of the mails despatched to Gallipoli up to December,
1915.


Appendix B.
Appendix A.
Statistics of Numbers of Bags of Letters and Parcels
Details of Despatch of Drafts to Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force.
sent Weekly to Mediterranean Force.
Month.
Letter Bags. Parcel Bags.
Date Date Dale Date
Numbers. applied autho- em- of
for. rised. barked. arrival. March 64 57
April ... ... 675 395
2 Officers — j
63 o.r. ... 13 May 27 May 3 June 16 June. May 817 498
Officer — June ... ... 791 1,643
91 o.r. ... 13 July 26 July 12 Aug. About
1 Officer—
24 Aug. July 1,094 2,866
86 o.r. ... 30 July 14 Aug. 5 Sep. About
17 Sept. August ... 1,440 • 4,071
1 Officer —
100 o.r. ... 5 0ct.... 18 0ct.... 6 Nov. 19 Nov. September ... 1,787 6,047
4,560
3 Officers — October ... 1,970 4,560
100 o.r. ... 5 Nov. 30 Nov. 21 Jan.’l6 1 Feb.
November ... 3,169 7,676
60 o.r. ... 16 Dec. 21 Jan. 1 Feb.
December
3,389
6,082


STATEMENT OF MAJOR McCLINTOCK.
POSTAL SERVICE FOR THE
I. Constitution of the Army Postal
Service,
1. The Postal Service for an Expeditionary
Force is conducted by a section of the Royal
Engineers (Special Reserve) known as the “ Royal
Engineers, Postal Section,” or “ R.E.P.S.” for
short. This body is recruited, both as to officers
and men, from servants of the General Post Office,
and is only mobilised for war or for annual military
training. Its methods of procedure, which are
regulated by the “ Manual of Army Postal Services,
1913,” differ somewhat from those of the Civil
Postal Service but have been considerably departed
from during the present war, especially in France
where the conditions are simplified by the proximity
to England.
2. The arrangements in the field are controlled
by an officer of this Corps with the title of “ Director
of Army Postal Services,” who is assisted by a
Deputy Director and a number of assistant directors.
The Director is responsible to the Commander-in-
Chief of the Force and is usually—but not in-
variably—attached to the Staff of the Inspector-
General of Communications. For instance, in the
Dardanelles campaign I was attached successively
to (a) G.O.C. Base, Alexandria ; (6) 1.G.C., Mudros ;
(c) D.Q.M.G., General Headquarters.
3. The postal personnel is divided between :
(а) Field Post Offices attached to and forming
part of Brigades, Divisions and Corps, and
(б) Base Army Post Office, Stationary Army
Post Offices and postal regulating depots,
which are under the direct control of the
D.A.P.S. These generally occupy 60 per
cent, or more of the total postal force.
4. In England the Army Postal Service is
represented by the “ Home Depot R.E.P.S.” and
the “ Director of Army Postal Services, Home ”
both of which have been brought into existence
during the present war. The former, besides
acting as a regimental depot for the Corps, com-
prises large sorting offices in London where the
mails for the various expeditionary forces are
made up, the correspondence for each battalion,
battery or other unit being enclosed in a separate
bag or bags. It is staffed by R.E.P.S. officers
and men but also employs a large civilian staff.
The Officer in Charge acts under the direction of
the “ D.A.P.S., Home,” who is an official of the
General Post Office, working at St. Martin’s-le-
Grand and on his ordinary civil duties, but given
a temporary commission as Lieut.-Colonel, R.E.,
in order to act as liaison officer between the War
Office and Post Office on postal matters and to
exercise a general supervision over the Home
Depot and the postal arrangements for troops
in Great Britain. He has no authority over the
Directors in the Field who, in their turn, have
none over the Home Depot either as to the manner
in which the mails should be made up or the routes
by which they should be sent.
DARDANELLES EXPEDITION.
5. There is also a Territorial Section of the
R.E.P.S. under a “ Director of Postal Services,
Home Defence ” for the service of troops engaged
on Home Defence. The last named appointment
is at present in abeyance the duties being performed
by the Deputy Director under the supervision of
the D.A.P.S. (Home).
6. The Australian, Canadian and New Zealand
and Indian Forces each have their own postal
corps. In the mixed force these work under the
D.A.P.S. of the Force as a whole, while continuing
to follow their own methods of procedure as to
system of sorting, facilities offered to the troops,
&c. {See also paragraphs 89-92.)
11. Stages of Campaign and Magnitude
of Work.
7, The history of the Postal Service at the
Dardanelles falls into three stages: (a) initial
arrangements and early service via Malta, from
February to 10 June; ( h ) service via Alexandria
from 10 June to middle of November; and (c)
attempts to accelerate the service in November
and December, and the evacuation.
8. As to the magnitude of the work, the cam-
paign was about equal to that in South Africa,
1899-1902, both as to the size of force and as to the
area involved, taking the extreme points —Egypt,
Cyprus, Dardanelles, Salonioa and Malta—into
consideration. In bulk of mails and facility of
communication, however, there was no comparison.
Owing to the growth of letter writing and reduction
of parcel post rates the mails for the Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force were altogether larger than
those for the South African Field Force, while
instead of a daily train from the port of disembarka-
tion of the mails to all parts as in South Africa,
the Postal Service in the M.E.F. had nothing to
depend on but transports sailing without pretence
of regularity and with a most tedious and difficult
transhipment half-way into smaller craft running
at night to the various landing places on the
Peninsula. As, perhaps, the most important factor
of all in a postal service is regularity, it would be
impossible to exaggerate the difference that this
made.
111. Initial Arrangements.
9. The first step was the dispatch of two small
Royal Engineers Postal Section parties in February
and March, 1915, with great secrecy, under two
Second Lieutenants for duty at two unnamed
“ Bases ” in the Mediterranean, -which for postal
purposes were designated “ Base Z ” and “ Base
Y.” Mails were ordered to be sent to Malta and
nothing was known in England as to their subse-
quent treatment.
10. I was appointed Director of, Army Postal
Services to the Force on 15th March. No official
information as to the nature of the expedition was
obtainable except that the force consisted of
four Infantry Divisions (two British and two


Australasian) and one Mounted Division; and
on this I made an estimate for a total R.E.P.S.
staff of seven officers and 200 other ranks. This
estimate —itself a modest one—was cut down at
the War Office to 164 and, as will be shown, proved
quite insufficient.
11. As the preparations for the campaign were
already well advanced the officers and men had
to be collected with the greatest haste from
wherever obtainable and without time for any
elaborate selection, and the whole were ready to
embark, with postal stock, stores and everything,
within 16 days. There then followed a little
delay in getting a passage, but the officers and the
main party sailed on 12th April.
IV. Early Stages of Campaign and Service
via Malta.
12. The main K.E.P.S. party, with myself,
which left England on 12th April, 1915, reached
Alexandria on 23rd April, the day before the
landing on the Peninsula, when the force was
already assembled, and the campaign launched.
This was much too late, as there was a great deal
of preliminary organisation, securing and fitting
up of buildings, &c., which should have been
completed some weeks before, and the late start
seriously hindered the work at the outset and,
indirectly, for long after. The Base Y party
was found to be working at the Dardanelles, and
the “ Base Z ” party had opened a small Base
Office at Alexandria in a single room building at
the docks, where from lack of staff it was much
overworked.
13. The postal problem on arrival was a difficult
one. The force had its Base at Alexandria and
Advance Base at Mudros, but with something like
an alternative base at Malta. A considerable
portion of the force including the 3rd Echelon,
G.H.Q., Base Headquarters and Base details and
the mounted portions of many units like A.S.C.
Trains and RE. Signal Companies, was at
Alexandria and likely to remain there, and most of
the hospitals were intended to be in Egypt. The
nearest point to Gallipoli on any existing mail
route was Port Said, with Malta running it close
as to distance but with a less reliable service frpm
England. In neither case was there any means
of forwarding the mails except by such transport
ships as might be going with men or stores, and
it was very uncertain whether the transport
service from Malta or that from Egypt would
prove the more reliable.
14. I found that the mails for the force were
being sent to Malta and forwarded thence in bulk
to Mudros, This caused great delay to correspon-
dence for M.E.F. troops in Egypt and was provoking
strong complaint; so I arranged at once for two
mails to be made up at the Home Depot, one to
Malta for the Dardanelles, and the other *to
Alexandria via Port Said for the M.E.F. troops in
Egypt, and supplied lists of troops for the purpose.
A small R.E.P.S. staff had already been stationed
at Malta on the journey out to see to the proper
checking and loading of the Dardanelles mail.
The Malta route was only retained because the
G.O.C. Base thought at the time that there would
be a more frequent transport service to Mudros
from Malta than from Alexandria.
15. But this arrangement prevented the employ-
ment of the Base Office for one of the purposes
laid down in the Army Postal Manual, viz., to
open and examine the incoming mails in order
to rectifv errors of sorting from local knowledge
and to re-direct correspondence for patients in
hospital or officers and men detached from their
units from rolls supplied by the hospital authorities
or from instructions from the addressees themselves.
Malta was outside the M.E.F. area and too remote
from the seat of operations to serve for this pur-
pose.
15a. The arrangement also proved unsatisfactory
as to speed, partly owing to the irregular mail
service to Malta itself and partly to a falling-off
in the number of transports from Malta to Mudros.
Moreover, the existence of two mails for one
force led to mis-sending and complaints.
Y. Service via Alexandria—lntroduction
and Description.
16, I therefore obtained permission at the end
of May for the whole mail to be brought to Egypt,
and this change effected a considerable improve-
ment in the service. The first mail under the new
regime reached Alexandria on 10th June.
17. The following is a description of the service
as it was carried on via Alexandria for the five
months, from 10th June until the introduction of
a direct service to Mudros on 19th November,
which comprised the most important part of the
campaign. There were variations from time to
time in the treatment of the mails at Alexandria
and Mudros but in its essential outlines the service
remained the same throughout.
18. Inward Mails, Arrival, (i) Letters. The
main letter mail was made up at the Home Depot
at 8 p.m. on Thursday and sent on Friday morning
with the civil mails via France to Marseilles and
thence by Peninsular and Oriental steamer to Port
Said,' generally reaching Alexandria the following
Friday but sometimes on Thursday night. There
was another weekly letter mail by French packet
which left London on Monday but only reached
Alexandria on Wednesday or Thursday of the
following week, usually such a short time before
the Peninsular and Oriental mail as practically to
make one mail.
19. The average number of bags received by
the two mails each week grew steadily from 722
in June to 1,858 in October and 1,938 in the first
two waeks of November when the service ended.
20. After conveyance to the Base Office the
mail was checked and bags for headquarters of
Divisions and Brigades, &c., and for units of which
part was in Egypt and part at the front were
opened to check the sorting and attend to re-
direction orders. After these, bags for other units
were similarly treated, so far as time allowed ,
but as the interval between the arrival of a mail
and the departure of the next transport was quite
uncertain from week to week no settled system of
working could be followed, and in spite of many
experiments and much thought, the results,
except in the two classes of bags named, were not


proportionate to the labour expended, though it
is only fair to say that during most of the time
this work was mqch hampered by lack of staff
and, up till the second week of August, also by
very inadequate premises.
21. Before dispatch all the bags were re-labelled
to their appropriate Field Post Offices.
22. (n) Parcels. —There was one parcel mail a
week which left London on Wednesday and was
brought by P. & 0. steamer the whole way to
Port Said arriving usually the following Thursday
fortnight. At Port Said the treatment of parcel
mails was not as expeditious as that of letter
mails, and they generally did not reach Alexandria
till Sunday. The treatment and embarkation of
parcels at Alexandria was liable to be delayed
till that of the same week’s letter mails was com-
pleted ; so altogether it may be taken that parcels
took about 10 days longer than letters of the
same date. Apart from this, the treatment of
parcel mails was on the whole similar to that of
letter mails.
23. The average number of parcel bags each
week was 722 in June growing month by month
to 5,081 in October with, a drop to 4,598 in
December, due no doubt to the public saving their
efforts for Christmas. The average number of
parcels may be taken as 13 per bag.
24. Dispatch from Alexandria. —lnformation as
to the sailing of transports was obtained from the
Embarkation Staff Officer. The loading was done
by native labour under the supervision of an
R.E. officer. The number of bags was checked
and entered, with destination, on a waybill which
was signed by the master of the ship as a receipt,
and a telegram of advice was sent to the Army
Post Office at Mudros. As a further precaution an
R.E, Pioneer travelled on board as mail guard.
•25. Lock-up accommodation was seldom obtain-
able on board the transports, but if necessary a
guard was obtained from the Officer Commanding
troops on board, and space was so limited that it
was hardly ever possible to load the bags in separate
stacks for the various “ Beaches ” and Islands—
a fact which materially increased the delay at the
next stage —Mudros.
26. Reception at Mudros. —No transports went
beyond Mudros, and everything had to be trans-
ferred there to the ferry ships and trawlers which
ran daily to the “ Beaches ” and Imbros. This
had to be done in the open harbour, as there were
no quays or deep-water piers, either by lighters
or by bringing the two vessels alongside one
another. The harbour was large and exposed to
gales, and in rough weather, such as was frequent
in winter, there was a considerable sea, which
added much to the difficulty and delay. The
Army Post Office could get no harbour transport
for its own until November and so had to indent
for a launch or lighter on every occasion and had
to wait, often for hours and sometimes for a day
or more, for its turn.
27. The procedure was as follows : As soon as
possible after the arrival of a ship with mails an
R.E.P.S. party of 10 or 12 under an officer or
non-commissioned officer was sent on board from
the Armv Post Office which worked on board the
“Aragon” to get the bags on deck, where they
were checked and sorted out according to their
destinations, the labels examined and corrected
if the unit had moved, or replaced if torn off.
The bags for Mudros and Imbros and (later)
Salonica were taken to the “ Aragon,” and those
for Helles, Anzac and (later) Suvla were left-on
board under an N.C.O. to be picked up by the
ferry ships which came alongside for the purpose.
The mails for Imbros and Salonica were transferred
by launch from the “ Aragon ” to the Imbros
trawler and the British or French Salonica ferry
ship respectively.
28. A mail guard travelled with every ferry
ship or trawler, taking a way-bill with particulars
of the mail.
29. The unloading on board the transport was
a tedious process and it was difficult to deal with
much more than 2,000 bags in one day. The
ferry ship could only call early in the day, so a
mail could seldom be sent to the Peninsula till
the day after its arrival at Mudros. If there was
any unusual delay in getting a launch or lighter,
or if the ferry ship failed to run, this time might
be increased to two days or more. Large con-
signments of 3,000 bags and upwards would almost
inevitably take two days or more to dispose of.
30. Treatment at the Beaches. —The mails were
unloaded from the ferry ships on to a pier or
lighter at night. In the morning they were
conveyed by mule cart, fatigue party or Greek
labour to the Stationary Army Post Office on the
beach and there checked and sorted out inside
the Army Post Office enclosure into dumps for
the various Field Post Offices. This work was
often interrupted by shell fire or by the fatigue
party being called away for other duties.
31. Two men attended from each Field Post
Office each morning to list the mails and deliver
them (still in sealed bags) to the Regimental
Post Orderlies who came in—usually with the
ration carts—in the course of the day, taking
receipts for them. The post orderlies were required
on first appointment to produce a written authority
from their Commanding Officer or Adjutant to
take over the unit mails. Registered letters were
taken to the Field Post Offices for delivery.
31a. The treatment and delivery of letters after
this stage was left to regimental arrangement;
but a special leaflet containing instructions for
regimental post orderlies as to the treatment of
registered letters, endorsement of undeliverable
letters and similar matters was distributed and
a General Routine Order was issued making Com-
manding Officers responsible that these instructions
were obeyed.
32. Conditions of Work on the Peninsula. —These
were much more trying for the staff than for their
fellows in France. Instead of a comfortable billet
the Field Post Offices had at best a tent to live
and work in, but more often a dug-out or a simple
hole in the ground with a sail-cloth or, if lucky,
a corrugated iron and earth covering. No portion
of the land was exempt from shell fire and the
beaches were a special target for the Turkish guns
and were “ watered ” most days and occasionally
subjected to regular bombardments. The Beach
Army Post Offices were frequently hit by shrapnel


and work on the mails had often to be stopped
because of shell fire. Dysentery and minor sick-
nesses were also common. It was under these
conditions that all the work had to be done and a
large stock of postal orders, stamps and cash to be
guarded.
33. The casualties amounting to 5 deaths and
17 wounded in a corps so little exposed by its
duties to danger speak for themselves.
34. Homeward Mails. —These were at first made
up at Mudros from bags and labelled bundles
received from the “ Beach ” Stationary Army Post
Offices and the Field Post Offices, but subsequently
at the Beach Army Post Offices themselves and
sent to Mudros for onward dispatch. From
Mudros they were usually sent by transport to
Malta for onward shipment by the regular mail
steamers to Marseilles or elsewhere, but sometimes
were sent by transport direct to England. The
service from Mudros to Malta was much more
frequent than in the reverse direction and the time
taken by letters from Mudros to England varied
from 6 to 15 days according to the speed of the
transport and the connection secured at Malta.
From one to three days should be added for the
journey from the Peninsula to Mudros and the
letters might have to wait some days at Mudros for
a ship. Otherwise the service calls for no comment.
35, Local Services, (a) Mudros to Alexandria. —
The upward service has already been described.
The downward service was slower, as there were
not so many transports. Its delay and uncertainty
was a constant* source of complaint from the
departments at the Base, especially the “ Records ”
branch of the 3rd Echelon which dealt with
casualty* returns. In consequence a large amount
of correspondence which might have been dealt
with by post was thrown on the telegraph cables at
cost to the country and prejudice to the telegraph
work. I frequently represented the need for
better transport facilities but without avail, and
attach a copy of my last formal application on
the subject which sums up the whole case (Ap-
pendix A).
Another section of the downward mail to
Alexandria consisted of the “ Returned ” or
“ Casualty ” correspondence for the wounded and
others not with their units. It was naturally
very bulky and its treatment at Alexandria is
described in paragraphs 93-96.
36. (6) Mudros to Imbros, Belles, Anzac and
Suvla. —These were maintained by ferry ships or
trawlers as already described. They call for no
special remark except that the ferry ships were
liable to fail from bad weather or other causes so
that the services averaged nearer four or five than
seven a week. During active operations they
were often suspended for some days.
37. (c) Imbros to Belles, Anzac and Suvla. —
Maintained by daily trawlers. The remarks under
(6) apply here too. -
38. (d) Mudros to Salonica.— There were five
ferry ships a week—two British and three French
—all of which were used except on a few occasions
when the weather was too rough to let the mails
be embarked. (These ships did not come alongside
the “ Aragon,” like the Peninsula ferry ships, and
the mails had to be put on board by launch.)
VI. Efficiency of the Service during
Period June-November.
39. In spite of all obstacles and defects this
service as a whole could not be properly termed
bad, especially having regard to the admittedly
extraordinary difficulty of the communications.
The English mails were delivered week by week
to the troops with unfailing certainty. With only
one known exception, due to the carelessness of
one man, not a bag was lost except, unavoidably,
on a few occasions by fire on board ship or by the
sinking of a transport or by the act of the enemy,
as when a H.E. shell burst in a dump of mails on
the beach at Anzac,
40. At the same time it could not by any stretch
be called good, especially when compared with
the service at home or in the 8.E.F., France.
41. The principal defects from the point of
view of the administration were ;
(a) The Irregularity and Uncertainty of the
Transports.— Although there were generally three
or four ships a week from Alexandria there was no
certainty whatever about their sailing nor any
attempt to provide a “Ferry” service on fixed
days. Several ships, for instance, would start on
one day and all but one would be wasted so far
as the carriage of mails was concerned. Times
announced for sailing were constantly altered, and
it was a common thing for ships to sail in a different
order to that announced, causing local and some-
times even English letters to arrive out of their
date of posting. Such events would upset all
loading calculations and were disastrous for a
mail service which depends above ail things on
regularity and certainty. It happened more than
once that ships after starting returned to Alexan-
dria, and one at least was diverted from Mudros
to take wounded to Malta without unloading and
so delayed a large parcel mail for 10 days. The
loading was further hampered by the secrecy
necessitated by the danger from submarines,
notice,of starting being delayed till the last minute
and sometimes till too late to get a whole consign-
ment aboard.
42. (6) Bad Accommodation in the Transports.—
As previously mentioned (para. 25), very fc\y
ships had lock-up accommodation for mails and
minor cases of looting —generally by native
labourers —were not uncommon. The actual
amount of loss was trifling, but the consequent
enquiries gave great trouble and such occurrences
were much exaggerated by rumour.
43. As also mentioned (para. 25), the space was
hardly ever sufficient to allow the sectional stowing
of mails in spite of great efforts to this end, and
this much increased the time taken in unloading
and sorting out the mails at Mudros.
44. (c) Transhipment Difficulties at Mudros. —-
These' have already been described in paragraphs
26-29, and need not be repeated.
45. (d) Irregularity of the Ferry Ships and
Trawlers. —The ferry ships from Mudros to the
beaches and Imbros were supposed to run daily
but, as a matter of fact, there were few weeks
when each of them did not fail to run on one day
or more owing to weather, accidents or diversion
for other purposes. The average number of days


per week was in practice nearer four or five than
seven, the Imbros brawler being the best, and the
Suvla ferry the worst. During active military
operations a service would often be suspended for
several days on end.
46. So much for the administration. As regards
the public the effect of these shortcomings were :
(a) That the Service was Slow. —Although the
Peninsular and Oriental service to Alexandria
took only eight days and that from Alexandria
to Mudros in June took two, the average time for
mails to the Peninsula was five days from Alexan-
dria and from 14 to 18 days from England according
to the delay in Egypt. From August onwards the
Alexandria-Mudros journey was lengthened by
two days owing to “ zig-zagging ” and the cir-
cuitous routes taken to escape submarines, and
consequently the minimum time for letters from
England became 16 and the average 18 to 21,
with possibly another day on the Peninsula in
reaching the addressee.
47. It should be noted that these times are
reckoned from the actual dispatch from the Home
Depot, or, in the case of Egyptian letters, from
Alexandria. The time between posting and
dispatch is not taken into account. It could
hardly be less than 24 hours*and if a letter either
missed a mail or was posted too soon it would be
more still. As the public always reckon by the
“ postmark ” time, this point is important. (Please
compare paragraphs 97-99.)
48. (6) The troops never knew when to expect
an English mail; and they felt this almost as
much as the slow service.
49. (c) The delivery of an English mail was
unavoidably spread over several days, some units
or some men in the same unit receiving their
letters before others —another natural cause of
complaint. This was due to: (a) Insufficient
time at Alexandria to load the whole mail between
the arrival of the mail and departure of the ship ;
(6) Lack of space on a ship to carry the whole
mail; (c) Inability at Mudros to unload and
transfer the whole mail before the sailing of the
ferry ship. In extreme cases, as mentioned, mails
or parts of mails would arrive out of sequence
due to ships sailing out of the order notified or to
one passing another on the way.
50. ( d) Damage or destruction of parcels from
the frequent handlings and transhipments under-
gone, leading to complaints of “ lost ” or “ stolen ”
parcels. The damage and loss from this cause,
which was very extensive, was largely contributed
to by the flimsy packing of many parcels and was
much reduced by some stringent notices inserted
in the English papers and posted at Post Offices.
(Please compare paragraphs 57 and 60.)
51. (e) Delay to correspondence between the
front and Alexandria, which in the case of official
letters, was a standing grievance with the various
departments of the Army at the Base —especially
the “ Records ” branch of the 3rd Echelon.
(Compare paragraph 35 (a) above.)
52. (/) The impossibility, already mentioned, of
organising a satisfactory re-direction system, which
meanU several Weeks delay to letters for the
wounded.
VII. Possible Remedies for Defects
Described.
53. The root of all the difficulties and short-
comings in the service was in the inadequate
sea-transport —the irregularity of the transports
and, to a less extent, their bad accommodation.
The obvious remedy was to establish a “ Ferry
Service ” on fixed days to suit the arrival of mails
by ships with sufficient reserved hold accommoda-
tion to permit of the sectional stowing of mails
in order to save time in Mudros Harbour. If
small ships could be allotted which after dropping
the Mudros and Imbros mails at Mudros could go
on to the beaches, a further great improvement
would result, as this would save the transfer of
large mails in Mudros Harbour and so would
economise time and staff and much reduce the
damage to parcels. This arrangement would have
afforded a regular service from England with a
delivery on the same, or nearly the same, day
every week in 12 days to Mudros and 14 to the
Peninsula for letters, and in slightly over three
weeks to the Peninsula for parcels, and would
have enabled, together with the staff economised,
a large proportion if not the whole of the “ casualty
correspondence ” to be re-directed at Alexandria
before dispatch.
54. I represented this to the G.O.C. Base as
early as 19th May and tried in various quarters,
with the Naval Transport authorities and others,
to get some such arrangement sanctioned, but
without success. The chief objections raised were
(a) that the Naval Transport Regulations contained
no provision for the carriage of mails, and that
this precluded the making of any special arrange-
ments which might interfere with the free use of
the ships for such purposes as were specifically
provided for in the regulations ; and (6) that there
was already a sufficiently frequent service from
Alexandria to Mudros and nothing more was
warranted.
55, Objection ( a) is dealt with in paragraph
122 towards the end of this report. As regards
(6) this objection entirely overlooked that it was
regularity and not increased frequency that was
needed in the service. Half the number of
ships sailing on fixed days would have given better
results so far as the mails were concerned.
VIII. D.A.P.S. Transferred to Staff of 1.G.C.,
August, 1915. Complaints About Parcel
Service,
56. In August I was transferred from the Staff
of the G.O.C. Base at Alexandria to that of the
I.G.C. at Mudros.
57. There had been some complaints at home
about the postal service which had been taken up
by General Sir lan Hamilton, and the question
of improved facilities for the mail service was
taken up in earnest. The complaints mostly
related to the supposed theft of parcels and I was
able to show from the very complete system of
way-bills and check at every point that they were
founded on a misunderstanding. Their real causes
were :
58. (a) A confusion between postal parcels and
those sent by the A.S.C. parcel transit service in


which a good deal of looting had admittedly
occurred.
59. (6) The much longer time taken by parcels
than letters of the same date advising their
dispatch, due to the parcels being sent from
England by a longer route. (Please see paragraph
22.)
60. (c) The large number of parcels broken or
rendered undeliverable by the rough handling
inevitably accorded to the mails at the many
loadings and transhipments. This was contributed
to by the bad packing of many of the parcels sent.
A stringent notice in the English papers as to the
packing of parcels considerably reduced the pro-
portion of those broken.
61. ( d ) The practice, forbidden in orders but
tacitly indulged in and even sanctioned by some
Commanding Officers, of appropriating and distri-
buting among their comrades the contents of parcels
-for men who were in hospital or for other cause
absent from their units.
62. As regards {d) above, it may be argued that
the parcels should have been packed in cases or
hampers for their protection instead of in bags.
The answers to this are—first, that the G.P.O.
would certainly not have consented to any such
arrangement which, although still followed in
many countries, has for years been abolished in
England, so that the parcels would still have
come for a large part of their journey in bags and
would have had to be re-packed at Alexandria,
for which we had neither the necessary staff nor
space. Secondly, it would have been impossible
to get hampers or cases returned by the units.
The expense would therefore have been very great
and it Is doubtful whether enough such receptacles
could have been got —at any rate in Egypt —
bearing in mind that the average weekly parcel
mail in August was 3,300 bags growing to over
5,000 in September and October. Thirdly, the
difficulty of handling the mails on lighters, piers
and beaches and between the beaches and the
trenches would have been enormously increased.
63. I will conclude the subject of the supposed
loss of mails or theft of parcels with two quotations
from a report to the Postmaster-General by Lieut.-
Colonel Williamson, R.E., D.A.P.S. (Home) who
inspected the service on the spot in October,
1915: —
“It will be seen . . . that the system of check
in force is very thorough, and that it is scarcely
possible for any discrepancy in the number of
mail bags to remain undiscovered. , Discrepancies
do arise occasionally but they are as likely to show
an excess as a deficiency and are always cleared
up ultimately; lam told that there is only one
authenticated case of the disappearance of a mail
bag during the whole campaign.”
“ The Maps Section of the General Staff at Cairo
dispatches large quantities of maps to the front,
and has insisted that special arrangements shall
be made to take the packets of maps along with
the mails to Mudros, as no other means of com-
munication is sufficiently speedy or reliable.
Packets of maps are accordingly sent with every
mail and are specially entered on the waybill.”
More important is a special notice issued with
a General Routine Order by the Commander-in-
Chief on 4th October. After recapitulating the
risks attending the conveyance of parcels ( i.e ,,
parcels sent as freight and not through the post)
sent by transport and the measures taken to meet
them, the notice proceeds :
“ The Commander-in-Chief trusts that the
troops will inform their friends at home of
what is being done in this matter and that
they will also advise them .that, when all is
said and done, the best and safest plan will
still remain to send the article by parcel
post.”
IX. Schemes for Improving the Service.
64. There remained the question of accelerating
and otherwise improving the service. To meet
this, three successive schemes were put forward.
65. My own, for a “ ferry service ” between
Alexandria and Mudros on fixed days twice or
three times a week. Finding that the Principal
Naval Transport Officer would not set aside
transports for this purpose but that the Commander-
in-Chief had power to hire ships in local waters
I proposed that a sufficient number of small
steamers able to carry 5,000 bags each should, if
possible, be hired for the purpose, which after
unloading the mails for Mudros and Imbros should
go on to Anzac, Helles and Suvla to drop the mails
for those places and so save the delay caused by
unloading at Mudros.
66. The advantages would be :
(1) A practically regular mail arrival on the
Peninsula instead of the existing erratic one, and
a reduction in the time taken by English letters
from a varying period of 16 to 20 days to a
practically constant one of 14.
(2) A properly executed system for re-directing
correspondence for the wounded and others before
dispatch from Alexandria instead of after delivery
at the unit and return to Egypt.
(3) A regular and accelerated service between
Alexandria and the front for the benefit of official
and local correspondence and of the mails for the
Australian, New Zealand and Indian troops.
(4) A reduction in the damage’ done to parcels
by the repeated handlings of the mails.
67. The scheme had the further advantages of
being economical, as any space not needed for
mails could be used for troops and stores, of not
dislocating existing arrangements, and of being
capable of being introduced immediately on the
acquisition of the necessary ships and without
waiting for other preliminary arrangements.
68. Inspector-General of Communication’s Scheme.
—My scheme was considered by the Inspector-
General of Communications not to offer sufficient
acceleration, as he wished to secure the fastest
possible English mail service for the men at the
front. He, therefore, decided to ask the War Office
for special mail ships with a speed of 12 knots to
run from Marseilles to Mudros once a week.
This would have reduced the transit of letters
from England to seven or eight days to Mudros
and nine or ten to the Peninsula and would have


afforded an immense improvement. Its disadvan-
tages were : #
(a) ‘lts cost.
(6) The difficulty of creating a satisfactory
postal base at Mudros owing to the absence
of buildings and dearth of landing facilities.
(c) The termination of all attempts to organise
the re-direction of correspondence for hos-
pital patients and others before delivery.
Up-to-date hospital rolls could not be
collected at Mudros.
(d) It would do -nothing for the Australian,
New Zealand and Indian mails nor for
official correspondence between Mudros and
the front, the delay of which had been a
frequent cause of complaint.
(e) It would revive the system of having two
mails for the one force which had already
been tried and found wanting.
(/) It would greatly increase the work in Mudros
Harbour which was already a matter of
much difficulty.
( g) Considerable preparation, e.g., the erection
of a sorting office ashore at Mudros and the
placing of an army postal transfer staff at
Marseilles, was necessary before the scheme
could be introduced.
69. Plainly, however, no one scheme could
possess all the advantages and it was a case where
either speed or a certain degree of efficiency had
to be sacrificed, and though my opinion favoured,
and still favours, the proposed improved service
via Alexandria, there was much to be said on the
other side and I did everything in my power to
support the Marseilles scheme once its advocacy
had been decided on.
X. Post Office Scheme —Its Adoption.
70. The War Office, advised by the Admiralty,
objected to the provision of the ships asked for
and a considerable correspondence followed. The
claims of the mails to special consideration was
strongly advocated by the I.G.C. and supported
by the Commander-in-Chief, Sir Charles Monro,
but without success. Eventually, the Post Office
seems to have been commissioned by the War
Office to negotiate with the French Government for
a joint postal Service direct from Marseilles to
Mudros by French transport and Messageries
Maritimes, and a War Office telegram dated
9th September said that “ this should reduce the
time occupied in transit for letters from some
eighteen to eight days. There would probably
be four services weekly from Marseilles.”
71. The matter was thus taken out of the hands
of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force alto-
gether and for some time nothing further was
heard.
72. ThenewZeWermailservicefrom Marseilles thus
arranged did not begin till well on in November—
the first mail reaching Mudros on 30th November—
just a fortnight before the evacuation began. For
some weeks before this the French ships had been
cut down to one a week, most of the French troops
having been transferred to Salonica, and even this
one was very slow and erratic, often putting in at
Salonica on its way and sometimes going no further.
In all, 13 mails came by this route during the 72
days from 30 November to 9 February when the last
of the troops embarked for Egypt or hardly more
than one a week. The time taken from Marseilles to
Mudros varied from 7 to 15 days with an average of
10-ffths, or, allowing for the journeys from London
to Marseilles and from Mudros to the Peninsula,
at least 15 or 16 days in all and probably more.
73. The acceleration of two or three days thus
effected was of little or no value to the troops and
was coupled with an increased irregularity due to
the erratic movements of the French ships.
74. Meanwhile, the French Government had
refused to carry our parcel mails and a rather
precarious service via Malta by fleet-messenger,
transport and naval collier was arranged which did
not come into force at Mudros till 9th December.
So far as it went this effected a considerable
acceleration, but it was too late to be of any
service and passed unnoticed in the general hold-
up of mails in consequence of the evacuation
(paras. 79-83) which began immediately afterwards.
Even so its start in some ways was premature.
It was brought in just at the moment of Xmas
pressure and before the additional R.E.P.S.
transfer staff, which was to be sent from the Home
Depot had reached Malta (paragraph 100 (6))
where great difficulties consequently arose. The
Mudros A.P.O. had no accommodation for parcel
sorting (paragraph 77) and the only ship from Malta
which could be depended on for any regularity—
the fleet messenger “ Wahine,” not an Army
transport —stayed only eight or nine hours at Mudros
and in rough weather there was a great risk of
not being able to unload the whole mail before
her return journey.
XI. Results of the New Service.
75. It will be seen that little or no benefit to
the troops resulted from the new services but
rather the reverse. Unfortunately great —perhaps
exaggerated—hopes had been roused in the
force by public statements of the improved
service about to be introduced. At home, an
acceleration of about a week to both letters and
parcels had been spoken of by the General Post
Office, while a general order (Appendix B.) issued
to the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force on
4th October—the exact authority for which I do
not know, as I was not consulted—promised a
service of 10 or 11 days from England to the
Peninsula. When the introduction of the service
was delayed till December and then failed to effect
any visible improvement, there was wide disappoint-
ment and loud complaint at the failure to redeem
the promises made or supposed to have been
made.
76. From the administrative point of view the
changes gave rise to great difficulties. These were
cheerfully faced by the staff in the hopes that
public benefit would result, but deserve to be
stated :
77. (a) Mudros as a Postal Base (compare
paragraph 68 (6)). —The Mudros Army Post Office,
which had to be expanded to a considerable sorting
office to meet the new service, could no longer be
housed on board the “ Aragon.” No buildings
or huts were obtainable at Mudros everything
being earmarked for the hospitals, but I secured


a good sectional building when at Alexandria at
the beginning of October and with some trouble
got a promise that it should be shipped. Mean-
while the Mudros Army Post Office was moved
ashore on Ist November and housed temporarily
in four large marquee tents (with separate living
quarters for the men) in order not to delay the
introduction of the service pending the arrival of
the hut ordered. The hut was lost in the sinking
of the “ Orange Prince ” at sea and the tents
were wrecked by gales at the end of November.
The office was moved to a partly finished building
which fortunately was available, and had to
remain there, though very inadequately housed,
for the rest of the campaign. A second hut was
immediately ordered on the loss of the first,
but transport again was the difficulty and it
had not left Alexandria when the evacuation
began.
78. (6) The work in Mudros harbour was greatly
increased. The same number of transports to and
from Alexandria had to be met as before and the
ships from Marseilles and Malta were all additional.
As the Army Post Office had only one lighter and
one motor launch for all purposes including daily
services to the “ Aragon ” and two Post Offices
the other side of Mudros harbour and to the five
Salonica ferry ships a week in either direction,
and seeing that the introduction of the new service
almost coincided with the commencement of Xmas
pressure, the strain on the staff and resources of
the Army Post Office was very great.
79. (c) The dispersion of the incoming mails
between four ports of departure in the Mediter-
ranean (Marseilles, Malta, Salonica and Alexandria)
instead, of one—Alexandria—as formerly, was a
great handicap when the evacuation came. So long
as the mails all came through one base office it
would have been an easy matter in case of need
to arrest and store them there, or to divert those for
any particular units to a new destination. The
Army postal staff at Marseilles and Salonica,
however, were not acquainted with the composition
of the Dardanelles Army and could not be relied
on to divert mails from Mudros to Alexandria for
units on their way to Egypt, and even Malta was
insufficiently staffed and only partly qualified to
cope with such work. Similarly when it came to
holding up the mails (paragraphs 81, 82) we had
part stored at Malta and part at Alexandria as
well as at Mudros. 1 have always thought it
radically unsound when dealing with a force
which is at all likely to move to have more than
one mail and one base. (This does not apply to
a force of the size of that in France, where the
size of the mails compels one to use more than one
route), and it was very fortunate in the case of
the evacuation of Gallipoli that the ill-consequences
were as slight as they were.
XII. The Evacuation,
80. The evacuation period began on 12th
December and lasted two months—till 10th
February—when the last of the Dardanelles troops
embarked for Egypt. The handling of the mails
during the withdrawal of so large a force was
naturally a matter of great difficulty and was
increased by three causes :
(C 49—242)
(1) Shortage of staff due to :
{a) A draft of 100 men applied for on sth
November and urgently needed before
Xmas not actually arriving till February.
(6) The division of the force between Egypt
and Mudros which took up a larger staff
than would otherwise have been needed,
(c) The general extra handling of mails.
(2) The dislocation of the services by the recent
attempts to accelerate the English mail, as already
described in paragraph 79.
(3) The fact that the first evacuation coincided
exactly with the period of Christmas pressure.
81. The sequence of events is as follows :
(The actual arrangements were not all quite so
simple as they read owing to many contradictory
orders and altered instructions received.) On 12th
December having been instructed to suspend
dispatches to Anzac and Suvla and having been
notified that the second lighter allotted to the
Post Office at Mudros for Christmas would be
withdrawn, and knowing that there were very
heavy mails already on the sea for Mudros, I
instructed Marseilles, Malta and Alexandria to
suspend all dispatches to Mudros except bags for
headquarters of Corps, Divisions, &c., and of
local official correspondence, in order to lessen the
inevitable congestion and landing difficulties at
Mudros under the circumstances described. This
embargo was maintained till the 20th December
for ordinary letter mails and till Ist January for
parcel mails, but mails for other troops than those
at Anzac and Suvla were let through earlier so
far as it was possible for them to be picked out at
Malta and Marseilles.
82. The mails for the Anzac and Suvla troops
which were already on the sea, and which included
the bulk of their Christmas mails, were got ashore
at Mudros to the number of 20,000 bags and stacked
there under tarpaulins against the arrival of the
troops from the Peninsula. Most of the work had
to b'e done at night as the one cramped little pier
was congested by day with the landing of troops,
sick, and stores. Mails for the Helles troops were
sent forward as usual.
83. The troops withdrawn from the Peninsula
were temporarily congregated on Imbros and
Lemnos pending embarkation for Egypt, and their
accumulated mails were delivered to them after
their arrival on those islands or, where this was
impossible from their short stay or other causes,
were forwarded after them to Egypt, Many
battalions refused to accept more than a limited
amount of mails while in these temporary camps
and bivouacs.
84. The outward dispatches from Imbros were
also suspended for some days for reasons of military
secrecy.
85. The evacuation of Helles began for postal
purposes on 29th December and followed a similar
course except that, Christmas being over and mails
for the late Anzac and Suvla troops mostly diverted
to Alexandria, the congestion was less and incoming
dispatches therefore, were not suspended. Out-
going dispatches were again suspended for several
days by orders from Headquarters.


86. The zeal and energy shown by all the officers
and men R.E.P.S. during this time made it possible
to overcome the difficulties with comparatively
very few hitches. So far as I know the local service
from Alexandria to Mudros and the onward dispatch
of a part of one week’s Salonica mails from Malta
alone suffered for a short time from the confusion
caused. But for the difficulties mentioned above
—and especially number 2—the situation could
have been met by the normal Army postal organisa-
tion with very little difficulty.
87. With the arrival of the last troops in Egypt
about 10th February terminated the Dardanelles
campaign. The Naval Division alone remained
for a time at Mudros, being transferred from the
M.E.F. to naval control. Its R.E.P.S. Field Post
Offices were withdrawn and the treatment of its
mails was handed over to the Navy.
88. I will now deal with some matters of a
miscellaneous nature.
XIII. Australian, New Zealand and Indian
Postal Departments.
89. The Army Postal Service for the Mediter-
ranean Expeditionary Force was a composite body
and comprised besides the British (R.E.) postal
staff large Australian, New Zealand and Indian
postal contingents which formed an important
part of the whole. These other postal corps were
under their own officers for discipline, &c., and
differed in many details of their procedure from the
Royal Engineers Postal Section and from each
other but, departmentally, they were all under
my control as Director of Army Postal Service
to the Force and I was held responsible by Head-
quarters for their efficiency and for the due co-
ordination of their energies. As far as reasonably
admissible, they were treated as one service and
wheie necessary as at Mudros, Anzac, &c., joint
British and Australian Post Offices were run under
the fame officer or N.C.O.
T( • take each briefly in detail—
90. Australian.— The Australian force was by
far the largest of the three and came without any
Postal Corps but had improvised one in Egypt
before my arrival. Field Post Offices had been
formed as laid down in the British Establishment
Tables and had gone forward to the Dardanelles
under an officer with some fourteen years’experience
in the Melbourne General Post Office who was
afterwards made Assistant Director of Army
Postal Services at Anzac. I found the Base Office
work ing at Cairo without an officer and very much
under-staffed. With the consent of Colonel Sel-
heim, O.C. Australian Intermediate Base, its
numbers were increased and it was transferred to
Alexandria so as to be better placed for dispatching
overt eas and to be where we could give it any
assistance in our power. An Australian officer
was placed in charge and I lent for a time an
experienced R.E, Warrant Officer to assist in the
orga uisation. One of the difficulties of this office
was that it had, of necessity, to deal with the mails
for the large Australian force in Egypt as well
as of the two Australian Divisions at the
front and there was always a conflict between the
two parties for the prior claims to the mails.
Notwithstanding this and other difficulties, such
as inadequate premises and the rather shadowy
claims of many of the staff to previous postal
experience, the office in a short time got into
very creditable working order, thanks to the
enthusiasm of the staff and the really remarkable
energy and organising power of the officer in charge.
Similarly, the work at Anzac, which for the first
month or two was very erratic and led to some
grave complaints of delay to official correspondence,
was reduced to good order by the Assistant
Director of Army Postal Service in charge under
the supervision of my Deputy Director at Imbros.
91. New Zealand. —The New Zealanders brought
a postal contingent under an officer and their
service appeared to be very well conducted.
Complaint was made of the inordinate delay to
their parcels due to their being brought by sea via
England instead of direct to Suez—a matter
about which I wrote to the Postmaster-General of
New Zealand who had it set right.
92. Indians. —The Indians had a similar con-
tingent. Their staff (except some of the officers)
is native and the bulk of the correspondence is
addressed in the vernacular. The service appeared
to be well conducted.
XIV. Treatment of Correspondence for
the Wounded.
93. The casualties during the campaign, as is
well known, were enormous, amounting to 15,000
in the first fortnight and to more than in the
whole South African war of 2£ years, during the
first 10 weeks ; and they brought a proportionate
amount of correspondence returned from the front
each week with no other address than “ wounded ”
or “in hospital.” A large part of the staff
and energies of the Base Army Post Office at
Alexandria was devoted to dealing with returned
correspondence for the wounded, and others
absent from their units. This is a class of work
which does not exist in the British Expeditionary
Force, France, as owing to the short distance
from London and the rapid communication between
different parts of the Army in the Field, re-
direction can be left to the post orderlies of the
units or, at most, to the Field Post Office for
delivery. If a man transfers to a new unit or
appointment he can inform his family within 48
hours and in another 48 hours or so will
be receiving letters addressed to his new
address. It is a matter of relatively small
importance whether he receives the letters written
in the interim—that is assuming the post orderly
at his old address cannot re-direct them and he has
not left his address at his old Field Post Office of
delivery. The same applies to men in hospital
but, in point of fact, most of the sick and wounded
are transferred immediately from France to
England so that in a few days when their friends
know what hospital they are in their letters cease
to come in the Army mails at all.
94. But in a force like the Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force, as in the South African
War, this is not the case, and if the Army Postal
Office were to summarily send to the Dead Letter
Office all letters returned to it marked “ left
battn.” or “wounded” the addressees would be
left for weeks without letters and such a course
could not be defended.


95. Elaborate machinery had therefore to be
set up for ascertaining the addresses of the wounded
and re-directing the correspondence.
96. I enclose as an Appendix (Appendix C) a
copy of a memorandum describing the system as
it was in August, 1915. Naturally the work
increased during the subsequent months and many
details of the procedure were altered, but the main
outlines remained the same and this account may
suffice to give an idea of what was a very important
and on the whole very successful branch of the
Army postal work during the campaign.
XV. Time of Posting in England.
97. There was one contributory cause to the
long time taken by letters in reaching addressees
in the M.E.F. which I think might have been
remedied. This lay in the method of making up
the mails at the Home Depot.
98. The civil mails for Egypt and the East
generally are not closed at the General Post Office
till the small hours of Friday morning, but at the*
Home Depot, from motives I believe of economy,
no night staff was employed, and the mails for the
M.E.F. were closed on Thursday evenings. Con-
sequently a large quantity of correspondence was
excluded from the M.E.F. mails which would have
been in time for the civil mails, and this corre-
spondence, as luck would have it, included the
Weekly Times, which is brought out late on
Thursday night specially for inclusion in the
Eastern mails. This caused frequent complaint
from officers who subscribed to this paper,
especially in Egypt where they did not receive
it till nearly a week after the clubs and civilian
subscribers, and led to comparisons between the
Army and Egyptian Post Offices not in favour of
the former.
99. To make matters worse, the public was not
told, and did not know, when to post letters for
the M.E.F. The counter staff at Post Offices
were not allowed to say anything except that
letters were forwarded by the first opportunity.
Not only did this give an impression of indifference,
but it meant great delay to the letters. Many
persons would post as for Egypt and miss the mail;
other letters posted at random would lie several
days in London before dispatch. It cannot be
repeated too often that what the public judge a
service by is the postmark time, i.e., from posting
to delivery, and there is no question that two or
even three days could have been saved on the
average postmark time of letters by announcing
a definite “latest time of posting’’for the M.E.F.,
even though it were earlier than that for Egypt.
I drew attention to this as soon as it came to my
knowledge (I think in June) but without effect.
XVI. Staff and Conduct.
100. Except for a portion of June and July
there was a chronic shortage of staff throughout
the campaign and until after the withdrawal to
Egypt. This was due partly to (1) my own original
low estimate having been cut down at the War
Office by 20 per cent.
(2) The necessity for staffing the Field Post
Offices of the 42nd Division which was transferred
(C 49-242)
to the M.E.F. from the Egyptian garrison early
in the campaign.
(3) The immense casualties which, several times
over during the campaign, upset all calculations,
coupled with the necessity for delivering returned
letters to men in hospital, a laborious class of work
not undertaken in France.
(4) The ommission to send any men for Base
and Lines of Communication work with the six new
Divisions which arrived in June and July. This
was particularly serious. To meet such contin-
gencies in the future I have recommended an
alteration in the Establishment tables.
(5) Delay in the sending of draffs, and especially
one draft of 3 officers and 100 men asked for on
sth November and not received till Ist February.
(6) At Malta, the failure to send from home , he
extra staff urgently needed for the transfer of
parcel mails (para. 74).
(7) Drainage on the M.E.F. Postal Establish-
ment to staff Salonika, the Western Frontier
Force (Egypt) and the mail transfer station at
Malta.
101. The conduct of all ranks was exemplaiy
and the zeal and energy displayed, often under
trying and discouraging circumstances, deserve?
the highest praise.
XVII. Buildings.
102, It is impossible to do accurate and orderly
work in the Base and larger sorting office without
good premises and good fittings—a fact which is
not always recognised in the Army as well as it
should be. The Base office for the first 3| months
was much hindered by the inadequate premises
and the difficulty of obtaining better quartern.
This was largely due to my late arrival in Egypt
when all suitable buildings at the Docks and
many elsewhere had been appropriated. Even-
tually a very suitable building was obtained in the
centre of the town. The same difficulty was
encountered over premises for the Australian Base
Office, and, to a less extent, that of the New
Zealanders.
103. The difficulties at Mudros have been
described in para. 77.
XVIII. Malta.
104. As mentioned in para. 14, a small R.E.P.S.
staff was stationed at Malta from the commence-
ment of the campaign to see to the transfer of
Army mails. Subsequently (in September) it
became necessary to take over the work of
addressing and delivering letters for the wounded
in the many M.E.F. .hospitals in Malta, and an
officer with additional staff was stationed there
and did very good work. Later on, Malta became
an important mail transfer station for Mudros and
Salonika and this work was taken over by the
existing A.P.O. there.
XIX. Work Done for the Egypt
Command.
105. A good deal of work, directly and indirectly,
was done for the Egypt Command which, except
for a small Indian Postal contingent along the
Suez Canal, had no Army Postal Service of its
own. Among other things, at General Sir John
M 2


Maxwell’s request we staffed and entirely directed
the postal service for the Western Frontier Force,
and opened a Post (Office at Mena Camp, Cairo.
From time to time R.E.P.S. staff was lent to the
P.M. General of Egypt to man the “ Military Post
Offices ” maintained at the principal Post Offices
in Garrison towns, and special trouble, was caused
through the transfer of the 2nd Intd. Division from
M.E.F. to Force-in-Egypt in May. As the Division
retained its Field Post Offices and its correspon-
dence continued for a long time to be addressed
to the M.E.F. and to come in the M.E.F. mail,
its arrangements had to be supervised informally
by the officer in charge of the Base A.P.0.,
Alexandria. I twice proposed either formally
taking over the work or that a R.E.P.S. officer
should be got from England for the purpose, but
the suggestions were not adopted.
XX, Base Office, Alexandria.
106, I will not deal with the work of this office
in detail as I assume that that will be done by
Captain Newsome, but its duties were many and
responsible. In France a Base Office is principally,
though not wholly, a depot where mails are landed
and loaded into a train an hour or two later, or
are received by train and embarked for England.
The Base A.P.O. at Alexandria had infinitely more
to do than this. For instance, there was the large
department which addressed and delivered returned
letters for the wounded (Chap. XIV, §93-96, and
Appendix C) —work which has no counterpart in
France, There were large branches for correspon-
dence accounts and stores, most, if not all, of which
work in France is relegated to the Home Depot.
There were intricate relations with the Egyptian
Post Office connected with the local deliveries
and many other matters, and there was the general
supervision of all the common services for the
Australian, New Zealand, and Indian Base A.P.O.s,
etc., etc., etc.
XXI. Inspection op Service.
107. The service was inspected in October, 1915,
on behalf of the Postmaster-General by Lieut.-
Colonel Williamson, R.E., Director of Army Postal
Service, Home Forces, whose very full and in-
structive report will no doubt be referred to by the
Commission.
XXII. Thanks to other Departments.
108. Every courtesy and much assistance were
received from the Postmaster-General of Egypt
and his staff. The Army Postal Service was also
indebted to the Police, Quarantine, Ports and
Lights and—most of all—to tfie Customs Authorities
at Alexandria for the loan of premises.
109. Every consideration was received from
principal Naval Transport Officer and his staff,
who were always ready to help so far as their
resources permitted.
XXIII. General Summary as Regards Mail
Service.
110. The outstanding points which I would
emphasise are {a) that from first to last no sea
transport was provided to suit the special needs
of the mails and, when applied for by me locally
and by the I.G.C. and the Commander-in-Chief
to the War Office, was refused ; (6) that all the
deficiencies in the service were directly or indirectly
due to the absence of proper transport; and (c)
that, in spite of this, a very tolerable service was
given. The sealed bags made up in the Home
Depot were delivered to the units—which is all
that the Army Post Office in France undertakes
to do—with perfect safety. In addition a great
work was accomplished, which is not attempted
in France, in the re-addressing and delivering of
letters for men in hospital. For thoroughness of
invoicing and check and for promptness of handling,
the service easily surpassed any other in the M.E.F.
and this was pretty generally recognised by all
who had goods to send. For official purposes we
carried, besides many thousand rolls and cases of
maps above the postal limits, so large an article
as a printing press with set of type complete, for
General Headquarters. Bags of urgent “ sealed
packets ” were regularly carried for the Signal
Service between Mudros, the Peninsula and
Salonika, and I would also refer to Sir lan
Hamilton’s General Order quoted in paragraph 63.
111. The faults were that the service though
certain was rather slow and irregular, and that,
from lack of time for re-direction at the Base,
letters for men in split units or in hospital were apt
to be greatly delayed. This was unavoidable.
The worst sufferers were probably the Yeomanry,
many regiments of which were partly in Egypt,
partly serving dismounted in the Peninsula and
partly in composite Cavalry regiments at Salonika.
112. These were the inevitable shortcomings
imposed by a transport system which left the mail
service to be nothing better than a bye-product
of the carriage of troops and stores.
113. As regards the direct services to Mudros
introduced in November and December, 1915, it
will be seen that neither I nor anyone in the
M.E.F. had anything to do with their framing,
nor with the causes which led to their non-
success.
114. The opinion of the Commander-in-Chief
of the M.E.F. on this point, so far as I am con-
cerned, is given in his letter to the War Office of
15th March, 1916, of which a copy is attached
(Appendix D).
115. The scheme being framed at home, its
authors had to rely on information gained in
London, and this was unfortunate as, from in-
stances which I could give, information about the
local conditions at Mudros and the Dardanelles
obtained elsewhere was not always correct, and
possibly this was so also with information in Paris
about the French transports.
116. It is quite certain, however, that all did
their best, and the failure to bring about more
satisfactory results may be put down to ( a) the
absence of any defined policy as to the degree of
importance or precedence to be assigned to the
mail service, and (6) the large number of authorities
employed—D.A.P.S.,l.G.C., War Office, Admiralty,
and Post Office having all taken part and those
most directly responsible and in touch with the
work having in turn each been overruled, or their
proposals modified, by others more remote.


XXlV. —Recommendations.
117. This Statement would not be complete if
it did not draw specific attention to the more
important lessons learned. Of these I think there
are two, namely :
118, Firstly, the necessity for deciding upon and
recording the same definite principles as to the
degree of consideration and precedence to be given
to mails in matters of transport and other facilities.
119. The existence of enormously bulky mails
and the desire of frequent and rapid communica-
tion between the troops and their relatives and
friends at home are comparatively new phenomena
in the Army, but have undoubtedly come to stay.
In previous British campaigns—at any rate, before
the South African war—letter writing as a habit
was comparatively infrequent among the rank and
file, and parcel post was in its infancy or non-
existent, and troops generally were content with
a slow and rough-and-ready mail service. Now
this is not so, and the time has come when —to use
common language —it has got to be settled whether
a mail service in war is a luxury or a necessity.
The Army Postal Service too often finds itself in
the unlucky position of being treated as both—a
luxury when it asks for facilities ; and a necessity
when, on account of their refusal, the service is
slow and bad. One hears from the Staff every
conceivable degree of opinion—from the man who
thinks that the troops would fight better and be
more contented and freer from preoccupations if
entirely cut off from communication with their
friends and families, to the one who says that a
good and rapid English mail service does more to
keep up the morale of a force than anything
else.
120. On this matter I do not pretend to decide,
but I know that many officers far more experienced
than I —including the former I.G.C. to the M.E.F.
(General Sir E. Altham, K.C.B.) —hold strongly
the need for better transport than, at all events,
that provided for mails to the Dardanelles, and
with this opinion I entirely agree.
121. I will only say further that, in my opinion,
local services, as distinguished from the English
mail, deserve more consideration than they usually
obtain, both in view of their value for Army
administration and for the relief they give to the
telegraphs. (Please compare paragraph 35.)
122. I have recommended to the Post Office that
some instructions on the subject should be inserted
in the Naval Transport Regulations (vide para-
graph 54), but I think that some guiding principles
should also be stated in Part II of the Army Field
Service Regulations.
123. I would draw attention to the very large
revenue earned by the mails for the various Ex-
peditionary Forces. At the present moment, I
understand, the postage on letters and parcels for
the troops abroad amounts to over £70,000 a “week,
or £3,500,000 a year. It is obvious that a large
proportion of this must be profit, and if the public
are willing to spend this huge sum for the carriage
of letters and parcels to the troops, it is the barest
duty of the State to see that they get an adequate
service in return before any of it is carried to
revenue.
(C 49—242)
124. The other matter is that of control, and is
connected with the division of authority mentioned
in paragraph 111 (6).
125. In theory, and by its constitution, the Army
Postal Service is as much a part of the Army as the
Supplies, Signals, or any other service. Its officers
and men are in precisely the same position as any
other soldiers, and the directors are responsible to
the Commander-in-Chief of their Force like those
of any other service. All the factors, moreover,
on which the service depends—Establishments,
Buildings, Transport, &c. —art controlled by the
War Office or the General in Command.
126. In spite of this, however, the Postmaster-
General, and not the Secretary of State for War,
is the recognised spokesman for the Service to the
public, both in Parliament and elsewhere, and
exercises a kind of control with power of inspection
over the work in the Field. For instance, it is the
custom, and directors are expected to present
their reports periodically or at the end of a cam-
paign, not to the War Office but to the Postmaster-
General ; and Lieut.-Colonel Williamson was sent
out to inspect the service at the Dardanelles (as
mentioned in paragraph 107), not on behalf of the
War Office, but of the Post Office.
127. I do not know of any authority for this,
and cannot think that it is either sound or in the
long run beneficial. So long as the Post Office
takes partial responsibility for the service in the
manner described the War Office cannot be ex-
pected to take the same interest in its efficiency
as if it were itself answerable ; and I cannot resist
the belief that if this had been so, the applications
for better mail transport in August, 1915, would
have received more support at home than they did.
It seems, moreover, altogether anomalous that one
Department should assume responsibility for a
service the entire means for carrying on which are
controlled by another. Nor is the existing division
of control fair to the directors, who must, in any
circumstances, remain responsible to the Com-
mander-in-Chief of their Force and cannot also
serve another master.
128. The present position is partly the outcome
of tradition from days before the creation of a
Postal Corps, when (as in the Crimea) the mail
service was conducted by a civil staff from the
General Post Office, partly due to the officers and
men being all drawn from the Post Office Service,
and partly to the absence of a D.A.P.S at the War
Office, which results in many questions relating to
the Army Postal Service being referred to the Post-
Office. The tendency has been intensified in the
present war, and is helped by the fact that, as
mentioned in paragraph 4, the Home Depot is
practically under General Post Office control.
129. I am strongly of opinion that the control
should be brought into conformity with the
theoretical by:—
(a) The assumption of full control of, and re'
sponsibility to the public for, the Army
Postal Service by the War Office instead of
the Post Office.
(6) The appointment of a D.A.P.S. responsible
to the War Office only, and having control
over the Home Depot, instead of the present
D.A.P.S. Home.


130. One good result of this arrangement would
be that there would Jbe a definite person to decide
whether the Home Depot should or should not
undertake any work desired by one of the
D.A.P.Ss. abroad. There were occasions in the
Dardanelles campaign when I wished the Home
Depot to do something to which it did not agree.
I had no power to require it to do what I wanted,
and there was no superior authority over us both
to decide.
131. Apart from recognising the authorities men-
tioned, I believe that it is essential for the future
development of the Army Postal Service that it
should be free to work without direction from St.
Martin Vie-Grand. This is in no sense setting up
the Army Postal Service as a rival to the civil
postal service or denying the value or even the
necessity for staff trained in civil methods. But
the requirements of the postal service of a mobile
army in the field are totally different from those
for a civil stationary population. The Army
Telegraph (“ Signal ”) Service is almost entirely
manned from or trained by the civil telegraph
service, but it would obviously never have reached
its present efficiency in the field if it had remained
under the direction of the telegraph side of the
General Post Office.
132. This reform could be carried out at once.
But I would go further and would recommend that
after the war the R.E.P.S. be changed from a
Special Reserve to a Regular corps and manned by
officers and men trained, like the Regular Army
telegraphists, in post offices at home, and possibly
employed in peace time in conducting the postal
work at Aldershot and other military centres. In
war it would be augmented from a reserve of
officers and men in the civil postal service. To
build up such a corps and to train the Regular
officers and men would necessarily take some
years, but the process might be accelerated by the
voluntary transfer of officers and men from the
existing R.E.P.S.
H. F. McCLINTOCK,
Major,
Bth Battn. London Regt.
(Late Temp. Major, R.E., D.A.P.S., M.E.F.)
London.
6th February, 1917.
Appendix A (referred to in paragraph 35).
(Copy.)
Director, Army Postal Service, M.E.F.
6th November, 1915.
Registered No. 384,
I.G.C. —
This matter was discussed at some length be-
tween the 5.T.0., the D.A.P.S. (Home) and myself
on the 18th ultimo, and the difficulties of the
transport service are fully realised.
At the same time it is extremely important that
something should be done to improve and regularise
the service with Alexandria. Even with a direct
service to Mudros for the English mail, the mails
between Mudros and Alexandria will remain of
great importance. They will include :—•
(1) All Australian, New Zealand and Indian
mails in both directions.
(2) Down-going correspondence returned from
the units for men in hospitals amounting to
about one-third of the total mail for the
Force,
(3) Official correspondence in both directions
between the field and Alexandria and Cairo.
(4) Private correspondence with Egypt in both
directions, including many orders for kit,
provisions, &c., necessary for the comfort of
the troops.
The present service by chance transport is
entirely irregular and uncertain. The intervals
between the transports vary extraordinarily, and
there is no guarantee when a letter from Alexandria
will reach Mudros and vice versa. Last time I
quoted an instance where a letter might have
taken nine days in reaching Mudros ; now I can
point to one where it could have taken seventeen.
I would draw special attention to the official
correspondence mentioned at (3) above, as it is
constantly represented to me how seriously the
departmental and kindred services—Works, Ord-
nance, Supplies, &c. —as well as the office of the
D.A.G., 3rd Echelon, are hampered by the absence
of an efficient postal service with the Base.
Not merely is the average time of post slow in
consequence of the irregular service, but there is
no certainty or even approximate certainty when
a letter will reach its destination. Consequently
all business is done as far as possible by telegraph,
at a very heavy cost to the Government, and what
cannot be done by telegraph suffers.
The postal administration itself is very much
hampered by the slow and uncertain post; and
a considerable time is taken up in answering com-
plaints of delay for which the Army Post Office is
in no way responsible.
The only remedy is to establish a ferry service
with Alexandria such as we have already with the
beaches and with Salonica, and as the French have
long had with Marseilles.
The S.T.O.’s observations as to the absence of
any provision in the transport regulations for the
carriage of mails are very suggestive, and if a
regular service cannot be provided by the Trans-
port Department, it is recommended that the
Army should charter packets for the purpose.
With a service three times a week it would not, in
normal circumstances, be necessary to use trans-
ports for mails at all, and the space now taken up
in their holds would be set free for other purposes.
On the assumption that the whole of the English
mails, including parcels, are brought direct to
Mudros, quite small ships would suffice. If the
scheme for a direct service should fall through,
especially as regards parcels, three ships a week,
each able to accommodate 4,000 bags, would
suffice and would furnish a very good alternative
to the Marseilles scheme.
(Intd.) H. F. McC.,
Major,
D.A.P.S.
Mudros.
6th November, 1915.


Appendix B (referred to in paragraph 75).
New Mail Service.
Whilst on the subject of communications with
Home, the Commander-in-Chief feels sure that all
ranks will be pleased to know that the War Office,
in consequence of his strong representations, has
arranged with the General Post Office that the
mails for the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force
shall, in future, be sent via Marseilles. The cost
of this concession will be considerable, but the gain
in time appreciable. Letters which have hitherto
taken 18 days at least to reach their destination in
the Peninsula should, when the new arrangement
is in working order, be delivered in 10 or 11 days.
A further announcement will be made of the date
from which the new mail service is to take effect.
General Headquarters,
4:th October, 1915.
Appendix C (referred to in paragraph 96).
Treatment of Letters and Parcels for the Wounded.
1. Origin of the work. —Almost immediately after
the arrival of the main party R.E.P.S. at Alexan-
dria (24th April) letters began to be returned from
the Front in large numbers marked “Wounded” or
“ Hospital,”' but without any indication of any
particular hospital, and have continued to be so
returned by every mail.
2. Necessity for Post Office to redirect. —It would
have been obviously improper to have returned
such letters to the senders, and, as the units had
no knowledge of the hospitals in which the wounded
were, it became the duty of the Army Post Office,
as in the South African war, to undertake the re-
direction of the correspondence to the best of its
ability.
3. Nature of work involved. —The work involved
falls under two heads : ( a) Collection and tabula-
tion of addresses ; (6) treatment of correspondence.
4. Collection of addresses. —Most hospitals in
Egypt send a daily, and hospitals in Cyprus and
Malta a weekly list of admissions and discharges,
to the Base Army Post Office, Alexandria. (Other
arrangements exist at Lemnos, where patients are
not usually kept for more than 21 days.)
5. Preparation of lists. —The names on these
lists are abstracted by battalions or other units
into alphabetical rolls by a joint British, Australian,
New Zealand and Indian staff of about 18 working
at the British Base, A.P.O.
6. Treatment of returned correspondence. —The
returned letters and parcels go to a special section
of the Office, called the Returned Letter Office or
R.L.0., and are dealt with by a special staff. The
letters for more convenient examination are set
upright in alphabetical order between wooden
divisions, much in the manner of a card index.*
7. Broken parcels. —A staff is employed in re-
packing broken parcels, which are treated to the
number of about 150 a day.
8, Proportion of correspondence redirected. —
Correspondence which cannot be disposed of by
the help of the lists is taken to “ Records,” i.e., the
office of the A.A.G., 3rd Echelon, and about half
of it is disposed of by the aid of the records there.
The remainder is kept for six weeks from the date
of posting, and if not then traced is then sent
back to the unit for retrial.
9. Hospitals scattered. —The hospitals are scat-
tered from Lemnos to Cyprus, Egypt and Malta ;
while many of the wounded have been sent direct
to England, in some cases without any list of their
names being made before departure. To keep
trace of the wounded is therefore a work of the
greatest difficulty, and, in fact, is not possible in
its entirety; while often information is not
received until after the man in question has been
discharged or transferred to another hospital or
convalescent depot, as such transfers are made with
great frequency.
10. Large numbers of casualties. —The casualties
in the M.E.F. by the end of June— i.e., in about
10 weeks from the commencement —exceeded the
total casualties in the two and a half years of the
South African campaign, and they have steadily
continued since then. The postal staff available
for dealing with the correspondence, on the other
hand, is much smaller than in South Africa.
11. Number of addresses recorded. —Apart from
Australian, New Zealand, and Indian lists, the
names of sick and wounded entered on the British
lists, together with the relative hospital and date
of admission, number now about 27,000. Separate
working lists are required in the R.L.O. and in the
sorting office, as well as a standard list, so that the
total number of entries is now 81,000.
12. Number of alterations.— Moreover, the entries
constantly nesd alteration to keep pace with a
patient’s movements from hospital to hospital,
and, roughly, 6,300 alterations are received weekly,
representing about 19,000 separate amendments.
13. Up-going correspondence. —The lists are also
used to redirect letters for the wounded from the
up-going mails so as to save the delay and risks of
a journey to the Peninsula and back. From
shortage of staff and pressure of time it is not
possible to examine the whole mail; but corre-
spondence for those units who have suffered most
heavily is so examined with useful results, espe-
cially with parcels. This work has been tem-
porarily suspended from shortage of staff, and it is
questionable whether in view of the labour in-
volved and delay to correspondence, for the troops
at the Front it will not have to be given up.
14. Comparison with B.E.F. and Home service. —
No similar work is undertaken in the 8.E.F.,
where it is understood that no special lists of the
wounded are kept, and where all correspondence
which cannot be redirected at the unit is at once
sent to London for return to the sender. Still less
is there anything similar in the Home Postal
service where redirection is not undertaken till the
letters reach the actual office of delivery, and each
address is furnished to the Post Office by the
addressee.
15. Laborious nature of work. —The process of
checking each individual letter with the lists is a
slow one, and requires a large and careful staff.
It has been much handicapped till lately by want of
space, and is so still by want of staff; but none
the less very good progress is being made in the


work of getting the correspondence to the ad-
dressees.
always accurate. Moreover, even when
accurate, it is sometimes received too late for
a man to receive his letters before being
discharged or transferred to some other
Hospital or Convalescent Depot. To meet
this difficulty a scheme was drawn up for
having a permanent “B ” — i.e., discharged
from Hospital as cured, but permanently
unfit for any but light duty—man attached
to each Hospital for the double purpose of
furnishing the Army Post Office with infor-
mation and of seeing to the proper treat-
ment and redirection of letters for the
patients, a matter in which there is room
for improvement at some Hospitals ; but
the men were not available. The point
will be pressed and if the men asked for are
still not obtainable it will become a question
of attaching R.E. men to at any rate the
principal Hospitals or groups of Hospitals.
16. Growth of work. —The work has steadily
grown, and is still fast increasing, as the subjoined
statements will show :
Number of
Standard lists.
(Battalions and
Units.)
Present System
commenced
Number of
Hospitals, etc.,
Sending Lists.
14th June.
End of May ...
Middle of June
End of June
Middle of July
Beginning of August..
Approximate
Number of
Wounded on
Standard Lists.
Appendix D (referred to in paragraph 114).
C.M.Q. 25/17.
Middle of July ...
Beginning of August
21,000
27,000
From
The General Commanding
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
To
Number of
Weekly
Alterations in
Hospital Lists.
The Secretary,
War Office, London, W.C.
General Headquarters,
15 th March, 1916.
Middle of July ...
Beginning of August
4,500
6,300
With reference to my telegram C.M.Q.T. 794,
dated 27th February, in which Major H. F.
McClintock’s, Army Postal Service, departure
for home was reported, I wish to place on record
the good work that Major McClintock has performed
while holding the appointment of D.A.P.S., M.E.F.
The conducting of a satisfactory Postal Service
at and about the Gallipoli Peninsula was a matter
of extreme difficulty, and to pretend that the
Service during this period was satisfactory would
be incorrect, but I consider that that was due to
circumstances over which Major McClintock had
no control.
Number of bags
Received in
Returned
Letter Office.
May (8-31)
June
670
1,276
July
August (1-9)
17. Difficulties to he overcome. —The main ob-
stacles are:—
I am of opinion that the organization, ad-
ministration, and actual local distribution of Postal
matter over which Major McClintock had control
was satisfactorily carried out.
(1) Lack of staff. —This will be remedied when
the drafts applied for on the 13th and 30th
ultimo both arrive.
On arrival in Egypt at the beginning of this year
Major McClintock reorganised the whole of the
Army Postal Administration, and in my opinion
handed over everything in a satisfactory manner
to Colonel Warren.
(2) Imperfect information supplied by the hos-
pitals.—lt cannot be too strongly empha-
sised that the P.O, is entirely dependent,
whether directly or through 3rd Echelon,
on information furnished by the Hospitals,
and that for various reasons, notably the
remoteness of some of the Hospitals and
pressure of work or insufficient clerical
staff at the Hospitals themselves, the
information is far from complete and not
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) A. J. Murray,
General, Commander-in-Chief, M.E.F


REPORT ON NEW ZEALAND POSTAL SERVICE
By CAPTAIN D. A. McCURDY, Commanding, New Zealand Base Post Office.
Organisation,
The New Zealand Army Postal Service, when
the main body of the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force left Wellington, consisted of three field post
offices which were attached to Divisional Head-
quarters, the Mounted Rifles Brigade and the
Infantry Brigade respectively.
On the 7th November, 1914, I received appoint-
ment as Officer Commanding, New Zealand Postal
Service, and took charge of the postal arrange-
ments of the force from that date.
The force arrived at Zeitoun, Cairo, on the
morning of the 4th December, and a post office was
opened on the following day.
About March, 1915, the Divisional Train was
formed, and a field office was attached in accord-
ance with the authorised establishment. The
personnel was obtained from the second reinforce-
ments. Further details arrived with the third and
fourth reinforcements.
On the 9th April the Infantry Brigade and
Divisional Train left for Alexandria to embark for
the Dardanelles.
About the 16th April a New Zealand mail
arrived, and was sent aboard the troopship
“ Goslar,” the last of the New Zealand boats to
leave Alexandria.
On the same date arrangements were made
with the Commandant, New Zealand Infantry Base
Depot, Alexandria, for the use of a portion of
Shed 43, which had been allotted to him, and a
staff of four postal details and myself commenced
duty there.
This staff was added to from time to time, as
the work increased, by drawing convalescents from
the base camp and the postal reinforcements from
New Zealand. Unfortunately only a small per-
centage of these men had had postal training.
It was brought before the notice of the D.A.P.S.
(Major McClintock) that non-postal men were
being sent as postal reinforcements. He repre-
sented the matter to New Zealand and from the
sixth reinforcements until the present time all
reinforcements have been trained postal men.
Treatment of Mails.
While the force was all encamped the matter of
the distribution of mails was very simple, and was
carried out in accordance with the instructions in
the Army Postal manual. Correspondence was
sorted into units in the Post Office, and was then
delivered to the postal orderlies of the different
units, who called daily at the Post Office.
The orderlies were responsible for the re-direction
of correspondence for men absent from their units.
Correspondence re-addressed was handed in to* the
Post Office for transmission to the new address.
On the departure of the force for Gallipoli this
system was altered. A card index was then set up
showing the addresses of men in hospital, addressed
post cards were given out to the wounded by the
Rev. Greene, C.F., on the arrival of the hospital
ships at Alexandria, and the men were instructed
to post them as soon as they reached the hospital.
Unfortunately a large number of men did not
think it worth while to forward these cards.
Captain Greene also supplied the Post Office with
the names of the men he had visited in the different
hospitals. It was arranged later by Major McClin-
tock for lists of admissions and discharges to be
supplied by the different hospitals—direct lists
were supplied by the Australian and New Zealand
hospitals, and information regarding men in
British and Egyptian hospitals was obtained from
the Base “ Z ” office daily.
On the arrival of a mail the letters were sorted
into alphabetical order, and were compared with
the address cards. The letters were then re-
directed accordingly. Parcels and newspapers were
treated in the same way.
As there was always several days between the
departure of ships for Mudros, this process did not
delay the mails for the troops in Gallipoli, and
enabled us to deliver letters, &c,, for men in
hospital promptly. For this purpose a motor
cyclist was attached to the New Zealand Base to
make a daily delivery to New Zealanders in the
Alexandria hospitals.
During the early part of the campaign hospital
lists w’ere very slow in coming to hand, weeks
elapsing between the time of a man’s admission to
hospital and the receipt of advice at the New
Zealand Base Post Office. This was particularly
noticeable with regard to Lemnos and Malta
hospitals.
To obviate the delay the attention of all ranks
has several times been drawn to Field Service
Regulations, Part 2, Section 102, paragraph 2: —
“ Officers and men who are detached from
their unit will send a card to :
The Officer in charge,
Base Post Office,
notifying the unit or place to which their corre-
spondence from home is to be sent.”
Parcels.
While in Egypt the parcel mails were very small,
as men were able to buy the articles they required
at the canteens : only a few hundred parcels being
received per week. These parcels came by the
New Zealand Shipping Company’s steamers via
Cape Horn to London, where they were despatched
and sent in bags to Port Said, the time occupied in
transit being about three months.
This was a fruitful cause for complaint, as men
would receive advice (via Suez) stating that a
parcel had been posted at the same time, and
would not receive the parcel until seven weeks
later. In the meantime complaint would be made
to New Zealand of its non-arrival, and the opinion
formed that the parcel had been stolen. Repre-
sentations were made to the D.A.P.S., M.E.F., and
a cable was sent to New Zealand requesting that


parcels be sent via Suez. This necessitated an
increase in the rates o| postage owing to the tran-
shipment at Sydney. The first mail by the Suez
route left Wellington on the 19th August, 1915,
and arrived at Alexandria on the 22nd September.
Parcels posted in England also suffered delay
due to their despatch by a different route from
letters.
During the early part of the time parcels for
Gallipoli were very badly packed, and on arrival
at the base were found to be damaged, and had to
be re-packed. Owing to the rough handling of the
bags it was frequently impossible to identify the
parcels. Cakes very often arrived as crumbs in the
bottom of the bags.
Circulation of Mails.
Mails for the New Zealand Forces were received
direct from the trains or boats by a representative
>f the New Zealand Base Post Office, who tallied
the number of bags or parcel receptacles, and gave
a receipt to the R.E.P.S. representative. They
were then taken to the Base Post Office and sorted,
and the letters for wounded or men stationed in
Egypt extracted.
The sealed bags were then delivered to the trains
or transports, and a receipt obtained from the
British postal authorities. Waybills accompanied
each despatch. Until arrival at Anzac the mails
were in the charge of the British Army Postal
Service.
At Anzac the bags were unloaded from the
trawlers into lighters, and on the beach were taken
charge of by the Landing Post Office, the staff of
which consisted of Australian and New Zealand
postal men.
After the mail had been checked it was taken
over by the Field Post Offices concerned, and was
then handed over to the unit post orderlies. As
soon as delivery was made to the unit post orderlies
the responsibility of the Post Office ceased. The
regimental post orderly was responsible for the
correct delivery to men with the unit, and the
return to the base of all mail for absentees.
Owing to the difficulties of transport of mails
very few of the undeliverable parcels were returned ;
the parcels and papers being distributed among
those on the Peninsula. This action was dis-
countenanced by the Post Office, and notices
appeared in Routine Orders forbidding it, but it
could not be prevented altogether.
With regard to the cases quoted by Sergeant
Balfour on the 13th March, page 4, “ N.Z.E.F.
Mails,” I am not now able to trace the men’s
movements before their arrival in England, but no
doubt they have had other changes.
2/202 Bombardier H. W. Sinclair. —Admitted
Military Hospital, Fulham, Ist September, 1915.
Furlough, 21st October to 4th November, 1915.
I have interviewed Sinclair, and he states that
he received his mail at the New Zealand Hospital
until late in August. He states that his early
letters were held by his unit. He did not advise
the Base Post Office of his address in England.
2/2236 Private G. O'Rourke. —Came with the
fifth reinforcements. He went to Mudros on the
25th September, and was admitted to an Australian
hospital there. He left Mudros about the end of
November for England, was admitted to the
Ist Southern General Hospital, Birmingham, on
the sth December, 1915, and went on furlough on
the 6th January, 1916. He states that he did not
advise the Base Post Office of his whereabouts.
13/189 Trooper G. H. Griffin. —Was admitted to
the 27th General Hospital on the 24th December
after several changes of address, embarked for
England on the 27th August, and was admitted to
the Ist Southern General Hospital, Birmingham,
on the 16th September. He was discharged on
the 13th November, and was re-admitted during
December. He went on furlough on the 13th
January, 1916. I interviewed him, and he states
that he received his mail until he left Egypt, also
that he called at the High Commissioner’s office in
London on two occasions and received no mail.
He called a third time, and states that he was told
that there was none on hand. He states that he
said he would not leave until he got some, and
after further search a large bundle was delivered
to him. He did not advise the Base Post Office of
his whereabouts.
8/2325 Private R. L. Ward. —Was killed on the
16th August, 1915.
10/1599 Private G. 0. Nilson. —Admitted to
University War Hospital, Southampton, 27th
October, 1915; Ist Southern General Hospital,
30th December, 1915 ; Addington Park Hospital,
Bth February, 1916. Furlough until 28th April,
1916.
6/2150 Private W. E. Holden. —Admitted
Western General Hospital, Manchester, 27th Sep-
tember, 1915. Returned to active service, 11th
January, 1916..
10/3622 Private L. A. Bluett. —Admitted
hospital, Mudros, sth October, 1915; admitted
Walton-on-Thames, 27th October, 1915. Dis-
charged, 23rd March, 1916.
8/2111 Private F. T. Riley. —Killed in action,
22nd March, 1916.
1 interviewed Griffin, Sinclair, and O’Rourke,
and each man states that he did not advise the
Base Post Office of his address. It is therefore
reasonable to suppose that the other men also
failed to do so.
With regard to the cable of the 19th January,
and my letter of the 26th January, 1916, I have
made inquiries in London, and find that the state-
ment that 400 or 500 bags of mail were delivered
to the High Commissioner’s office in the course of a
few days is incorrect. Mails were delivered regu-
larly as they arrived. The largest number received
at one time was 82 bags delivered on the 10th
December, which were despatched from Alexandria
on the 17th, 20th, 25th, and 29th November, and
69 bags delivered on the 24th December, which
were despatched from Alexandria on the 7th and
10th December. The* total number delivered
during December was less than 200.
D. McCURDY,
Captain.
O.C. New Zealand Base Post Office.
Printed under the authority of His Majesty’s Stationery Office
By Harrison and Sons, St. Martin’s Lane, London, W.C. 2.
Printers in Ordinary to His Majesty.*


SO
o _ GULF OF XERO S (SA R 0 S)
■ m 1 1—1 1=1 ' %, ~ J
* v / /v € j
BaklaBurnu oXurufhif '*f H
»(C XerosiffJ A* /r J
MAP OF THE
, GALLIPOLI PENINSULA ifkdfTr 'A " i
'\' r . i S' . *' w <
40°30'P Scale 1:250,000 — -.- -—— Vo’soj
i ' A '. fj j / yf 371 y)j I 'J ■
Miles, r > 4 3 2 1 0 5 10 Miles \ f' V S£^../.. „ dk \ )f* r
T 7 5« mal^«*e
6 «.vX t '. f uKutphChif /
Roads X3l „ Jfortv-B&qox Atvjig^J^
j 1 *"*"*>*' —AXXX A A~1fe I
Heights m feet , ~ • 97 ® sac M&nlgMusUfc Chik ■/
rfyy 93a 1060 1 Karaite ChifL >, Ji I
, ..xu. ■ a / 732 v y \ ax va#
'if . V ■■• ] / 732 yj V \YuhiLiiiri
% t K&i’ukh KeutJ % TtT . # \»
; ,:y : M ***'
j \ ... / y- / Papas CBif'- J t 5 *
6n : < OAL\imm:UBUU) %
j T«*u vKeuifT \ S
. w y ' I Xaraman 388 X- fiT \ } -«VJi
*T V 694 L 551 0MH ■ ’ \. V |< x 0 f : ’? eMemc T rP
758 / JW u i a \ //A/\ kahba.a\\ 7 : J
722 / -\yiil \// \] GalaU Mhardfik 820 i CH T ’ E H £ L,K \ ! \ <. 7
* ■ x 431 i -k ■ m. ■ C7 7 V7 J
• I V- *-« \ 591 ItKCHI 0 j Kilc/saKi t , /- ■;/ A
. KafaMkew sas > £, '/•' S-4/?V ADATEPt :P :'\
\ (X I jr««rTv/ ' ' 'Jr e neI
V )M|. K«. K — / AnOuMJM. pt%vy
vV v / «aa A '/ v 764 .7 rB upoosiuJ • vC V — v S ™ 1 • t > . />*'
j * / ; .'" vj yp-' to. ■• feV-W.foftTf,, : '- V
Suvla Uurnu / ' , M |'Vt'r »«,«» '5 y m ; V < «V=W<i ll 1 ', 4 i ’V JM/W®**
fftiirtn 466 / Seivih 104 *3 V> j/v irJA< 7 .. -o , \ . v kovanlik
1 ' (U»«S« y | ... Sim.hH**. Ir 5 “ fcwW »*( «4.”~ oKoroyhach I
Vrknderf Krtrhili mb “ P/ \ \ Y^u ° daOV 4 pTat,!UUH<x,dha
( x I ULGIN OA * vchaW™
\ A /J Haqhrhfkttii/ , 5 \v , / »«♦ .... OrmirtUv JBfomJbccrJaah 9> J
} • ( '■ / / i/. KlVesk*ur t J *u« T ala* %.
Fishermans Hut (' 3U #fC\ V / / [ . “
1 & \ N \\ r / / . :v V v v •:• ■ J ,
{AnzacCovi ■] A <iMyhnii A j\\ nho f'\ asmajik ° AGH
Hell Spit Kqftt Drrc ' «fe. .m , Jiofiqu/'tiO 1 • Erdagh AS dagm K
Brighton Beach \ / X / -V V //y ' \ ‘ 7 >■ : rX \ cfYosla/or I
I J c 7 yCz, r u f «=.■
< v " w*3-/ /, o h„.,Jk,uh,i,
I \ / «W. V . column. / «i«u« \
rkAn AbiJa) ‘ // / /' \\ A tasm tepe chamli teps ulu dash 7 I T *f*
XV; V \ 'IV -—A \\ 7/ , „ / nnrrvaxoinlar \
Per/n A' / P fl / '^X r f OOA'fXff CHANGARA KIR D. / / ' ' \. .‘V-X. ; "' '
CA e /&/ 0 .669 , I / J l 5 V, TEPE 3000 X / X ,
• Is . ■ A 6S3 „ r ■ v dhmipj- 3 ° ov X A \ I!
* / / / . -•. V . d/''WA AT A U X / n l070 shab D. / X \
m ,/ KiLut y B<lhr& . I — Q / SIRT TEPE / /
1 ui)iw\L' Lnan - /ifirti/ IfthihAoj- t. tavshan tepe / „ _ /
IMUROS 1/2 rtv. j r - ' {tSMi;r < >llLIJ\J\lK j * sakar d. /
wv V vvA ■ , ' ,• \\ —ArVOA; / . 2493 .v- \J
, x - / s> x / y~- ■ /,
A '• .. «KP •' . . jy • J*0uH*tter OKumcider / / kara d. / -
* ® r v«rfen -•■■■ a Kephei >% —oC 'hetexier jUto- ,, j
Gvjrstj .■ xyy o,*„ Y /«w«r a : ■ ('-a r —
‘TTxr.r Rums of XJ \ a J\ V _. I . V" ofel " 1
Dardanusf f-\kolobcLkti V KoMtxr Sirfkeux. J
/s 'fy s '** Ak Tash // ‘ -i T, - \ oSaribeid asarlik tash I O / 0 . . . _
X.v " v£«»*4i ( • s „ E , r .„. \ .— X .• *f
. TaMe Burnu ('■'#, M \H#u nuJctou] AA ;rVX_. / DAGM ' j'
j ~ m J' ■ EaUH.aaarl.Kpl ' V I \ - X y *- ‘ |
I a . x Ay. y., y\ -■ , , A,,^ i ''"
X XaXa /'.y .) \ \ y|X I | ■)* •'y'Y'P^ — HiyubO « > v -j
I .. u’,\' <y EreM,r jg xiUc ---y >«nW ' , >«-.=/. X i
l0 , L_ - x _ xx L. I
20 . 20°3o'
War Office. 10/5.
Additions, August 1917
ri S.G H.N9 27H 9


I * * 1
' * Larissa * D u b zond + ’ rn l^asnovodsk
Trikhala /\ iPanderma 1 M K w t 4 Hs
>\ ' / g ° r 7~^W-* yuZga ' « SiVaS -Erzingao * % .. 5 . « x + j V --—
\ ■ , | t [ . y-Ras el Air -*PJ_ , , -. M( | '— —" "''>/'
| a. l) J /' A - \ \ * ' X Hamadan *
C £ \ / ." * Tekrili Kifn* * _ ,."\
|r yf ‘ Tripoli/* / ' '"--.Tadmor VSamarrak '“Kermanshah / I *
* R A H E A N SEA "Vjo ?' :/ *'♦ / \
" 5 L 1 bamascus A ; ' \ t
■5 X Halfa . +_ / * * ,XlSPAHAN -A' **
• |i<P • / \j<i Dizful ■ X \
. ccX • J / 1 * \ \ * ■ * fa\J ,’ \ *Yezd »
“ i{jy* 1 < Y \ '-\ / \ /" \
(\ MersaMaTruh'^^^^^lexandria^j— X"* ort Said £ (fl \ / SamawaX. \ ♦ z X \ /
', A •BilOSaba ''', ,-' 1 *(> - \J X y] u
\ X A 1 E i An * sh . I y \ A\ { X' ,rman
\ 1 + J Basra / / /
of Jarabub U ez \ Maan/ N \
SiwaK x I \ '; \^
\> /I QA -S s i> • hassaX
OasiS h j)f '"~'' N -53 | ,X ' jfeo e da ’WQataHf - Jf
i Oasis of'Kharja % v ; j \,_
I ' ' S X V u T f' \ / x' I^USMtS.
I Aswan pX ,*/ , /
■ 5^ as / x
B \ )
|H fV \ Kassala Asmara « , | « Sanaa
E ' . t ARABIAN
G ' ' ’ -
Ordnance. Stu-vr\J.OJ 9■
X i ■ Scale 1:1 0.000,000
REFERENCE
Railways Kilometres TOO O TOO 200 3Q0 400 500 1000 1500 Kilometres
‘ - — Miles 0 TOO 200 300 400 500 1000 Miles
Streams
International Boundaries — ■ -
OUTLINE MAP OF TURKISH EMPIRE


FOREIGN OFFICE.
Agreement between His Britannic Majesty’s Government and the Persian Government. (Signed at Tehran,
August 9, 1919.)
[Cmd. 300] of Session 1919. Price Id. (1 \d.)
Conditions in Turkish Prisons.
Reports by Vice-Admiral Sir A. Caltliorpe and Rear-Admiral \V ebb.
[Cmd. 260] of Session 1919. Price 2d. (3d.)
MINISTRY OF PENSIONS.
First Annual Report, to March 31, 1918.
Constitution of the Ministry; Legislation affecting its Powers ; Central and Local Administration ; Administration
of Pensions ; Medical Treatment; Vocational Training ; Employment of the War-Disabled ; The Statutory Committee
and Special Grants Committee; Finance; Miscellaneous; Appendices ßoyal Warrant (Soldiers) Maich -9, 1917.
Order in Council (Seamen and Marines), March SO. 1917. Royal Warrant (Army Officers and Jnirses) August 1, 1917.
Order in Council (Naval Officers and Nurses), Sept. 29. 1917. Order in Council (Naval Warrant Officers) Sept. 29
1917. Summaries of Awards to Warrant Officers, N.C.O.’s and Men, Widows and Children, Dependants, Officeis and
their Families and Dependants, and Nurses; Classification of Awards according to Disabilities ; Numbers under
and discharged from, Treatment; Institutions provided or specially arranged lor by the Ministry; statistics of
Decisions of Special Grants Committee.
[Cmd. 14] of Session 1919. Price 9 d. (11 Id.)
Special Report from the Select Committee.
Constitution; Terms of Reference ; Delays; Statutory Right to Pension ; Medical Boards and the> Right of
Appeal; Appeals on Entitlement, Appeal on Amount; Flat Rate Pension, including that of Widows and the Alter-
native Pension; The Scales, and their relation to one another; Recommendations : Maximum Flat Rate Pen-
sion Children’s and other Allowances, Special Married Women’s Allowance, Widows, Alternative Pension, Widow s
Alternative Pension, Bonuses and on Automatic Sliding Scale, Treatment and Training Allowances, Conclusion.
H.C. 149 of Session 1919. Price 2d. (3d.)
Report of the Departmental Committee on Artificial Limbs.
Introductory; Supply of Limbs ; Proposed Issue of a Second or Spare Limb ; History of First Issue Reviewed ;
Creation of Fitting Hospitals; Selection of Types of Limb; Extension of the Arrangements to meet Increased
Casualties, 1916-17 ; Establishment of new Fitting Hospitals and Sections of Hospitals , Organisation of the British
Limb-Makers ; Difficulties arising from the Multiplication of Types of Limb ; Proposed Reduction of types to One
or Two for each Amputation ; Standardisation of certain Component Parts ; Recommendations to facilitate Stand-
ardisation ; Reservation in applying this Principle to Arms owing to the greater likelihood of Improvement in these ,
Effect of these Recommendations on the Advisory Council ; Proposed Change of Status ; Proposed Control of Limb-
Makers ; Proposed Formation of a Contracts Department within the Ministry of Pensions for dealing wRh Artificial
Limbs and Appliances ; Recommendations for Establishment of a Central Depot under the Ministry of Pensions,
Decentralisation Recommended ; Further Fitting Centres and Financial Aid if required ; Prices ; hitting and Re-
fitting ; Desirability of maintaining Fitting Centres for the Supply of the Spare Limb, with Surgical Supervision ,
Limbless Men are suited for Work on Limbs, but not necessarily for Fitting them ; Out-turn of Limb-Makers sufficie t
to meet the Demand in connection with the Supply of the Second Limb; Three New Centres Recommended ,
Management and Control of Fitting Centres must be modified to meet pnst-hdhm Conditions ; Responsibly of the
State asserted for these Arrangements ; Recommendation that Medical Men and Students be gi\ en Facilities
Studying the Work at Fitting Centres ; Proposed Revision of Rules as to Allowances payable to Pensioners during
Renewal or Repair of Artificial Limbs ; Present Arrangements for Repairs Reviewed and Approved ; Por the next
two Years all important Repairs must he done at the Fitting Centres ; National Factory not recommended; Recom-
mendation that the Experimental Workshop should he under the Ministry of Pensions ; Methods of Supply of Surgice
Appliances; Invalid Tricycles. (1919.) Price 6d. (7 d.) • .*•
" War Pensions Gazette. A Monthly Journal for War Pensions Local Committees, and all interested m their
work. Price Id. (1 \d.)
MINISTRY OF RECONSTRUCTION.
Advisory Council for Employment on the Land of Returned Sailors and Soldiers. _
Report ; Introduction ; Preliminary Questions ; Housing ; • Acquisition of Land ; Small Holdings ; Training :
Large Farmers, Farm Managers, Organisers and Experts, Small Holders and Labourers ; M ages and Emplovmcn ,
The Case of Disabled Men ; Trade Organisation : Book-Keeping, Co-operation Transport, Rural Information Offices,
Credit; Village Life ; General Considerations ; Lines of Development, Social Development: Village Clubs and Halls,
Recreation Grounds, Passenger Transport; Economic Development: Rural Industries, Gardens and Allotments,
Common Pasture, Electricity ; Machinery for Organisation : The State, Local Authorities, Voluntary Organ st ,
Village Clubs Association, Women’s Institutes ; Voluntary Effort and Private Enterprise ; Appendices Bumma }
of Recommendations ; Proposed Form of Application for Land ; Memorandum on Housing Policy submitted to the
President of the Local Government Board by Members of both Houses of Parliament; Report by Mr. R. V. Lennard.
(8vo.) (1919.) Price Is. (Is. 1 \d.)
Reconstruction Problems.
No. 12. The Re-Settlement of Officers.—!. Army and RAF.; 11. Navy .. (1919.) each 2d. (3 d.\
No. 20. Land Settlement .. ..• .. ... (9 9. pne® (3d.)
No. 27. Officers’Guide to Civil Careers (1919.) „ M. b 2 .)
IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM.
Second Annual 9lB 1919.
Introductory; Curator’s Report; Navy, Relics of Zcebrugge and Ostend ; Miscellaneous ; Army; Air Force
Section and Exhibits ; Munitions Section ; Medical Section ; Naval and Army ; Womens York; Kcli^ui .Work
Section ; Library ; Publicity Records ; Art: Paintings, Drawings and Sculpture, Medals , Photographic Section ,
Model Section ; Loan Exhibitions : Women’s Section, Pictures, War Relics, Photographs, Catalogues.
[Cmd. 138] of Session 1919. Price 2d. (3d.)


THE EHSTAL EEPOET
OF THE
DARDANELLES COMMISSION.
(PART lI—CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS, &c.)
WITH APPENDIX OF DOCUMENTS AND MAPS.
Presented to Parliament by Command of His Majesty.
LORDON
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE.
To be purchas'd through any Bookseller or directly from
H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses: '
Imperial House, Kingsway, London, W.C, 2, and 28, Abingdon Street, London, S.W. 1 •
37, Peter Street, Manchester; 1, St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff- ’
23, Forth Street, Edinburgh;
or from E. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
l
p ", ».
[Omd. 371.]
