

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
FINANCIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
to
Commanding Officers,
Militia Units
1919
BY AUTHORITY;
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne,




DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
FINANCIAL
INSTRUCTIONS
to
Commanding Officers,
Militia Units
1919
BY AUTHORITY:
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 13313.


Serial No.
Finance
Circular No,
District
Order No.
Instruction
Amended.
Serial No.
Finance
Circular No.
District
Order No.
Instruction
Amended.
:
f
j \
.
' •
V
AMENDMENTS TO FINANCIAL INSTRUCTIONS TO C.O.’S.
MILITIA UNITS.


Financial Instructions to C.O.’s,
Militia Units.
PAY-SHEETS, ETC., HOME TRAINING.
1. The instructions clearly laid down in E. and A. Regulation 166
must he strictly complied with. It has heen brought under notice hy
Director, Naval and Military Audit, that Pay-sheets are frequently
produced for inspection incomplete in many details, and that the
Records and Nominal Rolls are not properly written up.
The following remarks are furnished in connexion with the general
preparation of Pay-sheets; —
(I.) (a) Pay-sheets to show quotas and regimental numbers of
the members.
( h ) Names and initials (first Christian name to he written in
full) must agree with Nominal Rolls.
(c) Camp and Home Training Pay-sheets are to he made out
in the same order.
( d ) Columns “ Dates Joined ” and “ Date of Promotion are to
be written up.
( e ) Dates of promotions, transfers, &c., are to he shown.
(/) The regulation under which a discharge is made should he
shown in the Home Training Pay-sheet: E. A. Regulation 166(fc).
In the case of Home Training Pay-sheets, pay will be claimed
lonly for compulsory or alternative parades — vide F. and A.
Regulation 345(1).
( g ) Certificates on the hack of Pay-sheets to be signed.
(II.). The order in which the names should appear is as
follows: —
Officers according to seniority.
Members voluntarily enlisted prior to June, 1912.
(Then under each quota, N.C.O.’s hy seniority, followed by
men, alphabetically arranged.
The undermentioned errors and omissions have occurred in the
pay-sheets and records of many units, and Commanding Officers are
directed to special action with regard to same:
Pay-sheets do not show quotas and regimental numbers of the
members. _ .
Names and initials do not agree with Nominal Rolls.
Dates of promotions, transfers, &c., are not shown.
Attendances not accurately marked on Pay-sheets.
Certificates on back of Pay-sheets not signed.
Nominal Rolls not written up. .
Battalion Orders covering promotions, transfers, and recruits
taken on strength, not available. . „ /n
Company Roll-books kept carelessly, and not signed by U/L/.
parade.
Citizen Forces—
Preparation of
Pay-sheets.
/Mol (fa*
M.v\ I


Area Officers’ statements of trainees transferred not available
order mP H ° m6 Training Pa iU she ets not made out in same
It must be specially noted that Corps Orders for all promotions,
additions to strength, &c., must be issued at the time such promotions,
required P aC6 ’ an< * must availaWe for audit inspection when
f i?' p , reparin f Ro ™ e Training Pay-sheets all stoppages then known
to be due by members for fines, deficiencies in clothing, equipment &c
should be made in the column provided for that purpose. A list in
duplicate containing full particulars of stoppage and amount deducted
rom each member, the total of which should correspond with amount
o stoppages in recapitulation, must be forwarded with Pay-sheets.
In cases where it is necessary for Commanding Officers to make
stoppages for deficiencies, &c., after the Pay-sheets are submitted,
stoppage-sheet A.M. Form 810 must be used.
The amount of pay shown to be due in the Pay List will be carried
orward to the Stoppage-sheet. Against the amount in the Pay List
wiU be written the words “ See Stoppage-sheet.” The signature of
soldiers for balance due after deduction of stoppages will be taken on
the Stoppage-sheet.
The Stoppage-sheet will be attached to the Pay List and submitted
tor examination to the Audit Officer when required.
The total amount of the stoppages as per Stoppage-sheet must be
repaid to Corps Account and brought to account in Corps Cash Book
and ST t 0 in accordanc e with F. and A. Regulations 158
Jt has been brought under notice by the Director of Naval and
Military Audit that in some districts moneys are received from mem-
bers of the Military Forces by Unit Commanders for deficiencies in
clothing and equipment, &c., for which apparently receipts are either
not issued or are_ issued from other than official numbered receipt-
books, which practice is contrary to Treasury Regulation 34.
Except in cases where recovery is made by direct stoppage from Pay-
sheet when submitted, or through Stoppage-sheet after submission a
receipt must be issued on printed forms taken from books of receipt
torms issued by the Department, stocks of which are held by the District
tion^4) tOrS f ° r ISSUO t 0 Eegiments and Cor P s ( vide p - and A. Regula-
tion the butt of each receipt full particulars of the money received
must be entered, the butt to -be initialed by the Commanding Officer
and submitted for examination to the Audit Officer when required.
Each amount so received must be paid into Corps Account and
brought to account in Corps Cash Book.
Stoppages for deficiencies, &c., shall be immediately forwarded to
the District Paymaster for payment into revenue (vide F. and A. Regu-
lations 147, 158, and 159). g
Official receipt-books must be kept locked up. Under no circum-
stances should butts be removed from the receipt books, and receipts
must not be issued from such books for other than public moneys.
Any cancelled receipt form must be affixed to the relative butt for pro-
duction to the Audit Officer when making his inspection.


CAMPS OF CONTINUOUS TRAINING.
4. Attention is drawn to the want of care shown by many units in
the compilation of Camp Pay-sheets.
To avoid unnecessary work and delay in Camp, all Camp Pay-
sheets must, in accordance with F. and A. Regulation 166(d) be pre-
pared legibly in ink prior to marching into Camp, leaving .only the
attendances (which are to be marked up daily from Attendance Rolls)
and amounts to be inserted in Camp.
Pay is to be claimed for the actual number of full days’ attendance
in Camp {vide F. and A. Regulations 108 and 109). Absences must
not be deducted as stoppages.
The quota, regimental number, and rank must be clearly shown,
also the first Christian name of soldier, which must agree with the
Nominal Roll.
Camp Pay-sheets must be made out in the same order as that for
the first periodical payments, with due regard to seniority, and keeping
each quota in separate order of N.C.O.’s and men.
5. Those members who voluntarily enlisted prior to 30th June, 1912,
and who have not been discharged consequent on the outbreak of war,
will continue to draw pay at the rates laid down in paras. 132,
133, and 134 Financial and Allowance Regulations. Those voluntarily
attested subsequent to above date will be paid at same rates and under
same conditions as ordinary trainees (see notes under para. 1309 of
Australian Military Regulations).
6. Whilst performing annual Camp of Continuous Training, sanction
has been given by Finance Circular No, 160, dated 19th September,
1917, for the appointment of acting ranks to take the place of those on
active service, and the members so appointed will draw the pay of
the rank to which temporarily appointed, but in no case are the autho-
rized establishments of N.C.O.’s to be exceeded. The names of those
appointed will be confirmed in Corps Orders, and it must be distinctly
understood that pay for the acting duties is permissible for period
of Camp only, and will not be drawn for home training parades nor
advance or rear parties.
7. Name of Adjutant and attendances will be recorded on the Bat-
talion Staff Pay List, but no pay will be claimed. Adjutants receive their
pay in two moieties, viz., on the Ist December and 30th June, unless their
appointments are terminated in between these periods, when they may be
paid up to date of ceasing duties, but such notification must first be con-
firmed by Military Orders.
8. Pay for Battalion Staff must be claimed on C.M. Form 86, and
not on the ordinary Pay List. Attention is directed to “ Peace
Organization and Establishments ” as regards the actual members com-
posing an Infantry Battalion Staff.
Members will be paid for the attendances recorded on the last day
of the Camp. The pay claimed on Forms B 6 must bear the approval
of the Commandant thereon before pay is issued.
9. In cases of sickness (other than that caused by misconduct) or
injuries received durihg Camp, pay will be issuable at full rates to the
member for the period he is in hospital during the period of the Camp,
and, should he be detained in hospital after Camp, his case will be dealt
with under instructions contained in para. 178 of F. and A. Regulations
(also vide F. and A. Regulations 179, 184 b, also Instruction “A” to
F. and A. Regulation 360, at front of page 119). Pay for incapacity
as a venereal patient is inadmissible.
C. 13313.—2
Preparation of
Pay-sheets.
Voluntarily
enlisted men.
Acting ranks.
Battalion Staff.
Sickness or
injury.


10. Statutory declarations, which must be indorsed by the Command-
ing Officer, will be prepared the day after marching into Camp. They
will be examined by the Pay Corps, and when passed, the total amount
due to the member will be credited to his account in the column pro-
vided for that purpose.
This allowance is payable also in respect of a mother and for each
brother and sister under 14 years of age solely dependent on the soldier
for support. The mother’s address must be shown on the declaration, as
this allowance is inadmissible if she is living outside the Commonwealth.
The rates are as follows:
Wife _.. .. .. .. .. Is. 3d.
Each child under 14 years of age .. Os. 7^d.
Mother solely dependent .. . . Is. 3d.
The total of the pay drawn by the soldier, and that for allowance, must
not exceed Bs. per day.
11. These must be absolutely reliable, and strictly kept. They will
be frequently compared with the Pay-sheets by members of the Pay
Corps. Officers commanding will be personally responsible that those
attending Camp are identified as being actually entitled to be present
and are borne on the strength of the unit.
12. The numbers allowed for these duties will be promulgated in Dis-
trict Orders, and officers concerned must not exceed the totals allowed.
Claims for pay will be made on duplicate Forms 11, and the total
of same claimed on Form 9 payable to the Officer Commanding the unit.
Only claims for services which, in the opinion of the C. 0., are neces-
sary, should be submitted, and his certificate to that effect must be
indorsed on the Form 11.
13. It has been approved that where A.M.F. Troops are located in the
same Camp as Australian Imperial Force, the canteen should be pro-
vided by the Garrison Institute, and in other cases by the units con-
cerned.
In connexion with canteens provided by units, attention is directed
to F. and A. Regulation 56(e) wherein it is laid down that the propor-
tion of canteen profits received by the Commanding Officers shall be
paid into the Public Moneys Account of the Regiment or Corps, and
that in addition to the entries made in the cash book, a separate record
shall be kept showing all transactions of receipt and expenditure under
the regulation mentioned. The remaining paragraphs of the F. and A.
Regulation referred to will also require to be observed.
Attention is also drawn to F. and A. Regulation 57, whereby no
Warrant Officer, N.C.0., or man of the Militia Forces appointed to
serve in a canteen, as authorized by regulation, shall receive pay there-
for in addition to the pay appertaining to his position in the Military
Forces, and that the approval of the Commandant must be obtained
before any payment is made to a member of the Defence Force for
services rendered in connexion with a canteen.
14. Extra duty pay for men performing cooks’ duties at 6s. per day
is admissible for the number borne on the establishment as cooks (see
Peace Establishment). This pay will be claimed at the end of the
men’s Company Pay-sheet, supported by the Commanding Officer’s
certificate that the work has been performed to his entire satisfaction.
The cooks’ pay, together with their regimental pay, must not exceed
10s. per diem. Separation Allowance in addition is not payable to these
men.


15. When men are granted leave to attend Camp with units other
than their own, Pay-sheets must he prepared by the unit to which they
belong, and forwarded with Nominal Roll to the 0.0. of Battalion to
which they are attached.
If pay is drawn for any man not entitled to be present the C.O. of
Camp will be responsible for such payment.
16. Pay for “ men attached ” should not be entered in the Cash Book
of the unit drawing the pay, but in that of the unit to which the men
belong. Immediately on the expiration of Camp, the acquitted Pay-
sheet should he returned to the C.O. of that unit, who will give a
receipt for same, and make the necessary entries in his Cash Book. It
should be ; clearly understood that the acquitted Pay-sheets should be held
by the unit to which these men belong.
17. The following procedure must he adopted in future in connexion
with members of the Citizen Forces attending Casual Camps:—
A Nominal Roll, in triplicate, must be forwarded to the C. 0., Casual
Camp, by the C.O. of each unit from which men attend, showing full
particulars regarding all men authorized to proceed to Camp. The
Nominal Roll must show—
Quota, regimental number, rank.
Name (Christian name to be shown).
Rate of pay.
Number of days due for attendance in Camp.
Date of arrival in Camp.
C.O. of Casual Camp must see that he obtains Nominal Rolls cover-
ing all men in Camp, and will hand one copy of same to the Pay Office
representative checking the Pay-sheets, and one to the Camp Quarter-
master.
Pay-sheets must be prepared for men on Nominal Rolls in
accordance with F. and A. Regulation 166 (d) by C.O.’s of units, and
forwarded with the Nominal Rolls, so that they may reach the C.O. of
Casual Camp not later than the first day of Camp. Pay will not be
passed for any men not so certified.
Pay for any man in Camp without the above authorization must
be claimed on a supplementary Pay-sheet, so that his claim may be
investigated before payment is made.
Commanding Officers of all units to note that similar procedure
must be adopted in all cases where men are permitted to attend Camp
with unit other than their own.
18. This allowance will be claimed on the Pay-sheet on the line below
the Officer’s pay, the two sums being carried to the total column as one
amount.
Field allowance is payable at rate laid down for actual rank of
officer only.
In the case of a fresh appointment, it is claimable from the date
of the promulgation of the Gazette in which the notification appears.
Field allowance, at Is. per diem, is payable to Ist class Warrant Offi-
cers only—see para. 230 of F. and A. Regulations, amended by M.O.
No. 516/17.
19. In connexion with the payment of Sergeants’ Mess Allowance
under F. and A, Regulation 231, several queries have been raised by the
Director of Naval and Military Audit, who states that in many cases
the certificate at present submitted by the Commanding Officer does
not meet audit requirements.
Casuals attached
from other
units.
Pay of men
attached.
Casual camps.
(Officers’ field
allowance* ,
Sergeants’ mess
allowance.


No.
Rank.
Name.
Period.
No. of days at
Total.
From
To
Is. per day.
.
£ s. d.
It is requested, therefore, that in future a statement by the Com-
manding Officer, similar to that appearing on appended pro forma, be
prepared when payment of this allowance is to be made.
The statement, as well as the Mess Secretary’s receipt for the
amount, should be furnished in support of the claim, and must be
attached to the Form 9 on which the allowance is paid to the Com-
manding Officer, for transmission to the Director, Naval and Military
Audit.
Sergeants' Mess Allowance.
(Kegiment.)
1 hereby certify that the N.C.O.’s of the
whose names appear above, were members of, and were actually in
attendance at, the Sergeants’ Mess formed under canvas for*
at the Camp of Continuous Training from
to
Commanding Officer,
1 hereby certify that I have received the amount of £
from Commanding Officer, being Sergeants’ Mess Allowance as above.
Mess Secretary.
20. Claimed on Form 11 at rates specified by District Orders. The
total amount will be claimed on Form 9, payable to the Officers’ Mess
Secretary, and signed by the Brigadier as incurring expense.
21. Officers commanding units should take steps to requisition for all
necessary forms and pay-sheets before Camp takes place.
All vouchers will be prepared in duplicate. The space allotted on
Form 9, “Certifying Officer,” must in all cases be left blank.
MOBILIZED MILITIA UNITS.
22. In order to remove any misunderstanding as to the treatment of
pay and Pay-sheets in connexion with mobilized units, it should be
noted that Pay-sheets for all mobilized militia units, except when
mobilized for the Annual Camp of Continuous Training, are to be
dealt with, and payments made, in accordance with instructions relat-
ing to Australian Imperial Force.
The Pay-sheets, after acquittance, will be returned to the District
Paymaster for transmission to the Audit Office.
* Unit.


The question has been raised whether the amounts of pay of
mobilized Military Units will be included in the Cash Book of the
unit, and the following principle has been laid down for future guid-
ance :
Amounts paid to Militia Unit Commanders will be shown in
the Unit Cash Book in all cases of Ordinary Annual Training.
In such cases the acquitted Pay-sheets are retained by the unit, and
produced to the Auditor at his annual inspection. In the case of
mobilized _ units, however, acquitted Pay-sheets are forwarded to
the District Paymaster, and dealt with in the same manner as
A.I.P. Camp Pay-sheets, and no entry will require to be made in
Cash Book, unless it should happen that amounts are
paid into the Official Banking Account. In this event, an entry
should be made in Cash Book showing date on which acquitted
Pay-Sheets were transmitted to District Paymaster.
It has come to notice that doubt exists whether or not Pinancial
and Allowance Regulation No. 341 is applicable to mobilized officers.
In this connexion it has been ruled that such regulation applies to all
officers called up with their units other than for annual training.
GENERAL.
23. In connexion with Citizen Force Pay Lists, Commanding Officers
should note that the signatures of the members earning the money must
be obtained on the Pay-sheets (such signature to agree with the name
shown) unless it is not possible for the members to attend and receive
payment personally. In such cases payments may be made on pro-
duction of an “Order to Pay Agent” (Treasury Form No. 24) bear-
ing the signature of the soldier. All orders should be gummed in the
Pay-sheets for security,
. These orders, w T hich do not constitute a receipt, must be complete
in every particular, and the Commanding Officer must satisfy himself
that the signature as claimant is given by the soldier concerned, and
that the signature of the agent, which must also be obtained on the pay-
'sheet, is identical with his signature in the margin of the “ Order to
Pay.”
Unless the approval of the Treasurer has first been obtained through
the District Paymaster, pay drawn for deceased members may be paid
only to the executor or administrator legally appointed, and in such cases
the necessary documents must be produced at the audit inspection.
On no account must any alterations be made in Pay Lists after
they have been examined and received back from the District Pay-
master. Any subsequent adjustment which might be necessary will
be made on the Stoppage-sheet.
Where a Pay-sheet on being received back from the District Pay-
master any corrections in the amounts due to soldiers, such
alterations will require to be initialed by the payees, in addition ,to
their signatures when payment is being made.
24. With reference to F. and A. Regulation 156, the Director, Naval
and Military Audit, has drawn attention to the irregular manner in
which unclaimed pay has been dealt with by some Commanding Officers
of Militia Units.
In order to comply with this regulation, Commanding Officers must
make prompt payment to members. At the expiration of the three
Citizen forces—
payments.
Unclaimed
militia pay.


months specified in the regulation, Commanding Officers should have
all Pay-sheets and undisbursed money returned to Battalion Head-
Quarters by Company Officers. As the responsibility for the return
of unclaimed pay rests upon the Commanding Officers, they should at
once make a personal inspection of the Pay-sheets, to make certain that
all unpaid amounts have been returned by Company Officers.
The money should be immediately repaid to the Corps Account,
details of the amount being attached to the pay-in slip for future
reference. When entering the amounts in the Cash Book, pay should
be separated from stoppages and fines, and the latter items entered
under Corps Contingent Allowance. A cheque for the amount should at
once be forwarded to the District Paymaster accompanied by a state-
ment in duplicate giving particulars required by F. and A. Regulation
156. A triplicate copy to be affixed to Pay-sheets for the information of
the Audit Inspector.
Commanding Officers should furnish to the District Paymaster in
June and December of each year a certificate stating that at the date
thereof no unclaimed pay is held in contravention of F. and A. Regu-
lation 156.
25. The attention of C.O.’s is drawn to A.M.R. 386, wherein it is laid
down that N.C.O.’s and men are to be paid in the presence of an officer.
This regulation is to be strictly carried out when payments to the men
are being made.
26. All Home Training and Camp Pay-sheets must be filed in a Guard
Book '{.vide F. and A. Regulation 153), and Commanding Officers must
specially note that as these Pay-sheets constitute the permanent record
of the unit, it is essential that the utmost care be taken to insure that
they are complete in every respect, and that acquitted Pay-sheets
covering all pay drawn for members of the unit are properly filed in
the Battalion Head-Quarters.
27. Queries in connexion with Audit Reports on the Corps Accounts
must receive immediate attention, and satisfactory explanation should
be furnished without delay.
28. The attention of Commanding Officers is drawn to F. and A.
Regulation 154, relative to the furnishing of the Annual Balance-sheet
on or before the 10th July of each year, failing receipt of which by the
District Paymaster no portion of the Annual Allowance shall be pay-
able.
29. On the transfer or retirement of a commanding or other respon-
sible officer taking his place a request should be made to Head-Quarters
for an audit of the Official Accounts, vide F. and A. Regulation 165.
30. Officers may supply themselves privately with breeches, jacket,
great-coat, and trousers, in lieu of receiving the Military free issue,
and may, on production of sub-vouchers, recover from the District Fay-
master the cost of such clothing, not exceeding the published prices. _ The
payment of such sums shall be entered in the record of clothing issues
of the unit as if the articles paid for had been issued in kind—A.M. Regu-
lation 1094.
CORPS CONTINGENT ALLOWANCE.
31. All claims for expenditure under F. and A. Regulation 13< must
be made out on the authorized form (Treasury Form No. 9 Contingen-
cies), vide F. and A. Regulation 143.
Payment of
N.C.O.’s and
men in presence
of an officer.
Aaquitted pay
lists.
Audit queries.
Annual
balance-sheet*.
Audit of
accounts on
transfer or
retirement of a
C.O. or other
responsible
officer.
Uniform—
allowance in
lieu.
Corps vouchers.


These vouchers should be numbered consecutively to correspond
with the relative entry in the Cash Book, and must contain the fullest
details to satisfy the requirements of the Audit Inspector.
32. The Commanding Officer, before issuing a cheque in respect of
any claim, must sign the Form 9 as Certifying Officer, and the officer
making the payment must see that the acquittance is completed, and
that the signature of the recipient is identical with that of the claimant.
Cheques shall be drawn only for specific amounts in respect of certi-
fied accounts authorized for payment. The counter signature may then
be affixed, but cheques shall not be signed by Paying Officer until the
claimants apply or cheque is to be posted or delivered. Neither signa-
ture nor counter signature shall be affixed on any blank cheque form.
All cheques are to be crossed and marked “ Not negotiable.”
Articles purchased from Corps Funds, except such as are referred
to in M.O. 373/16, must he immediately taken on charge (vide F. and
A. Regulation 148) and the approved “ take up ” voucher filed for
audit inspection.
The attention of Commanding Officers, Citizen Force Units, is
drawn to F. and A. Regulation 153, wherein it is laid down that pay
lists, cash vouchers, &c., will be kept in a guard book. Cash vouchers
should be numbered consecutively, and must contain fullest details to
satisfy the requirements of the Audit Inspector.
33. A receipt on Form 9 must be obtained for every advance. The
officer receiving the advance must adjust same by furnishing petty
cash-sheet (Form 12) containing signatures expenditure^.An
tram fares,j&c., and tradesmen’s receipts for articles purchased. These
documents must be attached to the original Form 9 for audit inspec-
tion, and Commanding Officers must not make a further advance until
such adjustment is made. No advance exceeding £2 should be made.
34. The Postage account must be kept written up to date, in accord-
ance with F. and A. Regulation 310, and Commanding Officers shall
examine same at least once a week. A receipt must be obtained for any
stamps issued for the use of officers, who must furnish a statement of
expenditure of same before obtaining a fresh issue.
35. Articles of office furniture must not be purchased from Corps
Funds unless specially authorized, but should be obtained by requisition
on S.O.E. (Form P. 4).
It is noted that payments from Corps Funds are being made without
the authority of the S.O.E. for alterations to, and provision of fittings
for, Drill Halls and Offices.
Officers in Charge of Drill Halls are authorized to execute urgent
works (at a cost not exceeding £1 in each case), but before the expendi-
ture is incurred the authority of the S.O.E, must be obtained. Officers
who carry out unauthorized repairs, &c,, will be made personally respon-
sible for the expenditure involved.
36. It will be noted in regard to payment of telephone rentals, sani-
tary services, and water supply at Drill Halls in occupation by Militia
Units that ( a ) in the case of premises occupied solely by Militia Units,
supply will be charged to Corps Funds, and ( b ) in the case of premises
occupied partly by Militia and partly by Permanent Units, the amount
will be paid from Corps Funds and from votes under control of the
Department of Works and Railways in proportion to Militia and Per-
manent Units in occupation.
Cheques.
Petty cash.
Postage
account.
Furniture,.
Telephone,
water, and!
sanitation
charges.


37. When Drill Hall is used by different Corps, payment is to be made
by any one Corps, who will claim on tbe other Corps for the amount
of their respective shares.
38. Unless the amount of the loss or damage has been recovered from
the individuals responsible, Ordnance Accounts for Deficiencies must
not be paid from Corps Funds without authority, in accordance with
the provisions of A.M.F. Regulations 717-726. When damages or
losses are discovered, Commanding Officers should take steps to recover
the cost of same from the individuals concerned, and, failing such
recovery, the matter should immediately be referred to District Head-
Quarters for decision as to payment of the account.
39. The Public Moneys Accounts of units must not be overdrawn
under any circumstances. The Bank Pass Book should be balanced with
Cash Book at least once a month.
All officers concerned must exercise constant supervision over the
state of the account for which they are responsible, and oases of over-
drawal will be the subject of disciplinary action.
Instances have been brought under notice in which public moneys
received by units have been held for long periods before being paid into
the banks.
Commanding Officers are instructed that all public moneys received
by units must be immediately paid into the Public Moneys Account, in
accordance with F. and A. Regulation 150 ( a ).
T. W. JOLLIFFE.
for Civil Member.
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
