

FIRST REPORT
THE MELBOUKNE HOBSON'S BAY
United Jtiiißuan (Cmnpng
The Melbourne d Hobson's Bay United Railway Company's Act 1805
MELBOURNE:
SANDS AND M c DOUGALL, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET WEST.




FIRST REPORT
THE MELBOURNE & HOBSON’S BAY
UnM lUttliuag (tompng.
The Melbourne dt Hobson's Bay United Railway Company's Act 1865.
MELBOURNE:
SANDS AND M°DOTJOALL, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET WEST.




IMkinu nnir Hobmi’s Irate!)
|kilfoa y Compnir.
The Melbourne and Hobsons Bay United Railway Company's Act 1865
CAPIT AL-£534,700.
glimtors:
ANDREW SUTHERLAND, Esq., Chairman.
ADAM BURNES, Esq., Deputy-Chairman.
The Hon. T. T. A’BECKETT, M.L.C,
The Hon. WILLIAM CAMPBELL, M.L.C.
EDWARD COHEN, M.L.A.
The Hon. WILLIAM DEGRAYES, M.L.C.
CHARLES HEAPE, Esq.
JAMES FRANCIS MAGUIRE, Esq.
GERMAIN NICHOLSON, Esq.
Stetxetarg:
THOMAS FINLAYSON, Esq.




THE MELBOURNE AND HOBSON’S BAY
UNITED RAILWAY COMPANY.
REPORT OP' DIRECTORS
Cjtf |®c(trounrc $ Julisßit’s |htrr UnHtCr gitiltonn
Cmitpmtg.
The first General and Ordinary Meeting of the Shareholders
in the Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay United Railway Company
was held in the offices, Flinders Street, on Tuesday, the Ist of
August, 1865, at 12 o’clock,,noon. There was a good attendance
of Shareholders. The Hon. W. Campbell, M.L.C., one of the
Directors presided.
The advertisement in the “ Government Gazette” and “Argus”
newspaper convening the meeting having been read,
The Secretary read the following Report of the Directors :
The Directors, in presenting their first Report of the affairs of the United
Company, have to congratulate the proprietary upon the auspicious circum-
stances attending the amalgamation of the two Companies, and the prospect
which exists for their most sanguine anticipations in connection therewith
being realized. The Amalgamation Act received the Royal Assent on the
15th June, and came into operation on the 30th of the same month. The
St, Kilda and Brighton Railway Sale Act and the Hobson’s Bay Railway Act
Amendment Act also received the Royal Assent concurrently with the
Amalgamation Act.


Your Directors are of opinion that it would be difficult to over estimate
the importance of these acts. The amalgamation of the Melbourne and
Hobson’s Bay Railway Company and the Melbourne Railway Company
had been long felt, not only by all parties interested in these undertakings,
but also by the public at large, as a measure of the greatest importance,
and as such it was entertained both by the Legislature and the Government.
The purchase of the St. Kilda and Brighton Railway by the United Company
is only second in importance to the Act of Amalgamation. By enlarging the
sphere of the United Company’s operations and promoting the further develop-
ment of the traffic under one general management and control, it will ere long
become a steady source of revenue, while the Amendment Act, by a fair and
equitable adjustment of the differences which for several years existed between
the Borough Council of Emerald Hill and the Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay
Railway Company, has enabled your Directors to enter upon their duties to the
United Company, free from any external disturbing influences, and to devote
themselves unreservedly to its consolidation and the extension of the traffic.
The Trustees for the sale of the St. Kilda and Brighton Railway, having failed
to obtain a purchaser for that undertaking, have called upon the United Company
to purchase it on the terms prescribed by the Act, in pursuance of which the
United Company’s solicitors have been instructed to investigate and report upon
the title to the property to be purchased. The Directors recommend that deben-
tures shall he issued for the money authorised to he raised by the United
Company’s Act. A resolution to that effect will he submitted to the share-
holders at the meeting, and a resolution will also he proposed for making
arrangements for the transfer of shares and the payment of dividends in
London as heretofore.
The plans and sections of the works for the junction of the two lines
of railway having been approved of by the Govemor-in-Council, separate
tenders were invited tor the execution of the following works, and the
tenders of the undermentioned contractors have been accepted by the Directors,
namely:—lst. For the excavation of the earthwork, masonry of the tunnels,
and construction of the permanent way for the junction of the lines, Messrs.
William Porter and Co., at the sum of £10,350. 2nd. For the ironwork of
the tunnels, Mr. Enoch Chambers, at the sum of £5,200, 3rd. For the new
goods shed, rendered necessary by the site of the present wooden goods shed
being required for the line of rails to complete the junction, Mr. James
Leggat, at the sum of £9,290.


These contracts having been promptly entered upon, arrangements have
thereby been made for the whole of the works at Melbourne Station connected
with the junction being carried on simultaneously and finished in the
early part of December.
The plan of the new Station buildings at the Melbourne terminus is
at present under the consideration of your Directors, but the buildings
cannot be proceeded with until the works now in progress are more advanced,
as it is necessary in the meantime to retain all the available space forming
the present station ground for the accommodation of the goods traffic.
In accordance with the provisions contained in section 6 of the United
Company’s Act, the Reserve Fund now amounts to £21,997 Is. 6d.
The Engineer reports that the permanent way and rolling stock of both
linos are in efficient working order.
By order of the Board of Directors,
ANDREW SUTHERLAND, Chairman.
The Chairman, in moving the adoption of the Eeport, said
that he was afraid he would be hardly able to do justice to the
subject, as he was not much given to public speaking, and had
been called on at the last moment to preside. He was sure the
shareholders present would agree with him in expressing regret
at the absence of their late chairman, Mr. T. T. A’Beckett, who at
these meetings usually dealt so ably with the topics affecting
the shareholders, and hoped that it would not be long before he
(Mr. a’B) was again amongst them. As to the subject of the
amalgamation, he might fairly congratulate the shareholders on
its accomplishment. He believed that while it would be of great
henefitto both companies, it would be as great a boon to the public ;
and the facilities of speedy access to the seaside to be offered the
inhabitants of Richmond, Hawthorn, &c., would no doubt result in
a considerable augmentation of traffic. He had also to congratu-
late the meeting on the Company having at last got rid of what


seemed likely to be an eternal dispute —that with Emerald Hill.
It was an erroneous impression, that the Company had paid
a sum of money to get rid of any obligations they were
Tinder; he wished it to be understood that the concession had
only been made as a matter of convenience, and not because it
was felt by the Directors that there was any legal or moral
obligation to give way to the absurd demands of the Emerald
Hill Council. A proposition was made by the Directors of the
Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay Railway Company, two years ago,
to connect the Suburban lines of Railway along the south side
of Flinders-street with the Victorian Railways at Batman’s-hill,
but through the opposition raised against the measure at the
time it was laid aside. He hoped, however, that when the
public saw the advantage of the amalgamation which had now
been made, something further would be done to bring about a con-
nection with the Victorian Railways. He had now to speak of a
subject on which it might be thought better by some that silence
should be observed; he alluded to the wharfage rates. But as
a silence on the part of the Company now, might, perhaps, be
thought to imply consent, he, for one, would protest against the
Government retaining the whole of the money which they collect-
ed for wharfage rates at the pier constructed at the expense of
the Company, which pier had cost £IOO,OOO, and it was computed
by the Secretary that each ton of goods landed cost the Com-
pany Is. lOd. Besides this, there was at least £9,000 a year for
wear and tear. If Government levied a wharfage rate, it was
only fair that the owners of the Hobson’s Bay Railway Pier,
as well as the proprietors of other private wharfs, should have
some share of it; and they might at least make an application
to Government for assistance in defraying current expenses, wear
and tear, and interest on the capital expended. Another point
that had to be considered with the amalgamation was the great
reduction of the expenditure which would result. Already a
saving of £1,500 a year had been effected; and as soon as the
junction under the northern approach to Prince’s-bridge was
completed, a further reduction in the working expenses of
£3,000 a year would be made, making a total saving of £4,500
per annum. On the sth December next a meeting of the share-
holders in the Hobson’s Bay Railway Company would be held,
and a dividend would accrue to them for the period between the
time at which the last dividend was made, the Ist of May, and
the date of the amalgamation on the 99th of June.


Mr. Bell seconded the adoption of the Report, which was
unanimously agreed to.
Dr, Black moved, and Mr. Nicholson seconded, a resolution
to the effect that the chairman be authorised to affix the common
seal of the Company to the register of shareholders.
Agreed to.
Mu. R. Blundell moved, and Mr. Ashley seconded, the follow-
ing resolution, which was agreed to:—“That the full amount
which the United Company are authorised to raise by virtue of
the 14th section of The Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay United
Bailway Company’s Act 1865, for the purposes therein mentioned,
be raised by borrowing from time to time, in such sums as may
be deemed expedient, and that the Directors be and are hereby
empowered to issue debentures for securing the amount boi’-
rowed, with interest, at such rate as the Directors may think fit.”
Mr. Bell moved and Mr. Monahon seconded, the adoption of
the following resolution:—“ That the Directors of the Company
be at liberty to appoint a clerk to attend at an office, in the City
of London, to receive from shareholders instructions for the
transfer of shares in the Company, and to enter in a book, to be
kept for that purpose, the names of the proposed transferrees ;
and that any shareholder shall be at liberty to have his shares
entered in the said book on previously giving one calendar
month’s written notice of his desire in that behalf to the Secre-
tary of the Company. And after that any such notice and
entry, the dividends on the shares, which shall be entered in
the said book, shall, until said notice is recalled in writing by
the shareholder who gave the same, or by his assignee, be paid
to the credit of the shareholder, at the Company’s Bankers in
Melbourne, who will transmit the same for the shareholder, at
the current rate of exchange, to his credit in London, where it
will be payable on production of his certificate of shares.”
Agreed to.
Mr. Blundell moved the adoption of the bye-laws of the
Company.


The motion was seconded by Mr. Browning ; and the
marginal notes of the bye-laws having been read, the resolution
was agreed to.
Dr. Black moved the appointment of Messrs. E. Bell and
J. D. Pinnock, as the auditors of the Company. He said he
believed the Company had reaped considerable advantage from
the exertions of these gentlemen.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Cavanagh, and carried.
Mr. Heape, on proposing that the Secretary’s salary be fixed
at £l,OOO per annum, passed a high eulogy on the manner in
which that gentleman had conducted the affairs of the Com-
pany.
Mr. A. Burnes seconded the motion, stating that in his
experience no company had ever met with so zealous a servant
as Mr. Finlayson.
The Chairman concurred in what had been said, believing
that the amalgamation of the two Companies had been brought
about mainly by the exertions of Mr. Finlayson.
The motion was then put, and carried unanimously.
Mr. Blundell asked whether the propriety of turning the
property of the Company into stock had been considered ? He
thought such a plan would have a good effect, and by enabling
men to invest £5 or £lO in the undertaking, so extend the
public interest in its welfare as to lead to a greater amount of
protection to the Company’s property.
The Chairman said the matter had been thought over, and
considered premature for the present. It was a good suggestion
no doubt.
Mr. Blundell then moved—“ That the thanks of this
meeting be given to the Board of Directors, as well as the
Company’s solicitors and engineer (Mr. Elsdon), for the satisfactory
manner in which the affairs of the Company had been con-
ducted generally, and in particular for their successful efforts in
regard to the amalgamation of the two Companies.”


The motion was seconded by Mr. Lewis, and agreed to.
Dr. Black asked if the site of the new station had yet been
fixed, and whether it would not be well to call a meeting of the
shareholders to decide on the point.
The Chairman said it was in the power of the shareholders to
call a meeting to settle the question. He was not aware the
site had been fixed upon finally, hut believed the present inten-
tion was to keep the present site.
After a vote of thanks to the Chairman, the proceedings
closed.


J ArF'p
hmuo
m+-o2cK,




% T ' f
