

: POW
St^%\
PHYLLIS M. POWER




FIVE STORIES
MARGRETTE ANNE
PHYLLIS M. POWER
Proceeds in aid of Children?s Hospital Funds
1944
McCarron, Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street, Melbourne


CONTENTS
1 Singing Shell ----- 3
2 The Clock - - - - - 17
3 Margaret Codlinmoth - - - 21
4 In the Ghosts? Gallery 26
5 Horse Sense - - - - - 32


THE SINGING SHELL
Mum had sent Margrette Anne down to play on the beach.
It was a lovely still day; Margrette Anne knew the sea was
happy because it was running backwards and forwards across
the sand and not coming in with a roar and tumble of big
foamy waves like it did when the wind was angry. Yesterday,
Margrette Anne had watched the three men as they dug ever
such a deep canal right across the beach, from the sea right
back to the lake so that the water from the lake could flow
out to the sea and go exploring, like she herself did amongst
the rocks which formed one side of the deep bay. It had been
fun watching the lake water and the sea water meet, they
seemed to kiss each other before the sea water drew the lake
water with it back to the ocean. This morning Margrette
Anne had run across the sand as quickly as she could, scat-
tering little tickling showers of sand with her bare feet. She
wanted to see how deep the canal was, and how fast the water
from the lake was running out. Reaching the bank of heaped
up sand, the little girl carefully climbed to the top and looked
over. Oh! The lake water was quite deep and running really
fast making quite little ripples as it went. Margrette Anne
followed the bank till she came to where it ended and the canal
broadened out, spreading like a fan across the sand. Some-
thing white caught her eye and Margrette Anne carefully
picked her way, using the little high ridges of sand as step-
ping stones, till she stood directly above the white object.
With a little cry of surprise, she recognised the object. It
was a fish not much bigger than her hand; poor little fish, was
it dead ? But as Margrette Anne watched, the little fish gave
a flap with its tail, but there was not enough water for it to be
able to swim. After a moment?s hesitation because she was
just a tiny bit afraid of doing so, the little girl stooped down
and touched the little fish and it tried all the harder to swim
away, but only succeeded in half covering itself with sand so
it lay gasping. Plucking up her courage Margrette Anne


gently picked the little fish up by its tail and holding it quite
firmly, paddled out into the sea till the little waves were gently
breaking against her knees. Carefully she put her hand down
into the water and opened the fingers which held the little
fish?s tail. With a quick stroke of his sharp little fins and a
flirt with his tail, the little creature was out of sight. Mar-
grette Anne watched for a second and then turned back to-
wards the shore, wondering if there were any more little fishes
caught in the shallows. Sure enough, she presently found two
more fish gasping on the half dry sand. These too, she car-
ried back into the sea; the last one was quite a big one and
struggled quite a lot when Margrette Anne picked him up,
but she finally got him into deep water.
The little girl now decided to paddle along to the rocks
and sit in the mermaid?s throne if it were dry enough, and
just dangle her feet in the water. So, after picking up shell
and bits of seaweed and a queerly shaped bit of sponge on her
way, Margrette Anne at last came to the end of the beach
where the rocks were heaped in a great muddled pile as if
someone had just kicked the heap over. The mermaid?s seat,
a smooth flat rock with a back of rock, nicely rounded and a
low rock for one?s arm to rest on, was quite dry and the sea
just high enough for the waves to wash gently against her
dangling legs after she had made herself really comfy in the
warm sun.
Margrette Anne watched the gulls wheeling and chasing
each other as if they were playing a game of tiggy; she wished
she had someone to play with, but Mum had told Margrette
Anne that because she had been in bed with those nasty spots
she must keep away from other children, and it had meant
having Mum all to herself which had been nice, especially
coming to the seaside like this while baby brother stayed with
Gran; she must take him back some cuttlefish and shells. Sud-
denly Margrette Anne pulled her feet out of the water with a
little scream, something rough had rubbed against her right
foot quite hard.
My goodness, could it be a shark? And the child
scrambled to her feet, very frightened. She had heard old
Tom tell Mum that a grey nurse had been seen in the bay


lately and Mum had explained that that was a very dangerous
and wicked kind of shark which ate people and that it wasn?t
safe even to paddle out too far. What if this were it, and
Margrette Anne looked fearfully into the water.
?I?m so sorry, my dear, if I frightened you,? came a deep
voice which made her jump and gaze quickly round. ?Look
here in the shadow of the blue rock and you?ll see me,? came
the voice again and Margrette Anne thought she heard a fat
chuckle.
She looked under the blue rock which was a large mottled
heap of stone and there in the clear, greenest water, she saw
a very large fish; she knew at once it wasn?t a shark because it
was flat and beautifully striped in lovely colours.
?Oh, how lovely!? the child exclaimed.
?Thank you, my dear, I?m glad you like me,? answered
the great fish turning and wriggling so that his colours seemed
to ripple in the water. ?I?ve been sent by King Neptune to
thank you, my dear.?
?To thank me?? the little girl interrupted, surprised.
?Yes, to thank you for putting back those three little
fishes just now, they are very special favourites of His Ma-
jesty?s, and so he sent me to see if I could find you, and although
I am rather nervous at coming so close inshore, I decided to
risk it when our observers, the gulls, told me you were sitting
here. I didn?t think you?d be fishing.?
?Oh no,? cried Margrette Anne, ?though I like fish for
my dinner, I couldn?t bear to catch one myself, it seems so
cruel.?
?Well,? answered the fish, ?it?s really a sort of game, we
think we are cleverer than man and can keep out of his reach;
you see, we fishes are so very much older than man.?
?Oh, are you really?? the child couldn?t help interrupting.
?Oh yes, millions and millions of years older, God made
us first of all moving things and gave us the sea and all its
wonders to live in; but, when He created man He gave him
power over all other creatures, that?s why some of us who are
either greedy or careless are caught.?
Oh, I don t think I?ll ever eat fish for my dinner again,?
Margrette Anne said.


?Oh yes, you must, it?s so good for you and really we don?t
mind because we know it?s all part of God?s plan, and your
not eating your dinner won?t give that particular fish back to
the sea; and really so very few of us are caught, especially we
who live in the great deep, we are quite safe.?
Margrette Anne, remembering her manners, said:
?It was very kind of you to come and talk to me, but I
am sure you are quite safe here. If you have time, do tell
me all about under the sea, is it all dark and horrid??
?No my dear, it is just as wonderful a place as your own
dry land, but as the tide is going out, I can?t stay here much
longer.?
?Oh!? Margrette Anne exclaimed, disappointed.
?I?m sorry, my dear, but I don?t want to be stranded, be-
cause I?d be far too heavy for you to throw back into deep
water; but before I go, here is a present King Neptune sent
you,? replied the fish, adding: ?Watch! I will place it on
the crest of this little wave which will carry it and leave it on
the beach by that patch of red seaweed. Whenever you are
lonely or want to hear about the sea, just hold that shell to
your left ear and listen. Grown-ups will not be able to hear
the stories, but they?ll hear the sea!?
?Oh, thank you, thank you,? cried Margrette Anne, as
she clambered down off the rocks.
?Goodbye,? came the deep, soft voice of the fish, as like
a flash of light he disappeared behind the blue rock into deep
green water.
?Goodbye,? called the little girl, stopping to watch the
spreading ripples. Then she ran eagerly to the little heap of
glistening red seaweed and stooped down. There, nestled in
the scarlet weed, was the most lovely shell Margrette Anne
had ever seen. About as long as her hand, it was golden
brown, flecked with pinkish lights and polished till it felt
smooth as satin. Both sides folded inwards towards the
middle, leaving a narrow slit edged with little teeth almost
like a comb. Margrette Anne had seen shells the same
shape as this one before, but never one so lovely. She knew
one could hear the sea if one held this kind of shell and
listened. The child pressed the smooth surface to her ear,


but was not prepared for the gentle deep voice like an organ
which spoke her name, she almost dropped the shell in
astonishment.
?Oh, do be careful, dear, for if you drop me, I won?t be
able to tell you all the stories that King Neptune has stored in
me so that I can tell them to you.?
?Oh, I?ll take ever such good care of you. Come on, till
I show you to Mum,? and Margrette Anne, clutching her
treasure tightly, raced off across the hot sand in search of Mum.
Margrette Anne had run home as fast as her short legs
would carry her; she wanted to show Mum the shell and tell
her all the rest of the adventure as quickly as possible before
she forgot any of it. She knew Mum wouldn?t laugh at her
as some grown-ups might. Mum still remembered some of
the adventures her Sammy used to have, going out at night
when everyone was asleep and having the most thrilling times,
wasn?t he on visiting terms with the Fairy Queen herself? And
when he came back just before Granpop woke up very early
in the morning, he?d tell Mum all about what he?s done. So,
because of Sammy, Margrette Anne knew that Mum would
understand about her singing shell. It didn?t really sing, it
talked, but she felt singing was a prettier word and the little
girl put the shell up to her ear and oh! it was singing such
a lovely song about the sea, a sort of hymn it sounded, like you
hear in church, and Margrette Anne stopped to listen better.
Mum saw her standing on the red gravel path and called out
that dinner was ready and then she looked at the child more
closely.
?Come on, darling, and wash your hands and feet, there
are sausages and mashed potatoes for dinner.?
Oh Mum, I m so glad it?s not fish,? said her daughter,
running round to the bathroom which was just outside the
back door of their cottage. Half way through her second
sausage, Mum asked Margrette Anne who up till then had
been too busy eating to talk:
?Why were you glad it wasn?t fish to-day, I thought you
liked fish?? y
So I do Mummy, but you see, I had an adventure with a
fish this morning,? the child answered eagerly.


?Well, finish your dinner darling, and you can tell me
all about it while we have a rest afterwards.?
Obediently the child finished her dinner and then, pro-
vided with a large rosy apple, followed Mum out on to the
shady verandah and was soon comfortably lying on a low,
striped canvas stretcher, while Mum lay back in a deep cane
chair.
?Now tell me about your adventure; has that pretty shell
got something to do with it?? and Mum picked up the
polished treasure.
?Yes, it?s a magic shell, put it up to your ear, dearest.?
?I can hear the sea beautifully,? Mum answered. ?When-
ever did you find it??
?I didn?t find it, King Neptune sent it to me,? Margrette
Anne answered seriously. ?It?s a magic shell, it will tell me
stories about under the sea.?
?You?d better start at the beginning and tell me all about
it,? Mum answered. ?I?m just dying to hear what hap-
pened.?
So Margrette Anne told her story and by the time it
was finished she was getting very sleepy, and the last thing
she remembered was putting the shell to her ear and hearing
sweet voices singing a sort of swinging song like the waves
washing up and down on the side of a boat:
Sleep little mortal, sle-e-p,
Come while you slu-u-m-ber, and visit the deep.
Come where the green fronds of seaweed are gro-o-wing,
Come where the whale and the walrus are blo-o-wing.
And then quite suddenly, Margrette Anne found herself
in the strangest kind of garden. Why, there was a huge tree
growing over there out of the side of those rocks, it looked
just exactly like Grandpa?s big bath sponge. All sorts of
little tiny fishes were darting in and out of its holes just
like the birds did in the big pepper tree. One beautiful little
fish with all sorts of shining coloured scales came swimming
up to Margrette Anne.
?Hullo Mortal, how?d you get here, you don?t look
drowned?? he asked, swimming all round her, inquisitively
staring out of big round eyes.


?I don?t know how I got here, but I?m certainly not
drowned, as I wasn?t anywhere near the sea when I put the
shell to my ear,? Margrette Anne answered in a puzzled voice.
?Oh, so you?re the mortal to whom His Majesty sent the
magic shell this morning,? the fish replied respectfully.
?Yes, that?s me, and please don?t call me Mortal, it sounds
like a medicine or something nasty. My name is Margrette
Anne,? the little girl answered.
?Oh just as you like, but as the shell has brought you
here, His Majesty must have sent for you so you?d better come
along, he doesn?t like being kept waiting and he?s inclined to
be a bit bad tempered with all the strange things that have
been happening lately. You wouldn?t believe it how the
seas have been disturbed. As a matter of fact, the King
usually lives in the Mediterranean Sea this time of the year,
but so many strange things have been disturbing even the
very deepest parts that he decided to move out here to the
Pacific, but even here we sometimes see what must be a fish
because it swims under water like us, but it?s hard like a rock
and leaves a horrible smell.?
?Oh,? interrupted Margrette Anne, proud of her superior
knowledge. ?That?s a tin fish, it fires torpedoes; a friend of
Dad?s goes in one, he says it?s very exciting.?
?Now you?re trying to pull my tail,? her guide answered
crossly. ?How could mortals live in a tin fish. They?d
drown!?
?Dad told me the tin fish, or submarines, were filled with
air before they went under the water,? Margrette Anne ex-
plained, feeling rather important as she added: ?Dad?s always
right, you know.?
The parrot fish changed the subject, drawing the girl?s
attention to her surroundings for, while she had been talking,
the parrot fish had led Margrette Anne through the garden,
the plants of which seemed able to move from place to place
as they liked, seeming to be walking about as it were. ?It
must be awfully hard for the gardeners to keep this garden
tidy,? said Margrette Anne as she watched a whole bed of
brightly coloured sea anemones moving away.


?Oh no, every fish plant knows its place and comes back
to it. They just move about looking for food, but here we
are, at the palace gate,? announced the parrot fish, adding
quickly: ?Don?t go any nearer till I tell the sentries who
you are.?
At that moment Margrette Anne got a dreadful fright,
for backing towards her she saw a pair of the hugest lobsters
you could ever imagine, snapping their cruel looking pincers
as they came.
?It?s all right, sentry,? called a loud voice from somewhere
above, at which the lobsters stood on their tails and saluted as a
huge sword fish came swimming gracefully down to rest on the
gleaming snow white sand just in front of Margrette Anne.
?Welcome, my dear young lady,? he said. ?His Majesty
King Neptune is expecting you, so kindly follew me, not too
closely I beg, my tail is somewhat uncontrollable and might
wound you accidentally.?
?Thank you for warning me,? was all Margrette Anne
could think of to say as she prepared to follow her new guide
at a respectful distance.
It suddenly grew very dark and the water was very
cold all round her, and Margrette Anne began to be a bit
scared. Then, quite close to her, she heard a familiar sound,
a cat was purring, and she put out her hand to try and find
the puss.
?By my whiskers,? squeaked a voice close to her, ?Wherever
have those lantern fish gone, leaving the front hall in darkness
like this and a visitor arriving and all. His Majesty will
have to send a few of them to the nets for this, the lazy good
for nothings.?
Just then, Margrette Anne was quite dazzled by the
bright white light which shot out rather like a searchlight
from somewhere above her head. When her eyes had got
used to the glare, the little visitor saw that she was standing
in the strangest sort of room. It was very large and so high
she couldn?t see any roof, but the space above her head was
almost filled with large fish on whose heads glowed a sort of
lantern making the whole place as bright as day, only the
light was very white.


Five Stories for Margrette Anne
Margrette Anne gazed round her in wonder. Mum had
read her the story of Aladdin and the wonderful cave of jewels
he had found, but this was something far more marvellous.
The walls themselves were of pale pink coral worked just like
fine lace and over window-like openings hung long strings
of shining pearls, like the bead curtains at Mrs. Smith?s
where Mum got mending done; then there were huge mother-
of-pearl shells resting on deep red coral legs and heaped with
rainbow foam cushions, and on these couches lay the very
loveliest ladies Margrette Anne had ever seen, then with a
shock, she saw that instead of legs they all had shiny scale-
covered tails. They really looked rather pretty, like that
sparkly collar Mum wore on her black dress.
Margrette Anne had been taught it was rude to stare so
she looked away from the mermaids and found herself gazing
at a huge chair set on a high ledge of red coral studded all
round the edge with huge pearls; the chair seemed to be made
of gold bars built up one on top of the other like you?d build
blocks and over it and falling down behind was a huge curtain
made of every kind of silk.
?It?s pretty, my dear, isn?t it?? a small voice said close to
Margrette Anne?s ear.
?Yes, it?s lovely,? she answered, looking round to see who
had spoken. At once she recognised Mrs. Whitebait, though
she seemed larger than the ones she had seen in tins. Mar-
grette Anne was too polite to say so though, and the good lady
went on:
?That throne is made from bullion taken from wrecked
ships.?
Margrette Anne knew that bullion meant bars of gold
which were being sent from one country to another by ship.
?And the canopy is woven from cargoes of silk from
other wrecks, mostly from the Indian Ocean,? Mrs. Whitebait
explained. ?But hush, my dear, here is the King. Mind you
show him proper respect, don?t wag you fins while he?s speak-
ing to you.?
Margrette Anne didn?t see how he got there, but the next
second there, seated on the golden throne, was the most
wonderful and extraordinary old man she had ever seen. On


his head, to begin at the top, he wore a shining gold crown
just like the one on the King of Hearts in Mum?s pack of
bridge cards, long green curls of seaweed fell on to his
shoulders framing a very old face something like Santa
Claus, only his beard was reddish brown and Margrette Anne
realised that it, too, was seaweed and very fine and beautiful.
He had a long kind of coat, rather like great-aunt Susan's
flannel nightgown, high up at the neck with wide, long
sleeves, only this was made of layer on layer of something
thin, some of them dark blue, others green, like a wine bottle
when you look at the sun through it; others again quite pale
blue or grey and all round the bottom there was thick foamy
white stuff which sparkled like sunlight. In his hand, the
King held a tall thing rather like Dad?s garden fork, only
the prongs were queerly shaped and it was made of gold
set with all sorts of shiny stones that twinkled at you.
There was dead silence while the huge crowd of fishes
of every sort of which Margrette Anne had ever heard took
their places on either side of the throne. When they were all
settled, the little girl took two steps forward and then curtsied
as she had been taught at dancing.
?Thank you, my dear, that was very nicely done,? King
Neptune said. He had a deep gurgly voice like the sea
amongst rocks and Margrette Anne knew they?d be great
friends, the same way she always knew with people.
?You may come and sit beside me,? Neptune said next.
?Will you help the young lady up on to the dais,? he ordered
a couple of sea serpents who immediately wound themselves
into a kind of ladder while a large star fish swam beside her
as she climbed and offered Margrette Anne one of his points
to hold on to in case she slipped.
Very quickly the child found herself sitting beside the
King on his gold throne and she felt very small beside him.
?Now we?ll hear the news,? said the King. ?Where?s the
whale, he?s our news gatherer??
?Here I am, Your Majesty, but I am afraid there is not
much news to-day.?
?What about the Tasman Sea cup, who won that??
Neptune asked.


?The race had to be cancelled Your Majesty, there were
too many nets out and the sea horses were afraid of being
caught; as it was, I regret to say rather a large number of
flathead were caught, they would try and cross the Straits,
in spite of the red lights showing.? The whale blew a huge
air bubble of a sigh as he rose out of sight.
?We?ll have a little music and dancing now,? the King
ordered and immediately there appeared a school of porpoises
who performed a kind of country dance, leaping and twisting
about in the most amusing way to the music made by huge
cone-shaped shellfish. It was a bit mournful and Margrette
Anne was quite glad when it stopped and Neptune suggested
that it was time for refreshment.
?What would you like to drink, my dear? There will
be hard-boiled sea eggs and stuffed sea cucumbers to eat,? and
as Margrette Anne hesitated, he went on: ?You?d probably like
some milk wouldn?t you??
?Oh yes, please,? answered the little girl. Mum never
allowed her to drink tea, she wished there?d been ice cream,
though. While she had been thinking like this, several very
big sleepy looking fish rather like the seals at the Zoo were
driven in by sea urchins using blue stringrays as whips. Mar-
grette Anne watched fascinated while a couple of schnapper
milked the sea cows and then brought the big shell carefully
to the King. Margrette Anne wondered however she was
going to manage to drink out of the shell.
But she needn?t have worried, for the next moment a
large barracoota came swimming up to the King.
?Here?s what mortals usually drink out of,? he said and
placed a pretty blue china cup beside one of the milk shells.
?Help yourself, my dear, and here are some sand cakes,?
the King told Margrette Anne; it was extraordinary the way
things just appeared when their names were mentioned. Mar-
grette Anne didn?t much like the cakes because they really
were made of sand. However, she managed to pretend to eat
a couple but really stuffed them up the leg of her knickers
when no one was looking.


?I hope you are enjoying your visit,? King Neptune said
presently. ?Is there anything you?d like to see before you
go home?? he asked kindly.
?Please, I?d like to see how pearls grow if it wouldn?t
be a trouble.?
?Of course it wouldn?t. You didn?t think it a trouble
to wade out into deep water so that three of my favourite
Flounders could swim safely away, so it is no trouble to take
you to see my oyster beds. The frigate fish shall take us there,
but you won?t be able to see him as he moves so fast through
the water, I?ll have to cover you with my cloak,? and as he
spoke, King Neptune wrapped two layers, a grey and a bottle
green one, right over Margrette Anne, who almost immediately
afterwards felt herself rushing along like when her scooter
had bolted down the hill, only faster. At last they stopped and
the cloak was lifted away and Margrette Anne saw that they
were in a huge rocky cave, the walls of which were covered
with simply millions of oyster shells. But coming towards
them was a huge fish with a mane like a lion. King Neptune
guessed Margrette Anne was scared, for he laughed.
?You?re quite safe, my dear, the fish all know you are
my friend and guest. Why, even Grey Nurse up there won?t
ever touch you.?
Margrette Anne looked up and sure enough there was
a huge shark lazily swimming above them.
?Come on, there?s not much time left before the rainbow
comes down for you,? the King said as he gave her a gentle
pull. ?Look, here?s the first stage,? he went on as he tapped
on an oyster shell with his fork. Immediately the shell
opened and King Neptune said: ?Good day, my dear, how are
you to-day??
?None too well Your Majesty, see a grain of dirt has got
into my beautiful home.?
?Well, hurry and cover it up,? answered the King as the
shell closed with a snap. ?They don?t like being disturbed in
the early stage,? remarked Neptune as he moved on and
tapped on another and larger shell which opened like the
other.


?Good day,? again said the King. ?How is your pearl
growing??
?Not so badly, look for yourself,? and the fat oyster moved
so that they could see the smooth, cream pearl lying on his
shell?
?How lovely!? said the child, but the oyster had closed
his shell.
?How do they do it?? Margrette Anne asked.
?It?s a kind of spit that they have the secret of making,?
answered Neptune, ?that the oyster wraps round any tiny
grit that gets into his shell. They go on and on putting
wrapping after wrapping, I think something rather like a
pearl grows on earth,? Neptune said.
Margrette Anne thought for a moment.
?Oh, you must mean an onion that has a skin after skin.
I hate them, but Mum says that my hair won?t curl if I don?t
eat some.?
?Oh, we don?t eat pearls,? King Neptune answered. ?But
hurry up if you want to see the biggest pearl in the world,
for here comes the sun fish to say the rainbow is descending
and you mustn?t miss it or you?ll have to stay the night.?
As he spoke, King Neptune took Margrette Anne?s hand
and led her to the far end of the cavern saying in a loud voice
as they advanced:
?It?s alright, Mr. Octopus, it?s the King and a friend.?
?I?m glad you spoke Your Majesty, there was a diver
down here yesterday, gave me no end of trouble.?
?That will do for now, I?ll hear your report later,? Neptune
spoke in the same kind of voice Mum used when she reminded
Dad: ?The children are in the room, dear.?
Neptune next rapped on a huge shell. It was quite as
big as the wheels on Dad?s car and when it opened Margrette
Anne gave a little gasp for there, seeming to reflect the colours
of the rainbow, lay a pearl the size of the very largest football.
But Margrette Anne only got a quick look for at that moment,
a flying fish came darting up to the King.
?If you please Your Majesty, the rainbow is just reaching
bottom.?


?Thank you,? Neptune said and then to Margrette Anne:
?Come, we must run for it. What?s your favourite colour??
?Yellow,? she answered breathlessly.
?Well as soon as we get to the rainbow, jump on to the
yellow stripe and hold tight. It will carry you home.?
?Thank you so much for having me to see you, ? Margrette
Anne answered, remembering her party manners. ?I have
enjoyed myself so.?
?I?m so glad, perhaps you?ll be able to come down another
day, but jump on now and hold tight.?
Margrette Anne obeyed, jumping on to the yellow stripe
of the rainbow, and immediately she had that funny feeling
you get in an express lift, up, up, up.
?Come on sleepy head, it?s nearly teatime,? came Mum?s
voice as Margrette Anne opened her eyes to find the golden
sunlight streaming on her face. In her hand the singing
shell was firmly clutched.


THE CLOCK
Once upon a time, very long ago, there lived an old
jeweller who had won great fame for the skill with which
he worked, and the beautiful things he made out of silver
and gold and precious stones.
This old man, Andre by name, lived in a funny old French
town, in a house with tall jutting gables and windows, with
little square panes of glass in them, looked out on to a narrow
cobbled street which twisted and turned like a snake. At one
of these windows, which was generally open, the old man used
to sit and work, bent low over his table, with a pair of horn-
rimmed spectacles perched on the end of his nose and his
blue velvet skull cap pushed well back on his white hair.
Now, the Lord of the town was at this time quite a young
man, very fond of travelling. So, on one of his journeys he
had been to a town called Nuremburg in Germany and had
brought back what was called a Nuremburg egg, but what we
now would call a clock. This clock was a very rare thing
indeed, as indeed no one in his native town had ever seen one
before. The Baron was very distressed one day to find that
his precious clock would no longer go.
So he sent in haste for old Andre, thinking that the old
man would be the most likely person to be able to mend it
for him.
The old man shut his window and hastened to the castle
and received the clock from his lord?s own hands. He was
given all sorts of injunctions to be very careful with it.
?See,? said the young man, ?what a wonderful thing this
is. Why can?t French workmen make such fine things?
They are dullards beside the Germans.?
Now, old Andre, who rather fancied himseilf, did not like
this speech at all, and he made up his mind that he would
show his master that he could make a finer clock than any
German. He did not say so out loud, but instead asked to
be allowed to keep the clock a month to mend it properly.


After this, people wondered why the jeweller never worked
at his window and he was always too busy to mend anyone s
chains or earrings. He would not even make a new wedding
ring for the Mayor?s daughter who was to be married about
then. So, as none of the ready-made ones would fit her, her
husband had to tie a piece of blue ribbon on her finger instead.
At last one day, at the end of the month, old Andre was
seen to leave his house carrying a box under his arm, and
every one knew it was very precious by the care the old man
took of it. Many curious people asked him what he carried
with such care. But when he answered ?Eggs,? they did not
believe him, and laughed. But he did not care in the least,
only continued his journey to the Castle with a nod and a
smile.
Presently Andre was taken into the Baron?s private sit-
ting-room, and after he had bowed to his master, the jeweller
put his box carefully on the table and began to untie the cord
and take off the lid. He said: ?
?My Lord, a month ago to-day, I was bidden to mend
your clock, and your lordship said at that time that we French
workmen were dullards. I vowed that I would prove the con-
trary.?
So saying, he put his hand into the box and drew out,
and set on the table ?the Nuremburg Egg ?and then from
the same box he took a second clock, larger and far more
beautiful to look at than the former. The face was of beauti-
fully polished gold and the figures were marked in a precious
bright blue stone called lapis lazuli; while the hands were
one of diamonds, and the other rubies. The case of the clock
was of the same blue stone and crystal, so that one could see
the works inside the crystal, and also crystal covered the face
and looked like the windows for the clock was the shape of a
small house.
?There, my Lord, is what French workmen can do,? said
the old man with pride.
The Baron stood and gazed at the pretty toy for a moment
in surprise, then said;
?Indeed Andre, it is a pretty toy to look at, but it does
not go as does the German one.?


?Indeed my Lord, it does go for twelve hours on end.
If you will but incline your ear you will hear it. If you will
wait but a minute till it be noon, you will hear my clock ring
you the bell of the cathedral.?
So the Baron waited, and sure enough the little clock
began to chime the hour, silvery notes just like the beautiful
bell of the Church.
He was so pleased with old Andre that he gave him the
house he lived in and enough money so that the old man could
live without working any more.
The beautiful clock he sent to the Queen of France, who
was very delighted with it and always had it on her dressing
table.
Now, the strange fact about this clock was that old Andre
had tried so hard, and thought so much about it while he
was working that it was nearly alive ?anyway the hands were
?and the ruby minute hand, the biggest and longest fell in
love with the diamond hour hand, and how he hurried over
the minutes, and the quarters, and the halves, for once an
hour he met his love and kissed her, and the bell inside rang
out each time. But how very short a time they had together.
One day, the lady in waiting, whose duty it was to wind
the blue clock, forgot to do so. The hands stopped at a quarter
past nine at night and they moped and pined because they
were so far apart, and it was not till late next day that the
Queen looked at her pretty blue clock, to find it had stopped.
At once she sent a page in red velvet livery to look at the
sun dial in the garden for the right time and soon the hands
were set going again.
So things went on for some time, the lovers chasing each
other round and round, she more slowly?as becomes a young
lady?he, ever faster, till, as we would say, the clock gained
horribly, but still their moments together were all too short.
Now, one wet day, the little Princess was playing in the
Queen's Room, and presently while her mother?s and nurse?s
backs were turned, the little girl climbed on a chair and began
to play with the pretty blue clock.
All went well for a little while, then the Princess, not
satisfied with just looking at it and touching it, lifted it up


and, as she did so, the stool on which she was standing, slipped,
and she fell with an awful crash against the corner of the
marble table.
Of course, the Queen ran to her little girl and picked
her up, all covered in blood from a nasty cut in her forehead.
She and the nurse bathed it and petted and fondled her, and
no one gave a thought to the pretty blue clock which had
rolled away under the bed and lay there forgotten, till it was
the day for the housemaid to do out the room when it was
found with its crystal sides broken, and, of course, not going.
The housemaid took it to the Queen who was very sorry
about her pretty toy being broken, but she said perhaps it
would go still. But try as they would, the little blue clock
would never go again, and presently it was put away on the
top shelf of a cupboard and forgotten.
Now, when the clock stopped, it was just on the point of
striking twelve, so that the ruby minute hand and the diamond
hour hand were together, and together they remained side
by side, happy ever after. So, though the Queen lost her toy,
the two hands were happy and the little Princess really did
a kindness without knowing it.


MARGARET CODLINMOTH
Mr. and Mrs. Codlinmoth lived in the center of a most
beautiful apple which grew on one of the lower branches of
the very biggest tree in the orchard under which the children
could play and where they, sometimes on very hot days, were
allowed to have tea. If the apple hadn?t been quite so lovely
and red and ripe perhaps all the adventures which befell the
very youngest of the Codlinmoths would never have hap-
pened, but then it was such a lovely apple that little Mary,
seeing it, thought that it was just what her Daddy would like
for his breakfast and so she picked it and here the adventures
begin.
The Codlinmoth family were just sitting down to their
lunch as the little girl saw their home and the next thing they
knew was an awful shaking which made all the pictures on
the wall go crooked and the soup which Daddy was just
serving out to his sixteeen children all upset into his lap and
scalded him and he said something which made dear Mama
say in her best Sunday tone, ?My dear, do remember the
children.? But she didn?t have much time to say it in, for
at the same moment baby Archibald and his high chair went
sprawling and as the poor little chap had grabbed the edge of
the table in an effort to save himself, the whole of the china
and the food were scattered about the floor and of course
father was angrier still.
The rest of the family thought it a great joke, though
really they were rather frightened. After the first shock they
were so busy helping mother to pick baby out of the mixture
of soup and jam and green peas, to say nothing of the treacle
roly poly which had come unrolled and got mixed up with
Tommy?s legs. The Irish stew somehow had found its way
into the aspidistra plant on the sideboard. They did not notice
that their home was rapidly moving, for you see they were
fairly used to a gentle movement when the wind blew.


However, there was something strange happening. It be-
gan to get very cold and then the air became very damp and
they could hear a dreadful rushing sound and then round and
round went the apple and the whole family huddled in the
corner of the bathroom where they had gone to try and get
some of the stickiness off. Whatever could it be, it was
really a dreadful feeling? Round and round, first you were
on the floor and then thrown against one wall and then
another. Your head was hit on the ceiling and then you
were on your feet again with a bump which sent Mr. Codlin-
moth?s false teeth that he was so proud of clattering to the
floor and made mother?s glasses jump right off her nose. This
went on for as long as Mary washed and polished the apple
till it shone. The poor Codlinmoths were all in a dizzy con-
dition when at last their home was still once more.
?What a beautiful apple,? said Daddy as he sat down to
table. ?Where did you get it, Mary? But I can guess, off
the big tree. I wonder if the spraying has succeeded this
year in killing all the grubs and codlinmoths.?
And then again the apple received a severe shaking, and
Daddy said disappointedly:
?Ah no, I am afraid that there is moth here. See Mary,
there is ever so tiny a hole up here near the stem.?
?Oh Daddy, what a shame! It did seem such a lovely
one.?
?Never mind, perhaps it will be all right inside,? and
Daddy took up a silver knife which lay beside his plate.
And then a dreadful thing happened, just as the Codlin-
moths were beginning to feel a little better after their shaking,
they were all nearly terrified out of their lives again by the
sudden appearance of a shining pointed thing which swiftly
made its way down through the drawingroom ceiling, letting
in an icy blast, and oh horror cutting the house right in half
so that it fell apart with a sickening thud, throwing the family
once again in every direciton. In fact most of them were
thrown right out of the house altogether, and amongst these
was Margaret, the eldest girl, who, when she recovered a little,
found herself on her back on a piece of apple skin. As Maggy
lay panting she heard Daddy say: ?


?You see, Mary, it is not always the things that look
the best which are the best. This apple seemed perfect
outside, but is absolutely rotten inside. We will cut this other
one which is not so pretty and see if it is any better.?
But Maggy, as the family called her, did not wait to see
any more. She crawled quietly under the piece of skin and
from there on to the plate, but it was no easy matter to keep
her footing on the white slippery surface, and at first she was
very frightened of some birds that were painted on it as her
mother, who had taken a great deal of trouble to teach her
about things, had taught her that birds were to be carefully
avoided. However, these seemed so still that at last she made
up her mind to pass them and started to climb up
side of the plate and explore the edge of it, going very carefully
and hiding under every little bit of skin till at last she came
to a piece that hung down over the edge.
Maggy quickly climbed down this most convenient stair-
case and presently found herself on a large white plain strewn
with high mountains, some of them solid looking, but others
one could see through. In fact, she had bumped right into one
of these before she saw it and she was just beginning to wonder
which way to go when she heard a little squeaky voice beside
her say in Sluggish, which luckily she understood: ?
?Pardon me, madame, have you lost your way??
And looking round, Maggy found the most handsome
Slug she had ever seen standing beside her.
?Oh yes, I have indeed lost my way, or rather, I don?t quite
know which way to turn,? she answered.
?Precisely the same thing in the end.?
?No indeed, there is a difference.?
?Oh, if you are going to argue, I will say good day,? the
Slug answered in a huffy voice and started to walk away. This
gave Maggy an awful fright, and she clutched his sleeve with
both her hands.
?Oh dear Mr. Slug, don?t leave me, I will die of fright
if you do.?
?Well,? said the Slug, ? I do hate women who argue, but
it would be a very ungentlemanly thing to do to leave a lady


like you in trouble, so if you like, I will take you to my
mother.?
Maggy was overjoyed and she followed her new friend
and took good care not to argue the point with him when he
said that Slugs were of a much older family than Codlin-
moths, though of course, she had often heard her father say
the opposite. In fact he had once said that Slugs were a
common lot, but then, you could not always tell people the
truth.
After walking for what seemed to her hours, Maggy and
her new friend at last arrived at the foot of one of the biggest
mountains, which Slug at once began to climb with Maggy close
at his heels, she found it very hard work as she kept on slipping
back. At last he saw how tired she was, and at once let down
a sort of ladder of slime which made it much easier for her.
So at last they reached the top and then he warned her to
walk very carefully as if she fell down the other side she
would be drowned, as the dish, as he called it, grandly
using a human word, was full of water. Very carefully she
followed him till they came to a broad green leaf which he
told her grandly was the avenue to his home, the house itself
being in the heart of a rose. Mr. Slug led his visitor into a
pretty little sittingroom, all the most delicate pink shade, fur-
nished most beautifully with lovely comfy chairs and a gramo-
phone and a table. Here he left her while he went to look
for his mother, and Maggy was so tired that when she sat
down on one of the big chairs, she simply could not keep her
eyes open and when presently Archie and his mother came
in, she was sound asleep. The young Slug told his mother
where he had found their guest and as much of her adventure
as she had been able to tell him as they came along. His mother
said that he had been quite right to bring her home with him.
Of course, the talking woke Maggy and she sat up with a
start.
?It?s all right, my dear,? Mrs. Slug reassured her.
Margaret got up politely. ?I hope you don?t mind my
being here,? she said because she couldn?t think of anything
else.


?No, I?m glad to have you, my dear. I have suffered from
humans myself,? Mrs. Slug answered kindly.
She gave Maggy little pink cakes to eat and made her
feel quite at home.
So Margaret settled down with the Slug family, helping
with the house and minding the baby. He was such a sweet
little green wriggly thing curled up in his rosepetal cradle.
Mrs. Slug had many stories to tell of the garden. She liked to
hear about the Orchard and her own apple home from Mar-
garet,
So life went on happily, but there were signs of fading in
the Rose which sheltered the family, and Mrs. Slug began to
expect that it would be thrown out on to the dust heap. Sure
enough, one morning there was a violent shaking of the rose
and its lovely outer petals were all scattered, and the Slugs and
their visitor had to huddle up right in the heart and cling on for
dear life while what was left of the Rose was thrown out on to
the dust heap.
Here, when they had recovered from the shaking, they
found quite a large number of other Slugs and Caterpillars and
Worms of all sorts. Some of these, after changing their
shapes, at last turned into butterflies and moths. Margaret be-
came at last a handsome moth and when her wings were
properly dry, she flew away to the Orchard to make a home
of her own in some rosy Apple.


IN THE GHOST?S GALLERY
Chapter I.
A little girl, accompanied by two dogs, had one afternoon
in the last days of Charles I. wandered courageously into a
long oak-panelled gallery with its many suits of armour and
trophies of war; and as she advanced all the stories she had
heard of the dreadful acts of her ancestors came to her mind.
Though she was ten years old Cynthia had never been
here before; but to-day the whole household was occupied
bringing in the harvest as quickly as possible, as tidings had
arrived that the Roundheads were coming. So that little
Cynthia was left to her own devices, and consequently had
wandered into the deserted Ghosts? Gallery.
The very name struck awe into her heart, and thoughts
of the past mingled with the dread she had of anything hap-
pening to her father, Sir John Berry, then absent with the king,
fighting against the Roundheads.
From time to time tidings reached Berry Manor, always
sad for the staunch cavaliers, whose side lost ground day by
day. Cynthia was just thinking of what Master Jeromy, the
pedlar, had told her mother that very morning about how
the king had been taken prisoner, when a noise like the
grating of iron startled her. The dogs? hair bristled and they
lifted their ears, they were as much frightened as their young
mistress. The noise was repeated, and Cynthia turned in
terror; as she did so one of the dogs gave an angry growl.
Looking in front of her the child saw, to her terror, that one
of the wall panels was slowly moving, disclosing the figure
of a man dressed in a torn riding suit, with disordered curls
and tattered hat.
Cynthia would have screamed, but the stranger, coming
forward, bade her by a sign be silent. Impressed by his
maner and half terrified she obeyed, restraining the dogs at
the same time.


The stranger bowed before her, and then said in a low
voice:
?Pray little Mistress, have no fear and be silent.?
?Oh Sir, methought you were a ghost.?
?Nay, I am real flesh and bone; but tell me are you not
Mistress Cynthia Berry??
?Vest Sir, how come you to know my name??
?I am one of Sir John?s friends, an officer in his regiment.?
?And your name, Sir??
?My name is Captain Courtenay, and I have letters from
the king?s friends in France; but methinks,? he added, ?I have
told you over much.?
?Nay Sir, you may trust me, am I not a cavalier?s
daughter?? And, as she spoke, the child drew herself up,
her face growing red with indigation.
Captain Courtenay admired her thus and felt he had a
safe ally; and therefore he made up his mind to trust her.
?I crave your pardon, Mistress Cynthia, but on a mission
like mine caution is necessary. I have letters here which must
reach France, and there is a party of Roundheads at my heels.
Your father told me to come here if I was hard pressed, can
you hide me and give me a little food??
?Yes Sir, I can get food, but methinks it will be difficult
to hide you.?
?Does anyone know of the chamber in this wall??
?Nay Sir, no one will come here, this is the Ghosts? Gal-
lery,? and she glanced timidly round.
?I will remain here if you will bring me food, I am very
faint.?
Suddenly there was a sound of clattering hoofs and both
started.
?There they are,? whispered Captain Courtenay, ?keep my
secret and tell no one.? He entered the opening and slid
the panel across. It was impossible to tell where the opening
was.
Cynthia ran quickly, with the dogs at her heels, out of
the gallery, down the long stairs, into the parlour, where she
found her mother, a dignified and beautiful lady, hastilly pre-
paring to receive the intruders. A regular cannonade of blows


was being kept up on the great door and a gruff voice was
demanding admission.
Lady Berry rose at last and hastened towards the door,
which she unbarred and opened. There was a sudden rush
of a dozen or so rough troopers, but at the sight of this stately
lady they stopped. Then a man who was apparently an officer
said:?
?Your pardon, Madam, but we must enter.?
?By all means,? and she stood aside.
?I would, however, know your business.?
?We are in pursuit of Captain Courtenay, last seen a league
from here, and it is my duty to search this house.?
Lady Berry answered:
?Captain Courtenay is not here, sir.
?Nay Madam, I may not take your word, though I fain
would (he was very young); I must see for myself.?
?As you please, sir.?
?Will you guide me, Madam??
?Nay sir, you must look alone; or wait, my little daughter
shall lead you.?
Cynthia?s heart beat very fast, but she was a brave child
and saw that to go with them would be an advantage.
The officer and two of his men, led by the little maid,
began their search. They entered room after room, opening
closets and chests, Cynthia prattling all the while; she told how
Ivor had murdered his son because he had married beneath
him, and how both their ghosts walked a certain gallery be-
tween sun-down and midnight.
The sun had just set and it was growing dark. Every
room had been visited, and at last the party arrived at the
Ghosts? Gallery, of which fact Cynthia informed them in an
awed whisper, declaring that she would not enter with them.
The gallery was nearly dark and the troopers seemed almost
as frightened as their guide, so that a hasty glance satisfied
them. When they descended to the hall they found that the
rest of the troop had established themselves in the great kitchen,
having plentifully supplied themselves with sack and they
were in a state of uselessness.
Their officer, seeing this, turned to Lady Berry.


?I crave your pardon, Madam, but I must beg your hos-
pitality for tonight, I will endeavour to give as little trouble
as possible.?
Soon the men and their officer, tired out, were asleep.
Cynthia now ventured to tell her mother what had hap-
pened, and where Courtenay was hidden.
Lady Berry sent all the maids to bed and then took a
tray of food in her hand, and followed by Cynthia, bearing a
flagon of wine, she made her way to the Ghosts? Gallery, where,
when Cynthia called, Captain Courtenay appeared.
He ate his meal in silence, while his hostess fetched a cloak
belonging to her husband and one of his hats.
?Here Sir, is a means of disguise, and in the stables you
will find horses. I pray you choose the best, and may God
speed you. Cynthia, you show the little door which faces the
stables.?
Captain Courtenay would have thanked her, but she in-
terrupted him.
?Nay Sir, it is little enough I can do, waste no time, the
soldiers are asleep, and if you ride well you will reach the
sea before they wake.?
She left him and Cynthia began cautiously to lead the
way down narrow back stairs till they came to a small side
door; here she paused and opened it.
?The stable is yonder, Sir.?
?Thank you, Mistress Cynthia, I will never forget this
night, and neither shall the king.? Then he said, as he un-
clasped a buckle from his hat, ?This might betray me, will
you keep it for me??
?Yes Sir, and may God speed you.?
He strode out into the moonlight, and soon Cynthia saw
him lead the big black horse out of the stables on to the
turf, mount, and then, with a wave of his hat, ride away. She
watched him out of sight, and then gently closing the door
she crept up to her own little chamber and hid the precious
buckle away in a safe place.


Chapter 11.
The moon had risen and was shedding a soft silvery light
over the great trees in the manor park, casting deep shadows
on the lawns and paths. The king?s messenger, on his fresh
black horse, drew rein in one of these shadows, for he was
very young, and he looked back to the stately pile of the
Manor, and there in the shadow of the door he caught a
glimpse of a small white-clad form. He waved his hand,
and then, touching his horse lightly, he started, first at a
gentle canter and then as the distance grew he galloped
for his life. Thanks to Cynthia he had a good start on a
fresh horse, and before dawn he ought with God?s help to be
well on his way to France.
The night seemed to lend him wings, and the magic of
the ride filled his veins, so that he did not pay much attention
to his road, only being careful to avoid villages, till at last,
just as the moon was disappearing, he felt the breath of the
sea and knew that his goal was at hand. It was as well, for
his noble horse had carried him with very short rests for five
hours and it was nearly done, but was still willing, and soon,
at a moderate pace, he reached the beach at a point where
he knew a boat would be waiting. Presently he heard a
voice exclaim:
?ls that you, Captain??
?Yes.?
?Methought you?d turned Roundhead.?
?Nay Matthew, jest not, take this poor beast and let me
get away.?
?Here?s my son who will take you to the ship out yonder,?
and he pointed seawards, ?and I?ll take the horse.?
Captain Courtenay was soon aboard, the sails were set
and before sunset next day the good ship touched at Calais
and he landed and continued his journey. This time without
danger and in comfort, till he arrived in Paris, where he de-
livered his despatches and rested a few days; returning then
to England to help continue the ever more hopeless contest
between King and Commons, between churchmen and puri-
tans, till at last, with many others, he took refuge in Holland,


where he awaited the arrival of better days ?when the King
should come to his own.?
Often at night when the moon flooded the quaint old
Dutch town with its silvery light and the houses threw deep
shadows on the ground, Courtenay would seem to see a dainty
white figure framed in a doorway; it was only a child?s
figure, but then the girl would grow into a woman; and she
haunted him at night and in the evening, when he saw her
in her white frock and blue sash with her two dogs, their
hair bristling, standing in the ?Ghosts? Gallery.?
The years went by in their succession, with their many
important events, deciding the destinies of a nation and of a
King. However, time passes, and at last the people grew
tired of their self-chosen masters and begged their rightful
ruler to deign to return.
There came a day when King Charles 11. was hailed
with delight in England, and with him returned all his father?s
old officers, amongst whom was Colonel Courtenay. As soon
as he had leisure he made his way to Berry Manor, where he
found the widowed Lady Berry and her daughter Mistress
Cynthia, now twenty-one years old and a very beautiful girl.
Often with her dogs she would at evening wander into ?The
Ghosts? Gallery,? and would pass over in her mind every
instant of that memorable night and wonder if Captain
Courtenay would return. She had heard long ago of his safe
arrival in France.
One evening, just as the sun was setting, there was the
noise of an arrival in the courtyard, and presently Colonel
Courtenay was bowing before the two ladies.
?I crave your pardon, Madam, for my somewhat untimely
visit.?
?Nay Sir, we trust it may be of longer duration than your
last visit,? replied the elder lady.
Colonel Courtenay was requested to stay the night and he
accepted the invitation with all the polished gallantry of the age.
This was the first of many visits, till at last the gallant
officer begged Lady Berry to grant him her daughter?s hand,
and then with her consent the couple plighted their troth in
?The Ghosts? Gallery.?


HORSE SENSE
They were going to make a hunter and race horse of me.
Well, not if I knew it! but there, I?m putting the cart before
the horse, not that I?ve ever been in a cart. I am a light
chestnut in colour with a white face and two white stockings,
while there are several dark patches on my flanks and quarters.
Of noble parentage, my grandsire being famous in his day, I
always held my head high on the run.
I was not a particularly strong foal, though large for my
age, and my owners when they had broken me didn?t think
me worth bothering about, so out I was turned with a number
of old stagers who had seen and done quite enough in their
day. How we youngsters used to listen open mouthed to
their stories, some full of praise for the race-course, others who
hated almost the memory of it all. There was one old fellow,
with a lame leg, a dip in his back, and gone in the wind, who
had been a hunter, and from him I learnt many a tale of whip
and spur, of madly chasing dogs and madder riders who rode
you till there was hardly a breath left in you, after a beastly
fox any one of them could have potted with a gun at almost
any moment of the chase. Sometimes they even galloped
madly after a bit of smelly rag; what fools men are! I made
up my mind early that I wouldn?t take any of that sauce if I
could help it. Boundary riding perhaps, that was not so bad,
or a real good gallop after Kangaroo, but none of your rag
chasing for me, so I studied my old friend?s attitude well.
I was left in peace till I was over six, and had begun to
think myself forgotten and was enjoying life thoroughly. Till
one warm, peaceful afternoon, the sound of voices made me
look up from a really excellent tuft of grass. It was the boss
in his buggy with another man ?a towney I knew at once ?
they drove quite close up to me and I heard the boss say to
the man ?who I afterwards learnt was a friend of his ?(but
that doesn?t seem to prevent the selling of a crock) ?here?s the
fellow I was telling you about.?


?Oh,? says the friend, and looks me all over
?Of course he?s very rough, hasn?t been in for ages, you
know, but he?s a good stamp and well bred.?
?Looks a bit gone in the back,? answered the other (for
I had adopted by best switchback pose).
?Oh, only wants a bit of bracing up.?
Well the boss was so persuasive that in a few days? time
I was driven into the yards, caught after a good deal of trouble
and put into the stables.
Shall I ever forget that first night in? It was fearfully
hot and the ground was covered in straw. There was hardly
room to move, while the flies and things were unbearable;
besides I was tied by the head to a rope with a weight on the
end which ran up and down in the most annoying manner,
but which, strain as I would, I couldn?t break. This game
lasted for three or four days, and then one morning I was led
out with a saddle on my well-hollowed back, and a man
I had never seen took the reins and jumped up. We travelled
at quite a decent pace for a good part of the day and just
as I was wondering if it was time to go lame, something which
sounded like the howl of a dingo was heard, and a flock of
cockatoos started just behind. I gave one bound into the air
as something red and green with purple in it tore past, much
faster than I could gallop, which isn?t slowly when I choose.
It took that man just all his time to get me quiet before we
came to a hard smooth road and dozens of houses. I was too
bewildered and tired to be frightened at the funny carts and
things, so that I only shied occasionally just to keep the rider
on my back awake. At last we reached home, as I shall call
it. I was given a drink and put into a stall beside another
horse. Presently my rider, John was his name, came in and
began to maul and push me about with towels and brushes till
I grew fairly angry and did my best to take a nip off his leg.
He evidently suspected it and moved in time. Next morning
after a beastly night?l?m fond of open air, and this stable
business doesn t suit me ?a man and a woman came out and
stared at me. The man was my master and intended hunting
me and perhaps entering me for steeple-chase. Did he really!


The woman jeered scornfully at my hollowed back and with
good cause, for really I looked more like a switchback than
anything else. I was quite pleased with her remarks and
allowed my nose to be rubbed. Then began a regular train-
ing. For about a fortnight I stood being jammed and
prodded and rubbed and strapped into a thing they called a
dumb jockey, which was made of wood and straps and pulled
and held one into the most businesslike attitude which was
most uncomfortable; I was riden twice a day, once by my
master, once by John, till one morning suddenly, lame I went.
Oh it was well done. Well, for the next week they were
rubbing and bandaging and resting me till I got better?feel-
ing inclined for a little diversion?and once again the strap-
ping and rubbing process began, and my master would come
and stand in my box (I forgot to mention it, they gave me a
box) and he and John would make self-confident plans for
me. I had others, thanks.
Once again I broke down, and sea bathing was ordered,
so I was led, limping pitifully, down to the sea and taken
for swims?really quite enjoyable, so I drew this bout of lame-
ness out as long as I dared. Thus I continued for several
months, off and on lame. No training or any such rot could
start, but they still kept on hoping that I?d turn out all right
but I knew that in the end I?d be turned out all right. Well,
the grand climax came at last, with rather more dramatic effect
than I anticipated. It was a glorious morning, and I was
feeling particularly fit and full of oats and John had mounted
me, after a rather longer attack than usual, for the first time
and we were trotting gently down an asphalted road when a
man who was carrying a sheet of glass swung round a bit
and the sun on the glass scared me and I jumped to one side.
The asphalt was more slippery than I thought, and my rider
and I came down in a lovely heap on the pavement. There
was no need to pretend this time as I was cut and sore all over
and poor John was decidedly battered about. I was sorry for
this as I liked John, he had always been good to me and he
really seemed badly hurt. Quite how badly I never knew, as
while he was being put to bed I was taken off to hospital
where I stayed nearly three weeks being lotioned and poulticed


till I was fairly sick of it. The only consolation, however,
was that I hoped they would have had enough of me by
now, and would send me home. I was getting homesick, fed
up with your stable ways, sick to death of nosing round a
stuffy box. I longed for a good old gallop and for a roll in
the sand. I knew just the spot, beyond the plantation just
beside the creek. I wanted to smell the gums and hear the
parrots. I?m too old for your high polish and prancing man-
ners, give me a paddock with decent grass and a tank and
I?ll give you all the king?s stables in the world. But there,
I?ve made a long enough digression so I?d better get back to
my story. So, one day John, limping terribly, came to fetch
me. He never said a word to me on the subject; jolly decent
of him I call it as it was really my fault, anyway I went home
calmly and helped as well as I could with my dressing, as
they called it. Listening to the remarks of my owner and
his friends, who visited me periodically for the next two days.
After this I was again saddled and my owner mounted. This
was too much for my feelings, as I had made quite sure that
they had had enough of me. We got about half a mile from
home, then my owner exclaimed in a tone in which anger and
vexation plainly showed ??Damn it! the brute?s lame again.?
(I positively giggled, a thing forbidden to well mannered
horses, but what did I care). I was lame, lame as a three-
legged chair and I knew what that meant. Our homeward
journey was slow and looked terribly painful?with me, head
down, lame legged, and hollow backed, but light of heart, for
I knew by the tone of the man?s voice that he?d had enough
and to spare, both in cash and worry. I wasn?t wrong, for
after a few more visits and maulings, I was led away one morn-
ing to the station, packed, or rather bustled into a truck and
sent off with the train. It was a beastly journey, hot and
stuffy and shaky and I was very frightened; but at last, after
what seemed an eternity to me, it came to an end. I was
taken out of the box. The view and even the little station
seemed familiar and Yes! when I got out, there was old Dick,
my mate, and I neighed for joy. I was home, back in the
bush at last. In my joy I nearly forgot myself, but luckily kept
my head, and it was a very lame chestnut that was led along


Stones for Margrette Anne
the bush road, occasionally straining at the halter to get a
mouthful of the sweet grass at the roadside.
My mate commiserated me on my lameness and 1 tola
him to ?Just wait till we get in.?
When we reached the homestead the Boss came out and
looked me over and felt my legs and then remarked to Dick:
?Well, 1 can?t very well shoot the brute, he?s too good tor
that. We?ll turn him out with the pensioners in the creek
paddock for a bit and see how he shapes.?
So away I was led to the well known paddock and at the
gate Dick relieved me of the halter and giving my rump a
sla P?
?Go on, get along with yer.?
I nearly lost my head and galloped madly away, but re-
membered and limped forward to meet my old mates who
neighed their welcome. But when Dick was out or sight,
up went my heels and away I galloped for that patch of sand
by the creek and didn?t I have a roll.
Then began a time of peaceful feeding on the lush pasture
with good water handy and pleasant company. What more,
I ask, could a horse desire.
I f' 11 ' I 111
iimi Hill
3 1508 01701049 2
Nf>
Ft F23
A/ Copy


'
/ ,
%


?
.
?
I
,
-v
C ? i
? '
. ? ? *
*
. V
?*
