

f-notz.
Bhq & Jndjpnteq
OF
THE BRITISH CHURCH,
W ITH A BRIEF SKETCH OF
THE EKTGXjISHC R£33E'OR.MLiITIO»r,
AND SOME ACCOUNT OP THE GROWTH AND FALSE DOCTRINE OF
J'hb JPapal JSystem,
DELIVERED IN
S. MARK’S CHU.RCH, DARLING POINT,
BY KEY. THOMAS KEM MIS.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE
Proceeds in aid of CHOIR VESTRY BUILDING FUND,
-i - :f-.
•f as*
FI\ r E LECTURES




FIVE LECTURES ‘<f rt
ON ■»,
THE BRITISH CHURCH,
WITH A BRIEF SKETCH OF
THE EMaLISH REFORMATION,
AND SOME ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH AND FALSE DOCTRINE OF
'J' HE jSYSTEM,
DELIVERED IN
S. MARK’S CHURCH, DARLING POINT,
BY KEY. THOMAS KEMMIS.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE,
Proceeds in aid of CHOIR VESTRY BUILDING FUND.
FEINTED EY FREDERICK WHITE, IG6, PITT STREET,


“The Church to which we belong has thrown itself on the
primitive rule, Quod semper, quod übique, quod ab omnibus. She
has grounded her belief deep in the facts of history. She
accepts no doctrine that will not bear the test of universal
tradition. She rejects all local colouring. She aims at
universality, for the consensus sanctorum est vox spirit us sancii.
We hold, we grasp with unflinching tenacity, all the doctrines
which may be proved by ‘ certain warrant ’ of Holy Writ;
are rooted and grounded on antiquity; are sanctioned by
universality, and have been certified wherever the name of
Christ is named.”


M hiss/p
X7* 6
PREFACE.
These Lectures are published at the request of many who
heard them. My object in their delivery, was to exhibit the
primitive and apostolic character of the Church of England.
By an appeal to Scripture and historic fact, I have
endeavoured to prove the high antiquity and independence
of that pure branch of the Church Catholic, planted originally
in the British Isles by Apostolic hands.
In compiling this brief outline of Church History, I have,
of course, freely used the best authorities within my reach.
Among other books may be mentioned :—“ The Church
in the three First Centuries,” Blunt; Mosheim’s “ Eccles
History;” Cox’s “ Primitive Fathers ;” “ Church History,”
by Martineau ; “Turning Points in Church History,” by
Cutts; Sir Jas. Stephen’s “Eccles. Biographies;” “The
Church’s Broken Unity,” Bennett; “ Barrow on the Pope’s
Supremacy ;” Goulburn’s “ Holy Catholic Church ;” “ Out-
line of the History of the British Church,” S. P. C. K., &c.
References in general have been given in the notes to
different authors, but there are doubtless many thoughts and
expressions for which I am indebted, but which did not
admit of formal recognition.
.S’. Mark's, Lent , 1876.
- So
. ifv


CONTENTS.
Lectures i.-ii. —“ The Antiquity and Independence
PAGE
of the Church in Britain.” 4 to 29
Lecture hi- — “ The Growth of the Papacy.” 30 to 43
Lecture iv. — “ The English Reformation.” 44 to 58
Lecture v. — “ The Corruption and False Doctrine
of the Modern Church of Rome.” ... - 59 to 78


LECTURE I.
“ Walk about Zion, and go round about her : tell the towers thereof. Mark
ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces ; that ye may tell it to the
generation following.”—Psalms xlyiii, 12, 13.
fllE Psalm from which my text is taken is a song of
triumph—the celebration of deliverance from some great
national calamity.
Moab and Ammon enter the territory of Judah with an
invading army. They muster in the wilderness of Tekoa, —just
within sight of the.“ towers, bulwarks, and palaces ” of the Holy
City. Israel advances against the foe —like a crusading host—
with banners waving in the breeze and the sound of hymns and
psalms ascending from the forefront of their line.
But long ere the armies met, a sudden panic seized the foe:
they turned their arms against one another and fled! The hand of
God had been stretched forth on behalf of His people.
As in later times, so now, “ The Virgin, the daughter of Zion,
had laughed to scorn,” —the proud invader. There in the distance
stood the City of God unharmed, rearing her battlements towards
heaven and exulting in conscious security. No weapon forged
against her should prosper!
But whatever be the historic origin of this Psalm, it contains
truths for the Church in all ages —'gladness and consolation
for all generations.
Spiritually understood, it celebrates the glory, beauty, and the
stability of the Church of the living God—“ the pillar and
ground of the truth”—of which the earthly Jerusalem was but
a figure. It bids us also, with devout attention and true thank-
fulness, to “ mark well her bulwarks, consider her palaces.” Wo
are invited to examine her constitution, her title deeds, and her
powers: to rejoice in the thought of the manifold safeguards
and defences which she provides for the edification of her children.
With this injunction, then, of the Psalmist, I now ask you to
comply, in special reference to that branch of the Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church, to which it is our glory to belong. I
want you to see for yourselves the real position which we occupy ;
and will endeavour to prove, I trust most conclusively, by an
appeal to historic facts, the high antiquity and the independence
of that pure branch of the Church of Christ planted originally
by the hand of God in the British Isles : —That Church still one


in faith, in doctrine and discipline, which has existed since the days
of the apostles : —A. Church hoary with the antiquity of eighteen
centuries, legally inheriting all the institutions and privileges of,
and dating up historically to, the company assembled at Jerusalem
on the Day of Pentecost.
I do so in full view of certain statements and misrepresentations
recently made and in anwer to a challenge emanating from high
quarters of the Papacy in this country —“ Where was the Church
of England for fifteen centuries before Luther ? ’ ’
I accept that challenge (which I hoped long ere this had
been taken up by older and abler advocates ;) and I propose to
answer that question by furnishing a plain refutation of the
erroneous assertions which such a challenge is intended to imply.
Not unfrequently (as in the present instance) the Church of
England is spoken of as a separated branch from the Church of
Eome: as merely a “ national institution ” which had its origin at
the Reformation. This representation of the case, in plain contra-
vention of the facts of history, and obviously founded upon a
narrow and mistaken definition of the word Church, cannot
possibly be accepted by any who regard the Church of Christ in
its Scriptural idea, —not as a mere material corporation, but as a
Spiritual Society. They feel that the Church has (of course) an
earthly side. She enters into human history, and her annals are
intertwined with those of the kingdoms of this world. She has
relations to civil governments—her doctrines are stated inhuman
language. But these things do not form the essence of that
world-embracing kingdom set up in the world on the day of
Pentecost. The present Church of England, to be a true and
living member of that spiritual kingdom, must trace its origin
from a higher source than the will of sovereigns or parliaments.
To be a real portion of the Kingdom of the Spirit (and not a
mere human organization patronised by the State), she must at
least have something in common with the Church that existed
from the earliest times, and be connected by sure and firm links
with that little company that met in that upper chamber to
choose a successor to the traitor Judas.
In the discharge of the task on which I have entered, I have
taken pains to glean from both ancient and modern authorities
the most trustworthy account of the various Church questions
herein discussed. 1 have but one object to serve—not the
interests of party spirit or bigotry, but the glory of God and the
good of that Church, whose doctrines are those of the Catholic
and Apostolic Church of Christ as it existed in primitive times.
In dealing with this subject, it is quite possible that some of
the views advanced (although strictly in accordance with the
teaching of the Book of Common Prayer and the declarations of
Holy Writ) may not meet with universal acceptance. That it
should be so, is perhaps more a matter of regret than of surprise.
Bor not all who call themselves members of the Church of


England have made themselves acquainted with either its doctrines,
principles, or constitution, or the true grounds upon which she
claims the allegiance of her children. Bome among those who
listen to me to-night may expect to hear fierce and furious
denunciations of the Church of Rome—in the spirit of that
bigotry so prevalent, and which, nevertheless, dares to assume
the name of faithfulness. I fear they will be grievously disap-
pointed. What if the Church of Rome has hurled the thunder of
her anathemas against all who are not of that communion ! We
fear that others, who glory in the name of Protestant, have done
just the same in the denunciation of such as differ from them,
and not more charitably. What if one of Rome’s prelates has,
in language full of bitterness, vulgarity, and enmity, assailed the
Church of England ! let us, conscious of our advantage, leave arro-
gant censure and misrepresentation, uncharity and intolerance, to
less privileged men. For after all, let me ask, is this prevalence of
religious imprecation any reason why we, too, should forget the
Master’s spirit, and in language of bitter intolerance fling abroad
the thunderbolts of God, and call dowm fire from heaven upon
men and women—many of them more holy than ourselves —
adoring the same God —believing, amid much error, in the same
Saviour —and struggling in the same life battle ? Whatever be
the corruption in doctrine or practice of that Church, does it
justify me or you in placarding it as the system of “ the man of
sin,” and branding it with all the spiritual abominations of the
Apocalypse ? Moreover, when did it come to pass that the
language of religious imprecation stood in the place of sober
argument and fact P and who is proved right by curses P No, the
deepest and most scriptural convictions upon these matters, the
boldest maintenance of that faith once delivered to the saints, is
not, I trust, inconsistent with the dictates of charity.
Again, suffer me to state, with all deference to the position of
orthodox separatists from the Church, (in many of whom I gladly
recognise eminent saintliness and efficiency for good) that through-
out this discussion I use, advisedly, the word Catholic, not as the
antithesis of Protestant, but asthe lawful, scriptural, and true desig-
nation of our communion. I refuse to accept, as the distinctive
name of the Church of England, that which includes those by whom
the fundamental docrines of our common Christianity are denied
or ignored—which in itself is hopelessly vague and defies
definition; which, at best, would make the Church’s Creed a
negation of the doctrines of another communion. Itis perfectly true
that the Church of England did protest against Romish errors,
and does so still, and so is Protestant. But her
protest is equally levelled against the errors of Dissent,
of Socinianism, and Infidelity. Moreover, I decline
calmly to yield that glorious title (the only one which
the Prayer Book recognises in direct terms) to the mono-
poly of a communion apti-Catholic in spirit, and which, by its


Council of Trent, became anti-Catbolic in fact. Our title to the
name of Catholic must be maintained against usurpation on the
one hand and rebellion on the other. Lower ground than this
we cannot safely take. For, to use the language of the Bishop
of Peterborough, “ When we have made fair and full allowance
for all that can be said on the side of nonconformity, let us never
for a moment seek to conciliate it by any surrender of Church
principles. They are not ours to yield, and if they were we
should gain nothing by the surrender.” And I believe that
those who in our midst have (to use an expressive phrase of
the same Bishop) been “ coquetting with dissent,” will
sooner or later learn this, perhaps to their cost. For, “We
gain neither unity, alliance, nor peace, by giving up our distinctive
principles. As a Churchman I cannot pray against schism to-day
and help to promote it to-morrow.” All declamation
touching “ religious liberty ” and “ brotherly union ” is Utopian
in the highest degree, and will only issue (in reference to the
policy suggested) as far as the Church is concerned, in grasping
a phantom and losing much that we rightly deem precious;
while, to ask concessions from those who have nothing to lose but
everything to gain, is a poor compliment after all. “No ! let us
be true to our own principles —kindly and consistently true ; while
we show all personal respect and brotherly-love to those who are
indeed our brethren in Christ, though estranged and separated.
I am certain that such a course would be far more likely to win
the respect of dissenters, and lessen their disposition, wherever it
exists, to hinder our ministry, than the exhibition (now so popular)
of a weak, disloyal, culpable indifference to those essential and
distinctive principles which separate, and must separate, Church
and Dissent.”
Let us start then with this question—What do we mean
by those oft-repeated, yet misunderstood, words, recited by
thousands Sunday after Sunday in the Creed, “ 1 believe in the
Holy Catholic Church p ” And as the value of every article of
our Creed is that it is based upon and may be proved by £ most
certain warrant of Holy Scripture,’ I turn to that book for an
answer. I find, then, these memorable words used by our Blessed
Lord—“ Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build
My Church.” I turn next to the Book of Acts of the
Apostles, and I find the whole of it devoted to a descrip-
tion of the foundation, development, and progress of that
Church which, in the words just quoted, He proposes to
build. New, in dealing with this topic, a host of popular mis-
apprehensions will be put to flight if we remember that Christ
came not simply to teach certain religious doctrines, but to found a
society ; that He carried that purpose into effect, and bequeathed
to the world not only a large amount of precious truth in the
New Testament, but a great divine society, having its officers,
igles, rite of admission, powers of expulsion, solemn meetings,


and stated assemblies. That Church our Lord announces in the
words quoted Ilis intention of building, in some sense, upon the
Apostle Peter. Now, remember, when those words were spoken,
the Church was not actually built. That building began on the
day of Pentecost. And who took the leading part in the pro-
ceedings of that day ? Clearly S. Peter. He preached the
first Christian sermon, attended by the conversion of 3000 souls.
Under his sanction they were admitted into the Church by baptism :
—“ they that gladly received his word were baptised.” Again, it
was S. Peter who admitted the Gentiles to the Church in the
person of Cornelius and his friends. Clearly, then, the meaning of
the prediction was, that S. Peter was destined in the order of God’s
providence to lay the first or earliest foundation of that Church
which is “built upon the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
Himself being the head corner stone.” A Ve all know what tre-
mendous theories and erroneous conclusions, as to the primacy of S.
Peter, have been drawn from these words —conclusions which would
almost trench upon the prerogatives of our Blessed Lord. Into
the testimony of Holy Scripture against the doctrine of the Papal
Supremacy, as derived from this supposed primacy of S. Peter,
Ido not intend to enter now. It is sufficient for the present to
say that the Roman hypothesis is utterly irreconcilable with Scrip-
ture History in Acts of the Apostles. There is not a single action
of S Peter recorded in that book which implies that he had
a supreme authority over the other apostles. There are many
facts perfectly inconsistent with that supposition. For all
that the statement implies is this; —Christ proposed to
found, and did found by the ministry of S. Peter,
originally, a certain society called the Christian Church,
which all nations were invited to join, and which is, therefore,
Catholic or universal. Such was the prominent part which
he took in commencing the superstructure of the Church,
and by wielding the keys of the Word and Sacraments, ho
first unlocked the kingdom of heaven to penitent and
believing souls. And, remember, other apostles besides
S. Peter laid the foundations of the Church. S. Paul, more
especially, speaks of himself as having done so —“ According to
the grace of God given unto me, as a wise Master Builder I have
laid the foundation and another buildeth thereon.” Let no one
say (for one moment) this interpretation is at variance with
those well-known words of S. Paul—“ Other foundation can
no man lay than is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” The
apostles are foundations in a wholly different sense from
our Lord Himself. They are foundations in the sense that
the Church took its rise from their ministry. But the apostles
themselves rested on the chief corner stone. He is over all blessed
for evermore. His words have absolute authority. His redeeming
work saves to the uttermost from sin and death. His grace and
power are living and perpetual facts in the sacraments of Ilis
Church. He is the solid foundation of our faith, hope, love, and life.


I proceed now to give a brief sketch of the history of the
Church of Christ as it existed in England from the earliest times.
It is highly probable, if not absolutely certain, from the concur-
rent testimonies of several writers, that the Gospel of Christ was
conveyed to the ancient inhabitants of Britain about the middle
or before tie end of the Eirst Century Stillingfleet, Burgess,
Burton, and others, have collected many ancient and venerable
authorities to show that the gospel was preached in Britain by
S. Paul himself, who is supposed to have passed over to that
island between 58 and 61, A.D. A similar testimony is given by
Gildas the Wise, a British historian. There is also a well-
founded tradition that Bran the Blessed—father of Caractacus—
having been taken captive to Rome, A.D. 51, remained there
seven years, and on his return to his native land imparted this
knowledge to his countrymen. It appears that S. Paul was a
fellow-prisoner with him at Rome. It is, therefore, not unlikely
that this apostle was the very person through whose instrumen-
tality the British captive became a convert to Christianity. A
son and daughter of Caractacus are also mentioned as converts
to the faith at the same time, and the daughter, Claudia, is
identified with the saints, whom S. Paul mentions (2 Tim. iv.
21) —“ Eubulus greeteth thee and Pudens and Linus and Claudia.”
This Claudia is alluded to by the Roman poet, Martial, as married
to an illustrious Roman called Rufus, mentioned (Rom. xvi. 13.)
On account ot his modesty and gentleness he was afterwards
called Pudens. This identifies the Claudia Ruffiua of Martial
with the Christian convert married to Pudens, and joined together
in the salutation of S. Paul. There is record also of another
British lady who became a Christian at the same time, Pomponia
Graecina, wife of Aulus Plautius, then Governor of Britain.
Tacitus describes her as guilty of a “a foreign superstition ” —i.e.
Christianity. She is supposed to be included in S. Paul’s account
of the “ saints in Caesar’s household.” The following testimonies
from the Fathers will confirm what has been advanced:—
1. Clement of Rome, A.D. 96, writes thus —“S. Paul preached
in the East and West, having taught the whole world righteousness,
and having travelled even to the utmost hounds of the West."* This
expression includes Gaul, Spain and Britain.
2. Irenaeus, A.D. 178, a disciple of Polycarp, mentions the
Churches of “ Germany, Iberia (Spain), and the Celts," by which
term is included Gaul and Britain.
3. Tertullian, A.D. 193, speaks of “the various nations of
Gaul, and the parts inaccessible to the Romans hut now subject to
Christ." f
4. Eusebius, A.D. 325, in his account of the origin and spread-
ing of the gospel truth says—“ Some passed over the ocean to
those which are called the British Isles.” X
*Epist. ad. Corinth, § 5. fContr. Judoeos, c. 7.
JEccles. Hist, liber. 111. c. 4.


5. S. Jerome, A.D. 390, tells us that “ S. Paul, having been in
Spain, went from one ocean to another. He preached the gospel
in the western parts."
6. Theodoret, A.D. 493, says—The blessed Apostle S, Paul
carried salvation to the islands which lie in the ocean ’ ’
7. Yenantius Fortunatus, A.D. 560, writes—“ S. Paul passed
over the ocean to the island of Britain, and to Thule, the extremity
of the earth. ”§
8. Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, A.D. 560, expressly
declares —“ S. Paul visited our island of Britain.”
We conclude, then, from this testimony, that Christianity was
introduced into Britain at any rate during the life time of S. Paul.
A great deal of controversy took place with respect to a petty
prince of Britain called Lucius, in the latter part of the Second
Century, who is said to have sent an embassy to Eleutherius,
Bishop of Eome, asking to have the gospel sent to him and his
people; and that his ambassadors, having been instructed and
ordained, returned to Britain and established a church there.
Now, Gildas, the great authority for the history of the British
Church, makes no mention of Lucius or Eleutherius. Bede, in
the Eighth Century, introduces the storyinto England. Nennius, in
the 9th, expands the story into the conversion of Britain. But
from the testimony adduced, it is beyond all question that
Christianity had been introduced into Britain at a far earlier
period. Indeed the whole story rests on an interpolated note in
the Catalogus Pontijicum Romanorum, originally written A.D. 353.
It received several additions in 530, among others a note under
the entry of the name of Eleutherius, —that in his time, Lucius,
King of Britain, was converted. It may be classed among the
myths of early history.
With the exception of passing notices in Ecclesiastical writers
of the 3rd Century, (some of which I have quoted) we meet with
little relating to the British Church until the time of Diocletian.
In the early part of his reign the state of things is thus described
—“The gospel was not only making rapid progress, but the
professors of it enjoyed ample toleration. Places about the
court, and even in the imperial household, were filled by
Christians. Christians were appointed to the government of
provinces ; objections were no longer made to their meeting in
their own churches; and these buildings began (to assume an
appearance of architectural splendour.”—(. Burton's Ecclesiastical
History, p. 597 ) The Edicts against the Christians which made
the latter part of Diocletian’s reign notorious were not published
till A.D. 303. History has recorded the names of the first
British martyrs, —Aaron, Julius, and S. Alban.
In A.D. 311, the persecution ceased. An Edict of general
toleration was published throughout the empire. The churches
that had been destroyed were re-built, and the knowledge of the
§Vita S. Martini, lib. 111.


gospel began to spread and prevail without any material
hindrance. The Church came forth victorious from her trial in
the reign of Constantius Chlorus. His son Constantine, then
ruling in Britain, succeeded his father, A.D. 313, and, he becoming
a Christian, the age of heathen persecution ceased.
Diocletian had caused a monument to be erected as a memorial
of the destruction of Christianity. Within ten years of that
impious act, He who had declared that the “ gates of hell should
not prevail against it,” caused Christianity to become, under the
protection of Constantine, the acknowledged religion of the Roman
Empire. Erom this period we may date the flourishing state
of the British Church. Here, for the first time, we meet with
instances of its taking part in councils held for the purpose of
regulating the faith and discipline of the universal Church ; and
here also we have plain proof of its apostolic constitution of
diocesan bishops, priests, and deacons, in full communion with
the rest of the Church of Christ. At the Council of Arles, AD.
314, summoned to consider the question of the Donatist Schism
in Africa, three British prelates, a priest, and a deacon, were
present —Eborius, Bishop of York ; Restitutes, Bishop of London ;
Adelfius, Bishop of Lincoln ; Sacerdos, a priest; and Arminius,
a deacon. A striking proof of the independence of the British
Church at this period may be gathered from the following fact: —
The prelates assembled at this Council sent their decrees to the
Bishop of Rome, not to be confirmed by him, but that he might
publish them throughout all his diocese [i.e. province]
In their letter they simply call him “ dear brother,”
and address him by no other title than Bishop of
Romo. They inform him that the sentence they had pro-
nounced was warranted by divine commission and the authority
of the Church, and they close by expressing a wish that he had
been present, as they would have been glad of his company.
The Councils of Sardica, in A D. 347, and # Ariminum, in A.D.
359, were also attended by British prelates. About this date the
British bishops signified by a letter to Athanasius their adhesion
to the Nicene faith. In the latter part of the 4th Century extracts
from the writings of Chrysostom, Jerome, and others, show con-
clusively that there was a settled church in Britain with noble
edifices, altars, scriptures, and discipline, holding intercourse
with Rome and Palestine.f
The foregoing facts are sufficient to prove that the British
Church was founded, if not by an apostle, yet, within a very
short period of apostolic times; that it was flourishing in the
2nd, 3rd, and 4th Centuries ; that in the latter her bishops were
called upon to assist in certain councils, and were wholly inde-
pendent of the Bishop of Rome All the Churches then possessed
during those first four centuries an equal share of authority.
There was no attempt on the part of the Roman bishops to lord
* Or Rimini.
IMartiiaeau, p. 14,


it over God’s heritage. For, saith Cyprian, in 3rd Century—
“ Neither hath any of our bishops constituted himself a bishop of
bishops.”
In 4th Century S. Jerome declares the Churches of Rome and
Britain to be of “ the same condition, merit, and pastoral
authority.” Besides these, several rights and privileges were for
ever confirmed to ea ch respective diocese [ i.e . province] at the great
Council of Ephesus A.D. 431. It is true that Rome being the seat
of Civil Government, the bishops of that See had always a certain
deference paid to them, but they had no sort of authority or
supremacy over the other bishops, nor the least right to enact
laws for them.
And now, in the middle of the sth Century, we come to a very
dark period in the annals of the fatherland—the civil and eccle-
siastical history of which are for nearly a century and a-half
involved in the greatest obscurity. We reach next the invasion
of the Saxons. Misery and desolation were spread on every side.
Numbers of the Christian Churches were destroyed and the wor-
shippers driven away to the lonely mountains of Wales or the
distant parts of Cornwall. These remote portions of the Island
became the chief asylum of the British Church. Our chief
authority as to the religious belief and practice of the British
Church, at this period, is the British Historian, Gildas, who
wrote, A.D. 550 :
1. From him we learn the orthodoxy of the Church as to the
doctrine of the Trinity, and the Divine and human nature of our
Blessed Lord.
2. He testifies to the existence of British Bishops. He speaks
of bishops, presbyters, and deacons; refers to the service
appointed for their ordination and the lessons of scripture read
therein.
In the letter, which contains the notice of these and many
other points, not less than 300 passages are quoted from Holy
Scripture and from the Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiastic us. Of
the number of bishops in Wales we have no certain information.
We find at this date a record of several provincial synods; —of
the death of Daniel, Bishop of Bangor, A.D. 584; David, A.D. 601,
(Caerleon-upon-Usk). Speaking of the state of things in A.D. 587,
Usher writes, —“ Theonas, Bishop of London, and Thadiocus,
Archbishop of York, with other bishops, retired to Wales, where,
by their labours, they so plentifully propagated the gospel that
they made those parts glorious above all others by the multitude
of their holy saints and learned teachers.” This was within ten
years of the arrival of S. Augustine.
But before we enter upon the history of the mission which
Pope Gregory the Great sent for the conversion of the Saxons,
it will be well to put ourselves on our guard against ante-dating
the rise of the Papal system, and the introduction of corruptions


of doctrine into the mediaeval Church.* We must not be misled by
the early existence of names and phrases which subsequently
acquired a different significence, otherwise, we shall greviously
misunderstand Church history—do injustice to the ages which
preserved for a 1000 years the faith and discipline of the early
Church, not without some incrustation of superstition and
error, but without any authoritative inculcation of false
doctrine, and without any constitutional usurpations. And we
shall fail also to understand the modern date of that
system of Church constitution and false doctrine which we call
Popery. The title “ Pope ” means nothing but Father, and at
first was commonly given to all ecclesiastics, as it is to this day
in the Eastern Church, where the clergy generally are called
Popes. The title was gradually in the Western Church, translated
into the language of the different countries, —having exactly the
same venerable and unobjectionable meaning as the untranslated
word Pope, accidentally retained by the Bishops of Rome. What
we call “ Popery ” did not exist for at least 1000 years after
Christ. So again, a spiritual presence of our Lord in the Holy
Eucharist had been maintained in the Church from the very
beginning ; as apostolic liturgies amply testify. But that abuse
of the doctrine called “ transubstantiation ” and the practical
deductions from it were first heard of in the 11th Century !!
Phrases implying great veneration for the Blessed Virgin Mary,
may be found in Church writers from sth Century downwards;
but the unscriptural system of Mariolatry, which the modern
Church of Pome has made her centre, did not become part of
the religion till the 13th Century. It reached its awful climax
in the acceptance of the Immaculate Conception, A.D. 1854.
Again, it will be useful in order to see the true relation of the
Church of England to other branches of the Church of Christ.
(1) To sketch the early constitution of the Church, (2) and then
to mark the gradual rise of the Papal pretensions.
Wherever the Apostles by their preaching gathered a number
of converts, there they ordained presbyters to carry on the work.
Thus, Paul and Barnabas, on their mission in Asia Minor,
“ ordained them elders in every city.” At first the Apostles
retained in their own hands the government of the Churches thus
established. But after a while they consecrated Bishops to take
the oversight of the congregations in a city or some specified
district. So S. James was appointed at Jerusalem, Timothy at
Ephesus, Titus at Crete. This constitution of the Church obtained
universally in the first ages. I will only quote in support of this
assertion the words of Tertullian He utters this challenge
to some heretical congregations of his time. And as a member
and priest of that Church which claims unhesitatingly and can
prove that claim, —direct ministerial succession from Christ and
His Apostles, —I say to those who deny to us that succession,
# See Turning Points of Church History, p. 27, 31,


and who in a late period of the world’s history set up Christian
communities, and separate from the Church, —“ Let them show
us the original of their Churches, and give a catalogue of their
Bishops in exact succession from first to last; by which it shall
appear that their first Bishop had some Apostle or some apostolic
man for his author or immediate predecessor. For thus it is the
apostolic Churches make their reckoning. The Church of
Smyrna counts up to Polycarp, ordained by S. John, —the Church
of Eome to Clemens, ordained by S. Peter; and so all other
Churches in like manner exhibit their first Bishops ordained by
the Apostles, by whom the apostolic seed was propagated and
conveyed to others.” lam quite aware that there are those who
would underrate, or entirely deny, the peculiar character of the
Christian ministry : who reprobate as mischievous, and uuscrip-
tural, and idolatrous, the idea of a priestly office in the person
of a minister of the Church. It would have been very easy for
me to have avoided this question because of its unpopularity.
But this would neither have been clear in theory, nor brave in
practice. I entertain deeply, and now, not for the first time
thank God, announce fearlessly the conviction that the minis-
terial succession cannot be otherwise than essential to a rightly
constituted Church. Yet the strictest maintenance of these
principles, necessarily involved in the very essence and constitu-
tion of a Church, is not inconsistent with universal Christian
sympathy. For I believe that those Christian Societies, which
in these later ages have moved in the wake of the Apostolic
Church, “ are not without participating in the blessings of the
Holy Presence abiding in that Church, so long as in sincerity
of heart they endeavour to keep up with the Master in His
course.”
To resume: As all the Apostles were equal, so in primitive
times all Bishops were equal in spiritual power and authority.
Yet, notwithstanding this equality, a certain subordination of
Bishops naturally arose. S. John in the latter pare of his life
presided over the Church at Ephesus, and consecrated Bishops in
the country adjoining. The ecclesiastical divisions usually fol-
lowed the civil divisions of the empire, and the national divisions
of the countries which lay outside. The Bishops of a particular
Province formed a group, —usually the Bishop of the first
metropolitan city was the Primate or Metropolitan, and the others
were called his Suffragans. Gradually, for the sake of order,
certain powers were exercised by these Metropolitans. Still,
as to spiritual authority, Bishops were equal. Each was
independent in his own See, and the Metropolitan was only
Frimus inter pares , Sfc. Following the same law, or organisation
in groups, we find these Metropolitan provinces were again
grouped into patriarchates. (1) Eome, in the west; (2) Antioch,
in the east; (3) Alexandria, in the south of Christendom.
But these patriarchates have to this day remained independent of


one another. Here is one of the strongholds of our arguments
against the Papal pretensions. Antioch and Alexandria have
faded into insignificance, but Constantinople remains recognised
by the Christian East, as the centre of its unity, and the incon-
trovertible witness that Pome is not, and never has been, the
Head of the whole Christian Church. It is interesting to find
the Bishop of Borne himself, at the close of 6th Century, pro-
testing against the assumption of supremacy over the other
patriarchs. John, Bishop of Constantinople had, A.D. 589,
assumed in a public document, title of “Universal Bishop.” Gregory
vehemently protested against the title, saying,—“ I confidently
affirm that whoever calls himself or desires to be
called Universal Priest, [sacerdos i. e. bishop] is, in his
pride, going before Anti-Christ.” To his brother Patriarchs
he writes, “ The name universal was offered during
Holy Synod of Chalcedon to the Pontiff of the Apostolic
See, but no one of my predecessors consented to use so
profane a term, because plainly, if a single Patriarch is
called universal, the name of Patriarch is taken from
all the rest.” To John himself he writes, —“ The sole Head of
the universal Church is Christ.” This w’as the Gregory who sent
Augustine and his companions on a mission to Britain. Let it be
remembered that it was the publication at the close of the 9th
Century, of the false Decretals, forged in the name of Isidore,*
now, and long since, admitted to be spurious, which laid the foun-
dation for the usurpation by the Bishops of Home of this very
authority against which Gregory argues so forcibly. These
decretals purported to be a collection of decrees of the early
Bishops of Eome, in order to establish the position that the
Popes of those early times did exercise an appellate jurisdiction
over the whole Church.
The sum, then, of what I have stated on this head, is as
follows : We have no historical evidence in 2nd and 3rd Cen-
turies of any supremacy of authority in Bishops of Rome over
other Churches. Whenever such attempts were made, they
were successfully resisted. The Canons of Council of Nice,
AD. 325 ; Sardica, A.D. 347 ; Constantinople, A.D. 381; all
contain strong testimonies against the Papal supremacy. In
A.D. 422, we have the protest of the African Church; A.D.
451, that of Chalcedon. Prom the middle of 6th Century to
A.D. 590, the power of the See of Eome does not seem
to have made any great advances. Nor was the English
Church down to the Norman Conquest, troubled with
any serious pretensions. The change of the seat of empire from
Eome to Eavenna, had enabled the Popes to act with greater
boldness. The ignorance and barbarism of Gothic conquerors
tended to the same point, —the. exaltation of spiritual power in
the person of the Roman Bishop. Nor can we wonder that in an
*See Lecture 11, in loco.


age of much cruelty, ignorance, and superstition, Rome—the
centre of learning and civilisation —should be regarded as the
centre of religious unity, and source of spiritual power. Can we
wonder that the name of the reputed successor of S, Peter,
dignified as it was in some cases by the possession of great personal
merits and virtues, by degrees acquired a marvellous influence,
till it rose to its height in the llth Century, to be a spiritual
monarchy wielded by Gregory YII.*
But here for the present, in our walk about Zion, in which
according to the Psalmist’s exhortation, we have been setting our-
selves “to mark well her bulwarks,” —we must pause. One word
of reference to our own circumstances A reformed Church,f
which yet is a Church by something more than that courtesy
which concedes the name to all professedly Christian
communities, —a Church which stands resolutely upon the
old foundations of the Apostles, and which with unswerving
fidelity points to Jesus Christ as the Author and Finisher
of the faith, and which with equal tenacity clings to
apostolic fellowship, while clearing her system of all that is
opposed to apostolic doctrine, —a Church of this note is peculiarly
exposed to assaults from two classes of foes. She is disliked
by those who cannot show the same title deeds, or pretend
to the same spiritual ancestry. She is equally disliked by those
who have no sympathy with the action which she took at the
Reformation, who misrepresent her character, and deny her
claims. Surely, under such circumstances, we should endeavour
to give our people an insight into the true preciousness of the
spiritual inheritance, which, in the English Church has become
theirs : —to lead them to appreciate the advantages of our position
as at once Scriptural and Catholic. But this is only a small part
of what has to be done. The Church must be strengthened and
supported by the faithfulness, love, loyalty, and devotion of her
laitT, as much' as by the clear, uncompromising, distinctive, teach-
ing of her Clergy. If the Bible be the text of the Church of
England, then the Prayer Book is her commentary,—giving
faithfully the sense of the primitive Church on the interpretation
of Holy Writ. And let us not cease to pray, that He Who
walketh in the midst of the golden candlesticks, would
preserve our Church from false Apostles, who while
eating the bread of the Church, are selling her into
the hands of those who hate her, and would trample
on her had they the power,—albeit such approaches are
disguised under the high sounding titles of “ religious liberty ”
and “ brotherly union.” Let us pray, then, that she-may be guided
by faithful and true pastors,—ever proclaiming the truth as it
is in Jesus, and ready to banish and drive away all erroneous and
false doctrine. Then the Church need not fear the treachery of
pretended friends, or the wildest assaults of her enemies ; for the
*Martineau, p. 88, 9. fGroulburn’s Holy Catholic Church.


battle will not be ours but God’s. And mindful of our privileges
who will not say, “ Lord, I have loved the habitation of Thy
house, the place where Thine honour dwelleth.” O Holy Church
of England! 0 mother of Saints ! School of the wise ! Nurse
of the heroic ! Of whom went forth ! in whom have dwelt memor-
able names of old, to spread the truth abroad, or illustrate it
at home ! O thou, from whom surrounding nations lit their lamps,
what rivers of grace flow through thy ancient mighty channels!
0 Church of the many wise and good ! —of patient martyrs and
godly confessors ! To God be glory in thee, O Church of our
fathers, throughout all ages, world without end ! — Amen.


LECTURE 11.
THE ANTIQUITY AND INDEPENDENCE OF THE
BRITISH CHURCH.
'• Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark
ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces ; that ye may tell it to the
generation following.”—Psalms xlviii, 12, 13.
»0 MEA.N accomplishment is that which in the Inspired
Record, is attributed to the children of Issachar. They
were “ men that had understanding of the times, to
know what Israel ought to do.” A right estimate of the state
of the public mind, —of those mental and moral influences,
indications and tendencies which together make up what we call
the spirit of the age, —has ever been accounted a mark of true
wisdom in those who occupy any place of public trust. With
many of these tendencies themselves, we may have little
sympathy, nay, be at variance. But if we would influence the
age, we must understand it. In the investigation of the facts
and phenomena of social, moral, and political life around us,
which cast their lights and shadows over the Christianity of the
age, there are certain phases of the subject suggested, and
certain great issues found to be at stake, which no public teacher
is at liberty to overlook or ignore. It is not enough for a man
put in trust with the Gospel that he should have a thorough
conviction of its necessity —of its unspeakable value as a Divine
Revelation—of its perfect adaptation to the wants and endowments
of humanity. He must lay himself out to bring all his teaching
face to face with the mental and moral characteristics of the age.
(1) Now, looked at practically, the distinguishing feature of the
period in which we live, is doubtless, —activity, energy, progress.
Social action, material enterprise, aggressive discovery, these are
the grand characteristics of modern society. If asked by what
mark the present age will be known in future records, I answer,
by the wonders which have been wrought in the subjugation of
the powers of nature to the uses and needs of humanity. Now
as the dangers of an age always run parallel- with its chief
merits, so these bring with them the hazard of irreligious
self-reliance, and a feverish propensity to judge everything
by outward show and results. (2) Looked at intellectually,
the age is marked by increased facilities for education and
a more general spread of knowledge and intelligence in


all classes. (3) Morally,—amid much earnest thought—great
zeal for religion—keen controversy,—the age is conspicuous
for the adverse attitude taken against the claims of
revealed truth. It is shown principally in a dislike to, and
rejection of, definite dogmatic Christianity, There are those who
tell us religious truth is better left in the vague hazy region of
popular thought. They forget that a real answer to our spiritual
need, and a safe guide for daily life is, and must be, a positive
creed. And such an attitude of moral temper, leads not only to
serious errors of faith and practice, but to a general indifference
on the subject of religion, and especially to the claims of the
particular communion to which the person is supposed to belong.
Now for the practical application of all this, in relation to our
great subject,—which is certainly one of the questions of the
day. If the gigantic claims of the Roman Church be true, it
follows that every Church throughout the world refusing to
recognise those claims, is out of the pale cf salvation. This,
the Council of Trent does not scruple to declare. If the See of
S. Peter contain by Divine right, a supremacy over all things in
the Church Catholic, and in the person of the Pope be the sole
fountain of ecclesiastical authority and infallibility, then it
follows, that the whole fabric of the Church of our forefathers
totters and falls, and the whole Anglican Communion throughout
the world can possess no priesthood, —claim no power to preach
the Word or administer Sacraments, and all her children are
incapable of receiving any spiritual act or blessing at the hands
of her Clergy. “We have not so learned Christ.” To show
the utter baselessness of these claims, and the actual teaching of
Scripture and primitive Fathers in opposition thereto, is the
object of these special sermons. We have seen that, spiritually
understood, these triumphant words of the Psalmist fitly celebrate
the glory, beauty, and stability of the Church of the living God.
They invite us to survey the bulwarks, towers, and palaces ; to con-
sider the idea, essence, and constitution of the Church ; to examine
her title deeds, her claims and authority; to mark well the
manifold safeguards and defences which she provides for the
comfort and edification of her children.
Responding then to tins invitation, we are endeavouring, by an
appeal to Scripture and historic fact, to prove the high antiquity
and independence of that pure branch of the Church of Christ,
planted originally by the hand of God in the British Isles, —to
show that with that Church, we, in faith, doctrine, and discipline,
are still one ; legally inheriting all the institutions and privileges
of, and dating up historically to, the company assembled in
Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost.
I have entered upon this great question—whose importance
cannot be over estimated —in reply to a recent boastful challenge
emanating from the high quarters of Papacy in this country, and
couched in this question, “ Where was the Church cf England for


fifteen hundred years before Luther ?” That you may see the
need of not permitting such a challenge to pass uncontradicted,
just consider for a moment all that it implies ; —that Rome itself
alone holds (1) the keys of Divine truth, (2) the apostolic
descent, (3) the bond of unity. Those keys, it asserts, can be
given alone by the occupant of the See of S. Peter. That
apostolic descent, it maintains, can only come to the Church
through the Bishop of Rome. That bond of unity, it disclaims
as by any possibility existing save in communion with that See,
And what is the sequitur of these tremendous assumptions made
in violation of Church order—in spite of the facts of history ?
Of course if their premises be true, then we are simply,—as our
enemies on both sides would fain have us believe, —a mere
political organisation and secular institution, a mere department
of the civil service, a separated and schismatic communion
having an origin at the Reformation. But though such is just
the position which our enemies would assign to us, we have,
thank G-od, a more sure testimony, and a safer resting place,
who evermore profess our belief in one Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church. With the New Testament in our hands, and
the plain undeniable facts of history before us, we rejoice in
the knowdedge that the Church of England traces its origin from
a far higher source than the will of earthly sovereigns, or the
action of Parliament, —that as a real living portion of that
kingdom of the Spirit founded at Pentecost, she is connected by
firm unbroken links with the Apostles themselves —holding their
“doctrine,” united with their “ fellowship.”
Conscious, then, of our high position,—our great ad-vantage in
belonging to a Church at once Catholic in doctrine and Apostolic
in fellowship, we determined to leave intolerance, uncharity,
and vulgar abuse, to less privileged men. I have already told
you how small is my sympathy with those bigoted controver-
sialists, w r ho are continually anathematising their brethren ;
who endeavour to arouse popular indignation against Romanism
by calling the Pope the man of sin, and the Church of Rome
“the synagogue of Satan;” or with those who, on the other
hand misrepresent, traduce, and vilify the Church of England.
Angry recrimination and coarse invective never proved anything
save the folly of those who use such weapons, and the weaknsss
of the cause which needed such defence. All I ask is sober
argument, and a patient hearing. Let there be a fair field and
no favour. We do not for one moment fear Rome, or any other
communion. Whatever is true in them will live —that which
is false will perish. “ Every plant which my Heavenly
Father hath not planted shall be rooted up.” If any
Romanists be present, I beseech them, as a man, to listen
calmly and carefully to what I advance, and to judge for
themselves. “ Search the Scriptures.” Be slaves to no merely
human maxims. Seek for the truth, and “ the truth shall


make you free.” I have no wish for controversy. Gladly
would I, for one, pass by these false charges, as persistently
maintained as they have been unscrupulously made. But there
are times when those in positions of public trust, must speak
in defence of the faith once delivered to the saints, and when
silence would be as cowardly as it would be criminal.
In continuing our walk around the battlements of our
spiritual Zion, let me briefly recapitulate what I have already
advanced.
1. We have considered the idea and constitution of the Church
as a great spiritual society, founded on the Day of Pentecost;
and the real meaning of that memorable charge to S. Peter. We
have seen that the Homan hypothesis as to S. Peter’s supremacy,
when viewed in the light of Scripture, is utterly untenable. It is
only fair, however, tu say that there is on this subject a great
division of opinion in the Komish Church —(despite the boasted
unity of their system) —between the Gallicans and the Ultra-
montanes, as to the extent of the personal infallibility of the
Pope, as to the precise limits of his jurisdiction, and as to the
temporal power invested in him. But in view of the great
importance of these claims, let us examine them more fully in
the light of Scripture. We shall take in order the principal
places wherein mention is made of any commission given to S.
Peter. 1. Matt. xvi. 13, —“ When Jesus came into the coasts of
Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men
say that I, the Son of man, am ? And they said, some say that
thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias,
or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, but whom say ye
that lam ? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living Ged. And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and
blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father, which is in
heaven. And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon
this rock I will build my Church ; and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven. Then charged he his disciples
that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ.”
2. John xxi, 15, —“ So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon
Pete**, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these ?
lie saith unto him, Yea, Lord ; thou knowest that I love thee,
lie saith unto him, Peed my lambs. lie saith to him again the
second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith
unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith
unto him, Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me ? Peter was greved because
he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me P And he said
unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things ; thou knowest that I


love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep.” 3. The fact
that S. Peter’s name stands first in all the catalogues of the
Apostles, and that he is always first in the great transactions of
the Gospel dispensation. (1) He first walks on the sea to
embrace Christ. (2) He first defends our Lord with the sword.
(3) He is first in consultation as to supplying the place of Judas.
(4) He first of all the apostles, saw Christ after the Resurrection.
(5) He first received converted Jews at Pentecost. And (6) He
first received Gentiles in the person of Cornelius. Doubtless,
here he evinced a forwardness at all times to do his Lord’s work,
—a primacy, if you like, of worth, and reputation.
And now a word as to the interpretation of the passage
itself. From a candid perusal of the Fathers (of which most
laymen in Roman Communions are ignorant), it is clear no one
certain opinion is to be found on the subject. It is left an open
question, whether it refers to our Lord Himself, to Apostles
generally, to the faith expressed by S. Peter, or S. Peter
himself, S. Augustine* says, —“ What was said by our Lord, is
to be understood of Him whom Peter confessed, when He said
“ Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.” fS. Chrysostom says,
• —“ Upon this rock—the faith of his profession.” S. Cyril, of
Alexandria, says,J —“ The invincible and most firm faith of His
Disciple, on which the Church of Christ is fixed.” Rut again, tq
speak generally, we do not find that S. Peter is called by any
other name, or distinguished by any other title, than the rest of
the apostles. He no where either claims or exercises this
authority. In the first Council at Jerusalem, it is James, not
Peter, who presides and gives the judgment. If there be any
supremacy, it is exercised by S. Caul, who withstands Peter to
the face for his dissimulation, because he walked not uprightly,
according to the truth of the Gospel. And if the divine right
of the supremacy be not found in Scripture, where is the
evidence ? Not in the Fathers, for they with one voice testify
that, whatever powers were committed by our Blessed Lord to
S. Peter were also given to all the other apostles. —In express
words, several declare, that “ All the Apostles did receive the
keys.”
Then look at the second passage of Scripture, on which the
Church of Rome lays great stress, namely, “ Feed my sheep.”
Undoubtedly this is a commission of pastoral guardianship
over the Church. But was it given to S. Peter alone ? When
S. Paul said to the Bishop of Ephesus, “ Feed the Church of
God,” does it follow that the Bishops of Ephesus were the only
Bishops to obey this command? §S, Augustine and S. Ambrose^
# S. Aug. Retractat, 1. c. 21. fin Matt, xvi., 18. In Joan, 1.50.
£B. Cjril de Triuitate, 4 tom. v. p. 507.
§B. Aug. Tom. y. 196, E.—S. Amb. De Saeerd, ii.—Clirysost. De Saeerd. i.—
S._Rasil, Oont. Mont. c. 22.


S, Chrysostom and S. Basil, all unite in saying, “ Our Lord did
commit his sheep to Peter and the other Apostles, —conferring
continually on all pastors and teachers afterwards an equal
power.” fS, Cyril of Alexandria regards the expression, “ Feed
my sheep,” not in any sense as conferring a power on S. Peter,
hut as a threefold admonition because of his previous fall, and the
threefold denial, by which his apostolate had been so grievously
impaired. Shall we take the voice of the Church speaking in
tradition, or in the Councils of later times ? Then 1. No primacy
at all —save of worth and order —is proved to have existed
in S. Peter. 2. This primacy, such as it was, is never
mentioned as successive or inheritable, but as personal.
3. It is not certain that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome at all;
but it is certain that S. Peter appointed first Linus, and after-
wards Clement, to be Bishops of Rome during his own life time.
4. If all the preceding points were clearly proved, as Romanists
assume, no proof whatever exists of the inheritance and
continuance by succession of the powers of Peter to the See of
Rome. And if we take the testimony of history—
there is the clearest evidence, that for nearly six centuries,
the Bishops deemed themselves as constituting one equal
brotherhood, together forming one body in Christ their
Lord. But, assume for a moment all is true, what then ?
Would not the fact be so legibly written on the page of
history, that none could mistake it P Surely we should see plain
and unmistakeable signs in the immediate history of the Church.
We should see, on all occasions, bishops in every other See,
submitting to this great divine manifest authority,—all questious
of doctrine and discipline decided summarily by this one divinely
guarded voice. But what if the pages of history do not verify
this conclusion ? What if the whole Church, for centuries
after the time of the Apostles, knows nothing of it? Yea,
verifies the reverse of this conclusion ? Why, then, the whole
conclusion, and the arguments on which it rests, fall to the
ground, and the reverse of the conclusion, as we have already
seen, stands forth as truth. For the simple facts of history
testify that, for centuries, the Bishop of Rome is no more
recognised as the supreme authority, than any other of the
bishops around him.
In tracing the establishment of Christianity in Britain, we saw
upon the testimony of Clement of Rome, A.D. 96 ; Irenseus,
A.D. 178; Tertullian, A.D. 193 ; Eusebius, A.D. 325 ; S. Jerome,
A.D. 390; Theodoret, A.D. 493; Sophronius, A.D. 560; that
the Gospel was preached in Britain most probably by S. Paul
himself, about the middle, or before the end of the First Century,
Then, we saw (I think conclusively) the existence, from century
to century, at least down to A.D. 586, of an independent
Catholic (not Roman) Church, and an apostolic heirarchy,
fS. Cyril, tom. iv., 1120.


(the lately published dicta of modern Scotch divines notwith-
standing,) existing in the British Isles from the very beginning.
We have no account, up to that date, of any direct claim on the
part of Eome to interfere with her discipline, or direct her
doctrine. On the contrary, we found that the Church of Britain,
just as the other Churches of the different provinces of the Eoman
Empire, is persecuted by Pagan emperors: suffers with those
Churches, and bears testimony to the common faith. And when
the persecutions are over, she takes her part in the deliberations
of the Catholic Councils, against the heresies of the age; just as
the other Churches in Spain, Gfaul, Italy, and Eome itself.
Her bishops sit in Council with, write to, and hold intercourse
with, those bishops on terms of perfect equality. Her soundness
in the orthodox creed is universally acknowledged, while she
takes her part (albeit as a nation hardly emerging from barbarism)
in all that is said and done by the Church throughout the world.
And all this, when as yet, claims of Eome to any jurisdiction, as
distinctly and separately above the other Churches, had not been
heard of. The introduction of the Gallican Liturgy* by S.
Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre (who was the chief means of
preserving the Church from the Pelagian heresy), affords a
remarkable testimony to the integrity of the British Church; of
this Use, we find distinct traces in our Prayer Book to this day.
And the point to be borne in mind is this, —whatever were the
deficiencies and neglect of the Church in Britain, that all through
severe temporal trials, and under spiritual heresy, she never, in
any one case, appealed, either for guidance or protection, to
Eome. It was to the Synods and Church of Gaul she sent for
the advice and assistance needed. So that, clearly and con-
clusively, up to A.D. 596, the voice of the Church of Eome had
never been heard, or recognised as of authority in Britain.
Now, rightly to estimate the actual effect of the mission of S.
Augustine, and to answer the commonly received, but most
erroneous statement, that “ England owes its conversion to S.
Augustine,” and that the Church of England is therefore bound
to the authority and jurisdiction of the Pope,—let us see what
the facts of history testify, as to the way in which the Christian
faith was propagated in the three great divisions of Britain.
When the Saxons had succeeded in establishing their dominion
over the south and midland divisions of Britain, the ancient Church
of the Country became confined to the remaining portions, viz. :
Wales, or the western part, Ireland, and Caledonia. Eirst then
as to Ireland.—lt appears that before A.D, 400, several Churches
had been founded in the south of Ireland, but the whole North
and North-West remained in paganism. In the year A.D. 481,
Palladius was consecrated by Pope Celestine, and sent to the
converted Scots in Ireland. But it was reserved for S. Patricias
or S. Patrick, to become, as he has ever been called, the apostle
# Circiter, A.D. 160.


of Ireland. He was born A.D. 387, near Glasgow. When he
was sixteen years of age, he was carried off by some Irish
pirates. Escaping after a captivity of seven years into Gaul, he
was ordained deacon by S. Martin, and priest by S. Germanus.
So that he came to Ireland, not from Italy, but Gaul. Reaching
Ireland in A.D. 432, he entered upon his greet work most
successfully, planting monasteries under Abbot-bishops, as
centres of education, civilisation, and Christianity. It is related
by Nennius, that he founded 365 Churches, consecrated 364
Bishops, and ordained 3000 Presbyters. The Bishopric of the
Isle of Man owes its origin to the labours of this great prelate,
and boasts of an uninterrupted succession as a separate See for
more than 1400 years. 2. As S. Patrick was the apostle of the
Irish, so S. ISinian was of the Scotch,' —a bishop of North
Wales, who taught among the Piets from AD. 412 to A.D. 432.
Eifty-six years after the death of S. Patrick, Columba was born.
Preferring the cowl to the diadem, he left Ireland, and took
possession of lona, or Hy, a small island on the west
of Scotland, A.D. 565. He soon converted the savage inhabitants
of the island, and founded a monastery. Thence, he and his
monks issuing forth to the mainland, he spread through all the
north of Scotland the doctrines of the Gospel. 3. Next we come
to Wales and Cornwall. At the time of the Saxon invasion,
A.D, 450, Theonus, Bishop of London ; Thadiocus, Archbishop
of York ; and others, fled to the fastnesses of Wales, where, as
we have seen, they maintained the doctrines and worship of the
Church. Of S. David, S. Padern, S. Teilo, S. Asaf, and other
illustrious Welsh prelates, we have no time to speak. We only
know there were many more who, all along the troublous Saxon
times, earnestly contended for the faith of Christ, —while as yet,
no authority was advanced, or recognised, for guidance or help
from the See of Rome.
And now, at length, we fairly reach the Italian mission, or
mission of S. Augustine, A.D. 596. Many of you know the
story, as related by Bede.—One morning as Gregory, the Arch-
deacon of the Church of Rome, was crossing the forum of the
Eternal City, his attention was directed to a group of slave
children, exposed for sale. Struck by the fair complexion, blue
eyes, and flaxen hair, he stops to ask whence they come. He was
told they were “ Angles.” “ They would be angels ,” he replied,
“if Christians. And from which province do they come p”
“ Deiri,” was the reply. “ Truly,” he answered, “ they should
be called de ird (from the wrath of God), and brought to the
mercy of Christ. And how is their king named?” “Ella.”
“Yea,” said he, “may many alleluias be sung there!”
Pope Benedict dies, and Gregory is chosen in his stead.
He had never forgotten that group of fair children, and now
determined to befriend them. He selects Augustine, the prior,
who with forty monks, lands in the Isle of Thanet, on the


Kentish coast, August, A.D. 596. # Some days after their arrival,
the king gave them audience, under an ancient oak. They
approached in orderly procession, bearing a silver cross, and for
their banner a picture —not ot our Lady —but of our Lord,
painted on a panel, and singing the Litany. The king gave them
leave to remain, —to preach and make converts. We picture the
procession on its way to Canterbury,—the crowds of fair haired,
and blue eyed Saxon men women and children lining the rude
streets of the royal city, to gaze upon those forty Italians, in
long black robes, with the silver cross glancing in the sunlight,—
with their painted banner of our Lord and King,—chanting the
Litany in an unknown tongue ! Here they began their mission-
ary work, which proved so successful, that Ethelbert, king of
Kent, believed and was baptised, and the converts to Christianity
became numerous. Augustine being anxious to reduce the
British clergy under subjection to his authority, convened a
council for this purpose, but which utterly failed. Lor we are
informed by the Venerable Bede, that “ the demands of S.
Augustine were at once rejected, and all foreign jurisdiction over
their Church repelled by the unanimous voice of the assembled
bishops, who declared they owed no obedience to the Church of
Rome.”
A second Synod was then convened in Worcestershire, which
was attended by seven British Bishops. In answer to the demand
of S. Augustine, that they should yield submission to certain
decisions of the Roman Church, with respect to the time of
keeping Easter, and other matters, the bishops again refused
to comply to what they considered an unwarrantable demand,
and a blow at their liberty. In the essentials of their common
faith, they seem to have been agreed; but concerning those
points which the absolute authority of Rome established, they
answered, —“ They would do none of these things, nor receive
him as their Archbishop.” Clearly, then, the Bishops of Britain
felt that such a concession would have been a denial of their own
canonical ordination, and an abandonment of their rights as a
National Church. We shall see hereafter how this worked.
Sufficient for the present, that S. Augustine, in defiance of the
canons of Nicea, Constantinople, and Antioch, did set up against
the Bishops of Britain a foreign authority. As a missionary
preaching to the heathen, he was justified in the conversion of
the Saxons; but as a bishop entering on a diocese, established
for centuries, and then demanding the submission of a Church
existing there at least 400 years, he was not justified.
A comparison between the writings of Gfregory, and the
decrees of the Council of Trent, A.D. 1545, will sufficiently show
how much errors of faith and practice in the Church of Rome
have increased since the 6th Century. But whatever may have
been the abuses introduced by S. Augustine, his preaching had
*'J'urning Points in Oh. Hist. p. 17.


the effect of lessening Saxon prejudices against Christianity, and
enabling the British to take a part (indirectly) in the conversion
of their heathen conquerors. One word here as to S.
Aidan and Lindisfarn. At this period, the monastery of
lona was the chief seminary of religion in the north part
of Britain. Thither, Oswald, king of Northumbria, sent
for missionaries to instruct his people. Aidan, a man of
singular meekness and piety, a bishop of the Irish Church, was
sent. On his arrival in Northumbria, the king assigned him for
his diocese, the island of Lindisfarn or Holy Island, off the coast.
Other Scottish missionaries followed him in great numbers to
England, and with great devotion preached the word of God. Thus
half England was evangelised by the monks of Lindisfarn, and
their influence still, after a thousand years, is to be traced in our
English Christianity. Now, mark the magnitude of the part
which the Celtic element had in the formation of the Church in
England: Lindisfarn was a colony from Iona; lona was founded
by S. Columba, who came from Ireland; Ireland was converted by
S- Patrick, and S. Patrick received his training and orders, not from
Rome, but from the Gallican Church. So then we reach this con-
clusion. —Only two counties north of the Thames, had received
Christianity through the instrumentality of Rome. All the
midland counties from Edinburgh down to London, must
attribute the blessings of Christianity to the labours of a Church
altogether repudiating Roman interference, denying Roman
jurisdiction, and upholding an Apostolic succession of bishops,
perfectly clear and distinct. To sum up : —ltalian missionaries
christianised Kent; Celtic missionaries evangelised Mercia,
Northumbria, and the kingdom of the East Saxons. If,
then, we yield to Rome the special merit of having first sent
the Gospel to the heathen Anglo-Saxons, —the evangelisation
of by far the larger portion of England (as we have seen),
was due to her own children, and the Gallican Church. These
facts, then, clearly prove, that we are not, as Rome asserts,
chiefly indebted to her for our Christianity, in the person of
Augustine and his successors. Let it be known, that beyond
the single county of Kent, for one hundred years after the
arrival of S. Augustine, not a single kingdom was in any way
under Roman rule, in its transition from paganism to the Church
of Christ. But it was not in the nature of things that a country,
such as Britain was in the 7th Century, should long
remain free from the influence of the power of Rome.
Eor a long time, the insular position of the fatherland,
kept it free from those influences, and that dominion which
was absorbing all other nations. It boasted, as we have
seen, the receipt of Christianity from sources wholly indepen-
dent of Rome. Its liturgy, its ritual, its ceremonial usages,
and its apostolic descent—(for be it remembered, we no
more owe cither the origin, or the preservation of our orders
to Rome, than we do the preservation of our Bibles) —are traced


in a clearly distinct and separate line from that of the continental
nations. Bearing in mind then, this original independence of
the British Churches, with the whole of Wales still under its
ancient Episcopate; remembering, also, that Northumbria, the
Midland Counties, East Saxons, including London, were all
under the North or Scottish line of Bishops ; how did it come
to pass, that eventually a Bishopric of Borne, with its sole
jurisdiction in Kent, became the ruling Church of the land ? It
is to this enquiry we must now set ourselves.
We have thus reached one of the chief turning points in the
history of the English Church. On the death of the sixth Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, A.D. 664, Egbert, King of Kent, and
Oswy, of Northumbria, agreed to take steps to arrive at a
uniformity of customs throughout England, The battle field of
the Churches opposed to Boman jurisdiction, had ever been the
time of keeping Easter. The fact that a different date was
recognised, resulted in a perpetual jar and discord. The Palm
Sunday of one, would be the Easter Day of the other. A
Conference between the two Churches, resulted in a decision in
favour of the Easter use of the Kentish or Boman See.
Trifling as the matter may seem to us, this determination involved
submission to the Boman party, as represented by the See of
Canterbury; who now acquired greater strength and influence
than they had hitherto possessed.
Prepared by this concession, another opening for further
progress in the policy of the Boman Church was soon found.
Oswy having so far succeeded in uniting the two Churches,
entered into a compact with Egbert, for the appointment of an
archbishop, (in the room of Deusdedit, lately deceased) of such
attainments and character, as would bring the whole of England
into a conformity of faith. Wighart, a Saxon, was chosen.
Shortly before his consecration, he fell a victim to the plague
then raging. Pope Yitalian was not slow in making use of the
opportunity thus presented. Since the time of S. Augustine, no
archbishop had been directly named from Borne. The Saxon
kings and clergy had hitherto kept the See in their own hands.
But now, in the place of the nominee of the Saxons, Theodore,
a man of great learning and ability, a Greek, was consecrated
A.D. 668. To Archbishop Theodore, we owe the existing
organisation of the Church of England. Imitating the ancient
models, he convened the bishops and clergy,—recited publicly
the decrees and canons of the first four general Councils, —
pronounced the faith of the English Church, on this foundation,
as a portion of the Universal Church. Erom this we date the
absorption of the Scottish Churches—if not the British—into
that of Borne. Erom Theodore to S. Dunstan, and from S.
Dunstan to Lanfranc, the first primate of England, in the time
of the Norman Conqueror, history has little else to do than
record the gradual subjection of the English Church to the


dominion of the Papacy. Politics were interwoven with religion.
It was a sale and bargain between the two. Contests there
were for a time, as in the case of Henry 11. and Thomas aßecket;
but these contests terminated invariably in the cords being drawn
closer and closer around the political power of the nation, and
the spiritual power of the Church. The history of the Anglo-
Saxon Church therefore, as such, ceases and determines with
Archbishop Theodore. But this absorption, remember, was no
detriment either to her vitality, to her identity with past indepen-
dence, or to her truthfulness. Because at that time, there
were no doctrines peculiar to Eome, over and above those of the
Catholic faith. The corruption grew up subsequently. There-
fore, her absorption into Eome was justified, as an act of
confidence, and a sign of her inherent Catholicity. But that
which she gave up so readily then, she had the right to recall
when unauthorised additions to the creed of Eome compromised
the great truths of Christianity, and when that Church enforced
matters of doctrine and discipline, which the primitive Church
rejected. I might show, however, that even in Theodore’s time,
any recognition of the supremacy of Eome, as afterwards claimed,
was utterly unknown.
But here I must pause, hoping to resume this most important
and practical subject next Sunday evening. Meantime, suffer
me to remind you, it is not only as enquirers, but as warriors of
the Cross, sworn to fight manfully beneath the gleaming banner
of the Crucified, that you are asked to survey the walls and
ramparts of our beloved Zion ! Members of the Church of the
living God! awake, I beseech you, to a sense of your great
privileges—your manifold responsibilities—your high calling as
members of the ancient Catholic, and now reformed Church.—
You are soldiers in the army of Christ. Young brothers and
sisters, our hope is in you! Be firm, be steadfast, be pure, be
tender, yet true. In days of olden chivalry, the young knight
spent his vigil with prayer and fasting, kneeling low at the altar,
and when morning came, he was bathed and clad in robes of
white, —the cross-hilt of his consecrated sword was presented to
him ; receiving the Holy Eucharist, and clad in armour, with high
courage in his heart, and holy vows upon his lips, he rode forth
to do and dare, or die in battle with the foe ! The age of
chivalry is past, but not the valour of Christian knighthood. The
accidents are gone, but the reality remains. The vows of God
are upon you. Purity, self-devotion, and courage, are your
duties. His armour was but a symbol of the Christian panoply ;
his foes but the embodiment of the powers which assault and
hurt the soul. You, too, are following Christ to the gathering
battle, in the hope that He will make you more than conquerors.
Ay, if only we are true to our hopes—our profession —our vows,
there is hope for the Church’s future. God has yet many faith-
ful warriors amid the Christian host! There has been a noble


upward spirit evoked, which we will not willingly let die.
Young in its love of the beautiful—in its quenchless thirst for
the true —who does not see it in that goodly company, whose
leader bears that banner marked with the blood-red Cross, which
has for its legend, Excelsior? “ The one great note of high music,
struck from the harp of the world’s heart-strings, is graven on
that banner ! The student breathes it at his midnight lamp, —
the poet utters it when he strives to fling his heart’s beauty
upon the page! Fair hands have wrought in secret at that
banner.” The tears of calm-browed sufferers have fallen upon
its folds ! Many a child of poverty and sin has felt its motto, —
comforting him in sorrow, arresting him in shame. The
believer ever claims it, when ho desires a better country.
Brethren, lot us remember, the vision is for us. The promise
is to him that overcometh. Your names are on the muster roll,
• —your path to the house of many mansions is beset by strong
men armed. “ Quit you like men, be strong.” Every conflict
brings you nearer home, and rest, and reward. Greater
are they with you, than they against you. You are com-
passed with a mighty cloud of witnesses; all good angels lean
over you with their glittering faces! The silent company of the
immortal dead—the household and city of God —are with you!
The hearts of all God’s true children beat in unison with yours.
Above all, HIS voice, whose will is duty, and smile love, beckons
you onward, —saying, Eear not, I am with thee; Eight bravely, I
will help thee ; Conquer! I will crown thee with glory, honour,
and immortality !


LECTURE 111.
THE GROWTH OE THE PAPACY.
“ Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.”
Acts xxvi. 28.
ST. PAUL was —in the very highest sense of the words—
a great man * He had a mind that grasped the sublimest
truths —a heart that truly loved his country and his God.
He lived as well as preached Christianity. By his conduct he
confirmed the doctrine that his lips declared. He was a living proof
and portraiture of the religion of Jesus. The peculiar estimate, too,
which he formed of the world was at once the result and evidence
of his singular greatness. His judgment was not carried away
by show, nor did the splendour of the world conceal from him its
true moral deformity. He estimated no man according to birth,
office, attire, or wealth ; but in proportion to the real amount of
Christian truth that dwelt in his heart and was embodied in his
life. Mark him now in the scene before us. Here the poet, the
artist, the sculptor, may find scope for the highest effort of his
genius. Paul, the prisoner, stands before royalty undaunted and
brave. True, he was in chains —yet on the face of this world
there was no man more free than he. His spirit exulted in a
liberty which no despot could injure—no time could destroy.
An outcast in the world was he, yet its haughty rulers trembled at
the majesty of his looks and the power of his words. Here, with
his great mind filled with love to God and man, his cogent,
arousing, and eloquent appeals made Felix tremble, while Agrippa
exclaims —“ Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.”
I. —I see here first the mighty force of Gospel truth ;in shaking
the religion of the monarch and in strengthening the heart of the
Apostle.
ll.—Mark next its sublime aim. What is this P Is it to elevate
men from barbarism —to stir the mind to action—to awaken it
to a sense of its own precious being, high relations, and solemn
condition ? It does all this ; but its grand aim is to make men
Christians. But what is it to be a Christian ? Is it to be
orthodox in Creed ? Alas ! many evil spirits are great theogians :
“the devils believe,” and their faith has the legitimate effect —
Vide Homil. in loco, vol. vi. p. 40.


they “ tremble.” Is it, then, to be regular in attendance upon
religious ordinances ? The Pharisees were so, yet what saith
our Lord: —“ Except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.” Is it to be attached to the
person and ministry of Christ’s servants P Herod heard John
the Baptist gladly, bnt lived on in undisguised iniquity. Is it
conviction of Sin? Judas repented; Felix trembled; Agrippa
was • “ almost persuaded ” Then let S. Paul tells us : —lt is to have
our spiritual “ eyes opened,” to be turned “ from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God ;” it is to receive “ for-
giveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified
by faith that is in Christ Jesus.” —Acts xxvi. 18. This implies
(1) That we must accept the atonement of Christ as the only
hope of salvation —“ God forbid that I should glory save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (2.) That we make the will of
Christ the rule of life —“ Lord, what wilt thou have me to do.”
(3.) That we cherish the love of Christ as the inspiration of our life
—“ The love of Christ constraineth us ” These three things made
S. Paul what he was. Do you ask the value of this name of
Christian ? I answer it is a name above every human name —a
name that suggests matter for everlasting thought—that compre-
hends within its ample range all the pure, free, generous spirits
of every clime and age. It is a name that shall live in memory
when earth’s proudest names shall be forgotten and buried in
oblivion. Observe next: —
111. The practical method of Gospel truth, viz.:—moral suasion.
This implies—(l.) the existence of evidence to convince the judg-
ment. (2.) The existence of motives to change the will. Here,
then, is the great object of all the means of grace —of
ordinances of religion —of sacraments —preaching—prayer,—
it is to make men Christians. And how can we
better accomplish this than by carrying out the definition
of our own Church as to what a Christian really is : —“ He is one
who follows Christ and is made like unto Him.” “To attain this
end,” says a living prelate of the Anglican Church, “ teach
your own people quietly and carefully the distinctive doctrines of
your Church. Aim at making them loyal, intelligent, attached
members of her communion. Win their affections to the Church
as the homo of their souls, and they will not be easily drawn
away to frequent the dwellings of strangers.” Such, brethren, is
my object in this course of sermons and in the survey of the
bulwarks, towers, and palaces of our spiritual Zion in which I am
now engaged.
We have seen that the history of the Anglo-Saxon Church, as
such, ceases and determines with Archbishop Theodore. It merged
into the great Roman Communion—represented and embodied
by the Bishop of Rome. Let us not forget, however, that such
an absorption was no detriment either to vitality or identity


with past independence, or the truthfulness of the English
Church ; because at that period there were no doctrines peculiar
to Eome as oyer and above those of the Catholic faith ; —the
corruption, of which I have now to speak, grew up subsequently.
Those unauthorised additions by which the great truths of
Christianity were compromised ; —those perversions of true
doctrine, which afterwards took place, we proceed now to consider.
At this date we reach the second great turning-point in the his-
tory of the Church of England. Decay, gradual deterioration, is the
sure work of every institution in which man has a part. In the
social and political affairs of the world we see this truth plainly
enough. Nor is it otherwise even in those institutions whose
origin is Divine. True, indeed, is it, that the Church is of God ;
yet it is also true that human beings, receiving a divine revelation,
and becoming that Church, immediately bring into it their own
imperfections and sins. Therefore, the Church is no more exempt
from corruption and loss of original essence and spirit than any
other institution. It was so with the Jewish Church. It has
been so with the Christian. The Church has declined in the purity
of her doctrine ; in the high tone of her spirituality ; and in the
character of her government. We have seen, as far as Holy
Scripture is concerned, both positively and negatively, what was
the will of our Blessed Lord as to Church government. Positively
—it was that holy men of apostolic ordination should direct the
the whole body—acknowledging on? Lord—having one faith, one
baptism—bound together in unity of spirit and righteousness of
life. Negatively —it was that no one particular hierarchy, no
attempt at monarchical display of power, or subjugation of one
part to the other, should form the government of His Church.
Now, at first, strange to say, the claim of universal headship
came not from Eome but from Constantinople: and still more strange
to record, the great opposition thereto, on the highest Catholic
grounds, came originally from Home. But the history of the
world soon after this event, towards the close of the Gth Century,
made a great change. Three of the Eastern Patriarchates fell
under the inroads of the Mohammedan power, and Christianity was
well nigh lost. Then it was that Eome, in her turn, re-assumed
the superiority of her position, and becoming intermingled with the
rising political powers, was eventually the ruling patriarchate of the
west. As she received from those powers on one side, political
aggrandizement, she imparted to them, on the other, the sanction
of religion. Century after century she advanced with more and
more strength in her claim to that very universal dominion
which, in the person of Gregory the Great, she had so forcibly
denounced and repudiated. Then, in turn, rose up the Eastern
Patriarchs, rejecting the attempts and pretensions of Eome, even
as before the Bishops of Eome had rejected theirs. In this
resistance, thoiigh finally separated in communion, they have
continued ever since. They are an abiding witness that though


the power of Eome, as it grew in the middle ages, is a great
historical fact, which we cannot contradict, yet it is contrary to
the voice of the Universal Church. And if we ask how this great
historical fact is to be accounted for, I reply by an appeal to
the history of the political circumstances of the world. It was
the power of Eome as the chief city of the West. It was the
weakness of the other nations absorbed into the German Empire.
It was the concordat made between Eome, as an Ecclesiastical
power possessing privileges valuable in the eyes of ambitious
kings, and those kings seeking the cloak of spiritual authority to
veil the designs of temporal power. Originally, as we have seen,
the Roman Bishop ranked among his brethren without any
superiority of jurisdiction being either claimed or acknowledged.
Primacy in order was ever cheerfully conceded, but this did not
involve supremacy. In the Bth Century the kingdoms of the
world underwent a most important revolution. The Bishops of
Rome in that century withdrew their allegiance from the Eastern
Emperors. The Lombards were then the ruling power in the
north of Italy, and stood at the gates of Rome before the
defenceless pope. The Arabs, pouring themselves over the west,
had become masters of Spain—their general boasting that he
would preach Mohammed in the Vatican! At this very same
period the Frankish Monarchy was rising into power under the
second race of its kings ; and amongst these Franks the seed of
Catholic faith had been sown. They understood the emergency.
Pepin, the Mayor of the palace, enjoying the power but not the
title of royalty, had rebelled against his master, the lawful
King of the Franks. The last descendant of Clovis survived in
the feeble Childeric. The interest of the Pope, and his own
imminent danger, caused him to espouse the side of Pepin, who
undertook to defend the Church against the Lombards. He
drove them out of the cities which they had conquered in the
north of Italy; but instead of restoring the regained territories
to their lawful Emperor in the East, he invested the Bishop of
Eome with the sovereignty of that city and some adjacent
territory. In that action was laid the foundation of the temporal
power of the Papacy.
From this time the rulers of the Carlovingian dynasty and the
Pope of Rome interchanged, without demur, their offices of mutual
help. On the one hand Charlemagne becomes the Supreme
Emperor of the West, being crowned by the Pope on Christmas
Eve, A.D. 800 —thus founding the new empire of Germany—
and is absolved by the Pope from his allegiance to the Emperor
of the East. On the other hand Leo 111., Bishop of Eome, receives
sovereign temporal power over the city and territories adjoining,
and becomes the founder of a feudal principality under the
protection of the German Emperors. So, when we reach the
time of Hildebrand, who became Pope under the name of Gregory
YIL, then even the small vestige of subjection in temporal


matters to the emperors was altogether removed, and the Papacy
stood forth in opposition to Henry IV. as a free, despotic,
independent sovereignty. Here, then, we at once answer the
question how the Patriarchate of Pome acquired its great
extension of spiritual power. It was derived from its mixture
with, dependence on, and assumption of, the kingdoms of the
world. Added to this was the fact, that, being all this time
separated from the East, it became the sole Apostolic See
towards which any of the nations of the North or West, in the
ignorance of those days, could look for spiritual guidance. The
world was sinking under barbarian aggression. The African
Church had fallen beneath the inroads of the Mohametans ; Asia,
with many of its Churches, was more or less involved in heresy ;
the ancient land of the primitive apostolic faith ceased to possess
the cross which Jesus Himself had planted there. What wonder,
then, that the spiritual dominion of the See of Pome thus came
forth among the western nations of Europe as the sole repre-
sentative of the Church ?
And now observe how from this time forth the Papal power
expanded, and to what it ultimately attained. Councils of
the Church, which had formerly been constituted by the whole
East and West together, were now, by the separation of the two,
summoned only in the West. Councils which had been convened
by the Emperor were now convened by the Pope, in the double
capacity of Bishop of Rome and a temporal sovereign. They
were no longer (Ecumenical or General, but Roman. The third
Lateran Council was thus called by Pope Alexander 111., A.D.
1179, by his sole voice as a sovereign ruler. Add to this—the
Papal power now assumed to itself to be superior to the Councils,
even when convened. And since it was easy to proceed from
spiritual to temporal things, the idea soon obtained that the
kings of the earth were to owe their sovereignty to the approba-
tion, if not the appointment, of the Pope. And this being
recognised, it was but a step further to acknowledge that as
kings were appointed, so they might be deposed. So, as far back
as A.D. 1059, we find Nicholas 11. confirming the Duke of
Calabria and Sicily in the possession of his dominions ; Alexander
11. gave his Papal sanction to the invasion of England by William
the Norman ; Alexander 111. presumed to give Henry 11.
possession of Ireland; Gregory YII. released the subjects of the
Emperor Henry IY. from their allegiance; while Pius Y. deposed
Queen Elizabeth, A.D. 1569. So again, Pope Boniface,in the famous
Bull called JJnam Sanctam, A.D. 1302, concludes a summary of
what he thought was involved in the Papal Supremacy, with these
remarkable words : —“ Moreover, we declare, affirm, define, and
pronounce that it is altogether necessary for salvation that every
human creature should be subject to the Roman Pontiff.”* And
this assumed power was carried into (if possible) higher and


more awful things : asserting sometimes the infallibility, s,t other
times the impeccability, of the Pope, under the very attributes of
Deity. Nor does it depend alone upon these utterances of the
Popes, but on the decrees of certain Councils of the Eomish
Church: —* Fourth Council of Lateran, A.D. 1215, excommuni-
cates and deposes all kings who do not obey the Pope ; Council of
Florence, A.D. 1438, and of Trent, A.D. 1546, continue the same
claims with unabated ardour ; while the whole essence of the
power demanded may be finally summed up in these awful
words of Pope Innocent III.—“ The Pope is the Vicar of Jesus
Christ—the Successor of Peter—the Anointed of the Lord—the
God of Pharaoh ; short of God, but beyond man; less than God,
but greater than man ; who judges all men, but is judged by no
man.”
Let us now look back upon the world’s history and compare S.
Peter, the Apostle of Christ, with those who have boasted to
succeed him on the episcopal throne of Rome. We have seen
how the spiritual office of a bishop was entirely lost sight of in
the ambitious projects of a temporal prince ; —how, in the place
of the lowly and suffering martyrs of the Church, these great
princes grew up from time to time, founding or maintaining a
system of government in which the Church was entirely submitted
to the priority of their secular power. We have advanced from
the simple Bishop to the Metropolitan ; from the Metropolitan to
the Patriarch ; from the Patriarch to the Pope ; and we can now
understand what is meant by the Papal Supremacy, with all its
blasphemous assumptions On a former occasion I have clearly
shown that this doctrine is opposed to the canons of the Church—
is not consonant with Holy Scripture, nor supported by the
testimony of the Fathers. To sum up on this head we may, in
comparing these historical facts with Scripture, safely appeal with
S. Bernard in his declaration to Eugenius Hl.—“ What did the
holy apostle leave you? Was it any lordship ? Nay, hear him
yourself— ‘ Feed the flock of God among you—not as being lords
over God’s heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.’ And that
you may not think it said from humility alone, instead of truth,
there is the voice of the Lord Himself in the Gospels—‘The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; but it shall
not be so among you.”
Notwithstanding all that has been said —the appeal to Scripture;
to the facts of history; to the decision of General Councils ; and
to the voice of antiquity notwithstanding, also, the infamous
lives of many of the popes (of which I have yet to speak)—their
worldly ambition ; their gross immoralities; the revolutions,
contests, wars, and schisms, which abound in their history;—
nevertheless, and in spite of it all, there stands before us the
unquestioned fact that the doctrine of the Papal Supremacy is
still held by the great majority of the Roman Catholic world. It
# Fourth Lat. Coun. : can. iii.


is quite another question whether the Papal See has in reality
always exercised that supreme power which in theory she claims.
We know, in fact, that her supremacy has been contested, denied,
and subverted over and over again ; that in no case in regard of
the, Greek Church has that supremacy been exercised; that
continually throughout the West the independence of the several
bishops, and pre-eminently that of the bishops in Britain, has
been, by the voice of Council after Council, proclaimed and
established. But the question we have now to deal with is this—
how is it that the power of the Church of Borne still retains such
influence among the nations of Christendom ? How is that the
Papal system has thus grown up and exists in spite of all its
essential wrong ? There are several replies to this great question.
Possibly, in giving them, I may offend the prejudices or convic-
tions of some Romanists who may be present; but the interests
involved are so momentous that I must speak, and that fearlessly.
Pirst, then, with all due regard for the interests of truth and
charity, I answer: —The great majority of those who form the
lower classes of the Roman Church have always been, and are
now, without education. They are not permitted to examine
either the doctrines or the historical records of the Church ; —nor
have they for the most part any acquaintance with Holy Scripture.
The one guiding principle which animates them is unanswering,
unquestioning obedience. They are ignorant, too, of the strange
and sad histories attached to the Papal system, which by others,
not in the same spiritual subjection, ate well understood. I take
it to be simply impossible, as utterly at variance with reason and
common sense, for any man of ordinary information and intelli-
gence to accept, as worthy of credence, the mass of imposture,
folly, and fable which Rome, even to this day, requires at the
hands of her votaries. Yet, how is it that so many, in a passive
acquiescence with the existing state of things, take it for granted
that they are right in maintaining a system which is sufficient for
their devotion ? By what means has it come to pass that
antiquity, Holy Scripture, truth, and holiness, have all along been
set aside, and the anomaly of whole countries, submitting their
faith and Churches to a foreign jurisdiction, has so largely
prevailed P I have already explained this anomaly by showing
that it arose partly in the junction of the spiritual power of the
priesthood with the temporal power of royalty; and partly in
the connection of the feudal system with the doctrines of religion,
by which the idea of sovereignty in one bishop was put forward
with the subjection of others, in the same relation as feudal
princes to their suzerain. We may no less trace another —and
perhaps powerful—cause in the great schism, the separation of
the Eastern and Western Churches ; and in those struggles for
truth of doctrine against heresy, wherein the confessed priority,
by reason of place, learning, and ability, was ever conceded to
the Roman See. But I must now show that neither one nor all
of these reasons could have been sufficient, had not another been


added, as the foundation upon which all the rest were built up
and received their strength. That other reason is the unscrupulous
use of forged documents; alterations of primitive usages ; per-
version of words of Holy Scripture ; and a constant suppression
of such facts, writings, canons of General Councils, and other
monuments of antiquity as would, if left untouched, have
seemed to make against the claims which were so unblushingly
advanced. I now proceed to prove the truth of my assertion by
a few instances illustrating and evidencing the spirit of falsifica-
tion so prevalent in Papal history. Take first the alteration of
certain passages of Scripture. The old missals faithfully
recorded the exact words of Holy Writ whenever quoted.
So, in the Gospel for the Tuesday after the third Sunday
in Lent, you read —At that time Jesus looking upon his disciples
said to Simon Peter —“ If thy brother sin against thee go, &c.
If he will not hear thee tell it to the Church.” The wmrds
clearly show that S. Peter equally with the other disciples is to
submit to the Church all matters cf doubt or controversy. But
when you turn to the modern missals you find
the words changed, and they stand thus—“ Jesus said to
his disciples .” No mention is made of S. Peter. Why P Let a
priest of the Spanish Church* tell us : —“ Cardinal Bellarmine and
his colleagues, perceiving that this Gospel, read in this manner,
stood in the way of the pretended monarchy of Eome, suggested
the alteration of the words, since in the latter reading the sub-
ordination of Peter to the tribunal of the Church was not so clear
and evident.” f Passing over the system of appeals to Eome—a
practice founded on falsehood, contrary to the canons of Nicca,
and in itself a tyranny over the whole Church —I proceed to speak
of the False Decretals. Now, these “Decretal Epistles” pur-
ported to be an account of certain conventions, acts of councils,
letters and decrees of various popes of the first ages —embracing
altogether the first four centuries. They were conspicuous in
describing the power and supremacy of the popes of those early
ages, and represented them as of the same character as that
which they now desire to be established. A subsequent age,
whatever their origin, has proved their entire forgery: that they
were the invention of one Isidore Mercator, a Spanish priest, who
brought them into Italy, A.D. 858. They arc described even by
Eoman historians as “ The False Decretals.” X Archbishop
De Marca, one of the most learned Roman Catholic writers,
describes them as “ those suppositious letters of the ancient
Eoman Pontiffs,” —“ those false letters fabricated by Isidore.”
Fleury says: “3hey bear visible marks of falsity; their dates
are almost all false. Nevertheless the fraud, great as it was,
imposed upon the whole Latin Church.” § Moreover, it is well
known to every student of Ecclesiastical History how those
* Antonio Pereira. f Ant. Per. Tentative Theology : p. 138.
J De Concor.; lib. vii. c. 20. § Fleury, p. 41.


spurious documents utterly undermined the whole system of
ancient Church government. First there arose from this source
the celebrated Dictates of Gregory YII.; then the changes in the
Canon Law made by Burchard, Bishop of Worms, in the 11th
Century; and, finally, the Decree of Gratian. So that to this
day the whole of the Homan Canon Law is impregnated with the
teaching of these False Decretals, despite primitive usage, councils,
and ancient canons. To this effect hear the testimony of Eomish
writers : —“ Of all the false documents the most pernicious were
the false decretals, attributed to the popes of the first four
centuries, which have inflicted an incurable wound on the
discipline of the Church by the new maxims which they introduced
concerning the judgments of the Bishops and the authority of
the Popes.” * Van Espen t: —“ It is undoubted that the Homan
Curia supported this collection of false decretals in order that
the authority claimed in them for the Homan Pontiff might be
recognised by all.” Constant : —“ It can scarcely be told what
ruin Isidore brought on the Church by this fraud. The sinews
of discipline were weakened ; the rights of bishops thrown into
confusion ; discord, sedition, and law-suits prevailed many
centuries, to the disgrace of the Church and the offence of the
faithful.”
Now let us take the most charitable view of this most remark-
able fact. Let us suppose that Nicholas 1., in whose Papacy the
forgery commenced, was ignorant of it. Let us suppose that for
800 years all the succeeding popes, canonists, and the whole
Homan Church, were equally and hopelessly deceived. Still,
might we not reasonably say that when at length learned men
brought the forgery to light, proved it to be a forgery, and held
it forth to the odium of the Church adopting it, that then all such
doctrines, canons, laws, and customs, as had grown out of it
should at once and for ever have been repudiated and cast out
from the teaching of the Church ! But it was not so ; nor is it
so at this very day. And the real fact is this, the fatal doctrine
of Infallibility, assumed by the Homan Church to exist within
herself or in the Pope, altogether precludes the possibility
of confessing herself deceived. Hence the dilemma; —Either
Infallibility does not exist, and the Homan Church was deceived
by an impostor for 800 years, and so subverted the whole teaching
of ancient Catholicity through ignorance ; or, Infallibility does
exist, and the Homan Church, wilfully knowing what was false,
imposed that falsehood on the world to serve her own most
unjustifiable purposes!
It has come to pass, then, that the Homan Supremacy, as a
matter of fact, exists, because, at the risk of invalidating all faith
and truth, that Church has not scrupled to base her claims upon
a great historical forgery. True antiquity, real Catholicity, the
* Pleury, Troiseme Discours., § 2 f Jus Novum, p. 11, § 3
+ Pref. to Letters, p .125.


teaching of Scripture, the ancient customs of the primitive
Church, the decrees of General Councils, the unity of Christians
under one head, Jesus Christ, the real spiritual character of the
Church as a Divine Institution, —all these have been sacrificed
to one idea —unity of dominion and selfish thirst for temporal
sovereignty.
We have already traced, though briefly, the leading events in
Church History, connected with the growth of the Papacy between
the 7th and 11th Centuries. During the 9th and 10th Centuries
the continental Churches had fallen into great corruption.
Baronins describes the whole Church during that time as
“ exceedingly foul.” He says that in that period no less than 50
popes succeeded one another on the Papal throne, of whom many
secured its possession by fraud, by bribery, or by worse expedients,
and many lived lives of open and extreme profligacy.* If you ask
for evidence I refer you to the narrative of Baronius, of great
repute among the Eomau party as an historian. Turn to the
lives of Boniface VI, ; Stephen VI.; pre-eminently, Sergius 111.,
described as the slave of every vice and the most wicked of men ;
of John X.; John XII.; Benedict IX.; in later times John XXIII.;
Sixtus IV.; Alexander VI.; Leo X. And what in all these
instances do you find ? Not merely extreme worldliness or pursuit
of ambition, but lives full of gross, open sin against the moral law
of God.f Many of the scenes described it would be impossible
for me to give you in detail. X But as w r e peruse these records of
iniquity, we feel constrained to ask are such men —with hearts
full of lust, and with lives that wmuld have disgraced the worst of
heathen emperors —the personal “representatives” of the sinless
Eedeemer? Are such men, indeed, what they claim to be —
“ God’s vicegerents upon earth ? ” Shall we, wdio recognise
God’s own Son as Head over all things to His Church, shall we
make (as the Eoman system does) the ultimate resort of truth
and the immediate decision of doctrine to depend on one man, and
that man oftentimes (as we have seen) a monster of iniquity ?
Unless wholly and utterly we reject the unscriptural and uncatholic
dogma of the Papal Supremacy we have no choice.
But to resume: —There had been, as we have seen, 300 years of
gross abuse of the highest privileges of Christianity since the time
that Stephen 11. received the regalia from Pepin, King of Prance.
Kings and Popes were but vying with each other in a contest for
worldly power. The Pope crowns and upholds unjust and
tyrannical kings ; the kings in return bestow upon the Papacy
all the accessories of temporal sovereignty. The consequences of
this miserable degradation of the spiritual character of the
Church were soon manifested. Every sacred office became more
or less the object of public sale—popes, bishops, monks, and even
kings, alike participated in the nefarious traffic. Such was the
*Baronius ad. arm. 908, also arm. 912, tom. xi., p. 571.
fGribbon, “ Decline and Pall,” th. xlix. JVide Luitprand, lib. ii. c. 13.


state of things when Hildebrand, or Gregory YII., was called to
the Papacy. His first act of any importance was to throw down
the gauntlet of defiance to the kings and princes of the entire
West. Henry IY. * was the sovereign against whom the first
blow is levelled in the maintenance of this Papal Supremacy.
Such a scene the world never before had witnessed —the
most powerful sovereign of Christendom defied by a bishop in his
own kingdom; himself said to be dethroned and another invited
to take his place. Opposed to that Pope stood the king,
defying his anathemas and in turn deposing him. It was a grand
contest; and what was the issue ? Slowly, but surely, the power
of Gregory prevails, and in the year A.D. 1076, the world beheld
the king trembling before a bishop, crouching as a suppliant in
his presence. Look along that frozen path across the Alps and
you will see a king, his wife and infant child, without any
escort or mark of royalty, struggling over the mountain passes
in a most inclement winter. He is deserted by all. In the garb
of a penitent he makes his way towards Cannona, a wild mountain
fortress whither Gregory had gone. Thither, too, hundreds of
excommunicated prelates and nobles were journeying, and tiicre
this mighty warrior of the Church waits in triumph to receive
them. For the space of four days, exposed to cold and hunger,
the suppliant king knocks at the castle-gate, and is at length
admitted. There stood the youthful and powerful king of the
Germans before the puny insignificant form of Gregory, The
sword yields to the crosier, and the monarch bows to the priest!
Was'this a fitting representative of the meek and lowly Jesus,
who now sets his foot upon the neck of this prostrate king, in
defiance of the Scripture precept —“ Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers —to kings as supreme ? ”
There was an interval of about 200 years between Gregory
VII. and Boniface YIII. That interval, comprising the 12th and
13th Centuries, may be described as the precise period at which
the Roman Supremacy achieved its greatest height. The three
great defenders of the Supremacy during that time were Paschal
11., A.D. 1099 ; Hadrian IV., A.D. 1154 ; and Innocent 111. A.D.
1198. Boniface YIII. ascended the Papal throne A.D. 1294.
“The sensible decline of the Papacy,” says Hallam, “is to be
dated from this time.” The claim has played its part and served
its turn in the councils of God, and now that supremacy which
was solely of the earth, earthly —foul and stained for centuries
by many terrible crimes ; violating the whole system of God’s
government of His creatures —has perished, And while the
historical fact of the claim made, and so long maintained, is the
proof of the fallibilty of the Roman system, —the fact of its
departure and final cessation in the history of nations is the
proof of its falsehood. And, once again, let us view, in connec-
tion with this topic, the great historical fact of the final separation
* Emperor of Germany.


of East and West. You know the history. The Western
Church, embodied in Eome, charges the Eastern with heresy ; the
Eastern Church retorts and reciprocates the charge; both claim
to be right; the final issue is that the Eastern has ever denied,
and still denies, the Supremacy of the Pope. And what is this
Church against which Rome's anathema, pronounced in 11th
Century, still is held forth? It is the Greek Church, prevailing
in an unbroken succession from the Apostles’ times, in Russia,
Siberia, European Turkey, the Archipelago, the lonian Islands,
Asia-Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. Celebrated saints and
missionaries sprang from her bosom. In the time of Photius the
whole number of Eastern dioceses was no less than 1029. A Church,
therefore, neither deficient in zeal, sanctity, nor extent. The faith
of Christ, as interpreted by the great councils of the Church, is
received by her. All Russia, with her formidable empire, is the
daughter of that Church. Whatever her faults and errors may be,
they are not greater than those of Rome. There she stands—it
may be crippled—yet the same Church with the same system,
the same Patriarchal seats of jurisdiction as at the Council of
Chalcedon. In the existence then, to-day, of this Church denying
the dogma of the Papal Supremacy, we recognise plain and
undeniable proof that the Supremacy of the West, as claimed by
Rome, is a fiction, an unjust aggression, a breach of unity —and
no true dogma of the Catholic Church.
I turn next, in refutation of this doctrine, to the Church of
the Syrian Christians, in South India, and on the coast of Malabar.
When the Portuguese explorers, under Vasco de Gama, arrived
in 1503, they were surprised to find upwards of 100 Christian
Churches there. But when they became acquainted with the
purity and simplicity of their worship, they were offended,
“ These Churches,” said they, “ belong to the Pope.” “ Who is
the Pope ? ” said the natives, “we never heard of him P ” The
European priests were yet more alarmed when they found that
these Hindoo Christians had maintained the order and discipline
of a regular Church under Episcopal jurisdiction; and that for
1300 years past they had enjoyed a succession of bishops
appointed by the Patriarch of Antioch. “ We,” said they, “ are
of the true faith, whatever you may be. We come from the
place where the followers of Christ were first called Christians.”
And what were the charges brought against them ? “ That they
had married wives ; acknowledged but two sacraments, Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper; that they neither invoked saints nor wor-
shipped images, nor believed in Purgatory ; and had no other
names of dignity in the Church than Bishop, Priest, and Deacon.”*
These facts clearly prove that the charge of novelty belongs
rather to Rome than England, and that the doctrines of our
communion are really those of the Catholic and Apostolic Church
of primitive times. What, then, shall we say to all these things ?
Christian Researches, p. 105, 6.


If the facts of history prove anything, they certainly point to
one thing —the wholly unscriptural and unfounded character of
the tremendous assumptions of the Roman Church. And looking
abroad through the world, wherever the great Anglican Communion
exists, what is there to justify the language recently employed,
which pourtrays that Church as tottering to her fall ? Where are
the signs of decrepitude or decay ? Has she renounced the
Scriptures as her rule of faith —the Saviour as her living and
Divine Head ? Has the promise of Christ failed, spoken to
those from whom she claims to trace her origin—“ Lo, lam with
you always, even unto the end of the world ? ” But I would fain
encourage you in steadfast allegiance to the Church of England
by reminding you of the glory, strength, and stability of that
branch of the Catholic communion to which it is your privilege to
belong. She saw the commencement of all the governments and
of the ecclesiastical systems now extant. She was great and
respected ages ere the Saxon set foot in Britain ; ” before the
Franks had passed the Rhine ; aye, centuries before S. Augustine
and his missionaries stood on England’s shores! Great, yes !
“ when Grecian eloquence still flourished at Antioch, and idols
were still worshipped in the temple of Mecca!” And it is this
Church, founded by Apostles; nurtured in darkest days of
heathen persecution ; surviving continual shocks of heresy ;
sinking for a season under the pressure of Rome’s tyranny and
corruption ; rising and shining forth again in the light of truth
and freedom, shaking off for ever the yoke of Papal usurpation;
continuing even to this day a mighty witness for God ; —a pure,
Scriptural, Apostolic Church in all essentials ; in doctrine ; in the
sacraments; in unbroken succession ; it is this Church that a Roman
prelate has of late, in language as coarse as it was false, described as
“ founded by murderers,” and tottering to its fall. I ask, then
what is that system which has fast hold of the world’s intellectual
wealth at this day ? which spreads itself as an enlightening,
healing power in all lands—yea, breathes its lessons of truth and
freedom even in down-trodden regions which yearn and sigh for
liberty P Look out into the world—you mark one mighty
purpose in the history of nations, unfolding one great providential
plan. What Church was chiefly concerned under God in this
work? You behold science extending her discoveries, exhibiting
continually new and more splendid results ; while knowledge
opens still wider her ample page ! Is the Church of Rome the
fearless ally of scientific research, and does she seek to extend
and diffuse knowledge among the lowly ones of earth? We
behold Liberty putting forth her hand, that slaves may touch it
and leap into freedom. We see Scripture universally circulated.
By whose agency are these varied works of moral and spiritual
enlightenment wrought ? I answer sorrowfully, yet fearlessly,
not by the agency of the Church of Rome. Whatever is to
# Macaulay.


be her destiny I know not. But this much I dare to say —that
Church which proclaims liberty of conscience; which shakes off
the shackles of moral bondage and preaches the truth; —that
Church which spreads abroad the Word of Life, that men of all
nations may read in “ their own tongue the wonderful works of
God,” —which maintains apostolic fellowship and teaches apostolic
doctrine, free from man-made traditions and unscriptural addi-
tions ; —in that Church are elements of permanence, for God
is with her, and abideth in her, and so long as she is faithful,
“ the gates of hell shall not prevail against her.”


LECTURE IV.
THE REFORMATION.
‘ And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places ; thou shall
raise up the foundations of many generations ; and thou shall be called,
The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.” — Isaiah
ITIII., 12.
certainly,” says Bishop Jewel* in his celebrated
Apology, “there can be nothing of more weight said
against religion, than that it is new.” Hence, the per-
sistent efforts of our opponents in stigmatising the Church of
England as “ new,” and as having existed only since the Refor-
mation. The falsehood of such statements we have already
abundantly proved. By an appeal to historic facts and the
testimony of the primitive fathers, we showed the high antiquity
and independence of that pure branch of the Catholic Church,
planted in the British Isles by apostolic hands. In the Refor-
mation —of which I have now to speak, —the Church of England
sought only to return to that state of purity which it enjoyed
previous to the imposition of the Papal yoke. She invented no
new doctrines or practices, but merely divested the old ones of
the corruptions which had fastened upon them. She “ asked for
the old paths, wherein was the good way, and walked therein.”
“ Nay so far was it from the purpose of the Church of England
to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, Prance, Spain,
Germany, or any such-like Churches, that, she only departed
from them in those particular points, wherein they were fallen, both
from their ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches
which were their first founders.”! It is not only absurd,
therefore, but most mischievous, to speak of the Church of
England as if she were a separated branch from the Church of
Rome. Por when by shaking off the yoke of the Papacy, she
reassumed that independence which had belonged to her from
the very first, and corrected, .on Scriptural principles, and by her
own authorised spiritual rulers rejected those errors, which never
did belong to the primitive and Apostolic Church ; this cannot
be called a separation, but rather a restoration (as it really was)
to that pure and ancient model, from which Rome herself had
grievously departed.
* Juelli Apolog. Part Y..p. 75. f Canon XXX. of 1603, A.D.


“We hope,” says the learned Hooker, “that to reform
ourselves, if at any time we have done amiss, is not to sever
ourselves from the Church we were of before. In the Church
we were, and we are so still.” It is certain, that during the
reign of Henry YIIL, and until the 11th year of Elizabeth’s
reign, there were not two separate Communions and worships in
England. All the people were subject to the same pastors,
attended the same Churches, and received the same sacraments.
It was not until A.D. 1570 that the Eomish party, at the insti-
gation of foreign missionaries, separated itself, and fell from the
Catholic Church of England. The whole separation and schism
was originated and effected by the Eoman Bishops and their
adherents. It is a fact, which ought never to be forgotten,—we
did not go out from them, but they went out from us. In
Walton’s Life of Sir H. Wotton, there is an anecdote related,
that may serve to illustrate the challenge of Eomanism, which
in these lectures it has been my endeavour to accept and answer.
When in Eome, Sir Henry, having accepted the invitation of
a friendly priest to attend the service at a Eomish Church,
received from the priest a piece of paper, on which this question
was written, —“ Where was your religion to be found before
Luther?” In reply, Sir Henry wrote underneath, —“My
religion was to be found then, where yours is not to be found
now, in the written Word of God.” In view of the pretensions
of modern Eome, the conclusion at which we shall arrive at the
close of this investigation, will not, I think, be very different.
I recognise in the text (whatever be the primary application
of the prophecy) a most correct and beautiful description of the
distinctive chaiacter of the Church of England. Most faith-
fully does it pourtray the design and consequences of that great
spiritual movement, which issued in “ building up the old waste
places, and in raising the foundations of many generations.”
Unhesitatingly, therefore, to that Church, which professes to rest
upon ground recovered from the encroachment of deeply rooted
error, and which sought, as far as was permitted to her, to restore
Scripture to its rightful place and authority,—and which still
adheres to that purpose, —do I apply the words of my text:
“ Thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach—the restorer
of paths to dwell in.”
We have carefully traced the growth of Papal pretensions, and
the corruption of doctrine and practice from the 7th to the 11th
Centuries. Under Charlemagne and his immediate successors,
we have seen how the spiritual power of the Papacy, combined
with, and resting on, the authority of that Empire, did indeed
prevail;—that during the Bth, 9th, and 10th Centuries, there was
little dispute with bishops, who unscrupulously added to the
pastoral staff the stronger argument of the sceptre and the
sword. In Hildebrand, i. e. Gregory YII., we saw one who
seemed to embody by talent and disposition, the essence of the


Papal idea: —That the spiritual dominion of the Pope Avas to
embrace lordship over the whole earth. By policy first, then by
open war; by Avielding alternately spiritual and carnal weapons;
by combining with enemies and betraying friends ; by instigating
rebellion and undermining obedience; Hildebrand at length
established the Papacy as a Royal Kingdom over the heads of
the German Emperors, and the world saw with admiration, not
unmixed with fear, a temporal sovereignty set forth in the centre
of Italy, — in one who claimed to represent the fisherman of
Galilee, and in him “ the King who was despised and rejected
of men.”
And thus we approach the 12th Century. The Popes were
indeed supreme. * They asserted, and by carnal weapons main-
tained —with various success —their dominion. They appear on
the scene, alternately as political intriguers and military chiefs.
In this light you see Pascal 11., A.D. 1099, contending with
Henry Y.; and Hadrian IV., A.D. 1155, demanding of Frederick
Barbarossa, that he, though Emperor, should hold the Pope’s
stirrup as his vassal. As a result, came wars and rival popes, and
finally the submission of this Emperor to Alexander 111. While
this maxim of the Church Avas proclaimed without demur, —“ The
Bishop of Rome is Supreme Lord of the Universe, and neither
princes, nor bishops,—civil governors, nor ecclesiastical rulers, —
have any lawful power in Church or State, but what they
derive from him.”
The 13th Century brings us to Innocent 111. He walked
by no means unworthily in the steps of Gregory VII.
He deals with crowned kings as a child with toys ; sets them up
or pulls them doAvn at his pleasure. And as we read the history
of this period, we knoAV not which is the greater subject of
astonishment, the audacity of this Pope, or the utter coAvardice
and subjugation of such men as Philip Augustus of France, and
John Lackland of England, for both bowed their heads to him as
their superior lord. Here one word as to the Crusades, which
terminated at the close of this century. —The strong religious
enthusiasm kindled by these seven Avars, was one of the main
pillars on Avhich rested the supreme power claimed by the popes
for nearly two centuries. At last the Western Avorld awoke as
from a dream: intercourse with the East had opened and
ciA r ilized men’s minds. Commerce was extended, many fresh paths
of industry and trade discovered, and out of all this horrible
carnage grew a more enlarged vieAV of the duties and privileges
of mankind. In proportion to this change, was that also of the
estimate in which the Papal claims were regarded. It was not
so perceptible, but it was there; and at this very crisis a man
was raised to the Papacy, whose singular audacity of character
and determination of purpose, seemed to fit him for another test
of this great principle.
* In W estern Europe only.


So then the 14th Century brings us to the climax, in the
person and claims of Boniface YIII. In A.D. 1303, Philip the
Pair (then king of Prance) assembled the peers of his kingdom,
and retaliated on the Pope, with a charge of heresy, simony,
and other vices and crimes; demanding an examination of
the accusations in an (Ecumenical Council. The aspect of alfairs
now began to change. Prom that moment the “ sensible decline
of the Papacy is to be dated.” The popes succeeding Boniface
were men of a very different spirit. They were appointed under
the power of the French Kings, and became more or less the
subjects and creatures of the French Monarchy, having removed
the Papal residence from Eome to Avignon. In 1370, Gregory
XI. (one of these Gallican popes) attempted a restoration of the
Papal residence to Borne, but in vain. The Bomans and Floren-
tines refused to accept him ; and the successor of Hildebrand
found himself little more than a civil officer of the Crown of
Prance, with his ecclesiastical patrimony confiscated, and with the
affections of his spiritual subjects a mere name. In 1378, he was
succeeded by the Archbishop of Bari, a Neapolitan, under the
title of Urban YI. But the cardinals withdrawing from Eome
to Anagni, and thence to Pondi, elected as Pope, Eobert, Count
of Geneva, under the name of Clement VII., —thus denying and
invalidating their election of Urban. The two popes continued to
defend their respective claims, and received adherents : Clement
at Avignon, representing the French party ; and Urban at Eome,
the Italians. Prance, Spain, Scotland, Sicily, and Cyprus,
espoused the side of Clement; while the rest of Europe took the
part of Urban. This is known as the great Western schism. It
lasted exactly fifty years, from A D. 1378 to A.D. 1428,
Such was the extraordinary spectacle presented to the world
by the Papal See, —two assumed infallible heads of the Eomish
Church, anathematising and denouncing each other. Surely it
was time that the eyes of Christendom should be open to the
unwarranted pretensions of both! A few years before the
beginning of the Schism, Wycliffe, called the morning star of the
Eeformation, had come into notice. Edward 111. when summoned
by Urban Y., to do him homage for the Crown of England,
positively refused to comply with the demand, just as in the reigns
of Henry 111., Edward 1., and Edward 11., resistance had been
previously offered to papal encroachments. The remonstrance of
the barons in the reign of Henry 111., was couched in the
following manly words, —“ We can no longer bear with any
patience the aforesaid oppressions, which, as they are detestable
to God and man, are intolerable to us, neither will we any longer
endure them.”
With this period, we reach the lowest point of the degradation
of the Church of England. And now the reaction begins. Let
us trace its steps. In AD. 1350, the statute of Provisors put an
end to the popes’ infringments of the rights of patrons. In A.D.


1353, appeals to Eome were forbidden under pain of outlawry.
In A.D. 1367, Edward 111. refused any longer to pay the tribute
with which King John had disgraced the kingdom. In A.D. 1374,
an enquiry was instituted into the number and value of the benefices
then occupied by Frenchmen, Italians, and other aliens. In A.D.
1375, an embassy complaining of these abuses, was sent to the
Pope, and Wycliffe was one of the commissioners. In AD.
1376, Parliament drew up a most decided remonstrance touching
these usurpations of the Pope. In this reforming movement
Wickliffe was the representative. But his great work was the
translation of the whole Bible into English, and itsjvide circula-
tion among the people.
On the death of Urban YI., a successor Avas appointed in the
person of Gregory XII. On the death of Clement, his place
was supplied by the election of Benedict XIII. While to crown
the whole, after many minor complications and schisms, by Avhich
the whole Church was continually disturbed, the Gallican Church
assembled a Council at Paris, A.D. 1397, which dissolved all sub-
jection to both Popes, and the King of France detains Benedict
XIII. as a prisoner in his own palace.
Noav comes confusion upon confusion as we enter the 15th
Century. The cardinals and the ruling powers go from one
side to the other; attempts were made to induce one or other of the
rival popes to abdicate; these attempts Avere frustrated by the
treachery and falsehood of the popes themselves. Until at last
we reach the Council of Pisa, A.D. 1409. By the decrees of
that Council, Benedict XIII. and Gregory XII. being declared
schismatics, heretics, perjured and contumacious, Avere, according
to the sacred canons, removed from their government, and cut off
from the Church, while all the faithful were absolved from their
obedience.* Then came, as a necessary consequence, a new pope.
The election fell on Peter of Candia, Avho assumed the name of
Alexander Y. But in the estimation of the deposed popes, all
the decrees of Pisa were null and void. • And while each of these
still carried on the government of his own section of the Church,
the only advantage of the Council seemed to be this, it added a
third pope to the two already existing. So then, the French
pope (Benedict) summoned a Council at Perpignan ; and Gregory,
the Italian pope, summoned another at Aquileia. Each reviles
the other, —each claims his own adherents, — each was the head
of the Church. In 1410, Alexander Y. dies, and sixteen cardinals
immediately assembled, continued the schism, and elected to the
Papal throne a man utterly destitute of either piety or talent,
named Balthasar Cossa, a Neapolitan, under the title of John
XXIII. The details of his life, after his assumption of the Papacy,
are infamous beyond description So things went on to A.D.
1414, and then Ave begin to hear rumours of The Reformation.
And no wonder. True, there Avere still some good and holy
* Cave Hist. Liter, tom. 227.


men in the Church, who anxiously sought a reformation of
these fearful abuses “ of the whole Church, both as to the Hoad
and the members.” Men in search of truth and holiness, not
knowing where to turn, began to seek it outside the Church, —
which, torn by schism and utterly corrupt, would not give it to
them.* What a scene is here presented ! A. new Council to meet
at Constance was determined upon. It did meet in this year
(A.D. 1414). Pirst, it had to decide who should be pope,—
whether, in fact, there was any pope at all; and second, it had to
decide as to a crowd of heretics swarming within the Church, —
the necessary offspring of their own dissensions.
Now, for a moment, review this sad page in the Church’s
history. It was true that from the latter part of the Bth Century,
the Papal power began to be enriched with territorial authority ;
true that from the 11th to the close of 14th Century, it ruled
with a rod of iron the kings of the earth ; true that as men count
glory, the dominion, the irresistible power of the Church,—the
ambition and ability of her prelates, —was the main feature in
the history of those ages. But was that the fulfilment of the
Divine mission, —was it the Saviour’s purpose, that His Church
should assume temporal dominion, and in the persons of her
bishops contend with warriors, and statesmen, and kings, not only
in the Council Chamber, but in the battle-field ? If the Papal
supremacy depends for its proof upon a period of history such
as this, —stained with the annals of war and bloodshed, —will the
Romanist accept it as coming from God, when it thus bears upon
its very face everything contrary to God? But let all that can
be said of it be granted, what was the issue ? Its very glory
died out, and then came collapse. Now if the rule of the Papacy
over temporal things, by means of carnal weapons, had been of
God, would it have ceased? We trow not. The Roman theory
is, that the Pope is by Divine appointment the supreme visible
Head of the Church, and without that one supreme Head, the
Church cannot exist. But from A.D. 1378 to A.D, 1428, there
were sometimes two visible heads, sometimes three, —all simul-
taneously asserting a claim to that Headship ! A Romish writer
speaking of this period, says, —“ The apostolic See which should
have been the cheiisher of unity, was now the nurse of schism,
and was justly held in contempt. Men publicly, and in every
place, were no longer afraid to say that it was no matter, whether
there were two, three, ten, or even twelve popes.”t Now, look at
these facts in connection with the unity of the Church under the
Papal system. Putting aside the popes, what are we to say of
the Church at large ? People against people, kings against kings,
doctors against doctors ; anathemas, excommunications, accusa-
tions, curses, from the lips of men assembled to deliberate about
the peace and unity of Christ’s Holy Church. And moreover,
* Mosheim. Cent. XV., Part 11., chap. ii.
f Bossuet Delen. Cler. Gall. lib. v., cap, 7.


in point of fact, let us remember, these repeated Councils of
the 15th Century, do in themselves invalidate and destroy the
whole claim of Papal supremacy. They are the collective and
express opinion of the Church, after an experience of many
centuries (in which that dogma had been practically enforced), —■
to the effect that it was dangerous, unscriptural, and therefore
untrue. In the annals of the 15th Century,—in the contests
between East and West, —in the decrees of Pisa, Constance, and
Basle, —in the triple headship of Benedict, Gregory, and John,
as well as in the double headship of Eugenius and Felix, —we
read plainly enough, that the supreme dominion of one man, in
that which was the Church of many, the universal Church, was
not the will of God !
So far then, our task is complete. (1) The existence and
independence of the British Church, centuries before any inter-
course between the Churches of England and Eome took place,
has been set forth. (2) The gradual assumption of power by
Eome over the whole West, and then over the British Churches
has been traced. (3) The claim of spiritual supremacy, as
judged by the customs and councils of the Church Catholic, has
been examined and shown utterly to fail.
It remains now for us—l. To trace the history of the Eefor-
mation from the beginning of the 16th Century. 2. To notice
the general policy, final settlement, merits and defects of that
great movement. 3. To speak of those various doctrines,
•—as to a future life, as to the sacraments, and as to Divine
worship,—in which the teaching of Eome is unsound and unscrip-
tural. (4) And (by the way) to examine that novel theory of
“ development,” by which that Church still endeavours to uphold
these false doctrines and practices.
1. At the beginning of the 16th Century, Eome having suc-
ceeded by the strong arm of cruel persecution, in extinguishing
the various outbursts of the Waldenses, Albigenses, and other
sects which had attempted to exert any freedom of thought,
indolently gave herself up to imagined security. Alexander VI.
indulged in those horrid vices, which have made his name
illustrious among earth’s monsters. Julius 11., A.D. 1503,
displayed to the world what a tyrant, under the guise of a
bishop, by fraud and bribery, war and bloodshed, may achieve.
The whole body of the Episcopate, with some few exceptions,
was notorious for its profligacy. Struggles too, of the most
outrageous character, for mere secular power, involved the monastic
orders. The laity were grossly ignorant, as well as scandalously
wicked ; while the clergy generally looked on, tolerated, or joined
in wickedness which they took no pains to remedy. But the
vices of sensual enjoyment, and the magnificence of earthly
courts, could not be maintained without great pecuniary resources.
Various taxes were imposed to swell the revenue of the popes.
But even these were not sufficient. Hence the invention of indul-


gences, by which forgiveness of either past or future sins could
be purchased ; so that Purgatory might be anticipated by the
living ; and in the case of the dead, “masses ” might redeem their
souls from sulfering. By the good providence of God—parallel
with these scenes of depravity—just as the darkness and corrup-
tion were greatest, the art of printing was discovered. Gradually
and surely a general revival of letters followed. Scholarship and
literature, hitherto confined to the studies of the cloister, were
opened to the general world. And thus came the crisis. Blind
to all peri], Leo X., A.D. 1517, sends forth his edict, after the
manner of his predecessors, to raise the needful funds for the
supply of his court. A Dominican, named Tetzel, was
deputed in the ordinary cause of this traffic, to sell the Pope’s
indulgences in Saxony. All Avent smoothly, till he came within
the district of an Augustinian, whose name thenceforth was
to be associated with religious freedom, against papal tyranny.
That man was Martin Luther. Tetzel farmed the indulgences
with the utmost effrontery,—sold them in the gross to the highest
bidders, who again retailed them even in the public-houses, and
lowest resorts of the people. Lucher stood forth to protest
against the utter blasphemy and crying hypocrisy of this pro-
ceeding. The Augustinian soon had a willing audience. It
was a violation of order, decency, and religion; it cut down the
very foundations of the faith. The Pope defended Tetzel.
Luther defies the Pope. Controversy followed upon controversy,
and it never stayed, until the ultimate separation of the greater
part of Germany from the Papal dominion was thereby achieved.
Here began the first successful opposition to that gigantic power,
which for so many centuries had ruled the world.
I have no desire, unduly, to exalt the character or work of any
one of the Reformers. I think much evil and mischief has
resulted from such an attempt, to the ignoring of God’s agency
and the magnifying of man’s. But I cannot help recognising in
this man one selected by God and singularly fitted for the age
and the work he had to perform. I behold oneness of principle
embodied in action. He has a purpose—that miner’s son—
that purpose is the acquisition of knowledge. He exhausts speedily
the resources of Mansfeldt; sits at the feet of Trebonius, at
Eisnach ; enters a student at Erfurt; and at the age of eighteen
has outstripped his fellows, while admiring professors predict a
most brilliant career. But with Pilate’s question on his lips and
in his heart, he foregoes his successtul prospects ; parts without a
sigh from academical distinction ; takes monastic vows in an
Augustinian convent; goes as a mendicant friar about the streets;
wastes himself with voluntary penance, well nigh to the grave ;
pores over the fathers ; reads the old Bible, which he had found
at Erfurt; then in his cell at Wittemberg, and finally at Rome
there comes the thrice repeated assurance—“ the just shall live by
faith ; ” and he rises at length into moral freedom, a new man in
the Lord, Tardy in forming his resolve, he is brave in adhesion


to it. Not like Erasmus, bolding the truth in unrighteousness, with
a clear head and a craven heart; not like Carlstadt, hanging upon a
grand principle the tatters of a petty vanity ; —but bold, disin-
terested, he stands before us God-prepared and God-upheld, that
valiant man, whose fearless avowal was —“ Had I five heads I
would lose them rather than retract the testimony I have borne
for Christ; ” —that incorruptible Luther of whom, in his spleen,
the Pope’s Nuncio, failing to bribe him, wrote —“He has no
regard for gold ; ” —that fearless confessor, who, when told that
the fate of John Huss would probably await him, said calmly —
“ Were they to make a fire that would reach from Worms to
Wittemberg, and mount to the sky, I would walk across it
in the name of the Lord.” Nor was the movement confined to
Germany. Zuingle followed Luther, A.D. 1519, and established
a religious community in Switzerland ; Calvin, in Geneva, A D.
1541. Among his followers may be numbered the celebrated
John Knox, the Eeformer of Scotland, and the founder of the
great Presbyterian sects north of the Tweed. Sweden followed,
Denmark, the Netherlands, even Prance itself, for many years,
numbered among her people the offshoots of Luther’s preaching ;
schism multiplied and extended ; discord and division ensued ;
unity was gone, and the Papal power shaken to its foundation !
But what has all this to do with England? With the opinions of
the people, the spread of knowledge, and the revival of literature,
everything to do. With the movements of the Church, for the
time at least, nothing. Fortunately, as we shall presently see,
the Church still remained as she had previously been, in com-
munion with Pome.
Now we come to Henry VIII., who had ascended the throne
as a zealous adherent of the Pope. Educated for Holy Orders,
he was fully competent to enter the arena of theological contro-
versy. This he did, and attacking, with some success, the writings
of Luther, was complimented by the Pope with the title of
“ Defender of the Faith.” This title our English sovereigns still
continue to retain, but in the true meaning of that term. It is
very remarkable that this name should have been bestowed by
the Pope on one who so shortly afterwards rejected his supremacy ;
but this led to the purification of religion and the defence of the
faith “once delivered unto the Saints.” When a Roman
prelate, therefore, in modern days, denounces this sovereign
and points to a “murderer” as one of the “Founders of the
Church of England,” it may be well to remember the source
whence the said murderer derived his title of “ Defender of
the Faith.” It was conferred not by England but by Rome
itself. And here 1 may as well deal at once with this
objection as to Henry A r HL being the instrument or agent by
which the Reformation was brought about. Let us compare
history with history. Constantine the Great was the first Roman
Emperor that embraced Christianity. To him the Early Church
looked, in 4th Century, as her deliverer from persecution and the


promoter of lier faith. Yet, what was his character? Let
Gibbon answer : —“ A cruel and dissolute mouarch, corrupted by
fortune, who could sacrifice, without reluctance, the laws of
justice and the feelings of nature to the dictates of either his
passions or interests.” Add to this general description the
deliberate murder of his eldest son, Crispus, and you have
sufficient data. So, then, if Henry was the means by which the
Reformation was advanced in England, Constantine was the means
of advancing Christianity among heathens of the Empire. To say
that the Reformation is untrue because of Henry YIII.
is to say that Christianity is untrue because ot Constantine.
Again, Phocas usurped the Empire of Rome by bloodshed
and murder, yet the supreme power of the Papacy dates
from a certain imperial decree which was the result of an
appeal from Boniface 111., and the whole of the succeeding
system of Rome is based upon it. If, then, the Reformation
is to be cast aside, and the English Church be untrue, because
of Henry, then neither is the Papacy, with its universal
bishopric a true claim because of Phocas. Or take Napoleon 1.,
whose character as a tyrant, usurper, and murderer, is well known.
Yet, by whose consent was the imperial crown placed on this
man’s head ? By that of Pius YII.! To whom does the Church
of Erance owe its restoration as the religion of the country, and
Christianity itself its recognition after years of infidelity? To
this man who says, “ There must be a religion, and that religion
should be directed by the Government; they will say, lam a
Papist; lam no such thing ; I was a Mohamedan in Egypt, I
will become a Catholic here for the good of my people.” Does
Napoleon’s want of sanctity destroy the truth of the Church of
Erance ? If not, what more need be said of Henry VIII. and
the Church of England.
But to resume: —Not a bishop had moved, not a voice was
heard inciting to any junction with the foreign Reformation,
until the king sought to obtain a divorce from his queen. To
gain this object recourse was had to the Pope, but the state of
politics on the continent rendering it necessary for the Pope to
keep on terms with the Emperor of Germany, his decision was
delayed. The Papal allegiance of Henry was of less consequence
to him than the possession of a new queen. He perceived that
the minds of the people and the Church were ready for a religious
movement. The many political advantages of freedom from the
Papal yoke in the struggles of Germany were already acknow-
ledged. Why should not he, with the whole Church of England,
repudiate that supremacy so long exercised in contravention of
the Councils of the Universal Church ? It was done. In the
year 1531, convocation -was assembled and the question solemnly
debated. At length it was concluded, “ that the Pope’s power
in England had no good foundation. It had been managed with
tyranny and had begun with usurpation. They determined


henceforth to acknowledge the Pope only as Bishop of Rome.”*
Such was the first great step in the Reformation of the Church
of England, which was wholly distinct from the German. This
was a Synodal Act of the whole National Church. The Lutheran
movement was without Bishops, without synod, without any
appearance or pretence of Ecclesiastical Order. The English
Reformation is just the reverse, —in accordance with the Canons
of the Ancient Church ; not destroying authority but restoring
it; unitedly as a corporate body regaining that which had been
unjustly taken away. Thence the Church, advancing in her refor-
mation, takes note of doctrine, restoring the old and abolishing the
new. This is done first in the “ Institution of a Christian man,”
A.D. 1537, an admirably conceived work, giving with much
clearness the belief of the Church as held by all schools of
Divines at that period. Another authoritative document, entitled
“ Necessary Doctrine and Erudition,” was published A.D. 1543.
Purgatory is disclaimed ; Indulgences are rejected; Invocation
of Saints forbidden; kneeling or bowing before images and
offering to them any worship is condemned. Thus we pass on to
Edward VI. The same principles were maintained and still
steadily in progress.
Queen Mary, succeeding Edward, brought back for a season
Rome’s supremacy, and things reverted to the state in which
they stood prior to the Reformation. Persecution prevailed.
Conspicuous among the sufferers were the three great
popular heroes of the Reformation —Cranmer, Latimer, and
Ridley. Three years the persecution continued : it is computed
that during that time 277 persons were brought to the
stake, besides those punished by imprisonment, fines and proscrip-
tion. In 1558 Mary died, and the field was then opened for the
re-establishment of the Reformation.
In Elizabeth the Reformation was renewed, and then,
step by step, we trace a firm, constant maintenance of
the Catholic faith, which steadily resisted the innovations
of modern times, and carefully guarded the trust committed
to the Church in accordance with Scripture, the principles
of the Early Fathers, and the decisions of the Universal
Councils. The 39 Articles were drawn up, and received
the assent of Convocation in A.D 1503; the Second Book of
Homilies put forth A.D. 1571. Here, then, we pause. As far
as concerns the Church of England the Reformation is complete,
its principles intelligible, its history, beyond question, in all the
aggregate of facts, conformable to what she now claims to be, —
a living branch of the Catholic Church, in which the pure Word
of God is read and preached, and the Sacraments duly ministered,
—a Church in all essential points the same as it was in primitive
times.
# Barnet, Book 11.


# Now, as the policy of the Eeformation has again become the
topic of keen discussion in our days, it may be well for us to try
and estimate for ourselves its real merits and defects; and then
pass on to the consideration of those doctrines wherein Borne has
grievously departed from her former self and from the truth as
it is in Jesus. It is our bounden duty to discuss, examine, and
compare with the Catholic faith any doctrine which Rome, as a
local Church, claims to impose. That claim we utterly deny, reject,
and repudiate. I have no intention of entering into a minute exami-
nation of each dogma, but simply to point out those doctrines and
practices which are, unquestionably, contrary to Scripture and
the tradition of the universal Church, but which Rome, neverthe-
less, unjustifiably insists upon as terms of her communion : e.g., the
Doctrine of Purgatory, of Indulgences ; the Dogma of Transub-
stantiation ; the Assumption, the Immaculate Conception, the
Worship and Deification of the Virgin Mary ; and, lastly, the
Doctrine of Development, by which theory, of course, any
doctrine or practice may be justified. In connection with the
topic now under consideration —the policy of the Reformation—
I must speak first of the general state of the Church in the
middle ages, and of the way in which the Bible was regarded.t
On both subjects great misapprehension exists. Whatever may
have been its corruption there is no doubt that in the middle
ages the Church was a great popular institution. It was ever
the champion of the people, and the friend of the poor. In
politics she was always on the side of the liberties of the people
and against the tyranny of the feudal lords. The Church, too,
was the great channel by which men might hope to rise in life.
Any clever lad had an opportunity of being educated at the
School of a Monastery, and sent thence to the College, which
the Order maintained for its scholars at the University. And
from the ranks of these students the civil service, as well as the
offices of the Church, were supplied. On the whole, with many
drawbacks, the Mediaeval Church, according to its light, did its
duty to the people. It is the Popish Church, since the Reforma-
tion which is open to the charge of designedly withholding
knowledge from the people, for they know that knowledge is
fatal to the errors and pretensions of Ultramontanism, which
has really allied itseli with despotism against civil liberty. It
is no undue depreciation of our present religious condition in
England, and elsewhere, or any exaltation of the unreformed
Church to assert, as an historical fact, that Englishmen then were
not so superstitious and vicious as might have been expected,
and that Englishmen now are not so godly as they ought to be.
And, certainly, the mediaeval Church realised vividly a great
truth which, until lately, had almost died out in our midst, —that
one great function of the Church of God is to offer an acceptable
* Turning Points in Ch. Hist., p. 213.
. f Turning Points, p. 200, et seq.


worship through Jesus Christ; and in their beautiful Churches
and religious communities set apart for daily worship, in the
solemn grandeur of their services, seven times a day, they did
offer a worship which has, perhaps, only been exceeded in
splendor by that of the temple at Jerusalem. It is quite
gratuitous to suppose that because it was grand and beautiful it
was not spiritual and earnest. The Matins and Evensong in our
modern Prayer Book (which all admit breathes the very spirit
of devotion) are but a revision and abbreviation of services sung
daily in England from the time of Alfred the Great to that of
Henry YIII. There is also great misapprehension as to the
way in which the Bible was regarded in the middle ages. Some
people think it was very little read, even by the clergy,
whereas the sermons of those days are absolutely saturated with
Scriptural language. Another common error is that the
clergy were unwilling that the laity should read the
Bible, and carefully kept it in an unknown tongue.
The truth is, that most people who could read at all, could read
Latin, and would certainly prefer the authorised Vulgate. But it
is also true that there were translations into the vernacular. We
have the authority of Sir Thomas More, for saying that “ the
whole Bible was, Jong before Wycliffe’s days, translated into
English, and by godly people with devotion and soberness well
and reverently read.” That popular and dramatic account
by D’Aubigne, of Luther’s stumbling by accident upon a
Bible at Erfurt, has been conclusively disposed of by Dr.
Maitland, who shows that there were at least twenty editions of
the whole Bible printed in Germany alone, before Luther was
born!
As to the policy of the Reformation, we recognise on the
whole, abundant cause to be thankful for its blessed results.
In reforming doctrine, the aim was to retain the Christian faith,
as fully contained in Scripture, ascertained by the witness of
the early Church, defined in the creeds, and recognised by the
first four general Councils. Only certain later developments of
doctrine were rejected, whose growth was matter of history, and
which were contrary to the standards of the faith. In settling
the worship of the Church, the same principle was followed.
Taking the ancient services as the basis, the superstitious accre-
tions of later centuries were removed, but substantially the same
worship which had grown up in the earlier and purer times of
the Church was retained.
*One of the most important features of the English Reforma-
tion, and wherein it differed from the Continental, was, that it
was not the formation of a new religious body outside the Church,
but a reformation of the Church itself. This accounts for the
conservatism which pervades the whole movement. And while
we justly appreciate its manifold blessings, we may at the same
* Turning Points, p. 214, 15, 17.


time safely assert that there were grave defects in the work of the
Eeformation.—One was, that the opportunity was not taken for
enlarging and rearranging the machinery of the Church, and making
it adequate to the spiritual wants of the people. When the
monasteries and the chantries were swept away, steps should
have followed for reorganising and extending the sole remaining
ministerial ageney. More of the monasteries might have been
turned into Episcopal Sees, —others retained as schools, and the
tithes for parochial endowment: the chantries used as schools
and mission chapels. There were certainly some designs to
this effect entertained ; but the covetousness of kings and nobles
frustrated them, and the opportunity was lost. Another defect of
the Eeformation was, it left the Church without any system of
discipline,—a defect which has now existed for so many generations,
that Churchmen of to-day hardly know what the word means,
although included by the Eeformers among the notes or marks of
a true Church.
We have lately been taunted, as a communion, with being
forced to receive the Book of Common Prayer, and have been
described as “ having it thrust down our throats.” It maybe
interesting to know, that as one of the events following the final
settlement of the Eeformation, Pius IV., in A.D. 1560, offered
on condition of adhesion to the See of Eome, to approve of the
Prayer Book, including the Communion office and the Ordinal.
We have the recorded testimony of this pope in these words,
“ that the book contained nothing contrary to the truth, —compre-
hended all necessary for salvation. He was therefore prepared
to authorise the Book, if the Queen would receive it at his hands ”
How this fact of a Pope of Eome, sanctioning doctrines pro-
testing against, and directly contradicting those of his own
communion, bears upon the infallibility of such pope, 1 leave
Home’s bishops to explain. Perhaps it was one aspect of the
doctrine of development.
But I must now for the present close. Suffer me to plead for
your enlarged, intelligent attachment to, and loving regard for, the
Church of your forefathers. “It is good to be zealously affected
always in a good thing.” Good in itself, good in its influences,
let your faith be, not a cold negation but, a living active principle.
Then then there will be no time for dalliance with temptation—
none for the misgivings of unbelief. And who shall estimate the
effect upon the progress of the Eedeemer’s Kingdom, when the
Church is filled with the spirit of true Christian zeal! Each mem-
ber of the Church would then not only “ profess and call” himself
Christian, but become a witness for Christ—a worker for God,
and there would be neither silence nor faltering in the testimony.
The Church would then, in growing purity and strength, become
the dominion of ever ripening authority; the world would bow
its rank, its intellect, and pride, before the Eedeemer’s feet. He
then should reign, Whose right it is, over a people made willing


in the day of His power. For such a time the world is waiting—
the Church is praying. Brethren, will not you by your example,
hasten on the time /
Young men, there are some of you in the presence of G-od,
that feel the promptings of a noble ambition rising within your
hearts. Show yourselves in reality to be what you profess, soldiers
of Christ, and yours shall be the victory. To you the Church is
looking. Your fathers, worn out with the vicissitudes and
victories of years, are passing away. Just when we were expecting
for them higher fields and wider triumphs, they have gone from
us. Oh! thank God, they have fiung their mantles down, and it is
for you to follow in their footsteps, —to robe yourselves in the
garments of the holy dead, —and like them in the strength of
God to do and die!


LECTURE V.
THE CORRUPTIONS AND FALSE DOCTRINE OF THE
MODERN CHURCH OF ROME.
“ And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.”
—ii. Timothy, hi., 15.
fHERE is but one book in the world of which it may be
said: “It has God for its author, —truth without any
mixture of error for its subject,—and salvation for its
end.” It is the first of all books. From its pages moralists have
borrowed their noblest maxims, poets their finest thoughts, and
artists their most glorious conceptions. The Bible has done more
to bless society, to promote brotherhood, commerce, happiness, and
liberty, than any other book, and than all books together. And
if ever swords are to be beaten into ploughshares, and the fetters
struck from the limbs of slaves, it is by no other instrumentality
than the teachings of this Book, Even Theodore Parker grows
eloquent on this topic. “ View it in what light we may, the Bible
is a very surprising phenomenon. This collection of books has
taken such a hold on the world as none other. The sun never
sets on its gleaming page. It goes equally to the cottage of the
poor man, and the palace of the king. It is woven into the
literature of the scholar, and colours the talk of the street. It
mingles in all the grief and gladness of life. It goes with the
pedlar in his crowded pack. It blesses us when we are born, —•
gives names to half Christendom. It is the better part of our
sermons. In its storied speech our fathers blessed, and the
patriarchs prayed in times of old. The timid man awakening
from this dream of life, looks through the mirror of Scripture,
and his eye grows bright. He does not fear to stand alone, —
to take the death angel by the hand, and bid farewell to wife and
babes, and home ! Men rest on this their dearest hopes. It tells
of God and of His blessed Son, —of earthly duties and of heavenly
rest.”* Yea, more than all, it makes men “ wise unto salvation
through faith which is in Christ Jesus.” It is the glory of the
Church of England, that she assigns due honor to the written
* Theod. Park. Discourses, p. 192-3.


Word as containing all things necessary to salvation; —as the
ultimate ground of appeal in things spiritual, she maintains the
sole supremacy of Holy Scripture. In opposition to the tenets
of Rome, and in conformity with the Church of old, she regards
Scripture as the only infallible authority concerning matters of
faith and practice. While assigning to tradition its rightful
p l ace, she nevertheless maintains, that ‘‘ whatsoever is not read in
Holy Scripture, and may not be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man that it should be believed as an article of
faith.” Art. YL
I. We have now traced the history of the Reformed Church of
England down to A.D. 1570. We saw that its progress was
gradual, its principles scriptural, its record (beyond question in
all the great aggregate of its facts) comformable to the teaching
of the Word of God—the maxims of the ancient fathers—and
the decrees of the first four general Councils. We have seen
that it was a Reformation, not of religious sects outside the
Church (as in the case of the foreign reformers), but a Reforma-
tion by its own authorised spiritual rulers, of the ancient National
Church itself. “ I make not the least doubt in the world,” writes
Bramhall, “ that the Church of England before the Reformation
and after the Reformation, is as much the same Church, as a
garden before it is weeded and after it is weeded ; or a vine
before it is pruned, and afterwards when freed from luxuriant
branches in the same vine.”
And it is worth remembering, that this identity of Communion
was for a long period recognised by Rome herself. Even after
the Papal supremacy was repudiated in the reign of Henry VIII.,
and all through the reign of Edward YL, as far as the eleventh
year of Elizabeth’s reign, there was no interruption of communion
between those of Rome and England. A few years previously,
the Queen had received a notification of the meeting of the
Council of Trent. Partly on account of the terms of the invita-
tion, and partly because the Council would not be “ free, pious,
and Christian,” the Queen would not permit the Church of
England to be represented at it. An attempt was then made by
the Emperor of Germany on behalf of the Papal party, asking
that the deprived bishops might officiate as “vacant bishops,” and
have certain Churches assigned to them. The effect of this
would have been, 1o create and perpetuate a Romish schism.
The Queen, therefore, in her reply, points out this result, and
reiterates the assertion of the continuity and Catholicity of the
reformed Church of England,—arguing that the request was
unreasonable, “ for there was no new faith propagated in England;
no religion set up but that which was commanded by our Saviour,
preached by the primitive Church, and unanimously approved by
the fathers of the best antiquity.” In AD. 1570, Pope Pius Y.
perceiving the failure of his plans, as to “ vacant bishops,” and
the reception of the Book of Common Prayer by his authority,


published a bull of excommunication and deposition against the
Queen. The Roman party at once ceased to attend the parish
Churches. Foreign priests came over to England on secret
missions. France and Spain began a series of hostile operations,
which culminated in the invasion of the Spanish Armada, A.D.
1588.
A question of great historical, as well as ecclesiastical impor-
tance, may as well be dealt with here, viz., the continuance of
the regular ministerial succession in the Church of England,
through the Episcopal order. A few hours after the accession of
Elizabeth, Cardinal Pole, Archbishop of Canterbury, died, and
consequently the Metropolitan See was vacant. Matthew Parker
was nominated by the Queen, who issued a commission to
several Bishops, to proceed to his consecration. Some being
adherents of Rome refused.—Although at that period only
one diocesan bishop remained, yet, several of the bishops deprived
at the accession of Mary, were still living. Of the legal and
cannonical power of these men, to consecrate another bishop,
there could be no doubt. Accordingly, a second commission was
issued to these: Anthony Kitchen, Bishop of Landalf ; W illiam
Barlow, formerly of Bath and Wells, now elect of Chichester;
John Scory, elect of Hereford; Miles Coverdale, formerly of
Exeter; Richard, Suffragan of Bedford; John, Suffragan of
Thetford; and John Bale, bishop of Ossory; to the end
that they might consecrate the elect-Archbishop Parker.
Now, the Romanists declare the invalidity of the orders of the
Church of England, by reason of the absence of proper conse-
cration in the case of Parker. Twenty years after the event, a
Romish Priest, Holywood, published a story called the “Nag’s
Head Fable ;” in which he says the consecration of Parker was
an irregular ceremony, performed at a noted tavern of that name,
and witnessed through a hole in the door, by Neale, a chaplain of
Bishop Bonner. The points on which the Romanists impugn the
consecration, are chiefly these:—(l) That the bishops by whom the
ceremony was performed, had no spiritual jurisdiction. To this we
answer, —though deprived of temporalities, yet in accordance with
the canons of the Synod of Antioch, they officiated legitimately,
and had full spiritual power. Moreover, it is common for Roman
bishops to this day, who are merely titular (or “in partibus,”)
to assist in consecrations. (2) It is alleged that the ordinal
used, was not that of Rome. Courayer, a Romanist,
maintains at great length, “ that nothing essential, either
as to matter or form, was wanting, in the ordination of
Parker.”* Besides this, there is abundant evidence to prove,
that Parker was solemnly consecrated in Lambeth Chapel.
The official record still exists. Roman Catholic writers of
eminence admit the fact, — e.g., Courayer, Dr. Lingard, Canon
Tierney, and Chas. Butler; while all the original documents


have been zincographed and published. The consecration
took place December 17th, A.D. 1559, and was conducted strictly
in accordance with the ordinal of Edward YI. The Archbishop
of Canterbury being thus regularly consecrated, the other Sees
were gradually filled. We conclude then, the orderly succession
of the ministry in the Church of England, was beyond all ques-
tion, transmitted through Parker to his successors.
I. I have shown that the Church of Eome has schismatically
separated herself from other branches of the Church Catholic.
I have now to prove that she has departed from Catholic
antiquity, in (1) the canon of Scripture ; (2) in the definition of
the Catholic faith as essential to salvation ; (3) in the celebration
of the Christian mysteries. In doing so, I hope I shall be pre-
served from any needless use of language calculated to wound
the feelings of others. Plainly, truthfully, I must speak, I trust
neither bitterly, nor uncharitably.
First then, the fallibility of the Church of Eome is demonstrated
by the fact, that she has departed from the canon of Scripture.
S. Jerome, to whom the Church is indebted for that noble
Latin version of Scripture, called the Yulgate, thus speaks in his
preface to the Ist Book of Samuel:—“ This preface may suit as
an introduction to all the books, which I am translating from the
Hebrew into Latin, that we may know whatever is outside these
is to be classed among Apocryphal books. Therefore the Book
of Wisdom, the Books of Jesus the son of Sirach, of Judith
and Tobit, and the Shepherd of Hermas, are not in the Canon.”
In the preface to the Books of Solomon, he adds : —“ Like, there-
fore, the books of Judith, Tobit, and the Maccabees, which
the Church indeed reads, but does not admit them among the
Canonical Scriptures, —so also she reads these two volumes for
the edification of the people, but not for the confirmation of
ecclesiastical dogmas.” I state then the argument thus; —In the
days of S. Jerome, the Catholic Church, including the Church of
Eome, declared the Apocryphal Books to be not inspired. At
the Council of Trent, the Church of Eome declared the same
Apocryphal Books to he inspired, and to be received in the
Canon of Scripture. The Church of Eome is therefore fallible,
because she contradicts herself, and has fallen into error.
11. But, again, I proceed to show that in matters of doctrine,
and in the definition of the faith, the Church of Eome has
grievously erred. (1) I take those doctrines which concern the
future life. (2) Those which regard the Christian mysteries.
(3) Those which regard Divine worship. Conspicuous among
the first class of subjects, stands the doctrine of purgatory. Of
this dogma, the XXII. Article of the Church of England thus
speaks, —“ The Eomish Doctrine concerning purgatory *
* * * * * * * is a fond thing
vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scrip-
ture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God.” It is, of


course, quite clear that both the Jews and the early Christians
uniformly believed in an intermediate state, between death
and judgment. This state is called by various names. In
the creed it is signified by the word “ Hell ” or Hades. In S.
Peter 1, in., 19, as “ the prison.” By our Blessed Lord as
“ Abraham’s bosom,” and as “ Paradise.” Parallel with the
doctrine of the intermediate state, always received by the
Christian Church as a Catholic verity, was the custom of prayer
for the dead. It is clearly mentioned by *Tertullian, Origen,
Cyprian, and is found in the liturgies of S. James, S. Mark, S
Basil, and therein recognised as the public practice : e.g., S. Mark
—“ Give rest, 0 Lord God, to the souls of our fathers and brethren
who are departed in the faith of Christ; granting unto them in
thy kingdom, thy promised good things, which eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard.” In accordance with this principle of the Catholic
faith, the Church of England in her Communion office, com-
memorates the departed. Now, on this early practice, the
Eomanists most unfairly ground their doctrine of Purgatory. Eor
why, say they, pray for the dead, unless we can profit them ; and
how profit them, except by shortening the pains of Purgatory ? I
reply, many of the prayers alleged by Eoman controversialists
in the ancient liturgies, are for the very greatest saints, —for
apostles, martyrs, —yea, for the blessed Yirgin Mary herself.
Thus, “We pray for all the saints who have pleased Thee from
the beginning of the world, for patriarchs, righteous men,
apostles, martyrs, —especially for the holy immaculate blessed
Theotokos, and ever Yirgin Mary.”f Does the Church of Eome
then acknowledge that she who was born “ without sin,” is in pur-
gatorial fires because of sin? Yery gradual, and indeed
cautiously guarded was the course of this unnatural dogma.
Eor 600 years, the subject was never broached at all. And this
silence of antiquity is acknowledged by Cardinal Eisher,J and
many other writers on the Eoman side. In the Bth Century,
and even in the 12th, the doctrine was considered but a private
opinion. In the Council of Florence, A.D. 1138, it came forth
first with ecclesiastical sanction. Then the Council of Trent,
AD. 1563, seals and confirms it thus: “ The Catholic Church,
instructed by the Holy Spirit, out of the sacred writings,
and the ancient tradition of the fathers, has taught in the sacred
Councils, and lastly in their general Synod, that there is a pur-
Still, this assertion of the doctrine does not define
what purgatory is. It is only said, “ there is a purgatory.” In
the creed of Pope Pius IV., draw up A.D. 1564, as a summary of
that Council, all that is declared is, “ I hold constantly that there
* Tertull. De Corona. Milit. c. 3.—Origen. lib. IX., in Eom. Xll.—Cyprian,
Epis. 34, p. 77. —Tide also Harold Browne on XXII. Art.
f Chrysost. Liturg. Groec.
% Assert. Luther. Confutat., p. 111.
§ Council, Yol. Xlll.—Gibbon ch. Ixvi-vii.—Palmer Pt. iv., c. vl, § 5,


is a purgatory, and that the souls there detained are aided by the
suffrages of the faithful.” At length, in the Catechism of the
Council of Trent, the Church of Rome, as if no longer hiding
the doctrine, speaks out, —“ There is a purgatorial fire, in which
the souls of the pious are tormented for a certain time and
cleansed, in order that an entrance may be opened for them into
their eternal home, into which nothing defiled can enter.”*
Cardinal Bellarmine follows to the same effect. Benedict XIV.,
A.D. 1748, advances a little. Commenting on the Canon of the
Mass, he says, the priest there prays “ for all who are expiating their
sins in the fire of purgatory, and requests for them all a place of
cooling, which refers to that fire in which they are burning ; a place
of light which relates to that darkness in which they are ; and a
place of repose, which regards that anxiety of mind with which
they are struggling ; by which threefold species of punishment
those miserable souls are expiated by the Divine Justice.”f Such
then is the history of the Roman doctrine of purgatory! How
contradictory all this is to the goodness, love, and mercy of G-od,
and to the plainest declarations of Holy Writ,*we need not now
pause to consider. I will only add, that while the texts alleged
in favour of this doctrine fail to establish it, there are many
directly opposed to it. It was promised to the penitent thief,
“ To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.” S. Paul felt
assured that “it was better to depart and be with Christ,” to be
“ absent from the body and present with the Lord.” Not one word
about purgatory is ever urged upon Christians to quicken them
to a closer walk with God. IN ay, S. John declares he had an
express revelation concerning the happiness of those that sleep
in Jesus, viz., that they were blessed and at rest. When you
compare such declarations as these, with the exhortations not to
grieve for the dead in Christ, the general assurances concerning
the cleansing of all sin by the blood of Christ, it will be evident
that the doctrine was the growth of later ages, and sprang from
the root of worldly philosophy, not of heavenly wisdom. But
as the testimony of the primitive fathers is so distinct and
unambiguous, it may be well to quote it here. Justin Martyr,
A.D. 140, writes, —“ All souls do not die, the souls of the pious
remain in some better place, while the souls of the unrighteous
and wicked remain in a worse place, expecting the
Is this “better place” purgatorial suffering? Irenseus, A.D.
180, —“ The presbyters who are successors of the apostles, declare
that those who are translated to Paradise, remain there until the
consummation of all things. For there is a paradise prepared
for the just.”§ S. Cyprian, A.D. 250, declares that at death, —
“ the righteous are called to a place of refreshment, the wicked
* Part 1., De Symbol y.
t Benedict XIY., De Sac. Miss., quoted in Palmer’s letters to Wiseman,
J Dial. cum. Trypho.
§ Irenseus Adv. Hoeres. lib. y. c. 5.


are hurried to a place of punishment.” S. Athanasius, A.D. 330,
—“ There is not any death to the just, but a change into an ever-
lasting rest.”* Even S. Augustine, the principal authority cited
in favor of purgatory, writes, —“ It is unlawful to doubt that the
souls of the just and pious are living in rest,”f S. Chrysostom,
A.D. 400, —“There is no comfort in the future world for that
man whose sin is not washed away in this, for now is the time
for care, and warfare, and strife, then for victory, retribution, and
reward.”| Here let us pause to ask: 1 If the doctrine of pur-
gatory was not heard of in the Church for 600 years after Christ,
how can it be based on antiquity ? 2 If, when we do hear of it
we find it rejected by the Greek Church, and after all only
asserted to be a doctrine in the Latin Church, by Councils which
were not (Ecumenical, viz., Florence and Trent, how can it be
based on universality ? 3 And if, even in Roman theologians
themselves, we find no certain ground of argument, since their
explanation of it, as to the place, nature, and derivation of pur-
gatory, all are stated differently by different authors, how can it
be based on consent ? Surely we may with confidence rely on
the inspired testimony of the apostle, and say with S. John,
“ Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: even so saith the
Spirit, for they rest from their labours.”
111. The doctrine of indulgences. The inevitable tendency of
error is to propagate itself. Hence, as a necessary consequence,
the doctrine of indulgences must follow that of purgatory.
“ The uttermost farthing ” must be paid on behalf of souls in
purgatorial fire, —but they are helpless ; whence then, and how is
the debt to be discharged ? The Church of Rome answers, by
works done by the living,—by prayers, and masses, and gifts,
which are endued with the power of the relief desired through a
faculty granted by the pope. This faculty so granted is called
an indulgence. Now there are three axioms on which this idea of
indulgence is based. The first is, that in the merits of Christ
dying on the cross for the sins of men, there is an overplus of
satisfaction and atonement; that this overplus is in the hands
of the Church, and in the custody of the pope, who claims to be
God’s vicegerent on earth. 2. That there have been in all ages,
certain saints, confessors, and martyrs, who by their own good
works, have not only paid for all their own venial sins, but have
left a considerable residue of merit. 3, That since tbe pope, as
Christ’s representative, has a supreme power delegated to him;
he justly disposes of all this overplus of satisfaction and residue
of merit, when he applies it for the benefit of souls in purgatory.
Such is the theory of indulgences. It is singular that in the
Council of Trent, though the word is used, there is no definition
of the doctrine; whereas, in the Council of Florence, A.D. 1438,
* De Yirg. I. 1056.
t De Civitate Dei lib. xxi., c. 24.
% In Gen. Horn. V.


we find the real working of the thing, though no mention of the
word, Leo X., early in the 16th Century, is perhaps the first
who puts forth in undisguised words the fulness of his Church’s
meaning. The substance of his declaration is this, “ that the
Bishop of Eome is able, for reasonable causes, to grant to the
faithful in Christ indulgences, either in this life, or in purgatory,
out of the superabundant merits of Christ and His saints.”
Cardinal Wiseman describes an indulgence thus, —“ It is a
remission by the Church, in virtue of the keys, or judicial
authority committed to her, of a portion, or the whole of the
temporal punishment due to sin. The infinite merits of Christ
form the fund whence this remission is derived. But besides, the
Church holds that by the communion of saints, penitential works
performed by the just, beyond what their sins might exact, are
available to other members of Christ’s mystical body.” *To the
same effect are the statements of Milner’s “ End of Controversy,”
of Bouvier, and others. Such, then, is the meaning of an
indulgence : it is the granting by the pope a remission of punish-
ment due to human sin ; this remission either affecting the living
in prospect for themselves, or the dead through means of the
the living. In certain cases, and under peculiar circumstances,
what was called a “plenary indulgence” was granted. This
system was begun by Pope Urban 11., A.D. 1095, who granted a
plenary indulgence to the Crusaders.f So Bonaface YIIL, A.D.
1295, granted to all who should visit the Churches of S. Peter
and S. Paul, a plenary indulgence from all their sins. Then we
find privileged altars, at which by saying a mass, a soul
shall be released from purgatory. Confraternities have the same
benefit extended to them in return for certain good works.
Acts of worship by individuals have a similar result, viz.,
the obtaining of indulgences. It is argued that holiness
thereby is promoted, and good works encouraged by this
means. However this may be, we know what was the
actual result: the enrichment of the treasury of the Church
of Eome, and the substitution of money for worship and work,
until at last, during the middle ages and later, to use
the words of Cardinal Wiseman, “flagrant and too frequent
abuses occurred through the avarice, rapacity, and impiety of men ;
especially when indulgences were granted to the contributors
towards charitable and religious foundations.”J In justification
of this doctrine, Romish theologians refer to the case of S. Paul
dealing with the incestuous Corinthian, and to the practice of
the primitive Church. The answer to this argument is, that the
case does not apply. Eor first, the temporal punishment of the
offender has reference to this life, and not to purgatory. And as
to the primitive Church, the true notion of an ancient indulgence
X Controv. Lect. quoted in Palmer, Lett. vi.


had reference simply to the term of penance for such as fell into
idolatry; and the shortening of such term, and the relaxation of
penance, on token of repentance, and the speedier restoration to
Church fellowship.* But this is very different from the Roman
theory. Moreover, that theory contradicts and stultifies itself.
The theory is that the power of the keys is of necessity exercised
in the remission of the guilt of sin, and that alone; and it is only
after the guilt is remitted, that the temporal punishment has to
be considered, —and this by the theory remains to be dealt with
by God himself. Now here is a dilemma. Temporal punishment is
either remitted in the absolution of the Church, together with
the guilt, or it is not. If it be, then there does not remain any
to be dealt with in purgatory. On the other hand, if temporal
punishment is not remitted in absolution, why not ? But if it be
left in the hand of God, how can priest, bishop, or pope, deal
with it afterwards, when the soul is in another state unknown to
and beyond his authority ? On the whole, then, this doctrine
must be rejected, as vicious, immoral, contrary to the Word of
God, self-contradictory, and opposed to the teaching of the Church
Catholic. Roman writers confess that nothing was heard of it for
twelve centuries. The Schoolmen acknowledge that indulgences
began in the reign of Pope Alexander 111. The first authoritative
decree does not meet us till A.D. 1350. In the writings of the
fathers, there is no mention whatever of all those things, which
form the prominent features of the Roman indulgence. This
doctrine, therefore, cannot stand the test of antiquity. It is
a mere modern novelty and corruption, and therefore the
Church of Rome has no right, on any Catholic grounds, to
demand consent thereto.
IY. The doctrine of Transubstantiation. By many professing
Churchmen of the present day, and notably by dissenters, this
false doctrine of transubstantiation is spoken of, as if identical with
the doctrine of the Real Presence, which I venture positively to
affirm, is the doctrine of the Church of England, as it was that
of the primitive Church. Of course, I am aware that in the
estimation of many, the sacraments are nothing more than “ badges
or tokens of social co-operation altogether human acts, purely
external ceremonies, memorials which may possibly suggest
certain moral ideas by recalling the memory of a teacher who
died many centuries ago. I do not hesitate to say, that if this
had been the estimate of the Church of Christ, then long ago
the sacraments would have been abandoned as useless ceremonies.
“ If we believe that the sacraments are only picturesque memorials
of an absent Christ, we are in a fair way to believe that Christ, who
is thus commemorated is only and purely human, The fact that
the sacraments are channels of grace, points to the God-head of
their Pounder, and so Baptism becomes the layer of a real
regeneration, the Holy Eucharist will be a real communion of


the body and blood of Christ.”* In support of this statement, I
conclude that, —“ The doctrine of a real spiritual presence, is the
doctrine of the English Church It teaches that Christ is really
received by faithful communicants in the Lord’s Supper; but
that there is no gross or carnal, but only a spiritual and heavenly
presence there, not the less real, however, for being spiritual.”
“ Thus, much we must premise as unquestionable. The whole
primitive Church evidently believed in a presence of Christ in
the Eucharist. All spoke of feeding there on Christ, —eating
His body and drinking His blood. But the presence was
spiritual, the substance of the bread and wine remained.”! - Pre-
cisely in accordance with this statement is the teaching of the
XXIII. Article. See also I. Cor., x., 16, And so in the Church
Catechism, —“ What is the inward part or thing signified? The
body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful (communicants) in the Lord’s Supper.”
In the prayer of humble access, —“ Grant us, therefore, gracious
Lord, so to eat the flesh of Thy dear Son, and drink His blood,
that our sinful bodies may be made clean by His body, and our
souls washed by His most precious Blood.” Again, in the address
to communicants, —“ Then, we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ,
and drink His blood.” [Vide John vi., 53, 56.] And in the
Book of Homilies, —“ But this much he must be sure to hold
that in the Supper of the Lord there is no vain ceremony, no
bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent, but, as the Scripture
saith, the table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the
memory of Christ, the annunciation of His death, yea, the communion
of the body and blood of the Lord in a marvellous incorporation,
which by the operation of the Holy Ghost, the very bond of our
conjunction with Christ is through faith wrought in the souls
of the faithful.” Such, then, is the Catholic (not Homan)
doctrine in regard to the change wrought in the sacred
elements of the Lord’s Supper. There is a real presence in the
Holy Eucharist. Real, because spiritual,—real, in opposition to
figurative or symbolical. So that, in that Holy Ordinance, to
use the words of Cranmer, we are “ spiritually fed with His
flesh and blood; so that now the said mystical bread is both a
corporal food for the body, and a spiritual food for the soul.”!;
But now contrast the doctrine of transubstantiation. Like all
doctrines peculiarly Romish, it begins, grows, and develops, and
is finally made an article of faith. It was not until A.D. 831,
that it was proclaimed as a necessary doctrine of the Church.
Paschasius Radbert says, “ After the consecration, nothing
remained of the bread and wine but their external figure.” So
Haymo about the same period, “ The taste uf and form of bread
and wine remain, but the nature and substance is altogether
* Liddon Bampton Lee. p. 480-484.
f Bp. Harold Browne on XXXIX. Art., p. 678, 680,
X Cranmer, Remains. VoJ, 11., p. 340.


changed into the body and blood of Christ.” But we do not find the
actual word “ transubstantiation ” used by authority, till the 4th
Council of Lateran, A.D. 1215. In the decrees of the Council
of Trent, we read, “ If any shall deny that in the Sacrament of
the Most Holy Eucharist, there is contained truly, really, and
substantially, the body and blood, together with the soul and
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the whole Christ, but shall
say that He is only in it, in sign, or figure, or power, let him be
accursed.” Again, “If any shall deny that wonderful and
remarkable conversion of the whole substance of the bread
into the body, and the whole substance of the wine into the
blood, while only the appearance of the bread and wine remains,
which conversion the Roman Church most aptly styles transub-
stantiation, let him be accursed.”* The creed of Pius IV., AD.
1564, is to the same effect. INow it would be easy to show, that
for twelve centuries at least, no such doctrine as this was recog-
nised ; not one whit more is taught by Catholic Divines,
than the Church of England teaches us at this moment
to believe. There is nothing in the ancient fathers, or in
the ancient liturgies, or in the Roman Canon of the mass
itself, to justify the strange and merely modern dogma of
Rome. It is utterly unnecessary, contrary to all antiquity,
all catholicity, all consent; a mere theory, as absurd as it
is monstrous and uuscriptural. This, however, is an unques-
tionable fact; the whole primitive Church, while rejecting
transubstantiation, did believe in a presence of Christ in
the Holy Eucharist. Ignatius speaks of “ one flesh of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and one cup for the unity of His
blood.”f Justin Martyr, “This food is called by us Eucharist,
&c.; we take not these as common bread and common drink.
This food is the flesh and Hood of Him the Incarnate Jesus."%
Irenaeus speaks of “ the mingled cup and the created bread
becoming the Eucharist of Christ’s blood and body.” Clement
of Alexandria, Origen, S. Cyprian, and S. Jerome, all clearly
distinguish between the natural body and blood of Christ, which
were crucified and shed, and the spiritual body and blood which
are eaten and drunk by the faithful. S. Augustine writes,
“ Spiritually understand what I have spoken to you. What you
see is bread, and the cup. But as your faith requires, the bread
is Christ’s body, the cup His blood.”§ Here, then, is abundant
evidence against transubstantiation, but not against the truth of
Christ’s presence in the Holy Eucharist; nor against a real
participation of His body and blood. (See Article XXYIII.)
It will be necessary, before dismissing this part of our subject,
to show that the practice of the Church of Rome, in denying the
* Council Trident, Can. 1, et H
t Ep. ad. Smyru., n. 7
J Apolog. I. 65, 7,
§ Ep. ad JBonitacium


cup to the laity, is as unscriptural as in her modern dogma of
transubstantiation. In this practice, I maintain the Church of
Home has taken away, as not essential to the validity of the
blessed Sacrament, that which Christ commanded should form a
part of that Sacrament, It is a question, indeed, whether by
infringing and dislocating a Divine ordinance in this manner, the
laity do receive the Sacrament at all. Cardinal Bona, a great
liturgical writer of the 17th Century, speaks thus, —“ The
faithful always, and in all places, from the very foundation of the
Church to the 12th Century, were accustomed to communicate
under the species of bread and wine; but in the beginning of
that cenfury, the use of the cup began by little and little to be
laid aside, and many bishops interdicted the people the use of
the cup for fear of irreverence and effusion.”* The same truth is
admitted by Herrington and Kirk, in a work called, “ The Faith
of Catholics.”t But the latpr decrees of Constance and Trent
prevailed, and the doctrine is set forth, that “ under either kind
we receive both the body and blood of Christ.”J In a catechism,
called “ Grounds of Catholic Doctrine,” we find this question and
answer. “ But are not all Christians commanded to drink of the
cup, —Drink ye all of it?” A. “No, that command was only
addressed to the twelve apostles who were all that were then
preeent.”§ Surely, this is strange argument. If the words,
“Drink ye all of it,” are only applicable to the apostles, then the
same must be said of “ Take and eat this,” for none but the
apostles were present. The dilemma is plain. Either the
apostles were priests, or they were not. If not, then the com-
mand concerning the blessed Sacrament, applies to all Christians
to receive the cup as well as the bread. But if they were priests,
then the command to receive the bread is as much confined to the
office of the priest, as the other injunction, “ Drink ye all of it.”
And if so, the whole Sacrament, as necessary to salvation, is at
once abolished. But let us hear the voice of the Fathers:—
Ignatius, A.D. 100, —“ There is one bread broken for all, and one
chalice distributed to all.”|| Justin Martyr,—“ The ministers of
the Church give to all present the consecrated bread and
S. Cyprian speaks of the administering of the cup to the people,
as “the original institution of our Lord’s tradition.”** S. Basil,
A D. 360; S. Ambrose, A.D. 370; S. Chrysostom, A.D. 390; all
unite in declaring “ there is one body and one cup given to all.”ff
Pope Gelasius, A.D. 492, describes “ the division of one and the
* Dona. Her. Lit. lib. 11., c. 18.
t Vol. 11, p. 385.
X Cone. Const. Sess. XIII., A.D. 1481. Trident. XXI., c. i., can. i.-ii.
§ Abridgement of Christian Doctrine, p. 83.
11 Ep. ad Philadelph.
IT Apolog. 1., 65.
** Ep. ad Ccecil. 1., 185.
tt Mor 8. c. Awb. ia 1 Cor-, ii., Chrys. Horn, ivii,


same mystery as sacrilege Julius, A.D. 920, —“An error
which ought immediately to cease.”t Now popes are infallible by
the present theory of the Roman Church. Let them escape the
inevitable conclusion, which the present practice of their Church
suggests, as best they can.
V. Mariolatry. The answer to these two questions, “ Whom
are we to worship, and how ?” comprises the whole sum and sub-
stance of religion. Now the Scripture replies, “Hear Oh Israel,
the Lord thy God is one Lord.” And as to the method of
worship, “ There is one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus,” and “ God is a spirit, and they that worship Him
must worship Him in spirit and in truth.” While acknow-
ledging in the broadest sense these great scripture truths,
yet the Romanists permit tributary and secondary objects
of worship in practice, to occupy their devotions equally with
God, viz., the saints, holy angels, and especially the Blessed
Virgin Mary. To obviate the evident wrong involved in the
practice, Rome has invented terms by which she describes different
kinds of worship. The worship of God, Latreia ; of saints,
Douleia ; of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Ilyper-douleia. First,
there are prayers offered to God, through the mediation of
the Adrgin, and passing over the merits and intercession of
Christ. The second stage of the adoration, is that in which
she is called upon to use her intercession with God, —the
breviary is full of these prayers. The third stage is, prayers
which are addressed directly to her, no longer seeking her inter-
cession and advocacy, but that she herself, irrespective of God,
would grant some temporal or spiritual gift. The fourth kind of
adoration is found in praises and hymns, where glory is offered
to her as a Divine Being, standing in the place of God, e.g., “ The
Holy Mother of God is exalted above the choir of angels in the
heavenly realm. The gates of paradise are open to us by thee.
Rejoice, 0 Virgin Mary, thou alone hast destroyed all heresies
in the whole world.” Bonaventura compiled a psalter in honor
of the Virgin. His plan was, simply to take that of David, and
wherever the name of the Lord occurred, to substitute “ our
Lady.” Thus in Psalm xxx., for “In thee O Lord have I
trusted,” we find, “In thee 0 Lady, &c.;” xxxi., “ Blessed
are they whose hearts love thee, O Blessed Virgin Mary,
their sins shall be mercifully blotted out by thee Ixvii., “ Let
God arise, &c.,” “ Let Mary, &c.” In a similar manner,
the Te Deum is paraphrased. —“We praise thee, Mother
of God; we acknowledge thee Mary the Virgin. 0 Lady save
thy people. Vouchsafe, 0 sweet Mary, to keep us this day and
for ever without sin.” In addition you find this, —“ Therefore,
O Empress, and our most benign Lady, by the right of a mother
* Ep. ad Majoric. De Consecratione.
f Julius Ep. ad Episcop. Egyp. 9, c. 111.


command thy most beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, &c.”*
Another writer, Bernardine de Bustis, argues thus, —“ Since
every son is naturally inferior to his mother, the Blessed Virgin
herself is superior to God , and God himself is her subject , by
reason of the humanity derived from her.”f “ Mary has done
more for God, than God has for man; so that thus, on account of
the Blessed Virgin, God is in a certain manner under greater
obligations to us than we are to Him It may be said, these
are writers of ages gone by, and such is not the doctrine of the
Church of Rome now. Not so. There is a Roman Catechism,
compiled by Cardinal Bellarmine, and to the repetition of that
catechism, indulgences were granted by Pius VII. at the com-
mencement of the present century. In that catechism occurs
the following sentence, —“ We fly to thy protection, Holy Mother
of God. Despise not our prayers in our necessities, but deliver
us at all times from all evils, glorious and Blessed Virgin.” In
the year 1832, Gregory XVI. wrote an encyclical letter, in
which, “ on solemnising the festival of the triumphant assumption
of the Holy Virgin into heaven,” passing by God as the
deliverer, ignoring Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, he throws
all on the Virgin: it is to her “ celestial inspiration ” he looks
for council in his difficulties.
A word as to the Assumption and the Immaculate Con-
ception. It is stated by Baronius and others, that “ Mary
the Virgin, the mother of Jesus, was taken up into heaven
A.D. 48.” Now if such an event had really occurred, would
Scripture be silent? In 47 and 48 A.D., Paul and Barnabas
were preaching in Asia. S. Luke continues the history down to
AD. 63. S. John lived to A.D. 96, and then writes his Gospel.
Would he have been ignorant of the death and burial of one
so solemnly committed to his care? Take, then, the writers of
the 2nd and 3rd Centuries. They speak not one word of this
great event. S. Epiphanius, in the 4th Century, says, —“ Whether
the holy Virgin be dead and buried, or whether she was slain, or
whether she is remained, her end is not known. We must not
honor the saints beyond due measure, but honor their Lord.”
It was made a festival of commemoration in Italy in the 7th
Century, in Germany and France not until the 9th Century.
Looking then at the question in the light of history, our unavoid-
able conclusion is, that however much, as painters and poets, the
Romanists may delight in the idea of the bodily presence of the
Virgin now in heaven, it is simply a Action, with no foundation
in history, no recognition by the early Councils, and no authority
in the Word of God.
A s to the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, there can be
no doubt that up to the middle of the 12th Century, nothing was
* Yol. YL, p. 406.
t Serm. 11., p. 605.
J Bernard. Senuensis. Yol. IY.,p. 124.


heard of such a dogma. S. Bernard, who was conspicuous for
his warm and faithful adoration of the Blessed Virgin, yet con-
demns the doctrine, and a festival of the Conception, which some
monks at Lyons were desirous of celebrating as “ a new festival
which the usage of the Church knows not, reason approves not,
and ancient tradition does not countenance.” If freedom from
sin in conception were required for the Virgin, he shows
it must be required for the parents of the Virgin, and
so on to all her ancestors. He calls the doctrine a “ novelty,”
“an error,” “a superstition.”* Peter Lombard, in a sermon
on the assumption, writes, —“ The glorious Virgin was conceived
in original sin.” Not till the 14th Century is the doctrine
promulgated, and set forth for public discussion. At the
Council of Basle the festival of the Conception was first
appointed. It was not recognised by any pope till A.D. 1471.
Indeed, up to the 16th Century, it was left an open question.
In A.D. 1617, bulls were issued forbidding any to assert in
conversation, or in sermons, that the blessed Virgin was conceived
in sin, at the same time not allowing the use of the word
“immaculate ” in any public office of the Church. In the
Council of Trent, the Dominicans successfully resisted the
enforcement of the dogma, and nothing was decided all through
the L7th Century, and all through the 18th Century, until, in an
evil hour, A.D. 1854, Pius IX. issued his celebrated bull,
“ Ineffabilis” in which after long centuries of doubt and silence,
opposition from the ablest and holiest, and contradiction
of all Catholic teaching, he decided that a belief in the
Immaculate Conception was necessary to salvation. Now, either
Pope Pius must be wrong, and therefore fallible, or the whole
Christian Church for eighteen centuries must have been in error.
Which think you the more probable opinion ? And let it not be
forgotten, that the Church of England in reality, honors the
blessed Virgin far more than that Church, which blasphemously
ascribes to her the titles and attributes of Deity. We honor the
Virgin in accordance with Holy Scripture, and the testimony of
the fathers. The Church of England has two festivals in her
commemoration, viz., the Anunciation, and the Presentation in the
Temple. We also rejoice to call her blessed, in the song of the
Virgin Mary, the Magnificat, and with her our souls do “ magnify
the Lord, and our spirits rejoice in God,” her Saviour no less
than ours. To sum up ; If in Holy Scripture there is not one
word to justify, but rather everything to condemn this doctrine ;
if in the creeds it is only stated that she was a virgin and a
mother ; if the apostolic fathers of the Eirst Century are all
silent on the subject,—How can such a doctrine as the worship of
the Virgin Mary be true? It may be said, what of subsequent
ages r Let us see. Five centuries pass, three of which are
engaged in the greatest controversies, bearing upon the person of


Christ, and involving the office of the blessed Virgin,—in which
the principal Councils of the Church had assembled, and yet the
present Eoman dogma was utterly unheard of!
We have now very briefly examined those points of doctrine
wherein Rome differs from the rest of Christendom. We have
tested them one by one, and have seen that they, contrary to
Scripture, cannot be proved by antiquity, are not received by
general consent, have not been accepted by the Universal Church.
The question then naturally arises, how these doctrines in spite
of their own rule, have been established in the Romish Church
as articles of faith? All the world has now ascertained the
worthlessness of the prool of certain dogmas, hitherto cherished
by the Church of Rome. She must either abandon them, or give
some other testimony of their reality. But how can an infallible
Church abandon a doctrine once proclaimed? Another scheme,
therefore, must be propounded. Accordingly, it is now asserted
that the ancient faith, as found in Holy Scriptures, and as taught
by the fathers, was in an imperfect embryo state, needing growth
and expansion corresponding to the history of the world, and the
needs of the Church. And this they call “ the theory of develop-
ment.” Mr. Newman, in an essay on this subject, asserts repeat-
edly, that the plea of antiquity is no longer tenable in respect of
several dogmas. He specially mentions image worship, and the
cultus of the blessed Virgin.* Now here is the clue given at
once, for every confessed novelty in the Roman creed. There
is a developed doctrine to be entertained. Though the apostles
never taught it, though the fathers dreamt not of it, the Church
ascertained it when she felt her need of it, and then proclaims it
as a doctrine to be believed under peril of anathema ! Now we
confess that there are two sorts of development, which are
real and true. Any development which arises as a necessary
inference from an acknowledged truth, or is a deduction
from many combined truths, is itself true; this is called logical
development. Or any development which arises as a matter of
fact in the application which it bears to an individual, or in the
history of the world, is by its very terms true; this is called
historical development. As an instance of the former, the doctrine
of the Trinity ; of the latter, take the conversion of the Druids, or
of any heathen nation to Christianity. But the developments of
of doctrine which Rome has introduced are very different matters.
—lndeed being contrary to Holy Scripture, and the practice of
the apostles, they are false developments, and therefore corrup-
tions. And where will the process end ? If from the reverence
due to the blessed Virgin Mary, there has issued Mariolatry and
the deification of a creature, with her shrines, her images, services,
schemes of adoration, which are now matters of faith, developed;
may not the process in a few years acquii’e a further develop-
* Essay, p, 357, 407.


ment P* When Pius IX. gives way to a pope who shall be a
greater devotee of Mary than himself, may she not become a very
goddess, and receive “ the sacrifice of the altar,” no longer her
blessed Son’s, but her own ? Moreover, if the doctrine be true,
then the apostles were misled and deceived; nay, were false
witnesses, for S. Paul saith, “ I have kept back nothing that was
profitable,” and again, “ I have not shunned to declare unto you
all the council of God.” Still further, our blessed Lord only
told men a portion of what it was needful they should learn, in
order to be wise unto salvation; and only performed a part of
what was needed for man’s redemption! Yes, and the Scriptures
which were given by inspiration of God, in order that each man
of God might thereby be thoroughly furnished unto all good
works, is an incomplete revelation, and all the goodness and the
love, and suffering and martyrdom, all the triumphs of the Cross
for centuries, —these were but shadows of the faith, the reality
was to come afterwards! Brethren, not so have we read
Scripture, studied history, or learned Christ. No, but after the
way which they our opponents call heresy, still “ worship wo the
God of our fathers,” through the one Mediator, Jesus Christ our
Lord.
I have now completed, as far as the brief limits of a few
sermons would permit, the task which I undertook. Enough, at
any rate, has been advanced to prove the antiquity and indepen-
dence of the Church of England. We have seen that it was
founded, if not by the apostles themselves, at least within a
century of apostolic times; that it was flourishing in the 2nd,
3rd, and 4th Centuries, —was represented by British prelates at
different Councils; that in those days all the Apostolic Churches
were independent of each other, and of equal rank and authority ;
that the Church in Britain had for more than five centuries existed
previous to the arrival of S. Augustine and the Eomish mission-
aries, and up to that time, there had been no attempt on the part
of the bishops of Borne to arrogate universal supremacy; that
by far the greater portion of England and the British Isles was
converted by prelates of British origin; that in the time of
Theodore, the British Church merged into that of Borne, con-
formed to her discipline, and received many of her corruptions
as they were successively introduced into the Church; that it was
not till the middle of the 11th Century that the pope acquired
much spiritual authority, or claimed any civil jurisdiction in
England ; that one sovereign after another protested against and
resisted the encroachments of the Boman See, But that, at length,
through the cowardly conduct of King John, the Church of
England, in the 13th Century, lost her independence ; that, even
after this period, the resistance manifested against papal encroach-
ments by different monarchs, plainly showed that the English,
however oppressed, never wholly lost sight of independence,
* Dr. Newman admits that the Church was first Catholic, then Papal.


either in Church or State. Beginning at the 14th Century, we
next traced the progress of the Reformation, by which we under-
stood, not the separation from any other Church, or the
introduction of any new religion, but the casting off those
corruptions of faith and practice which had been the growth of
centuries, and the restoration, as nearly as could be approached,
to that pure and Scriptural model of primitive antiquity, “ built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
Himself being the chief corner stone.” Had Romanists adhered
to the primitive practice, and to the plain teaching of the Word of
God, much discord and bloodshed would have been saved, and the
Reformation never have been needed! What then shall be our
closing words. In the face of these manifold errors and corrup-
tions of the Church of Rome, —learn to appreciate the advantage
of our own position among the Communions of Christendom, —a
position at once Scriptural and Catholic. “ Hold fast the form of
sound words.” “Remove not the ancient landmarks which thy
fathers have set.” One of those landmarks is the Bible. Remember,
“ It is the word of the living God, and able to make us wise unto
salvation.” Receive no doctrine as necessary to salvation, which
cannot be proved by the warrant of Holy Writ. Remember, it
is the rule of faith, —of practice also ! Then lift it high in your
temples, clasp it close to your hearts, it is the word of the Lord
which abideth for ever! Another of these landmarks is
prayer, not through or to saints and angels, but to God through
the one and only Mediator Jesus Christ our Lord. Brethren,
that is a landmark of olden times, which from the beginning was
deemed sacred. I have seen silver locks bent over that landmark,
while the hot tears quickly flowed! I have known sad faces hide
against that stone, and then rise up bright and unclouded ; they
had held converse with that God, Who “ heareth prayer.” Upon
that old landmark, is the pressure of the folded hands of the
prophets and apostles, and martyrs in every age. Sufferers for
conscience sake have there drawn strength to defy tyrants, and
to smile at fire and death. The paths to it are pressed by pilgrims’
feet, and the sods around worn by the knees of sainthood in all time.
A sacred Head once bent over ic, and bleeding hands once touched
it, as the cry went forth, “ Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do.” Lastly, another landmark is the Cross
of Atonement! the all sufficient work and righteousness of
Christ. No superfluous merits of saints, no masses for
souls in purgatorial fire, no indulgences are needed, while
in its simplicity that Cross stands, and the eye of the faith-
ful rests on the mighty Victim who once hung bleeding there !
You have seen a well-known picture of a fair fresh young form,
clinging to a cold stone Cross set in an angry sea. The white
surf dashes against that Cross, and high green waves come sweep-
ing over the frail dinger as she holds it. Her arms are clasped
around the beacon, and the tresses stream back as the eyes in
faith are directed heavenward! Thus, brethren, let our faith


cling to tlie Cross, or rather to Him who died thereon; this our
determination, —“ G-od forbid that I should glory, save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
And let me add, be steadfast in your adhesion to a Church
wherein these simple Gospel truths are upheld, divested of modern
corruptions and man-made traditions. Ido not claim perfection
for the Church of England. If, on the whole, you can show me a
community more Scriptural in its doctrine, more primitive and
apostolic in fellowship, then I will gladly renounce and forsake
this. But whither shall we go ? To some sect of Christians
which has arisen in later days, separated from the Church, and has
assumed authority from purely human sources, to minister the
Word and Sacraments? In short, shall I adopt Christianity
without a Church ? Or, shall Igo to a. communion, which can
indeed boast ecclesiastical authority; but an authority which
sets at defiance, yea, tramples under foot the “ Magna Charta ”
of our spiritual liberties ; an authority which mutilates sacra-
ments, deprives the laity of the cup in the Holy Eucharist, which
bows down to graven images, which makes a new dogma in the
19th Century, and denying the Lord that bought them, worships
the creature in place of the Creator who is God over all? No,
conscious of our manifold advantages, let us thank God we
belong to a Church Scriptural in doctrine, apostolic in constitu-
tion, “wherein the pure Word of God is read, and the Sacra-
ments duly administered.” It is not the fault of the Church, if
hitherto she has failed more signally to fulfil her high
commission. Only let her children be true to her principles,
and all will be well. For I believe that brighter and more
blessed days are yet in store for our beloved Zion, so long
as she maintains those two great distinctive principles,
—apostolic order, and Scriptural truth. Then shall be heard a
voice, “ destroy her not for a blessing is in her.” In her Articles,
Liturgy, and Homilies, are the truths of the everlasting Gospel;
in her vaults are the ashes of Zion’s defenders ; in her services are
the spirits of the martyred dead ! “ She is a crown of glory, a royal
diadem in the hand of God.” Only let her be faithful, proclaim-
ing fearlessly those doctrines for which apostles, martyrs,
and confessors shed their blood, and she need no longer fear the
assaults of open enemies, or what is worse, the half-heartedness
and treachery of pretended friends ! Then indeed would she
hasten on that day, when the voice from heaven should be heard,
“ Arise, shine, thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
arisen upon thee.” “ Many daughters have done virtuously, but
thou excellest them all!”


