

ss:
I
sg
p
.
' V-i - ;■.
' -:>: v ' ;• -- «. ' :v v< , ;: • s.' : c\. -
:- «>'> .*''> - x- >" ' v -■■ s ,,
.
-
? ■
■-'-p:;^;pv§
■ ■ .-/ : - - ■ <•'•'', / ■;; :.' ■ ■. - .'■ v.-# 4 ?-' -.C'r : ' •* ■ - V ■■
: ■ .' ■ ■ .• :' :>! >-V '
i
.
- ' • . ‘ v'** -f ' ?'•'>. 'vSy-^
- ' v • . ■ • ■ v v\‘
, p. .. . •■' - • ■ -.' ‘ ■ \ ' -' -


The Library is open to Members at
each meeting. Members may £eep
books one month. If £ep/ longer the
borrower is expected to contribute a
silver coin to the Library Fund.


ir
X
V*
<Cv
w
\v.\
)J)


✓


FIVE LITTLE BUSH GIRLS.


Dedicated to the Memory of
My Dear Mother.
THE AUTHOR.
First Print, October, 1918.




“It’s about the hardest thing I ever tried.”


FIVE LITTLE
BUSH
GIRLS
BY
E. LEE RYAN,
Illustrated by Betty Paterson.
AUSTRALASIAN AUTHORS’ AGENCY,
237 COLLINS STREET. MELBOURNE.


This Book was Printed in Australia by
BRUCE. & Co.. 434 Bourke St.,
and the Blocks were made by
Patterson, Shugg & Co.,
21 Burns Lane,
Melbourne.


29
36
42
51
61
67
71
77
88
95
.. 102
.. 110
.. 118
.. 126
I I I
31/3/
CONTENTS.
Chapter. Page.
I.—THE CONSULTATION .. .. 7
II.—“ GILLGONG” 20
lII.—THE LETTER .. .. .. 29
IV—“ TEDDO ” .. .. . • • • 36
V.—THE REPLY .. .. .. 42
VI.—A SURPRISE .. .. .. 51
VII.—FRANK .. .. .. .. 61
VIII.—THE STORM .. .. .. 67
IX.—ANTICIPATION .. .. .. 71
X.—MOSMAN .. .. .. .. 77
XL—HOME AGAIN .. .. .. 88
XII. —WILLIE .. .. .. .. 95
XIII. —A SYNDICATE .. .. .. 102
XIV. LESSONS .. .. .. ..110
XV.—EILEEN’S RETURN .. .. 118
XVL—CONVERSATIONS .. .. ..126
XVII.—THE GOVERNESS .. .. .. 133


Page.
. . 141
.. 154
.. 162
.. 169
.. 175
.. 180
.. 186
.. • 193
CONTENTS.
Chapter.
XVIII.—THE SUBSCRIPTION .. .. 141
XIX.—POETS .. .. .. ..154
XX.—GOOD-BYE TO “TEDDO ” .. 162
XXL—INTERCESSION .. .. ..169
XXII.—A HERO .. .. .. ..175
XXIII. LETTERS .. .. .. ..180
XXIV. A NEW ARRIVAL .. .. . . 186
XXV.—NEW PEOPLE .. .. .. 193
XXVI.—SOME MERRY MEETINGS .. 202
XXVII.— THE INVITATION.. .. .. 209
XXVIII.—'THE PARTY .. .. ..219
XXIX.—A WEEK ON THE RIVER .. 225
CONCLUSION .. .. ..234


CHAPTER I.
THE CONSULTATION.
“ I’m just about sick of it all,” said Eileen.
“So am I,” murmured Mollie, almost under
her breath.
“ Me, too,” said Eva.
“ An’ me, too,” agreed Doris. “ I’m weal sick of
it.”
“ Me tick, too,” cried Baby, looking round at the
disconsolate faces, and, putting two fat hands to her
eyes, she cried lustily.
“ Stop that, Baby,” cried Eileen, severely. “ Stop
at once.”
But Baby only cried the louder.
“ Wait a bit, Baby. Here’s a nice piece of bread
and jam,” said Mollie, and the cries ceased instantly.
“ I’m goin’ to ask Mum to let’s all have bread and
jam for tea,” said Doris. “ I’m sick o’ old drippin’
—weal sick!”
“So am I,’ agreed Eileen. “ Other people can
have butter and jam together, while we’re scraping
along with old dripping. I’m just sick of every-
thing.”
“ So am I.”
“ And so am I.”
“ And so am I.”
“ And so am I.”
see


And then five very disconsolate little girls swung
five pairs of very disconsolate legs vigorously as
they sat in a row on the wooden verandah. At least,
Baby tried to swing hers in unison with the others,
but she only succeeded in giving a rather weak kick
now and again, as she watched the other legs and
tried to munch her bread and jam at the same time.
“ Let’s count up all the bad luck we’ve had this
year,” said Eileen.
“ Oh, yes, let’s count,” they all cried excitedly,
and instantly they sat erect, all except Baby, who
still solemnly swung one leg and then the other, and
hung tenaciously on to the last piece of crust.
“Go on, Eileen. Speak up.”
“ First the two cows died, and one of the calves,
and didn’t we have trouble with the other one?” she
said with a sigh.
“ And then the big horse died,” chimed in another.
“ So it did, and then ”
“ Old Star’s foal died,” said Mollie.
“So it did,” cried Eileen. “ Old Star’s beautiful
foal died.”
“ Me want Tar’s foal,” cried Baby.
“Oh, stop that noise, Baby! You never let us
have a nice quiet talk,” said Eileen. “ What next?”
“ The sheep got poisoned weed,” said Eva.
“ And the dingoes came,” answered Doris.
“ So they did,” cried Eileen, ticking off the events
on her fingers. “ That’s six. Can't we make
twelve?”
“ Say that lot over again,” said Doris, “ and we
might think of more.” She sat down and prepared


to enjoy herself listening to their bad luck.
“ Yes,” answered Eileen, with hands in the air.
“ There’s the two cows and the calf—oh! by the
way, I didn’t count the calf last time; that’s three,
and the horse—that’s four; and old S-t-a-r-’s f-o-a-1 ”
(spelling it aloud, so that Baby would not go into
a fresh paroxysm of grief) “ makes five, and there’s
the poisoned weed and the dingoes. That makes
seven. We nearly have twelve —we might think
of more by night,” she went on hopefully.
“ Oh! I know another —one you haven’t thought
of—very near the biggest of them all,” shouted
Doris.
“ Oh ! Doris, darling, tell us !”
\\ hat about the haystack being burnt down?”
she exclaimed triumphantly.
“ Oh, yes ! they shouted; “ very near the worst of
all, because if the wind was blowing the other way
and the house was a lot nearer the stack, it would
have been burnt, too.”
“ Fancy me thinkin’ of it, and you not, and me
very near the youngest,” said Doris proudly, as she
folded her hands complacently, with a look of self-
satisfaction.
That s eight! shrieked Eileen, “ I knew more
would come. We’ll get the twelve yet.”
“Oh, look at the beautiful sunset!” cried Eva.
Just like a big crimson lake!”
“Beautiful grandmother!” grumbled Eileen.
“ \\ hat’s the use of a beautiful sunset, I’d like to
know; I m just about sick of seeing the old sunset
—the same old thing every day, with a few more


colours dashed into it at times. I’ve seen enough
sunsets to last me to the end of my days, after all
the old droughty ones we’ve been seeing for
months.”
“Were’s de tun-tet?” Me want te tun-tet!”
screamed Baby, as she clutched her fingers towards
the paling pink sky.
“ Yes, dearie, you’ll get it, too,” answered Eileen.
“ You’ll get tons of sunset if you keep on living
here. You’ll get days and days and days of it, till
you’ll wish the old sun would never rise again, so as
you wouldn’t see him set again.”
Eva remained quietly watching the departing
glory of the evening sky. Sometimes Eva got “ fits
of goodness,” as Eileen called them, and then she
was “ unbearable.” She sincerely hoped she was
not going to get one now, and spoil their nice
grumbling evening, for of all things that Eileen
liked at times it was to grumble to her heart’s con-
tent, especially when she had an audience, so she
plunged back to the theme before the “ goodness
seized Eva.
“ Well, we’ve counted eight. There must be
more. Oh! yes —didn’t old Dave die?”
“So he did!” shouted Doris wildly. “ Poor old
Dave died, and didn’t Dadda have trouble fixing up
about the funeral and lettin’ the policeman know,
and all that?” and she folded her hands importantly
again. “ It’s a wonder we didn’t think of him first
of all the troubles, being a man, you know. Say
them all over again, Eileen, and we might think of
more,”


Doris was enjoying herself thoroughly. She was
five, and fat and chubby, and she swung her fat legs
excitedly and held up her fat fingers to tick off the
events.
“ Well, cut them short this time,” said Eva, “ and
let’s get on to something else.”
“ Indeed, it’s nice to talk about ’em,” answered
Doris. “ Two cows, calf, big horse, f-o-a-1, weed,
dingoes, fire, and old Dave —nine bits of bad luck in
one year!”
“What about Frank cutting his foot that time?”
cried Eva, who was getting warmed up to the sub-
ject.
“ Oh, what a bit of luck!” gurgled Doris. “ Ten,
ten ”
“Oh, yes!” cried Eileen. “Frank cutting his
foot, and having stitches put in, and wasn’t he a
cripple for weeks? That’s ten, sure enough. Fancy
ten big accidents in one year, besides the drought
and old hot sunsets, and dripping for butter, and
long, lonely days when no one comes.' I’m real sick
of it all. I wish I was rich and had pretty clothes,
and could travel about and have lots of fun. There’s
Enid Davis, and she’s not a bit prettier or better
than us, and she wears beautiful dresses and lovely
silky stockings.” She extended her shapely leg.
“ Fancy that in one of Enid’s silks! Why, it would
be a different leg.”
Then they all laughed merrily for a time, but dis-
content was in the air.
“ I think Enid’s just lovely,” said Doris, with a
sigh.


“ We’d all be if we had pretty dresses like her,
and no work to do. She has no right to be richer
and happier than any of us. She happens to be
lucky. I don’t know why ever there’s such a differ-
ence between people. If Enid wants a drive, she
just has to call for the car. If we want one, it’s
either the broken-down buggy, or the jolting sulky,
or ‘ Shanks.’ I think, if I were God, I’d have things
fixed up differently.”
“ Oh, Eileen, don’t say that!” said Mollie. “ Don’t
bring God’s name into it.”
Mollie was the eldest, and at times, for all her
natural gaiety, felt her responsibilities.
“ Now, don’t get sermony, Mollie. Let's have a
good straight-out talk sometimes. Ido wonder
why God doesn’t send rain, when the ground and all
around is as black as the ace of spades.
“ I s’pose poor God’s busy,” said little Doris.
“ Goodness! we’re busy enough without havin the
world to look after.”
“Yes,” put in Eva, eagerly. “Just think of all
the big world He has to look after. I wonder He
can manage it at all. There’s all the country and
all Sydney, and all other towns, and all other parts
of the world. Do you remember, when we were
trying to learn geography, all the places we had to
think of? To think He has to look after them all!
I just don’t know how He manages at all.”
But Eileen’s shapely legs still swung vigorously
to and fro, in silent protest.
“ I wish we were all big men, and could go out
and work and make money, and get real rich, and


buy lovely homes, and —and—all that. And I wish
Mamma would never have to work again, and that
Frank could go aw*ay and get rich and —and —oh!
anything different to this.”
They all looked up the long, white, dusty road
that stood out .clear and distinct in the gathering
twilight, and for a time were very quiet, with re-
bellion in their hearts.
At last Mollie, with a bright light of resolve shin-
ing in her eyes, turned to them.
“Do you know what I’ve been thinking? I
don’t know if I ought to tell you ”
“ Oh, do, Mollie —do!” They all crowded round
her. “Whatever is it?”
“ It’s something I’ve been thinking over for three
whole days.”
“Three whole days, Mollie? How ever did you
manage not to tell us?”
“ It’s a big plan—it might be too big, but—l
think we ought to try. Come on. I’ll tell you!”
They all gathered together with big wonder-eyes
and listened. And Mother, who had spent the
afternoon down under the shade of the friendly
bluegums on the creek, darning and patching, won-
dered what was keeping her little girlies so quiet
up on the wooden verandah.
“ You know, Dadda has a very rich brother some-
where in the world, and, of course, he’s our uncle.
So, at that rate, we have a Rich Uncle!”
“ A Rich Uncle,” they all murmured.
“ A smart lot of good he is to us,” put in Eileen.
“ That’s the last we’ll hear of him.”


“ Wait a bit,” went on Mollie. “ I’ve been think-
ing we ought to write to him.”
“ Write to him,” in chorus, “ but we don’t know
him!”
“ That doesn’t matter. We’ll write to him.”
“ Write to him,” repeated Eileen. “ A lot of good
that will do. I suppose he’d never answer the
letter. Anyhow, where is he?”
“ I don’t know. But I think we can find him.”
“How, Mollie —how?”
“ Well, he travels a lot in Europe, but he’s in a
big firm in Melbourne, and if we write there they’re
sure to forward it on to him. But keep this a
secret —a great big secret.”
“ Oh, yes!” they all gasped.
“ We’re all in it, you know. We’ll all sign our
names.”
“Yes —oh, yes!” they all gasped again. “But
how did you find him out, Mollie?”
“ I heard Mamma and Dadda talking about him
nearly a year ago. They had a Melbourne paper,
with a lot about a big firm in it, and they said he
pretty well owned it. Langdon and Ross is the
name —Collins Street. And Mamma said what a
very rich man he was, and then she sighed and said
how different things were.”
“ What a pity you didn’t think about the letter
then,” sighed Eileen. “We might be rich to-day.”
“ I think I must have thought something then,”
said Mollie, slowly; “ but it was only a few days
ago, when I saw Mother looking so tired, that the
letter flashed across my mind.”


“ And I never knew Dadda had a brother,” said
Eva.
“ You knew you had an uncle somewhere,” put in
Eileen.
“ Yes, but I never thought of whose brother he
was. You can know a lot of things without know-
ing much about them,” declared Eva, stoutly.
“ Melbourne! That’s the capital of Victoria, isn’t
it?”
“ Oh, never mind what it is!” snapped Eileen.
“ Go on, Mollie.”
“The worst of it is,” wdht on Mollie, “ he and
Dadda have not been good friends since they were
boys. Of course, they might not be real bad
friends, but they quarrelled when they were young,
and never write to each other at all, and I suppose
he’s nearly forgotten he has a brother while he’s
travelling all over the world.”
“ Oh ! dear, aren’t people a nuisance to go quar-
relling, especially when one of them’s rich?” said
Eileen. “ I do wish he was friendly with us: he
might help us. I don’t suppose Mamma and Dadda
would take anything—it’d be too much like beg-
ging.”
“ Veil, we’ll just write from ourselves,” said
Mollie. “ From five little bush girls—his five little
nieces that he doesn’t know—and we’ll all sign our
own names.”
“Good! Grand! Splendid! Oh, Mollie, you’re
a brick! Let’s start the letter straight away. Oh,
Mollie! what’ll we say? I wonder when he’ll get
it.”


“ But I hope he don’t write and tell Dadda that
his five little —little—what are we? —nieces, wrote
to him,” said Eva.
“ Oh, no! we’ll tell him not to,” declared Mollie.
“ It’ll be a hard letter to write; I’ve been thinking
over it for the last three days.”
“ Three days!” again murmured Eva. “ I don’t
know how you’ve thought of it for three days with-
out telling us,” she said admiringly. “ I’d have to
have told us all straight away. Oh, Mollie, you’re
real clever! I’d have never thought of our Rich
Uncle.”
“ Oh, Mollie, do let’s find him!” said little Doris;
“ let’s find him quick! He might bring us lollies
and candy and —and dolls ”
“ And nice dresses and books and pictures and —”
said Eva.
“ And pocket-money and trips,” put in Eileen.
“ I hope he ain’t got poor before we find him,”
said Doris.
“ Oh!” There was a chorus of exclamations,
while their faces clouded. “ I hope not.”
“We don’t want any more poor ones in the
family,” said Eileen, quickly.
“ He’s not poor,” said Mollie. “ We’ll all write
and tell him about ourselves and the drought and
the bad times, and how Dadda has to struggle ”
“ Yes, how Dadda has to struggle,” repeated
Eileen.
“ And all about our losses —and about Mamma.
What’ll we say about Mamma?”
“ Say she’s a brick,” shouted Eileen, “ and she’s


always cheery and never gives in ”
“ And she makes all our clothes,” said Doris.
“ And we often know she’s real tired, and she
keeps on sewing,” said Eva.
“ And when I get a big woman I’m going to take
care of her,” said Doris, quite carried away.
“ Never mind when you’re a woman —we want
help now,” said Eileen.
“ And we’ll say she tries to make time to teach
us,” said Mollic, “ and bring us up nicely, and we’re
afraid she’ll tire herself to death before we grow
up, and we’d like him to write to us if he can spare
the time.”
“Yes, spare the time,” repeated Eileen.
“ And —and —we’d like him to come and see
us ”
“ Come and see us!” they repeated aghast. “ Oh,
Mollie! you’re not going to ask him over here, are
you ?”
“ Yes. What else can we do?”
“ But if he’s such a big, rich man, and travelled
such a lot —oh, Mollie! our place won’t be grand
enough, will it?”
“Yes, of course it will. It’s nice and clean, and
we’ll all help to tidy it up and make things as nice
as possible. And it’s the only thing to do —to ask
him here, and let him see for himself how Mamma
and Dadda have to work while he’s tripping
round.”
“ Yes, while he’s tripping round,” echoed Eva.
“ He’ll have to be very hard-hearted if he sees us
like this, and does not help us,” went on Mollie.


“ We’ll pay him back when we grow up. We don’t
want to be common beggars, but w 7 e do want money
now.”
“Oh, Mollie! and I never thought you used to
think like this,” declared Eileen, in a low* voice. “ I
never thought you wanted to be rich like I do ”
“ It’s not for myself so much as others,” cried
Mollie. “ I’m not going to see Mother toiling from
daylight to dark, and trying to keep nice and
pleasant, and Father and Frank nearly too tired to
talk when they come in of a night, and nothing but
loneliness staring us in the face, when all the time
we might be able to make things a little better.
We’ll write that letter and post it by next mail,”
she w r ent on in a low 7 voice. “ Mother is going to
see Mrs. Smith to-morrow 7 , so w 7 e’ll write it then.
But we must keep it a great big secret.”
“Well, this has been a w 7 onderful evening,” said
Eileen, “ and I’m dying for to-morrow to come.”
“ It’s been a wonderful, bootiful evenin’,” bubbled
Doris, clasping her fat hands. “ Bad luck and good
together.”
“ I hope it will be good luck,” said Mollie as she
flew 7 inside to set the table, for aw 7 ay across the dis-
tance she saw the men returning slowdy from their
day’s toil, while Eileen and Eva hurried off to feed
the lambs, and the tw 7 o toddlers trudged off to the
creek to meet Mamma.
“If only w r e can manage it! If only w 7 e can
manage it!” w 7 as the thought that filled Mollie’s
mind as she hurried hither and thither from the
kitchen to the dining-room. “If only Uncle gets


that letter and comes straight away and fixes up
things and gives us all a fresh start. If only we can
manage it!”
Outside in the gathering darkness Eileen and Eva
fed and petted the lambs while they laughed and
talked, for a gleam of ne\y hopes and anticipations
had come to them.
Late that night, when darkness and silence had
descended on the homestead, three pairs of bright
eyes peered at the stars, while Mollie, Eileen and
Eva talked over the wonderful letter that was to
be posted by the next mail.


CHAPTER 11.
GILLONG.
Up till the evening that they had “ put their heads
together ” and planned that wonderful letter, the
Hudsons had lived much the same lives as other
little bush girls, although, on the whole, it was
much quieter. Just at the present it was very dull
on account of the drought, and also their one neigh-
bour,’with a big family, had sold out of “ Wilga ”
Station, and gone further west, and that had put an
end to the half-time school that had flourished for
twelve months between the Hudsons and Jenkins.
Now only a caretaker and his wife lived at Jenkin’s
homestead, so the little girls were very short of
playmates. Sometimes Enid Davies, from Myall,
would call to see them, or they would pa} r a visit
to her place, but as Enid was away so much they
seldom could count on her.
“ Besides, Enid is so rich,” Mollie would say
sometimes, “ although she is real nice, but I don’t
like a lot of her friends.”
Already Mollie could feel the restraint of “ class ”
in the air.
“ Things are going from bad to worse,” Eileen


would often grumble. “I do wish people with big
families wouldn’t sell out. There should be a law
to prevent it. We could have some fun and games
when the Jenkins were near, and we did have some
fun at school, even if it was a bit of a nuisance at
times,” and then she would sigh as she thought of
the little weather-board school-house, where their
teacher—a bright, fresh-faced young man from the
Department —had been so keen about studies and
competitions and games.
It was with regret that they all bade him good-
bve, although there had been days and days when
they had all felt like throwing slates and books at
him—days when they could not manage columns
of figures or dictation or dates, and Eileen would
wish the teacher “ at the bottom of the sea,” or “ at
the end of the world ” or any other far-off place.
But he had left with words of kindly encourage-
ment, telling them not to forget their lessons, and to
read and study, till such time as they could obtain
another teacher; and for a while they had tried, but
it was very hard to keep up anything without some-
one to supervise, as they all discovered, although
Mother tried her best to teach them a little every
day.
“What’s the good of learning old sums?” said
Eileen. “We’ll never use them.”
“ Oh, you never know!” Mother would say, hope-
fully.
“ Yes, I know,” declared Eileen. “ I’ll just live
and die here, like I’m going on, and nothing will


ever happen, and I’ll never want sums or nothing
else.”
“ You might get married and go away,” said
Mollie.
“ No, I won’t. If Ido get married, I suppose it'll
be to some cockie about here, so I don't want to
know anything for that!”—emphatically.
"You mustn’t call them ‘cockles,’” said Mollie,
severely. “ They’re all selectors or lessees about
here.”
" Well, whatever they are, I won’t marry any of
them. I'll die an old maid, or go right away and
marry a rich man and have a motor-car.” Which
showed that Eileen was not very consistent, and
would say anything for argument’s sake.
Things had been going from bad to worse on the
Hudsons’ selection for the past year. A run of bad
luck seemed to have struck them, and sometimes
after a long day of toil Mr. Hudson would sit far
into the night, under the silent stars, smoking
grimly, while he wondered how long he could stand
it. Already he was deep in debt to the bank, and
the loss of some valuable stock during the year had
made things look blacker. He was of a hopeful
nature, and determined to stick to his land through
thick and thin till better times came. But to the
children the good times seemed a very long while
coming.
Mollie was fourteen, and had big, deep blue eyes
and red-gold hair. She was bright and animated
and fond of fun, and eagerly grasped any little
brightness that came within her reach, and in her


kind, tender way, eager to share it with others.
Eileen, with her big dark eyes and thick brown
hair, was fond of luxury, only she never had a
chance to gratify her wishes. Her greatest wish
was to become “ a fine lady,” with everything at
her command.
Eva, with her nine years of experience, was some-
what old-fashioned. She desired very much to be
clever, and “ some day ” meant to learn everything.
Then came Doris and Baby, who never did much
except play with dolls and sticks and tins and
bottles.
A big fat porter bottle, with a red ribbon round
its neck, was Doris’s pet “ dog,” and she would tie
a string to the ribbon and lead “ him ” everywhere.
Although she had many favourites among her dolls,
her special pet was “ Rose,” a big rag doll, with a.
very dirty face and eyes like two “ daubs of the
blue-bag,” as Eileen often said. Eor all her dirty
face and “ blue-bag ” eyes, she was taken every-
where, and even slept with her fond little mother.
When the annual picnic was held in the little town-
ship Doris disgusted them all by rigging out Rose
in the wax doll’s white muslin and pink ribbons,
and carrying her to the picnic. It was a very dirty-
faced Rose and a very draggled muslin frock that
they found in the bottom of the buggy on their
return, for, in the excitement of meeting new people,
Doris had quite forgotten her treasure for the time
being.
Then they had “ stick ” horses, which came in for
a lot of care, and during the drought Doris daily


placed little nose-bags, filled with sawdust (for
chaff), on their heads, after she had dipped their
heads into a pail of water. “ ’Cause the poor things
are like ourselves, and get so thirsty,” she would
murmur, as she ran backwards and forwards, at-
tending to their wants.
“ When God sends the rain, we’ll have nice green
couch-grass for youse,” she would tell the sticks, as
she laid them away for the night. There was
Rattler and Robin and Tommie and Bally, and
while Baby could only jog round the house on hers,
Doris would scamper over the paddock.
Frank Lynton had lived with the Hudson family
for the last five years. His mother had been Mr.
Hudson’s favourite cousin, and on her death-bed she
had given her son into his care.
“ I know you will be good to him, Robert,” she
had murmured. “ You know, his father was a
ne’er-do-well, but I’m sure my boy will not follow
in his steps.”
So Frank became one of the family, and tried to
settle down and do his very best, although as the
years went on he knew that the land was not for
him, and, try as he would, he could never build up
any interest or eagerness in the work. This only
made him try the harder to help and please “ Uncle
and Aunt,” as he always called them, for he had a
great sense of gratitude, and he gave his fresh
young strength and energies to help them in their
needs, while all the time deep in his heart was an
unsatisfied longing for something different.


“ If only things would change for the better, and
I could leave Uncle,” he would murmur, as he went
about his work. “ But I must not let them know —
not yet awhile; but I’ll have to later on. I’m not
going to waste my life doing things I hate.”
Then he would work grimly on, with determina-
tion on his young face. And no one at “ Gillong ”
ever guessed the unsatisfied longings in the boy's
heart —no one but Mollie.
It came about in this way. It had been a very
hot, trying day, and Frank had left home at five
in the morning and returned at twilight, after mus-
tering and drafting sheep the whole day long. He
was utterly weary and worn out as he rode to the
hayshed and pulled the saddle and bridle oft his
horse, and there Mollie met him.
“ Oh, Frank! a man came down from Myall to say
there’s a big draft there to-morrow. Travelling
sheep were going through, and they didn’t give
notice, and all the sheep are boxed, and they want
you up, first light.”
“ Oh, hang it all!” cried Frank, wrathfully. “ I’ve
been at it every day this week. It’s nothing but
drafting from morning till night. I’m just about
sick of the whole turn-out.”
“ Yes, it is hard,” said Mollie, slowly.
“ Hard! It’s deadly. A fellow might as well be
dead as be tied up here, week after week, grinding
his life away. I’m just sick of it.” And he threw
himself on a big bale of hay.
“Oh, Frank! I’m so sorry,” said Mollie, softly.


“ It’s no use being sorry, Mollie,” he answered,
with a hard laugh. “ A fellow has to go through it,
I suppose—for a while, at any rate. But you don’t
know how hard it is, Mollie, when a fellow hates the
very thought of the work he’s tied to, and is always
longing for something else he knows he’d be better
at. What’s the use of throwing your life away in
those paddocks, when there’s something else you’re
dying to get at and know you’ll be a success at it?
You know that there’s hundreds of people just fit
for this kind of work, and could do it better than I
can ”
“Oh, Frank! I am sorry; I always thought you
didn’t like this,” said Mollie, “ but you’re always so
cheerful and so bright, and ”
“ It’s the least I can do, Mollie, and I shouldn’t
grumble now. I’d be a real cad if I were not grate-
ful to you all. You mustn’t think I’m not grateful.”
“ I know you are,” answered Mollie, warmly,
“ and I’d like you to tell me more,” she went on,
hesitatingly, “ if —if you would.”
For the first time in his life Frank poured out his
heart and told her all his dreams and wishes.
“ And I’m saving up for it this ever so long. And
} 7 ou know, Alollie,” he concluded, “my father was a
ne’er-do-well, and if I go on up here without my
heart in my work I suppose people will put me
down the same, and all the time I’m out of my
sphere. I’m sixteen now, Mollie, and it’s time I
was at it; but here I am, and there seems no chance.
Look here,” he cried, “ as soon as we get rain and
things are a little better I’ll tell Uncle all about it,”


The stars had come out one by one as they
talked, and now the sky was a mass of flickering
points, as Mollie, with a sad heart, gazed into the
twinkling depths, wondering what on earth she
could do to help her loved Frank, and suddenly
there flashed into her mind the thought of that
wonderful letter.
Yes, that would be it! She would write to that
rich uncle that she knew so little of. He was rich,
and he might help Frank. He might help them all.
But she must never let Frank know—Frank, nor
Mother, nor Father. Surely it would not be wrong
to write on the quiet for a good cause like this.
For three dqys she had thought and thought and
worried, before she told her sisters of her plan.
“ Fm glad you’ve told me all this, Frank, and I
think you’re—you’re splendid,” cried Mollie, dash-
ing away the tears; “ and I only wish I could do
something for you. You’ll have to keep on hoping
and wishing, and some day something good may
happen.”
“Yes, some day,” echoed Frank. “I hope so.
But we’d better go in to tea, Mollie,” he said, cheer-
fully, “ and then Fm going to bed early, to get ready
for a big day to-morrow.”
Frank never knew that, long after he was asleep,
Mollie went to his box and carefully examined his
’clothes, noting all the patched and darned shirts and
socks, and wondering if he could make those last
until he could go away.


“ If only he could go before he has to get any
more new clothes, and then he could get a nice new
supply for his studies,” thought Mollie with shining
eyes. “ Oh, Ido hope that I can manage to fix up
things!”
Frank slept calmly on—the sleep of the tired,
never dreaming that any factors were at work to
bring him nearer his heart’s desire.


CHAPTER 111.
THE LETTER.
“Whatever shall we say?”
They had been trying for the last three hours, and
were getting quite out of patience.
“ Go on, Mollie, have another try.”
“ ‘ My dear Uncle ’ —no, we can’t put ‘ my/ be-
cause he’s ‘ ours/ ” said Mollie, crossing out the
“ my.” “ Just —‘ Dear Uncle Henry.’ ”
“ He mightn’t like ‘ Henry/ ” suggested Eva
“ No, he might rather be called Harry,” said
Eileen. “ Let’s leave his name out.”
“ All right. Just ‘ Dear Uncle ’
“ He mightn’t know it’s for him if you just put
that,” cried Doris, and then they all laughed.
“ All right, just ‘ Dear Uncle, —You will no doubt
be astonished to hear from us ’ ”
“ No, from the five undersigned,” put in Eileen.
“ It’s more business-like.”
“ All right— ‘ from the five undersigned. No
doubt you do not know that you have five little
nieces away up in the bush in New South
Wales ’ ”
“ Australia,” put in Eva.


“ We don’t want Australia,” cried Eileen in dis-
gust. “Yes, ‘New South Wales.’ Go on, Mollie.”
“ Let me see —‘ and wq would very much like to
meet you. We have no idea where you are now,
but hope this letter will reach you.’ ”
“ Yes, that’s right!”
We live up here in the bush, and have a very
quiet time ’ —quiet time,” she repeated, tapping her
pencil.
“ ‘ And we’re poor,’ ” put in Doris, “ ‘ and would
like some money.’ ”
“ No, we can’t put it that way.”
“ Well, hurry up, then, and ask for the money.”
“ We’re not asking for money,” said Mollie,
severely. “ We’re going to ask him to come and
see us, and then ”
“ And then we’re hoping he’ll give us some,” cried
Eva.
“No!” cried Eileen, excitedly. “We’ll trust to
his generosity ”
“ Oh, yes ! put in ‘ generosity ’ —it sounds so
well,” said Eva.
For some years Father has had very hard
times,’ ” went on Mollie, “ ‘ and we’re all strug-
gling ’ ”
But things get no better,’ ” blurted out Eileen,
“ ‘ worse—if anything.’ ”
All struggling,’ ” went on Mollie, “ ‘ but things
are still very black.’ ”
And there don’t seem a chance of a silver lin-
ing,’ ” chimed in Eva.


"Silver lining, be hanged!" said Eileen. "He’s
the only hope we’ve got of a silver lining.’’
“ ‘ And as we’ve heard, Uncle, that you are very,
very wealthy ’ perhaps I ought to say ‘ we’ve
heard by accident,’ ” said Mollie, perplexedly; "you
see, he might think Father and Mother are always
talking about him if I don’t.”
" Yes, ‘ by accident,’ ” agreed Eileen.
By accident, that you are very wealthy; we’ve
been hoping to meet you and tell you all our
troubles.’ ”
“ Don’t forget about the foal and the fire and ”
“ Oh, shut up, Doris!” snapped Eileen.
And perhaps you can set matters right for us.
We don’t want to beg, Uncle. We only ask you if
you could give us a loan.’ We’ll have to mention
money, girls,” said Mollie; "we can’t wait till he
comes ‘ perhaps you could give us a loan by
helping Father and Mother (who work so hard),
and when we grow up we’ll pay back every penny
of it. We’re all strong and healthy and willing to
work.’ ”
And we’re as clever as most people,’ ” put in
Eileen.
“ Yes, ‘ and we can assure you that we would be
quite clever if we got a chance, and would, be all
willing to take up something to make money to pay
3ou back, if you would only let us have a loan
soon.’ ”
“ Mollie, you are clever,” said Eva, “ to write
all that!”


“ Yes, I’m pretty good at letters,” answered
Mollie. “‘ If possible, we would like you to come
and see us.’ ”
“ Tell him he can have the verandah room,” said
Doris.
“‘And then you could decide for yourself if you
would care to help us/ ”
“ Don’t forget to tell him not to tell Father and
Mother that we wrote,” warned Eva.
“ Oh, no!” they all cried.
“ ‘ And now, Uncle, we have a big favour to
ask of you. Don't, please, let Mother and Father
know we wrote to you, on any account, because
they would be fearfully annoyed. It’s because
they’re working so hard and try to do their best, and
are so cheerful about all the bad times, that we’re
writing to you.’ ”
“ I think we ought to write another one all over
again, and tell him right at the beginning it’s a
secret,” said Eileen.
“Oh! do you think so?” asked Mollie, wearily.
“I wonder ought we? I’m just about sick of it.
It’s about the hardest thing I ever tried.”
“ Oh, it’s sickening!” declared Doris.
“Ugh!” grunted Baby.
“ I’ve scribbled about a hundred already, and
we’re just as far off as when we started,” said
Mollie. “ I wish he’d ride up this very instant and
save us all this trouble.” And she looked away and
sighed. “ Oh, well! I suppose we’ll only have to do
it. We’ll have to stick at it till we do get something
to suit.”


“ Yes, we’ll have to have it ready for to-morrow’s
mail,” said Eileen.
“ Oh, yes, it has to be done! Let’s have another
v yy
They had a great many “ goes ” before they man-
aged one to satisfy them, but at last they all
gathered round while Mollie read the last one out
aloud, and they declared that would have to do.
Dear Uncle, —
No doubt you will be surprised to hear from us. We
are your five little Bush Nieces. We live away up in
the North-West of New South Wales, on a selection, in
a wooden house on the bank of the Gillongi Creek, and
our father is your brother Robert.
“ Won’t that s’prise him?” chuckled Doris, clasp-
ing her fat hands.
Eileen gave her a withering look, to command
silence.
Of course we are all strangers to you, but we would
like very much to know you. We don’t know where you
are now, but hope this letter will reach you, and we would
like you to come and see us as soon as possible.
The five of us now have a very big secret to tell you,
and we hope for our sakes you will keep it. Father and
Mother don’t know we are writing to you, and we never
want them to know, because they would be very, very
much annoyed and angry, and might think that you will
think that we arc beggars. But we would not think of
begging; only as we are very poor, and Mother and Father
are always struggling and working hard, we are hoping
that you might lend us some money, and we’ll pay back
every penny of it when we grow up. We are all willing


to work to make money, and if we get the chance we are
sure we would be quite clever. But we would like to see
you and talk to you, and as we heard by accident that you
are very rich and travel a great deal, we hope that you
will come up here very soon. Our house is only a wooden
place, but it is very clean, and we’ll all do our very best
to make you happy; but we do hope that you will keep
our secret.
We have a very lonely life up here. I suppose you
don’t know what loneliness is, as you are so rich and
travel so much; but if you woke up day after day and
saw only the hot sunshine and a few pet lambs and people
working hard, and no one new and fresh to talk to, and
the night comes on, and there’s another day gone, and
nothing done.
. If you think you would care to meet us when you read
this letter, we would like you to write to us to the under-
mentioned address, and we’ll ask the mailman to give it
into our hands, as we would not like to hurt Mother’s
and Father’s feelings by letting them know we wrote; and
we are sure you are clever enough to fix up a way of
coming here without letting them know we asked you. If
we can only talk to you, we are sure we can make you
understand.
If you think you -wouldn’t like to meet us, please burn
this letter, and oblige,
Yours very faithfully,
Mollie Hudson, aged 14 years, blue eyes and goldeny
hair.
Eileen Hudson, aged 12 years, dark eyes and hair.
Eva Hudson, aged 9 years, grey eyes and dark hair.
Doris Hudson, aged 5 years, blue eyes and fair hair.
Baby Hudson (X, her mark), aged 2 years, blue
eyes and fair hair.


P.S.—We give you a description of ourselves, as it
might interest you.
P.S.—PLEASE KEEP OUR SECRET.
D.H.
B.H. (X)
Address: Misses Hudson,
“ Gillong,”
Brangan Junction,
N.W. Line
N.S.W.
P.S.—The above address will always find us.
M., E., E., D and B. Hudson.
To H. Hudson, Esq.,
C/o the Firm of
Langdon & Ross
Collins Street,
Melbourne,
Private, Victoria.
Confidential
&
Urgent.
Important.
“ That ought to be plain enough,” said Mollie,
anxiously. “He ought to understand just what we
mean.”
“Understand? Of course he’ll understand! He
ought to go and bury himself if he doesn’t,” declared
vehemently. “Why, a man with one eye
and a wooden leg would understand that. I’m glad
it’s over,” she went on; “ it’s the hardest bit of work
I ever tackled!”


CHAPTER IV.
“TEDDO.”
And now the trouble was to square Ted, the mail-
man. He jogged up about four o’clock the next
day, with his packhorse and mailbags, and the girls
hovered round while he had a cup of tea and told
all the news. Strange to say, Ted seemed to stay
longer than ever that day, and Mother would per-
sist in talking to him and asking him questions, and
Mollie and Eileen were nearly distracted. There
was no chance of giving him the letter while Mother
was there, so they tried to get Ted away out to his
horses.
“My word, your horses look well, Ted! You
must feed them very well,” said Eileen.
“ Yes, a mailman wants good horses,” he
answered, well pleased. “ That’s one thing about
me, I always look after my nags. Why, I’d rather
go short myself than see ’em hungry!”
“ Fancy !” said Mollie.
“ Yes, as long as Ted’s on the line, you’ll never
see poor mail horses. I couldn’t be like some of
them other chaps you see knocking round, with
horses like bags of bones; I always say the gee-gees
first.”


“ Fancy!” said Mollie again, not taking a bit of
interest in Ted’s rambling.
“ Do you remember old Dave, Mrs., that used to
run this mail last year? Why, he was always eight
or ten hours late. Recollect?”
“Yes, indeed, I do,” said Mother, coming out to
view Ted’s wonderful “ nags,” much to the little
girls’ disgust, for another day she would not bother.
“ We’ll never get it away,” whispered Eileen.
“ Let’s have a stroll,” said Mollie, as she saw Ted
drawing out pipe and tobacco, preparatory to filling
his pipe before he continued his journey. So the
two of them strolled round the “ bend,” to wait till
Ted came along.
“Of all the bad luck,” grumbled Mollie. “ An-
other day Mother wouldn’t see Ted at all, and we
could have just given him the letter without any
trouble.”
“ It’s always the way,” sighed Eileen.
Then they heard the welcome thud of horses’
hoofs and the clink of harness and buckles as Ted
appeared.
“Oh, Ted! here’s a letter we want you to post,
please,” cried Mollie, “ and here’s a penny for the
stamp; and, Ted, don’t tell anyone at home about
this, please—because—because it’s a secret, and if
a reply conies, Ted ”
“Hello! what’s the game?” asked Ted, sus-
piciously.
No ‘ game ’ at all,” said Eileen, indignantly.
“ It’s a business letter.”


“ It’s not a boy you’re writing to on the sly, is
it?” asked Ted, with a wink.
“ No, we don’t write to boys,” snapped Eileen.
« It’s a very important letter, Ted, and there’s noth-
ing wrong about it. It’s —it s for a good cause.
“Oh! a charity affair?” said Ted. “Righto,
give’s it here. I’ll post him for you all right.”
“ Oh! and, Ted, a reply might come, addressed to
the Misses Hudson ”
“ Mrs. Hudson —your Mother? ’
“ No, to the Miss Hudsons —us —you know. I
suppose it will be M-i-s-s-e-s, so we want you to
keep it back, and give it into my hands,” said
Mollie.
“Righto! give it into your hands,” repeated Ted,
as he pocketed the letter. “And when do you
expect the blooming reply?”
“ Oh, we don’t know, Ted! It might be a week,
or it might be a month ”
Ted whistled. “Whey! Righto, 111 watch for
it, and give it into your hands when it does come.
You can stake your life on Teddo!”
“ Oh, thanks so much, Ted! I’m sure we can
trust vou. And, led, if you don t mind, wed like
you to take this sixpence and have a drink with it
from the five of us, because we’re all in this letter.”
“Chase the ducks!” exclaimed Ted in surprise.
“ Keep your sixpence, little Missie, and thank you,
all the same ; you’re little bricks !”
“But we’d like you to take it, Ted; we would,
really.”


“ We’d love you to take it, Ted,” put in Eileen.
“ Run away and play,” cried Ted. “If Teddo
can’t do a favour without taking drinking silver, he
ought to be shot! So long; you can trust your life
with Teddo.”
For the shock-headed “ Teddo ” was a good-
natured lad, and many a one “on the line ” had
reason to be grateful to him.
“Thank you so much, Teddy,” they all cried.
“ Thanks so much.”
“ That’s all right!” answered Ted, riding off. “ So
long.”
“So long, Teddy,” called out Eileen, and they
watched him till he disappeared from view round
the next “ bend.”
“ Queer little cusses!” muttered Teddy to him-
self. “ 1 wonder what’s their little game. Nothing
wrong, though, I’ll be bound.”
As soon as Teddy was lost to view the girls had
misgivings.
“ 1 wonder ought we have sent it,” said Mollie.
Oh, well! it’s too late to cry about it now,” an-
swered Eileen, who was also feeling a bit “ scared.”
I do hope its all right,’ said Mollie, anxiously.
“ I wonder whatever he’ll think.”
“ Goodness knows!” declared Eileen, solemnly,
shaking her head. “ I do hope he’s not a grumpy
old man. What a terrible thing it would be, Mollie.
if he sent it back to Mamma and Dadda!”
“ Oh, dear! I never thought of that,” cried
Mollie.


And then they "were joined by the other children,
who had overheard the last remarks, and who
looked very woe-begone.
“ I hope he don’t send us to gaol,” said Eva, and
Doris burst into tears.
“ I wish we never wrote the ole letter; I wish we
never had an ole uncle.”
“Oh, he might never get it!” said Eileen, hope-
fully.
“ Oh, I hope he does!” answered Mollie, quickly,
who was beginning to get over her misgivings.
“ Now, no more crying; let’s laugh instead, and—
remember —not one word about this ! Let s try and
forget it for a week, whatever.’
“ Yes, mum’s the word,” said Eileen, solemnly
“ Yes, mum’s the word,” declared Eva.
And then, led by Mollie, they all went back home,
singing and laughing.
In a big private office, with oak fittings and crim-
son carpets, in the suite of offices of Langdon and
Ross, Melbourne, a tall man, with iron-grey hair
and keen, dark eyes, read the letter a fortnight later.
“ Bless their hearts ! Little Bush Nieces! Want
a loan ! Pay back every penny when they grow up!
Keep our secret! Try and make me happy'! Come
and see us soon! By Jove! they’re original, right
enough. Bless the children! Robert’s five little
girls, and they’re lonely—and they' think I don t
know what loneliness is, because I’ve got plenty of
money and have travelled a lot. Ah ! little girls,


you have yet to learn that money and travel can’t
always banish loneliness. Five little Bush girls!”
he mused, laying down the letter, and leaning his
head on his hands.
Then that very keen business man who had only
just returned from the Continent, and was prepar-
ing to go off again very soon, did something very
unusual for him. He sat for a whole hour, think-
ing! and then seized pen and paper and wrote for
the rest of the morning, and his private secretary
and clerk wondered what on earth had come to the
head of the firm; and when the letter was finished,
he sealed and stamped it, and marched down to the
Post Office and posted it himself, and the big office
with the oak fittings and crimson carpets saw no
more of him that day, and his big sheaf of corre-
spondence was left till the following morning.


CHAPTER V.
THE REPLY.
“ I don’t suppose he’ll ever get it.” For over a
fortnight Eileen had been saying that. If an
answer doesn’t come to-morrow, I’ll say it’s gone
astray. I didn’t think he’d get it from the moment
we sent it.”
“ Oh, nonsense, Eileen! We can’t expect an
answer straight away,” answered Mollie.
“ Straight away,” echoed Eileen. “ I like your
‘ straight away.’ It’s eighteen days since we posted
the letter, and I’m just about sick of waiting. But
I suppose there’s nothing else to do,” she added, dis-
consolately, as she kicked her heels against the
verandah steps. “ I’m sorry now that we wrote
such a long letter. What we should have done was
iust to have written a very short note —just ‘ Dear
Uncle, —We are your five Bush Nieces, and we’re
very poor, so please handy up some cash. —Yours
respectfully,’ and then all our names. That’s what
we ought to have done. But, anyhow, I suppose if
he does come, the first thing he’ll want to do is to
pack us oft to school, to an old governess or to an
old teacher of some sort. I suppose he’ll be like
that big ‘ Commercial ’ that said we were raw.”


“ That said we were what?” cried Mollie.
“ Raw. I heard that big ‘ Commercial,’ with the
red shiny boots, who stayed here last week, say to
that other traveller that we were raw material ”
“ Raw material!” repeated Eva, in disgust.
“ What did he mean?”
“ That we wanted schooling, I suppose,” said
Eileen.
“ Ugh!” said Eva, with her head in the air. “ I’d
rather be raw than be cooked looking like him.
But where did he say it, and when and how?”
“ Oh!” said Eileen, impatiently, “he said that we
were nice children, but raw material, and it was a
pity that we were running wild. That’s just what
he said, and if you want to know what he meant
you’d better write and ask him. I do hate saying
word for word what people have said, and after to-
day I’ll never do it again. I suppose Uncle will
say the very same thing—that is, if he comes ; and,
of course, I don’t expect him. I don’t expect to
ever hear another word about that old letter, and I
expect to live here to the end of my days. I sup-
pose I’ll just grow up and go into long dresses and
put my hair up, and —and go on till I’m thirty and
forty and fifty and sixty, and then die here, just
working about a bit, and feeding lambs, and watch-
ing the shearing, and seeing the wool go away, and
never go for a trip myself, and then die.”
She looked so dismal and drew such a forlorn pic-
ture of herself that Mollie burst into laughing, for
Eileen had fits of the blues and grumbles in the one
instant, and the next was flying round the house in


high good temper, the gayest of the gay.
Everv mail day now they watched for Teddy with
wild eagerness and suppressed excitement, but
Teddy came and Teddy went in the same old wav,
banding out letters that didn’t “ count,” fishing out
papers and telling scraps of news, and riding off
again without gladdening their hearts.
But an eventful day arrived, when he lingered
longer than usual over his cup of tea; when he
strapped and buckled and unbuckled the pack-
saddles, and fixed and arranged the mail-bags until
the coast was clear, and then across a great stack of
canvas bags he beckoned to Mollie.
“ Here,” he said, as he whipped a letter out of his
pocket; “here you are, and don’t say that Teddo
failed you.”
“ Oh, Teddy!” murmured Mollie, growing almost
faint with excitement —“ at last!”
“ Yes, at last, right enough,” answered Teddy,
“ and I hope it brings you luck,” he said as he rode
off.
Mollie stood with the precious letter in her hand,
almost too dazed to speak. She must tell the others
and get them all away together—away down in the
bed of the creek, under the big gum tree, where all
their picnics were held. They must all get away to-
gether, where no one could hear them, and she must
not open the precious letter till the others were with
her.
Mother was lying down reading the paper, and
the men had gone out again, so she called softly to
the others, who came out with curiosity stamped on


their faces. Mollie beckoned and pointed to the
road down the creek, and then with her fingers on
her lips to denote silence she held up the magic
letter.
“ Sh! No noise, creep out quietly, and not a
word!”
Once out of the house and garden, they scam-
pered as fast as they could down the track to the
creek, Eva making up the rear with Baby, who
puffed and stumbled; but not a word did she utter
after that warning glance of Mollie’s.
“ Oh, Mollie, it’s come!” cried Eileen.
“ Yes, it’s come,” she answered, “ and I’m afraid
to open it.”
She looked at the stamp, she looked at the ad-
dress again, and turned the envelope over and over.
“ I wonder whatever is inside it. Ido wonder what
he says.”
“ Let’s see the writing,” said Eva; so the letter
was handed round to the circle.
“Go on, Mollie, tear it open,” said Eileen; and
Mollie ripped the flap of the envelope.
“ Oh, what beautiful thick paper!” she mur-
mured.
Doris looked eagerly to see if any money fell out,
but there was nothing—only thick sheets of paper.
“ Are you all ready?” asked Mollie.
Yes, we re ready,’ they answered, clustering
round.
“ Very well, then ”
She smoothed out the pages and cleared her
throat.


“‘ My dear little Bush Nieces ’ ”
“ Oh, dear! does he say that?” asked Eva.
“ Yes. ‘My dear little Bush Nieces.’ ”
“Oh, well! it’s all right, then?—go ahead, Mollie, ’
cried Eileen. “It sounds well to start with—go
ahead and see what else he says.’
And then Mollie read right on—
My Dear Little Bush Nieces, —
Pleasant surprises are the best things in the world, for
they wake a person up thoroughly and make him think of
people and things that he hasn’t thought of for years, and
add a new zest and interest to life; and your letter is one
of the most pleasant surprises, if not the very best, I have
ever received.
Chorus of “ Oh’s!”
I shall be delighted to meet my little unknown bush
nieces.
Another chorus of “ Oh’s!”
But first of all I must assure you that I shall keep your
secret for ever if you wish, or until such time as it pleases
you to release me from secrecy.
“ Oh! isn’t he nice?” gurgled Doris, while all the
others clasped their hands in delight.
Far from wishing to burn your letter, as you suggest, I
shall keep it as one of my treasures.
Chorus of “ Oh’s!” again.
I have not long returned from the Continent


The letter dropped from Mollie’s hand at this, but
she picked it up hastily.
“Where’s the Continent?’’ asked Doris, eagerly.
“ Oh, any old place!” said Eileen. “Go on
Mollie.”
and as soon as I overlook matters in connection with my
hrm, I shall be ready to pay a visit to “ Gillong
The letter fell again while they all gazed at each
other.
“Here! He’s coming here?”
“ Goodness me, he’s coming!” gasped Eva. “ I
hope he don’t tell.”
“ Don’t tell?” echoed Eileen, scornfully. “ Didn’t
lie give his word ?”
In the course of a week or so I shall write to your father,
but don’t be afraid, my dears, that anything I say shall’
arouse suspicion. lam going to be as smart and as
clever as my little Bush Nieces and concoct a letter that
will make everything right. Thank you so much for your
offer of happiness; you will find me a willing subject to
take all you offer in that respect
“ Oh, dear!” cried Eileen; “ and we haven’t any to
offer him!”
“ Yes > bu t we promised we would,” said Eva.
“ Whatever will we do?”
“ I didn’t think he’d come,” moaned Eileen.
“He can play with Rose sometimes,” declared
Doris, making a great concession.
Play with Rose and ride the stick horses ”
commenced Eileen, witheringly; but Mollie gave
her a warning glance.


“ Yes, Doris, we’ll all do our best.”
“ Oh, dear! I wish we had a gramophone,” sighed
Eva, “ to play for him.”
“ I suppose he won’t stay long,” said Mollie, hope-
fully, “ and he can talk a lot of the time.”
“ What a pity the creek wasn’t up, and he could
go fishing,” said Eva.
“ Yes, and sail boats,” continued Doris
“Tail boats!” echoed Baby.
“Sail fiddlesticks!” snapped Eileen. “Go on,
Mollie. What was the last?”
“ Let me see —ah ”
in that respect. And so you are often lonely? Well, I
don’t wonder, as you seem quite isolated; but I think you
will find as you go through life that a great, great many
people are lonely, even when everything seems prosperous
and bright; so you must not despair on that score, and
perhaps things will change for the better before very
long, and brighter days may be in store. What a great,
great deal we will have to talk about when we meet! And
re the little loan
“ Did he Send it?” asked Doris, jumping up.
“ Sh! Go on, Mollie,” from Eva.
which you are so anxious to pay back when you grow up.
Well, we shall arrange that, too, and for the present, adieu,
mv newly-found nieces. With love and good wishes to
Mollie, Eileen, Eva, Doris and Baby, from
Your affectionate Uncle,
Henry Hudson.
“ Oh! isn’t it lovely?” gasped Eva.
“ Bosker!” agreed Eileen.
“ Bueful, bueful,” gurgled Doris.


“ It’s just splendid,” said Mollie, with shining
eyes. “Three cheers for Uncle!”
They all joined hands and danced wildly round
Baby, who had fallen asleep on a heap of bushes in
the shade of the gum tree.
“And to think that he’s coming! In about
another week’s time Dadda will get a letter from
him to say he’s coming,” cried Eileen. “ Oh, dear!
oh, dear! I’m that excited that I feel silly. It’s the
only excitement we’ve had since old Dave died.
But it’s lots better. Oh, dear! oh, dear! it’s just
grand! I won’t know whatever to do to put in the
lime till Uadda’s letter comes. And Ido hope we’re
not about when he gets it,” cried Eileen. ‘‘Oh, dear!
whatever will he say? Ido hope that he won’t
guess that we’ve been writing. Ido hope that
Teddo never splits. Do you know what I’ll do
when he comes? I’ll give Teddo a whole pound to
spend as he likes, and I’ll ask him to take it. Oh,
dear! I wish we had about a dozen rich uncles, and
we’d never see a poor day again! Hooray!”
“ Hooray! Hooray!” shouted Eva and Doris, till
Baby woke up, looking silly and stupid, blinking in
the sun.
“ Clap hands, Baby,” shouted Doris, and Baby
clapped away while she yawned and woke up
properly.
“ Do you know what you’re clapping for?” asked
Doris. “ Well, it’s because our rich uncle’s coming,
and we’ll all be rich by-and-bye,” and then she hoo-
rayed at the top of her voice again.


“ I wish I could go to sleep and not wake up till
the next letter comes. Oh, dear! it will be so hard
just going about in the same old way, knowing
what we know,” said Eileen. “ We’ll have to be
awfully careful. I know I’ll be dying to talk about
it, and to sing and laugh and shout and hooray when
Dadda and Mamma are about. I’ll be glad when
the other letter comes, so as I can give way to my
feelings.”
“So will I,” said Mollie. “It will be hard to pre-
tend we know nothing.”
And hard it was, and they often had to get away
by themselves to talk the matter over and wonder
and surmise, and give three cheers for Uncle.


r)
CHAPTER
A SURPRISE.
The letter had come at last. Ted was late, and
they were all waiting for him as he rode up to
“ Gillong,” and when he fished a thick, square en-
velope out of his pocket, and handed it to Father,
Mollie and Eileen thought their last hour had come.
“ It’s it,” whispered Mollie, and she turned and
fled, with Eileen close at her heels. They couldn’t
face the ordeal yet. Later on they would be called
to listen to the wonderful news, but even- a -brief
respite was welcome.
“ Oh, I hope they never guess!” said Mollie,
anxiously.
“Guess? How can they?” asked Eileen, scorn-
fully; but, all the same, she, too, was anxious.
“What on earth is this about?” said Father, as
he tore the envelope open; and then he gasped.
“Harry! From Harry! Good gracious! Vera,
Vera,” he called to his wife. “ Look at this —a
letter from Harry!”
“ From Harry?” cried Mother, in amazement.
“ Harry?”
“Yes, Harry! Wonders will never cease! It’s
the last thing in the world I expected.”


“ What on earth does he say, after all these
years ?”
Then they both read the letter.
“ And he’s coming here? Coming here? Well,
wonders will never cease!” cried Mother. “ Com-
ing here! Dear, dear! just when things are at their
worst, with the drought on and not a decent thing
to give him to eat. . . But fancy writing after all
these years! . .”
“ What does he say there, again?”
Mother read aloud:
It’s wonderful how memories of the old days come
back to one, and I would very much like to see you and
Vera again, so if you can put me up for a week or so I
shall be delighted to come. I know you are suffering
from a very severe drought up there, but I trust that that
will not make any difference, as I have to go away again
shortly, and wish to see you and the children before J
commence my journey.
I have about a week to spare, so I hope you can put me
up for that time. We will have much to talk over when
we meet. I suppose I can go by coach from the nearest
township, and please don’t go to any trouble on my ac-
count.
And there was very much more in the same strain
that Mother read with exclamations of wonder and
amazement.
“Well, it’s the last thing I’d have thought of!”
declared Father.
“ It’s next week he means to come,” cried Mother.
“ Why, we’ll have to wire him.”
“So we will,” said Father. “ I suppose you can
manage it all right?” he asked. “About fixing up


things ?”
“ Oh, yes! we’ll manage it,” said Mother, cheer-
fully. “ I must let the children know. Won’t they
be surprised? I suppose they hardly know they
have an uncle,” and she called aloud, while Father
marched off to the stable, marvelling at the wonder-
ful news, and already building castles in the air.
The five children were together at the usual gum
tree meeting ground when they heard the call, and
they looked at each other in dismay.
“ Look surprised, Doris, do you hear, when
Mother tells us. We must all look surprised, and,
for goodness sake, ask questions—somebody and
everybody. It doesn’t matter what they are, as
long as we’re talking, and let’s all look astonished.
Oh, dear! it’s dreadful!” wailed Mollie.
“ Yes, we must all help,” declared Eileen,
staunchly. “ Everybody must ask questions and
ask all sorts of things, so as it won’t look funny.”
“ If only we didn’t know, and didn’t have to pre-
tend !” wailed Eva.
“ If we didn’t know, there’d be no surprise,” an-
swered Eileen, “ for there’d be no letter, no uncle,
or anything.”
“ Come on, we’d better run,” said Mollie; “there’s
Mother calling again. Come on, let’s run, and we’ll
be out of breath when we get up, and it won’t be
so bad then if we don’t ask questions straight
away.”
And then they took to their heels, and Baby was
puffing like a pair of bellows when they reached the
house.


Presently five breathless little girls stood in front
of Mother, who was looking very pleased and im-
portant, as she smiled at the open letter in her hand.
“ I have a very, very big surprise for you, my
dears. We’ve just heard from your uncle in Mel-
bourne, and —and you’ll hardly believe it—but he’s
coming to see us next week!”
They never remembered quite how they got
through it. They only knew that for a space there
was dead silence, and then a Babel of voices as they
all asked questions together, 'scarcely heeding
Mother’s replies. They only knew that they had
come through the ordeal all right, that they had all
acted their parts well, and that Mother had never
guessed; and as Mollie noted the look of pleasure
on her Mother’s face, she was repaid for all her
anxiety about the letter she had worried over so
much.
Then they all commenced to work and clean up
the house for Uncle. They scrubbed and scoured
and polished and shone, till every door-knob looked
like burnished gold and the window-panes gleamed
like diamonds. They swept up all round the house
and garden and away outside the gate, till there was
not a speck or a straw or a leaf to be seen. Dear
me! the house was like a new pin, and the little
room on the end verandah was transformed. The
washstand out of Mother’s room was put there, and
snow-white curtains on the little iron bedstead, and
the strip of carpet that Mother always kept away in
case of emergency was spread on the floor. A


snowy cloth was on the little wooden dressing-table,
and a glass vase waiting for the day that Uncle
would arrive, when it would be filled with pepper
leaves and berries, as there were no flowers left.
They all helped; even Baby w T as found going
round with bits of rag, polishing the already shin-
ing door-knobs, or busy, with a saucer of w r ater and
rag, “ washing ” the floors; and Eva and Doris
even took the broom down to the bed of the creek
and sw r ept up around the favourite gum tree, and
threw away twigs and sticks and bushes oft" the
path, and did all in their pow r er to make things spick
and span for Uncle.
They all laughed and sang and shouted and
talked a lot those days, now that they could speak
openly of Uncle’s coming.
“ I hope we never have a secret again as long as
we live,” said Eva.
“So do I,” said Eileen. “ I hope it’s my first and
only one. Why, I feel years older since I’ve been
keeping this one.”
“ I’ll have no more,” declared Doris.
“ Me, too,” said Baby, looking solemn.
“ Oh, well! anyway, the worst is over,” said
Mollie, cheerfully.
“ I don’t know whether it is or not,” declared
Eileen, dubiously. “ I don’t know how w r e’re all
going to face Uncle, knowdng that he knows what
he knows, and we’ll all have to look so innocent,
and pretend things—oh, it will be awful! ”
“ Oh, yes!” agreed Eva, “ I believe my face will
burn off with shame.”


“ There’s nothing to be ashamed of,” declared
Mollie, stoutly, although she, too, was quailing at
the thought of the ordeal.
"Oh, but the pretence!” said Eva.
" Well, it’s for a good cause,” answered Mollie.
“ Why, look how bright Father and Mother have
been since they got that letter. Oh, whatever wo
do, we must never let them know! We’ll just have
to act again, and pretend for all we’re worth, when
Uncle comes.”
" Oh, we’ll face it when the time comes—never
fear! said Eileen; “ but the thought of it is worse
than—worse than ”
“ Castor oil,” said Doris.
“ Yes, castor oil,” agreed Eileen, as she couldn’t
think of anything worse at the moment.
The great day arrived at last, and they were
nearly sick with excitement. Everything was in
readiness. The pet lambs all had new red strings
round their necks, the stick horses had been “ fed ”
early, and were tied up with narrow strips of bright
blue print; the porter-bottle " dog ” had a new rib-
bon, and Rose was decked out in her best finery; so
nothing remained to be done but to wait.
Father had borrowed the station buggy and
driven to Brangan Junction to meet him, and they
knew they would soon hear the “ top-top-top ” of
the horses’ hoofs on the creek bridge.
" My, but ain’t he a swell!” said Old Joe, as a tall
man, dressed in grey, alighted from the buggy at
the gate.


Old Joe had been with the family for years, and
so was privileged.
“ My! but ain’t he?” gasped Eileen, unconsciously
lapsing into Joe’s style.
Mother had hurried forward to greet him, and for
an instant Mollie’s heart sank. How could they
ever approach this tall, stylish man, who looked so
smart and alert, and so well groomed from the
crown of his hat to the sole of his boot; and to think
that they had written to him and asked him to
come! Dear me! he was the smartest and most
business-like man she had ever seen, and he looked
rather stern and severe, too, although his eyes lit
up with a smile as he shook hands with Mother.
They wished for an instant that he was just the
ordinary, every-day, common or garden variety kind
of a man; but it couldn’t be helped—they’d have to
face the inevitable.
And then he glanced towards them.
“And these are your little girls, Vera?”
“Yes; come along, children, and meet your
Uncle.”
They all came forward bravely, and were intro-
duced to their new uncle; and he was a real “ sport,”
and never let on that he had even heard of them
before. He asked their names and ages, as though
there were no such thing in the world as a letter.
They soon gained courage, and returned his smiles.
“I suppose you are real little bush girls?” he
asked, with a twinkle in his eye.
Mother answered, “ Yes, real little bush girls,”


and then they laughed outright, because they knew
what he meant.
Oh! all the talk there was at “ Gillong ” that
night! Long after the children had gone to bed
the two brothers sat out on the verandah and talked
of many things, while the kindly moonlight cast a
glamour over the parched, dried earth, making the
white road gleam like a silver band.
It wasn’t until the second day that they had a
chance of a confidential talk with Uncle, and then
they had a meeting at the usual meeting-ground—
the old gum tree, and sat round, solemn and impor-
tant looking.
“Well, children, we had better discuss this pro-
position of a loan.”
The children looked more important and solemn
than ever.
“Oh, yes!” said Mollie, anxiously; “of course,
we don’t know much about money, and all that,
but we do know that we want it badly.”
“ And about how many hundreds do you think
you will require?” Uncle was enjoying the meet-
ing immensely.
“Oh, dear! we don’t know—do we, Mollie?”
asked Eileen, anxiously. “ You see, we don’t know
much about it.”
“You see,” put in Mollie, eagerly; “ Mother and
Father and Frank have to work so hard, and have
so much worry, and we’re always having such bad
luck, and we thought if we only had more money
things would be ever so much easier ”
“ Yes, money can oil the wheels,” agreed Uncle.


“ Yes, oil the wheels,” repeated Eileen, “ and
there are plenty of rusty ones about here.”
“ Yes, things are about at a standstill,” said
Mollie, “ and of course it would have to be to Father
you w T ould lend money, and I suppose he won’t
want to take it, because he’ll think it will be such
a long time before he can pay it all back; but we
will pay you back —in time; but, of course, we can’t
let Father know we mean to pay. We’ll work and
work till we pay back every penny. In about two
years’ time I’ll be able to go out as ladyhelp, and if
Eileen could get some education she could go out as
governess later on, and we’d both save up to pay
you back. Oh, Uncle! you don't know how we’d
save and scrape, if we can only get money
now ”
“ And I have three pet lambs that I’ll sell when
the drought breaks,” said Eileen, “ and that will be
a help towards it.”
“And Dadda gave me old Jennie’s foal, and I’ll
sell it when it grows up,” said Eva, eagerly; “and
then I’ll go out to w r ork, too.”
“ You are clever little girls,” said Uncle, gravely.
“ Don’t you think you would rather be something
else than ladyhelps and governesses?”
“ Oh, yes!” cried Mollie, “ but we’ll do anything
to make money if you will only help us now.”
“Yes, and later on I might be an actress,” said
Eileen, calmly.
"Would you like that?” asked Uncle.
“ Oh, I wouldn’t mind! It would be an easy way
of making a living, and I’d have plenty of fun and


chocolates, and pretty dresses.”
“ Some day I’d like to be a rich lady,” said Doris,
“ and I’d give all little girls a real nice time.”
“Me be pitty lad} r ,” said Baby.
And then they all laughed.
“ Uncle, we want to thank you for writing to
us, and thank you for coming. You’ve made every-
thing brighter already, and Mother and Father are
so much happier-looking since you came, and they
don’t seem to be always thinking of the old drought
and hard times and debts ”
Uncle let them go on, for just then he couldn’t
speak. But by-and-by he turned to the little group
of upturned faces, and addressed them very quietly.
“ My dear little children, you have thanked me,
and now I wish to thank you.”
“ Thank us !” they exclaimed.
“ Yes, for many things. . . Later on you will un-
derstand, but I’m very glad you sent me that letter,
because I may be able to do some good for your
Father before it is too late. I think you may safely
leave the matter with me. I managed that letter to
your Father all right, didn’t I?”
“ Oh, yes, Uncle—beautifully!”
“ Well, leave this to me, and don’t bother your
young heads about repaying me. I’ll see to that.
Father and I will fix that up. .
“ Oh, Uncle, you are good! But we will feel so
mean if we don’t pay you something,” blurted out
Mollie.
“ No, don’t you worry about money and debts.
Be happy, careless children as long as you can.”


CHAPTER VII.
FRANK.
It was very quiet up at the house the next after-
noon. Mother and the children had gone down to
see the overseer’s wife at Jenkin’s old place. The
children liked the overseer’s wife; she always made
nice little hot cakes when she saw them coming, and
she always had some English papers with big pic-
tures in them, and she had boxes of sea-shells that
she let them play with every time they went. They
always knew just what was going to happen. First
she would come out and welcome them all —and she
was nice and plump and had rosy cheeks and nice
blue eyes—and then when she had a little talk she
would introduce the papers to the children, and then
the wonderful sea-shells, which they never got tired
of admiring, and they would empty them out and
run their fingers through them, and wonder when
they would go to the wonderful far-off beaches and
play with the glistening shells and stones. They
almost forgave the overseer’s wife for not having
any children for them to play with, while they
played with the shells. And then she and Mother
would talk such a lot, that they would try and make


believe that it was just as good as having the
Jenkins back.
Only Mollie was at home, and she hurried about
her work and set the table for tea, darkened the
dining-room to keep it cool, and then, with one last
look round, she hurried out and tied her shady hat
on.
“ Now everything is ready, I’ll slip down and tell
Uncle.”
Mollie had another secret, and it was harder to
tell and try and fix up than the letter.
Then down the track to the river she sped.
“ I do hope he’ll understand it all,” was the bur-
den of her thoughts as she sped on, lest her courage
should fail her. Down under the oak trees Uncle
was reading a book, and he looked round with sur-
prise at Mollie’s flushed face.
“Oh, Uncle! I want to talk to you. I’ve got a
lot more to tell you, but I couldn’t say it when the
others were about.”
Then she poured forth Frank’s story into Uncle’s
listening ear.
“ And, Uncle, he goes about his work when his
heart’s not in it, and people up here will be saying
that he’s slow and dull, when all the time he’s not in
his right place. He’s a round peg in a square hole,
or a square peg in a round hole, or some such thing,
and he’s helping to fight the drought and do the
work he hates, and never complains, because he
says he’d be a cad if he did, and all the time he’s
dying to be an electrical engineer. He’s saving his
money, but he doesn’t get much wages, and I be-


lieve he’ll be too tired whenever the time does come
for him to go away —but if he only has a chance,
Uncle —a .chance while he’s young and dying to get
to work, he’d be clever; I’m sure he would.”
Mollie’s cheeks were flaming now, and her eyes
were shining again.
“ He’s never told anyone but me, Uncle—and I’ve
thought about it ever since. When I see the big
Brown and Smith boys going about here and think-
ing they’re smarter than Frank—because they never
think of anything else, and only live for land and
stock —I get that wild, Uncle, to think that Frank
might never have the chance to show them how
smart he could be —but you won’t tell him I’ve told
you, because he would be so annoyed. I want you
to pretend you’ve found out for yourself and give
him a chance, Uncle—or tell him you will later on.
Oh, if he only knew that there was a chance of his
getting to his loved studies, and a chance to make
a name for himself later on, this work wouldn’t be
half so hard, because he’d have something to live
for—and if you will help him. Uncle, tell him soon,
please,” Mollie rattled on; “ tell him to-night if you
can, because there’s a big sheep draft to-morrow,
and I know he hates them, and if you tell him it will
help and cheer him through the heat and dust of
the dav.”
J
“ \\ ell, well, Mollie, you’ve given me something
to think about. So Frank wants to be an electrical
engineer, does he? Well—well ”
Then Uncle gazed away into space, and sat so
long silent that Mollie became anxious.


“ It’s awfully mean of us to trouble you so much,
Uncle, because you have money —but —but you 11
never be sorry for helping Frank —and
“ Well, well, Mollie, so that’s his dream, is it? I
had dreams, too, when I was a youngster, and I had
no one to help me. I’m rich now, but my dream has
never been realised—but—the boy must have his
chance; we must get the square peg out of the round
hole —and we must do it soon!”
“ Oh, Uncle!” was all Mollie could gasp, and then
almost before she was aware of it she had thrown
her arms round his neck and kissed him ; then sped
away through the trees towards home, with a great,
singing gladness in her heart. And Uncle, left
alone, threw his book down and gazed into space.
“ God bless you, little Mollie,” he murmured.
“ You’re smoothing the for others. Frank
must have his chance; I knew r he was out of his
groove here—and I’ll tell him to-night to cheer him
—through the heat and dust of the day. . . Ah!
Jean! Jean! if only you’d been true and cheered me
through the heat and dust of the years!”
Late that night, when the moon was shedding its
glory over the Gillong garden, and glinting on the
shining pepper leaves, Mollie stole out to where she
saw T a figure pacing to and fro among the moon-
beams and shadows.
“Oh, Mollie! Mollie! Mollie!” cried Frank;
“ you’d never guess what’s happened! My dream s
coming true—at last! Uncle Harry is going to
send me away after Christmas to learn the engi-


neering! What do you think, Mollie—he said he
knew I was out of my groove here, and he’s sending
me off next year! Oh, Mollie! Mollie! I can’t be-
lieve it’s true.”
The boy’s voice was jerky, as he told the won-
derful news.
“To think it’s nearly all over, Mollie—all the
tons and tons of work that I’ve hated ! Oh, Mollie!
I m glad you came! 1 felt I couldn’t wait till morn-
ing to tell you.”
Loyal little Mollie commenced to tell him how
glad she was, but she burst out crying and told him
between her sobs how much they would miss him.
“ You’re the only brother we’ve ever had, Frank,
except little Jim, and we hardly remember him.”
For little Jim had come and gone like the glint of
a star, and only a little white cross on his tiny grave
under the wilga tree in the paddock told that a little
life had been kindled for a space, and was then
wafted to its long home. But deep in the mother’s
heart was a wild abiding desire for her only son
that not even the presence of five little girls could
quite banish.
“ It’ll be so lonely without you, Frank. I don’t
know whatever we will do—w r e’ll all miss you
always.”
Then Frank tried to comfort her.
But I 11 come back sometimes, Mollie, and when
I’m rich you-must all come and live with me. Oh!
and I 11 write to you often, Mollie, and you must
try not to miss me too much, because I’m going to
work hard and get on, and then ”


For to Frank everything seemed possible, once
the great desire of his heart was about to be grati-
fied, and Mollie did her best to try and think of the
good times ahead.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE STORM.
All day long- the air was thick and murky. All
day long there were signs of a gathering storm.
Great big banks of fierce, sullen clouds began to
bank up in the afternoon, and far-off, ominous
sounds of thunder were heard. At first it was a
mere growl, and the edges of the great jagged
clouds were illumined by lightning. By-and-bye
the thunder grew louder, and cruel forked and chain
lightning began to play in the heavens.
The children wandered round the verandah and
looked at the sky, and wondered and wondered
again would it rain.
I believe it 11 be the end of the drought,” said
Mother, hopefully. Eva had a rug ready to cover
her head when the thunder grew louder, for she
was terrified of storms; and Baby and Doris would
squeal that they were frightened.
Mollie and Eileen, too, hung in the background,
blinking at each flash and sincerely hoping that it


would soon be over. Old Joe was in his element,
and talked volubly to Mother and Uncle.
“ I said all along it’d break this way, same as the
’B2 druith. There’s the same bank of clouds down
west, and another storm abrewin’ over ’ere. They’ll
meet directly, and there’ll be the deuce of a smash.
Shouldn’t wonder if the creek ain’t up to-night ”
“Oh, Joe! wouldn’t it be lovely?” chimed in the
children.
“ An’ it’s more’n likely she will be. I recollect
the time the ’B2 broke. Why, all the rivers and
creeks and gullies and gilgies and swamps were
runnin’ mountains high!’’
A low moaning sound reached their ears, and they
looked at each other in alarm.
“ Oh, Joe! what’s that?” asked Eva, creeping up
to him.
“ It’s the wind. It’s cornin’ this time, right
enough. Got the windows closed? She’s cornin’
strong,” said Joe, who dearly loved a storm, and had
no fear of even the “ dizziest ” chain lightning,
much to the little girls’ admiration.
“ I wonder will it hurt us, Joe?” asked Eva.
“’Urt you? ’Ow could it ’urt you?” asked Joe,
with fine scorn. “ Just you watch the lightning
play up in them clouds directly; it’ll be real pretty. ’
But already Eva’s head was enveloped in her rug.
“ Sakes alive! you’ll be smothered before it’s
over!” cried Joe.


The moaning sound grew louder and louder, and
the leaves began to tremble and the branches to
sway, while great flights of bush birds winged their
way hurriedly away to the east.
“ Look at ’em !” cried Joe —“ same as the ’82!”
At last, with a sudden gust of fury, the trees were
tossed and bent before the weight of the gale.
Oh, dear! oh, dear! I wish the others were in,”
cried Mother anxiously, and then away across the
paddock Father and Frank were seen coming at full
speed. They pulled the saddles and bridles off their
horses and turned them loose, and then rushed into
the house as a blinding flash of lightning lit up the
gathering darkness.
Ah, here we are! cried Frank’s ringing voice, for
ever since the evening that Uncle had spoken he had
been a different Frank, and his laugh rang clear
and gay on every possible pretext. For such is the
power of a gleam of hope.
How the storm raged and tore! Clap after clap
and flash after flash! Away in the distance a tree
was heard to crash to the ground, and then great
drops of rain began to fall, banging on to the iron
roof as though they would come through. Then it
fell in blinding sheets, and fairly danced on the hard
glazed ground.
“The same as the ’82,” said Joe again, as he lit
is pipe, all the creeks 11 be down in the mornin’,
and we’ll have to move them sheep,” he went on
complacently.


Sure enough, when morning came, the creeks and
gullies were roaring with thick, muddy waters, and
thousands of frogs were croaking lustily. And
what a time the children had, wading through the
muddy streams, and finding all the ruins of the
trees that had fallen, and making “ ridey-horses ”
out of the great branches that had once reared
themselves so proudly in the air. For the rain had
poured steadily all night, and the cruel drought was
ended.


: l S OCZ®ry
CHAPTER IX.
ANTICIPATION.
“ \\ ell, of all the things that could ever happen,
this is far and away the best, and I’ll never grumble
again, ’ said Eileen. “To think we’re all going to
Sydney for a holiday. Oh, it’s nearly too good to
be true! When did he tell you, Mamma?”
“ ° nl y last night, and I shouldn’t have told you
so soon, for I know you’ll do nothing but talk about
it for the next month; but I couldn’t resist telling
you,” said Mother.
b ncle had left that morning. He had changed
his plans, and had stayed longer at Gillong than he
had intended, and before he left he had made Mrs.
Hudson promise that she would bring the children
down to Sydney for the remainder of the summer.
“ I will take a cottage,” he said. “ You all need
a change of air, Vera, and will come back with re-
newed energy to cope with bush life.”
And at last Mother had consented.
Oh, the preparation and excitement at Gillong for
the next few weeks! Mrs. Grey, the overseer’s
wife, came down and insisted on helping. She
brought with her a sheaf of fashion books and pat-


terns, and cut out little frocks of the very latest
design, and took them home and ran them up on
her new machine. She also helped and gave hints
about everything, for she had spent a good deal of
time in Sydney. And, oh! the questions she was
plied with by the eager children!
“Do you get sea-sick going to Mosman?” asked
Eva. “ Because that’s where Uncle’s going to take
the cottage; and it’d be terrible if we were sea-sick
every time we went to town.”
“ I’m dying to see the crowds and crowds of
people,” said Eileen. “ But it’ll be hard not to talk
to them. Up here people would think you funny
if you didn’t speak to them, even if they are
strangers.”
“ I wish we could take the sticks,” sighed Doris.
“Pretty sights they’d be!” said Eileen. “You
couldn’t ride them down there. You’ll be able to
ride boats and trams instead.”
So the stick horses were laid away, rolled up in
paper, till their little owners returned.
Already Eileen felt quite the “ lady,” as she was
fitted for her new frocks, and talked nothing but
Sydney.
“ Did you hear we’re going to spend the rest of
the summer in Sydney, Teddy?” she remarked, care-
lessly, to the mailman, as he drank his tea.
“In Sydney?” gasped Ted. “ Bli’ me, I never
heard a word about it.”
“Yes, we’re going the week after next,” she re-
plied, coolly, as though going to Sydney were the
most usual thing in the world. “ Mamma and all of


us, and later Dadda and Frank are coming for a
while.”
Bli’ me!” gasped Ted again. “The bloomin'
family’s going! Well, this is news! I suppose
that’s why I’ve been carrying so many parcels for
you lately,” he said, a light suddenly dawning on
him. “ Where are you goin’ to stay down there?”
“ Oh, Uncle’s taking a cottage!” put in Eva.
“ Oh, that big swell cove that was staying here?
Bli’ me, your luck’s in!”
“ We’ll tell you all about it when we come back,
Teddy,” said Doris. “And I’ll bring you home
sea-shells and all sorts of pretty things.”
“Right you are, little ’un!” said Ted, as he
finished his tea and commenced to fill his pipe.
“ I’ll tell you what you can get me, if you don’t
mind—some real good sorts of straps; you know the
sort,” he said, turning to Eileen, “ same as them I
strap the bags on with. Last time I sent to one of
them Sydney firms they sent bad buckles. Here,
I’ll you the money now,” and he pulled out a
pound note.
“Oh, Teddy! it’ll do when we come back,” said
Eileen, not taking the proffered note. “ They won’t
be near that much.”
No, take the note now and give us the change
when you come back. ‘ Pay as you go ’ —that’s
Teddo’s motto.”
And e\ ery mail day Teddo’s list of requirements
grew bigger, until it seemed as though the pound
note would not meet them; and Eileen would jot
them in her little notebook.


“You see, you know me, and know just what I
want,” he would say, apologetically.
“ I’ll tell you what I would like,” he said one day
after he had fixed and patted and arranged the mail-
bags ever so many times —“ a tie like that your
Uncle used to wear; sort o’ black with little silvery
streaks in it.”
“ Oh, but, Teddy, that was real dear!” said Eileen,
quickly.
“Oh, I don’t mind price!” he answered; “when
Teddo sets his heart on anything, he don’t mind
paying up.”
“ Righto !” said Eileen, making a note.
So the time flew away, and one day, to their sur-
prise, Enid Davis dashed up in the big new car from
the station.
“Why, we thought you had gone for the sum-
mer,” said the children, in amazement.
“ No, we’re home for a month or so,” she an-
swered, “ and I felt a bit lonely, so I popped down
here.”
“ Oh, well! I’m afraid we won’t be company much
longer,” said Eileen, as she straightened herself in
her chair and put on the “ real lady style,” as Mollie
said afterwards.
“ Why —how is that ? I love coming here,”
answered Enid.
“ Oh, we’ve decided to spend the rest of the
summer in Sydney!”
“ Oh!” Enid looked astonished, but was too
polite to say so. “ That will be nice,” she went on.
“Yes, it’s just as well to enjoy yourself while


you’re young,” said Eileen, calmly. She always
felt a bit jealous of Enid’s fine clothes and pleasant
times. “ Our Uncle is going to the Continent later
on, and he is anxious for us to spend a little time
with him in Sydney.”
“ Oh, yes! Dadda met your Uncle at the rail-
way, and said he was such a nice man.”
“Yes, we think a lot of him,” answered Eileen.
“ So your Dadda met him?” she asked, eagerly, for
she was glad to know that Enid’s father had seen
their nice Uncle.
“Yes, they had dinner together just before the
down train left, and Dadda said he was sorry he was
not at home while your Uncle was here, because
they could have had some nice chats.”
“ Oh, Uncle was kept pretty busy chatting with
us,” answered Eileen.
But Mollie hastily added that it would have been
real nice for the two men to have met often.
“ We 1 re going back to Sydney in about six weeks’
time,” said Enid. “ Perhaps we’ll meet down
there.”
“ Yes, if we’re not too busy sight-seeing,” put in
Eileen.
“ Oh, we’d love to see you!” said Mollie.
“Yes, we’d love it,” chimed in Doris, as she
stroked Enid’s pretty silky dress. “ And I’ll give
you some pretty sea-shells if you haven’t got any.”
“ Oh, thank you, Doris! I’d love to have some if
you can spare them.”
They talked on for an hour or so, and Enid rose
to go.


“ So it’s next week you’re going?”
“ Yes, Monday, and this is Friday; so we haven’t
much time,” said Mollie.
“ I’m glad she knows we’re going,” said Eileen,
as the car hooted away.
“ Oh, Eileen; } r ouTe not a bit nice to Enid!” said
Mollie.
“ I always think she’s showing off,” put in Eileen.
“ Well, she’s not, then. It’s you that’s jealous,”
replied Mollie.
“Jealous? I don’t think!” snapped Eileen.
The next day Mr. Davis called and asked to be
allowed to send his car to take them to the railjvay
on Monday, as Enid had told him of their antic : -
pated trip, and, to the children’s delight, the car was
accepted.
“ Won’t it be beautiful,” screamed Eileen, “ to be
bowling along in that grand new car, and won’t the
people at the railway look? I’m sorry I said that
about Enid now, because I’m sure she asked her
Dadda to lend it.”
And so on Monday a car-load of merry, excited
young people, and Mother looking pleased and
excited, too, were bowled away to the big iron horse
that was to land them in the wonderful city.


CHAP T E R X.
MOSMAN.
“ I never thought it could be so nice,” said Eileen.
“ I never thought there were so many people in
the world,” said Eva. “ Why, we must have seen
millions and millions and millions to-day!”
“ The sea was just lovely this morning. I could
watch it all day long. We’re going out again the
first moonlight night,” said Mollie.
“ I gave de ole organ man two pennies while you
was away,” said Doris, “and he played all the
choones I liked best.”
* And I gave a penny to the old blind man near
the Savings Bank,” said Eva.
“And I bought a dear, darling little duck of a
lace collar for sixpence,” said Eileen, displaying it.
“ Oh, I wish I’d saved my pennies for one,” said
Doris, regretfully.
Never mind, you enjoyed the music,” said
Eileen, consolingly.
\es, but its all over now, and you’ve got the
collar and I haven’t got anything.”
Every evening they met and talked over the
e\ ents of the day. They had been in Sydney a


month, and were enraptured with all they saw.
They had quite run out of a stock of adjectives.
Everything was lovely, or beautiful, or great or
grand ! They had gone to the beaches and gathered
great bags of shells. They had dipped in the surf
and shouted with glee as the big white-topped
waves dashed over them. They had gone to the
garden and gallery, and Zoo and picture shows over
and over again, and could go through the whole
programme cheerfully again, till Mother remon-
strated with Uncle.
“ You are spoiling them. Let them stay in and
play in the garden,” she said.
But Uncle only smiled. He knew the months of
loneliness those little girls had put in in the coun-
try, and was determined to give them a feast of
enjoyment.
“ I think Mosman must be the dearest place in
all the world,” Mollie would say, as she gazed at the
pretty homes nestling in their well-kept gardens.
Their cottage was only about five minutes' walk
from the ferry, and when nothing better was on
they would race down the hill and watch the boats
come in and go out, and talk and wonder about all
the people. They became quite familiar little
figures on the Mosman wharf —the five of them to-
gether —as they sat and criticised and compared
notes.
They grew quite familiar with the postboy, and
told him all about Teddy, and made him wish he
was a country mailman.


“ It’s a wonder you don’t ride round with your
letters,” said Eileen.
“Ride round? I’d like to see a horse climbing
these steps and hills. It’d have to be a different
horse to any I’ve ever seen,” answered the post-
boy.
“ Oh, yes, of course!” said Eileen. “ I’d forgot-
ten that. You see, up where we live there’s no hills
or steps. It’s all as flat as—as the verandah here.”
“ I wish you’d bring some of your land to Mos-
man,” grinned the post-boy.
They became quite friendly with the tradesmen,
too —the baker and butcher and milkman.
“ It’s so funny to have you all coming here,” con-
fided Eileen, “ because up the country we bake our
own bread and kill our own sheep, and old Joe milks
the cows.”
They grew to know the people in the post office,
too, as they would call in occasionally to see if a
country letter happened to be delayed or missed in
the sorting. At first the officials glared at them, but
by-and-by they came to know the merry faces of
the bush children, and only smiled at their ques-
tions.
1 hey had only been a week in Mosman when
they chummed up with the little boy next door.
“ I wonder who our neighbors are,” Mollie had
said the day after they had arrived and finished un-
packing. “ I’d love to talk to them.”
“Would you?” asked Mamma. “Well, we’ll
have to wait a while. Sydney people arc different


to country; they know so many people that they
mightn’t have time for more friends.”
“ There’s a real nice-looking girl in there I’d love
to know,” said Eileen, “ and if she doesn’t soon
speak I’ll speak to her.”
“ And we want to know the little boy,” said
Doris.
A few days later Doris and Baby spoke to the
little, well-dressed boy, as he was coming down
the steps on his way to school.
“ Dood-day,” said Doris.
“ Day,” said Baby.
“ Good-morning,” said the little boy, politely.
“ We’se your new neighbors,” said Doris.
“Yes,” said the little boy.
“ And we’se been waiting for you to speak to
us. Don’t you speak to new neighbors?”
“ Oh, I don’t know!” said the little boy. “ I
want to speak to you, anyhow.”
“ Did you always live in Sydney?’
“Yes, all my life.”
J • *
“ Wasn’t you ever away up in the country,
undreds and ’undreds of miles?”
“ No, never!”
“ Well, that’s where we live.”
“Do you?” gasped the little boy. “Oh, do tell
us all about it,” he went on, eagerly, and he lis-
tened and asked questions till he found he was late
for school, and jumped up and seized his books.
“ Oh, dear, I’m late! Whatever’ll teacher say?”
“ Oh, leave ole school!” said Doris, quickly, “and
come and play with us.”


“ I can’t. But I’ll come in after school, if
Mamma will let me.”
“ Oh, yes, do! Good-by e-r-good-bye.”
Then a friendship sprang up, and little Willie
spent most of his time with his new friends. He
could listen for hours and hours about the horses
and sheep and rabbits, and he asked such funny
questions that the children would scream with
laughter.
“ Oh, Willie! you ought to come up with us, and
see it all,”, they said one day. “ It’ll be all pretty
and green now, and you could learn to ride.”
“ Learn to ride!”
Willie closed his eyes for sheer joy at the
thought. Would ever such good luck come his
way ?
“ Oh! I wonder could I?” he gasped.
“ ’Course you could!” said Doris. “ I can ride ole
Brownie when she walks slow.”
“ Sometimes Mamma lets me ride on the baker’s
cart up to the Spit Junction, but it’s only very sel-
dom,” he added with a sigh, “ and I have to walk
back.”
“ Our horses are better’n the baker’s,” said Doris.
“ Oh, lots!” said Eva; “ and’ you’d soon learn
to ride on ole Brownie.”
“Oh, dear! do ask Mamma to let me go. Let’s
beg and beg and beg, all of us,” pleaded Willie.
“ All right, we’ll all ask,” they promised.
After that he haunted them like a shadow.
“ Ask yet?” he would say a dozen times a day.


At first his Mamma wouldn’t even listen to it.
What! let her little boy—her little Willie —go up to
that outlandish place hundreds and hundreds of
miles away; oh, she couldn’t hear of it! And
Willie was heart-broken.
“ Why, there’s no doctor within miles of your
place, is there?” she asked Eileen.
“No, we don’t want doctors; nobody ever dies
up there.”
“Nobody ever dies?” echoed Marcia, Willie’s
sister.
“ No. We’ve seen more funerals since we came
to Sydney than we ever in our lives. And I
believe Mamma only saw about three funerals up
there, and she’s been there for years and years!”
said Eileen, proudly.
“Dear me! However docs that happen?” asked
Marcia.
“ Vk ell, you see there’s hardly anyone up there,
so I suppose that accounts for some of it,” went on
Eileen.
“ Oh, well! no thanks to them for not dying if
there’s no one there,” said Marcia, disdainfully.
“ I thought there might have been hundreds of
people living to be about a thousand.”
“ Oh! but those that are there don’t die —well,
hardly ever, except old Dave and a few more I know
of,” went on Eileen. “ And if a lot of old people I
know keep on living for a long time yet, they’ll very
likely be about a hundred when they do die.”
But this argument did not move Mrs. Taylor in


favor of Willie’s going. One day Willie came in
with a very determined face.
“ I know what! If Mamma doesn’t let me go, I’ll
run away!”
“What! Run away to sea?” asked Eva, eagerly.
“ No, run away to the country, up to your place,
silly!”
“ It’s too far to run,” said the practical Doris.
“ ’Course, I don’t mean to run all the way. Who-
ever heard of such a thing?”
“ Well, dat’s what you said,” persisted Doris.
“ Ugh! just like a girl. If you were a lot of boys
now, you’d run away with me—just to show ’em
that you’re not afraid of anything. I mean to clear
out and walk up to your place, and when I’m gone
Mamma might be sorry she didn’t let me go with
you in the train,” said Willie, almost on the verge
of tears; “ and I might starve and die on the track,”
he -went on, with tears of self-pity welling into his
eyes.
“ So you might,” agreed Eva, mournfully.
“You just might,” said Doris, ready to cry;
“ and we’d never see you again, and you’d never see
us,” she went on, bursting into tears; “ and the
dingoes might come and eat you up.”
At that Baby cried, too.
Then Willie grew grave. “I’ll tell you what!”
he said, suddenly struck with a bright idea. “Go
and ask Mamma while you’re both crying. Quick
—don’t leave off! You cry real hard, Baby!”
And up the “ next door ” steps the two young


rascals went, and cried copiously when Willie’s
mother opened the door.
“Why, my dears, what is wrong?” she asked, in
dismay, as she drew them inside.
“ We —we —wa-nt —Willie,” sobbed Doris.
“Want Willie!” echoed Baby, and cried out
loudly.
“ But he’s not at home, my dears. Isn’t he in at
your place?”
“Ye-es, but we wa-wa-nt him up the country
with us, an’ if you do-do-don’t let him come, he’ll—
he’ll run away to sea,” went on Doris, getting mixed
up in her story; “ an’—an’—die on the track—an’—
an’ the dingoes’ll eat him all up.”
Then Baby roared real genuine tears of distress.
“Dear, dear!” said Mrs. Taylor, “he’d never do
that, would he?”
For she saw through their conspiracy and guessed
that Willie was waiting next door, all impatience to
hear how his two little champions got on.
“Ye-es, he’s goin’ to run away soon,” went on
Doris.
“An’ he’ll die!” shrieked Baby.
Then Willie’s mother talked quietly to them.
“ Well, well, we’ll see about it. Perhaps I’ll let
him go with you, after all.”
And then, because Willie’s Mamma had a sense
of humor and guessed that her small son was wait-
ing to hear the news, she kept the little girls for
quite a time, and gave them lollies and dates, and
they quite forgot about Willie waiting to hear the
answer.


Willie met them with a very angry face when
they trudged up their own steps ever so long after.
“ It’s a wonder you ever came back,” he said,
sarcastically. “Did you forget I was waiting?
What did she say? Quick !”
“ She said, she said ”
“Go on! what did she say?”
“ She said p’raps, an’ she’d see. An’ I think she
means to let you come.”
“ Is that all she said, all the time you were in
there? ‘P’raps, and she’d see!’ A lot of sense
there is in that! Didn’t she say anything else,
Baby?”
“ She gave us lollies.”
“ Oh, hang the lollies!” cried Willie, in despair.
“ Did you cry when you got in there, or did you
chew lollies?”
“ But she means to let you come, I do believe,
Willie,” said Doris, earnestly.
“Oh, yes, Willie! If she said perhaps and she’d
see, I think she means to let you go. Another time
she wouldn’t listen to us,” put in Eva.
“Yes, I believe she means to let me go, too,” said
Willie, hopefully. “ Oh, if I could only go, I’d
stay there months and months!”
“ You might get lonely,” said Mollie, who had
just come in.
“ No, I wouldn’t get lonely. I’d never get lonely
if 1 stayed there all my life,” said Willie. “ And 1
might stay there all my life, too. I might grow up
a big man up there, and I might never come back.”
“ Might never come back?” asked Eva.


“ No, I might stay there and help your father with
the horses and sheep, and after a while I might buy
your place.”
“ No, you won’t!” said Doris, stoutly.
“ All right, then —but I might, all the same,” ho
went on under his breath.
‘‘l’ll tell you what!” cried Eileen. “Let’s get
Mamma to go in and ask your Mother while she’s
thinking about letting you come.”
“ Oh, yes! let’s ask your Mother to go in right
away,” cried Willie.
So Mother was persuaded to go and ask, and in
the end she won the day.
A great friendship had struck up between Eileen
and Marcia. Eileen admired Marcia’s dainty
dresses and ribbons and hats, and took to copying
her. And then they commenced to go out together
to little tennis parties, for Marcia had many school
friends who had musical evenings and little enter-
tainments, and she always asked Eileen to go with
her, and Eileen enjoyed them all immensely. It
was nice to sit in the beautiful drawing-rooms and
lounges and have ices and salads and coffee handed
to you, and to be asked all kinds of questions about
country life, and to be considered someone won-
derful because you could ride so well, when up the
country they took it as a matter of course. And
Eileen, like many another girl, began to wish that
this kind of life would last for ever. Marcia was
kept very busy at school, and had many studies.
She was very keen on physical culture, and perhaps
some day would become an instructor. She would


come in and give demonstrations in Hudsons’
drawing-room or kitchen, and have them all twist-
ing and turning furiously, trying to manage exer-
cises that she could go through so gracefully.
Then one day an idea came to Mrs. Taylor. Why
not ask Eileen to stay with them, while Willie went
to the country? So the question was put, and it
was agreed that Eileen would remain for a few
months with Marcia.


CHAPTER XI.
HOME AGAIN.
They were all back again at Gillong. All except
Eileen and Frank, for Frank had gone to Sydney
early in March, to commence his studies; and they
were all glad of Willie’s company, for he filled up
to some extent the blanks left by Eileen and Frank.
After their splendid holiday they were all glad
to be back again, for the ground was covered with
a carpet of greenery, and there was plenty of water
in the creeks and gullies, and the children raced
up and down the banks and shouted for sheer glad-
ness and lightness of heart. Mollie would mount
her horse and canter away across the paddocks,
singing as she went, for hadn’t everything gone well
lately? Frank had his darling wish gratified, and
Mother and Father looked so well and happy be-
cause their burdens were lightened. Uncle sent
them cards from every port; and she would recall
Uncle’s last words as he stood on the deck of the
big ship that bore him to England (for they had
all gone to see him off) :
“ Good-bye, Mollie, dear; and the next time I go
I hope you will be with me. It is you I thank for


this reunion; and, remember, Mollie, it is through
you that Frank has got his chance while he is still
young and keen —God bless you, little girl!”
After that she felt she could never be very un-
happy again, and she would think of a time that
might come when she would stand on the deck of a
big out-going ship and plunge away through the
rollicking, dancing waves, out past the Heads,
where the snow-capped breakers foamed and tossed
and tumbled, and away o’er the trackless ocean, till
wonderful new lands were reached !
Willie declared that the country was the best
place in all the world, and he would never, never,
never go back to “ old ” Sydney again!
“ Pshaw! I hate all the rows and rows and rows
of houses, and no big paddocks and no mobs of
sheep or horses, and I hate all the old cart-horses
now, the old baker’s and butcher’s and milkman’s,
and I hate all the cab-horses, and all the horses in
Hordern’s and Lassetter’s vans, and I hate the
trams, and I hate everything in Sydney! I wish
Mamma would come up here and live!”
“ What a pity we couldn’t get a nice little house
built in the little paddock for your Mother,” said
Eva.
“Oh, yes! wouldn’t it be grand?” cried Millie.
“ Or a tent would do.”
“ A tent?” cried Eva, in disgust. “ Oh, no !”
“ Yes, we lived in a tent for weeks once at Narra-
been.”
“Oh, but that’s different! That was picnic-
like.”


“ Well, we can make it picnic-like up here,” de-
clared Willie, “ and Dadda could come up when he
gets his holidays.”
“ Oh, no, Willie! they could never live in a tent
up here,” said Eva, decidedly. “ It’s real different
to Narrabeen.”
“ I don’t see any difference,” declared Willie,
“ except there’s no surf. That’s the only differ-
ence. Besides,” he added brightly, “we could be
nearly always at your place. < We needn’t spend
much time at all in the tent.”
Just now-Willie was more in love than ever with
the country, for they were to have a short shearing
at Gillong while the days were still warm. It
would be only for a week or so, but Willie had
visions of snow-white sheep being driven away from
the woolshed, of great thick fleeces being tossed on
the wool-table, and all the noise and excitement and
bustle of shearing time. And perhaps he could
drive the sheep up from the paddocks to the yards
sometimes, and he was looking forward to a real
good time.
Willie was perfectly happy. He was actually
driving sheep from the creek paddock to the wool-
shed, all by himself. Mounted on old Brownie, he
rode slowly backwards and forwards behind the
sheep.
“You’re sure you know your way, Willie?” Mr,
Hudson had asked.
“Know my way?” repeated Willie, with fine
scorn. “ ’Course I do. You’ve only got to ride


across the bridge and turn down the creek, and
round the bend, and round ’em all up and drive ’em
back to the slip-rails, and let ’em through, and
you’re there,” he went on, jauntily.
“ That’s right!” answered Mr. Hudson. “Of
course, you can’t get lost. You can’t get out of
the paddock, anyhow, only by the slip-rails. But
mind you don’t get ‘ bothered ’ like some new chums
do, and ride away from the place you want to go
to.”
But Willie wasn’t afraid. He had set off
whistling blithely. He’d let them shearing fellows
see how he could drive a mob of sheep to the yards,
even if he were only a city boy! The sheep were
scattered about in all directions, so he rounded
them up quietly and “ headed ” them towards the
creek. He had gone much further down the
swamps and gullies than he ever had before, but
he didn’t notice that as he whistled and shouted to
bring the sheep scampering up from the bends.
After driving them along slowly for some distance
he “ hit ” the creek, and suddenly discovered that
the bends and turns seemed unfamiliar; but he kept
on steadily, trying to keep down a rising fear.
“ We’ll soon come to that old leany tree,” he
said aloud, although he began to have a horrible
fear that he was getting lost. The next bend was
still unfamiliar, and then a panic seized him.
Where was he? Off the track? And with no
chance of finding it again. He wondered if he were
going the right way, and a wild desire seized him
to race up to the front of the mob and wheel them


back. He just didn’t know where he was. He
had twisted and turned so many times while mus-
tering. It was all very well for the Hudsons to
say there was no chance of getting lost in the creek
paddock. There was. Why, he was lost now.
He didn’t know whether to let the sheep go on or
turn them back; he didn’t know exactly where he
had brought them from, and where he had “ hit ”
the creek. Then, like most other new chums, he
completely lost his head. Here he was, out in the
big paddock, with not the slightest idea where to
turn; and the worst of it was, they wouldn’t give
him a thought till all hours, as he was supposed to
drive the sheep slowly, and perhaps he’d be miles
and miles and miles away by then—perhaps he’d be
dead! What a fool he was to come alone!
He pulled up and stared at his surroundings.
Nothing but blue-grey gum trees everywhere, with
a monotonous sameness about them. Nothing
whatever to guide him. Just the same all round,
and the sheep were beginning to camp now that it
was growing warm. He was sorry he ever saw
them. He never saw such silly old things as sheep!
He was sorry he ever came out into the silly old
paddock. Where was he? Why, every place
looked strange and new! Yes, he was lost —lost—
lost! and he put his head down on the pummel of
the saddle and burst into tears. Why did he ever
leave Sydney? He wished now that he was along-
side the G.P.O. clock; he wished he could see a big,
friendly, blue-clad policeman, to point out the way.
He wished they had policemen up here in these silly


old paddocks, to show a man the proper track, and
he wished —oh, he wished he’d never come alone!
If he lived to be a hundred thousand years, he’d
never come out like this again ! Here he was, under
the blue sky, surrounded by blue gums and acres
and acres of grass, and he might stay here all night,
and perhaps they’d find him dead in the morning!
Of course, they’d be sure to find him dead! He
wondered what his mother would say when she
heard of her poor little Willie, and then he com-
menced to sob. He wondered whatever Dadda
would say. He wondered would he give up his
office work for a time, and would he wear a black
band round his arm; and what would all the other
men say when they saw Dadda going in so pale and
quiet every morning. He could just imagine them
all getting together and speaking of poor little
Willie, who got lost in the bush, and how he was
found —dead! And then suddenly a wild fear
seized him. Supposing the story should come true
—supposing he were out all night, and the dingoes
did come! Oh, horror! He wished he had never
seen the horrid old country. If ever he got back to
dear old Sydney again, he would never, never leave
it. No! not for a million thousand Hudsons, or a
million thousand horses and sheep and dogs, or a
million thousand paddocks! Sydney was the best
old place in all the world. No getting lost there!
No chance of it with million thousands of people
to ask the way! If you were in the least doubt
you simply had to just ask the first person you met,


and they'd give you all the information you needed.
Good old Sydney! Oh! what would he do?
Just then he heard a whip crack. Oh, joy!
Away in the distance, through the trees, he saw
Big Tom from “ Myall ” riding slowly towards him.
His heart gave a great bound. Saved at last! Safe
again! But he must never let Tom know he’d been
afraid. He must never let him know that he’d been
crying. He liked Big Tom because he called him
Bill sometimes, and treated him like a man. So he
slipped from his pony and dashed his hands and face
into the water and slipped his handkerchief under
his hat, as he had often seen the men do on the hot
days; and he was glad to have it flapping round his
face in case Tom might notice the tell-tale tears.
Then he mounted hurriedly and shouted to the
sheep, and began to muster them up again; and, lo!
there was the “ leany ” tree, and the old familiar
bend not twenty yards off from where he had been
hopelessly sobbing! and there, just round the bend,
Gillong was in sight; and he could even see Doris
and Baby playing out on the flat. All within cooee
of him all the time! Dear me! All his worrying
for nothing! What would they say if they knew?
But he would never, never, never tell them!
And so no one ever knew that Willie had given
up hope that fine morning, and thought he was lost
for ever in the creek paddock.


CHAPTER XII.
WILLIE.
It was three days later.
“ Oh, do let us bring the sheep in from the Gums
paddock!” cried Willie. “We can drive them up —
really we can. You’ll come, won’t you, Eva?”
“Yes, I’ll come,” cried Eva, who was getting much
more fond of the outdoor life. “We’ll just show
them, Willie, how smart we are, and that we can
bring them in; and it’ll save sending a man.”
“ All right,” said Mr. Hudson. “ Off you go!”
“ And we’ll take Gussie,” said Willie.
“ All right, please yourself, but he’s no good. He
knows no more about sheep than a kitten.”
“ All the same, he’s a nice dog,” said Willie to
himself, as he and Eva and Gussie started off.
They found the sheep down in the far corner of
the paddock, feeding quietly.
“ Now, then, come along,” said Willie, “ and get
your woolly coats off,” and he tried to whistle and
called to Gussie, and soon had the sheep heading to-
wards the gate.
“ Easy, isn’t it?” he cried to Eva, who had been
picking the pretty feathery grass.


“ Oh, yes! the easiest thing in the world,” she
answered back.
“ I’d love to be a drover,” said Willie. “ Some-
times I’d like big mobs of cattle, especially when
they all broke away and I’d have to gallop after
them. And sometimes I’d like mobs of sheep,
too, especially when I had good dogs. I think I’ll
break Gussie to be a real good sheep-dog, and have
him for one of my best when I grow up.”
“ But he’s no good. Dadda says he’s not, and he
ought to know; and he said if he lives to be a
hundred he’ll never be any better.”
“ Hah, rubbish,” said Willie, with all a new
chum’s self-assurance. “.I’ll bet I could break him
in. Here, Gus, where are you?” For Gussie had
disappeared, but presently came rushing up from
the creek, barking and yelping.
“ Here, Gusso, good dog,” cried Willie.
But Gussie was frisky, and scampered round
barking and yelping.
“ Lie down, you fool!” shouted Willie. But, like
a streak of lightning, Gussie was off after the sheep
that were just nearing the gate, rushing in front of
them and turning them back to the creek.
“ Here, Gussie, Gussie, Gussie. Here, boy, come
back here, you black animal!” shouted Willie, ex-
citedly, as he and Eva raced after the dog. “ Here,
Gussie, Gussie, lie down, you brute!”
Away went Gussie, yelping excitedly and sending
the sheep helter-skelter back to where they’d been
driven from.


“ Let’s open this gate, Willie,” cried Eva, who
was hot and flushed. “ That’s what we ought to
have done first, and then they’d have rushed
through. Let’s open this fool of a gate, and we’ll
have to round them up again.”
They tugged and tugged and shoved and sighed
and grunted, but all to no purpose. The springs
were broken, and refused to budge.
“ Come on, shake it again,” said Eva, but all to
no purpose.
“ Oh, damn the gate!” cried Willie
“ Oh, Willie!”
“ Yes, damn the gate, and damn the dog, and
damn the dashed old paddock 1”
“ Oh, Willie, you’re swearing! Swearing!” cried
Eva, aghast. “ I never thought you’d swear.
When you came up here you wouldn’t think of such
a thing.”
“ Well, I’ll think of it now, and I know hundreds
more, too. All men swear,” answered Willie, with
two red streaks in his cheeks. “ All men swear,
and I’m going to, too. I’m not going to be an old
ninny.”
“ You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Willie!”
said Eva.
W ell, I’m not, then. I’m not a bit ashamed,
and another thing, I wish you’d stop calling me
Willie. It’s nothing but Willie, Willie, Willie, all
over the place. W illie’s an old woman’s name.
It’s just like an old woman with half a dozen kids.”
m shocked at you. I never thought
you were so —so —ugly.”


“ Well, I don’t care if I’m ugly or not. You
call me Will, if you want to call me anything—not
Willie, or little Willie, any more.”
“ And I’ll tell them at home that you swore,
too.”
“ Tell ’em; tell ’em anything you like. Anyhow,
it’s not a real swear —nothing to what I’ll say when
I grow up.”
“ I hope I don’t see you when you grow up, if
that’s the kind of man you’re going to be.”
“Ugh! you’re not a sport. You're not a sport’s
boot-lace,” continued Willie, assuming a lordly air.
“ I wouldn’t be anyone’s boot-laces,’ answered
Eva’, disdainfully. “ And —and I’ll never come out
with you again. You’re a rude boy!”
“Oh, a rude boy, am I?” mimicked Willie. “If
you were a man I’d fight you.'’
“ Yes, I suppose you would,” said Eva, still dis-
dainfully. “ That’s what you'll be, I suppose, when
you’re grown up—a fighter, and a drinker, and a
smoker, and a swea ”
Just then a whip cracked in the distance, and they
turned in dismay.
“ Oh, Willie, the sheep! Ido hope Gussie hasn’t
killed them.”
“ Great snakes!” shouted Willie. “ Let’s after
them,” and away they scampered, forgetting their
anger for the time being.
Away across the paddock the sheep were coming
slowly towards them, driven by Big Tom from
“ Myall.”


“ Hello!” he cried in his loud, hearty voice. “ I
thought you were supposed to be taking this lot to
the shed.”
“ So we were, Tom ; but Gussie chased them away
from the gate, and we’ve been trying ever since to
open the old thing,” announced Willie, importantly.
“ And is it open now?”
“ No. It refused to open,” said Willie, with all
his manners laid on again.
“ Refused to open,” chuckled Tom under his
breath. “ All right,” he cried, cheerily, “ you two
get behind this mob, and just walk along slowly,
and I’ll fix up that gate in one act. I’ll take this
mongrel with me,” he continued, as he tied his whip
through Gussie’s collar. “No use of three new
chums being together,” and he rode ofif.
The children had time to get cool again, and
Willie was a bit ashamed of his outbreak; and,
another thing, supposing Eva did tell at home, they
might send him back to Sydney. They might pack
him back by the next mail. Good gracious! that
would be dreadful, just when he was learning to ride
well and knew all the dogs and horses—and—right
in the beginning of the shearing, too! He didn’t
want to go back to Sydney for months and months
yet. He must try and conciliate himself with Eva
somehow.
“ My word, this is a pretty paddock, Eva.”
“Yes,” answered Eva, shortly.
“ Real nice flowers down there, too. Nice yellow
ones.”
“ Yes,” answered Eva.


“ I’ll get you a bunch if you like —a great big
bunch, and—l’ll tell you what—l’ll carry them
home myself.”
“ Oh, I think it’s too hot!” said Eva, languidly.
“ They’d all fade.”
“Do you think so? What a pity!”
He didn’t know what else to say for a time.
“ I’ll tell you what; I’ll come back when it’s cool,
if you like, and get you a great big bunch.”
“ No, thanks, give them to your boot-laces, if you
want to gather some,” said Eva, coolly.
“ Give ’em to my boot-laces?” echoed Willie,
blankly.
“ Yes, you’ve got such a lot to say about boot-
laces,” answered Eva, hardly knowing what to say.
“ Oh, sport’s boot-laces!” said Willie, with a light
suddenly dawning on him. “ I didn’t mean any-
thing nasty, Eva. I often say that. Goodness me!
iffs a great Sydney saying. Why, I often tell my
mother she’s not a sport’s boot-lace, and she don’t
care a bit. Why, she wouldn’t care if I called her
a sport’s boot-lace every day,” he went on, hardly
knowing what he was saying in his excitement to
get on a friendly footing again. “ No, my mother
wouldn’t care one bit ”
“ Now, then, you two —don’t go mooning there;
round ’em up,” shouted Tom.
And then Willie rushed off, and Eva, too, woke
up, for what a time they’d get when they reached
the woolshed if the sheep got away again. Why,
they’d be laughed at, and it was a terrible punish-
ment to be laughed at.


They were received with a cheer at the wool-
shed, and hailed as the “ amateur drovers,” and Tom
never told how he came to the rescue. He was what
Willie would term a “ sport.”
For the next few days Willie was anxious, won-
dering if Eva told. But things went on in the same
old smooth way, and he grew content.
On the third evening Eva found a great big
bunch of yellow flowers on her table, and she
guessed who was the giver and the reason why they"
were sent. So she accepted the peace offering.


CHAPTER XIII.
A SYNDICATE.
There was a conspiracy at the homestead. Great
whispering and talking and planning among the
younger set. Great fossicking among old tins and
gardening implements; and then, one fine day, a
party of four set off to the river, down to the Rocky
Bend. It was nearly a quarter of a mile to the
Namoi from the Gillong gate, and they all trudged
across the track, each carrying bulky parcels. Down
at the river Willie turned and addressed the com-
pany in a pompous voice :
“ Yes, I believe there’s gold here —any amount
of it. Why, look at them rocks—they’re shining
again! I bet we’ll knock gold dust out of em
before long.”
“ Oh, Willie!” they all gasped. “Do you really
think so?”
“ ’Course I do. It’s a wonder all you people
never thought of it before. Why, there’ll be a gold-
field on your place yet,” he went on, with his eyes
shining. “ Yes, a great big diggings, and I’ll be the
one that found them.”
“Oh, Willie! wouldn’t it be lovely?” they all
shrieked.


“ Wouldn’t it be great,” he went on, “ to have
monster big diggings and crowds and crowds of
people and miners’ huts and tents and all that up
here, all through me finding out a gold-field ”
“ Oh, Willie!” they all shrieked again.
“ Why, look at that sand there! Why, there’s
gold in it, sure enough!”
“Oh, Willie! however’ll we set about getting it
out?” cried Eva.
“ We’ll fix it up,” said Willie, confidently. “ We’ll
get it out somehow. I’ve seen chaps in pictures
with old dishes, and they wash the sand and strain
oft' the water, and the gold dust’s left behind, or
something like that. Anyhow, we’ll have a try at
it.”
“ Oh, yes, let’s try!” they cried in chorus.
Then the four of them set to work with little
dishes, and scooped up sand and washed and
strained the water off, and looked very important,
indeed.
“ We’ll ex —ex —periment,” said Willie.
“ Yes, we’ll ’speriment,” said Doris.
“ Periment,” said Baby, as she swung an old tin
pint wildly in the air.
They worked patiently for an hour, without re-
sults, and then Doris shouted out that she had found
some.
“Where, Doris, where?”
“ Look at this —it’s a lot shinier than the other.”
“ I believe it is,” said Willie.
“ I believe it is,” echoed Eva.


So they emptied it on to an old tin tray to dry,
and set to work again with a will. By-and-by the
others shouted that they had struck gold, too, and
more shining yellow sand was poured on to the
tray.
They looked round for Baby, but she was busy
building sand castles and wells and filling them up
with water from the old pint. She made dozens
and dozens of trips to the water’s edge, and filled
the old pint to carry back to the wells; and as the
pint was leaking, there was only about a quarter
left when she reached the wells. But Baby didn't
care. The more trouble she had, the better she
seemed to like it.
“ Look at her,” said Willie, in tones of disgust.
“ A smart lot of good she’d be on a gold-field!
Let her build her old castles and her old wells —a
smart lot of good they’ll do her!” Then he went
on working harder than ever.
“Do you know,” he cried a minute later; “ I be-
lieve there’s another way —chopping up rocks and
stones, and getting it out like ore or something.
Let’s try it.”
“ Oh, yes, let’s!” cried Doris, who was getting
tired of this slow old way. “ There’ll be more fun
chopping up rocks than washing old sand.”
“ And we’ll send the ore away to Sydney for
some of them chaps to look at and tell us what it’s
worth.”
“Oh !” they cried in the one breath. “ Won’t
that be grand? Let’s start chopping.”


/1 ‘ BfcTfY~ (
~ p*Tgw.*o* >
“ She made dozens of trips to the water’s edge.”




“ Wait a bit, there’s only one tomahawk,” cried
Willie. “ Let me go first, ’cause I thought of it,”
and he slashed with a will into the shining rocks,
and before half an hour great blisters had risen on
his soft hands.
“ Let’s have a hit at it,” cried Eva, and she took
the tomahawk and bashed into the stone. Then
they heard the thud of horses’ hoofs up on the bank,
and Eva dropped the tomahawk and looked up as
Big Tom rode to the top of the bank.
“Hullo! making mud pies?” he cried, as he dis-
mounted.
“Ye-es,” shouted Willie, and they all exchanged
telegraphic glances. They mustn’t let Big Tom
into the secret. They mustn’t let anyone know
until gold was discovered, and those wonderful
Sydney men had examined it and told them what
it was worth. Then they would tell their wonder-
ful news, and then the rush to the gold-fields would
begin!
“Yes, the sand’s lovely down here,” cried Eva.
“ Oh, lovely!” said Doris.
“ Lovely!” echoed Willie.
“ Lubly tand !” cried Baby.
“ Nearly as good as the sand on the beaches, eh,
young man r” said Tom, as he came down the bank.
“ Te-es,’ said Willie, as he made a sign to Eva
to sit on the tomahawk, and she hastily hid it in the
sand and then sat on it.
“Yes, it’s nearly as good,” went on Willie. “I
mean I believe it’s better, Tom; it’s real yellow, and
the beach sand is white.”


"Oh, this is richer sand than yours!” said Tom,
as he stooped down to the water s edge and took a
long drink.
"Richer?” cried Willie, looking round at the
others. Had Tom guessed there was gold lying
about in the gleaming sand?
" Yes,” chuckled Tom, “ richer. It’s like yellow
butter and white butter —which would you rather
have?”
" Oh, the yellow, Tom!” they cried, quite re-
lieved, for now they knew that Tom didn’t mean
anything about gold when he said rich, and their
secret was still safe.
" Why, Baby’s got the best castles of the whole
lot of you!” said Tom, surveying Baby’s buildings,
" and wells and roads and all.”
“ Oh, yes, Tom !” they all agreed. " We’ve only
been fooling.”
Then Tom sat on the sand and talked. Another
time they would have liked talking to Tom, but
to-day they did want to go on with their prospect-
ing. At last he rose to go, and Willie accompanied
him up the bank, and stayed there till Tom was
almost out of sight, and then he dashed into the
work again.
"Hello! is this where you are?” a fresh young
voice called out from the top of the bank, and they
glanced up to see Mollie’s laughing face. Oh, dear,
dear! what bad luck! They didn’t mean to tell
Mollie, and now they’d have to, because she’d won-
der what they were working so hard at and why


their hands were blistered. In fact, she’d ask all
kinds of questions, and here she was coming down
the steep bank! What a sickening place it was!
They couldn’t even have a secret to themselves.
First Tom, and then Mollie. The river was miles
and miles long. Why ever didn’t they keep away
from the Rocky Bend just for that evening?
“ Here, Mollie, you promise not to laugh at us?”
cried Willie, sturdily.
“Of course-1 won’t laugh,” said Mollie.
“And promise not to tell?”
“ No, I never tell, either. But what are you
doing?” and she commenced to sink down on the
sand near the wonderful tray.
“ Mind the specimens!” cried Willie
“ Specimens?” cried Mollie.
“Yes, we’re mining—gold-mining!” said Willie,
stubbornly.
“ Oh, playing mines?” said Mollie.
“ No, not playing, either. We’re serious. We
think we’ve struck a patch, and we’re going to
work ”
“ And later on,” chimed Doris, “ there’ll be tents
and huts and camps, and hundreds and thousands of
men here, minin’.”
Mollie laughed gaily.
“ There, I said you’d laugh, and you promised
not to,” said Willie, in disgust.
“ Oh, I couldn’t help it!” cried Mollie. “ Who
ever heard of such a thing?”
“ Because they’re all too silly to see it,” cried
Willie, hotly. “ Why, any fool with common eye-


sight would know that there was gold in this sand
and in those rocks!”
By-and-by Mollie grew serious, and listened.
“ I’ll tell you what,” she said at last. “ Why
don’t you ask someone?'’
“Ask someone?” said Willie, witheringly.
“ Who’s to ask?”
“Why, old Joe; he was years and years and
years on the gold-fields when he was young.’’
“ So he was,” cried Eva.
“Oh, Mollie! was he?' cried Willie. "Oh, he
ought to know!”
“ Yes, let’s ask him,” cried Eva.
“ Oh, let’s!” gasped Doris, “ quick as ever we can.
Let’s hurry home and ask him before he has his
tea.”
“ No, you don’t!” cried Willie. “ I’ll ask him,
’cause I found the gold and did all the work. 11l
do the asking.”
“ Yes, we’ll wait till after tea," said Mollie, “ when
he’s smoking. Let’s all go over to the stable and
ask him.”
“ Oh, yes, let’s!” agreed Doris again.
It was nearly sunset, so they hurried and gath-
ered up their treasures —the “ gold dust ” and
“ specimen ore ” —and trudged oft home; and after
tea a deputation of five waited on Joe, who listened
attentively, and then with the aid of a kerosene
lantern examined the specimens.
“ So you think you’ve struck gold in the Namoi
River, eh? Gold at the Rocky Bend? Why,


there’s no more gold in that sand than there is in
my foot!”
But some dreams die hard, and Willie and his
little band still worked away at their gold-field.
Teddo was again pressed into the service, and one
day posted a small tin of “ dust ” away to Willie’s
father, to be examined by an expert, and the verdict
came back on very official looking paper—“ Just
ordinary sand from the river-bed.”


CHAPTER XIV.
LESSONS.
Eileen had been overjoyed at the thought of
staying in Sydney, and she commenced school
duties with a will. She was almost a beginner in
many of the subjects that Marcia was proficient in,
but she was naturally bright, and soon acquired a
knowledge of everything.
On Saturday afternoons they played tennis, and
on Sundays they had long walks, and Eileen used
to write home glowing accounts of how she spent
her time.
But learning music was her one trial.
“ It’s such a good chance,” Mrs. Hudson had
said, “ for Eileen to get a good foundation.”
So the young visiting teacher at the College had
Eileen placed on his list, and after a few lessons he
marked her down as a “ non-trier.”
Up the country she used to play by “ ear ” on an
old piano that had long since seen its best days, and
now scales and such like were doubly trying.
“No, Miss Eileen, not that way. Wrong!
Wrong!” the teacher would cry, impatiently, as
wrong notes were struck or hands were placed in
the wrong position; and Eileen, who simply hated
the humdrum, hammering exercises, would grow
sullen and wade through the rest of the lesson.


Things reached a climax after about a month of
lessons.
“ No, Miss Eileen, you’re no better now than
when you commenced. It’s agonising to have to
listen to you. No time, no expression—you simply
have no ‘ soul,’ no ear for tone, no ”
But Eileen turned on him with flashing eyes.
“ No soul,” “ No ear,” rankled in her mind.
“ I’ve got as much soul and as much ear as }'ou
have!” she cried. “You think yourself, with your
old music, don’t you? Well, let me tell you
that there’s plenty of cleverer people than you that
don’t know a note of music, and if I can’t play I
can do lots of other things—yes, I can! —and I’d
like to see you up the country, trying to ride a
horse, and see where your ‘ soul ’ and ‘ ear ’ would
come in.”
She banged up her music and jumped up from
the piano.
The teacher was simply petrified. To be spoken
to like that by a little country girl! Preposterous!
Really, Miss Eileen, you forget yourself.”
“No, I don’t,” answered Eileen, “but I’m just
sick to death of ‘ soul ’ and ‘ tone ’ and ‘ finish ’ and
melody, and all the rest of it, and I would just
like to see you up the country on a horse—and not
old Brownie, either!” and she marched out of the
room before the time was up.
Really, a most extraordinary girl,” murmured
the teacher, as he sat there and waited for his next
pupil. He was only newly appointed to the teach-


ing staff, and did not have the knack of imparting
sympathy and enthusiasm to his pupils.
“ I hate that old musical box,” said Eileen that
evening to Marcia.
“What old box?” asked Marcia, perplexedly.
“ The music teacher, with all the musical letters
to his name,” went on Eileen, calmly.
“Why?” asked Marcia, opening her eyes very
wide. “ I think he’s beautiful, and he has such
glorious dark eyes.”
“ Ugh! dash his old eyes—they’re as silly as the
rest of him. He sits there goggling and screwing
and beating time like an old —old Jack-in-the-box,”
concluded Eileen.
“ Oh, Eileen! I don’t believe I can ever take
another lesson from him,” laughed Marcia. “ I’ll
laugh when I see him ‘ goggling and screwing ’ ”
“Yes, and bending down when the music’s soft,
and sitting up straight and flapping his hands when
the music’s loud. Ugh! it sickens me; I’m sorry
I commenced to learn.”
“ Oh, Eileen! you are funny,” laughed Marcia
again. “And all the girls think he’s lovely; why,
I’m just dying to tell them what you’ve said, only
it might get back to his cars.”
“ Oh, it doesn’t matter!” said Eileen, with her
head high in the air. “ I told him this morning
what I thought of him.”
” You—told —him —this —morning—what—you
thought—of—him !” gasped Marcia.
“Yes,” answered Eileen, and then she detailed
the conversation.


“And you left him before the lesson was over?”
cried Marcia.
“Yes, I left him sitting there, gasping.”
“Oh, Eileen! you are brave; I’d never have done
it. I’m real nervous at my lesson.”
“Pshaw! I’m never nervous, and I’m never
going to be, either. I mean to be an actress some
day, you know, and it won’t do for me to be ner-
vous. Thank goodness, actresses don’t have to
know music, and if I have a dozen children I’ll
never let one of them learn a note unless they want
to. Playing by ear’s good enough for me, and it’ll
be good enough for my children.”
Then Marcia went off into another peal of
laughter. “ Oh, Eileen, I wish you’d stay here for
ever!” she cried. “ I’ll miss you dreadfully when
you’re gone. But Ido wish you’d try hard at your
music.”
“ Oh, I suppose I’ll have to! But I’m more satis-
fied now that I’ve said all that about ‘ soul ’ and
‘ ear.’ ”
About a week later Eileen got a most unaccount-
able fit of home-sickness. She had received long
letters telling her about the clover paddocks, and
the dew glistening on them first thing in the morn-
ing, and how fat the horses were; and all of a
sudden Sydney grew distasteful.
Sitting at her desk, the thought of those long
green stretches would come to her; the thought of
the green-clothed gullies, with the children racing
up and down on their ponies; the thought of the big
blue gums along the creek, waving long brown


strips of bark wildly in the wind, and the big fire
of myall logs burning brightly in the Gillong dining-
room at night, and the gleaming white frost on the
corn cobs in the cultivation paddock shining under
the rays of the wintry sun. And one day she put
her head on the desk and burst into tears. She
wanted to be there straight away. After all, there
was no place like home, and she wanted to go right
up and mount her horse and race all over the pad-
docks. The teacher was astonished.
“ But there’s nothing to stop you from going
home, is there?” she asked kindly.
“ N —no!” blurted Eileen, “ but I didn’t want to
go until now, and it just came on real sudden, like
a bad tooth-ache, and I couldn’t help c-crying.
I’m —I’—m not coming back to school any more.
I’ll get ready and go straight home.”
There was consternation in the Taylor household
when they heard of Eileen’s resolution.
“ No, I’ve been real happy with you, Mrs. Taylor,
and I’ll miss you all dreadfully, but I’m real home-
sick —you know, I think country people suffer from
home-sickness,” she went on apologetically, “ and I
just can’t wait another day. Every time I hear the
thud of a horse’s hoof it makes me lonely, and
you’ve all been real kind —and—I’ll always like you
-—but—all the same, I must go home.”
Mrs. Taylor just knew how she felt, and helped
her to pack up, and was as kind as her Mother, and
Marcia was almost heart-broken.
“ You must come back again as soon as you can,
Eileen. Oh, dear! I won’t have half the fun now


that you’ve gone. No one to talk to about people
and the music teacher or anything else.”
Then Mrs. Taylor fell to worrying about Willie.
She wondered was her little boy home-sick, too,
and didn’t like to say; and she wrote him a very
long letter, and told him to be sure and come
straight away if he felt like it, and how she thought
he ought to come home now in any case, and how
she missed him. And the heartless little Willie,
when he received it, grunted and said, “Just like
a woman!” Then he sat down and wrote her a
long letter to satisfy her, and 'to let her see “ once
and for all ” that her little boy was not in the least
home-sick, or even likely to be.
And one afternoon Eileen boarded the North-
West train, and with many promises of letter-writ-
ing and much fluttering of pocket handkerchiefs and
farewell messages she was whirled away to the far
North-West Bushland.
And*the same train that brought her home carried
Willie’s letter back to his Mother:
My Dear Mother,
I am very, very happy up here, and I am not at all
home-sick like Eileen is, because you see I am kept pretty
busy. Mr. Hudson doesn’t know how ever he can get on
without me again. lam a great help to him. Every
evening I bring in the cows and pen up the carves. They
are little beauties—five spotted ones and a rone, and a
red. If he was a foal they would call him bay, but they
don’t have bay carves —only red, so you will know that
whenever you are talking about them; but foals are bay,
not red, and they’d all know you came from Sydney if you
started calling them the wrong names. lam a good rider


now, and I can yard sheep and drive horses and do thou-
sands of other things. Tell Dad not to go troublin about
getting me into an office later on, because I mean to
take a job of handy man on a station —that is, if ever I
leave here again. Mr. Hudson calls me his handy man,
and I am sure I am a great help to him. It wouldn tbe
very nice of me to leave him when I am such a help, and,
besides, I’m not a bit home-sick. If you feel you want
to see me very bad you ought to come up here. It isn’t
so very far—only about 420 miles from Sydney; and if
you are a good sleeper you can go to sleep just after you
leave Sydney and wake up just before you get to the last
station here, and you wouldn’t know you’d been travelling
all the time, so you wouldn’t feel a bit tired.
I hope you won’t be writing for me to go home for a
long time yet, as I want to spend the winter up here, and
then the spring, because thousands of birds will build
their nests in the bush trees, and I want to see the young
ones, and it will be very hard luck if I don’t see them
after coming all this way; and I want to see the ever-
lasting daisies all over the paddocks, and I am sure you
will be nice and kind and let me stay; and I wish you were
here now to have a good old roll in the clover —it’s great!
I’m sure Dad would like it, ’specially if he had his old
gardening suit on, and it don’t matter if it gets covered
with green.
The shearing was great. I wish we could have
months of it. There is going to be another one in the
spring, and I’m going to be tar-boy and general useful in
the shed, and Mr. Hudson is going to pay me some wages.
I told him not to bother, but he says he will; so I’ll send
you a check when I get enough to make one, and you
ought to have a trip to the mountains with it. I wish
you were up here to see me working.
Well, Mother, I have written you a nice long letter.
Excuse any mistakes in spelling and grammar and stops,
but I don’t think there’s very many, because I’ve kept
singing out to Mollie and asking her how to spell a lot


of words. I don’t think I want much more schooling. I
think a man can make plenty of money without, and it’s
no use spending money on books when you don’t want
’em.
I hope now that you will know that I’m not home-
sick. I don’t think boys do get home-sick much, ’cept
when their hungry; and with love to you and Dad from
your loving and grateful and happy son,
WILLIE.
P.S. —Love to Marcia. I nearly forgot her. A man
does soon forget his sisters wdien he’s away from them.
Tell her I’ll take her home a present when I go—a kan-
garoo or emu or some sort of bird.
Yours truly,
WILLIE.
Willie’s mother, when she received this, shook
her head and said, “ Well, well, I suppose I had
better let him stay; he seems so happy, but I do
wish he missed me a bit,” she added with a sigh.
“ He’s too young yet to understand things,”
laughed Dad, as he re-read the letter. “So Willie’s
just got into double figures, and he thinks he has
had enough schooling, and wants to start money-
making. \\ ell, well, boys will be boys,” and he
pocketed the letter to show to some of his cronies at
the Club, while Mother spent the best part of the
morning hunting for it to show it to Auntie Grace,
never dreaming that it had already gone the rounds
of the Club, where it had raised many a hearty
laugh, as seasoned business men recalled again
their lost youth and young ideas.


CHAPTER XV.
EILEEN’S RETURN.
Eileen’s head was craned far out of the train as
it drew into the station, where Teddy, with a broad
smile on his face, was waiting for the mail and any
stray passengers.
“ Anyone here to meet me, Ted?” she asked as she
bounded out.
“ You have to come with me in the sulky,”
answered Ted.
“Go with you? Oh, I say, lam disappointed!”
“ That’s a nice greeting for a man!” said Teddy.
“ Oh, Teddy, I didn’t mean anything against
} ou!” she declared, “ but, you know, I was looking
forward to seeing some of them, and what about my
boxes?”
“ Logan’s van’s cornin’ over to-day, and it’ll bring
them.”
“Oh, dear! oh, dear! I do hope it gets there to-
night. I’d hate my boxes to have a night out on
the roads, and there’s some pretty things in them,
too.”
“ I suppose he’ll get there,” said Ted, cheerfully.
" Oh, I’m not so sure about that. Don’t you re-


member when he was bringing that case of porter
over, and he broke into it, and had a whole day and
night on the road, and lost a good many parcels,
too?”
“Got many traps?” asked the good-natured
Tedd) r .
“ Only three, but one is so small you’d hardly
count it, but it’s pretty heavy,” she went on, doubt-
fully, “ and then there’s another big one, but it’s
as light as anything. It's that light you’d hardly
feel it, and the other—well, the other’s a bit solid.”
“ Let’s see the little one,” said Ted; “we might
stow it in.”
“ Oh, Ted, you’re splendid!” gushed Eileen, as she
hurried him along the platform. “ There it is—
the little heavy one, and there’s the big light one I
was telling you about; just lift it, Teddo, and see
for yourself how light it is.”
“ It’s light, right enough,” agreed Teddy, as he
glanced down at the waiting sulky. “ I think I
could hoist this big chap on to the back.”
“Oh, Teddy, if you only could!” gasped Eileen.
I m sure Logan’s old van will be late coming over,
and I do want to unpack as soon as I get home.”
“ Well, keep your eye on them mailbags, till I
come back,’ ordered Teddy, as he hurried off with
the big light one; and Eileen sat on the wooden
bench and watched him rope it on to the back.
“ There’s no doubt Teddy is good,” she thought,
‘ and I’m glad now that I brought him that tie
instead of spending the money on that check ribbon
for myself that I felt I wanted so badly; but I


couldn’t get them both, so I am glad now that I
decided on the tie for i eddo.’
“ You’ve got it fixed on beautifully,” she said, as
Teddy hurried back to get the mail and the second
box; but he was too important, and hurried to
answer her as he rushed round, strapping on boxes
and bags.
“ All aboard,” he called at last, and Eileen climbed
up on to the seat beside him.
“Oh, it’s lovely to be back again, Teddo!—just
lovely, and everything looks so big and so wide and
so breezy, and there is such a lot of space, and I bet
they’ll be glad to see me at home again.”
“My word, they will!” agreed Teddy, “and so
you got lonely down there?”
“Yes, real lonely. I just couldn’t stay a day'
longer. Goodness me, Teddo, I just felt inclined
to take to my heels and run and run till I got here,
and I just felt that I loved everything and every-
body up here. Why, I believe I’ll fairly kiss the old
cows and hug the pet lambs and dogs and chickens
when I get home, and —but what’s the matter,
Teddo?”
For Teddo had gone off into a fit of laughter—
he was so hugely entertained.
“And before you’re home a week you’ll be sick
of them all,” he said at last.
“ Indeed, I won’t,” she answered, indignantly.
“ I’m much older than when I went away you must
remember, Teddy, and I see things in a very dif-
ferent light,” and she sat up very straight.


“ Yes, you’re a few months older,” guffawed
Teddy, “but, all the same, you’ll always have a
hankering after Sydney—all women and girls do.
I bet the first hot day that comes next summer you’ll
be wanting to get back to that there surf and the
boat trips and all the rest of it; and you’ll take to
\our heels then and never stop running till you get
there." And then he laughed again till he nearly
rolled out of the sulky.
“ Really, Teddy, it doesn’t take much to amuse
you,” said Eileen, and so they talked and argued all
through the drive, while Teddy pulled up at the
different mail-boxes, which were sometimes boxes
nailed on a tree, or a kerosene tin sitting on a stump
and secured there by a long nail. Papers and letters
were thrown in and sometimes a parcel or a pound
of butter or a loaf of bread, for Teddy acted as a
general shopper at the little railway township. Then
the horses would trot along again through the fresh
clover that flicked, flicked, flicked against their
hoofs, and filled the air with a crushed fresh smell
of greenery, and Eileen drew in long, deep breaths
and said it was “ lovely.”
“Gripes!” said Ted, as he turned the horses
sharply, and wheeled back to a mail-box off the
road.
“ Oh, Ted! \\ hatever are you turning back for?”
“ Forgot to leave old Payne’s tobacco,” said
Teddy.
“ Oh, never mind it this time!” pleaded Eileen;
let him smoke tea-leaves or bark, or anything;
why, it’s ever so far back!”


“ No, I promised I’d fetch it, declared Teddy,
stoutly, “ and a promise is a promise, even if it’s
only made to old Payne,” and Teddy looked quite
pleased with himself after this statement, while
Eileen sat back in a resigned manner.
At last the little bridge near the homestead came
in sight through the trees, and Eileen shouted aloud
for joy.
“ Thought you were going on the stage down
there?” said Teddy, giving a parting shot.
“ Oh, that’ll come later on!” said Eileen, loftily.
“T m too young yet. I want a little more home
life before I leave for the stage.”
Then Teddy made a grimace and murmured
under his breath.
“ Stage! —I don’t think!”
There was shouting and commotion when the
sulky drew up at the gate, and Eileen sprang to the
ground. Then a babel of voices filled the air as
everyone tried to speak at the same time.
“ Qh, lam glad to see you all again!” Eileen told
them over and over, and Mother actually had tears
in her eyes, though she couldn t for the life of her
tell you why.
And Doris and Baby, with fat, happy faces and
the roses of winter on their cheeks, danced round
the new-comer.
“ I have a little new pet lamb; you can have a
nurse of it if you like when you have had a w ash.
“ Oh, thank you, Doris, but I don’t think I will
this evening!”


“ And dere’s dear little puppies over at de shed,”
volunteered Baby.
“ There’s Willie, and goodness me if he’s not rid-
ing! Doesn’t he look funny?” shrieked Eileen.
Willie overheard the remark, and looked daggers
at Eileen. Then he dismounted and walked slowly
up to her with a great stockwhip wound round his
arm.
“ Good evening, Eileen; how did you leave them
all in S}'dney?” he asked, coolly.
“My goodness, but you do look funny!” answered
Eileen. “You are different; why, your Mother
wouldn’t know you —you’ve grown that tall, and
you’re getting fat, too, and fancy you being able to
ride!”
“ Oh, it doesn’t take a fellow long to learn that!”
he answered, carelessly.
“ I’ve got some nice presents for you from your
mother,” said Eileen.
“ Presents?” gasped Willie, with his eyes lighting
up and his grown-up manner completely gone.
“ Yes, a pair of stockings and a muffler and some
tooth-paste and scented soap.”
“ Ugh! Presents. I don’t call them presents,”
said Willie, in tones of disgust. “Anything else?”
“What did you think I’d have?” asked Eileen,
hotly. “A motor-car or a carriage and pair?”
“Come off,” said Willie, “I thought you might
have a cricket bat or a football, or something that
would be of some use and fun to a fellow, instead of
old tooth-paste and old scenty soap; none of the
men up here use scenty soap, I bet.”


“ No, and it might be all the better if they did/'
flashed Eileen; “ and, another thing, I think you’ve
got real spoilt since you came up here, with your
stuck up, grown-up airs, for a kid of your age.”
“ Oh, come in Eileen, before you two start fight-
ing!” said Mollie, with a laugh.
“ Fighting!” echoed Willie. “ Pshaw, I wouldn’t
fight with a girl!”
They all met again before teatime, and chased
round with the pet lambs, and climbed the fence of
the calf-pen, and gazed at the little calves, and tried
to coax out the chickens from under their mother’s
wing, where they were nestled for the night.
“ They’re such little beauties,” said Mollie.
“ Little fluffy golden ones and speckled and snowy
white and brown, and some are real black.”
“ Oh, the darlings!” said Eileen; “ I’ll see them
all in the morning.”
“ An’ tometimes we ’as fosts in de mornin’s,” said
Baby, clasping her chubby hands; “no fosts in
Tidney ?”
“ No, you darling,” cried Eileen, “ it’s as mild as
butter down there. Oh! but I’m glad to be back
again, for all Sydne}‘’s niceness, and I’ll never,
never, never grumble any more at the bush or the
quietness or the work or anything else. I’m never
going to grumble again as long as ever I live.”
“Oh, dear!” gasped Doris, shaking her head
solemnly and looking in wonder at Eileen.


fs Q SOCIETY I
“Oh, dear!” said Eva, in tones of surprise.
“Oh, dear!” cried Mollie, in mocking tones of
unbelief.
And “Oh, dear me! whoever is talking?” cried
Willie, in sarcastic tones.
Baby’s teeth were stuck fast in some toffee that
Eileen had brought her, so she could not say any-
thing.


CHAPTER XVI.
CONVERSATIONS.
A governess coming! What, a governess coming
just when things were at their best. Just when
the paddocks were green and the horses were rolling
fat, and everything was free and easy, and every-
one felt inclined for fun and gaiety and jollification.
A governess coming to keep them in musty old
school, and make them study dry old books and
lessons and figures. They never thought Mother
could be so hard-hearted and so cruel and so mean.
“And I’m just sick and tired of old school. I
got enough of it in Sydney to last me a lifetime.
I did think I would be free from it now and get'a
rest at home,’’ sighed Eileen.
“ I wish there were no such things as govern-
esses,” wailed Doris. “ Governesses and old
school!”
“ I ’ate old tool!” roared Baby
“ Oh, dear, sometimes I wish I was dead!” went
on Doris.
“ A smart lot of good being dead would do you,”
snapped Eileen.
“ Coin’ to school’s worse nor bein’ dead some-
times,” said Doris.


“ It’s not so bad if you learn your lessons,” said
Eva, who was rather glad of the idea of the
governess, but daren’t say so in the presence of the
others for fear they’d laugh at her.
“Who wants to learn old lessons?” cried Doris.
“ I want to play all day and feed the chickens and
watch the little ducks in the' water, and catch cray-
fish and bully-frogs, and there won’t be any time
for all that with a governess—boo-hoo!”
“ It’s sickening,” declared Mollie, looking away
over the green paddocks; “ there’s always some-
thing turning up just when things are going good.”
“ Don’t you like her coming, either, Mollie?”
asked Eva, breathlessly.
“ No,” answered Mollie, “ not just yet. I want to
ride and ride while the horses are fat. I don’t
want old school and lessons any more than you
others.”
“Oh, why didn’t you tell Mother that?” cried
Eileen, breathlessly; “ she might have listened to
you. She thinks you are so sensible.”
“What’s the use of talking?” snapped Mollie.
“ She’ll come, no matter what we say.”
And I’ll bet she’ll be old and scotty and prim
and particular,” said Eileen. '
\ es, and wear glasses, and will always be losing
them, and will hardly ever smile, and read a lot,”
said Eva.
\ es, dry old books—all about good people that
were never in the world at all,” finished Eileen,
and expect us to be like them. She needn’t think


she’s going to make me like any of her old good
people in books.”
“ Nor me, either!” said Doris.
“ Me, eder!” said Baby.
“ And I bet she won’t be able to ride!” went on
Eileen, “ and knows nothing about bush life.”
“ And I bet she don’t like little ducks and
chickens,” put in Doris.
“ I wonder what will she be like, and what’ll
her name be,” said Mollie.
“ I bet she'll be tall and thin!” said Eva
“ Oh, sure to!” said Eileen. “ I can see her now,
getting round with her head in the air, turning her
long nose up at everything,” and then Eileen walked
round, sniffing contemptuously, and they all
laughed merrily.
“ Dear, oh, dear! I do wonder what she’ll be
like!” said Eva, sobering up.
“Who?” asked Willie, who just then came
through the gate.
“ The new governess,” they cried in one breath.
“What! heard any more about her?” he asked,
eagerly.
“ No, we’re just wondering ”
“Ugh! Just wondering —just like girls; that’s
all you're good for —wondering.”
Then there was an uproar, and five pairs of feet
chased him round the verandah, and five pairs of
arms imprisoned him.
“You're always wondering yourself,” they cried,
“ and you’re too conceited to let on.”
“ Yes, ’course he is, ’course he is.”


Then Willie set to wondering in real earnest, and
he bet she’d be cross as two sticks, and wear ugly
old dresses and couldn’t understand a fellow liking
sheep-mustering, and drafting and all that, and he
bet she’d never go for a swim in the river with
them, and he bet she’d never fish, or if she did catch
one she wouldn’t be able to take it off the line, and
she’d be calling all over the place for him to do it,
and she’d always be wanting him to put the bait on.
Well, she needn’t get calling for him, for he just
wasn’t going to stand it; if a fellow went fishing, he
was going to fish and not go baiting a line for an old
governess!”
“Yes, and I’ll bet she’ll hate country life,’’ de-
clared Eileen, eagerly.
“Of course she will,” echoed Willie. “ She won’t
know a thing about it. I say,” he went on, growing
brighter, “ we might have some fun with the old
party ” —(for Willie was sadly deteriorating in his
manners lately) ; “ yes, we might have some fun,
you know, if we get her mounted on old Nigger
and teach her to ride ”
They all laughed again, at the spectacle of the
governess on Nigger.
“ And I’ll crack the whip behind old Nigger, and,
gee-whizz, won’t he go ?” roared Willie, and the five
other little sinners joined in the laugh.
“We might have some fun yet,” they agreed,
hopefully.
“ Yes, leave it to me,” went on Willie. “ I’ll see
to that. I didn’t come all the way from Sydney to


shut myself up in old school. V e’ll have some fun
right enough.”
“ But she might be nice,” said Eva, timidly.
“Nice?” echoed Willie. “Nice? What are you
talking about?”
I ve often read of real nice governesses,” went
on Eva.
“ Read r’ said Willie, scornfully. “Yes, you
might read about ’em, but you seldom see ’em.
No, they might live in books, but not in life,
and don’t you forget it!”
“ Oh, dear, it’s a hard life!” sighed Eileen, “ just
when things seemed to be going right, too; but it’s
no use wishing or expecting or hoping for things
to go right, because they never will.”
“ No, they never will,” echoed Eva.
“ No, dey never will,” agreed Doris.
Ne\ er, ne\ er, never, said W illie. “ A fellow
just thinks everything is goin’ on great, and some-
thing comes along to upset him.”
“ \ es,’’ they all agreed, eagerly.
Like the day I rode Dandy,” he went on. “ I
was that glad about it because I was goin’ to have
him for my hack, and then he must go and get a
stake in his leg that very night! Oh, it’s no use
" ishing for anything, because you never, never get
it I”
No, never!” they all agreed, mournfully.
Oh, my goodness me, here comes the mail!
There might be a letter about her.”
d hen there was a general scatter and excitement.
Sure enough there was a thick, important looking


letter from the College for Mother, and they all
crowded round her while she read it.
Her name was Miss Gibson, and she would arrive
at “ Gillong ” on the following Wednesday.
“ And here it is Friday now! Oh, dear!” they
cried, in consternation. “ Let’s make hay while the
sun shines.”
They all rushed madly round for the next few
days, trying to crowd all the outdoor life they could
into their lives. One would think to see them that
their school-days would begin at six in the morning
and not end till six in the evening, so eagerly did
they snatch up every minute and spend it outside.
“ There’ll soon be old lessons and figures to take
up all our time,” they would say, mournfully; and
then set to enjoying themselves with a will.
“On Saturday and Sunday I’ll get up at 5
o’clock,” said Willie, “and ride all day. Yes, I’ll
ride till it’s dark. I’ll let her see that she can’t keep
me in all the time!”
So they all nursed a grudge against the governess
who was coming into their lives.
“ 111 let her see that Saturday and Sunday belong
to myself, and I’ll hardly as much as say good-
morning to her on them days. I’ll let her see!
And, another thing, I’m not going to ride about
with her if she wants to learn to ride, so you need
never ask me to. If she wants to learn to ride
you can go with her—Mollie or Eileen.”
Oh, dear, how very kind you are!” answered
Eileen. “ It's not so long since you learned to ride


yourself, and I heard about the day old Brownie
nearly threw you.”
“ Nearly threw me,” echoed Willie, in fine scorn.
“ I simply slipped off her, because she would go
round one side of the fence when I wanted her to
go the other. I wasn’t going to let her best me, so
I just slid off and let her go on her own, and I
caught her afterwards and took her back and rode
her round the way I wanted her to go. She didn't
best me.”
Just then Eva burst into tears.
“ Whatever’s wrong?” they asked, anxiously.
“ We’ll —we’ll never have time to—to —go down
to the bend and gather the mushrooms, and —and —
I do love mushrooms!”
“ We’ll have time, silly,” answered Willie. “ You
leave it to me; I’ll see that she gives us time to
gather mushrooms.”
He stalked off with the air of a conqueror.


V K So^ s %
r
NftaK— / as
** y
CHAPTER XVII.
THE GOVERNESS
Down the long flat road bowled the buggy that
was bringing the governess from the station, for
Father had gone over the night before to meet the
train; and now the children, in a state of wild ex-
citement, were grouped together, and wondered.
Even Willie let all his eagerness and excitement be
seen. Just for the moment the grown-up, care-
less, sang froid manner that he usually adopted was
quite cast aside, and he was a little, eager, natural
boy again.
“ I’ll bet you anything that she’s lame and’ll wear
glasses,” he said, looking round at the others.
“ There you are now. I’ll bet before I see her.”
“Oh, sure to be!” they agreed. “Oh, dear! I
wish she wasn’t coming. If only she wasn’t com-
ing, wouldn’t it be lovely?”
The buggy drew up at the gate, and Mother went
forward to meet the newcomer.
“By Jove, she don’t look bad!” cried Millie, as
he peeped through the dining-room window.
“ Why, she looks real young,” cried Mollie.
“ She’s just like a girl,” cried Eva.
“ What’d you expect her to be?” asked Millie,
“ a bloomin’ old man?”


“ Oh, but I mean a real nice young girl!” ex-
plained Eva.
“Just you wait a bit,” he replied.
“Oh, she looks real nice!” said Eileen.
“ Ugh ! looks are nothing,” grunted Willie, who
was somewhat disappointed at all his predictions
coming to nothing. “ Wait till she starts teaching,
and see if she looks so pretty then. She’s got her
best manners on now.”
“ And what a pretty hat,” said Mollie.
“Oh, lovely!” agreed Eileen, “and a real pretty
dress, too. Look, she’s taking her dust-coat off!”
“ Oh! who wants to see her old dress?” snapped
Willie, who felt somewhat out in the cold.
“ They’re coming in. Let’s all go out the back
way,” and off they scuttled.
Eater on they were all introduced, and Miss Gib-
son was so bright and friendly and took such an
interest in everything that they found themselves
quite drawn to her. Even Willie said grudgingly,
in his most grown-up way, that “ she wasn’t half a
bad sort, and if they carried things out properly
they might knock out a good many holidays.”
They took her out to see the pets, and she asked
their names and seemed to know all about pet lambs
and even chickens, and she could actually ride.
Then when they found out she used to live in the
bush when she was a child they took her to their
hearts straight away.
“Yes, I am a real bush girl,” she smiled, “but
I’ve been in Sydney for the last four years, teaching
at College. I just used to long for the bush, and


the horses and the rides, and the wide, free, open
spaces, and solitude when you wanted it, and to get
up early and watch the sun rise, and then to watch
the stars twinkle into space, and then just to gaze
and gaze at the sky until there seemed nothing else
in the world but yourself and the starshine.”
“ Really, it was wonderful,” the children declared,
“ to think that a nice girl who knew all about the
bush and who knew pet lambs and could ride had
come to teach them, and to think that they had had
all their trouble and worry for nothing, thinking and
wondering about her.” Eileen said it would be a
lesson to her, and she would never, never worry
as^ain.
c
So five very happy little bush girls went to bed
that night, with the suspense of the last few weeks
quite gone from their minds. And Willie, too, was
quite jubilant.
“ Anyhow, it’s better than having a cross, prim
old dame that won’t let a fellow have a joke,” he
said, as he lit his candle in the hall, “ and we’ve only
got to work things all right and I’ll bet we’ll get
plenty of holidays. One thing, she can’t expect a
man to be always stuck at school.”
And so school life commenced, and went on very
smoothly, although now and then the children felt
it a bit irksome, for they had been used to so much
freedom that it was something quite new to have
to answer bells and keep rules and silence in school
hours, and sometimes they simply longed to tear
out over the green paddocks just in the midst of a


history or geography lesson. Their minds would
wander away from names and dates down to the
clover patch or to the river bend or some other well-
known patches, and as soon as school was over they
would rush off with wild hurrahing and run wild
for an hour or two.
Miss Gibson, though kind, was firm, and insisted
on good work and attention, and sometimes, as much
as they liked her, they would get together and dis-
cuss her, and then perhaps they would come in and
find her chatting brightly with Mother or helping
her to make scones and cakes, and all their ill-
feeling would vanish, for Mother looked so much
brighter and happier since the governess came, and
they would rush off to see if they, too, couldn’t
help.
Sometimes in the afternoons Miss Gibson would
let them off an hour earlier, and would take a walk
with them. She had sometimes noticed traces of
discontent in her little charges, and wished to imbue
them with the love of Nature.
“ Do you know, children,” she said one day, “ I
really don’t think you realise how well off you
are.”
“ Well off?” echoed the children, for they were in
a discontented mood that day, and nothing seemed
to go right.
“ Yes —well off. Just think what you inherit.
Those vast wide spaces, and the great blue dome of
the sky for a roof, the beautiful sunbeams, or at
night the silver-specked vault, and at your feet a
great, green velvet carpet fit for kings to walk on.”


“ Dear me, that sounds beautiful!” cried Mollie.
“ I often think we’re lucky, but I can’t think things
like you.”
“ Tell us more,” begged Eva, who regarded it as a
story, and she linked her arm through Miss Gib-
son’s.
Miss Gibson laughed merrily.
“Very well, dear. Did you ever think what a
world of wonder we live in?”
“ Oh, that’s all right when you’re rich and travel
about!” said Eileen. “You’re sure to see a lot of
wonderful things then.”
“ Why, my dear, they surround you.”
Eileen looked round. “ I don’t see anything so
very wonderful.” Eileen was in the mood for argu-
ment.
“ Look at those lights and shades down in the
gullies; look at those twinkling little golden clover
flowers. Look at the sunlight flickering on those
great snow-white gum trees; and later on this even-
ing we will watch the sunset, with all its glorious
colours that artists rave about and try in vain to
seize for their canvas. Think of all the beauty and
wonder of the seasons, the coming and going, the
birth and bloom and fading and decaying and
silence and rest of our wonder world. We ought to
all try and keep young at heart, and enjoy and love
the big open book of Nature that is flung open all
around us. Think of the glorious moonlight nights
and the beautiful glowing sunrises, or that pearly
glimpse we get of the world just before dawn, when
it all seems wrapped in mystery. I want you to


become lovers of Nature, and you will never be
quite lonely. Think of the joy of watching tiny
leaflets and buds opening into beauty and watching
and tending their growth. Think of the wonders
along the river banks, where the wild ducks dip and
glide and dive, and the dear little fluffy ducklings,
with bright, beady eyes, fluttering about in the
water, imitating their elders. Don’t you ever think
what a grand thing it is to have your .sight, just to
see all the beauties around you?”
“Ye-es,” said Eileen, somewhat reluctantly; “it
is all beautiful and wonderful.”
“Yes, it is so,” they all agreed.
“ Dear me, it’s nice to think about it,” said
Mollie. “ You do make everything sound nice, and
you make one glad to be alive and living in the
country. Let’s have lessons outside sometimes,
Miss Gibson,” she went on. “ Oh, I’d love it!”
“So would I!” and “So would I,” they all
shouted.
“Very well,” answered Miss Gibson, delighted to
see them so enthusiastic. “We shall have lessons
outside sometimes, and excursions to the river and
different parts of the paddocks, and in the years to
come you will look back with pleasure on those
Nature studies, lam sure. Why, you might all
develop into writers or artists or poets if you will
only open your minds to the beauties about you.”
“ Oh, dear!” sighed Eva. “If I could only be an
artist!”
“ I want to be a poet,” declared Doris.
“ And I’d love to write,” said Mollie.


“ I’d like to be all,” declared Eileen, “ and I might
be some day once I start and put my mind to
things.”
“ I don’t think,” jeered Willie. “ It’s as much as
you’ll manage to be one of ’em.”
“ I’m goin’ to write poetry,” declared Doris.
After that the children grew most enthusiastic,
end were always bringing in specimens and plants
and leaves, and watching butterflies and ants and
calling each other to watch the sunsets, and discov-
ering new beauties in everything. But one day
Mother said they were carrying things too far, when
Doris came home sopping wet and her boots and
socks caked with black mud; and Eva nearly as bad,
for she had just pulled Doris out of the creek, where
she slipped in while trying to catch a little wild
duck that was playing at the water’s edge.
“Such a little beauty!” cried Doris, as she
dragged her socks oft. “ I wanted it for spessi-
man.”
“ You’d better leave ‘ specimens ’’ alone,” said
Mother, “ if you can’t manage any better than that.”
“Yes, I better leave ‘ spessmans ’ alone a bit,”
agreed Doris, as she shook her socks, for she gene-
rally agreed with anyone.
“ Of course, you can gather flowers and plants,”
said Mother, relenting somewhat, “ out in the pad-
dock, where you’re safe.”
“ Yes, out where I’m safe,” echoed Doris.


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE SUBSCRIPTION.
“ It’s a wonder you ever left the country, if you
are so very fond of it,” said Eileen one day to the
governess. “ You tell us to like it, and yet you
went away to Sydney,” she went on, somewhat
defiantly.
Miss Gibson paused a while, and then said
slowly:
“It was compulsory. My father was once a very
wealthy man, but a big smash came, and I was
obliged to earn my living, so I went to a City Col-
lege, and ”
“ Oh!” they all murmured, “we are sorry.”
“What was the smash —a motor-car?” cried
Willie, eagerly.
Miss Gibson smiled.
“No, Willie; speculations and other things.’
“ If it was a motor-car I’d never ride in one
again,” declared Eva.
“ Oh, dear! it must be awful to be real rich once
and then get poor,” said Eileen. “ I don’t know
how you stand it.”
“It is hard for a while; but, after all, there are
some things better than money.”


“ Name them,” said Eileen, in mock despair.
“ While we have health and strength and capacity
for simple enjoyments left, we can never be un-
happy long, and work is a great tonic.
“Oh, dear!” sighed Eileen. “It’s a funny old
world, and you seem as happy as anyone, although
you were rich once and have to earn your li\ing
now. It wouldn t suit me.
That evening Eileen called a meeting, and they
all talked in low tones.
“ We ought to get up a subscription for her. ’
“ Oh, yes, let’s!” cried Doris, clapping her hands.
She'always loved anything fresh or exciting. “ Let s
get it up quick!”
“Has anyone got any money? A subscriptions
no good without money.”
I have two shillings,” said Mollie
“ And I have ninepence,” said Eva; “ it’s all in
pennies, but I don’t suppose that makes any differ-
_ T)
ence.
“ Not a bit, and I know Baby has sixpence.
You’ll let us have your sixpence for nice Miss Gib-
son, won’t you, Baby, darling."
“ Ess,” said Baby, solemnly.
“ That’s right, and I have one-and-ninepence ’
“And I have two-and-six,” cried Willie, as he
rushed off and brought it back, balancing it on his
fingers. “ I did mean to buy a big knife with it,
like old Joe’s,” he said, as he handed it to Eileen,
somewhat reluctantly, “ but you can have it.


“ Don,t give it if you’d rather not, Willie,” said
Eileen, quickly.
“ \ es, take it; I might be rich myself some day,
and then get poor, and I’d like someone to get up a
subscription for me.”
\ es; and, besides, you can always get the loan
of old Joe s knife,’ said Eileen, consolingly.
“Yes; and, besides, the very next half-crown I
get I’ll buy one with it, so I suppose a fellow can
wait a while,” he said, trying to appear cheerful.
“ You’re leal dood,” said Doris.
“ Perhaps you ought to only give half,” said Eva,
“ because you see you’re a visitor here, and oughtn’t
to give so much as us.”
“ No, half a crown or nothing,” said Willie
grandly; “besides, I’m the only man that’s giving,
so I ought to give most.”
“ How much have you got, Doris?” asked Eileen.
“ A penny,” she said, handing it to her.
Is that all.'' \\ here’s the threepence you had
last week?”
“ I let it fall in the creek the day I chased the
duck.”
“ Oh, dear, dear, you arc careless!”
“ And de od er sixpence I give Teddy to bwing me
lollies wif.”
“No wonder you were so pleased about a sub-
scription \\ hen you had nothing to give. Let’s count
how much we’ve got.”
And they all got slates and pencils and added up
the sums.
“ What do you get?” asked Eileen of Willie.


“ Seven and seven pence,” answered Willie.
“ Yes, that’s right. What a pity we couldn’t make
it eight shillings.”
“ Suppose we ask old Joe,” said Eva.
“ Oh, no, Miss Gibson mightn’t like it. Now
we’d better write out a little speech.”
“ Oh, yes, let’s/’ cried Doris again. “ What’ll we
say?”
She sat back in her chair and prepared to enjoy
herself.
“ We’ll write it out real nicely, and you’ll paint
flowers round it, won’t you, Eva?”
“ Oh, yes, do,” shrieked Doris; “ roses and pansies
9 99
“ Oh, no, they’re too hard,” said Eva. “ Nice
green leaves and berries, I think —nice red berries.”
“ Oh, yes!” they all cried.
“Yes, yes,” shrieked Doris, “green leaves and
wed berries,” and she clapped her hands loudly.
“ You do the writing, Mollie, and we’ll all sign
our names,” continued Eileen.
“Yes,” shrieked Doris again; “but what about
Baby?”
“ Oh, I’ll hold her hand,” said Eileen
“ Lovely,” cried Doris, subsiding again into her
chair.
So Mollie set to work to write out a speech, and
they all tried to help her, and after a lot of trials and
a few fights they managed one.
“ Let’s hear it,” said Eileen, and they sat down
while Mollie read aloud.


Dear Miss Gibson,
Your six pupils wish you to take the enclosed money
as a little present, because we are sorry that you were
once rich and lost so much money, and hope you will soon
he rich again, and that you will always be very happy.
YOUR FOND PUPILS.
“ That’s all right,” said Eileen.
“ No, there’s another word for ‘ take,’ ” said
Willie; “it would sound better. Let’s see, what
is it now?—oh, I know!— ‘ except ’ —yes, except the
money.”
“ No, not ‘ except,’ ” said Mollie. “ ‘ Accept,’ I
think.”
“ Anyhow, there’s only the difference of a letter
or two,” answered Willie, “ and it sounds better.
Put one of them in and chance it.”
“ Oh, no! we’ll have to look it up and make sure,”
said Mollie with a sigh, “ and if there’s anything I
do hate doing it’s looking up a dictionary.”
“ Oh, bother the dictionary—l hate ’em, too!”
said Willie.
“And so do I,” agreed Eileen; “but we’ll have
to look for it.”
They got the dictionary and hunted till they
found it.
“ Ah, ‘ accept ’ —that’s it!” cried Mollie
“ Anyhow, I was pretty near it,” said Willie, well
pleased.
“ Now, write it out to-night, and to-morrow Eva
can paint it.”
“ Oh, dear! I wish to-morrow morning was here,”
said Doris, who hated waiting.


•So to-morrow morning Eva rose bright and early
£,nd painted a spray of very bright green leaves and
very bright red berries on the card, and called them
to put their names on it. Willie came first, be-
cause he was in a hurry to have a ride round the
paddock before school time. He hurriedly seized a
pen and ducked it into the ink.
“ Let’s sign, and get away,” he said, importantly.
“ Oh, do be careful!” said Eva.
“ Careful? Who’s not careful, I’d like to know,’
he answered, and just then a great big blot of ink
splashed on the page.
“ Oh, look what you’ve done!” cried Eva, almost
in tears.
“Oh, bother the old card!” cried Willie, in a
temper, and then there was a battle-royal.
“ I knew you’d blot it. There! it’s all spoilt now,
and I’ll have to do another one.”
“What did you call me for? You knew I was
in a hurry. I’m sorry I signed my old name now.
Why didn’t some of the others write it for me? I
haven’t got time for fooling about writing on old
cards.”
“ You’ve got as much time as any of us, and
you’re real ugly —that’s what you are.”
“Oh! ugly, am I? Well, I’ve got plenty of
mates, and I’m sorry I gave my half-crown now.”
“ All right, then; I’ll tell Eileen what you said,
and she’ll give it back to you.”
She jumped up to run off and find Eileen.
“No, you don’t!” cried Willie, now ashamed of
himself. “You know I didn’t mean it. Just like


a girl-running off to tell tales, and pretendin’ you
think a fellow means what he says; here, let’s see
if we can’t fix it up. I’ll get the loan of old Joe’s
knife, and we’ll scrape the blot out.”
“ No, that wouldn’t do.”
“ what about wiping it up with blotting
paper?”
“ No, no good; it would all smear.”
“ W hat about painting something over the blot
some more leaves or something?”
“ No; the3 r ’d look silly' down there.”
“ V\ ell, what about painting a big butterfl}' over
it, flying up to the berries, eh? That’d look
grand.”
“ No, I’ll have to do it all over again.”
“ I’m real sorry,” said Willie. “ I wish I could
paint, and I’d do it for }x>u. Square dink, I would!”
“°h! never mind; I’ll do another to-da>', and
we’ll sign our names to-night, and we’ll have to give
it to her to-morrow.”
“ Righto!” said Willie, as he marched off.
Meanwhile Eileen had been very busy thinking.
She actually hadn’t slept much the night before for
thinking. Seven-and-sevenpence wasn’t much to
gi\ e Miss Gibson. If she only had some more! If
she could only make some money; but there was
no way—yes, there was just one way that flashed
into her mind as she tossed about in bed. To-
morrow Mr. Smith, the butcher from Bragan Junc-
tion, would call for killing sheep. Supposing she
sold him Ronald, her big pet lamb. He would be
sure to give fifteen shillings to sixteen shillings for


him, and she’d give ten shillings of it to Miss Gib-
son. Yes, that’s what she would do. She didn’t
care if Ronald were a pet and if she’d miss him.
He’d only go out to the paddocks after a while, and
get mixed up with the rest of the flock, and very
likely be sent away to Homebush, or perhaps he’d
be killed at home for their own table later on. Ugh !
she couldn’t bear to think of that! No, the best
thing to do would be to sell him to Mr. Smith.
She’d be brave, and she’d see Mr. Smith the first
thing to-morrow, and she’d tell him that she had a
big fat lamb for sale. She’d be real business-like,
and she’d take the money, and then she’d get away
somewhere quickly, where she couldn’t see Ronald
being driven off with the other sheep. She knew
it would be dreadfully lonesome for a while with-
out Ronald, but —she didn’t care. She would se 1 !
him.
So when Mr. Smith came she was the first tj
see him.
“ Yes, Mr. Smith, father’s down in the gums pad-
dock, but I have a fine big fat pet lamb I want to
sell.”
“ Righto!” said the genial butcher. “ How
much?”
“ Oh ! er—about sixteen shillings.”
“ Let’s have a look at him.”
Eileen led the way to the little back paddock,
where quite a flock of young fat sheep were grazing.
‘ That’s him with the red ribbon round his neck.”
‘‘ Righto! I’ll give you sixteen bob for him.
I ve got the silver now, and I’d better carry him


down to the gums and put him with the others
there. Them pets don’t like leaving home, and —
but what’s wrong?” For Eileen was crying fit to
kill herself.
“ I—I —don’t think I can let him go.”
“ ’Pon my goodness, don’t take on like that!
What! don’t want to sell him?”
“ N-o —o. I wanted the money to give to—to —
someone for a sub —a subscription, but —they’ll have
to do without.”
“ Righto, little woman; I won’t take him, but he’s
prime,” said the butcher, casting a regretful glance
at the fat lamb. “ But, listen! Let me give some-
thing towards that subscription,” and he drew out
a handful of silver. “ Here, take five bob. I don’t
want to know what it’s for. I’m not curious, but I
want you to take it because I’m sure it’s a good
object.”
“Oh, it is, it is!” cried Eileen, “but I can’t take
your money, Mr. Smith. I’d feel too mean.”
“You must. I’ll be hurt if you don’t take it..
There you are, real hurt, and I don’t wonder at you
not being able to sell the pet; but all the same, I’d
ha’ liked to have had him,” he said, as he mounted
his horse and cast another regretful glance at the
prime lamb. “ Good luck to you, my girl!” he
shouted as he rode off.
Eileen stood gazing at the five shillings.
“ Oh, dear! I’m a great big baby—that’s what I
am, and I don’t know how I’m going to tell the
others. Supposing I don’t tell them. But I’ll have
to; they’ll want to know where I got the five


shillings. Supposing I say it was given to me in
secret. Oh, no, that would never do! They’d
always be asking me about it. Supposing I say I
picked it up. Oh! but that would be too mean —I
must let them know about the nice butcher. It
wouldn’t be fair to him if I didn’t. No, I’ll race up
and tell them now —now, while I feel I can. I’ll
just take to my heels and run and tell them as soon
as I get up there.”
She was as good as her word, and ten minutes
later an excited crowd had gathered round a hot,
flushed Eileen, who told them hurriedly of the good
kind Mr. Smith.
“Ain’t he lovely?” said Doris, admiringly.
“ He’s a nice kind man, and I’ll pway for him to-
night. We’ll all pway for him.”
“ Do you mean to say you meant to sell Ronald ?
1 don’t know how ever you could think of such a
thing,” cried Eva.
“ Oh, well! you see I couldn’t when it came to
the time,” said Eileen. “ I just tried my best to,
and I couldn’t.”
“ And I shouldn’t think you could,” said Eva, in
tones of finality.
“ But of course he’ll have to go some day,” said
Mollie. “ Still, all the same, I couldn’t bear to see
the butcher carrying him oft to kill him,” she con-
tinued, quickly.
“ Me, either.”
“ Me, either.”
" Me, eder,” they all chimed in
At last the list was finished, and Mr. Smith’s


five shillings was entered “ from a kind, unknown
friend, and the next step was the presentation.
“ Yo ure the boss of the show, Eileen; you give
it, ’ said \\ illie, “ and you’ll have to make the
speech, too.”
“Oh, dear, I don’t know whatever to say!” said
Eileen, nervously.
“ Go on, there’s nothing to be frightened of,” said
Wdlie, bravely. “You’ll have to think of some-
thing. \ou always say you’re goin’ on the stage;
this will be practice. Go on, let’s hear you before
>ou go on the stage,” and he stuck his two thumbs
in his leather belt and marched round the room.
“ Oh, dear! I suppose I’ll have to say something,”
said Eileen. “ Let’s see, now,” and she walked
round and round and rehearsed speech after speech.
“How’ll we give her the money?” asked Willie,
all of a sudden.
“ I never thought of that,” said Eileen.
“ No, of course you didn’t. It takes a man to
think of those things. It’s a good thing for you I’m
here. \\ hy, that’s the very first thing you should
have thought of.”
“ No, not the first,” said Eileen.
V hat, then?” he demanded.
“ Collecting the money, of course.”
“Oh, any fool would know that!” answered
W illie; ‘so you’re not so smart as you think.”
“ V e’d better put it on a little tray,” said Eva
“° r a little bag,” said Mollie.
‘ Oh, no. loose! Let’s have it loose,” said Willie,
“ so’s it’ll look a lot and we can hear it clink.”


“Do you think so?” asked Mollie. “ I think we
ought to have it in a little purse, like a purse of
sovereigns.”,
“ Only, of course, it won’t be sovereigns,” said
Eileen. “ You have a little muslin bag, Mollie —
just the very thing.”
“So I have—just the very thing,” and she ran off
to get it. “ You can see the money through it, too;
it will be just right,” she cried, as she returned
with it.
“ Here, let’s put it in,” cried Willie, and he stuffed
the silver and copper in. “ It’s real nice and fat,
too. My word, she’ll think she’s getting a fortune,”
he went on, delightedly. “ Good thing I thought
of the bag.”
“You thought of the bag?” cried Eileen, in sar-
castic tones. “ Why, you wanted it given up loose,
all scattered over a tray.”
“ Anyway, only for me you wouldn’t ha’ thought
anything about how you were going to give it to
her. and you’d ha’ been scooping it up out of your
hands and very likely letting it fall all over the floor
if I hadn’t spoken about it, so there!”
After a great many more arguments and a great
deal of talking, everything was decided on at last.
That evening, while Miss Gibson was sitting
quietly correcting exercise books, the deputation
waited on her, and she received the surprise of her
life. In they marched, with Eileen at their head,
who made a sweeping bow, and the others tried to
follow suit. Baby was so much taken with the
proceeding that she kept on bowing and ducking for


the rest of the evening. She bowed to each and
every one of them. She marched off to the kitchen
and bowed to old Joe, till he asked her if she had
turned silly, and she bowed to all the pictures and
chairs; and, in fact, enjoyed herself immensely.
“ Dear Miss Gibson, we wish you to—to ”
“Accept,” whispered Mollie.
“Accept this little token—a little picture and n
small bag of money, which we wish was much
digger, and all our good wishes,” said Eileen, with
another sweeping bow.
‘ Really, children, this is a surprise—a little pic-
ture and a bag of money ”
“Yes, you see, ’cause you lived in the country
once ” began Doris, while all the others chimed
in to explain matters.
“ And we all hope you’ll be rich again some day,
and if you put the little bag of money in the bank
it might be a help in years to come.”
\ es, and, besides, we might all be real poor our-
sel\ es some day, and have no one to help us,’
chimed in Willie.
“ And we all like you very much for telling us all
the nice things about the country, and we’ll never
forget you,” said Eva.
And if you d rather buy lollies, ’undreds and
thousan’s, or anything you like with it, you can,’
said Doris.
Then Baby returned from the kitchen, where she
had visited Joe, and bowed solemnly to them all,
and sent them into shrieks of laughter.


“ So I have an unknown friend ?” said Miss Gib-
son, reading the list.
“ Yes, it’s Smith, the butcher at Bragan Junction,”
cried Willie. “ Didn’t know he knew you, did
you?”
“ Willie, stop at once!” cried Eileen, and then she
told the story to Miss Gibson; “ and he doesn’t
know who the subscription’s for, or nothing about
it; it’s just because he’s kind that he gave it, and he
wasn’t a bit inquisitive, and if ever I get real rich
I’ll send him a nice present,” she continued.
So the evening passed merrily away, and Miss
Gibson was much touched by the evidence of kind-
ness and thoughtfulness on the part of the children,
and the little picture, with its vivid green leaves and
bright berries, was put away among her treasures.


CHAPTER XIX.
POETS.
All the children got the writing craze at “ Gil-
long. They all wanted to be poets or authors,
and there was one continual scribble. Papers and
books and slates were covered with little scraps of
verses, till Mother declared she could never read
another bit of poetry.
Sometimes Eileen would come along with four-
teen verses of very much the same kind of jingle,
and ask them to listen and criticise.
Oh, you said all that before!” Willie would sav,
m disgust—“ away up there in the third verse.”
“ \ es, but, Willie, don’t you see it’s put in dif-
ferent words, and you have to keep saying the same
thing over—only a little bit different to fill up.”
“Ugh! you’re a sickening old poet; you’d make
a fellow tired.”
But Eileen was not daunted. Only lately she had
taken to looking very important, and had kept quiet
about her work, but, all the same, she scribbled like
grim death.
“ Some day she’ll come in with about a million
verses and make a fellow listen to them,” Willie
would grumble.


Sure enough, one day she came to them with a
fat note-book, and asked them to listen to the very
best she had ever written —quite a gem, she con-
sidered —so they all sat down to hear it:
The moon-beams shine through the summer night,
All on a garden fair,
And the perfume of the flowers arise
All on the fresh night air.
The moon-beams play with the shining leaves,
And the flowers nod and sway,
And the stars look down with gentle eyes
All night till the dawn of day.
There were about eight more verses in this strain,
and then it went on:
The children play in the garden fair,
All through the summer hours,
And the birds they sing and the butterflies wing
Among the fruits and flowers.
“ Butterflies wing? What’s that?” asked Willie.
“ Oh! that means they fly; a poet can say any-
thing, and it’s all right.” Then she went on with
about twenty more verses.
“ Beautiful!” cried Doris, clapping in ecstasy.
“ Very nice, but too long, I think,” said Mollie.
“ Oh, I don’t think so!” said Eileen. “ I’m going
to send it to one of the Sydney papers. It’s as nice
a bit of poetry as ever I read in my life.”
“Are you goin’ to give it to a paper?” asked
Doris.


“ Give it? No; they’ll have to pay me for it, and
pretty well, too, or I won’t part with it.”
So the precious MS. was sent away, and Eileen
waited with what patience she could for a reply.
Then all the others became keener than ever on
writing. Doris tried to compose, but she couldn’t
make the lines “ fit,” and would get in a rage and
tear up the paper, and she nearly drove them all
crazy asking how to spell words and getting them
to help her.
“ Oh, do leave it off—you’ll never be a poet! You
don’t even know what words go with each other,”
said Willie one day when she was begging his help.
“ Oh, come on —help me! It’s all about pwetty
bluebells and daisies and my dolly ”
“ Hang the bluebells and daisies and your old
doll!” answered Willie.
“You’re real ugly; you’re stopping at my place,
and you won’t help me,” said Doris, in a temper.
“ All right, then; go on.”
“ I love my little Dolly.”
“ I do, I do, I do,” chimed in Willie.
“ No, that won’t do,” called out Doris. “ I love
my little dolly, I do; I love her so; and she is nice
and pwetty ”
“ As everyone must know,” said Willie.
“ Oh, yes ! beautiful. ‘As everyone must know.’
Write it down, Willie.”
And Willie wrote down the first verse.
“ She plays with the bluebells down along the
crick.”


“ And she’ll tumble in the water if you give her
a good kick,” quoth Willie.
“Oh, Willie! You’re nasty. You mustn’t say
that about Rose.”
“ All right, then. Go ahead.”
“ Down along the crick,” repeated Doris, “ where
the daisies and the bluebells
“ Grow so very thick, ’ added W illie.
“ Beauful!” she cried again.
“ There, that’s two verses,” said Willie; “ that’s
enough for one day. All good poets never make
more than two verses in a day.
“ Don’t dey?” said Doris.
» No, and you ought to leave it alone now for a
week, and you’ll be a real good poet when you start
again.”
“ That’ll be beauful!” she cried again, clapping
her hands.
Eva used to write a lot about sunsets and moon-
beams, and fleecy clouds and brilliant birds. She
used to use the dictionary a great deal those days,
finding out big words to make her poems sound
grand. She always called them poems, and she
would copy them out neatly and paint little sprays
of flowers round them, and would only occasionally
let them be read. Mollie tried poetry for a time,
but soon gave it up and dashed into prose, and
wrote nice articles and essays.
“ There’s more sense in yours than all the rest put
together,” said Willie. “ It’s a lot nicer reading
than old poetry.”


Meanwhile Eileen waited for a reply about her
precious MS.
“ Not in y et? ” sh e would say, as she scanned the
paper every mail day.
“ Oh, you might have to write a lot before you
get it in print! Mollie would say.
“There’s no doubt about mine,” Eileen would
answer.
One day a big envelope came, and Eileen tore off
the wrapper, to find “ Not suitable ” in big letters
. across her cherished manuscript.
I II never try again,” she cried, almost on the
verge of tears. “They’re a mean, horrid old lot.
those paper people. I’m sure it is as good as the
old stuff they print. It’s just because I’m not
known.”
They all tried to console her. In fact Willie
went so far as to say he’d call and see those paper
chaps when he went back to Sydney, and give them
a bit of his mind. Although he did not like Eileen’s
poetry, he was very loyal, and sympathised most
heartily with Eileen.
“I’d like to chop every one of ’em up!” said
Lons. And so by degrees Eileen’s keen disappoint-
ment wore off.
Just a week later there was great shouting and
commotion over the page of a Sydney daily for
there was one of Mollie’s articles in cold print with
her name (“ Mollie Hudson ”) shining at the’foot,
vjn, the joy and excitement!
“How ever did you think of it, Mollie?” and
Oh, it s beautiful!” came in choruses, for the little


article, entitled “The Old Picnic Tree,” breathed
of the fresh air of the paddocks and the leafy shade
of an old gnarled, knotted tree.
“ Mollie’s a writer, Mollie’s a writer,” they all
shouted, dancing round her; and then they had to
have a half-holiday in her honour, and spent the
afternoon at the old tree that she had written of;
and they had billy tea and nice little hot cakes that
Mother had made in honour of the occasion. They
spent a wild, happy time, weaving fancies and ro-
mances about the time when they should be all
famous.
“ Perhaps we’ll all be real rich and clever when
we grow up,” said Eileen. “ Wouldn’t it be lovely
if the five of us were all writers or artists or
musicians, or something of that sort, and had nice
big studios and plenty of money, and —and —have
a real grand jolly life.”
Of course, they all agreed with her, and thought
perhaps things might turn out in that fashion; and
then Willie said that he “ might very likely beat
them all —he didn’t speak much about what he was
going to be,” he said, “ but, all the same, he might
surprise them all some day; so they needn’t be too
surprised if he, too, became rich and famous.”
“ Oh, tell us all about it, Willie!” they begged.
But he said he hadn’t quite finished thinking
things out; but, all the same, they needn’t be too
surprised if they heard of him later on being very
famous! Then he tried to look very important,
although until that moment the thought of being
famous had never entered his head.


Then the shades grew long in the paddock, and
they all scampered off home to the welcome glowing
fire of myall.
In an office in Sydney a man looked forward
eagerly to the arrival of the mail from the North-
West, for an eager enthusiast would write in glow-
ing terms of the bushland. Miss Gibson would
take her writing tablet to the paddocks, and write
quickly page after page :
My Dear Basil,
We are in the depths of winter, and you know what
winter in the country can be like at times. Well, it is just
delightful. The clover spreads far and wide like a great
green velvet carpet, up and down the gullies and away
across the paddocks. The deep tints of the clover, the
vivid green of the crowsfoot and wild carrot mingle in a
study of lights and shades, while the little blue flower of
the crowsfoot and the golden one of the clover vie in
scrolling floral effects on that vast green carpet. How I
revel in the wealth of sunshine out here in the paddocks,
but as evening draws in the chill air rises, and I hurry
back home through the clear cutting freshness, and there
a glowing fire awaits one. When the evenings are dull
or rainy I sit there and gaze into the glowing, gleaming
coals, and you never saw such beautiful, haunting colours
as you see among the myall coals! —one can weave all
kinds of fancies. Great sheafs of snow-white ashes fall
silently on the hearth, like a snow-white pall, and then I
take the poker and stir up the glowing heart of the fire
again, and amber and red lights gleam among the dancing
flames. Some people think that I must have a very lonely
life up here, but I assure you that the time simply flies.
I often gather the children round the fireside and tell
them stories, and just to sec their eager faces is payment


enough, for, do you know, it always seems wonderful to
me to watch the growing mind of a child and hear their
impressions of life, etc.? And I have been trying to instil
into them a love for and a very big interest in the beauties
and wonders of nature; for in after years, if empty and
lonesome days will come (as they too often come), they
will have something to fall back upon, and perhaps find
solace in, for it is wonderful how keen a joy we can find
in the out-of-door pursuits if we have a love for and an
appreciation of the beauties of nature.
And, oh, those glorious moonlight nights we have up
here in the winter! Why, it is quite vivid. Trees and
shrubs stand out clearly, and their shadows stand out
blackly under the rays of the serene silver moon that
swings high in the sky. Everything is transformed by
the kindly rays into things of beauty, and sometimes I
stand and gaze away across the paddocks bathed in the
silver light and marvel at the stillness. And, do you
know, as much as I love those moonlight nights, they
make me feel lonely? I just don’t know why—only that
it has that effect; and sometimes I almost welcome a rainy
night, when the rain drops beat a wild tattoo on the iron
roof, and I draw up my chair to the glowing fire and sit
there and dream.
lam looking forward to the spring-time. I have
promised to paint a big picture representing the Spring-
time in the North-West for old Professor Dawson, and I
am all eagerness to begin.
Till then, adieu, for it will not be long ere “the whole
world will wake and sing.”


CHAPTER XX.
GOOD-BYE TO “ TEDDO.”
They were all under a shadow at “ Gillong.”
Teddo was leaving the line. Teddo, whom they
remembered as long as they remembered anybody,
was going to leave the district. His contract had
run out, and a new man would soon take over the
coach line, and a coach and four would take the
place of Teddy’s sulky, for many passengers were
travelling by the new railway line, and were clam-
ouring for better accommodation than Teddy’s line
of vehicles. Miss Gibson had hinted prett} r plainly
that there was to be no holiday in connection with
Teddy’s departure.
“ I do certainly think we ought to get a holiday
the day he leaves,” said Eileen.
“ Yes, indeed, he has been a good friend to us,”
sighed Mollie.
“Yes, Teddo’s been a good friend to us,” agreed
Eva.
“Yes, Teddo’s been a weal good fwiend to us,”
echoed Doris.
Then Baby burst into tears, and said that she
wanted Teddo to “ tay wit dem.”


“ I’ll never forget that letter,” said Eva.
“ And how well he kept the secret,” said Mollie.
“ And how he never even as much as hinted that
he had a secret,” went on Eileen; “ never by a word
or a look did he ever mention that letter.”
“ No, he can’t be beaten,” said Mollie. “ We’ve
got a lot to thank Teddo for. Fancy asking a new
man to post a letter like that and keep our reply!”
“ It couldn’t be done,” said Eileen, in tones of
finality. “ And to think we can’t get a measly
holiday in honour of his going.”
“ What did Miss Gibson say?” asked Eva. “ Did
you ask for one, Mollie?”
“I didn’t exactly ask,” said Mollie; “but I men-
tioned something about it, and she said we had too
many holidays; that she only taught about half the
time she should, and that birthdays were always
coming along, and that there was to be no more
holida} r s or no more birthdays till the end of the
year.”
“End of the year!” they all echoed in amaze-
ment.
“ Why, it’s only August now, and my birthday
comes in September,” declared Eileen.
“ And mine comes in November, an’ I’m goin’ to
have one whether she likes it or not,” said Doris, on
the verge of -tears.
“What! no more holidays?” asked Willie, as he
came in. He always came and joined the group
when he thought there was anything extra on.
“ No, dere’s to be no more birthdays or no more


excuses for holidays till the end of the year, and it’s
only de middle now!” cried Doris.
“ Oh, dear! and mine’s at the end of this month!”
cried Willie, “ and I suppose she won’t let me have
one, either. Jolly hard on a fellow when he comes
all the way from Sydney, and don’t get a holiday on
his birthday.” He looked very glum.
“ I’ll tell you what!” cried Eileen, excitedly. “ I’ll
give up my birthday for Teddo —there you are !
Surely we can get one day between now and the
end of the year, so we’ll beg off one for Teddo.”
“Oh, Eileen! will you?” they all cried. “That’ll
be lovely!”
“That will be great!” said Willie. “But I’ll
tell you what —mine comes sooner than yours, so
I’ll give mine up. There } 7 ou are!”
“ Oh, Willie, you’re splendid!” cried Eva. “Do
you really mean it? True?”
“Of course it’s true. We’ll all go to old school
on my birthday, same’s if it was just any other day,”
he said, stoutly.
“ Oh, no, Willie!” I said first, and perhaps when it
comes to the time you might be sorry and want
yours,” said Eileen. “ You can ‘ cry off ’if you
don’t want to give yours.”
“ No, I won’t cry off,” said Willie, stoutly. “ I’ll
stick to my word.”
You’re grand, Willie,” cried Eva
“ I didnt think it was in you,” cried Eileen
“ Here, shake hands.”
They all solemnly shook hands, and Willie felt
quite a hero.


“ Oh, you don’t know me yet,” he said, cheerfully.
“ An’ p’raps, after all, you might get yours given
to you just the same, Willie,” said Doris, hopefully.
“ No,” answered Willie. “ I won’t take it. I
give up all claims to it. It’s only fair to give Teddo
a day when he’s leaving the district.”
Then he marched out of the room, and felt like a
martyr for a good cause.
After all,, they got the holiday, and the funny part
of it was that Teddo wasn’t there until the evening;
so they played all day, and prepared a big tea in
Teddo’s honour for the evening. Just all the chil-
dren and Teddo were present, and speeches were
made and toasts were given till Teddo was almost
in tears and wondered whatever he had done to win
such regard from the assembly.
“Good luck to you, Teddo! Wherever you go
you will carry all our good wishes with you, and
may you never lose your kind heart,” cried Eileen.
“ Never forget that five little bush girls are in
your debt, Teddo,” cried Mollie. “ We’ll never
forget you.”
“ Good old Teddo!” cried Doris
“Good luck to you, Teddo —all your life!” said
Eva.
“ I’ll let oo take my ole dollie, Teddo, if oo like,”
said Baby, as she solemnly held her spoon in the
air.
“ Bless your little heart an’ soul, Baby,” cried
Teddo. “ I wouldn’t take it from you for the world.


But I’ll tell you what I’ll do —I’ll send you a beauty
from Queensland.”
“ Oh, dood Teddo, dood Teddo!” chuckled Baby;
“ send me a pitty noo dolly.”
“We’ll all miss you dreadfully, Teddo,” said
Mollie. “ There’ll be no one to tell us all the news
on mail days now.”
“ And no one to tell us when the little Smith girls
down the creek have new dresses,” said Eva.
“ Or no one to tell us about the buck-jumping
horses at the station,” said Willie. “ Ugh! it’ll be
a bit off without you.”
For Teddo had always brought along a little fund
of news for each one.
“By Jove, Teddo, old man, we will miss you!”
went on Willie. “ We’ll hate coach days to come,
and not see you rattling down the road. It won’t
seem the same at all without you. Good luck,
wherever you go!”
They all cheered Willie’s speech, and then Teddo
rose to his feet.
“ I’m not much of a hand at a speech,” he said,
“ but I must say a few words and thank everyone
of you for the nice things you have said. I think
the five of you are the nicest little girls in the world,
and Willie’s one of the nicest chaps, and wherever
I go I’ll never forget you. It was real bosker of
you to give me this spread, and Teddo never forgets
old friends—never. ~ I’ll always remember the lot of
you; and I’m not much of a hand with the pen, but
I’ll write you all a letter from Queensland —you see
if I don’t!”


“ Me, too, Teddo,” said Baby.
“ Ess, you, too, Baby.”
“Oh, do, Teddo, do!” came a chorus of voices.
“ We’d love to get your letters.”
“ Yes, I’ll write, right enough. Teddo don’t make
promises to break them.”
There was great cheering then, and cries of
“ Hear, hear.”
“We know that, Teddo —we know that,” came
the chorus again.
“ And I say again that I’ll never forget you,” he
went on, “ and I hope you’re always happy and
contented and get on real well all your lives.”
They filled the room with shouts and cheering
when Teddy finished his speech, and Willie waved
a big handkerchief and shouted, “ God save the
King ”; and then Mother, Dad and Miss Gibson
came in, and Teddo’s health was drunk in lemon
syrup by all. After some more talking, he bade
them all good-bye, and rode through the silver
moonlight away through the frosty air under the
sparkling stars of the winter’s night. The chil-
dren’s voices followed him, singing “ He’s a Jolly
Good Fellow,” “ Good-bye, Sydney Town,” and any
other songs that came to their minds at the time;
and after each song there would be “ Three cheers
for Teddo.”
So Teddo started the first stage of his journey
that took him away among strangers in the big
State of Queensland, and his little bush friends
would not see him again for many years to come. But
as they grew up they all retained memories of the


kindly red-headed Teddo, and from time to time a
very carefully-written letter would come from him
from some far-off town with a most outlandish
name, and many a time the map of Queensland was
searched to find “where Teddo was now”; and,
though other mailmen came and went, there was
never another such as Teddo on the line.


“ A letter had come for Willie from his Mother.”




CHAPTER XXI.
INTERCESSION.
A letter had come for Willie from his mother,
saying that he really must come home; he ought to
be satisfied now, and they missed him very much,
and he really must return to school, and ever so
many more reasons why he should come home,
Willie felt very downhearted.
“ ’Course I’d like to see them again, and I think
a terrible lot of them, and all that, but I do want to
stay longer. I asked Mamma ever so long ago to
let me stay till November, and she nearly promised
she would, but a woman never can keep her word,”
he went on, dashing away a tear.
“ We’ll write and beg and beg for you,” said Eva.
“ Will you? Good! Write and say you can’t
part with me, that I’m a—a —a real decent chap,
and say —oh, say anything at all you like, only do
get her to let me stay till November. Say it’s a
long way up here, and it’s no use coming for a little
while. Let’s see—how long have I been here now?
About seven months —well, say that a person ought
to stay nine or ten months, but that I’ll be real sat-
isfied to go home in November, and to be sure and
let me stay till then.”
“ Yes, we’ll say all that and a lot more.”


“ Righto! and I’ll pay for the stamps,” said Willie.
Whatever it costs, let me know.”
Then a letter was concocted, and to read it one
would think that Willie was a little angel upon
earth..
We much regret that you want Willie back so soon
[they wrote]. You know, it is such a long way up here,
and once he gets home it may be years and years and
years till he comes back. He means to work and study so
hard when he goes home to make up for this long holiday,
and we would love him to stay till November; and then he
will be quite, quite satisfied to go. But if he went now
we would all miss him so much, because he’s such a help
and such good company, and Dadda would miss him fear-
fully, and so would Mamma and Miss Gibson and all of
us. He studies real well for Miss Gibson, considering
that he is out so much and loves riding so much, and, you
know, in Sydney he’ll never get a ride; so now, while the
horses are fat, he ought to stay and ride a real lot, and I
am sure if you will only let him he will grow up to bless
you.
“ How will that much suit?” asked Eva, who took
the composition on herself and read it aloud to him.
“By cripes, it’s real good!” answered Willie.
“ Go on a few more pages like that, and she must let
me stay.”
“ Well, if you say that word any more I won’t
write at all.
“ What word?” asked Willie, trying to appear in-
nocent.
“You know quite well; you got it from old Joe,
and you needn’t bother copying him. Oh, dear!
Whatever else can I say?”


“Let’s see; you said I was nice and cheerful,
didn’t you ? Well, say—oh! say that I look real
well, and I’m getting real fat.”
“ But you said that in your last letter, didn’t
you?”
“ Yes, but you say it, too.”
Willie looks so well and is getting real fat, and has a
lovely colour now, and he’s so nice and cheerful and
pleasant and kind that we would all love him to stay
longer; so I am sure, dear Mrs. Gray, that you will not
refuse our request, and that Willie will never forget you
for it.
There was much more in the same strain, and
then signatures were attached; but I think it was a
little note that Mother enclosed that made Mrs,
Grey decide to let her little boy remain till Novem-
ber, and there was great rejoicing when the decision
arrived.
“ We’re real good at writing letters,” said Eva,
somewhat proudly.
“ Yes, that was a bonser one about me. I don’t
know how you thought of it all.”
“ Oh, we can think all right,” said Eileen. “ I
wouldn’t wonder if we made some money some dav
thinking out inventions and patents and all those
kind of things.”
“ Well, when I grow up I’ll help you,” declared
Willie. “If you want any money just come along
to me.”
He felt very grateful for that letter, as he thought
of the good free time before him.


“ How will you make the money?” asked Eileen.
“ Oh, I’ll manage that, all right! I haven’t de-
cided yet, but I’ll have it so you needn’t be afraid to
come for a loan. I won’t forget old friends..”
Willie was very polite for quite a long time after
that. He was always offering his chair to Mother
or one of the girls, and he was continually asking
Mother if she felt a draught, and would she like
windows or doors closed? And he actually tried
to study at night time to please Miss Gibson. The
thought of staying till November pleased him so
much.
“ I wonder how much money it would take to
buy Myall?” he said to Joe, as they were riding
round the paddock.
“ Pretty near a million, I reckon,” answered Joe.
“A million!” gasped Willie. “Oh, dear!” he
groaned. “ I’ll never manage it.”
“Was you thinkin’ of buyin’ it?” asked Joe.
“ I was wondering if I ever could,” said Willie.
“ If I went to work and started to save up my money
straight away; but, oh, dear! I’ll never manage it.
A million’s a terrible lot of money, isn’t it, Joe?”
“ I reckon so,” answered Joe. “ I wouldn’t like
the counting of it.”
“ No, ’specially if you were sleepy,” said Willie.
“ You take it from me, young man, I wouldn’t be
sleepy if I ’ad the ’andlin’ of a million of money.
Why, I’d be thinkin’ every noise was a burgular
after it. No, old Joe’d be pretty wide awake if ’e
’ad the ’andlin’ of a million of money!”


“ Of course I wouldn’t care if I didn’t have a very
big place,” went on Willie. “ I wouldn’t care if it
was just one little paddock on the corner of the
creek. As long as it was land and belonged to me,
and I could live up here and ride. That’s all 1
want.”
“ just enough to run a horse on, like. - ' ’ said Joe.
“ Yes,” said Willie, eagerly. “Do you think I
could buy a place like that?”
“ Well, of course, you’d have to make a livin’
somehow,” answered Joe, “ and you couldn’t make
much of a livin’ on a one-horse run; and I wouldn’t
like it to be said that old Joe ever put the idea into
your ’ead about it. But some day you might win a
lease, or buy a piece of land —enough to run a few
hundred sheep on, and by degrees you might buy
a little more, and get on that way. But you want
a bit o’ money to start with, or else you’ll have to
work very ’ard. ’Course, though, the banks would
lend you money, and you might be able to make a
do of it.”
“ That’s what I’ll do. I’ll get the banks to lend
me money. I never thought about them. Why,
it’ll be real easy. I’ll go to a lot of different banks
and get them all to lend me a little; and I won’t let
any of ’em know that I’ve been to the other one —
see? My word! won’t Mother be surprised when
she hears I’ve got a bit of land?”
“Hey, steady there!” said Joe, a bit afraid.
“You’re too young yet —a long way too young to
think about it. Well, you can think, but don’t go


trying to git land right away. You’ve got a few
years ahead of you yet.”
“Yes, that’s the worst of being young,” sighed
Willie.
“Well, it’s funny, the difference in boys,” soldo-
quised Joe; “ here’s you dyin’ to be on the land, ami
there was Frank dyin’ to be off it.”-
“Yes, funny, isn’t it?” agreed Willie.
From that time he commenced to build castles in
the air, in which figured prominently a green stretch
of paddock with a gurgling creek running through
it; a dear little cottage nestling on its banks, and a
flock of big woolly sheep, some fine horses, and a
few dogs to make up the sum total of his posses-
sions.
“ And, of course, I must have some cattle,” he
would think, when completing the picture in his
mind’s eye; “ and a dear little pony and sulky to
meet them at the railway station when they come up
to stay with me.”
“ They ” represented Mamma, Dadda, and Marcia.


CHAPTER XXII.
A HERO.
Mrs. Grey, the overseer’s wife, at Jenkin’s old
place, was very ill. It was something unusual for
Mrs. Grey to be ill. Mother spent a lot of time
with her, and Miss Gibson would go down and read
aloud to her by the hour. But she grew gradually
worse, till at last Mother and the governess took
it in turns to stay with her, following out the doc-
tor’s instructions, which were written or wired
daily from the far-off town.
The children rather liked the novelty of Mrs.
Grey being ill at first, because they had broken time
at school, but as time went on they grew tired of
it. It was too lonesome in the house without
Mother at night time, and they missed Miss Gibson,
too. So old Joe came to the rescue, and told them
yarns.
“ Did you ever hear tell of the time youse were
nearly burnt to death, and your Mother saved you?”
he asked one afternoon about dusk.
“Oh, no, Joe!” gasped Doris, with wide-open
eyes. “ Tells.”
“ Oh, you wasn’t in the world then!” answered
Joe. “ Little Eva was a baby.”


Then Baby cried because Eva was ever a baby.
“ Oh, tell’s about it!” cried Willie, eagerly.
“ You never heard tell of it, then?”
“ No, never,” cried Willie. “As true as anything,
I didn’t.”
“ We have, but we’d love to hear it again,” said
Eileen.
“ Righto!” and Joe tapped his pipe on his boot,
preparatory to filling it.
“ Oh, dear! are you going to fill your pipe first?”
asked Willie. “ Come on, I’ll help you.”
“ No, thanks, young man; I don’t care about the
way you cut baccy.”
“ Oh, dear,*start telling us, Joe, while you’re cut-
ting the tobacco!” said Willie, all eagerness to heac
the story.
“Hold ’ard, hold ’ard!” said Joe, calmly, as he
went on with his work. At last the pipe was filled
and lit, and Joe proceeded.
“ Yes, we was all away draftin’ at the yards down
at the back of ‘ Coolabah,’ and a fire broke out down
along the crick, about four mile from here. There
was tons of dry grass lying about, and it blazed like
fury. Your Mother seen it light up, and you can
bet she got the shock of her life. Not a man within
miles, and all youse little ones with her. She knew
if it came this far the house and all would go, and
very likely you and her’d be burnt to death. So
she rushed out to the paddock and catches old
Dolly and whipped her into the spring-cart, and she
put all youse in, an’ she rushed round and gathers
up a little brood of chickens that she couldn’t bear to


think of bein’ burnt to death, and put ’em in a box
and jumps out into the cart and sent old Dolly
like —like blazes, down the Myall road, and all the
time the flames was cornin' nearer an’ nearer, and
she was hardly game to look back, fearin’ she would
see the house on fire.”
“Oh, dear!” gasped the children. “Wasn’t it
awful?”
“ Yes, and she sent old Dolly as fast as she could
go down the road, and just as she turned the bend,
lo and behold youse! she sees a pack of horsemen
galloping down towards her!”
“ Oh!” they gasped again in relief.
“ Yes, they’d seen the fire, and knew it was near
your place, so they rushed off from the yards and
got here just in time to save the ’omestead. My!
wasn't your Mother glad? She just sat and cried
after the shock; but, my word, she must have
rushed round to have got you all safe away, for the
fire was no time coming up the crick, and it swal-
lowed all before it! Yes, she just sat and cried, for
it was an awful shock to her, because she thought
the fire might overtake you and you’d all be burnt
to death alive.”
“ Oh!” they all gasped again. “ But wasn’t
Mother brave?”
“ Brave!” echoed Joe. “ Why, I call your Mother
a hero!”
“ A hero—yes, that’s what she is!” they declared.
“ Yes, she’s a regular hero,” declared Willie,
stoutly.


“ Oh, dear, Fm glad we’re saved!” said Eileen,
“ and were not burnt to death alive.”
“Do you know what I’d ha’ done, if I’d been
there?” asked Willie.
“ No,” said Joe, quietly.
“ I’d ha’ got the scythe, and I’d ha’ cut all the
grass down round the house, and I’d ha’ raked it a l l
away out so’s there’d be nothing for the fire to burn
near the house —see? And I’d ha’ got wet bags and
hung them all round ”
“ Yes, and what’d the fire be doing all this time?”
asked old Joe, sarcastically. “Do you think it
would wait for you to cut the grass and rake it all
away, and find the bags, and all the rest of it? Oh,
no, young man, you wouldn’t ha’ been alive to tell
the tale to-day if you had started on them lines, and
don't you forget it! No, you couldn’t ha’ done
better than your Mother,” he added, turning to the
other children. “ I always said, and I always will
say, that your Mother’s a hero.”
“ Oh, dear! isn’t it lovely to have your Mother a
hero?” gasped Doris.. .
“ Here she comes now,” said Joe. “ I wonder
what’s the news.”
“ I say, let’s give her a cheer,” said the children.
“Well, I’d like you to, and I’d like to join in;
but it mightn’t be in keepin’ with the time, seeing
as how Mrs Grey is so ill.”
“ Oh, yes! a good thing you thought of that, Joe,”
said Mollie.
“ Old Joe can think sometimes,” said Joe, well
pleased.


(s: ' /^S V
I*- V ‘SOC’lr,
\ V
Then Mother came in with the good news that
Mrs. Grey was much better, and that a friend of
hers would arrive to-morrow r to look after her.
Then the children cheered to their heart’s content,
both because Mrs. Grey was better and because
their Mother was a hero.


CHAPTER XXIII.
LETTERS.
My dear Basil,
lam in the North-West, and it is spring time! The
fresh, warm-tinged air of the open spaces sends new life
through the frame, waking old ambitions, recalling lost
ideals and dreams of youth. The North-West world is a
vast temple filled with the incense of the wattle, and the
gladsome carols of feathered songsters. Just to lie on
those verdant carpets and gaze into the twinkling depths
of the blue sky; just to gaze and gaze and wonder and
wonder again at the beauty and space and gladness of it
all!
At night the sky is a silver-specked vault, charged
with the silver of the Milky Way, or flooded with the
light of the moon. What a great, great pity it is that our
minds and hearts ever grow old! If only we could go
through life with wonder eyes, what delights and wonder-
ments we would find in this old prosaic world. And we
could, if we would, retain this sacred possession of
perennial youth. It is not always the years that count.
One of the youngest persons I know is a man of forty-
five, and the oldest person I ever met was a boy of
fourteen! Ah, those young-hearted folk! How delight-
ful it is to meet them! Don’t they seem to make life
worth while?
Down in the scrub a field of beauty stretches before
me. The tall blue gums stretch towards the sky with
their snow-white branches gleaming among the shadows


and filtering sunlight, and here and there a mighty giant
of the forest waves long, tattered, shroud-like strips of
brown bark that have been cruelly stripped from their
branches by the forest storms. But already the healing
has come; the smooth new bark gleams and glistens in
the warmth of the kindly sunlight, and the tattered
shrouds wave a tender farewell to those new spirits born
of their disaster.
I climb and scramble through forests of slender
saplings, over fallen logs and stumps, among blue-grey
vegetation or, in the next instant, among vivid green trees
that grow in symmetrical beauty, as though tended by a
gardener. Fancy, if one had the planning out of a bush
garden in that North-West forest! What a labour of
love, what a fascinating theme to work on! Clearing and
thinning and “ lopping”; guarding with tender and
jealous care some forest beauty that now gleams
tenderly through darkening, choking growth. What
winding paths and avenues and clumps and groves would
be formed, with here and there a cleared space for
masses of garden flowers. But a haunting, elusive per-
fume steals gently on a slight breeze from the inner
depths of the forest, and I hasten thither to be met by
fresh delights. The air is filled with the cloying sweet-
ness of budah, nipand, wild orange, and clematis
blossoms.
The wild orange, or bumble, or “ moogiel ” (the
aboriginal name) stands somewhat aloof from their
neighbours. Who knows? Perhaps in the days of old
they held pride of place in that vast scrub, and, mayhap,
the dusky maidens twined bridal wreaths from their
creamy blossoms; but howe’er it may be they stand aloof
with their crown of glossy leaves and creamy blossoms
and tender green fruit. Perhaps black fingers, long since
stilled, wove hopes and shy thoughts among garlands of
tender blossoms in the days ere the white usurper set
foot on Australian shores.
I don’t know what you will think of it all, Basil, but


you asked me to send along these descriptions of the
North-West, and I am seeing it at its best, so you must
make allowances if I enthuse. I know all about the long,
drear, desolate droughts, but “ why think about to-
morrow if to-day be sweet,” and so I give way to keen
delight of the beauty and freshness of the surroundings,
and trust that I draw a vivid pen-picture of this lovely
forest.
MARIE.
My dear Basil,
Oh, those wattle groves of the North-West! How can
I describe their tender, haunting loveliness?
To-day I stood on a red, sandy road, and gazed down
a long, glowing vista, where, like gold-crowned maidens,
the wattle trees stretched for miles on either side, as
though guarding that long avenue from destruction. A
slight breeze stirred the branches, and the fluffy balls
nodded in welcome, and scattered a shower of golden,
powdery dust on to the shimmering sand. I stole almost
reverently through that golden avenue, for a sense of
benediction was in the air.
A burst of melody broke on the stillness, and I stood
stock-still. Surely such a paean of praise might the angels
sing! The liquid notes swelled higher and clearer as the
black and white feathered songster continued his glad-
some song. I stole quietly through the bushes and
watched the singer who filled the scrub with melody.
Just a black and white bird (a magpie) standing on the
dead branch of a tree —no stage setting here. With head
thrown back he trills and “cadenzas” and warbles as
though his heart would burst, and a sea of throbbing
melody surrounds me. And then the song dies away, and
I am left with a sense of loneliness, for a hush fills the
auditorium of the forest; but it is soon broken, for other
birds awake the echoes, chirping, calling, singing and
chattering and fluttering hurriedly around, as though the
very universe depended on their exertions. The scrub


is filled with baby-birds in different stages of growth.
Some are merely very unattractive little morsels, that
open hungry beaks as Mother-bird appears; some half-
fledged and unattractive, too; some are just wee, fluffy
balls, with bright, beadlike eyes; and others are at the
interesting stage of learning their first “steps.” Up
among the friendly branches they flutter and screech as
they try their little wings, with alternate chattering and
scolding and encouragement and comments from Ma and
Pa. I pause and ponder. Next year those tiny, helpless
morsels will have their homes among the leafy branches,
and they, too, will be builders. Think of it! In one
short year’s time the birds will have commenced their
life-work, and what about we humans? Year after year
we are watched and tended. Year after year our
education goes on, and yet I doubt then if we are as
faithful builders as those feathered songsters. But adieu
till next week, when I will tell you more about the fields
and paddocks.
How I wish you could have a whole free week up
here to revel in the green gladness and wonderful space!
MARIE.
My dear Basil,
The paddocks are full of young life. Out on the green
the foals frisk and gambol, while their mothers, with
admonishing whinnies, try to coax them back to their
side. To-day a wee foal of but a few weeks old came
and stared at me with wonder eyes. Standing daintily
on its slim legs and tiny black hoofs it stared at “ the
stranger within the gates.” I longed to pat its soft nose,
to stroke its silky ears, to embrace its shining, satiny
neck, but I didn t dare to move, for I knew there would
be a startled glance, a scamper of hoofs, a wild rush and
the mob would be off, leaving a trail of trampled
greenery in their wake, and with me a sense of desolation.
So I sat still and gazed into those wonder eyes, as the


little creature came nearer and nearer with cautious
steps, and was joined by its curious little mates, till there
were seven high-bred, dainty animals gazing at the soli-
tary human. A shining bay, with black points, held pride
of place as it reared its head daintily, and two little
chestnuts followed closely; a wicked little shining black
satin-coated one already showed the whites of its eyes,
and a brown and a roan completed the number. They
stood about solemnly, those seven little critics, and I
wondered at their verdict. There and then I resolved
that they should find a place on my canvas, and I seized
my brush, when suddenly the roan foal, becoming frisky,
gambolled and tossed its head, and, with playful leaps,
dashed across the paddock, the others following helter-
skelter. I don’t think I shall ever forgive that roan foal
for breaking up the party, and I’ll feel a grudge against
every roan horse I see, whether roaming free in the
paddocks or harnessed to work. And then the whole
mob scampered off; with tossing mane and head held
high in the air, they galloped and pranced and gambolled
and frisked for very lightness of heart, and revelled in
their glorious sense of freedom and the intoxication of
that spring morning. In the next paddock the unbroken
horses heard their revels, and they, too, started on a wild
stampede. I could hear the thud, thud, thud of galloping
hoofs as thej r disappeared away in the distance, and the
muffled sound of the return, as with flashing eyes, waving
mane and distended nostrils those young, untamed
creatures raced and raced for very joy of living. I
thought of tired, spiritless cab-horses standing day by day
in unbroken motonony, of cart-horses, whose only
glimpses of greenery is the common at night time, and
I sighed that I could not transport those weary, spirit-
less animals, who have surely forgotten (if ever they did
know) those free, wild stretches, that unbroken spirit,
those wild stampedes through a wealth of greenery in
company with a gay, care-free mob, intoxicated with the
freedom and beauty of early spring mornings.


All the children joined me in my afternoon walk, and
we took the track to the Namoi river. Among the bull-
rushes and weeds along the water’s margin, the shy, slim,
graceful water-hens rush noiselessly. The children
gathered bunches of bull-rushes, clad in their goldeny-
brown plush top-coats, and then we gathered shells and
mussels, and then placed the mussels all back again in
the water, for high above our heads, in one of the river
bends, we saw a bed of wild buttercups, and .as we
hastened through the reeds a brood of ducks floated out
—darling little, tiny fluffy balls, with bead-like eyes,
drifted along the deep, still waters, with the important
mother-ducks leading the way. There were faint, little
cries and chirps as they glide along and were joined by
flocks of others, young and grown, gliding peacefully
down the still, deep river, through patches of sunshine
and stretches of shade.
The children find new beauties every day in the bush
life. “ Why, we never used to notice half those things
till you came here,” said Eileen the other day. “ I think
we must have been going about with our eyes shut half
the time.” But I know, of course, that it is because the
gift of observation has been cultivated lately, and every-
thing appeals to them now, and where once the paddocks
and the river banks were delightful places to run about
and play in, now there are fresh points of interest in tree
and flower and plant life.
To-morrow I commence my picture, and I shall work
very constantly at it till it is quite finished, so don’t ex-
pect too many letters in the weeks to come.
MARIE.


CHAPTER XXIV.
A NEW ARRIVAL.
Mother had gone away. In all the years of their
life they had never known Mother to leave them be-
fore. But she had gone now for a whole fortnight,
and her letters were very constant.
Miss Gibson and Mollie were housekeepers, and
all the others helped. At first they were most par-
ticular, and Eileen and Eva would sweep and tidy
their room most scrupulously every morning, and
Doris would tidy up her doll’s clothes and wash and
paint up old Rose’s face every morning, and Baby
would wander round and get in everybody’s way.
“ I’m just about sick of work,” Eileen said one
day. “ I’m only going to do our room every other
morning now, Eva, and the day Mother comes home
we’ll give it a monstrous cleaning.”
“ All right,” agreed Eva, who was a bit tired of
it, too.
“ An’ I’ll only wash Rose’s face once a week,”
declared Doris.
Miss Gibson was extra kind to Baby those days,
and would nurse and talk to her for ever so long.
“ Why, you’re making her a real baby again,”
said Eileen. “ She’ll be getting too lazy to walk.


I suppose it’s because Mother’s away that you pet
her so much.”
“Poor old Baby!” laughed Miss Gibson, “she
won’t be a baby for ever, you know.”
“ No, and sometimes I wished I’d died when I was
a baby.”
“Why?” asked Miss Gibson, for she knew that
Eileen was in one of her discontented moods, and
would probably talk and talk till she talked herself
all unconsciously out of it.
“ Oh! ’cause there’s nothing much to live for, only
learning old lessons and things that don’t interest
you, and growing up and being disappointed, and —
and all sorts of things.”
“ Never mind, there might be a bright time
coming.”
“ No, there’s no bright time coming. People
always say, ‘There’s a bright time coming.’ But
it’s a very slow old traveller, for it never gets this
far. ‘ A bright time coming ’ ”
“ Well. what about the time that Uncle came?
That was a bright time.”
“ es, but that’s all over now, and we might go
all our lives waiting for a bright time that will never
come,” and so, talking, grumbling, and arguing, she
talked herself into quite a good temper again.
Meanwhile another fortnight flew by, and then
a letter came to Miss Gibson, and there was a hur-
ried consultation with Mollie. Then Eileen was
let into the secret, and then the others were told.
“A little brother, a little brother!” they shouted.
“ Well, isn’t it funny?”


“ Well, of all the things that ever would happen,
I thought that would be the last!” said Eva.
“Dear, dear, dear!” cried Doris, jumping round
and clapping her hands. “Won t we have fun with
him?”
“Won’t we?” screamed Eva. “I hope he’s
pretty, and I’ll paint a picture of him.”
“ I suppose he’ll be cross, and will always want
someone to nurse him,” grumbled Eileen.
“ Jingo! I wish he was older,” said Willie; “ he’d
be great sport for me.”
Then Baby set up a roar, and said she wanted him
now; and Miss Gibson lifted her up and talked to
her.
“ He’ll soon be here now. Baby, and you won’t
be Baby any more.”
“ Is that why you was always nursing her?” asked
Doris. “And did you know, and never tell us?”
and then she cried, too. “If you’d told me I’d ha’
made him some little dresses, ’stead of makin’ them
all up for Rose.”
“ Don’t cry, dear; we’ll all sew for him when he
comes home, and Baby can play with him when he
gets older.”
“ Oh, dear! won’t it be funny having a little
brother?” said Mollie. “ Oh, dear, I wish he’d soon
come home!”
“ I’m going to have first nurse,” said Eileen. “ I
said first.”
“ No, I am!” cried Eva, and then there was a
quarrel about it.
“ I know what I’ll do,” said Willie, slyly. “ I’ll


ride up to Hogan’s letter box the day your Mother's
coming home, and get her to let me have first nurse.
There!”
“No, you won’t —you’ll do nothing of the kind!”
cried Eileen, stamping her foot.
“ No, he’s not your brother,” cried Eva.
“ No!” roared Doris, “ he’s not your brother, and
I’ll hit you, too.”
She rushed at him, and there was a wild stam-
pede, while they all chased Willie; and the gover-
ness let them have their fight out, for she knew how
excited they were.
By-and-bye they all came back good friends, and
had promised Willie he could have fourth nurse,
because Baby wasn’t old enough to care, and she
could have the last one.
By Jove! won’t he laugh when he grows up, and
I tell him that I nursed him when he was little?”
said Willie, proudly.
“Oh, he might die!” said Doris, bursting into
tears. “He might never grow up—he might die.”
Then Miss Gibson had to pacify her and promise
her she would make toffee for tea, and so peace was
restored again.
For the next few weeks nothing was talked of
excepting the new baby, and while they were sup-
posed to be studying or doing their homework they
would wonder what colour eyes it would have, and
if “ it ” would be cranky or good, and if “ it ” would
like bush life or rather go to Sydney and study like
Frank. It would nearly fill a book with their won-


derings, and all the time the time was drawing near
when “ it ” would be home with them.
“ I suppose ‘it ’ won’t be very pretty,” Eileen
would say. “It will be too little for a long time
yet.”
“ I wonder what’ll we call it,” said Eva.
They ran through hundreds of names, but none of
them would suit.
“What about Teddo?” asked Doris, struck by a
bright inspiration.
“ Oh, yes, let’s call him Teddo!” cried Willie.
“ Oh, no !” said Eileen —“ not Teddo. Teddo’s all
right—for—well—for Teddo, but it won’t do for our
little brother.”
“ I think it’s real nice,” said Doris, “ and Teddo
was a real nice man.”
“ Oh, yes, I know! but, all the same, we’re not
going to call it after Teddo.”
“ I like Ronald,” said Eva.
“ No, my pet lamb’s named Ronald. He can’t
have that,” answered Eileen. “ I don’t know what-
ever we can call him,” she went on, anxiously.
So they went through a lot more names till they
became quite cross, and they decided to leave the
old name, and let someone else find one. And so
the days wore on till the wonderful brother arrived.
And then the joy and the criticisms.
“ Isn’t he a darling, and a little dear, and a
beauty?” and all kinds of endearing terms were
lavished on him, and he was just like some of them
thought he would be, and real different to what


others thought, and he proved a great entertainment
to them.
“ Why, he’s got a little red face just like Teddo’s,”
cried Doris.
“He hasn’t,” cried Eileen. “He has a lovely,
pinkish face.”
“ He’s just like a little angel,” said Eva, “ and I’m
sure Teddo wasn’t like an angel.”
“ But he’s like Teddo, all the same,” persisted
Doris, “ an’ we ought to call him Teddo.”
Then Mother asked what about calling him after
Uncle Harry, and they were all thunderstruck to
think they had not thought of that before.
“Of course we will!” cried Mollie.
“ Yes, ’cause only for Uncle he might never be
here,” said Doris, seriously; “’cause everything’s
different since Uncle came.”
So it was decided to call him Henry, which would,
of course, mean “ Harry,” or “ Hal,” or “ Har.” But
he was nearly always called “ The Baby,” and so
Baby still kept her name as merely “ Baby.”
Dadda made him a cart —a box with wooden
wheels—and it was fitted up with cushions, and the
baby spent many hours there as the weeks went on,
and would lie and coo and laugh for ever so long,
and the children would crowd round and talk to
him. 1 hey declared that he answered them, and
they were sure he knew each and every one of them
and was the most wonderful baby that ever lived.
Doris declared that he called her “ Doris ” one
morning as plain as anything; and she said that she


loved babies, and when she grew up she would like
to have about a hundred.
“Ugh! they’ll be like rabbits!” Eileen answered.
“It would be awful to have that many.”
But Doris said she didn’t care.
Willie would beg to be allowed to drag the cart
down the road and give the “ little chap ” a ride,
and sometimes Mother would let him, until she
found out that he would sometimes leave the cart
with her precious treasure and rush off after a
bright-winged bird or butterfly.
“ But look here, Mrs. Hudson, it’s only for a
minute or two, and the baby doesn’t mind —not a
bit! He’s great chums with me ”
“ Yes, but supposing something knocked the cart
over, or supposing—oh, hundreds of things; so you
may just wheel him down the road in sight of the
house sometimes.”
And Willie said that was very tame.


CHAPTER XXV.
NEW PEOPLE.
The weeks sped by. Sometimes the children
would say the time dragged. At others they
wouldn’t have half enough time, and wished the
days were twenty-four, instead of twelve, hours
long. It just depended upon the mood they were
in whether the time dragged or flew.
Every Tuesday afternoon they did the week’s
darning, and would sit out on the verandah, with
the darning basket or other mending, and work
away, sometimes grumbling, sometimes laughing
and talking or listening to Miss Gibson’s stories or
reading.
“ I don’t know why we wear stockings,” said
Eileen one day, as she mended an exceptionally big
tear in Baby’s sock. “We ought to wear leggings
—yes, leather leggings; and there’d be none of this
old stitch, stitch, stitching. Do you hear, Baby?—
you’ll have to get a little pair of leather leggings
made at the saddler’s.”
Baby roared, and declared she “ wouldn’t wear
’em, an’ she was tightened of the tadder,” and was
just going oft' into fresh cries of grief, till Eileen
assured her that she would let her off.


“ But, all the same, it would be a good idea,” she
went on, digging the needle into her sewing. “ I’m
sure it would be lovely to run about without boots
and socks ”
“What about bindies?” asked Doris, trium-
phantly.
“ Oh, well! people’d only have to use their eyes,”
said Eileen, coolly. “ Anyhow, I’m sick of mending
and darning and patching—l d like to live in trees
like the Swiss Family Robinsons ”
“ Or monkeys,” said Willie, teasingly.
“ \ou speak for yourself,” answered Eileen, and
then the laugh was turned on Willie.
“ I say, we never had that week on the river yet,”
cried Mollie.
“ Oh, no! wouldn't it be grand? Let’s ask about
it now. Come on!”
“ Oh, yes, let’s!” shrieked Doris
Then needles, darning wool, cotton, and stock-
ings were scattered all over the verandah, while they
rushed away to find Mother.
At first she thought they had taken leave of their
senses, but they begged and pleaded so hard that at
last she consented to think about it.
\ es, well have a great time. We’ll swing the
hammocks in the big trees, and, oh—it’ll be great!”
cried Mollie.
What about waiting till Frank comes back?
You know, he expects to have a short holiday in
the early spring time.”
Oh, so he does, so he does!” they fairly shrieked.
•\\ ell wait till then. I-rank will enjoy it, and he’ll


be such a help, putting up the hammocks and fixing
up the fires, and all that.”
“ Huh ! That’s a nice way to talk about a fellow,”
said Willie; “just want him to work!”
“We don’t want him to work,” declared Mollie.
“ We’re real glad to have him, and we know he’ll
love helping us.”
“ Oh, I could lend you a hand if you want help,”
said Willie.
“ Of course you can, and we’ll be real glad to have
your help.”
“ Yes, there’s not much I can’t do in the fixing up
line,” went on Willie, boastfully.
“ Oh, no, you’re all right for your age,” said
Eileen, “ but of course you’re so very young.”
If there was anything Willie hated it was to be
called young.
“ I’m not so very young, either,” he answered.
“ Now, I call Doris and Baby young. I’ll surprise
you all when it comes to fixing up camp.”
“ Yes, you’re real good at fixing up,” agreed Eva.
“Oh, dear! won’t it be grand?” they all echoed
again, and just then Dadda came in.
“ I have some good news for you, children.”
“Good news!” they cried. “Whatever is it?
Oh, tell us!”
“Tell us, quick!” cried Doris.
“ Mr. and Mrs. Grey are leaving soon, and the
manager and his wife and children are coming to
live there.”
“ Oh!”
The darning, which had been taken up again, was


fairly banged on to the verandah now, and scissors
and wool were scattered far and wide, while Eva
threw a reel of cotton high in the air.
"Children coming! Playmates! Hurrah!”
“ When are they coming, and who are they, and
how many, and how old are the children, and are
they nice?”
“ Are you glad ?” asked Dadda.
“Glad?” repeated Eileen. “Glad’s not in it!
We’re overjoyed. Of course we all like Mrs. Gray;
she can make lovely little cakes, and keep her house
lovely and clean, but —little cakes and a clean house
are not playmates. And when we’re dying for fun
and playmates, cakes and houses don’t count!”
“ No, dere no good,” declared Doris, in tones of
finality.
“Oh! won’t it be fine?” cried Eva. “I hope
they’re nice.”
“ I hope so,” said everyone, in tones of concern.
“ If they’re not nice, won’t it be awful?”
“ Worse nor cakes an’ a house,” said Doris.
They all went off into peals of laughter at the
worried look on Doris’s face.
“ Oh, I think they’re sure to be nice,” said Mollie,
hopefully.
“ But supposing they’re not,” groaned Eileen.
“ Supposing we wish the Greys were back again ?”
“ We’ll fix ’em up,” said Willie. “If they’re not
nice when they come, we’ll make ’em nice.”
“ Well, young man, they’re coming the day after
to-morrow, so you’ll have to get ready for your task
very soon.”


“ The day after to-morrow !”
They all sat still for a while, with the wonder of
“ I didn’t think it would be for another week,
whatever. The day after to-morrow!”
“ I wonder will they go past here, and will we get
a look at them?” cried Eileen.
“ No, they’re coming past Frazer’s old place.”
“ Oh, bother them!” she cried. “We mightn’t see
them for weeks. I’ve a good mind to camp at
Frazer’s old place, just to get the first look at them.
I wonder how many children there are, and do they
like the country, and can they ride, and what are
their names? Did Mrs. Grey tell you anything
about them?”
“ No, she doesn’t know them at all.”
“ Oh, dear! I don’t know how ever I can live till
they come,” groaned Eileen. “ I bet I’ll dream
about them to-night.”
Sure enough she did, and she recounted her dream
to a wondering group next morning.
“Yes, there were five of them, and what do you
think —they were all exactly the one size?”
“ Oh! ”
“ And they all had red hair. Real red hair, every-
one of them.”
“ Oh, they must have looked funny!”
“ All the one size?” asked Eva.
“ Yes, the five of them; all the one size, with little
red heads.”
“ They must have all been twins,” shrieked Doris,


“Twins!” echoed Willie, in tones of disgust.
“ Triplets, you mean!”
“ Triplets—oh, listen!” cried Eva. “ Fourlets
or fivelets, more like.”
“ Oh, dear, they must have looked like five little
carrots!” said Doris.
“Yes, that’s what they looked like—five little
carrots, all dressed up.”
There were shrieks of laughter at this, but the
dream made them all the more anxious to see the
new people. As the days sped on, they grew nearly
frantic with curiosity.
“See them?” they’d ask Dadda and old Joe, as
they came in, in the evening. But they were always
doomed to disappointment.
But one day old Joe had good news.
“ Yes, I seen ’em to-day,” he said, as he unsaddled
his horse. “ I called there with a sheep notice.”
“Oh, Joe! How many—what are they like?
W hat did they say?”
A volley of questions were hurled at him.
“ She seems a nice lady ”
“ But the children, Joe —what about ”
Children? echoed Joe. “Who said there was
children.'' he went on, in his most tantalising
manner.
“Oh, Joe! but there are, aren’t there? Oh, tell
us, Joe.”
If there s no children, I 11 go—l’ll go and drownd
myself,” cried Doris, bursting into tears. “ I will
I’ll go and drownd myself ”


“ Steady, there —yes, there’s children. Well,
there’s none real little —least, not what I seen.”
“ Oh, tell’s all about them!” cried Doris, with the
tears still standing in her eyes.
“ There’s a boy looks about fifteen —a nice lad, he
seems, with red hair.”
They all gasped.
“ Red hair! Oh!”
“ You didn’t see five of them, did you, Joe? Five
of them with red hair? Because, if you did, that’s
my dream out.”
“Dream? Who’s talkin’ about dreams?” an-
swered Joe, testily, for he was always cantankerous
till he had his tea. “If you’re goin’ to start talkin’
about dreams, I’ll tell you no more about them.”
“ Oh! go on, please, Joe.”
“ Yes, a nice lad he seems, and his hair ain’t real
red; leastways, not that bad-tempered ginger red.
It’s more like the reddish-brown colour of a myall
log just where it’s chopped.”
“ Yes, I know the shade,” said Eva, eagerly.
“ He’s got a nice fresh face, and he seems a real
nice lad. And there’s a girl about the size of Eileen
there, and there’s another one in a sort of a pram
or chair.”
“ Oh, she must be the baby!” they gasped.
“ No, she ain’t the baby, but I think she must be
delicate. She looked about nine or ten.”
“Oh ! Any more?”
“ No, that’s all I seen.”
“ You didn’t hear any more laughing or —crying
anywhere, did you, Joe?”


“ No,” he answered, testily; “of course I didn’t.
Wouldn’t I know there was more if I heerd ’em
laughing or crying?”
“ Oh, the poor little delicate one. I’d love to see
her. V hat a pity she won’t be able to join in our
fun!” said Eileen.
“ Now, that’s all I know about ’em,” said Joe.
“ So don’t you ever mention the new people to me
again. If you want to find out any more go and
see ’em for yourself, and don’t let on I said anything
about the little delicate one—for there’s no knowin’
how they’ll take it.”
“All right, Joe—all right,” they shouted after
him. But what a pity! ’ they said among them-
selves, “ there’s not more of them. If there were
only five or six.”
“ I wish dere was a tousand,” declared Doris.
\\ hy don t you say a million thousand while
you’re at it?” asked Willie.
W ell, anyhow, it’s time Alother went to see
them,” said Eileen.
“Yes, of course it is,” they all agreed. “Let’s
go and tell her to go soon.”
Y ait a while. Y ho’ll go with her?”
There was a pause.
“ Y'hose turn is it? It isn’t mine, because I went
to Bragan Junction last week,” said Eileen. “I
suppose Mother and Miss Gibson will go and one
of us. Let’s see—it’s Eva’s turn.”
Oh, no! you go, Eileen; you go first, and tell
us all about them.”


“ But supposing I don’t like them. You go,
Mollie.”
“ Oh, no! you always get more news than any of
us. You go first.”
“Yes,” agreed Willie and Doris. “And, another
thing, ” went on Willie; “I don’t see what Miss Gib-
son wants to go for. Mollie ought to go instead.”
“ Oh, no, Miss Gibson must go,” said Mollie,
hastily. “It wouldn’t be nice to leave her at home.”
“ No, and, besides, let them see we have a gover-
ness,” said Eileen. “ It’s just as well to let people
know you can afford it.”
“ I never thought of that,” agreed Willie. “ I
hope your Mother wears her best dress.”
“Of course she will,” they chorussed. “ And now
let’s find Mother, and get her to name a day, be-
cause once the day’s named half the trouble’s over.”
Off they scampered to find Mother.


CHAPTER XXVI.
SOME MERRY MEETINGS.
The visit was paid at last, and Eileen went as a
kind of “ scout,” to seek news and information, and
the others waited with what patience they could
for their return. But the time seemed very long
as they watched up the road, long before there could
be any possibility of them appearing; and at last
Eva suggested that they should walk up and meet
them. Willie joined them, and they all marched
forth and walked to the Big White Gate, a mile and
a half from home, before they met them. Eileen
sprang out to tell them everything.
“ I’ll walk home,” she said, “ because I’ve got
such a lot to tell them.”
“Won’t you get in and have a drive, Doris?”
asked Mother.
“ No, tanks,” answered Doris. “ I want to hear
about ’em.”
“ Oh, they’re boskers! A lot better than I
thought, and we’ll be able to have great fun to-
gether. What do you think—there’s five of them.
Old Joe must have missed two the day he was
there.”


“ That’s great!” they cried.
“ There’s Colin, about sixteen. He’s nice, and his
hair’s hardly red at all, although there’s a bit of red
in it, and he can ride and shoot and skate and ”
“ Does he wear long pants?” asked W illie.
“ Yes, and he had a lovely Norfolk suit on, and
looked like the nice fellows on the catalogues.”
“ I wish I was in long pants,” grumbled Willie.
“What! A boy like you? A nice sight you’d
be in long pants. Why, you’ve got five years to go
yet. It isn’t long since Colin took to them.”
“ Did you call him Colin?” asked Eva.
“ Yes, of course I did, and he said we must all
call him Colin. We’re all going to meet them to-
morrow down at the river bridge, because Colin’s
promised to take Meta there, and it’ll be great fun.
Meta’s the delicate one. She’s not always delicate,
but she hurt the spine of her back, and she has to
have a long rest. That’s why she has an invalid’s
chair, but she’s real nice and cheerful. Then there’s
Edith —she’s next to Colin. I should have said her
before Meta; and there’s two little boys—Keith and
Kossie. They are little dears, but very wild. I
mean they chase round and make a noise, but
they’re lovely looking. And they’re twins.”
“ Oh, dear, I wish to-morrow would come soon!”
said Doris.
“ It won’t be long,” said Eileen, consolingly.
The next afternoon they met, and became firm
friends. They told each other their ages and dates
of their birthdays, and their favourite names and
favourite flowers, and they made up their minds to


be friends always, no matter what happened.
“ You look real nice in that chair,” said Eva to
Meta, impulsively.
“Do I?” she laughed. “Well, I’ll be real glad
when I can leave it. Sometimes since I have come
up here I’ve had some nice little short walks, and
it is just lovely to be on my feet again. I never
knew how nice, it was to walk till I’ve been lying
down so long.”
“ I’ll read all my poems to you some day, if you
like,” went on Eva.
“ I’d love it,” Meta answered.
“ Yes, I have a nice collection of stamps,” Colin
was saying to Mollie, “ and some of them are very
valuable, and I have some beautiful foreign post-
cards, too ”
“Any money in post-cards?” asked Willie, with
his hands deep in his pockets.
“ Oh, no, it’s just a hobby.”
“ I believe in money-making,” asserted Willie.
“ Some day I’m going to start and make a big lot
of it.”
“ Good luck to you,” laughed Colin. “ You’re
thinking of it early.”
“ A man has to start young,” answered Willie, as
he strode off with his fishing line. He would have
dearly loved to have a game of chasings with the
two little boys and Doris, but just on the first meet-
ing he wanted to appear dignified.
“ He’s a queer little chap,” laughed Colin to
Mollie.
“ He thinks he’s a man when he talks like that,”


said Mollie, hastily. “ He’s a real nice little boy
when he’s natural.”
Meanwhile the two little boys iv ere becoming un-
manageable. .They would race backu ards and
forwards over the bridge, like two young horses, and
up and down the steep banks of the river, until they
became more daring, and started to jump from one
stone to another across the water.
“ Come out at once, you young rascals!” com-
manded Colin, “ and don’t attempt to go in there
again.”
So for a time there was peace while they played
at making houses with sticks with Doris and Baby.
Then Mollie looked up and saw a sight that made
her blood run cold, for, perched high on a tree over-
hanging the deepest part of the river, were the
twins far out on a slender branch that swayed with
their weight. One false move, and they would be
dashed into the gurgling water that lapped round
the cruel sharp stones just beneath them. Colin
saw them, too, and his face blanched.
“ Not a word, Mollie,” he gasped. “Go and talk
to Meta. Talk for all you’re worth, and don’t let
her see them, whatever you do.”
Mollie never quite knew how she reached Meta,
and what she talked about to make her laugh so;
but she caught hold of the invalid’s chair and
wheeled it away down the road and around the bend,
out of sight of the fatal tree, after she had whispered
to Edith and Eileen to go to Colin.
The twins could see their danger, and looked ap-
pealingly to those on the river bank, for they had


all joined Colin by this, and Doris and Baby waved
and clapped their hands in fear.
Keep still, the pair of you!’’ commanded Colin,
“ and I’ll come up to you.”
He tore off his coat and boots, and attempted to
climb the tree. They were a long way out, but it
was easy enough to reach them if they would only
keep still. At last Colin, lying on a strong branch,
put out his hand and drew Keith back to safety, and
v hen halfway down handed him to the watchers on
the bank. He then went back again for Kossie,
who was beginning to cry and getting restive. Sud-
denly one of the branches he was clinging to broke,
and the next instant Kossie would have been tossed
into the water, had not Colin, with a mighty effort,
grasped him. For a minute he swung in mid air,
and then he was drawn back to the branch. For
a time the two of them hung there. The watchers
on the bank held their breath. If the branch
should snap, and send the two clinging figures into
the stony depths below! A few twigs and bushes
broke off and dropped into the gurgling water, and
the watchers shuddered. Supposing it should have
been Colin or Kossie! But at last the tension was
over, and Colin slowly descended, with Kossie in his
arms. Then Doris, Baby, and the others rushed the
twins and kissed and hugged them, and told them
ne\ er to do it again, and gave them all kinds of
advice and warnings.
No, never do it again,” said Colin, sternly, fac-
ing the culprits. \ou might have been floating


down the river now—two little corpses. I’ve a good
mind to ”
But his words were drowned in the wail the
twins set up at the thought of being two little
corpses, and it was long ere they could pacify them.
“ Me don’t want to be corpse,” shouted Kossie.
“Me don’t, eder,” cried Keith. “Me want to
wide me po—o-ny.”
“ Well, you’ll never ride your pony again, you’ll
never see your pony, if you go doing things like
that,” said Colin. “ Come on, let’s have some billy
tea to cheer us up, and then it will be time for
home.”
“ Oh, what a pity it’s nearly over!” said Doris.
“ I wish it was just beginning.”
“ Never mind, we’ll soon meet again,” said Colin,
as he threw a stack of twigs and bxishes on the fire
that crackled and blazed merril} r . They all had a
parting cup of tea, and gave three cheers for Colin
and three cheers for all themselves ; then Doris said :
“ Three cheers for the twins!”
“ They don’t deserve it,” said Colin, but he joined
in the cheer, and caps and hats were thrown high in
the air.
“ What a beueful day it was,” said Doris, as they
walked home across the paddock.
“ Yes, lovely. Nearly an accident and all,” said
Eileen. “It was just like what you’d read about.
Oh, it was a lovely day, and I love the twins, al-
though they’re wild and a bit bold.”
“ Pity Kossie didn’t fall in and didn’t get hurt. It
would have been great to talk about,” said Willie.


“ If he only fell in and sailed down the river a bit.
It would have been real great!”
“Ye—es. As long as he didn’t get hurt,” agreed
Eva.
“ Yes. I wish he fell in and sailed away,” said
Doris, briskly. “It wouldn’t ha’ hurt him, an’ we’d
had great fun. Pity Colin didn’t push him in,” she
cried, warming to the subject.
“ Oh, well, anyhow, he nearly fell in, and it was
real exciting, so we can’t grumble,” said Eileen, and
they all agreed.
They all walked home through the cold, sharp-
tinged gloaming, very pleased with themselves and
the world in general.
As time went on there were many merry meet-
ings, and the twins had some hairbreadth escapes,
and the Gillong children wondered how ever they
had lived so long without the Garlands, and the Gar-
lands wondered the same about the Hudsons. Some-
times they would go fishing, and the twins would
throw stones and sticks in the water, just to see the
circles growing wider and wider. Colin would
chase them up the bank with his rod, because he
said they hunted the fish away; and then they would
climb trees and “ hoot-toot ” among the branches
and declare they were owls or other birds.
They were a source of never-ending joy to
Doris, who dearly loved to watch them at their
tricks, and she wished and wished that she knew a
million thousand boys like them.


CHAPTER XXVII.
THE INVITATION.
“ Oh, dear, I wish something nice would happen !”
sighed Eileen. “ It’s a terrible long time since any-
ing real nice happened.”
“ Yes, not since Uncle came,” said Eva.
“ Oh, wha —what about the baby?” gasped Doris,
in amazement.
“ Oh, yes, of course—the baby —well, the baby’s
all right, but, still, I want some real fun. I’m sick
of everything again, and I know the Garlands are
great, and we’re lucky to have them; but I’d like
something real different and real surprising to
happen.”
“Yes, I wish something exciting would happen,
too,” said Mollie. “ Something real nice and excit-
ing ”
“Yes, not Mrs. Grey getting sick, or anything
like that,” said Eva.
“ Oh, no, Mrs. Grey getting sick is not the kind
of fun —er, I mean excitement—l want,” said
Eileen ; “ that was right enough for a time, but I
want real fun now.”
“ So do I,” said Mollie.
“ And so do I,” said Eva.


“ And me, too,” agreed Doris. “ I want some real
fun —not Mrs. Gray, or the baby, or old Rose, or
anything else.”
“ Me, too,” chimed in Baby, who was beginning
to feel quite grown up since the other baby came.
“ Pity somethin’ wouldn’t happen to the twins or
something,” said Doris. “ Not too bad —only some-
thin’ or other, I don’t know what.”
“But, of course, nothing will happen,” said Eileen,
dismally.
“ No, of course it won’t,” agreed Eva.
“ No, it never does,” went on Eileen. “ It’s the
same old thing over and over. Go to bed, get up,
have your meals; go to bed again, get up, have your
meals,” she repeated like a parrot, and she might
have kept on repeating it for another hour or two,
only that they saw the mailman coming in the dis-
tance, and they wondered if he would bring any
letters; but “of course he wouldn’t,” Eileen said; he
never did bring letters to them, only once in a blue
moon, so what was the use of wondering about him
or looking for him or anything else.
“ If he don’t bwing letters I —l don’t know what
I’ll do,” said Doris. “ I wish—l wish a letter’d
come to take us away to some place we never heard
of,” she went on, not knowing what to wish for.
“ Oh, yes, and it might be worse than here!” an-
swered Eileen. “ A lot of good that will do you !” .
“ I don’t know what I’d like,” said Mollie, “ but
something where we could have plenty of laughing
and talking and great fun.”


“ I wish we had another noo uncle,” sighed Doris.
“He was the best ’sprise we ever had. Pity we
hadn’t some more.”
“ Oh, you’d soon get sick of uncles,” grumbled
Eileen.
“ There might be a letter from Uncle to-day,” said
Mollie, brightly. “ It’s a long while since we heard
from him. I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if there was
one from him to-day.”
“ I’ll bet there won’t be,” croaked Eileen, “so
don’t be thinking there might, because you’ll only
be disappointed.”
Mother opened the mail-bag, and out dropped
some square thick envelopes.
“ Oh, letters!’ called Mother, and there was a
scramble to see whom they were for.
“ Mother and Dadda, Miss Gibson, and the
Misses Hudson, and one for Willie, in the same
writing,” she cried.
“ I hope it’s not a bill for that whip of mine,” said
Willie, as he tried to appear careless about getting
a letter.
“ A likely thing a bill would come in an envelope
like that,” said Eileen, sharply.
Then there was excitement indeed, for the let-
ters were invitations to a party at “ Myall,” and
not merely a party, but a plain and fancy dress
party. There was great excitement at " Gillong,”
as they discussed their dresses and “ characters.”
“ I think I’ll go as a Cowboy,” said Willie, as he
swaggered round.
“Oh, no; go as something nice,” said Eileen.


“Nice? What do*you call nice?” asked Willie.
“ There’s nothing nicer than a cowboy. You ought
to see ’em at the pictures.”
“ Oh, no! Go as Lord Somebody, or Sir Someone,
or somebody grand. You can be an old cowboy
any day.”
“ No, thanks, I don’t want to be any of your grand
chaps. I might be a footballer, or a cricketer, or
a stockman; but none of your grand men that wear
silk and satin. Ugh ! And I might be a Red Indian
yet. Yes, that’s what I’ll be —a Red Indian,” he
cried, excitedly. “ Oh! it will be fun rigging it up.
Let’s come and make a start at it now. I’ll have
feathers all over my head, and I’ll get the loan of
that dingo skin of your Mum’s, and —oh, it will be
fun!”
“ No, you won’t be a Red Indian,” cried Eileen.
“ No one will dance with you.”
“Dance with me?” echoed Willie. “I don’t
want ’em to dance. I want to have some fun. I
thought you were all wishing for fun, and now it’s
coming you want to dress up in fine clothes. Ugh !”
“What about Little Lord Fauntleroy? Oh,
Willie, you’d look pretty!”
“ Little Lord Fauntleroy!” gasped Willie. Ugh !
Do you think I want to look pretty? Do you think
a man wants to look pretty ? Ugh!”
For the next week excitement and disorder held
sway at “ Gillong,” for there was so much trouble
in choosing costumes.
One day Eva would decide on “ Flower Girl,”
another on “ Erin ” or “ Rule, Britannia,” or some


other character; and they were all the same, till
Mother and the governess were nearly distracted.
“ I don’t think I’ll go,” said Eileen one evening.
“ Why?” they all asked in chorus.
“ Because I don’t know what to be, and it's too
much trouble deciding. And, besides, it’s silly
going in fancy dress, fixing up everything; and I’d
rather go in a real pretty silk dress and nice silk
stockings and pretty shoes and a fan, and all sorts
of nice things; and I’m not rich enough for that, so
I’ll stay at home.”
“ Oh, nonsense !” cried Mollie. “ It’s lovely to be
going in fancy dress.”
“ Oh, its all right for you —you’ve decided!”
“ Well, why don’t you decide ?”
“ I can’t. Every day makes it harder, and I get
more mixed; so I’ll just give the lot up and stay at
home;” and she looked very disconsolate.
“What about a gipsy?” asked someone
“Or a queen, or a mermaid, or—oh, lots of
things!”
“ Now, look here, Eileen; you’ll have to decide,”
said Mollie, firmly. “ Let’s fix it up now.”
So, after a great deal of talk, she decided on
“ Gipsy Queen.”
Then there was work getting their dresses ready.
Mollie was “ Night,” and the soft black dress, with
the half-moon and stars cut out of silver paper,
suited her splendidly. Across her red-gold hair she
had a black velvet band, with a quaint little half-
moon slanting across it.


The “ Gipsy Queen ” looked fine in her red dress,
with slashes of gold paper and touches of black vel-
vet, and coins and berries placed cunningly here and
there. In the make-ups everyone helped, and the
tags off tobacco were even pressed into service.
Even old Joe would sit at the kitchen table after tea
and cut out hundreds of stars and other shapes out
of silver and gold paper; and many the argument
he and Willie had over correct sizes, etc., and how
many stars were in the sky, and thousands of other
things; and, of course, the arguments were never
decided, because they ■were both sure that they were
right, and left it at that.
Eva was “ Flower Girl,” and had a pretty white
muslin frock, decked with flowers, and carried a
wand (made by Old Joe) wreathed with flowers.
Doris was “ Winter,” and looked radiant in her red
dress, bordered with wadding for fur, and a little
white wadding cap trimmed with red berries. Baby
was “ Red Riding Hood,” and fancied herself in her
little blue frock and white pinafore and red cape
and hood; only when she had been at the party a
while she grew tired of the cape and hood, and
threw it off, and was just plain Baby in her little
blue frock for the rest of the evening. At the last
Willie had decided to go as a “ Scout,” and his
mother had to hurriedly post him a suit from Syd-
ney; and Mollie fixed up one of Frank’s felt hats
for him, and he was very pleased with his “ rig out,”
as he called it.
Two days before the party a letter came from
Frank to say that he was coming home for a short


holiday. “Just a week or ten days,” he wrote,
“ and lam looking forward to it. What a lot we
will have to talk about! Tell Doris and Baby I’ll
expect them to give me a picnic under the old picnic
tree.”
They were all silent for a while, overjoyed at the
great news, and then their tongues were loosened,
and a babel of voices filled the air.
“Well, if it’s not the very best thing that could
happen,” cried Eileen. “ I’ve been wishing that
Frank could be here to see us in our fancy dresses,
and now he’ll be here. Hooray!”
“Oh, dear, dear! whatever’ll he go as?” cried
Doris. “ I wish he’d be old Father Christmas.”
“ Father Christmas, indeed!” cried Eileen. “ I
fancy I see him !”
“ Yes, an’ he’d be a mate for me, then,” said Doris.
“ He could have a red coat with fur on it and ber-
ries, and he’d look real nice.”
“ Pity I didn’t know he was coming sooner,” said
Willie. “ I’d have saved postage on my suit. He
could have brought it up.”
“So he could,” they agreed. “ What a pity!”
“ Oh, it’s all right,” said Willie, lordly. “ A fel-
low doesn’t have much use for money up here.”
They danced round Frank when he arrived, and
all wanted to tell him all the news at once. They
admired him, and said he looked “ lovely ” and
“ beautiful,” and all kinds of nice things, till Frank
laughingly declared he’d grow too shy to talk.


But he was a different Frank to the boy who had
left “ Gillong ” only about eight months ago. He
was so alert and bright and keen, and his eyes were
dancing as he talked and laughed. For he had
found is niche, and was working hard at his
heart’s desire; and Mollie thought gratefully of
“ L'ncle,” who had put it in his power to take up the
work he liked.
“ I’m getting on fine, Mollie,” he confided later
on, “ and I’m sure as the time goes on that I’ll reach
the top. Oh, it’s fine to be at something that you
like—something that you can put all your ener-
gies into and use your brain power. Sometimes I
think of the long, long days that used to seem so
hopeless, and I shudder. But it’s great to be back
among it all again for a while, and I’ll enjoy every
minute of my holiday.”
They showed Frank their dresses, and there was
much whispering and laughing among them.
“ Guess what this used to be once,” cried Eileen,
holding up Doris’s jaunty little “winter ” cap.
“ Couldn’t in a lifetime,” laughed Frank.
“ The wadding out of the old tea cosy,” she cried.
“ And Baby’s red cape and hood are made from
an old cloak Mamma had when she was a girl. Do
you see this wand? Well, old Joe made it, and we
covered it with gold paper.”
“ Marvellous!” cried Frank. “ What a pity I
wasn’t here sooner to rig myself out in something. ’
“ I’ll tell you what —go as a Red Indian,” cried
\\ illie. “ I wanted to, but couldn’t manage it.”
But Frank decided he would go in plain clothes.


The new baby came in for a lot of attention, too.
“ Well, little chap, I wonder what you’ll want to
be when you grow up,” said Frank, leaning over his
little cart. “ I wonder will you be fond of bush
life, or will you have a hankering after other
things.”
The new baby smiled up at him, as though it
didn’t care what became of it in the future.
“ Anyhow, I’ll keep an eye on you and find out
what you do want, and see that you get it.”
Frank meant it, for in his heart was a great glad-
ness, and life seemed worth while. He grew quite
excited over the prospect of the party, too.
“ Won’t Enid be surprised?” said Eva. “ Won’t
she be glad, too? You look lovely, Frank, and that
suit of yours is beautiful. I bet you’ll be the nicest-
looking grown-up boy there, and I’m real glad
you’re here to come with us. What a pity you’re
not a poet, Frank,” she concluded.
“A poet?” One of those chaps that forgets to
have his meals?” cried Frank, teasingly.
“ No, a real nice, clever poet, and write big books
of poems, and have pretty pictures in them. You
know, I could paint the pictures later on, because
I’m going to be an artist.”
“ Oh, well, I'll think about it,” laughed Frank,
“ and perhaps we’ll bring out a book in conglome-
ration—Eva Hudson and Frank Lynton.”
“ Y ouldn’t it be lovely?” she gasped.
“Oh ! let’s talk about the party,” pleaded Doris.
“ Don’t be an old poet, ’cause it’s real hard gettin’
words to go, an' you’d be always writin’ and writin’,


an’ you’d never have time for games or anything.
A party’s better’n poems a lot.”
They all fell to wondering what the Garlands
would wear.
“ Of course there’ll only be Colin and Meta there,
I suppose, unless Edith goes to look on.”
“ No, they’re all going,” said Mollie. “ Even the
twins.”
“What! the twins going? Oh, that’ll be better
than ever!” they cried. “The twins will give us
some fun. Oh, Frank, you’ll love the twins!”
“ I’m not too sure about that,” said Frank.
“ It’s the best news I ever heard,” cried Doris,
dancing round.
“ The twins will be there. The dear, darlin’,
bold, noisy, darlin’ twins.”


CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE PARTY.
They all went from “ Gillong ” except old Joe, and
he came out to see them off, and told them that
there wouldn’t be anyone as nice as them there, and
to fly round and enjoy themselves. The station was
a blaze of light as they drove up, and buggies were
coming from all directions, and motor-cars and a
few horsemen.
“ Oh, dear, I’m getting shy!” said Eva. “I do
hope I don’t keep like it, or I won’t enjoy myself a
bit.”
They were all too excited to feel shy when they
alighted, and were led off to take off their wraps.
“ What do you think?” gasped Eileen, as she took
off her cloak before going down to the party room.
“ I’ve seen four gipsies already. I’m sorry I’m not
old Queen Elizabeth or Mary of Scots, or some of
them.”
“ Never mind, I’m sure you’ll look as nice as any
of them,” said Miss Gibson. “ Come along, now,
and forget any grievances and enjoy yourself right
merrily.”


Enjoy themselves they did, and after a while
Eileen didn’t care if there were forty gipsies there.
They danced and sang and played games in the
moonlit garden, and there were such a lot of nice
boys and girls; and how they did talk!
Young Harry Egerton, from a big station further
north, danced a lot with Mollie, and he quite beamed
when she told him she liked his name. When he
asked her why, and she told him it was because she
had a nice Uncle named Harry he didn’t look half
so pleased.
“ And we’re going to Sydney to stay with him
again this summer,” she went on. “ He’ll soon be
back from the Continent now.”
Then Harry said he was going to Sydney for the
summer, too, and they’d meet down there.
Enid was so pleased to see Frank again that she
had the second dance with him, and then fat George
Blackston came up and said she promised it to him
a long time ago. She smiled sweetly, and begged
to be excused, because Frank had been so long
away, and was only staying up the country for a
little time.
So George marched off and secured another part-
ner, and said he didn’t think the party was going to
be much good.
“Why?” asked his partner with wide-open eyes,
for she had just been thinking how “ lovely ” it was.
All the evening the fun was kept going. At first
Willie strolled round and watched them all; but
after a while he, too, joined in the merriment, and
what a time they had!


Doris was romping round, and tore the wadding
on her dress, and after that little pieces of white fur
were scattered all over the room. But she didn’t
care, with her head thrown back, her eyes and
cheeks glowing, she pranced round and said it was
the beautifullest party she was ever at. And Eva,
too, put away her flower-wreathed wand and joined
in the fun.
Mother and a lot more grown ups looked on and
smiled and talked about the costumes, and the baby
slept through it all, never knowing the good time he
was missing.
“ You know,” confided Eileen to one of her part-
ners, “ we ought to have a lot of parties like this.”
“ Of course we ought,” he agreed.
“Yes, every week or every fortnight, whatever,”
and he agreed again.
What a crowd were there —nearly all in fancy
costume! Gipsies and Flower Girls and Queens
and Shepherds and Stockmen and Soldiers and
Sailors joined in the throng.
Harry Egerton told Mollie that “ Night ” was the
prettiest costume there, and Frank told Enid that
“ Dawn ” was. For Enid was arrayed in a pretty
costume of goldeny shade, merging into the rose-
pink of dawn.
Colin came as a courtier, and Eileen said she
would never have believed that Colin could look
so nice, if she hadn’t seen him with her very own
eyes. He picked her out at once, and said that the
Gipsy Maid must dance with the Count, as in “ the


days of old.” So the meriy Gipsy Girl danced hap-
pily with the gorgeous Count.
Meta was a Scotch Lassie, and the twins were the
Little Princes in the Tower, and looked angelic in
their dear little black velvet suits, lace collars, and
patent shoes and buckles; and Edith enjoyed her-
self immensely looking on, and a very merry partv
of boys and girls gathered round her chair.
“ Next party I hope you’ll be able to join in all
the fun,” said Eileen, kissing her.
“ Oh, yes! of course, later on I will,” answered
Edith, brightly, for she had learnt while still young
the great lessons of patience and unselfishness.
Then supper was announced, and Enid suggested
that they should have a grand march in full regalia
to the supper table, and they all agreed heartily.
Wands and baskets of flowers, etc., were hastily
gathered together, and Baby made a wild rush for
her cap and hood, which were thrown aside; and
they all marched out to the big covered-in verandah,
where the supper was spread.
On they went, two by two, laughing and joking
and making a pretty picture of color and brightness
in their varied costumes. And if the fun had been
bright and gay all the evening, it became even
better at the supper table. There were jests and
jokes and ripples of merry laughter, and Eileen con-
fided to her partner that she was just finding life
worth living.
“I wonder where’s the twins?” said Colin, look
ing round the table.


“Oh, yes —the twins!” echoed Eileen, and just
then she gave a little scream. “ Oh, dear! what’s
that?” and on the other side of the table someone
else gave a little shriek.
“ Oh, a dog!” they cried.
“What? Where?”
“Under the table, and he bit my leg!” cried a
little fair-haired girl.
“ Oh, dear, you’ll go silly!” cried someone. “If
he’s a mad dog, you’ll get hy—dro—pho—bia.”
“ Oh !” the girl shrieked.
“ And he’s bit me, too !”
“ And me —and me ”
“ Oh!”
Then there was a scramble. A lot climbed into
their chairs, while heads were ducked under the
table, to find—the twins! Yes, the twins, chuckling
fit to kill themselves!
“ We noo we’d tighten you,” they cried, as they
popped out. “We noo you’d sing out. We was
sittin’ under there ever so long.”
“ You ought to be sent home,” cried Colin, hotly;
but all the others laughed.
“Did you think we was mad dogs?” they cried,
in great glee. “We said we’d tighten you a long
time ago.”
Then they patted their little velvet suits and
straightened their little lace collars, and looked nicer
than ever. Then everyone roared with laughter,
and the supper went on merrily, as though there
was no such thing in the world as drought or hard
times.


And when the buggies came round for the home-
ward return there were laughing good-byes and all
kinds of promises, while the waiting horses
champed at their bits, or a big motor throbbed as
if in protest at being kept so long. Good-byes were
flung back across the cold night air, as at last they
rolled away home, saying it was the nicest party
that ever was.


t*~ i s o Cr^
\x _gj
CHAPTER XXIX.
A WEEK ON THE RIVER.
The time had come at last, and a merry party
gathered to go oft to the river. They had chosen
a spot a few miles from “ Gillong.” The Hudsons,
the Garlands, Enid and some of her friends, and the
governess made up the party.
Old Joe drove the cart with the tents, hammocks,
and bags and boxes, and after a lot of persuasion
he let the twins and Doris drive with him.
“ But, mind you, none of your tricks or nonsense,”
he threatened. “ Doris is as bad as the pair of you
now.”
“ Oh, Joe, we’ll be good !” declared the twins, with
their innocent-looking faces.
“ All right, then, none of your pranks! D’you
hear?”
“ Yes, Joe.”
“ W ell, mind you ’eed,” he answered, as he started
off.
For the first mile they were all right, and then
they grew restive. When Joe wasn’t looking Keith
would hang on to the tailboard of the cart with his
legs swinging in the air, and execute a high kick


now and again, much to the delight of the other two.
Then, like a flash of lightning, he would be back in
his place if old Joe glanced round. But he played
the game once too often, and just in the middle of a
high kick the cart wheeled round the bend, and he
was thrown far out on to the soft clover.
“Oh, Joe, Joe, pull up quick!” cried Doris.
“ You’ve thrown him out.”
“Who? What?” cried Joe. “Threw him out!”
and he pulled up with a jerk.
“Yes, Keith, round the last bend.”
“ Sakes alive, send a man crazy, so you
would. I ’ope he ain’t ’urt,” and he turned back
quickly, to see our hero racing along and crying
at the top of his voice.
“ Come ’ere and jump in. How did you fall out?”
“ The c-a —rt bumped me —o —ut,” sobbed Keith.
“ Where was you sittin’ ?”
“ N—o—t far from de others.”
“Show me the spot,” said Joe, sternly. “You
must ha’ been up to some of your tricks. Where
was you sittin’?”
“ I was near the back of the ole cart,” said Keith,
sulkily.
“ Was you hangin’ out of it?”
Xo reply.
“ Come on, out with it! Was you hangin’ out of
the cart?”
“ Yes,” said Keith, defiantly.
“ Well, serves you right for failin’. You might
ha’ broken your leg, failin’ like that. You’ll never
drive with me again as long’s my name’s Joe.”


Then he lit his pipe and drove on and didn’t
speak to them again till they reached the river; but
the young rascals were whispering and giggling to-
gether long before then—up to some fresh roguery.
Such a gay crowd set to work to pitch the tents
and swing the hammocks, and soon the fresh smell
of cut timber and bruised leaves filled the air, while
laughter and merry voices were heard on every
side.
The hammocks were mostly bags slung up with
wire, and in some cases sheets of wire-netting, with
a rug thrown over them. But they swung among
the leafy branches under the fresh-smelling leaves,
and there were never better beds in the world! It
was delightful to wake in the early morning under
a canopy of leaves, and see the sun peeping forth,
transforming the dew-tipped leaves and grass and
gossamer spider-webs into glistening jewel-like
splendour. To hear the birds chirping and twitter-
ing along the river, or watch them plunge into the
stream. To hear the flap of the fish as they sprang
out of the water, and then to hear the fire crackling
merrily. At times like this they all wished they
were gipsies.
Then breakfast would come, with fish fresh from
the river and potatoes cooked in their jackets, and
there was nothing but goodwill and merriment from
morning to night.
They would have tea as the evening shadows were
creeping along the river, and hear the birds flutter-
ing and cooing among the branches, or far along the


river strange calls and chirps would be heard from
strange wild bush birds. Then the merry jackasses
would give forth their jolly, rollicking laugh, and
wake up all the echoes; and the children would join
with them, till there was perfect pandemonium.
And by-and-bye a great golden moon would swing
in the sky, lighting up the scene into fairy-like
splendour, making the tents stand out whitely and
transforming the broad stretch of water into a
golden sheen. This was the time for stories, and
they would gather round the camp fires and listen
while the “ grown-ups ” talked ; and sometimes they
would declare that they could see gnomes and
fairies high among the glistening gum leaves, and
even hear them chattering.
One night they found Keith and Kossie, armed
with two little tomahawks, just about to try and
climb a great gum that had gnarled and knotted
branches, and they declared they were going up to
give the gnomes the fright of their lives.
“We wadn’t goin’ to hurt ’em; we was only goin’
to have some fun,” they answered when Miss Gib-
son protested with them.
“ When I grow up I'll settle some of dem old
gnomes,” said Keith, shaping up to fight, “ and I’m
goin' to find de ole wolf dat nearly killed Red Riding
Hood and shoot him,” he ended up, tragically.
“ Oh, but the woodmen shot him!” cried Doris.
“ Well, den I’ll kill his brudder,” declared Keith.
“ That’s right, you’ll kill someone if you’re not
careful,” said Frank, with a hearty laugh. For
Frank’s laugh rang out gay and clear these days,


and oftimes Mother and Father would look at him
and marvel at the change.
“ I don’t think we did right by the lad, keeping
him so long with us at the work he must have
hated,” said Father.
“ Oh, well! it will make him appreciate his good
fortune all the more now,” said Mother. “ And I
don’t think Frank regrets the time he spent with us
now, but it’s nice to see him so happy.”
The last evening came, as last evenings will, no
matter how we try to stay their progress. The
last evening of a happy, care-free week —a week to
which many looked back in after years with a sigh
or a smile, but always with a tender memory.
“ I wonder will we ever have another week here.
I wonder where we’ll all be this time next year.”
And a great, great many more wonders were voiced,
as they gathered round the camp fire for the last
time. And how they did talk! The things they
had meant to say for ever so long were said to-
night. Fresh stories and jokes were recounted, and
from being at first a somewhat saddened party, with
the thought of the “ break-up ” in the morning, they
became noisy and gay. Just in the midst of the
laughter two little figures bounded up before them.
“ Good gracious ! Whatever’s that? The twins !”
Sure enough it was the twins —the twins, smoth-
ered in mud and dirty water, with dead leaves stick-
ing to the mud that covered them, and dirty, muddy
water streaming from their clothes.
“ Where have you been? I thought you were in
bed?” and other questions were put to them.


“ So we wad, and we seen a rabbit and we jumped
out an’ chased him, and Kossie fell in the river and
I pulled him out ”
“ An’ den he fell in ” chipped in Kossie, “ an’
I pulled him out, and den ”
“He fell in again!” shouted Keith, roaring with
laughter at the thought.
“ Dear, oh, dear! I thought you were the gnomes
or the wild men of the woods,” cried Eva. “ You do
look funny.”
“ An’ de rabbit got away ”
“Of course it did,” said Colin. “It had more
sense than you two.”
Then they had to be bathed and put to bed and
given a lecture, which took no more effect on them
than the proverbial water on the duck’s back.
There was more talking, followed by supper, and
they climbed into their hammocks, to sleep under
the open skies, under a star-specked dome, for the
last time for many a month to come.
They were back again at “ Gillong ” a week after
the week on the river. They sat on the wooden
verandah, the five of them, and gazed at the great
green stretch before them. Mother and Frank
had driven to Bragan Junction that morning, and
they should be back any time now. Inside, the
governess wrote letters to Sydney.
“ It’s only a year ago that we sat here, drought-
stricken,” said Mollie. “ What a big, big difference
in one year! Then we didn’t know Uncle, and we
didn’t know Sydney or Miss Gibson, or ”


“ And Frank was here, working hard and sick of
the drought, and ”
“And we didn’t know the twins,” chimed in Doris.
“ No, and we didn’t think we’d be going to Syd-
ney again this year. Why, in two months’ time
we’ll be down there again, and Uncle will tell us all
about his wonderful trip—my word, I must look up.
my geography,” said Eileen.
“ And we didn’t know Willie,” shrieked Doris, at
the top of her voice, “ a year ago.”
“ No, and now he’s nearly our brother,” said Eva.
“ What a lot of good things have happened! I
believe if we counted up we’d get a dozen.”
“ And we didn’t have the baby,” shrieked Doris,
louder still.
“ Oh, no —no baby brother! I’d forgotten him,”
said Eileen.
“ I think we often forget him —for a little while,”
said Eva. “ We’re so used to talking about the five
of us.”
“ Let’s count all the good things; let’s count
quick!” shrieked Doris, holding up her chubby
fingers.
Baby held both her hands up.
“ First—E T ncle. Second
“ Here they are. Here’s Mother and Frank,”
called Eileen, “ and whoever’s that with them ?
Why, it’s Uncle! It’s Uncle!” she shrieked. Sure
enough it was L T ncle, smiling and smart and dis-
tinguished looking.
“Uncle, Uncle!” they shouted, and the five of


them were hanging round him, all asking questions
at the one time.
“ You didn’t think your old Uncle could come up
here without you knowing all about it, did you?
Well, Uncle is trying to be. as clever as his little
bush nieces, and your Mamma and Frank kept the
secret well.”
“ How long have you known? How long, Mum
and Frank?
“ Ever since Frank came home,” smiled Mother,
“ but I wanted to surprise you.”
“Ever since Frank came home?” they repeated,
blankly. “ However could you keep the secret that
long?”
Why, couldn t youasked Uncle, looking
knowingly at the five of them. Then they all
shrieked with laughter.
“ It’s the best thing in the world that could have
happened,’ said Eva, “just to have you back here
again.”
“ Yes, and I want you all to hurry up and get
ready to come to Sydney. Can you manage in a
month? I’ve taken a beautiful big house with
grounds, so I’ll be looking out for you.”
“ Ready!” they cried. “Of course, we’ll be ready.
Oh, it will be beautiful! Beautiful! Three cheers
for U ncle!’ they cried, dancing round him.
It was late that night before the lights were out
at “ Gillong.”
“ I’ll never grumble again as long as ever I live,”
said Eileen, as she blew out the candle and slipped
into bed.


socie^
“ Oh, you’ve said that hundreds of times,” said
Mollie, sleepily.
“ Yes, but I really mean it this time. I’ll—never
—grumble —again —as long as —ever —I—live,” she
repeated, as she fell oft' to sleep.
The moon rose slowly over “ Gillong ” —a great
golden moon —and sailed high in a cloudless sky.
Its rays lingered lovingly on the children in their
little white beds on the verandah. It flickered on
the quivering leaves of the gum trees in the garden,
where Frank and Willie were wrapped in a dream-
less sleep in their swinging hammocks. Then it
sailed serenely on, casting its magic glow over the
paddocks and scrubs and creeks on “ Gillong,” till
it paled before the glow of dawn in the eastern sky.


CONCLUSION.
My dear Basil,
The days are growing longer. There is a tinge of
summer warmth and drowsiness in the air. The corn
paddock at “ Myall,” which has been a picture of vivid
green, with the pale gold corn cobs peeping out of their
golden tresses and swathing of tenderest green, is
turning to rich, deep green, with red-gold and burnished
cobs raising themselves proudly erect or swaying in the
breeze. The wheat field, too, is turning to yellow with
the rustling ears breathing ever a slight cadence to the
breeze. And with the growing length of days my picture,
too, is growing apace. I stand back and gaze at it ere
I place my brushes away for to-morrow’s work. It is a
picture of joyous young life, of early blossom and fresh
born greenery, of tender leaflet and bud, of wattle’s gold
and a glimpse of road winding among forest giants, and
the spirit of the early tenderness and benediction of
Spring time breathes over all. If in the years to come I
shall ever again gaze on that picture, my thoughts shall
go rushing back to glorious, fresh-tinged days when all
the world seemed young; to lilting, joyous song of birds;
to the gambols of those merry foals; to the teeming,
indescribable hum of insect life among those forest trees;
to the haunting perfume of that golden wattle—in fine,
to all the charm and allurement of Spring time in the
open spaces.


The end of the year is not far off, and on the whole
it has been a year of interest, of pleasure. When one
studies human nature, as well as the great open Book of
Nature around one, then the time flies by all too quickly.
Soon I shall take a short holiday in Sydney, and just
for a space become one of the busy, hustling crowd, and
revel in the glimpses of shining water and twinkling fairy
barques and harbour lights and white-winged yachts, and
then back again to the life of the Bushland, and the
pleasant task of teaching the dearest, funniest children I
have ever met —Five Little Bush Girls.
MARIE.
FINIS.




ft




A/
ft ft.23. Z
Z cof y
3 1508 01755744 3


’vs3s
