

!fi ve-and-twenty
VULGAR
FALLACIES
THE LAND QUESTION
<|| DISSECTED.
BY AN M.L.A.
Pelbottinje;
<s>=n| PUBLISHED AT THE “HERALD”‘OFFICE, BOURKE STREET EAST
0) PRINTED BY B. “ HERALD M PASSAGE, BOURKE STREET EAST.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


(U
1 /»i,%
C j
j/y\y
/v<j. ff* 0 ?


VULGAR FALLACIES
ON THE
The first difficulty of a writer on the Land
Question is to determine where he ought to
begin; how much he may take for granted, as
conceded on all hands, and no longer necessary
to be debated. The gentlemen who shepherd
the pastoral interest in Parliament and the
press, make war like the Maories; they retreat
before any formidable movement of opinion; but
return and re-occupy the abandoned ground
whenever their opponents go into winter quar-
ters. It is a curious moral phenomenon to
watch a pro-pastoral journal addressing the same
audience on the same topic as often as Mr Jeffer-
son has played the “ American Cousin,” and
with neatly as little change in the dialogue or
scenery. Fallacies, which seemed to have been
effectually strangled on former occasions, reap-
pear as lively as if nothing had happened, and
have to be combated again and again and again.
The first difficulty of a writer, therefore, we repeat,
is where to begin in a coHtroversy where nothing
is conceded. It would be a great gain if the
people could occupy the territory they have once
conquered, as General Cameron proposes to do
under similar circumstances, with some perma-
nent force that would prevent re-invasion ; or
could at least set up some boundary stones to
mark the extreme points to which their arms
have been carried, and the enemy driven off.
Here, at the beginning of a new session, with
the Land Question still to settle, and, unfortu-
nately, still to debate, we have the prospect of
having the whole story from the Orders in Coun-
cil (which are repealed) to the “repudiation”
of the O’Shanassy Government (which is a
fiction), brought up anew in dreary debates, and
LAND QUESTION.
drearier letters from the pastoral regions. The
very dreariness -and monotony fighting for the
enemy by disgusting the public with the entire
question ! In the absence of more effectual
measures, it has struck us that we might help,
in an humble way, to clear the ground a little for
real work, if we gathered together a few leading
Fallacies, which have been disposed of so often and
so effectually, that we are fairly entitled to con-
sider them dead, and to refuse, as far as they are
concerned, at least, to debate them again, or
regard them any longer, except as skeletons or
spectres. The process we employ for this pur-
pose must be a rough and ready one, with little
pretension to method or classification ; and the
result will be useful chiefly as enabling the
reader to recall to memory what has been better
said before. The present aim of the pastoral
party is to revive the auction system in the sale
of public lands, and to retain possession of the
pastoral lands till 1870, at the insufficient rent
fixed by arbitration; and the fallacies most in
favour at present are those which promote these
objects. They are to be found in letters, speeches,
and leading articles, and may be gathered in
considerable numbers at present with the help of
a pair of scissors. The natural philosopher, en-
gaged in making a collection of butterflies or
beetles, as often as he catches a suitable specimen,
fastens it to a sheet of paper with a corking pin,
and considers his work done by simply exhibiting
it to view; and this is the plan we propose to
adopt. Wc will merely hang our fallacies up
for public inspection, with the slightest possible
label to identify diem. Here is a batch to begin,
which we will continue from day to day, as suit-
able specimens come to hand.


HATCH FIRST.—THE AUCTION SYSTEM.
I. Under the Auction System the county
got a fair price for its lands, which are sacri-
ficed under the System of Selection.
The Auction System was abandoned for this
reason, among others, that it did not secure a
fair price to the State. The squat!er is clamor-
ing and intriguing for a return to the Auction
System, precisely because it enabled him to get
the public lands at his own price, and to any
extent he thought proper. The ordinary work •
ing of it was this;—When a district was sub-
mitted to auction, the squatter who wanted it
ran up (he price upon any small competitor, to a
sum far beyond the average value, quite certain
that when he had frightened away competition,
the remainder would fall into his hands at the
upset price. And commonly the result answered
his expectations. As regards the State getting
the full value, if the full value be much over LI
an acre, it has never got it under the Auction
System. The average price brought in latter
years has been—in 1859, 22s 6d; in 1860, 24s
sd; in 1861, 22s 3d ; in 1862, up to the passing
of the Land Act, 21s 9d; from which price auc-
tioneer’s fees had to be deducted. During these
years, land of the same quality as that proclaimed
in agricultural areas under the present Land Act,
was sold at these prices; and if the squatter paid
any more for it, he paid it as a private bonus to
a species of middle-men, who had sprung up
under the Auction System, and levied black
mail for refraining from competition.
11. Under the Auction System everyone was
content.
Under the Auction System, it is notorious that
no one was content, except the squatter and the
black mail man. The sole admissible defence
for the Occupation Licenses was that under
auction no poor man had the smallest chance of
getting any land worth having, except at an in-
ordinate price. And on that ground Parliament
refused to condemn the Licenses till a better
system was substituted. If we revive the
Auction System no industrious man will here-
after get anything but the refuse rejected by the
capitalist.
111. If general auction be objectionable, the
system of Limited Auction (under the Nichol-
son Act) workedfairly both for competitors and
fur the State, and might be restored with ad-
vantage.
The way Limited Auction worked for compe-
titors was to confine to those persons who had
lodged the purchase money beforehand, the right
of competing with the squatter; consequently,
to give him an easier victory. The way it worked
for the State is indicated by the conclusive fact
that the average price brought by country land
under it was only one pound one shilling per
acre. There were 300,000 acres of such land
sold (in addition to what was leased), and of
these all but twenty-six thousand acres went
without competition, at the upset price, to the
squatters !
IV. That we must, at any rate, give up a
system which has Jailed.
Yes, when the system has failed, and a better
can be substituted. Here, what has failed is,
not the system, but certain provisions made by
lawyers to guard it against evasions. The fun-
damental principles of the present Land Law are
a fixed price and deferred payments and
nothing has happened to shake a reasonable man’s
confidence in them. The Act has been violated
by unscrupulous squatters and their agents hav-
ing hired men to make false declarations. But
that fact furnishes a reason for taking mea-
sures to defeat such unscrupulous persons; no
necessary reason for abolishing the system which
has been violated. When a similar practice of
hiring men to personate electors was discovered,
no one urged it as a reason for giving up our
electoral law; they simply said that we must
provide more efficient cheeks on personation for
the future; and we have since provided more
efficient checks accordingly. False oaths are
not unknown in the Custom-house, or in the
Supreme Court; the Distillers’ Act is notoriously
violated by the erection of private stills, and the
Publicans’ Act by sly grog selling; but it is not
considered necessary in these cases to abolish
Customs duties or the practice of trial by jury,
because it is difficult to compel unscrupulous
persons to respect their oaths, when they have a
strong interest to the contrary.
V. The present law ought to he repealed,
because it fostered immorality by creating a
system of false di clarations.
Mark the impudent attempt to shift the re-
sponsibility of cx-ime from the malefact r to the
magistrate. Fancy Goddard or Branch plead-
ing that he was compelled to commit burglary
by the police, who interfered with his quiet pur-
suit of plunder and drove him to operate by
violence, and in the dark. The police, no doubt,
in this sense foster immorality, anU so did the
Land Act.
VI. The squatters were driven to violate the
law in self-defence.
This argument assumes that they are never
to be displayed, and may be pleaded against the


Auction System or any other system that can be
invent d. It may be pleaded now and pleaded a
hundred years hence. Self-defence will always
iustify shutting the door against any competitor.
If the squatters are tenants at will of the Slate,
bound to give way upon due notice, such a plea
is wholly inadmissible.
VII. Better give up a system which the
squatters have succeeded in violating.
The squatters have succeeded in violating the
present Land Act no doubt; but they succeeded
in violating all the systems which preceded it.
Being rich, organised, and unscrupulous, they
have immense advantages in effecting their
object, and in securing their agents from disco-
very. Under pre-emptive rights and the old
Auction System, they r obtained all the best land
alienated before 1859. The Nicholson Land
Act, in order to hold them in check, limited the
quantity one man could select in a year, and
created penalties which rendered the tenure of
leased land void for non-residence, or if improve-
ments to value of LI per acre were not made
within twelve months on the purchased subdivi-
sion ; and an annual penalty of 5s per acre was
inflicted if improvements of value of 10s per
acre were not made on purchased land within
two years. Under this Act they obtamed a
million of acres, by violating the provision
which restricted the selector of 640 acres; and
they have since utterly disregarded the condi-
tions of settlement. Within the last six months
upwards of half a million of acres have fallen
under the operation of these penal clauses.
Again, under the Occupation License system,
nearly one-half the applications came from
squatters and their agents. The experienced and
successful violators of the law, of course, fell to
work again under the present Act, and, unfortu-
nately, were again successful. But that is
scarcely a reason for restoring the system which
of all that has existed rendered their operations
most easy.
VIII. It was the speculator not the squatter
who violated the Act.
This is a pet fallacy; the speculator is to the
squatter what the “ cat ” is to the servant’s
hall; whenever any untoward discovery is made,
rely upon it, you will be assured ’twas he that
did it. But who is the speculator ? He is ge-
nerally one of three things.
1. An agent secretly employed by the squatter
to buy for him.
2. Such an agent formerly so employed, and
now pursuing on his own account the evil trade
to which he was trained.
3. Or a person who purchases because he
knows the squatter is bent on having the land in
defiance of law, and will therefore buy it back at
a profit. A million and a quarter acres were
selected under the present Land Act, and the
squatters have since claimed remission of pastoral
rent on a million of these acres, as purchased
land in their possession. Whoever purchased
them them they have confessedly got them now,
and the popular proverb declares the receiver to
be as bad as the thief.
IX. To revive the Auction System will
punish the violators of the laio, by preventing
them from completing their projected estates.
It is notorious that no persons have been so
busy canvassing for a revival of the Auction
System as those who have evaded the Land Act;
and for a very obvious reason, its revival would
be equivalent to a direct bonus upon their un-
lawful and ill-gotten acquisitions. To whatever
extent it succeeded in making land more costly,
or more difficulty attainment, to that extent it
would increase the money value of their land
already purchased. For example, if Mr Land-
mark has selected thirty thousand acres by a
fraud on the Land Act, at an average of sixteen
shillings an acre; and you raise the average
price for the future to a guinea, you increase
the value of his 30,000 acres by L7OOO or L 8000;
if you can raise the average to thirty shillings,
you nearly double the value of the Landshark’s
Estate.
X. That the Land Act has been an entire
failure ; and we must try something else.
Not so. The working of the Land Act has
been singularly successful in several re-
spects. For example, with reference to the
development of novel industries. Upwards of
500 persons applied for industrial leases within
twelve months, and their willingness, when
their applications had been favourably enter-
tained, to conform to the stringent conditions,
and the prompt payment of the rent in advance,
afford satisfactory indications of the bonafides of
the applications. Again the act has enabled the
Commons, which were before a mere delusion,
to be effectually occupied by farmers and miners.
The act bad enabled the Board of Land and
Works to exercise a wise discrimination in dealing
with the occupation licenses. Those holders
who occupied and cultivated the land had their
applications to select promptly and generously
disposed of; while those who merely obtained
licenses as agents for squatters, or for speculative
purposes, without any intention of occupying


the land, were aot permitted to complete their the countrj had not been sacrificed to the greed
frauds. The evasion of the provisions regarding
agricultural areas has not been the result of
defects in the law, but of the unexampled want
of probity and patriotism evinced by a wealthy
and influential section of the community— the
members of which have countenanced each other
in the perpetration of frauds, which if com-
mitted in reference to individuals instead of the
State, would have caused the authors to be
scouted from the society of all honourable men.
XI. The principles of the Act have had a
trial and they won't do.
On the contrary they have either had
no trial or a trial on the smallest pos-
sible scale. Let us see how the act
worked wherever by any fortunate accident
(the honesty, poverty, or timidity of the squatter
for example) it had fair play. This is the ac-
count which Mr MGntosh, the late member for
East Bourke, a practical farmer, gives of the
selection in Gipps Land. “ I and a
number of friends who were anxious
to get land for agricultural settlement,
went down to the first selection. I remained
ten days, and I saw the operation of the Land
Act during that time. I have no doubt it has
afforded an opportunity to farmers such as
they never had before. I and the friends
who went from Melbourne with me all got land,
and land of the best quality I have seen in
Australia (though all did not get as much as
they wanted); and I believe nearly three-
fourths of the land selected has fallen into the
hands of intending settlers. The squatters got
the remainder; but, instead of one-fourth they
would have got at least three-fourths under any
former system. And what we got we got at a
reasonable pric», which will enable us to
use it profitably for agricultural purposes.”
As respects the area of Evansford, near Lex-
ton, this is the account which the Talbot
Leader, 7th April. 1863, gives of the agricultural
settlement :—“ The aspect of the Evansford
area at this moment is that of considerable
bustle and agricultural energy. For some time
past a number of the original selectors have
been busily engaged in fencing their allotments,
in erecting homesteads, and in preparing their
land for seed. It is computed by those who are
supposed to understand the matter, that fully
2000 acres of the area will be brought under
cultivation this season. The bulk of the land
will be sown with wheat and potatoes, and we
may, therefore, anticipate a reduction next year
in the rates for these two classes of produce.”
A picture which would have been repeated in
a hundred districts if the hopes and interests of
of a few hundred persons.
XII. That the principles of selection at a
fixed price (instead of auction) may he aban-
doned as a novelty adopted without due con-
sideration.
A fixed price for actual settlers in a new
country, instead of being a Victorian novelty,
may be said to be the land law of the whole
world. In the United States there is a fixed
price of 5s 3d for actual settlers. In Canada
there is a fixed price of 2s and 4s, with free
grants of 100 acres in certain cases. In all the
Australian colonies but one, and in New Zea-
land, a fixed price is the rule; and it
is notable that the Land System of New Caledo-
nia, which has been recently proclaimed by the
Governor, without the interposition of any
legislature, copies ours in these and some other of
its most popular features. The Governor is
empowered to declare certain portions of the
territory open for selection ; one fourth of such
land is retained for actual settlers at a fixed
price and with deferred payments for a short
period ; and where there are competitors for the
same allotment they draw lots. It is not the
present system but a change back to auction
that would make Victoria an exception to the
rest of the world. The allegation that the
principle was adopted hastily and without
due deliberation is a complete mistake.
Nearly five years ago, Mr O’Shanassy, in sub-
mitting to Parliament the basis of a land system
on behalf of the Government of which he was
the head, proposed a fixed price for actual
settlers. Between three and four years ago,
Mr Nicholson again proposed it and carried it
into law; and it was in operation more than
twelve months before the Land Act of 18G2 was
submitted to Parliament.
XIII. The present law violates the princi-’
pies of political science ?
Who says so, whose authority on such a
question is of any value ? Our land law as
described in Mr Duffy’s “ Guide’’, has been
examined widely in the reviews and newspapers
of England, and partially in those of France
and Germany, and not one public writer
suggested that the scheme was objectionable on
these grounds.
XIV. We must submit to the evasion of
penal restrictions, because we cannot prevent it.
We have never effectually tried to prevent it.
The administration of the Nicholson Land Act
fell into the hands of its opponents, who pro»


bably did not want it to succeed, and who cer- may be confidently expected where there is a
tainly made no attempt to enforce the penalties.
The administration of the present Act has also
fallen into the hands of its opponents; and what-
ever they may desire, they cannot and will not do
as much to protect it as its authors would h ive
done. The great conspirators will altogether es-
cape ; yet there is no moral doubt of the identity
of the majority of them, nor need there be any
legal doubt. There are various methods, by
which a full knowledge could be gained of the
evasions, and punishment of the principals se-
cured. A Parliamentary Committee or Royal
Commission might be appointed, and each selec-
tor in succession called before it, and exa-
mined whether the purchase money was his
own, and in what manner his signature
was obtained. A commission has frequently
been appointed in Englard to examine into cases
of Bribery at Elections; and the frauds under
the Land Act are surely not less important in
respect to national interests and public morals.
The same result might be obtained by re-enact-
ing the Commissions of Enquiry Act, 18 Victoria,
Nc. 10(Adamson’s, vol. 1, page 150), which would
enable the witnesses to be examined upon oath. The
Commissioners of Audit have authority to hold
similar enquiries (sec. 40-43). As the hand-
writing lo most of the suspected applications in
certain districts is identical, no matter where
the selectors lived; such an enquiry would be
certain to elicit that they were signed in blanks,
and therefore, legally, no application under the
Act. It is time enough to assume that restric-
tive clauses cannot be enforced when we have
made some reasonable attempt to enforce them
and have failed.
BATCH SECOND. THE RENT OF RUNS.
The object of the fallacies reviewed in the last
batch is to promote a return to the Auction
System, by which the squatters would be enabled
to turn their stations into freehold estates, and
transform Victoria into a Western Australia,
with immense individual properties, but no pro-
gress or population. The object of the fallacies
reviewed in the present batch is to enable the
squatters to evade bearing their just share of the
public burthen. They have escaped for the first
year at a hundred and fifty thousand pounds
less rent than the Board of Land and Works
assessed them at; if they can continue the same
remission for nine years, they will have gained
more than a million and a quarter sterling among
twelve hundred persons; and the rest of the
community will have to pay that much more to
the revenue, if our expenditure continues at the
same rate. What a tremendous crop of fallacies
million and a quarter to be gained !
XV. The agricultural portion of the Act
has failed, but that is no reason for touching
the pastoral portion.
The Act was a compromise; a balance of in-
terests like the British Constitution, which, 10
work well required mutual good faith. The
squatter got his run secured to him without
competition from farmers who wanted little
runs, or merchants who wanted new invest-
ments ; the farmer, on the other hand, was to
get his farm at a fixed price without comp -.tilion
from the squatter. The agricultural portion of
the Act has failed, because (and only because)
the squatter, the moment he had his tenure
secured, conspired to violate the provisions of
the Act intended to protect the farmer. It has
failed, because the bad faith of certain squatters
made it fail. The present prayer of the squatters
is, that having succeeded in defrauding their
neighbours they may be permitted to make
their own wrong an argument and justification
for new aggressions. The answer is a simple
and coraple’e one —“ You purchased security
against the auction of your runs by promising
certain advantages to other classes; but you
have not paid the price agreed upon, and the
bargain is therefore at an end.”
XVI. All squatters ought not to be punished
for the faults of the few.
Certainly not. It is not proposed to punish
anybody, but an arrangement made for the
public benefit, not having worked well for that
end, requires to be changed. The arrangement
was not made for the good of squatters, but for
the good of the public; and it is not proposed to
change it for the punishment of squatters, but
for the advantage of the community. The Eng-
lish Corn Laws were not repealed to punish
landowners, but to cheapen the necessaries of
life; and the Australian lands ought to be made
available for settlement, and subject to a suffi-
cient rent in the meantime, not to punish squat-
ters, but to increase the population and prosperity
of the country.
XVII. Pastoral leases for a given period ,
having been promised by the Act , it is necessary
to heep the promise, whatever the squatters
may have done.
This fallacy is deeply rooted and w’dely spread ;
having been very carefully planted by pastoral
politicians. It will surprise many readers to
learn that there are no leases under the Land
Act, only yearly licenses; and that instead of


promises of this nature being made, the licenses we come to the auction of runs, there will not be
were granted with the most unequivocal warn-
ing that they created no new privilege or advan-
tage whatever. The section which grants them
declares that a pastoral license “shall net confer
any great r privilege upon the person to whom
the same shall be issued, than licenses to occupy
for pastoral purposes have hi herto conferred.”
“ Hitherto ” they conferred a tenure from
year to year. The intention of the framers of
the laws is to be gathered from their own decla-
rations to P 'iliament. Mr Duffy, who intro-
duced the measure, declared that no fixed tenure
was confe. red; and this point being disputed by
the Opposition, Mr O’Shanassy, the head of the
Administration, reiterated it still more emphati-
cally. Parliament is entitled to alter the con-
ditions of the holding, or to terminate it abso-
lutely at pleasure.
XVIII. Possession of the runs for nine years
at the present rental is expressly provided by
the act.
This fallacy is believed by nine men out of
ten, and yet it is without any substantial foun-
dation in fact. What the Land Act declares
and provides is that the present tenure and the
entire land system a? it at present exists must
terminate at the end of the year 1870—seven
years hence. It cannot last longer, but it may
end much sooner; may end indeed at any
moment Parliament thinks proper. That it
probably would be altered, was plainly in the
contemplation of the legislature; for the 121st
section of the act makes provision for such an
occurrence, and declares that in such an event,
one class of the community must be considered
as having had full notice of such intention from
the beginning. The section is in these
words :
“ CXXI. No occupier of land for pastoral
purposes shall be entitled to any compensation
by reason of this act being hereafter repealed or
altered.”
It requires a prodigious amount of intrepidity
in the face of such a provision as this to aifirm
that the act is unalterable and the tenure secured
for nine years.
XIX. The late Government attempted to
inflict an excessive rent on the squatters.
It may be fairly assumed that in valuing
twelve hundred runs in a few months, the gen-
tlemen entrusted with the duty must have made
some mistakes. If they made twelve mistakes
out of the twelve hundred valuations, it is more
than has ever been proved, but quite enough for
the purpose of those wh > had a million and a
quarter to gain by blinking the truth. When
a dozen in the colony let lower than the valua-
tion of the board. That the amount proposed
to be levied on pastoral lands was, in the main,
just and moderate is demonstrable. The “ ex-
cessive rent” complained of only charged the
squatters at the rate of seven millions of sheep,
as the grazing capability of the thirty-seven
millions of acres which they hold; or more than
five acres on the average was allowed to ea h
sheep; while on their purchased land less than
one acre feeds a sheep. The “ excessive rent”
was so considerately distributed, that little over
two millions of acres was assessed as “first
class” pastoral country ; less than three and a-
half millions of acres as second class, while
twenty millions of acres were placed in the third
and fourth classes, and over eleven millions of
acres relieved from assessment as "at present
unava lable.”
XX. The number of appeals plainly proves
that the rent was too high.
The number of appeals merely proves that
the appellants confidently expected to effect a
reduction by some means or other; not
that they were entitled to it. A fair
test of the capability of a run ought to be
the oivner’s own estimate of it. Taking up the
file of Melbourne papers for the last year or two
we find many of the identical runs, from which
there have been appeals, advertised for sale; and
here are a few which will enable us to compare
what the owner says his run will carry when he
wants to sell it, with what the Board of Land and
Works estimated it to carry; and also with what
the arbitrators were induced to declare its highest
grazing capability.
Cases where the advertised grazing capabilities of
Stations, when offered tor sale by tire proprietor*,
is greater than that fixed by the Boat d, and greatly
in excess of that awarded by the Arbitrators.
Name of Euo.
Board’
Esti-
mate.
s Owners’
Arbi-
trators’
Award.
She^p.
Sheep.
Sheep.
Mountain Creek
Emu Springs and Ta’ong
Mount Camel .. ..
Reedy Lake
Maiden Hills .. ..
The Ben
Wonga Lake
Burra-buira
Knebs worth
Louth
Kamarooka, or Piccaninnj
Creek
Sandy Creek
Glenburnie
If the arbitrators’
what is to be said of
awards fix the rent fairly
the ovvuer’s estimate of the


prooerty he wanted to sell. If the owners’ nine years! In other cases they made deductions
estimate be honest, what is to be said of the
awards.
XXI —lt was “ repudiation ”to reject the
decision of the arbitrators legally appointed
under the Act.
If so, the present grovernment are repudiators
as well as the last. The arbitrators gave them-
selves exactly twice the amount of fees they
were entitled to; Mr Duffy refused to pay more
than half the sum claimed; and Mr Heales has
carried this decision into effect by paying them
with ten shillings in the pound of their original
demand. The “ costs’’ form an essential element
of an award, but t hey have been set aside by com-
mon consent as unjust and untenable. Is it
“ repudiation ” to assume that gentlemen may
have made mistakes against the state in their
valuations’ who made such an egregious
mistake against the state in their costs ? Again,
the arbitrators fixed the rent of runs lower than
the assessment passed in 1862, contrary to the
Act; Mr Duffy refused to ratify these awards;
and the Supreme Court has condemned them as
contrary to law. It was denounced as “repu-
diation ” in the debate in which the government
were overthrown to refuse these identical awards
which have since proved not only inequitable
but illegal.
XXII. The Government were bound to
accept the aivards when once they were
made.
Not necessarily. If there had been fraud, for
example, it vitiates all contracts; and if there be
no fraud, gross carelessness or manifest and
flagrant injustice has the same effect. The
question sent to arbitration, practically, was
what increased rent the squatters ought to pay
in return for a more secure tenure, and the
right of compensation for certain improvements.
The arbitratois were directed and sworn to
ascertain the absolute “ grazing capabilities ” of
each run. In multitudes of cases they returned
the highest grazing capability as less (sometimes
as thirty, forty, or fifty per cent, less) than the
runs had been paying for years ! In other cases,
where the run had been partly unavailable till
the power of making improvements had been
granted by the act, it was their duty to ascertain
the highest grazing capability under the new
conditions; an I they declared that not more
than a third, a fourth, or even a fifth of a run
ought to pay rent; the remainder to be exempt for
for purchased land, which the act provided,
another agency for deducting, and which in
many instances has since been deducted over
again by the squatter.
XXIII. 7he Government rejected the
awards of thiir oicn arbitrators.
In many of the worst cases the arbitrator
appointed by the Government was no party to
the award, having peremptorily refused to sign
it. The arbitrators appointed by the squatter
and the County Court Judge, when they con-
curred, constituted a majority, and were capable
of making a legal award without him.
XXIV. The proposal of the late Govern-
ment to return to the system of assessment
amounted to “repudiation ,”
Let us see if it did. The return to assessment
would have compelled the squatters to pay upon
the stock actually depastured, and no more;
the Land Act declared that they were to pay
up®n the highest “ grazing capabilities” of their
runs. Now, as the stock the runs actually
carried could not possibly be in excess of their
grazing capabilities, it follows as a necessary
consequence that the change could not inflict
any injustice upon them. This impudent
fallacy was invented to excuse those who had
got an advantage unfairly, and were determined
to keep it. There has undoubtedly been repu-
diation; but it was committed by men who
secured an improved tenure, and the right of
compensation for improvement by undertaking
to pay a higher rent, and now successfully evade
that undertaking.
XX V. It teas, besides, a violation of public
faith.
“ Always, my son,” says Augustus Tomlin-
son in “ Paul Clifford,” always shelter yourself
behind some imposing name or some venerable
institution. If your lay tithes are called
in question insist that the Church is
in danger; if your sinecure place be me.
naced, bawl out that the Throne is under-
mined; if you would sell your green groceries at
a profit, imitate, if possible, the sagacious Mus-
sulman, who tenders his figs in the name of the
Prophet.” And he adds, we believe, for we
quote from memory, “ If you would get the ad-
vantage of the State in a bargain, be sure to de-
clare that to refuse your demand would be a
gross violation of the public faith !”
PRINTED BY R. STEWART, “ HERALD ” PASSAGE, BOURKE STREET BAST.


m>
bi&UO
f Udo 7


3 1508 01667571 7


