

' < \ »>
\ J> v 5
tlX
"• jO
S^NVv \
J dB
\ ' :
agm. «BP»8BSmB»w. " *■ - ’ *T\ * *">,'% ~ *■ \
f ■ - . ’i/
X I.-’~.V: ; -:: U „ • '• --'V- :") ] *' j
/ I y /■:. yC'v‘; ~y o&i'cyp - -yyjjiSßfea / «|&i
I. ■ v -
■V •
H


j\v v


Foamo Bubblo


Dedication
TO MY NIECE MARGARET
I am indebted to Hazel Holland for writing the
verse in this book.
H.A.
First Edition, September, 1942.
(Copyright)
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Pinnacle Press,
431 B Kent Street, Sydney.
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney, for transmission by post
as a book


kj mM&o j
AlDERS0^^/x\
J / __ b«j N \ \
p tGGY OLDfltlO
FRANK JOHNSON
350 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY


ip : - p
J V ' \ 'i
“Elizabeth Found The Horizon”


FOAMO BUBBLO
CHAPTER I.
O YOU believe in fairies? Elizabeth did.
She was just like every other happy little girl, playing
on the beach, and splashing in the sea with her play-
mates.
The beach was a place of never ending surprises. On the
rocks, where they played hide and seek, were all kinds of queer
little shell fish. They clung to the rocks so tightly, that it was
quite useless trying to make them leave their homes.
Elizabeth made up all kinds of stories about them, giving
each one a fairy name.
For had not her Mumsie told her not to hurt them, as a tiny
fairy lived in each one.
Then there were the little sun warmed pools nestling in
the rocks, making prickles of delight run up and down her back
when she paddled in them.
The crabs did not like being disturbed and made Elizabeth
squeal with fright, as they hurried away out of the quiet pool,
with their funny one sided run.
Elizabeth lived in a big comfortable cottage, surrounded
by a beautifully kept garden, which was the pride of her Mumsie.
One important lesson Elizabeth's Mumsie had taught her
was never to pull a flower up by the roots, because fairies live in


Elizabeth Makes Friends With The Boat Builder


flowers too and if you hurt them they die, and that would never,
never do. She spent hours peering into the flowers, trying her
very hardest to see a fairy.
As far back as Elizabeth could remember, she had
wondered what was over the edge of the horizon. Her Mumsie
had told her, "sea, and more sea." Her Mumsie was never
wrong, but somehow Elizabeth could not help a small doubt
creeping into her mind. If only she could see for herself, every-
thing would be so much easier. "Do you think I might have just
one little peep over?" asked Elizabeth very earnestly. Mumsie
had laughed, and promised that when she was older she could.
"I am sure I would find fairies there—lots and lots of them" —
Elizabeth had thought.
She worried about getting there so much that she did not
bother to look for the flower fairies any more, and spen-H all
her playtime down on the beach, which was only a few yards
from her home, gazing day after day at the horizon.
There was a nice boat-builder with whom Elizabeth had
made friends, and sometimes he let her help him do odd jobs
on the boats. He was such a nice person with whom to talk,
and when she asked him if there were fairies in the sea, he had
scratched his head thoughtfully, while Elizabeth waited in sus-
pense. If they were anywhere, he said, he was sure she would
find them there. Elizabeth had been delighted.
fHE SUN beat down on a sea that rolled and stretched
far into the blue horizon. Little Elizabeth walked slowly
into the boat shed. It had been much too hot sitting
on the beach. She found the boat builder too busy to
talk, so she sat for a while in the shade.
At the en d of the wharf a small dinghy bobbed up and
down. Elizabeth liked the boat, it looked so lonely waiting,
and it seemed almost to be asking her to sit in it. So, after
looking around, and making sure there was no one in sight, she
hurried down to it as fast as her sturdy brown little legs would
carry her. The dinghy rocked a lot, but at last she was seated,
feeling very brave and important.


It was such a nice little boat. She had a funny feeling
that it liked having her there, and, strange to say, it seemed to
be straining to get away! "Creak, creak," went the rope.
After a long serious look at the knot on the end of the rope,
Elizabeth shook her head, "It would be naughty if I let you
loose," she said out aloud. "Creak, creak," went the rope, it
sounded like, "free me, free me." She looked across the sea,
and somehow the edge touching the sky seemed much closer.
"So near," thought Elizabeth "I am sure I could row to it," and
ihen in some mysterious fashion, the knot was untied. "I did
not think it would be so easy," she thought guiltily.
The oars were heavy, they made a dreadful splash, and
away she sped merrily, the sea pushing the boat along.
"It's very tiresome," thought Elizabeth. "I do not seem
to get any nearer to the edge." The gulls perched on top of
some moored launches stared at her inquisitively with their
bright beady eyes, and the sun became hotter and hotter,
making Elizabeth fee! sleepy. Her hands, too, were sore, and
the oars felt too heavy to hold. "I think I will rest awhile," she
said to herself, yawning and nodding her head drowsily.


The Old Man of The Sea
CHAPTER 11.
LIZABETH stared in surprise, for right in front of her was
a very old man, sitting on a wall of blue glass, with golden
sunlight shining through It, while the sea foamed against
It, spreading out as it fell back like beautiful white lace.
"Who are you? and where am I?" gasped Elizabeth, her
large brown eyes opening very wide with surprise.
"Did you not want to come here?" asked the Old Man.
"Oh, yes!" said Elizabeth, "this must be the horizon."
"Yes, the edge of the world," said the Old Man, his blue
eyes twinkling, and his long while beard billowing out in front
of him.
"You must be the Old Man of the Sea," said Elizabeth
wisely.
"Quite right. You have been a long time coming to visit
us, little girl. It has been many years since a mortal believed
in us," and the Old Man of the Sea sighed deeply, causing a
terrible booming noise.
"May I look over the edge?" asked Elizabeth, taking her
fingers out of her ears. The sigh had died down, and Elizabeth
saw a funny little person running madly away along the wall.
As it ran, it became smaller and smaller.
"Who is that funny little person?" Asked Elizabeth.
"That is the Echo," said the Old Man of the Sea, "he was
much bigger a second ago."
"I would like to see him again," said Elizabeth.
"He won't like it," answered the Old Man of the Sea, "but
I will bring him back," and he heaved a tremendous sigh.
Instantly from nowhere appeared the largest and saddest
looking person she had ever seen echoing Ah-hh, and, as the
sigh boomed back, it started to run, once again getting smaller
and smaller, its queer transparent little body disappearing
altogether in a smoky haze.


“That must be little Sir Echo," said Elizabeth. "Please do
not sigh too often, it must make the Echo sad."
“I will try and laugh next time, but it is such a nice comfort-
able feeling to sigh," said the Old Man of the Sea, covering
his mouth hastily with his hand and just in time stopping another
sigh.
"I wish you would let me look over the edge," said Elizabeth
again, just a tiny bit impatiently this time.
“Will not your Mother be worrying about you?" asked
the Old Man of the Sea.
“If I am not home for dinner she will," answered Elizabeth,
“is it nearly time? Perhaps it might be better if I were to
come back later?"
No," said the Oid Man of the Sea. "I am afraid that
it would be too late. You see the glasses on the end of your
nose will have grown smaller and smaller, and so by the time
you return, you will not be able to see through them any more."
“My goodness," said Elizabeth, looking down her nose,
and sure enough, there they were, perched on the end of it,
such pretty ones of pale pink glass.
"Do not touch them," said the Old Man of the Sea, as
Elizabeth put up her hands to take them off. "You must leave
them on as long as they will stay there; without them, you will
turn into just another ordinary little girl."
"I do not want to wait any longer," said Elizabeth, "let me
come over now."
"Very well," said the Old Man of the Sea.
Then the little boat began to rock crazily, and the sea
whirled and hissed against the wall; in fact everything went
topsyturvy. Elizabeth thought she was flying through the air,
and then suddenly she sat down with an awful bump, and, lo!
everything was calm and sunny again, and there she was sitting
beside the Old Man of the Sea on the lovely wall at the edge
of the world.
"Oh! Oh! How beautiful," sighed Elizabeth. And sure
enough who should appear, but little Sir Echo, sighing in front


of her. He was smaller this time, because Elizabeth's sigh was
softer than that of the Old Man of the Sea.
He was dressed in a misty grey suit, which did not seem
to have any beginning or any ending, and somehow he looked
to Elizabeth like a stick of candy that was fast melting away.
He was really a strange looking person. Ah-h-h he sighed, and
looking at her reproachfully, he ran off, faster and faster, as
though he was trying to catch some part of himself which had
already melted away.


Over The Horizon
CHAPTER
COKING down quickly, Elizabeth thought
something had tickled her on the leg.
JjM Sure enough, something had; the prettiest
|iff|e people imaginable were playing around
her feet. They were even playing hidings in the
Old Man of the Sea's beard!
"Who are, you?" called Elizabeth.
"We are the foam fairies," they chorused back. They
were having lots of fun, jumping high up in the air, and tickling
the pink toes of fat fluffy cloud-babies, whose big saucer eyes
were the color of the bluest sky.
"Stop tickling us," they screamed in cloudy voices, as they
tumbled and scuttled past each other, but the foam fairies were
having too much fun to stop, and tickled harder than ever.
"They will have laughed themselves pink in the face by
sunset," said the Old Man of the Sea.
"Will they be sick?" asked Elizabeth.
"Oh, no, that will not hurt them, it is when they go grey
and black in the face, and start crying, that they annoy me. The
wind fairy, their brother, rushes out of his home in a bad temper,
and gives the naughty foam fairies a nasty beating; he has no
sense of humor at all," said the Old Man of the Sea, shaking
his head sadly.
"Stop!" cried Elizabeth, just in time. The Old Man of the
Sea closed his mouth on a very large sigh. He looked apolo-
getically at Elizabeth.
"It is time you started on your travels in sea land," he
said, clapping his hands loudly.
Elizabeth saw little Sir Echo in the distance clapping his
hands furiously —the claps pealed back and forth like thunder.
Then she had a nasty fright, as a low penetrating growl
sounded near her, and, looking down timidly, she saw the
queerest little dog gnawing savagely at her shoe.
"Stop it at once, Pluto!" shouted a voice, and a little man,


dressed in a suit of green, ran lightly up the face of the wall
with a cap of foam on his head.
He greeted Elizabeth by calling out cheerfully, "Hello,
ittle mortal."
"You do not have to call me little," said Elizabeth primly.
"I am much bigger than you are."
"Now, now, no arguments," warned the Old Man of the
Sea. "This is Sea O Foam, he is going to look after you."
While the Old Man of the Sea was talking, Sea O Foam
was turning somersaults backwards, then disappearing behind
a fo am bubble fairy and reappearing with his mouth full of foam,
which he blew out in streams of frothy bubbles. Pluto, his sea
dog, was jumping in the air excitedly, snapping at the frothy
gusts, as they blew past his wet little nose.
"That is the funniest dog I have ever seen. Fancy having
a tail just like a fish; it looks so silly when it wags," remarked
Elizabeth.
"He is a very smart dog," said Sea O Foam with dignity,
blowing foam right into her eyes.
"Oh dear!" cried Elizabeth, "I cannot see, you nasty little
man," and she toppled blindly into the sea.
Down, down, she dropped until her feet touched the
bottom. Feeling safe again, she looked around her. The sight
that met her eyes was very frightening. Everywhere as far as
she could see were trees, tali, dark green ones, with their thick
willowy branches floating In the water, and, as the heavy deep
sea pressed against them they sighed and whispered to each
other. Queer dark fish peered down at her, as they swam
lazily among the branches.
"Goodness," she breathed, "this is horrid."
"What is horrid?" asked a flat little voice.
"This nasty forest," said Elizabeth,
peering around. "Where are you?" she
asked after an uneasy pause..
And sure enough there was someone.
vab bumeone. \
"Right beside you."


■ ■ „
\Q C
7 , "
Down She Dropped Amongst The Foam Paries


\\
’’You look like a shadow," said Elizabeth, "I can see right
through you."
"I am one," said the sad flat voice.
"We all are, yes," seeing the puzzled look on Elizabeth s
face. "There are hundreds of us; we are called the Shadow
Dwarfs."
"What do you do?" asked Elizabeth.
"We keep the bottom of the sea tidy, and see that all
the mortals who visit us find their way to Davey Jones Locker —
sometimes they don't want to go there."
Just then there was a deafening squawk, right in her ear.
Elizabeth jumped high in the water with fright, and as she floated
down again, the Shadow Dwarf said, "You scare very easily,
it was only a parrot fish."
"Scarey, scarey," said a harsh voice from above. Looking
up, Elizabeth saw the parrot fish perched in a tree.
"You did not frighten me," said Elizabeth. "I tripped."
"I will nip your ear this time," squawked the parrot fish,
making a rush at her.
"Please don't. Oh, please don't. Stop him!" she screamed
to the Shadow Dwarf.
"You should not have told a fib, it's very naughty. Say
you are sorry," he said indifferently.
The parrot fish stopped abruptly in front of her, its eyes
blinking wickedly.
"I am sorry," said Elizabeth. "I will not do it again."
"Very well, I forgive you," said the parrot fish. He looked
disappointed. "I think a nip would
the same, don't you?" he asked the
"Perhaps she will be good now,"
Dwarf.
have done you good just
Shadow Dwarf.
answered the Shadow
Grumbling, the parrot fish swam off.
"You must come with me now," said the Shadow Dwarf
"I have a lot of cleaning to do. Hurry, lam
going to put you in 'Davey Jones Locker.' "
"But I do not want to be put there," cried
Elizabeth, and she ran off.
"Come back," called the Shadow Dwarf.
15


“Elizabeth, Elizabeth” Called The Shadow Dwarfs


Escape
CHAPTER IV.
S ELIZABETH ran her legs grew heavy and slow; it was
I an awful feeling.
Tckl "Goodness," she thought, "I cannot run very fast."
Then she saw a funny little house, such a queer shape,
quite big at the bottom and growing smaller and smaller as it
went up, curling round and round, spiral after spiral, just like
some shells Elizabeth had gathered on the beach at home. The
shell house had a big front door and dozens of little windows,
all shapes and sizes.
To her dismay, the door would not close. Goodness, she
thought, where can I hide. Each room she ran into was just
the same; the doors would not close. I'll lock the windows, she
thought, but there were neither glass nor locks on any of them.
What a strange house, she thought, what ever can I do.
Peeping out she saw hundreds of shadowy little figures
slipping through the sea; some had brooms in their hands and
some with bags on their backs. They looked pale and eerie
in the dark still water as they grimly massed in front of the little
house. Then in a weird chorus they called:
"Come out, Elizabeth, and be put to bed in 'Davey Jones
Locker'. Come quickly, Elizabeth, Elizabeth!"
"What ever will I do, I do not want to be put to bed, and
1 do not think I should like 'Davey Jones Locker,' " said Elizabeth
aloud. And she sat down in despair on a box.
"Get off me this instant," cried an angry voice.
"Good gracious!" said Elizabeth, jumping up.
And Willie the box fish swam around her in high dis-
approval.
"Did you sit on me purposely?"
"Oh , no," said Elizabeth, "I thought it was just an ordinary
box. I would not have done it if I had' known it was you," and
she started to cry.
"Hmm," grunted Willie the box fish, "there is no need to


( -
' 1 j
“What Shall I Do,” Wept Elizabeth
18


upset yourself like that; you did not hurt me. little girl. Do
stop crying."
"They want to put me in 'Davey Jones Locker,' " said
Elizabeth, starting to sob afresh.
"Who are they?" asked Willie the box fish.
"The Shadow Dwarfs. I do not want to go with them,"
said Elizabeth tearfully.
"Oh," said Willie the box fish, closing his eyes and thinking
deeply.
"Elizabeth! Elizabeth!" called the Shadow Dwarfs. "We
are coming to get you."
"What shall I do?" pleaded Elizabeth. "Do help me,
Willie box fish," she wept, wringing her small hands.
Willie box fish opened his eyes, and said, "I can hide you
in my box."
"Can you?" asked Elizabeth, wonderingly, as she lifted the
lid. "Do you think I can fit in it, it looks very small?"
"That is all right," assured Willie box fish. "Get in." And,
sure enough, it was,quite large inside and, as Elizabeth dropped
the lid on top of herself, she sighed with relief.
She rolled from side to side when Willie, box fish swam
off, and giggled softly as she heard the Shadow Dwarfs calling
In their flat sad voices, "Elizabeth! Elizabeth! Where are you?
Davey Jones Locker is waiting for you." But gradually their
voices grew fainter and fainter, until they faded away
altogether
I will always like box fish now, thought Elizabeth, but Willie
will be my favourite.
Then there was a great commotion.
Elizabeth felt herself going around and
around in a circle. There was a lot of
furious barking and snuffling and she heard
a voice she knew. Then the lid was lifted
and Sea O Foam popped his angry face
in; he was puffing and blowing streams of
foam bubbles out of his mouth.
19


"You have certainly given us an awful chase," he said. "If
it had not been for Pluto I would not have found you."
Elizabeth was delighted to see them.
"I am so sorry," she said, "but I could not help it."
"Do not scold her," said Willie box fish, "she has been very
frightened."
"Yes," said Elizabeth, her words tumbling over each other
"The nasty Shadow Dwarfs wanted to put me in Davey Jones
Locker, but dear Willie box fish saved me," and she bent down
and kissed him on the gill. Willie blushed a bright pink with
pleasure.
"if you need me again I will be around," he said as he
swam off, weighed down with his box.
"Fancy having to carry a box all the time," said Elizabeth
thoughtfully.
"Oh, he does not mind. He is used to it," said Sea O
Foam. "Come on, we have to visit the Coral Fairies; they are
getting ready for the Sea Queen's Garden Party."
"Grr, Grr," growled .Pluto, making a wild dash at a cuttle
fish which was making faces at him. The little fish took fright
and disappeared into a crack in a rock, causing Pluto, who was
rushing blindly at it, head first, to hurt his
nose, which took all the fun out of the
game, so with his fin tail drooping he sulkily
paddled back to his master.
"That will teach you to behave," said
Sea O Foam. "Now come along


A Fish’s Tale
CHAPTER V.
fAKING ELIZABETH'S hand. Sea O Foam dived with her
into a wide opening. It was very hot and dark, and, just
when Elizabeth felt too hot to breathe, the air changed
and she found herself in a great hall. It was so long she
couldn't see where it ended. She was amazed to see that the
walls were made of glass mirrors, and swimming in front of them
were hundreds and hundreds of fish staring at their own
reflections with big fishy eyes. Just then Elizabeth saw a very
small fish swim swiftly along and press Its nose against the glass,
staring unblinkingly at its reflection. She opened her eyes in
astonishment as the little fish began to grow bigger and bigger;
and in a few seconds it was enormous.
"Oh," gasped Elizabeth, "I have not seen a fish do that
before."
Sea O Foam shrugged his shoulders.
"It is happening all the time here —you see, this is the fisher-
man's dream hall."
"Why do you call it that?"
"Well, it has been here since the beginning of time. Silly
mortals that fish in our land are alv/ays doing it."
"Doing what?" asked Elizabeth.
"Saying the fish they lose off their cruel fishing lines are so
much bigger than they really are. Their silly minds are always
exaggerating things."
"What does 'exaggerating' mean?" asked Elizabeth in a
puzzled fashion.
"Telling stories," said Sea O
Foam impatiently. "Look out!" he
cried excitedy. He was just in time.
The little fish had grown so big that
it was too much for him and with a
groan he blew up and burst with a
terrific bang.
21


Elizabeth was thrown up In the water, losing Sea O Foam
and Pluto in a mad rush as fish after fish streamed past her.
Some naughty fisherman told an awful story about that poor
little fish, she thought In dismay as she fought her way along:
at last she found herself in a sea garden with the sun slanting
through the water.
What a pretty place, thought Elizabeth. The flowering
Anemone were the colours of the rainbow; they clustered in
masses everywhere. She saw dozens of little people running
backwards and forwards, and galloping sea horses pulling clam
shell carts loaded with coral, with dwarfs driving.
"What are you staring at?" asked a little man, "we cannot
have lazy people here, you had better do some work. You
are very clumsy looking, but it cannot be helped. You are a
strange looking creature altogether."
Elizabeth felt very upset at the little, man's remarks, but,
without a word, took the shell bucket and seaweed brush he
thrust into her hands.
"This heap will do," said the little man, leading her to a
large pile of coral ready to be painted.
It was not easy. Elizabeth got paint on her face and hands,
but she painted bravely on, using too much paint and making
it run and drip off the coral in great big tears.
"I knew she would make a terrible mess of us," said a tiny
voice.
Elizabeth dropped the piece of coral she was painting, as
though it was a red hot coal, for dozens of little eyes were staring
at her.
t"She put paint in my eyes," squealed a
voice.
"Oh!" said Elizabeth, "How was I to know
you had eyes."
"Yes you did," shrilled all the pieces of
coral together. "You did it for spite," and they
cried louder than ever.
"You are horrid little creatures," Elizabeth
cried, tipping her bucket of paint all over them.
"Yes you did," shrilled all the pieces of
coral together. "You did it for spite," and they
cried louder than ever.
"You are horrid little creatures," Elizabeth
cried, tipping her bucket of paint all over them.


—7
. <•■ ~rw»-* -
i •"*****f**———
ag «* ,,,r » «■■—- ■'■"■' 0 y C
Dozens Of Little Eyes Were Staring At Elizabeth


"That will teach you not to tell stories," she snapped, as
she walked away, with her head held high in the water.
"That was not a nice thing to do," said some coral fairies
as they hurried by. "You do not seem to be able to paint very
well, so you had better help us. Come on, hurry," they pushed
her in front of them.
"Where are you taking me?" asked Elizabeth.
"We are going to get some more paint," they told her,
halting in front of a row of sleek flying fish. One coral fairy,
mounting his steed, turned to Elizabeth and said, "You had
better get on behind me." Then he helped her up.
"Hold tight," he called and off they flew, up, up and up
out of the sea right into the sunrise, which was a glory of red,
gold, pinks and blues, with splashes of violet and mauve.
Elizabeth held her breath with delight.
"Fill this," said the little man, giving her a bucket and ladle.
Elizabeth saw the other little men digging big spoonfuls
of color out of the sunrise, and dropping it into their buckets, so
she began digging with all her might.
"Don't mix your colors," shouted a coral fairy, as Elizabeth
dropped a spoonful of red into her bucket, which she had been
filling with blue.
"Oh!" she gasped, "I am so sorry."
"Then watch what you are doing," the others cried.
"My bucket is full," said Elizabeth with pride.
"You are the last," grumbled the little fairy, and turning
his flying fish towards the sea, they flew swiftly back to the coral


id ' X// M
Hold Tight Called The Coral Fairy And Away They Flew


Elizabeth walks into Trouble
CHAPTER VI.
TTING on a rock were Sea O Foam and Pluto, patiently
awaiting Elizabeth's return.
I) "I am having such a lovely time," she laughed, as she
greeted them.
The coral fairies had been busy before, but now they were
even busier; their faces were coral red from hurrying. By now
the coral garden was just about finished, and they only had to
light it up with the Star fish.
"Lovely! Oh, so lovely! isn't it?" said Elizabeth to Sea
O Foam.
He did not hear her; being too busy watching Pluto, who
was delightedly wagging his fintail, as he licked the paint off the
weeping coral babies.
"You bad little dog fish," cried Elizabeth, grabbing him
up in her arms. Pluto did not like her holding him a bit, and
he wriggled and squirmed. So, unable to hold him any longer,
she dropped him, and away he paddled, barking as he went.
"Pluto does not like being held, it hurts his pride," said
Sea O Foam.
"Where is his pride?" asked Elizabeth.
"I do not really know," said Sea O Foam doubtfully, "but
you hurt it just the same," and he turned and walked away.
"Oh!" said Elizabeth thoughtfully, and again "Oh!"
"Are you not going to dress for the Fairy Queen's garden
party?" asked a coral fairy.
"I have not anything else to wear," said Elizabeth.
"Oh, well," said
the coral fairy, "you will
have to do, but do not
let her see you; she x T
would not like your »
frock; it's not very || v|,


Pluto Wriggled And Squirmed


pretty, and you see, she only likes beautiful things. 11
"But I can look at her, can't I?" asked Elizabeth with tears
in her eyes. Had she only known, she could have worn her
best party frock.
"This is not my best dress," said Elizabeth humbly, but the
fairy had gone.
think I will go for a walk," thought Elizabeth
Off she went down a long narrow coral path; on reaching
the end of it she saw a rock door, and going up to it she knocked.
There was no answer, so, after waiting for a moment, she timidly
opened it. And found herself in an orchard of sea apple trees.
To Elizabeth's surprise, she read on each apple, "An apple a
day keeps sickness away."
Mumsie taught me that, fancy them knowing way down here,
she thought, as she pulled an apple off the tree to eat, but it
did not taste like the apples she was used to, so she supposed
fairy apples were different. As she swallowed the last mouth-
ful she saw the funniest thing, an old woman sitting up in an
apple tree, with long white hair and a tall black hat; Elizabeth
expected it to fall off at any moment.
"Why are you sitting up there?" she asked.
"I can sit where I please," snapped the old woman
"Of course you can," said Elizabeth stepping back
nervously. "You are the Witch?" she said, for something to
say.
"Tee Tee, Hee Hee," chuckled the Witch, "so you know
who I am? I thought you had forgotten me," and she rocked
herself backwards and forwards with delight.
"I remember you," said Elizabeth. "You are in lots of
my story books."
"You must come and sit with me," said the Witch, beckon-
ing her with one long bony finger.
"Don't," whispered a voice.
Elizabeth was surprised to see sitting on her right shoulder
a beautiful little fairy, with a crown of gold on her head.
"Do," said another voice, and looking at her left shoulder,


Elizabeth saw an ugly little elf, who was making hideous faces
at the good fairy.
"Even if I wanted to, I would not do anything you told me
now; you are a rude little man," said Elizabeth haughtily.
The Elf doubled himself up with laughter.
"Ho! Ho! listen to Miss Goody. Do you know?" he said
peering right up into her face, so close that the hair growing
straight up on his head tickled her nose, making her sneeze
violently.
"Do I know what?" spluttered Elizabeth.
"Ho! Ho!" laughed the bad fairy. "You do not know.
Well, you have done lots of things I have told you to do. It ,s
a pity 1 let you see me, it has turned you against me, though
why I cannot tell."
The good fairy shook her head sadly, as an angry sound
of protest broke from Elizabeth's lips.
"He is quite right, Elizabeth, you listen to him and take
his advice more often than you take mine."
"Then I won't any more," said Elizabeth, "I really do
promise."
"Thank you," said the good fairy and smiling she dis-
appeared. And turning a somersault, the bad fairy put out
his tongue at Elizabeth and shook himself into nothing.
"Come here at once," called the V/itch.
"I will not," said Elizabeth, "I never did like you."
"I will make you," cried the Witch, working herself up into
a fury. And she started to chant a spell over Elizabeth.
Beneath the full round moon I fly
And weave the spell of the magic eye
I stir my stew of the witch's brew
And watch for fat little girls like you
One two!
One two!
Watch for fat little girls like you


The bark is smooth and the apples sweet
Just fit for a fat little girl to eat
I stir my stew and wait for you
To do what the greedy mortals do
One two!
One two!
Watch for fat little girls like you.
Trying her very hardest not to move, she was drawn slowly,
slowly towards the witch; she was getting quite close, when
there was a rush and a wild flurry and a mad whirl of legs and
arms, and, to Elizabeth's relief, the witch disappeared. In her
place was a long thin worried looking man; in fact, everything
about him was long and thin, even his ears. They grew right
up the sides of his head, ending in sharp points
As he jumped down from the crab apple tree,
he said as if talking to himself.
"She is such a nuisance, I am always having
trouble with her," as he spoke he
bag a little higher on to his back.
moved a large
"What did you do with her?"
curiously.
asked Elizabeth
"Do with whom?" asked the man, looking at
Elizabeth for the first time.
"The witch of course," said Elizabeth.
"I put her back in my bad deed bag, but I
won't be able to keep her there for long, for she
always manages to get out. How, I
he said crossly.
do not know,"
"Have you many bad deeds in
your bag?"
asked Elizabeth.
"Hundreds, and hundreds," said
the man, "it
is getting that way my bag will not be big enough
to hold them a
Collector."
am tired of being the Bad Deeds
"Then why don't you stop?" asked Elizabeth.
"Tut, tut," cried the man, "I must be off, there
is another bad deed giving trouble,
will have to
30


catch it." And off he ran, as fast as his long thin legs would
carry him.
"I will try not to do any bad deeds which worry you," called
Elizabeth as she waved goodbye, but he was too far away to
hear her.
"What are you doing now?" asked Sea O Foam. As he
appeared in front of her, he kicked Pluto who was playfully
gnawing the leg of his sea green trousers. Pluto sat down
hurriedly on his fin tail, licking the kicked spot, at the same
time casting a baleful eye at his master.
Just then Elizabeth felt a bump on her head, and looking
up she saw, red, yellow, and green sea apples falling off the
trees; every second more fell all around her.
"Hurray!" shouted Sea O Foam, "it is raining apples." It
ooked so pretty but it hurt too much to stay, so off she ran
after Sea O Foam.
"Goodness," he said when they
were safely out of the orchard, "I
have a dent in my foam cap," and sure
enough there was a big dent in the
side ot it, where a sea apple had hit
it.
"Never mind," said Elizabeth, "I
do not think anyone will notice it."
"I hope not," said Sea O Foam
glumly, "it is my only cap, I can-
not get a new one until I return
to Foamland."


A Sorrowful Party
CHAPTER VII.
HE CORAL garden was aglow with star fish lights, and
seated on a throne of pink coral was the Fairy Queen.
"She is just as I knew she would look," said Elizabeth
to Sea O Foam.
Her frock of the palest blue was covered in large gleaming
pearls, her golden hair shone like moonbeams, which fell on each
side of her lovely face, lit up by big green eyes; sad to say,
they were not very happy looking.
"The Fairy Queen does not look very gay, she has not
smiled once," said Elizabeth.
"We do not speak of it, but I can tell you, she has not
smiled for days," said Sea O Foam. "Not since her Fairy King
disappeared." She has all her subjects looking for him, but I
am afraid it is hopeless; he cannot be found."
"What do you think could have happened to him?" asked
Elizabeth.
"Perhaps he is enchanted, no one knows," said Sea O
Foam sadly. "! he court jester is having a very dull time, for he
is unable to make the Queen smile; even his best jokes fail."
"Which is the Jester?" asked Elizabeth, creeping over to
the throng, and peeping over a large sea Anemone.
"There he is," said Sea O Foam, pointing to a big Octopus,
sitting at the foot of the Fairy Queen's throne. "His name is
Glum Glum."
"A silly name for a Jester," said Elizabeth, and she noticed
that when he moved himself he tinkled.
"Why does he tinkle when he moves?" asked Elizabeth.
"Because he has got bells on his feelers, and shells in his
nose," whispered Sea O Foam.
"Ha, ha!" laughed Elizabeth alou d. Th ere was a nervous
scurry.
"Sh, sh," said Sea O Foam.


"I cannot stop," giggled Elizabeth and off she started
again: "Ha, ha, he, he!"
In a flash she was surrounded by fairy soldiers, in shining
fish scale armour. Taking her arms they dragged her before
the Fairy Queen.
"It is a noisy mortal," all the sea fairies cried, crowding
around her.
Glum Glum, the Jester, shook his bells, and solemnly
recited a piece of poetry, sidling up next to Elizabeth as he
did so.
A young man sat upon a wall
And sighed till his form grew thin and tall,
Such a great big sigh
That he grew so high
And lost his head in the noonday sky.
His brother rolled upon the ground
And laughed till his form grew fat and round
Such a burst of mirth
That it burst his girth
And scattered that man to the end of the earth.
Now one laughed too large and one too sma
But the worst is not to laugh at all
So our hearts beguile
For a little while
And we'll teach you the fairy way to smile
"That was quite clever, Glum Glum," said the Fairy Queen.
And all her subjects clapped their hands.
"That will do," she said. "Now little mortal, you should
not laugh so loudly, it is not very nice."
"I am sorry," said Elizabeth, hanging her head in shame.
"But Glum Glum, your Jester is so funny, please forgive mo."
Glum Glum shook his bells in approval.
"Very well," said the Fairy Queen, "I will
on you. Release her," she commanded the
pardon you. Release
soldiers.


Elizabeth was filled with joy at the Fairy Queen's kindness.
And she begged her permission to find the Fairy King.
"Little Mortal," said the Fairy Queen, "all my subjects
have failed. Perhaps you may succeed, but there may be
many dangers in front of you. Wear this ring, it will help you,"
she said, bending down and placing a big pearl ring on Eliza-
beth's fat brown finger.
"Oh, thank you," said Elizabeth excitedly, and amid cheers
from the Queen's subjects, she 1 bowed very low, and ran off,
with Sea O Foam and Pluto not far behind.
"Where will we look first?" asked Elizabeth.
"We had better ask the gulls," said Sea O Foam. So they
shot up to the surface.
Pluto got into mischief at once, chasing the white sea
horses, as they galloped along, with their white manes flowing
behind them.
"Flave you
shouted Sea O
flying overhead
"No," squawked the gulls
"You had better ask the Alba
tross, he knows everything."
So off they swam in
search of hlm
/
A


r
Jonah Greets The Traveller
CHAPTER VIII.
HAT IS a strange looking person," said
Elizabeth, pointing to a lonely grey fig-
ure sitting on a great rock, perched high
out ot the sea.
"That is winter waiting for spring; why he
waits for her no one knows, for she will not look
at him, or speak to him."
"Do not go near him," said Sea O Foam
hastily, as Elizabeth started off towards winter,
"he will freeze you to sleep, and even the Fairy
Queen's ring will not help you."
Just then, with a great blowing and spouting,
a whale heaved itself out of the water.
"Hello!" he groaned, "I am so miserable
and sick."
"What is the matter with you?" asked Eliz
abeth.
"it is that Jonah again," he wailed. "He is
spring cleaning inside me."
"My, how awful, but my Mumsie told me
Jonah got out ot your inside a long time ago."
"Oh, yes, he did," groaned the whale, "but
he got lonely, and came back to worry me. Oh!
Oh!" he moaned, "he is using the vacuum cleaner
now."
"What are you making all the fuss about?" ’
asked a voice, followed by a lean wiry man. \
dressed like a sailor.
That must be Jonah, thought Elizabeth.
"How are you?" asked Jonah, "I have not seen a morta
for hundreds of years."
"I think you are a very mean person," said Elizabeth, "to


Jonah Laughed As He Sat On The Whale


worry the poor whale the way you do."
The whale groaned in approval.
"He is only pretending," grinned Jonah. "He really likes
me inside him, for he would be very lonely without me. Now !
have made up a song about it, little girl. Would you like to
hear it?" and without waiting for her reply, he began:
I keep him all shining
I spring-clean his lining
To keep him from pining
I slip and I slide
When I leave his inside
He says that he hates me
That history dates me
How he aggravates me.
He'll grumble, he'll shout
He'll wriggle, he'll spout
But he likes me about
He says he won't take me,
Get off or he'll make me.
But he won't forsake me.
He's part of the sea
And they're both part of me
Oh, here is my whale
And he has a flat tail
And I use him to sail
O'er the Sea-O.
O'er the Sea-O.
As I polish his hide Together we'll be
O'er the Sea-O. O'er the Sea-O.
When the song ended he doffed his cap to Elizabeth and
hopped back into the whale's mouth. The whale groaned
aloud, blinking big salty tears out of its eyes.
"Go, go, mortal, I am too unhappy to have company," he
wept.
"We are looking for the Albatross," said Elizabeth, "so
we had better go. Goodbye, poor Mr. Whale."
"You will find him in the wake of a ship," said the whale,
as he ploughed and shook, and inwardly quailed.


Seeking The Albatross
CHAPTER IX.
HEN THE SUN went down, Elizabeth met the phos-
phorous fairies dancing on the water, quick shiny
little people, who slept all day, and played all night.
Their funny little moon-struck faces smiled at her.
They were very friendy, laughing and singing, and they played
hide and seek in her hair, and had wonderful fun tobogganing
down her back.
Sea O Foam grew tired of watching them, and encouraged
Pluto to chase them. He did not need much encouragement
and frightened them nearly out of their wits, when he snapped
at them and tried to swallow them.
"Here is the Star fisherman," they told Elizabeth, and she
saw a little old man pulling in a seaweed net.
"How many star babies have fallen tonight?" called the
phosphorus fairies, swinging on his fishing net.
"Only one," said the Star fisherman. "I will have to take
it back to its mother soon, it is making a terrible fuss."
"You poor little thing," said Elizabeth, gathering into her
arms a weeping fat bundle. Its pretty head was covered in
star dust curls, it was golden and dimpled. It soon stopped
crying, to stare, blinking its eyes at her and cooing.
So Elizabeth sang a song which her Mumsie had sung to
her, and the sea and the wind joined in. She was quite sad
when the Star fisherman took his little charge from her, and
rode away with it on a moonbeam to its mother.
"I would have loved to have kept it," said Elizabeth to
Sea O Foam, "it was such a beautiful baby."
"We have found the Albatross," cried Sea O Foam, and,
there sitting majestically on the rail of a big ship with the wind
singing in its sails, was the Albatross, its head tilted wisely on
one side.
"Did I hear my name mentioned?" he asked.
"Oh, Albatross," said Elizabeth clinging to a sea horse's


mane to keep herself out of the water. "We need your help,
you are so wise."
The Albatross meditated for a while then he said:
"What do you wish to know, little girl?"
"I am looking for the Fairy King. He has been lost for a
long time, and 1 promised the Fairy Queen I would find him for
her."
"Mm," said the Albatross, winking at her slyly, making
Elizabeth feel uncomfortable, for he looked such a wise old bird.
Then he said in a deep slow voice:
"From the magic realm of Fantasy
Deep in the Caverns of the Sea
Where the whirlpool ogres love to be."
Then he closed both eyes, and went to sleep.
"Come on," said Sea O Foam, "he will not tell us any
more, I think I know where he means."
"Do you think he meant that the Fairy King is down at the
bottom of the sea, lost In a cave?" asked Elizabeth. "I do not
like the sound of the Ogres." As she spoke she gave a
frightened shiver.
"If you are afraid," said Sea O Foam, with a shrug, "we
had better turn back."
"No, lam not," said Elizabeth, hastily. "Let us start at
■ i
once.
"Good luck," called the phosphorous fairies, dancing away
over the waves.
"Down we go, hold my hand," shouted Sea O Foam, and
with a splash they dived, with Pluto hanging grimly on to Eliza-
beth's frock with his teeth.


"You will fear it," she cried, but Pluto's hold became firmer
than ever, and before she could say "Jack Robinson," a huge
cave appeared in front of them, guarded on each side by a
huge sea lion.
Seeing the little search party, they roared and strained at
heavy chains that held them.
"Goodness!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "what are we going to
do now?"
"Wish on your ring," said Sea O Foam, "it might work."
"I wish," said Elizabeth, "they would turn Into little sea
cats."
And lo and behold! they shrank smaller and smaller, their
roars turning into faint meows.
"It has worked!" laughed Elizabeth gleefully, "the Sea
Lions are quite harmless now."
And Pluto, who was pressed, shaking with fear, against
Sea O Foam's legs, became quite bold, and swam from one
to another barking at them. Then they slipped through the
gloomy entrance of the cave in safety.


Mother Of Pearl And Her Babies


A Clue At Last
CHAPTER X.
HIS IS Mother of Pearl's Cavern," said Sea O Foam
Then Elizabeth found herself in a shiny pearl white
cave.
"It is just like a hospital," said Elizabeth.
There were rows and rows of oyster beds, and as Elizabeth
looked she saw in each little white bed a beautiful baby pearl
fast asleep.
"Do you like my babies?" asked a soft voice.
Elizabeth looked up, to see a tall white lady smiling at her.
"I am the Mother of Pearl," said the lady, "who are you,
little girl?"
"My name is Elizabeth," she answered, "and this is Sea O
Foam, and his clever dog Pluto."
"I have been having a very trying, time," the Mother of
Pearl said, "I cannot understand how it happened. This morn-
ing when I went to look at some of my new pearl babies, I found a
black one amongst them. A thing like that has not happened
for years. It is such a pity, as I will have to send it away; I can-
not have it mixing with my dear little white pearl babies."
"Where will you send it?" asked Elizabeth.
"Mother Odds and Ends will take care of it, that is her
duty."
"I have not heard of her before," said Elizabeth, "who is
she?"
"She looks after all the odd things in Sealand," said Mother
of Pearl. "Would you like to stay and help me, there are such
a lot of babies to mind?"
"I would like to very much," said Elizabeth, "but we must
find the Fairy King. May I come back another time?"
"Perhaps, we shall see," smiled Mother of Pearl. "Now it
is goodbye," and she hurried off to look after her babies.
"We will try this cave next," said Sea O Foam, and so it
began, in and out, one cave after another, dark caves, light


' f^ 1
caves, creepy caves, and crawly caves, until Elizabeth's sturdy
little legs began to feel ever so tired, and Pluto took to sitting
on his fin tail more often than was good for it, gazing at them
mournfully, as if to say, "When is this silly game going to stop?"
"I think we are lost," said Sea O Foam, casting an uneasy
glance at Elizabeth.
"Then we will never find the Fairy King," said Elizabeth,
"and—
A voice interrupted her:
"I can take you to the Fairy King if you do as I tell you."
Elizabeth jumped in surprise, "Who spoke?" she ques-
tioned. There was no one in sight. "Who was that?" she
whispered again to Sea O Foam.
"I cannot see anyone," said Sea O Foam running and
looking everywhere.
"It is no use looking for me," said the voice. "No one
sees me, lam the Sea's murmur. lam only whispering now, but
I grow stronger. People can hear me all over the world," the
voice rang with pride, "I always come down here to rest my
voice." 5 m- . i
"How did you find the Fairy King?" asked Elizabeth
excitedly.
"Well ," sai d the voice, "I was murmuring through the
caves when I found him. But do not waste time asking ques-
tions, he is in great trouble, even now you may be too late."
"Please help us to find him," begged Elizabeth. "We will
do anything you say, won't we, Sea O Foam?"
"Of course we will," he said impatiently.
"Well," said the voice, "you must stand on your head,
close your eyes very tightly, and say quickly three times:
"Whirl a gig, whirl a gig, whirl a gig
"We will have to leave Pluto behind," said Sea
O Foam sorrowfully. So, patting him and telling
him to be good and wait for
them, they slowly obeyed the
voice's orders.


To The Rescue
CHAPTER XI.
STHEY said the last gig Elizabeth heard a terrible voice
say:
/ii "Will we eat him now, or have him for supper?"
And opening her eyes she found herself on a narrow
ledge, with a very tightened looking Sea O Foam beside her. No
wonder he was frightened, tor Elizabeth saw below them three
huge giants crouched around a big rock table, and chained to
one side of the wall was the most handsome person she had
ever seen.
"That is the Fairy King," whispered Sea O Foam.
"Now we have found him," whispered Elizabeth, "it looks
just as hopeless."
"Oh, it is terrible," shuddered Sea O Foam, covering his
face with his hands.
Elizabeth was horrified to see the giants eating great bowls
full of foam bubble fairies, and the poor little things were
screaming in terror as they vanished in great mouthfuls. When
they had eaten all. the foam bubble fairies they pushed their
plates aside, and sat staring hard at the poor Fairy King.
Elizabeth thought the giants would hear the noise of her
heart beating, it sounded so loud to her. They could not have
heard, for they never once looked up.
"My stomach is comfortable, I would sooner have him for
supper," boomed one giant.
"Me too," roared another.
"He will make a juicy morsel," boomed the third one.
glaring at the poor Fairy King, and smacking his lips.
"Two against one," roared the biggest giant.
"You cannot bully me," roared the greedy one, pushing
the great table over in his rage and rushing madly at the others.
Elizabeth had never seen a fight like it, the noise was
deafening, pieces of the cave began to fall down, crashing all
around them.


Standing On Their Heads They Cried “Whirlagig”


"We will have to chance it now," shouted Sea O Foam.
It was almost impossible to hear each other speak, the noise
was deafening.
"Climb," cried Sea O Foam, as he disappeared over the
ledge. Elizabeth had to follow suit. Down she crawled like
a big fly. When she reached the bottom the noise was worse
than ever, and she narrowly missed being trodden upon by a
maddened giant.
The Fairy King was chained up very strongly, and they
began to despair of ever setting him free, when Elizabeth
remembered her magic ring. Then she said, "Please, magic
ring, free the Fairy King." In a flash he was free.
"I will never be able to thank you," said the Fairy King,
kissing both Elizabeth and Sea O Foam with joy. Then he said,
"We must leave here at once, my brave rescuers, for it the
Whirlpool Ogres see you they will eat you."
"Oh!" gasped Elizabeth, "I do not want to be eaten, let us
find a way out of here."
But no matter how they searched they could not find the
smallest crack to squeeze through. And just when they had
given up all hope a voice said, "If you want to get out of the
cave you stand on your head and say three times, 'Whirl a gig.'
"Oh," cried Elizabeth, "it is our friend the Sea's Murmur."
"Quick," cried the Fairy King, "they have seen us," and
standing hurriedly on their heads, they saw the Whirlpool Ogres
roaring madly towards them. "Whirl a gig," they cried in a
chorus three times, and Elizabeth found herself falling with a
soft splash back in the cave from where they had started.
Pluto was overjoyed to see them again, but they had no
time to lose; they could hear the Whirlpool Ogres roaring close
in pursuit, their voices growing louder.
"Follow my murmur," said the voice. "You must be quick
or they will catch you," and away went the murmur, with the
little party following it, in and out of one cave after another.
All the time the Whirlpool Ogres getting nearer and nearer.
At last! Up they shot, up and into the clear blue sea.
"Safe!" laughed Elizabeth.


She could see the Fairy Queen coming to meet them in a
beautiful Clam shell chariot drawn by white sea horses.
The Fairy King ran on to greet his Fairy Queen, Sea O Foam
and Pluto following excitedly behind. They had forgotten all
about Elizabeth.
Suddenly a shocking thing happened to her. There was
a roar of anger, and, looking down, poor little Elizabeth saw a
Whirlpool Ogre coming up from the' bottom of the sea right
beneath her.
"Help!" she cried.
Then, with a terrible whirl, she was flung high into the air,
then down she came, and in a second up she went again. The
Whirlpool Ogre was bent upon tossing her to pieces.
"Save me!" she screamed.
But far, far down below she saw the Fairy King and Queen,
Sea O Foam and Pluto waving goodbye frantically.
Then she was thrown higher than ever, making her fairy
friends grow fainter and fainter.
Higher, higher, Elizabeth felt quite sick with fright. Then
the worst happened, for the magic ring fell off her finger. With
a last cry of "Help" El izabeth heard a voice say, "It is alright,
you are quite safe, I have got you."
And she opened her eyes, and found herself in the bottom
of her little dinghy, bobbing up and down, with a big launch
just beside it chug chugging away.
The man looking down at her said, "You had better wait
until I come down to get you, and then I am going to take you
home."
"Home to Mumsie?" asked Elizabeth as the nice man lifted
her aboard his launch.
"Yes." he said, "I am sure she will be glad to get you back
safe and. sound. Where were you trying to go to?" he asked.
"I got there," said Elizabeth triumphantly.
"Got where?" asked the man, his blue eyes smiling at her.
"Over the horizon," answered Elizabeth, "I toppled right
over the edge."
THE END






♦
.
