

FOILED! THE ENEMY ON OUR OWN...LAND
PASSED BY CENSOR
Th e THRILLING
EXPERIENCES
OF DETECTIVE
DUNNETT
IN HIS FIGHT
AGAINST THE
GERMAN
SPIES IN
AUSTRALIA
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.




FOILED !
THE
ENEMY
IN
OUR
OWN
LAND.
COPYRIGHT, 1915


DEDICATED TO
The Men who hawe gone to the Front,
To those who care going to follow,
and
To the Men who are fighting The Enemy in Our Own
Land.


Sydney:
The Land Newspaper Company, Limited.
1915,


GEORG STEINHAUER—THE MASTER SPY.
The most sinister enemy of the British Empire to-day. It is he who is
responsible for the organisation of the entire German Secret Service. It was
he Who visited Australia in 1909-10 and laid the plans on which " The Enemy
in Our Own Land” works. It was he who visited England with the Kaiser in
1911 and stayed at Buckingham Palace. It was he who shook hands with the
King while plotting for the downfall of the British Empire. (See page 79.)


FOILED!
THE ENEMY IN
OUR OWN LAND
THE THRILLING EXPERIENCES OF
DETECTIVE DUNNETT IN HIS FIGHT
AGAINST THE GERMAN SPIES IN
AUSTRALIA. ■
AS CHRONICLED BY
W. GORDON HENDERSON.
Publishers and Sole Distributors:
The Australasian News Company Limited,
Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and
New Zealand.
1915.


FOREWORD.
THE question has been asked ten thousand times since
the great European War began over twelve months
ago—What is it that during all these months has
given the Germans such a preponderating advantage over
The Allies? And the conclusive answer always has been
— Preparedness. But, whilst accepting that conclusion,
how few of us realise what that preparedness really
means? We conjure up the manufacture and storage of
huge supplies of ammunition, the building of great guns,
the laying of strategic railways. These and a multitude
of other activities represent the outcome of German pre-
paredness; but we are apt, in face of the colossal force re-
presented behind that one word, preparedness, to fail to re-
cognise the mainspring that keeps the brutal, yet alto-
gether wonderful, German military machine at work.
That mainspring is the Secret Service.
What that service has accomplished is almost un-
believable. It represents probably the most powerful as
well as the most thoroughly organised system in the
world. It is not a field service, or a diplomatic service,
or a commercial service—it is simply an army that lives
in and constantly feels the pulse of every movement in
every sphere that is calculated to have the remotest in-
fluence on German policy. It is to be found in every ham-
let in every country. It is as vigorous in Australia as
it is in England. Not till the War is over, if even then,
shall we know a tithe of what it has done to hamper our
every movement, both on the field and off—how many
battles we have lost through its agency, how many strikes
it has organised, how often Kitchener has had to change
his plans because of its virulence. But the most unsatis-
factory feature of the whole business is that to-day, after
twelve months of warfare, many thousands of these spies
are still at large.
It is not our province here to criticise the methods,
or lack of method, of the powers that hold our destiny
in their grasp. We must trust them implicitly to carry us


through, for, after all, they are the only persons in a posi-
tion to know the whole truth. But the object of this
volume is to convey to the average citizen, in narrative
form, some idea of the system on which the Kaiser’s
spies work. These stories, at least as far as the local col-
ouring is concerned, are not presented as facts, simply be-
cause the publication of facts at the present time is a
military offence; but there is sufficient of fact embodied
in them to give the necessary weight that, it is hoped,
will suffice to draw pointed attention to The Enemy in
our Own Land, to put us, as citizens of the Empire, on
our guard against the Secret Service agent, especially him
who, whilst sharing with us our everyday life, may at
the same time be selling us, bound hand and foot with
thongs of our own providing, as victims for the torture
chamber of the Master Hun.
Little reference has been made in these stories to
the work of the British Diplomatic or Secret Services.
That they have done splendid work in assisting our ad-
ministrators, our army and our navy, by honourable
means, to achieve what success so far has been ours is
well known. There is abundant proof on every hand that
they have been very wide awake, but what their methods
have been must, for the most part, remain a closed book.
The Queen Elizabeth-D erf linger incident referred to in
The Naval Despatches is sufficient indication of the suc-
cess that has attended the methods pursued both before
and since the outbreak of hostilities.
It was the author’s intention to publish this volume
towards the end of last year —indeed it was completed as
far back as early October —but it was held up for various
reasons which it would not be wise to go into here. Had
the British authorities permitted more information to
reach the public regarding the underhand methods of
The Enemy in our Own Land, we believe the public
could, and would, have materially assisted to rid the Em-
pire of the spy scourge.
Although these stories culminate with the foiling of
several of the most dangerous spies in Australia, it must
not be supposed for a moment that the author suggests
that the “Enemy in Our Own Land” has been suppressed .
To-day the German Secret Service is as powerful, and pro-
bably even better organised, if that were possible, than it
FOREWORD.


was at the outbreak of the war. That it has not done any-
thing very spectacular in Australia is due, not to lack of
opportunity, hut to the fact that the time is not yet ripe—
let us pray that it never may be —when it can further the
interests of the Fatherland by other than peaceful insinua-
tion. And let us remember, too, that the cities are not our
only vulnerable points. The country, with its grain, its
wool, and its live stock is the stomach on which our army
fights.
Before this volume leaves the press it is possible
that there may be dramatic developments to our advan-
tage at the seat of war, but we are convinced that, whilst
the ultimate triumph of The Allies is as certain as the
rising of to-morrow’s sun, that triumph would come im-
measurably nearer with the application of a stronger hand
to the suppression of the German spy menace.
W.G.H.
Sydney, August 25, 1915.
FOREWORD


The Call to Arms.
In the House of Representatives to-day, Mr. Orchard
(A .S. W.) drew the attention of the Prime Minister to the
fact that a large number of men had stated they would not
enlist while Austrians and Germans were employed in the
Government service. He asked if the Prime Minister
would take steps to dismiss these men?
The Prime Minister: This Government will do no-
thing of the kind. Those citizens who are carrying out
their duties as Australian citizens ought to have the same
rights as ordinary citizens. We are fighting the enemy,
not those people who are amongst us. —Extract from Syd-
ney Morning Herald, 19/8/15.
* * *
WHETHER the Government is right or wrong in the
attitude it has adopted in regard to The Enemy
in Our Own Land, we cannot believe that any
large proportion of the unencumbered manhood of Aus-
tralia will permit official shortsightedness to stem the
patriotic fervour which already has given to the Empire
100,000 of Australia’s sons.
Men are still wanted—men, more men, and still
more men. We have entered into the fight side by side
with the Motherland and her Allies—the fight for liberty,
for justice, for civilisation itself—and we must see it
through. We have a paramount duty to ourselves and
to the world that must rise high above the actions and
opinions of parochial politicians or mistaken statesmen.
They may be right; we do not know. But we do know
wherein our own duty lies.
It is for this reason that the author has granted to
the Government a number of pages for recruiting purposes
in this volume, in the hope that they may reach and in-
fluence some who have not yet realised the urgency of the
call to arms.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Foreword . . 1
The Call to Arms . . . . . . . . . 4
I.
Steinhertz and Company 7
11.
The Naval Despatches . . 16
111.
A Woman's Cunning 24
IV.
The Infernal Machine .. 32
V.
A £lO,OOO Deal 44
AT.
Crossed and Doubled-Crossed 52
ATI,
How Dunnett Saved the Troopships 62
VIII.
Dunnett’s Great Coup 72
IX.
Steinhauer, the Master Spy 81


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page.
Steinhauer—The Master Spy Frontispiece
Coo-ee! 27
H.M.A.S. Australia 33
“We Took the Hill” 43
The Cry op the Mothers ; _
The Trumpet Calls 73


I.
STEINHERTZ & COMPANY.
THE Governor-General was giving a garden party in
Sydney. It was a glorious afternoon in August and
all the elite of New South Wales—and many others
beside —were present. Rumours of the sudden breaking-
off of diplomatic relations between Austria and Serbia,
and the consequent embroilment of Germany, were mere
incidents in international affairs that could not be per-
mitted to interfere with the pleasure of a couple of hun-
dred free-born, merry-hearted Australians. And in any
case, what had we to fear even if, as the newspapers
hinted, the situation did become more serious? Were we
not an island continent too far removed from the vortex
of European conflict ever to be disturbed? Was the Brit-
ish Fleet not supreme and the British Army equal to any
force it might be called upon to face? Of course they
were! They always had been!
One by one the long defile of guests were received
by the Governor-General, the presentations including re-
presentatives of nearly all the nations of which cosmopo-
litan Australia is made up.
“Monsieur Steinhertz,” announced the aide-de-camp,
mechanically attaching the French title to a typical Ger-
man —a handsome, well-groomed, clean-faced Teuton,
somewhere about middle age, with a suave manner and
keen yet elusive eyes.
“Ah, Steinhertz, how are you? Glad to meet you
again—and looking so well too.”


„Delighted,, your Excellency. I trust you too are
well, said Steinhertz as he shook the Governor’s hand
with something more than the formal touch, and retired
bowing repeatedly.
“Who is the handsome gentleman?” asked a grand
dame of the Military Commandant with whom she was
talking. “I have seen him so frequently at recent func-
tions.”
“Why, that’s Herr Steinhertz—Mr. Steinhertz”—
said the Commandant—“one of Sydney’s foremost busi-
ness men.”
German, is he? Oh, Ido love foreigners. They
have such beautiful accents, so musical. Don’t you think
so?”
“Yes, somewhat, I suppose. Shall I introduce him?”
“You may, later, when he is not so much occupied.
He seems to know almost everyone worth knowing here.
Look, that’s the Admiral now talking to him. And that
is the Belgian Consul to whom he has just raised his hat.
But who are those gentlemen the Admiral is introduc-
ing?”
“Mr. Grim, the new Postmaster-General, and Sena-
tor Milson, Minister for Defence.”
“Oh!—Did you say Mr. Steinhertz is a professional
man?”
“No; business—an indent agent, I believe; but he
does not seem to devote much time to business. He
never misses an opportunity to be present at vice-regal
and other society functions, and as for patriotic and charit-
able movements, he is never out of them. It must be
glorious to be wealthy enough to be a philanthropist, to
do so much good. They tell me he gives thousands away
among the poor and the sick that we never hear of.
Doesn’t like to advertise himself!”
“How interesting! I shall be more than pleased to
meet him/’ said the grand dame. “Perhaps I may be
able to enlist his sympathy in connection with my scheme
for the erection of a 'Home of Welcome to Foreigners’.”
* * *
with Germany: British Ultimatum!”
W shouted a dozen excited voices simultaneously
as they scanned the headings of an evening paper
that had just been brought into the garden.
FOILED; THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


The transformation was wonderful. For a moment
the crowd stood still, then there was scurry and bustle
everywhere. The party came to a sudden end. Military
men made off in their cars for the barracks. The Ad-
miral rushed for his pinnace and was soon flying across
the harbour. Captain Elrick went off in the other direc-
tion. for Garden Island. The Governor-General retired
indoors to read the latest cable that had arrived. Busi-
ness men returned to the city with all speed.
Steinhertz alone seemed to be cool. He stood deep
in thought for a moment, then as a group of women ap-
proached him he exclaimed: “Oh, how dreadful; how
terrible! It cannot be true. Why should two nations
that are the best of friends want to fight each other!
There’s nothing to fight about. Anyhow, the —the Eng-
lish—the Australians —have always been very good to
me,” he concluded, “and I am honoured in being a na-
turalised British subject.”
* *
HALF an hour later Steinhertz, the spy, Chief of the
German Secret Service in Australia, was seated at
his office-desk, surrounded by bundles of papers,
plans, photographs, etc.
“Fritz,” he called to the office-boy, “go out and get
me a map of Sydney harbour, one showing the depths,
distances, etc. You can get it from any bookseller for a
few pence. On your way back call in at Breslau, the
sausage-maker, and tell young Grover I want him.
Quick!”
No sooner had the boy disappeared than Steinhertz’s
secretary, Kruppman, who occupied the office between
his chief and the business premises, announced Mr. Goltz.
“Ah, Goltz, you got my wire,” said Steinhertz, as a
fresh-skinned, round-faced young man stepped in. “How
are you getting on with that business?”
“We have not been able to do anything yet, sir,” re-
plied Goltz. “I commissioned a steward on the Hankow
to secure the despatches, but so far he has failed. He
wired me from Brisbane to say that Captain Grimley had
kept the papers too well under his eye during the whole
voyage from Hong-Kong.”
STEINHERTZ AND COMPANY.


“Urn! Then we must adopt other means to get
them. They are too valuable to be missed at this junc-
ture, Let me see! The Hankow arrives at Sydney to-
morrow. Grimley will go straight to Admiralty House,
of course—about 3.30 I should think. You will not be
able to do anything before dark. You had better get into
touch with Denbruch and Marie Boelger right away. They
will prove useful.”
“They are in the outer office now, sir! I brought
them along in case you should want to give them instruc-
tions.”
“Good! You will soon be ready for promotion,
Goltz, if you continue to show so much foresight.”
“Kruppman! Show the lady and gentleman in!”
“Ah, Marie! You look well! And you too, Den-
bruch. Good afternoon. Goltz has informed you of our
mission, of course. We must get those despatches at all
costs. What do you propose, Denbruch?”
“I have a scheme,” interrupted Miss Boelger. “There
is to be a small function of some kind at Admiralty House
to-morrow night. On such occasions the orderlies and
others who might be in the way are usually allowed off
duty. There will be no difficulty in my getting into the
building as a press representative or something of the
kind, and I think we can manage the rest if Inspector
Dunnett of the Police Department does not forestall us.”
“Then I leave it to you, Marie. You have never
failed us yet. But, remember, it is essential that we have
the despatches by to-morrow night at the latest. Good-
bye!”
“Will this map do?” queried Fritz, who entered im-
mediately the trio left.
“Capital, Fritz; just what I want! Take it to
Kruppman and ask him to mark it off and code it, and to
send duplicates to Steldt, Hauptmann, and Goldstein.
Why, if you wanted a map like that of the harbour of my
native city you could not have it for £lO,OOO. Ha! Ha!
Those shrewd English people! Is that Groyer in the
office? Send him in!”
The heavy sulky-looking butcher boy, who ten min-
utes previously had been weighing out sausages behind a
marble counter, was suddenly transformed to a smart,
erect, military-looking young man.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


“How old are you, Groyer?” asked Steinhertz.
“Twenty, sir.”
You are a member of the Citizen Forces, of course?”
“Yes, sir!”
“Anything to report?”
Not yet, sir; but I shall have all the numbers and
other details complete by the end of the week.”
“There will be at least two distinct Expeditionary
Forces, Groyer. You will go with the second one.”
Yes, sir. I have already offered my name.”
“What, already! But the Government has not de-
cided to send the troops yet.”
“No, sir! But I went up to my captain this after-
noon and told him that I would like to fight for my coun-
try if there was an opportunity.”
“Ha! Ha! That was a little risky. But what did
he say?”
“He asked me if I were a German, and when I told
him that I was an Australian and could not be held re-
sponsible for my father’s nationality, he patted me on the
back, said I w r as just the type of lad Australia was proud
of, and told me that if it were decided to send a contingent
abroad he would see what he could do about making me
a non-com.”
You are a first-class shot, Groyer, good at sniping,
and you know the code?”
“Yes, sir! The square one!”
“That will do. You will report to me twice daily till
you leave Sydney. Take this money. If you need any
more while in camp call for it personally. Your limit
for the present will be £350. Good-bye.”
“Paul Schnieder,” announced the Secretary, hand-
ing in a card.
“Come in, Schnieder, what success?”
“I think we are on pretty good ground, sir. I have
got the definite promise of three of the leading labour
unions that if any hostility is shown to Germans by other
members of their unions they will take action immediately,
and call a general strike if necessary. I have drafted
several resolutions to be passed in case of trouble, deplor-
ing the introduction of racial antagonism into the ranks
of unionism and asserting that the workers of this coun-
STEINHERTZ AND COMPANY.


try have no quarrel with the. workers of Germany, but
only with the ruling classes who are endeavouring to stem
the tide of democracy by creating and fostering interna-
tional jealousies and racial hatred.”
“Splendid, Schnieder, splendid! How much has it
cost us?”
“Practically nothing so far. Oh, I wouldn’t bribe
them. They are only too willing to be influenced. I
have been in touch with them for some time, have given
them the use of my wool-store frequently to hold meet-
ings, have addressed them twice on labour problems and
have helped one or two individuals out of temporary diffi-
culties.”
“What of the Small Arms Factory, at Lithgow?”
“I think we will be able to control the output there.
I succeeded in getting Schmidt installed as an American
expert and he can be depended upon to do his part tho-
roughly.”
“And the metal market?”
“It is absolutely in our hands. We are deflecting
every Australian cargo for the present to America, whence
it will be transhipped via Rotterdam, and even if Britain
succeeds in buying in the States she will have to pay
such a price that we will be able with her money to fin-
ance a gigantic corner, and also, if necessary, to foment
trouble among the American handlers.”
“Very satisfactory, Schneider! Very satisfactory.
Of course you did not succeed in buying over Inspector
Dunnett?”
“No, sir! He’s too straight. We’ll have to take
other means to deal with him, I am afraid.”
“Kruppman! You might bring me that report by
Inspector Dunnett on The Secret Service System. That
confounded fellow knows more than is good for him—or
us. Has anything been done with regard to his recom-
mendation that a special department be created to deal
with the spy question?”
“ The recommendation fell through, sir. We got to
work in the right quarter, and when the proposal was
brought up the idea was ridiculed.”
“ By jove! it must have taken many months of Dun-
nett’s time to compile all these details. Read me the last
two pages, will you, Schnieder ? —the , detective’s conclu-
sions.”
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


TO summarise our investigations ; As we found that
at least 95 per cent, of the spies in Australia are
Germans, or in the employ of Germans, we thought
it expedient for the present not to follow up the
others. In all we estimate that there are over 3,000 Ger-
man spies scattered throughout the States, but the ma-
jority of these occupy fixed posts in the capital cities.
They are to be found in every Government office, in the
postal, telegraph, and telephone departments, in the rail-
way and tramway services, as waiters in the big hotels,
as commercial travellers, as wool merchants and buyers,
as manufacturers, as storekeepers, as farmers and farm
labourers, as miners, as wharf labourers, as doctors, as
tramps, in the highest official and lowest menial walks of
life, and in every important centre.
There is one man at the head, in Sydney. He has
many aliases, hut is best known as Steinhertz. He is an
indent agent by profession, but most of his indentations
seem to be recruits to fill up the gaps in his wonderful
chain of spies. There is also a chief in each city, and a
sub-chief' in every area, the Commonwealth being sub-
divided into 120 areas. Very few of the chiefs or sub-
chiefs know each other, and none of the rank and file
know who the heads of the service are. Reports are col-
lected from every spy at regular intervals, commercial tra-
vellers and woolbuyers mostly acting as the collectors. The
total yearly payments we estimate at £12,500.
There is no fixed plan of campaign as far as we have
been able to ascertain. The object is simply to gain every
item of information that may prove useful to their coun-
try, their methods being varied to suit every special case.
At present their attentions seem to he confined to military
and naval affairs. There is probably hardly an officer
in the service who is not watched and reported upon regu-
larly. But their policy is also political and industrial as
well, strike organisation being one of its main features.
“ He has a pretty fair idea of it,” said Steinhertz,
“ but, fortunately, we have an even better idea of his
methods. Still, we must not take any risks.”
'fc >Jc
INSPECTOR DUNNETT, Chief of the Detective
1 Force, was seated in his office studying a long list of
names that had been handed to him by Sub-Inspector
STEINHERTZ AND COMPANY.


Sinclair, . while the latter was transferring notes from
his pocket-book to a series of cards in a long drawer that
bore the word “ German ” on it.
“ Look up Steinhertz there, Sinclair,” said Dunnett.
“ That’s the fellow who will want most watching. Where
is he at present?”
“Was at the garden party, this afternoon,” replied Sin-
clair. “ Here’s his photo. He spent last week in Mel-
bourne, and the previous month in New Guinea. Has
been doing an extraordinarily big business recently in
tinned goods. Has sent 4500 cases to various centres up
country and 3500 to Herbertshohe and Friedrichshafen
within the past two months.”
“Have any of them been examined? ”
“Not that I know of, Inspector. Why?”
“ Because I am mighty suspicious of their contents.
Send a man to watch how they are handled, and, if neces-
sary, get the Customs people to open a number of them.
But be careful! I’ll be surprised if many of them con-
tain what the label indicates.”
“I’ll have that done as soon as possible, Inspector.
But about to-morrow night. What do you want me to
do?”
“To stop here till I give you a ring. I’ll go over to
Admiralty House myself —as a naval veteran. If things
are all right I’ll let you know. If not, I’ll ’phone you
what to to. The Hankow arrives in the afternoon, and
Captain Grimley is sure to spend the night with the Ad-
miral. There may be no danger, of course; but as war
has actually been declared the risk is too great to be dis-
regarded. And in any case it may give us an opportunity
to prove whether or not Steinhertz is what I believe him
to be. At present no one will listen to any accusation
against him. He is a member of half-a-dozen public
bodies, and has undoubtedly done much good in the in-
terests of the community. Yet I have had my suspicions
of him for years. You remember the beginning of our
labour troubles, about 1906 or 7, when miners, seamen,
wharf-labourers and others all seemed to be in a ferment
about the same time?”
“You mean the time when we had to prohibit the
carrying of revolvers?”
“Yes; well, I learned some time afterwards that a
German miner at Newcastle was at the bottom of the
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


whole upheaval, and when I followed things up a bit
I found that he had had repeated visits from a commer-
cial traveller named Schultz, who, I have since ascer-
tained, is in the employ of Steinhertz.”
Still, it is possible that that may be only a coin-
cidence, Inspector. You remember how we were deluded
by
“No doubt. No doubt. That is how I treated it at
the time. I never even reported it. But I am inclined
to put a different construction on it now. I discovered
many much more extraordinary coincidences when I was
making my investigations for that report on the spy sys-
tem that was so unceremoniously turned down. Anyhow,
we shall soon know.”
STEINHERTZ AND COMPANY.


II.
THE NAVAL DESPATCHES.
THE Admiral was entertaining a few friends at dinner
at Kirribilli in honour of the visit of a distin-
guished Imperial officer who had been in Australia
for some months reporting on defence affairs, and
who had been suddenly called home on account of the
European conflict. Nearly thirty guests had been invited,,
almost all of whom were military or naval officers and
their wives.
There was another guest of some importance, too,.
Captain Grimley of H.M.S. Indomitable, who had arrived
in the course of the afternoon with despatches from the
China Station.
“ You have timed your visit very well, Captain,”
said the Admiral, when Captain Grimley arrived in the
afternoon. “I am having a few friends here this evening
to say good-bye to General Wilberforce, and you will be
able to join us. We had perhaps better get to business
straight away, as we have at least a couple of hours be-
fore my guests begin to arrive.”
“ You understand the object of my visit, of course?”
queried Captain Grimley.
u Yes,” said the Admiral. “ Home advised me three
weeks ago. Trouble is expected in the Pacific. I under-
stand my ships are to combine with the China Squadron
in a demonstration of force with the object of impressing
our enemies with our preparedness for anything that may
happen.”
“ There have been somewhat startling developments
since the despatches were penned, as you are well aware,”
said Captain Grimley. “ But you had better have a look


twiilSillill
liililiii
iElSili
ilillll
iliilßllttiS
.lilii
“Siissi
V
■■
yiH'
If :"1
-X
in
ill
111111


at these; they will give you some idea of how correct
the Old Man’s suspicions were.”
“Whew! So that was the game,” exclaimed the
Admiral, after perusing the despatches. “ I did not ex-
pect Germany to move so soon in these waters, although,
of course, we all realised that she must do something in
the Pacific. The Kaiser has sent an additional armoured
cruiser, two torpedo-boat destroyers, and a couple of sub-
marines to Kiao Chau and has been landing troops at
Tsin-tao in small detachments for months past. He has
also arranged for the installation of powerful wireless
plants in New Guinea, Samoa, and the Caroline and Mar-
shall groups, and is laying in huge supplies of coal and
oil at these islands. It looks as if we will require more
than a demonstration of force to dispel these phantoms.
We knew about the coal and wireless, of course, but the
Kiao Chau business is somewhat of a surprise.”
“ Fortunately we are pretty well prepared for even-
tualities,” said Captain Grimley. “Like yourself, the
China Station has not got too much information. John
Bull never has been in the habit of saying much till he
is certain of his facts. Things have been moving very
dramatically. But it is only what we had to expect. Im-
mediately I heard of the assassination of the Archduke
Francis Ferdinand I said ‘ England’s in it.’ Everyone
knew, of course, that Germany would not openly declare
war on Britain, but that she would find some means of
starting the conflict with others and drawing us in. That
has always been Germany’s way —everything underhand.
In fact, I would not mind betting that, even if it was a
Serb , who shot the Archduke, he was not acting under the
instructions of the Belgrade Government at all, but under
the direction of the German Secret Service. It is a won-
derful service, you know. There is not a part of the
globe it does not cover. Only recently General Botha
reported that he anticipated trouble with a section of the
burghers in South Africa. He had discovered a deep-laid
plot in Orangia to rise against the British and proclaim
the State an independent republic again. The intrigue
was traced to a German agent who had promised to
finance the burghers up to £400,000. Secret service men
in India, Egypt, and the United States have all been
exceedingly busy of late, to say nothing of their campaign
in connection with the Irish Home Rule trouble.”
FOILED; THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


“ They have their agents here, too,” said the Ad-
miral, “ but they seem to have made little impression. At
any rate, the authorities treat their efforts almost as a
joke. I shouldn’t be surprised if they succeed in doing
some damage, though, for their organisation is perfectly
wonderful, and we know, of course, that they will stoop
to anything under the sun so long as it advances the
interests of the Fatherland. Do you remember the part
they played under that fellow 1 Steiber in the Franco-
Prussian War?”
“ Yes ; their methods then had as much to do with
the fall of the French as had the Prussian army itself.”
“ By the bye, did you ever hear the real cause of
Russia’s refusal to assist her ally in that memorable
campaign? I’ll tell you. From the time of the war
with Denmark in 1866, the Kaiser determined to smash
France and capture Alsace and Lorraine as the first step
in his conquest of Europe. But he knew that France
had a treaty with Russia, and that whilst there was a
prospect of the two nations combining against him he
hadn’t a hope of success. So he set his Secret Service to
work. His chance came in ’67. The Czar and he . were
on a visit to Paris when an attempt was made on the
Czar’s life. It was a Pole who fired the shots, and all
the world believed it to have been simply the outcome of
Polish discontent. But it wasn’t. It was a scheme
hatched in Berlin and carried out by the German Secret
Service in Paris. I forget the exact details, but the
intention was that the shots should not take effect. Ger-
man bystanders would see to that. Then the Kaiser would
tell the Czar how the whole thing was planned by the
treacherous French, and how, but for the precautions
taken by his agents, the plot would have succeeded. When
the war between France and Prussia ultimately broke
out, the French representative who went to St. Peters-
burg to discuss the part Russia would take, was coldly
received, and was told that Russia had decided to remain
neutral —a nation that had plotted to take the Czar’s
life, and that refused adequately to punish the would-be
murderer, could not expect help against a foe that had
proved a friend to Russia.”
“ Your remarkable story just bears out my conten-
tion —that Germany has every iron in the fire, and will
yet use them to contract the scope of hostilities to quarters
with which the War Lord thinks he will be able to deal.”
THE NAVAL DESPATCHES.


“ I am glad you said thinks, Captain. It will be
only a case of thinking. Our own diplomatic and secret
services, combined with those of France and Russia, are
quite equal to the Kaiser’s. Let him do his worst; he
cannot succeed. As for Australia, she can be depended
upon to do her part nobly and thoroughly on both land
and sea.”
“ There will be something doing when Jellicoe meets
the German fleet, I can tell you,” said Captain Grimley.
“Our cunning old friend, Von Tirpitz, imagines he
has built several super-dreadnoughts that will outclass
the Queen Elizabeth and her sister ships. You heard, of
course, how we tricked them! It was a piece of very
smart work. At the time the plans of the Queen Eliza-
beth were being discussed a naval draughtsman in the
service, well-known to be a German spy, was frequently
consulted on important points, and, as a result, he soon
got to know where the plans were kept. A few' days after
their completion they were abstracted from a safe over
night and replaced in the morning. That same day
complete photographs of the plans were carried to Berlin.
That the scheme succeeded we now know, for the Derf-
linger and her sister ships have been built at Kiel direct
from the British plans, whilst our Queen Elizabeth class
turns out to be superior in every way to the bogus plans
which the Admiralty went to such trouble to have pre-
pared.”
“ I am sorry to have to interrupt our most interesting
conversation, Captain; but I see it is nearly 7 o’clock. I
must be ready to meet my guests in less than an hour.
You’ll dine with us, of course. We can discuss the Pacific
problem to-morrow.
>!<*>!<
IMMEDIATELY dinner was over the health of General
Wilberforce and several other short toasts were hon-
oured.
“ Who is that simply-dressed lady with the menu in
her hand,” asked a bearded and bemedalled naval veteran
of an officer who sat beside him.
:£ A newspaper representative, I believe,” replied the
officer. “ I have seen her at several society functions.
Looks wonderfully young to have such grey locks, doesn’t
she? ”
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


“ Yes; but she does not seem to be taking much
interest in the General’s speech. I suppose she is study-
ing the dresses for some local rag,” replied the veteran.
The lady referred to —a stately, middle-aged woman
of refined features, but very pale face —had arrived just
after dinner. She was looking around as if making a
mental note of those present, but all the time kept tap-
ping with a pencil, the pointed end of which she held
loosely in her hand, on the edge of the menu.
“ Far end corridor,” said the veteran to himself.
“ Yes, that’s just about it. The Admiral’s office.”
“ Flat black case, unlocked. Nine-thirty,” continued
the veteran, still staring at the tapping pencil. “ Um!
I must get Sinclair on the job, too. . It’s going to prove
too much for one, I am afraid.”
Immediately the guests commenced to file out on to
the spacious verandahs overlooking Sydney harbour, In-
spector Dunnett sought an interview with the Admiral’s
secretary. “I want to use your ’phone,” he said; “but
no one must hear me. Can I trust you to keep guard
for a few minutes ? ”
“ Yes, certainly,” replied the Secretary. “ Come
downstairs to my room. But what’s wrong, Inspector?
What are you doing in that garb? I hardly knew you.”
“Hish! Not a word. No one in the flag-lieutenant’s
room? ”
“No!”
“Nor in the clerk’s office across the passage?”
“No!”
“ Then lock the door on the outside, will you.”
“Hello! That you, Sinclair?” whispered Inspector
Dunnett over the telephone a few seconds later. “I was
right. Come straight away. Better go via Milson’s Point
to avoid suspicion.”
“ When you get an opportunity within the next few
minutes you might tell the Admiral I would like a word
with him,” said Dunnett to the Secretary as he left his
office. “ The Admiral’s office is at the far end of the
passage, isn’t it, just above your’s? You might see that
it is locked.”
“Oh, that’s all right, Inspector; it is always locked
when there are people about.”
“ And where is the key? ”
“ In my pocket.”
“No!”
THE NAVAL DESPATCHES.


“ Good! Give it to me. It will be all right. You
won’t forget to tell your chief, will you? I’ll meet him
On the garden seat at the far end of the tennis lawn.”
The two had by this time reached the drawing-room.
The stooping veteran, staff in hand, moved slowly on to the
verandah and out in the direction of the tennis-court. All
the time he had kept his eyes open for the lady journalist,
but she was not to be seen. “Strikes me I have seen that
face before,” he mused; “but if it belongs to the person
to whom I suspect it does, she has changed wonderfully
since I last saw her, in Melbourne.”
Ten minutes later Sinclair, dressed as a naval lieu-
tenant, came swinging over the lawn at the same time as
the Admiral and Captain Grimley approached from the
house.
The veteran stood at the salute.
“Keep your eyes open for the grey, middle-aged wo-
man with the pale face,” he whispered to Sinclair as the
latter passed on.
“One of our oldest veterans,” said the Admiral as
he introduced Captain Grimley. “Was with your father
on the Penelope at the taking of Lagos in ’5l, I believe.
Isn’t that so, Dun- ”
“Hish! there’s no time to waste,” said the Inspector.
“It is now 9.15. At 9.30 an attempt is to be made to
secure a despatch-case from your office. We must act
quickly. There are spies about.”
“Good God! Dunnett! You don’t mean to tell me
that ”
“Hish! Everything is safe, only you must not be sur-
prised at anything that happens. We intend to take them
red-handed. Keep outside with your guests. Leave the
rest to me.”
By 9.20 the veteran retraced his shuffling steps to
the corridor, where, apparently unobserved, he slipped
into the Admiral’s office and secreted himself behind the
Admiral’s desk. The door was closed but not locked.
Nine-thirty chimed on the old clock in the hall, but
nothing had happened.
A minute later, however, there was a tremendous ex-
plosion followed by a hissing noise somewhere in the
direction of the kitchen. Then there came a cry of “fire!”
taken up by a score of voices in all directions.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


Dunnett chuckled to himself. “Cunning dodge,” he
muttered, “but too late!”
Several feet scampered along the corridor and the
Inspector stood breathlessly waiting for his expected
visitor. But no one came.
Five minutes passed. There was noise and bustle
everywhere, but the door remained closed.
Another minute and the Inspector could stand it no
longer. He moved quietly towards the door and turned
the handle. The door was locked.
Then he heard the Admiral’s voice outside.
“Open! for God’s sake open! Quick!” shouted the
detective, as he switched up the light.
The Admiral himself turned the key and rushed into
the room.
“What has happened, Dunnett?” he asked eagerly.
“Is everything right? The despatch-case!”
“It’s there all right,” said the Inspector as he turned
towards the open desk. “But who locked that door?”
“I don’t know,” replied the Admiral. “I presumed
it was part of your scheme.”
“But I have the key in my pocket,” said Dunnett
as he moved towards the door.
Withdrawing the key from the lock he stood looking
at it. “My God!” he ejaculated. “It’s a new one!”
“There are only two keys of my office that I know
of,” said the Admiral in amazement; “the one I have in
my safe upstairs and the one my secretary keeps. Neither
of them is new.”
“Then we have been tricked, your Excellency!” said
Inspector Dunnett. “But with what object—l cannot un-
derstand it.”
“I can,” said the Admiral as he opened the despatch-
case. “The despatches are gone!”
THE NAVAL DESPATCHES.


III.
A WOMAN’S CUNNING.
IT was with the greatest difficulty the Admiral composed
himself sufficiently to bid his guests good-night and
to apologise for the “unfortunate accident” that had
caused such a stir. It was only a wine keg that had burst
in the cellar, he assured them, and very little damage had
resulted.
“Whatever is to be done?” he asked Captain Grim-
ley when they were able to return to his office shortly after
10 o’clock.
“Do you think they will run them down?” asked the
Captain.
“I am afraid to,think of what may happen if they
do not. Dunnett is a smart fellow, and so is Sinclair;
but they seem to have fallen in badly this time. There
is one consolation. The code is a particularly intricate
one and it will be impossible for them to decipher it in a
hurry. Dunnett knows the haunts of these spies very
well, and if it is possible to run them to earth we can
depend upon him to do it.”
“But if he fails!”
“Do not let us talk about it, Captain. It is too aw-
ful to contemplate. To think that we should have been
so tricked, and in my own office too. Oh! it maddens me.
Why didn’t Dunnett act earlier?”
“It was a very cunning game, anyhow,” said Captain
Grimley, and it seems to have succeeded.”
* * *
IT was 2.30 a.m. and the Admiral and his guest were
still in the office when a ring at the telephone aroused
them both from the moody silence into which they had
fallen.


“Yes,” said the Admiral as he put the receiver to his
ear. “Speaking. Is that you, Dunnett?. . . What! Got
them.. . Thank God!. . . Who ? Sinclair!. . . Where
are they?... What —not for a few hours?. . . But they
are safe?. . . Thank God, Dunnett—and you!. . . Come
as quickly as you can.”
“They’ve got them, thank God!” shouted the Ad-
miral jubilantly. “I knew they wouldn’t fail us. Sin-
clair chased the spy to Parramatta and recovered the des-
patches intact. They won’t be here till morning, Cap-
tain. Hadn’t you better snatch a few hours’ sleep? Til
wait here in case I should be wanted.”
“Sleep! Not me,” said Captain Grimley. “This is
my watch as well as yours, your Excellency.”
The hours crawled slowly on, the while the Admiral
paced up and down the room, listening to his friend’s
wonderful tales of German spying coups, but saying little.
He scarcely knew whether he was elated or depressed, and
was wearily anxious for the morning to come.
* * *
DUNNETT had lost no time in getting to work. By
10.30 he was out with a detachment of plain-clothes
men scouring the city for any trace of the pseudo-
journalist; but in vain. They aroused and searched the
houses of over a dozen suspects and called at every news-
paper-office in town, but there was not the slightest
sign of the missing spies.
Dunnett had just returned to Headquarters when he
got a ring from Sinclair.
“I’m at Parramatta,” said the Sub-Inspector. “What
a chase! But I have bagged them. . . No, not Marie
You had better come out right away.”
In a little over half-an-hour, Inspector Dunnett’s
motor-car pulled up at the Parramatta Police Station,
where Sinclair was awaiting him.
“I’ve got them locked-up for the night,” said Sin-
clair. “It was Goltz and Denbruch as you suspected;
but by jove! they nearly got clear. Have you seen any-
thing of Marie?”
Not a trace. But how do you know it was Marie?
You didn’t see her?”
“No; but Goltz confessed. I tried the dodge of tell-
ing him, just after I rang you up, that his female accom-
A WOMAN’S CUNNING.


plice had been captured, and even ventured to name her
It was a bold stroke, but I struck oil first go. He fell in
beautifully.”
“But where do you reckon she is now, Sinclair? We
must get our hands on her at all costs. She is one of the
most cunning as well as the most dangerous spies in the
country.”
“Apparently she has been living with either Goltz
or Denbruch, or both, so I thought she would probably
come up to Parramatta during the night, or try to.”
“That’s good,” said Dunnett. “I supplied her de-
scription, or rather descriptions, to all the police on cab-
rank rounds with orders to inform all taxi-drivers that if
the lady presented herself as a fare they were to drive
her to a certain place of safety.”
“And I instructed Exchange to refuse all calls on
Parramatta during the night unless they came from
Headquarters.”
“But where are the papers?”
“In my pocket!” replied Sinclair.
“How did you get on to them? You must have been
pretty slick.”
“So slick that I hadn’t time to give you the tip, In-
spector. Soon after I left you in the garden to go in
search of the pale grey woman. I walked round the north
side of the house and noticed someone coming up that
path that leads past the Admiral’s back window. He
moved leisurely round by the stables, then turned and
walked smartly along the avenue towards the entrance-
gate. I followed quickly, among the trees, and as I saw
him spring into a motor-car without so much as a word
to the chauffeur I glanced up and knew I was on the right
track. The wheel was in the hands of our old friend
Denbruch. I could not mistake his face. His eyes were
goggled and his peaked cap drawn well down over his
forehead, but he could not hide those high cheek-bones —
so unlike those of a typical German —and his heavy chin
was also too plain to be mistaken. So I commandeered
the fastest motor I could see and followed. It was the
keenest chase I ever took part in. I expected Denbruch
to make for the punt at Milson’s Point, but he swung
round into Alfred-street and followed the tram-line for a
bit. Then he turned along various bye-roads through
North Sydney, ultimately joining the tram-line again near
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


the Reserve, and following it till he came to the Lane
Cove Road. He gained a little on us up-hill, but we al-
ways managed to keep him in sight, and, if anything,
reduced his lead on the level. At Willoughby I lost a
few seconds picking up Sergeant Jenkyns, then we went
right on to Fig Tree, where we crossed the bridge. Where
we went after that I hardly know, but I realised some
time later that we were crossing the Drummoyne bridge;
then we were dashing through Balmain in the direction of
the city, and a few minutes later were in Enmore. Ulti-
mately we were careering along the Parramatta Road at a
break-neck speed, disregarding all the whistles and sig-
nals that went up against us. The roads were in a shock-
ing state, all ruts and bumps, but we maintained our
speed wonderfully until —bad luck, wasn’t it?- —just out-
side Parramatta one of his back tyres blew out. The rest
of the journey was a procession. We were overhauling
him at every bound and were actually within ten yards
when a shot rang out and our chauffeur fell forward. At
the same moment the spy jumped from the car, cleared a
fence, and disappeared.”
“What! I thought you had him,” interrupted Dun-
nett excitedly.
“So we have. The story is not finished yet. He is
in the cell behind you; but I didn’t catch him. I left
that to Jenkyns while I took the wheel and ultimately
overtook Denbruch just near the entrance to Parramatta
Park. He showed fight, and would probably have done
some damage had not Constables Simpson and Woods
come on the scene. None of his shots took effect, for-
tunately, although I felt one whizz dangerously close. We
searched him on the spot, at least Simpson and I did. I
had sent Woods back to look for Jenkyns. There was no
trace of the papers either on his person or in the car, so
we cuffed him and brought both him and the car to the
station. Within a quarter-of-an-hour we got a ring from
Woods to bring the stretcher to Church Street. I went
down with Simpson and met Jenkyns and "Woods search-
ing the prostrate body of Goltz, He had fired at Jenkyns
and they had grappled till Jenkyns got in the knock-out
blow.”
“But the papers!”
“They were not on him, and as we carried him back
to the station I was beginning to feel desperate. What if
it had all been part of the plan—to get us out of the way
A WOMAN’S CUNNING.


while Marie escaped with the booty? I was pretty miser-
able when I came in, I can tell you. I knew I had not
carried out your instructions, and I also knew what the
result might be. Then I got the shock of my life. Just
behind us was Constable Jackson, who is in charge of the
local office. He had a bundle of papers in his hand.”
“Are these of any use to you?” he asked, “be-
cause —-—”
“Heavens!” I gasped, rising; “where in the name
of ”
Jackson took no notice of my interruption as he
handed me the bundle. “Because if they are not,” he
continued, “I can sell them for £SOOO. I have a buyer
in the back parlour.”
“But where did you get them?” I asked.
“Can’t you see the mark of the motor tyres across
them,” said Jackson. “I picked them up just a few
hundred yards down the street. Our wealthy friend in-
side told me just where about they would be and pro-
mised me £2OOO if I would keep them in safe hiding till
I heard from him in a week or two. I said the price was
too small, so he made it £3OOO, then £SOOO. But I
thought I might get a better offer from you.”
“So you shall, Sergeant Jackson,” I said.
“He is not the only one who will get promotion,”
said Inspector Dunnett. “ You have done the best night’s
work in your life, and I shall see that the fact is not over-
looked. But it is time we were getting back, Sinclair. I
gave the Admiral a ring before I left Headquarters to
assure him that all was safe. But he will be terribly
anxious till he has the papers in his hands again. Gad,
but it has been a terrible night!”
“Do you know where Goltz used to live some months
ago, Jackson?”
“Yes, sir, and his missus too. Round in Argyie
Street.
“That’s right! Well, slip round there and keep a
watch on the place till you’re relieved. If the missus
shows up, or, indeed, any woman comes near the house,
bring her along here and ring Headquarters for instruc-
tions.”
“Woods! You and Simpson will keep an eye on the
back-roomers till morning, when we shall have them
taken to town.”
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


“And Marie with them, I hope,” said Dunnett, as he
motioned Sinclair and Jenkyns into the car with the
wounded chauffeur, whilst he mounted the driver’s seat
and pulled the lever.
By 5.30 Dunnett and Sinclair were back at Admiralty
House, where they found the Admiral and Captain Grim-
ley still in the office, both looking tired and worried.
“Ah, thank God once again!” exclaimed the Ad-
miral, as Sinclair handed over the despatches.
“Ditto a thousand times over,” said Captain Grim-
ley, as he shook both men by the hand at the same time.
“But how did you do it? Where were they? How did
they get them?”
Sinclair re-told his story with as many dramatic em-
bellishments as possible, whilst the two stolid naval men
silently nodded their interest and surprise.
“But how was the trick worked?” asked the Ad-
miral. “How did you come to be locked in the room, In-
spector? Which reminds me, by the bye, that after you
had gone I found my office window open.”
“That explains a lot,” said Dunnett.
“It does,” said Sinclair. “Goltz was just coming
from it when I saw him.”
“So I couldn’t have been very much behind time after
all,” said Dunnett. “Yet they had me all right. And I
have you to thank, Sinclair ”
“What’s that row?” said the Admiral, rising nerv-
ously to his feet. “Sounds like a woman’s voice.”
The noise came nearer. There was scuffling in the
corridor, then a knock at the door, and an orderly and
the Admiral’s secretary, both in their pyjamas, stood in the
opening holding between them a struggling, defiant wo-
man.
“It’s Marie —Marie Boelger!” exclaimed Dunnett
excitedly. “Where did you find her?”
“In the wine cellar,” said the orderly. “Must have
been there when the explosion occurred and got locked in,
I think.”
“Whew!”
“Well, Marie, and what have you got to say for your-
self,” asked Dunnett. “See, here they are —the des-
patches! We’ve got Goltz and Denbruch, so you might
as well make a clean breast of it. It will go all the more
lightly with you later on if you do.”
A WOMAN’S CUNNING.


“I have nothing to tell you,” said Marie, as she
looked angrily at the despatches on the desk.
“Oh yes you have,” said Dunnett, “quite a lot. But
111 start the story if you are too shy, Marie, and you can
finish it. Just after dinner last night I saw you come
into the dining-room and sit near the door. You had a
pencil in your hand and kept tapping with it on a menu-
card, signalling to someone in the Morse code as a matter
■of fact. You told them, or him, something about ‘Far
end corridor. Flat black case. Unlocked.’ This un-
prententious little thing here, I suppose, you meant. Then
you went outside among the guests. What happened after
that?”
“We locked you in his Excellency’s office,” said
Marie, a smile coming over her face for the first time.
“You were too simple. You fell right into the trap.”
“I willingly bow to your superior cunning,” said the
Inspector, “but you might as well tell us how you did it.”
“It was all too simple for words,” said Marie, relax-
ing somewhat. “Give me a chair and I’ll tell you-
partly.”
The Admiral himself rose and gave her a chair,
“We knew that the despatches were here,” she com-
menced.
“How did you know?” interrupted Captain Grim-
ley.
“Never mind,” said Marie peremptorily. “We knew
they were here and we determined to get them. It was
arranged that I was to bribe someone to blow up a wine-
keg or something of the kind at 9.15.”
“At 9.30 you mean,” corrected Inspector Dunnett.
“I said we were to have an explosion at 9.15,” con-
tinued Marie, looking disdainfully at Dunnett. “And
someone was to yell Fire! along the corridor. In the
confusion that ensued Goltz was to enter the Admiral’s
office— at the far end of the corridor, Inspector Dunnett
—and make off with the despatches. But when I saw my
old friend the Inspector here in his badly-fitting naval
outfit keeping an eye on things, I sat down at a table in
the dining-room where he would be able to admire me. I
passed a message to Mr. Nobody, telling him where the
Admiral’s office was situated and fixing the time for 9.30.
We did not change a detail of our plans, however, except
that, the way being so clear, we thought we could dispense
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


■with the fire alarm. Just on 9.15 Goltz entered the office
while I kept watch. A few minutes later, I saw the In-
spector also enter. Realising the position I slipped along
and locked the door.”
“But there was no key in it,” said Inspector Dunnett
“Yes there was. My key, which I turned and left in
the lock so that you would not be able to open the door
from the inside.”
“When I went outside to the spot where I was to
meet Goltz,” continued Marie, “he was not there. I
wondered if anything had happened. ■ In any case I de-
cided to give him every chance by blowing up the keg
into which I had already placed a harmless charge. The
cellar door was still open and there was no one about as
I entered. Immediately I had lit the fuse and before I
could get out,, someone came along, and the explosion took
place while I was hidden behind a cask. I remained
there till the fuss outside was over, fearing to come out
from the smoking room lest someone be on the look-out
for me. Then the door was locked before I succeeded in
-escaping. I remained there all night, and eventually was
foolish enough to entrust myself to the mercies of these
two men, thinking I could persuade them that I had
fainted after rushing into the cellar in the midst of the
■confusion, trying to find my way out of the building.”
“You are far too clever to be at this sort of game,”
said the Admiral as he looked almost admiringly at Marie.
“Well! won’t you give me a chance to do something
better?” pleaded Marie, tearing the wig from her head
and assuming the most innocent, girlish expression imagin-
able.
“After you have had an opportunity to be your own
companion for a while,” said Dunnett. “Meantime you
had better come across the water with us. The trip will
do you good after your night’s confinement. Will you
accompany us as Mrs. Denbruch, Mrs. Goltz, or simple
Marie Boelger?” laughed the Inspector as the trio passed
-out into the corridor.
A WOMAN’S CUNNING.


IV.
THE INFERNAL MACHINE.
44 1 lOW difficult, or how easy, is it to get aboard the flag-
-1 1 ship, Inspector?”
“Oh! no difficulty at all, for you, Sinclair. You
can get a permit any time you like. But what’s on ? The
Australia goes out in the morning, doesn’t she?”
“Yes; unless something happens to prevent her.”
“Why? What do you mean, Sinclair?”
“That if Steinhertz’s latest scheme succeeds she may
go to the bottom of Sydney Harbour before to-morrow
morning, or, if she puts to sea, she will never come back.”
“Whew! What have you got on to, Sinclair?
Sounds good.”
“Nothing very definite yet, Inspector; but to say
the least of it I am hot on the scent. Early this morn-
ing while loafing around near Steinhertz’s office I was
surprised to see Weingertz (alias Mackenzie, alias Rob-
son) who I thought was safe behind the barbed-wire fence
at Liverpool, come slouching along, all muffled up, and
enter the office. I was a bit untidy at the time, having,,
as you know, spent last night in the Domain, but I im-
mediately spruced myself up as much as possible, and, a
few minutes later, presented myself at the office as Herr
Schlickner. I gave the password and insisted upon see-
ing Steinhertz at once. Kruppman, the Secretary, said it
was impossible, but consented to take in my card. As he
opened his chief’s door I slipped close up behind him to
look at a map on the wall, and in the momentary opening
and closing of the door I heard Steinhertz, who was ap-
parently both agitated and annoyed, declare: “It may cost
you your life, hut it must he done. You know the penalty
if ■”


THE FLAGSHIP OF AUSTRALIA’S NAVY.
“Just as dawn was breaking... the Flagship of the Australian Fleet up-
anchored and glided out into the fairway, whence she vanished silently into the
pall of morning on her first great mission of death.”


“Kruppman came back and asked what my business
was. I refused to discuss it with him, so he told me to
exercise a little patience and pointed to a chair just out-
side his door. It did not take me a moment to wax into'
a perfect passion, summoning up all the German I could
command for the occasion, and accusing the Secretary
of the rankest discourtesy. Then I bustled out of the
office, cursing like only a true blood-and-iron Prussian
can. In the street I hailed a passing hansom, and while
driving round by Government House readjusted my cra-
vat, turned up my coat collar, pulled my' cap over the
right eye, got enough dirt about my clothes to pass for a
regular Domain dosser, paid my fare, and dismounted.
“Less than ten minutes elapsed before I was back at
Steinhertz’s office, and I had ten more to wait before
Weingertz came out. He carried a big parcel under his
arm and looked twenty years older than when he went in.
I followed him to his den in Oxford Street, where, I
found, he was back boarding with Mrs. Hindin, who,
you will remember, helped us so much in the Schaefer
case. Shortly afterwards I had an interview with her
regarding a room she has to let, and in the course of con-
versation paid her a deposit of £lO, with a promise of a
good deal more for any information she may be able to
glean. She promised to keep her weather eye open and
to ring me up if there was anything to report. About an
hour ago I got a ring, and, as she said she had something-
important to tell me, I arranged to meet her in the Gar-
dens. I have just come from there now.”
“Splendid, Sinclair! splendid! And what have you.
discovered?”
“That Weingertz has joined the Navy as an ordin-
ary seaman on H.M.A.S. Australia.”
“Impossible, Sinclair! It couldn’t be done.”
“Listen! Some time after I had been at the board-
ing-house, who do you think should call there?”
“Can’t guess! Kruppman perhaps, or Steinhertz?”'
“No! Our old friend Marie Boelger, disguised, of
course, but not sufficiently so to deceive the eagle eye of
Mrs. Hindin. She asked for her nephew, Weingertz,
and was shown up to his room, where she remained
nearly an hour, apparently in earnest conversation, in
German. When she left Weingertz called Mrs. Hindin
to his room and explained that he had just been having a
row with his aunt, because, against her wishes, he had
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


joined the Navy. He realised that it was somewhat of a
down-come for him to become a common seaman, but he
felt that in a time of great crisis like the present it was
the duty of every true patriot to put his pride in his poc-
ket and fight for his country in any capacity that pre-
sented itself.”
“Urn! But why on earth did he trouble to tell Mrs.
Hindin so much?”
“I don’t know, but I presume that that parcel he took
home from Steinhertz’s office contained the necessary
transformation togs, and he realised that if he were to be
seen leaving with them on, without having informed any-
one, suspicion might be aroused. Anyhow, that is as far
as we have got. What is to be the next move, Inspector?
Shall I take a run over to the flagship?”
“No! You’ll take Allardyce with you,” said Detect-
ive Dunnett, “and, as ordinary seamen, get in touch with
the Navy’s latest recruit. Do not lose him for a moment
whatever happens, and if he tries to get aboard the flag-
ship, or any other ship, cuff him. I can depend upon you,
Sinclair!”
“Yes, sir! absolutely.”
* * *
SHORTLY before 8 o’clock that night three jolly sea-
men entered the bar of a hotel in George Street.
They were already in high spirits. It was their
last night ashore, and they were spending it as boistrously
and light-heartedly as if none of them had a care in the
world. Soon they were joined by a fourth, who, although
less talkative, was quickly on the best of terms with them.
Then came two others, who, apparently, judging by their
gait, had already been making a round of the saloons.
All belonged to the flagship except the fourth man, whose
ribbon was that of H.M.A.S. Sydney.
■ “As odd man,” said No. 4, “let me shout. What
is it to be? Rum, or ——”
“Rum be damned!” growled No. 2. “Ain’t yer ’ad
enough one-in-three fer a while? Give us ”
“Cow’s juice,” laughed No. 1.
“With a big spot o’ bull in it,” chuckled No. 5.
“Give it a rest, mates,” said No. 2. “Let’s ’ave
plain ’onest beer- —beer as we won’t lip for the next six
months at least, if I knows anythink o’ the methods of
THE INFERNAL MACHINE.


Die-sir Bill. Not that I seys I knows more’n anybody
else, but larst time me an’ the Old Man was ’avin’ a con-
fab ’bout things in general, ’e seys to me ’e seys ”
“Never mind what he said, we’re not going to have
any beer to-night,” interrupted a loudly-dressed young
woman who had just entered the bar, and edging her way
through the group of jollies, had reached the counter, on
which she was resting her elbows. As she spoke she
dropped one hand to her hip and, turning her ruddy face
sideways on the other, looked straight into the faces of the
surprised seamen.
By cripes!” declared he of the Sydney, eyeing the
woman approvingly, “ain’t she a beaut?" Hallo, Pinkie,”
he said, moving towards her. “Don’t mind if I include
you in the shout. What are you having?”
Pinkie—she did not object to the name —smiled be-
nignly at No. 4. “As Scotty is doing the shouting,” she
said with a coquettish leer and a thumb jerked towards
him, “we must do things properly. You won’t see any
more land grog for a long time, boys, so I propose we
start with a taste of champagne.”
“Good girl! good girl!” shouted the merry revellers
in chorus. “Champagne, Scotty! champagne for seven!”
No 4 began to protest, but Pinkie caught his arm
and, wheeling him round to face the barman, ordered “two
bottles of the best,” amidst the uproarious laughter of the
onlookers.
“But it’s twenty bob a bottle,” said the barman, hesi-
tating, to see the money, before he opened the bottles.
“What has that to do with you, anyhow,” said Pinkie.
Then turning to No. 4 she put an arm round his shoulders
and said: “Come along, Scotty, part up. It’s a good
cause, you know.”
No. 4 fumbled about his pockets, then, turning away,
produced a purse from somewhere about the belt of his
trousers and handed the barman a five-pound note.
“Strike me blind if we ain’t dinin’ wi’ a bloomin’
lord!” ejaculated No. 1.
“An’ the very sort to give the Germans ’ell,” said
No. 6, slapping Scotty on the back.
Ihe glasses were filled, and as the barman laid No.
4’s change on the counter Pinkie quickly appropriated it,
and while No. 4 was endeavouring to coax it from her,
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


raised her glass to her lips. “To Scotty, boys,” she said,
“the most generous Scot on the packet.”
“To Scotty!” gurgled half-a-dozen voices, lost in the
sparkling effervescence of the finest “grog” to which they
had ever put lips.
“And another,” said No. 3, as he commenced to help
himself freely to the bottle.
“And still another,” cried No. 2, grabbing the second
bottle.
No. 4 had remained very quiet during the burst of
hilarity that had accompanied the drinking of his health.
He had not touched his glass, whilst most of the others
had filled and drained several.
“Come on, Scotty; don’t be a nark,” said No. 6.
“Let’s have a bosker good time while we’re at it, for God
knows when we’ll get another chance. Clear for action
to-morrow, you know.” .
“But I want my change,” Said No. 4. “What’ll the
missus say when I get home to Pompey at Christmas-time
without a bean?”
“Tell her your other missus spent it for you,” said
Pinkie, as she threw two more sovereigns on the counter
and asked for a repeat order.
“I suppose you’re perhaps right,” said No. 4 sud-
denly brightening under the fascinating glare of Pinkie’s
sparkling eyes, and draining his glass. “Might never
see my missus again. An’ what good ’d a fiver be to
Davy Jones? All right, here goes, boys. Fill ’em up
again. “To our sweethearts and wives and to the ’an-
somest girl in Sydney.”
“Bravo, Scotty! Bravo! To the gals. To Pinkie!”
By the time the fourth bottle had been emptied, the
Australia crew were extravagantly happy, and when
Pinkie tossed the last sovereign of No. 4’s change on the
counter and ordered a whisky for every man in the saloon,
the scene became so wild that the people in the street
stopped to listen, and two policemen suddenly appeared
among the revellers.
In an instant Pinkie and No. 4, each with an arm of
No. 2, were outside, threading their way through the
crowd and along George Street as fast as the faltering
steps of their companion would allow them. At Park
Street they turned east, and, crossing Elizabeth Street,
cut through Hyde Park in the direction of Oxford Street.
THE INFERNAL MACHINE.


It had commenced to rain, but they did not heed it,
nor did Nos. 5 and 6 of the public-house party, who had
followed on at a safe distance.
In the park the trio stopped and had a consultation.
No. 4 took a fiat bottle from his pocket and was handing it
to No. 2, who was sitting on the grass, when Pinkie put
up her hand and told him to keep it till they saw if it
were necessary. They stood talking for a minute and
looking round to see that no one was in sight. Just then
a policeman came along and ordered them to move on.
He waited till they did so, so perforce they had to take
their rapidly-getting-helpless charge in hand and assist
him out of the park. Soon they were back at the board-
ing-house, into which the three disappeared.
“Things are shaping well,” said Sinclair, as he
pulled Allardyce into the doorway of a shop at the oppo-
site side of the street, “but I wish I hadn’t taken quite so
much of that champagne.”
“I feel in great fettle, fit for anything,” said Allar-
dyce, “but I don’t mind confessing it, that girl has fas-
cinated me.”
“Did you know her?” asked Sinclair.
“No, not me; wish I did.”
“Why, Allardyce, that was Marie Boelger, one of the
cleverest spies in Australia. I have seen her in a few
roles, but, by jove, I never saw her act her part better
than she did to-night. She was simply stunning. That
Scotty business was a masterpiece. It shut up all ques-
tions about Weingertz’s accent right away, and the fellows
fell in beautifully. But I wonder what game they have
on with that poor chap Weingertz wanted to drug in the
park?”
The two detectives had not long to wait for enlighten-
ment, for soon Weingertz came out alone, wearing the
ribbon of H.M.A.S. Australia on his cap, and carrying
something under his arm wrapped up in a newspaper.
He walked as soberly as a judge back in the direction of
the city.
Sinclair and Allardyce waited for a time, then, fol-
lowing him to Elizabeth Street, hurried through the park
and got ahead of him before he reached Market Street.
As he turned the corner of that street he came across the
two hugging each other in the most affectionate way and
paying each other the most endearing compliments. Wein-
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


gertz stopped for a moment, then rolled up to them to re-
new the friendship of an earlier hour.
“Where d’ye get to, mate?” said Sinclair, putting his.
arm round Weingertz’s neck. “Skipped the division
pretty slick, ye did. Gave ’im a bad fiver, I suppose, an’
had to cut Eh?”
“Funny sort o’ bloke y’are,” stammered Allardyce, as.
he shook hands with Weingertz for the sixth time.
“Thought you was a dam—pardon—Sydneyite! Was ye
’shamed o’ yer blanky ribbon, Scotty?”
“Garn,” said Weingertz, “that was only a little joke.
I changed my napper-piece with that other chap so’s ’e
could pass ’imself off as someone else. But I’ve lost ’im;
he went off wi’ my girl. Pinkie, you know, Nice girl
Pinkie. Darned hard luck t’ lose her after bein’ skinned
of a fiver.”
“Wha’ time ish’t, mate?” asked Allardyce. “Got:
t’ be ’board 11.30 y’ know.”
“Don’ know. Must be pretty near 11 now. What
d’ye say t’ another drink ’fore we go ’ome?”
They had three more drinks before they finally com-
menced to make their way towards Circular Quay.
On the way down both Sinclair and Allardyce re-
peatedly asked Weingertz what he had in the parcel, and
were as repeatedly told that it was “something good” that
he would share with them when they got aboard.
“But ’ow are yer t’ get it past the ship’s co’porals?”
queried Sinclair. “They’ll be pretty partik t’-night. Last
night, ye know!”
“Oh, that’ll be easy enough,” said Weingertz. “I’ve
got a bottle too. It’s easily done. Carry th’ bottle in one
hand an’ the puddin’ in th’ other. Slip ’im th’ bottle an’'
ye’ll get yer pass.”
“So you’ve been at the game afore?” said Sinclair.
“Course,” replied Weingertz, “I didn’t do five years,
under Tug. Wilson for nought, d’ye think?”
“Five years, an’ ye ain’t got no stripes yet! By the
time I’m five years aboard I’ll be Jimmy the One, if not
the Bloke ’imself, wi’ a fine state cabin aft.”
“I could ’ave been Flag-luff years ago, if I’d liked,”'
said Weingertz, “but I didn’t ’cause of private reasons.”
Thus chatting and lying, the three reached Man-o-
War Steps just as the picket-boat hooked up to the jetty.
“Bustle along there!” bawled the cox’in as the heavy-
legged, sleepy-looking seamen came rolling into sight.
THE INFERNAL MACHINE.


The voice seemed to awaken the men suddenly from
a silent reverie into which they had fallen. None of
them spoke, but Weingertz’s frame shook visibly.
“Wha’s wrong, mate?” asked Sinclair, “Got the
’ump? Still griefin’ ’bout Pinkie, I s’pose. Cheer up,
Scotty, you’ll soon be dead.”
Weingertz did not answer, but held his parcel tighter,
straightened himself up and increased his pace.
“Let ’er go!” shouted the cox’in as the three were
pulled aboard. “We’ve got time to make up already.
Get a move on there No. 2, or I’ll make the darned lot o’
ye pull wet.”
The oarsmen pulled with a will as the rain pattered
down on their oilskin overalls and soaked the dozen or
more seamen in the bottom of the boat.
There was silence again—even the cox’in was quiet —
as the boat bounded rapidly across Farm Cove. Except
for the steady splash of the oars and the dull hiss of the
rain on the water, only the occasional snore of one of the
men who had already fallen asleep, broke the silence.
“The “glims” of the Australia had already been
“doused” and her starboard light could be but dimly seen
ahead.
Weingertz was breathing heavily. His bundle was
■wet. He hugged the saturated paper about it, then sat
up and tried to shield it under the oilskin of one of the
rowers. As he did so, Sinclair could distinctly hear the
winding of a spring. He too became excited. One, two,
three —ten, twelve turns.
Sinclair gave a sigh of relief. “She won’t go off for
at least some minutes,” he thought. “There’ll be time.”
“Aye-hai-wye!” came a bellowing voice from out the
darkness.
“No, no!” shouted the cox’in in reply.
Then the great form of the monster ironclad loomed
out of the night, towering away up into the weeping hea-
vens, the oarsmen raised their oars, and the boat swung
to the gangway with the precision of a motor-car pulled
up at a doorstep.
Steadily the weary, drenched seamen ascended the
gangway, the first with wonderful alacrity, the others
mostly with assistance. As they reached the top and
turned to salute the quarter-deck they could hear the sub-
dued echo of “The King, God bless him!” coming from
■FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


somewhere in the region of the gun-room, where the junior
officers had been celebrating their last night in Port Jack-
son.
Half-a-dozen had reached the deck and passed the
ship’s corporals. Then came Weingertz, preceded by Sin-
clair and assisted by Allardyce. His quivering frame told
of the terrible anxiety that was seething within him. He
could scarcely lift one foot after the other, and as he
reached the deck his face could be seen as pale as death
and as agonised as hell itself. Immediately he set foot
on deck he took a deep breath and staggered forward, as
he did so pushing a bottle into the hands of none other
than the Marshal-at-Arms himself.
The Marshal simply tapped him on the shoulder as
the signal to stand aside.
A corporal had just run his hands over Allardyce,
who was following on the heels of Sinclair when Wein-
gertz, raising the parcel above his head, made a sudden
rush towards the engine-room companion-way.
In a moment he was in the arms of someone who
seemed to rise up out of the darkness, and in another Sin-
clair had snatched the bundle from his grasp.
Just one second did Sinclair stand there. He could
hear a dull, whirring noise and feel the pulse of the bundle
in his arms. Then he rushed to the side, and as he hurled
the death-laden box clear of the gangway and the boat a
shot rang out and he staggered back. Another followed,
but in the instant between the two he heard the splash that
sealed the fate of the infernal machine for ever.
* >j<
“TIE’S coming round all right,” said the ship’s doctor,
1 1 half-an-hour later as Sinclair moved uneasily on
a stretcher in the Admiral’s cabin.
“Thank God!” said Detective Dunnett.
“That you, Inspector?” asked Sinclair faintly.
“What’s wrong? What’s that chewing my blasted shoul-
der? Knock it off, Inspector. It’s got teeth.”
“All right, Sinclair. It’s only a scratch. The doc-
tor has got the bullet out. Now keep quiet.” Then with
a burst of affection he laid his hand on the whole shoul-
der and said: “Sinclair, I’m proud of you, old man. My
God, I am!”
“Weingertz!” exclaimed Sinclair, rising up suddenly.
“The box! Where is it?”
THE INFERNAL MACHINE.


“They’re both at the bottom of Sydney Harbour,”
replied Dunnett. “After Weingertz wrenched himself
from my grasp and shot at you, he felled Allardyce with
a blow and cleared the rails like a kangaroo at a stock-
fence. On the way down he struck his head on the gang-
way and disappeared, leaving but a red spot behind.
The boat’s crew have been searching for him ever since,
but I expect he is making food for the sharks by this
time.”
“But where did you come from, Inspector? How
did you get here?”
“On the same boat as you,” answered Dunnett.
“About half-past 10 last night Mrs. Hindin rang up for
you and I took the message. Weingertz had just left, she
said, wearing the cap of a seaman who was then lying
helplessly drunk in his room. As he went out Weingertz
kissed Marie Boelger good-bye and told her he would be
aboard the last boat from the shore, as there was more
chance of there being a number of drunks on it than on
any of the earlier ones. Marie left at the same time, but
by the back door.”
“I knew I could trust you, Sinclair, old man,” con-
tinued Dunnett; “but to make doubly sure I went to Ox-
ford Street, stripped the seaman, got into his togs, risked
the Sydney cap, minus its ribbon, and came here, leaving
a constable in charge of the room till our return. I sent
a wireless to Garden Island and to the ship so that there
would be no difficulty in my getting aboard. I was the
first to get into the picket-boat and the first to put foot
on the deck. The rest you know.”
sft sH *
JUST as dawn was breaking, the three detectives were
transferred to a Garden Island pinnace that lay
alongside, and a few minutes later the Flagship of
the Australian Fleet up-anchored and glided out into the
fairway, whence she vanished silently into the pall of
morning on her first great mission of death.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


j m a H ' mt H €> if a'
TflTlt’ TfflP Hi Ip:
I ■I m 1 11 is Isi
M *«»»“ Spr ■■ i m Wm I W H u mm m*
ft
m m ||


V.
A £10,000 DEAL.
CAPTAIN Fordham had seen service in South Africa,
and according to his own accounts had done some
remarkable work while attached to the Intelligence
Corps in the operations in the Eastern Transvaal. In fact
he claimed that but for him on more than one occasion
Colonel De Lisle’s force, to which he was lent on account
of his brilliant scouting work, would have been ambushed,,
probably annihilated. Yet he had never even been men-
tioned in despatches. And as for promotion, that seemed
to be out of the question altogether for him. He had gone
to Africa as a captain; that was over 13 years ago; his rank
was still the same. He had done everything in his power
to court the appreciation of his superiors, but had failed.
That he knew his work no one could deny, but, unfortun-
ately, he never forgot to remind his brother officers of it;
and that fact more than anything else was responsible for
his being the best hated officer in barracks. Among dis-
own men he was well enough liked, chiefly, perhaps, be-
cause they recognised, that he was responsible for their fine
gunnery, A Company Royal Australian Garrison Artillery
being undeniably the best marksmen in the Commonwealth.,
For the past six months Captain Fordham had been
stationed at The Heads. His men had recently put up a,
new record for big-gun practice, and whilst they were com-
plimented on it, he was merely mentioned as being in com-
mand. He was heartily sick of it all, and was frequently
heard to complain bitterly against certain of his superiors.
At one time he had been very sober-living; now he was be-
ginning to frequent the Grand Club a little more than was-
judicious.


Here, Fritz! who’s that handsome fellow that has
been occupying the end table so frequently of late?” asked
Fordham at the Club one evening.
That’s Mr. Goldstein, the mining magnate,” replied
the waiter. Funny; he asked me only as you came in to-
night who you were; in fact, said he would like to meet
you.
No sooner had Fordham finished dinner than the well-
groomed, jovial-faced Goldstein crossed the room and drew
a chair beside him.
‘‘Goldstein’s my name,” he said. “I thought as you
were alone you might help me to appreciate a cigar. Not
intruding, I hope?” 5
“Not at all, Mr. Goldstein. Pleased to make your
acquaintance, I m sure. My name’s Fordham.”
“Royal Garrison Artillery I see ”
“Yes.”
• /r • , ' ove ’ y° u ’ re not the officer I heard so much about
in Melbourne, are you ? Been doing some great gunnery
work, breaking records in fact?” 3
Fordham smiled and nodded.
“Let me congratulate you, Major Fordham ”
“Captain, sir, Captain.”
“Oh! pardon me, Captain. Still, I’m only a little
premature, I hope. That last record must carry the value
ot substantial promotion you know.”
No chance; not even a word of commendation, ex-
cept from the newspapers. That’s the third time in six
months A Company has broken its own record. And I
don’t mind telling you it is the last!”
“You surprise me, Captain. Why, a friend in Mel-
bourne—a member of the Military Council as a matter of
tact-told me only recently that he considered you one of
the most efficient officers in Sydney. But this, of course
is between ourselves.”
“Oh, certainly, Mr. Goldstein. But it’s strange. Still,
it may be only the local snobs who are against me.”
Against you! Why should they be against you, Cap-
tain?”
“ Well But it’s hardly the thing for me to criti-
cise my superiors, Mr. Goldstein.”
“Oh, that’s all right, that’s all right. Confidence for
confidence, you know. You have no need to fear my re-
peating the slightest detail you tell me. I’m discretion it-
A £lO,OOO DEAL.


self. And what’s more, I—if you don’t mind my saying
so —I have taken rather a fancy to you. I don’t know that
I can do very much in the direction of securing for you the
promotion you have so deservedly won; but if you’ll let
me use my influence in the right quarter I think I might
be able to put in a spoke for you.”
“It is very good of you, Mr. Goldstein, but I’d just
be afraid of ”
“Be afraid of nothing, Captain. As I said before,,
I’m discretion itself. And I certainly like to see a man
get a fair deal. What will you have, Captain, another
B. andS.?”
* * *
IT was very late that night before Captain Fordham re-
turned to his station—with assistance. Mr. Gold-
stein was going out of town for a day or two, and had
asked him to spend the week-end with him at Leura.
“It looks as if fortune were to turn my way after all,”
said Fordham to himself next day. “What a stroke of
luck that I went to the Grand last night. I feel more in-
clined to go on with that scheme I was thinking of sub-
mitting to Headquarters for the reorganisation of the sys-
tem of Sydney coast defence.”
The week-end at Leura was the most delightful Cap-
tain Fordham had spent for years. Mr. Goldstein’s home
was beautifully situated in spacious grounds of its own.
His wife was an ideal hostess; his ward, Marie Falkenhyn,
was as unsophisticated and as charming a young woman
as the Captain had met for a long time; whilst Mr. Gold-
stein himself and his friends who came to chat and play
billiards in the evening were as jolly a company as one
could desire to meet.
On the Sunday Mr. Goldstein had arranged for a
motor trip to Mount Wilson, but at the last moment he
found he could not go, so he asked Captain Fordham if he
would care to take Miss Falkenhyn for the run.
Miss Falkenhyn was delighted —and so was Captain
Fordham.
It was long after dark when they returned home, the
chauffeur, somehow, having taken a wrong turning. The
house was almost in darkness; everyone had gone to bed
except their host. But he was in very good spirits, so>
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


good, in fact, that had Fordham seen him sitting up taking
from the chauffeur more than an hour later the rest
of this tale would never have been told.
That Captain Fordham was infatuated there could be
no doubt. He wrote to Marie frequently from Syd-
ney. They met on every possible opportunity. She
introduced him to her friends and took him to frequent
card parties where he sometimes lost more money than
he could afford.
Mr. and Mrs. Goldstein did everything in their power
to throw the two young people together, and Captain Ford-
ham’s visits to Leura were made most welcome.
Mr. Goldstein had an interest in several racehorses,
and the Captain was induced to speculate rather heavily on
their chances till he had to confess to Mr. Goldstein that
he had overstepped the mark and could not meet his liabili-
ties.
“Don’t let that worry you, my friend,” laughed his
host. 111 see you through. And Marie, you know, has a
pretty fair income of her own,” he added suggestively.
By the bye, Captain, I was in Melbourne last week,”
continued Mr. Goldstein, “and chanced to meet my military
friend. You remember that conversation we had regard-
ing your re-fortification scheme? Rather a coincidence,
but he told me, in the strictest confidence of course, that
the authorities were dissatisfied with the present defence
position and were endeavouring to devise an entirely new
plan. What about submitting yours?”
“By George! your military friend must have tremend-
ous confidence in you before he told you so much!” said
Fordham. “You have been awfully good to me, Mr.
Goldstein. I’ll never be able to repay you. If you’ll ad-
vance me the money I’ll go down to Melbourne right
away.”
The visit to the Victorian capital was disappointing.
Captain Fordham had an interview with the Naval Secre-
tary, to whom he submitted his plans; but they were coldly
received. He was not even invited to explain them to the
Naval Board.
Months went by, during which Marie and Captain
Fordham lived very happily together, but Marie was very
extravagant and they soon found themselves in serious fin-
ancial difficulties. Time and again Mr. Goldstein helped
them out. Then one daw he suddenly changed his front.
A £lO,OOO DEAL.


“Look here, Fordham,” he said, “I am in a devil of a
fix. I have been speculating too heavily and have just
had a terrible run of bad luck; in fact, I am practically
played out. I cannot give you another cent, and what is
more I want the £2OOO odd I have lent you from time to
time as soon as you can give it me.”
“But I haven’t got a bean,” said Fordham in amaze-
ment, “and I find bills coming in every day demanding im-
mediate settlement. lam afraid I have allowed Marie too
free a hand.”
“Don’t blame Marie,” said Mr. Goldstein somewhat
savagely. “It is your own damned extravagance—your
cards, your drinking and your women —that have brought
you to this.”
Fordham discussed the situation with Marie. He ex-
plained and expostulated, but she did not seem to be able
to understand his anxiety. She must have her pleasure.
If he could not afford it, she must go elsewhere.
“In any case,” she said, “I shall come into my own
money soon, so what need is there to worry?”
Fordham felt somewhat reassured, and played a game
of hide and seek with his creditors for several months, hop-
ing to be able to clear them off by the end of the year. But
Christmas came and he was deeper in the mire than ever.
Several of Marie’s friends had cut her; the stores would
not give her any more credit; even the Goldsteins stopped
calling, and Mr. Goldstein sent several snorting letters to
Fordham. The latter’s only solace seemed to be wine and
Marie’s love.
On Christmas Day Marie brought an old friend to
dinner, Mr. Denbruch, a wealthy German wool-buyer. He
paid her great attention and asked Fordham’s permission
to call again.
Fordham thought he saw an opportunity to get relief
and willingly invited Denbruch to call when he felt in-
clined.
But Denbruch’s attentions became too frequent, and
when, one evening, he asked Fordham to allow him to take
Marie to the theatre, Fordham lost his temper and ordered
him from the house.
A week later Goldstein called. He was in a fearful
hole, he said, and saw only one way out. And the only
man who could help him was Fordham.
FOILED; THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


But I have nothing,” said Fordham. “Marie’s
money has never come, and even if it does, we’ll want every
penny of it to clear ourselves.”
r m < f L °° k ’ J T °f dham ’ 1 have a Proposal to make,” said
Goldstein. It s safe, and if you agree to it we shall both
be able to get out of our troubles. A friend of mine who
lias seen me with you has been commissioned to get hold of
the plans of Sydney’s fortifications.”
“Good God, man! You don’t suppose I’d ”
“Listen! I’m not supposing anything at all. lam
on y telling you that it is our only way out. If you refuse
tlien I shall have to take other means, which certainly won’t
save your skin. You have already told me sufficient to in-
cur your being drummed out of the Army. But I don’t
want to split on you. I simply want you to do a series of
httLsketches for me, or to instruct me how to do them my-
“ Then I’ll see you damned first!” said Fordham
. . fast ’ Licnd, not so fast,” continued Gold-
stem. If it is your patriotic scruples that are standing
m the way, I may tell you that there is not the slightest
danger of any harm resulting. I just returned from
Melbourne to-day, and while there my military friend in-
formed me that a combined meeting of the Military Coun-
cil and the Navy Board had been considering the scheme
you submitted to them some months ago. They have
decided to modify it in certain directions and to adopt it.
the money for its execution was passed in the last Bud-
get, so that the work will be gone on with immediately.”
, ex P e °t me to give you copies of my plans
do you? Bah!” ' 1
“Not at all, Captain. I confess I am playing double-
but what I want you to do is to give me the plans of the
present fortifications. That will fulfil my part of the
bargain. And by the time they have been sent to Ger-
many and studied there, the new scheme will be under
way, so that, in reality, you will be doing a good service
to your country by grossly misleading the German authori-
ties. I don’t want you to give me your answer now. To-
morrow I will meet you as you come off duty. By then
you will have had time to consider things. And I know
what your answer will be.”
No need to wait till to-morrow, you damned Ger-
Fordham - “ M y answer is ‘No! abso-
lutely No!’”
A £lO,OOO DEAL.


“What’s all this talk about?” said Marie, as she en-
tered the room. “Oh! I beg your pardon, Mr. Goldstein.
I thought it was Mr. Denbruch’s voice I heard, and I
wondered why he had come back after being so rudely
treated.”
“We were discussing a little plan for your benefit,
Marie,” said Mr. Goldstein. “A scheme to get you out
of your financial troubles.”
“That’s enough, Mr. Goldstein; it has nothing to do
with her,” interrupted Fordham. “Please, Marie, leave
us alone.”
“No, darling; you are worried. I want to help you.
I know that I have not been all that I should like to be
to you, but if we could once get over our present trouble,
we’d get married and live quietly and happily for the
future. Tell me, dear, what is the scheme?”
“No, Marie! It is too dishonourable a project for
me ever to take part in. It is better that you should
know nothing about it.”
“Then you do not trust me. I have suspected it for
long. To-morrow I leave this house.”
“Stop, Marie, stop, you will drive me mad.”
“Yes, after you have ruined me,” retorted Marie. “I
mean what I say. lam going.”
“Come, come, Captain Fordham,” interrupted Gold-
stein. “Don’t be a fool. There is no risk. Why not tell
Marie? She may be able to help us. In any case if she
says ‘No’ I will take it as the last word.”
Goldstein re-explained the whole scheme, and as
he did so Fordham watched Marie’s face intently. When
she was told how the plans would be useless in a year’s
time, she suddenly beamed, and Fordham felt that he was
lost.
“I think it is just the best thing I have ever heard,”
she said when Goldstein concluded. “Although my poor
old father was a German there is nothing I should like
more than to strike a blow at the country that treated him
so badly. Oh, I shudder even now when I think of the
terrible tales he used to tell me of the brutality of the
Prussian officers. But I have lived all my life in this
country to which father came to escape service in the
Franco-Pmssian War, and I love it so much. Why
should we not play them at their own game and sell them
the plans that so soon will be useless? Surely you can-
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


not be so unreasonable, dear. And think of the terrible
fix we are in, too. What an easy way it is out of all our
troubles!”
“Do not tempt me, Marie. I am sorry, but I can-
not —I will not —enter into this dirty business. It is all
too despicable, too dishonourable.”
“Not even for my sake?”
“No, Marie!”
“Then, Captain Fordham, I bid you good-night and
good-bye. Mr. Denbruch has proposed to me. To-mor-
row I shall accept him. You can do your worst. You
have been offered a chance to make me happy and you
refuse because of something you call honour. What of
your honour to me? You took me from my guardian
an innocent girl. Now you cast me adrift. For honour,
forsooth!”
Marie burst into tears.
Fordham stared blankly before him. Then a spirit
or resolution seemed to seize him. “What is the price?”
he asked.
“Ten thousand pounds, Captain, ten thousand
pounds.”
“Then I’ll do it,” said Fordham, savagely banging
his hand on the table. “I’ll play the game as cunningly
as ever German played it!”
A £lO,OOO DEAL.


VI.
CROSSED AND DOUBLE-CROSSED.
6C f TELLO ! Is that Police Headquarters?. . I want
X 1 to speak to Inspector Dunnett. . . Yes, please,
quick!”
“Is that you, Inspector?. . . Oh, you wouldn’t know
me. . . I have something important to tell you, but lam
afraid I may be watched. Can you come over to, say,
Fort Denison right away? That’s about the safest place,
I think. . . I’ll be there in about half-an-hour, say at
9.30. . . You’ll come in the police boat I suppose. . . All
right, I’ll look out for you.”
Captain Fordham had passed through a terrible
night, and as he now sat in his quarters he was almost too
confused to think. For the hundredth time he told him-
self it was impossible. Marie could never betray him.
Yet as he recollected the strange nature of his first meet-
ing with Goldstein, the rapid development of their friend-
ship, the manner in which he had always been thrown
into Marie’s company, and the calm way in which she
had left her guardian and come to live with him—the
more he allowed his mind to dwell on these things the
more he felt convinced that he had been the victim of a
diabolical conspiracy. Yet he loved Marie. He would
marry her to-morrow if he were able. Ah! it couldn’t be
true. She must care for him. No woman could ever be
to a man what she had been to him unless she loved him.
He began to regret he had rung up the police. It might
only lead to his disgrace.
A stiff glass of brandy settled his nerves somewhat,
and he resolutely told himself that he must see it through,
whatever the result.


The trip to Fort Denison did him good. He reached
the old fort just ahead of a small rowing boat that brought
an old bearded man alongside.
“Give us a hand, mate,” said the old fellow.
“Who are you? What do you want here?” de-
manded Fordham.
“It’s all right, Captain. I thought I had better
come in my Sunday clothes to avoid suspicion,” said In-
spector Dunnett.
“Ah, Inspector, lam glad to meet you. I’m Captain
Fordham,. Royal Garrison Artillery. lam sorry to bring
you over here, but I have had somewhat of an unusual
experience, and as my suspicions are aroused, I thought
you might be able to help me. But why do you come in
this guise?”
“Oh! just a fad of mine, Captain, that’s all. But
let us get to business. You wanted to see me about —the
fortifications, I suppose?”
“Yes; how did you know?”
“Just guesswork, Captain. I knew you were sta-
tioned at The Heads, of course. Someone been trying to
spy on the place?—or ”
“Well, hardly, but Look, Inspector, can I
speak to you in absolute confidence, without the risk of
what I tell you coming out if it proves that my suspicions
are unfounded?”
“That all depends upon who is concerned,” replied
the Inspector. “If, for instance, it were that fellow
Goldstein ”
“What the devil do you know about him?”
“Oh, nothing; at least not so much as I should like
to. I have a pretty complete record of his exploits in
other centres. That was when he was Mr. Smith, Mr.
Poison, Mr. Wingate, and various other aliases; but since
he came back to Sydney about four years ago with Tony
Rickmers and Karl Graves, he has been very quiet, and I
almost lost touch with him. That is, personally; the office
never lost sight of him. The Blue Mountains police have
kept us informed of his recent doings. Only this morn-
ing, after getting your ring, I was looking up his cards.”
“But how did you know it was I who rang?”
“I knew the voice, and to make certain I asked the
Exchange.”
“Then I have been watched, have I?”
CROSSED AND DOUBLED-CROSSED.


“Oh, certainly! We watch most officers who have
anything to give away. You know Mr. Goldstein’s
charming ward, of course?”
“Yes, rather well.”
“Rather intimately, you should say, 1 think. She
has run you into a pretty fair figure at the various stores
and emporiums. Nearly £I2OO, if I recollect aright.
And you are .also in for a tidy sum with Goldstein!”
“Good God! How do you know all this? And I
suppose you also know the price. it is to cost me to get
out —and the method?”
“No; that’s what I want you to tell me. You seemed
pretty agitated when you left your home last night after
your interview with Goldstein. And from that gentle-
man’s subsequent conversation with Mr. Denbruch I
gathered that our services would be required soon, either
one way or the other. But tell me what took place last
night, and I’ll then be in a position to complete the story,
with your assistance to fill in a few gaps.”
Fordham detailed what had taken place. It had
been his intention to tell nothing; only to ask questions,
and, if possible, get the police to investigate so that he
might know how to act. Now he realised how much his
own reputation was at stake. “If the police already
know so much,” he argued,, “it is ten to one on their
knowing everything.”
“Let me see. It was on the 10th of April of last
year that you met Mr. Goldstein at the Grand Club,” said
the Inspector, consulting a loose-leafed notebook. “You
smoked his cigars and drank a good deal of brandy and
soda at his expense. You left the Club shortly after 11
o’clock in rather an unsteady condition. The following
Saturday morning you went to Leura by the 8.5 train
and remained there till Monday afternoon. On the Sun-
day you went for a long ride with Marie Falkenhyn,
otherwise Mrs. Denbruch.”
“Lord! You don’t mean to tell me she had lived
with Denbruch before then. That she was his wife?”
“Well, I don’t say she was his wife. She lived with
him at times, and called herself Mrs. Denbruch. But
she had other names —Mrs. Goltz, and Marie Boelger for
instance. She is really an Austrian of high birth; was
educated in England; ran away when she was a mere
child with a Prussian officer who deserted her; got in
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


touch with the Socialists in Berlin; then joined the Secret
Service, and ultimately came to Australia with Steinhertz,
chief of the Kaiser’s spies in this country. She has been
living very quietly recently. The last we heard of her
was that she was living with a certain Captain Ford-
ham ”
“Stop! I can’t stand any more of this. You seem
to have had me watched like a damned criminal instead
of treating me with the respect due to my station. Who
put you on this game? Some of my rivals, I suppose?”
_ “Now, don’t go off like that, Captain. What I am
telling you is for your own good. Your rivals, so far as
I know, are, fortunately for you, totally ignorant of your
doings.”
“For my own good, be damned! If you are so soli-
citous about my welfare, why did you not warn me before
I went so far? You wanted to trap me so that I might
be held up as an example to others—that’s all. But you
have failed, failed miserably, Inspector Dunnett ”
“Not quite, but we might have done so had we
warned you. You see, we like to do things in our own
way. And in this case at any rate we are going to suc-
ceed, but only with your assistance. To get back to
where we were, however. That motor ride to Mount
Wilson! What took place on that occasion?”
“How do you mean?” .
“What did you talk about? How much did you
tell her?”
“I told her nothing, absolutely nothing. We simply
had a mild flirtation.” ’
“Come, you are forgetting, Captain. While resting
on a rock just a little way down the .mountain side she
suggested that she would so much like to see what a fort
was like, and you promised that Some day you might be
able to show her over one. Isn’t that so?”
“Great heavens! Who was there to hear us?”
“Sinclair, my right-hand man. Don’t you remember
an uncouth looking fellow who offered to pilot you around
for a couple of shillings?”
“God!”
“But what about your promise to Miss Falkenhyn?
You never fulfilled it, I know. At least you never showed
her over a fort, but did you ever show her any plans of
one?”
CROSSED AND DOUBLED-CROSSED.


“Never! I have never shown a plan to anyone either
inside or outside the Service, except to the Naval Secre-
tary in Melbourne.”
“That’s splendid! First rate, Captain. You’ve
played your part well. But you ran a terrible risk right
from the time you went for that motor ride till you rang
me up at Headquarters to-day.”
“But it is only within the last few months that any-
thing has ever been hinted to me about selling the plans.”
“Yes; but you sold yourself long before that. If
you had attempted to draw out from that fatal Sunday
onward you would have fallen in. Can’t you see how
they had you? You went out motoring with another
man’s wife the day after you met her. It was very late
before you came home. Everyone had gone to bed, in
fact. You slept the night there, and Miss Falkenhyn,
who usually shared the room with Mrs. Goldstein, was
not seen till next morning.”
“It’s a lie, an infamous, unscrupulous lie!”
Quite so! But you have only the chauffeur as a
witness to prove what didn’t take place, and as he is one
of the clique, well, you see where you are?”
“Then you induced Mr. Goldstein to lend you
money under false pretences,” continued Inspector Dun-
nett. “You were to marry Miss Falkenhyn and wanted
the money to furnish a home.”
It s a lie. It was Mr. Goldstein who induced me
to speculate on his horses, and it was he and his friends
who won my money from me at cards.”
“No doubt. But how can you prove it, especially
as Mr. Goldstein has no horses? No; there are five or
six to one against you.”
“But you mentioned a moment ago that you had
submitted certain plans to the Naval Board,” continued
the Inspector. ‘That is news to me. What were they?
I knew you went to Melbourne a few months ago, but as
you spent all your time in official quarters I presumed
you were on official business.”
They were plans of a scheme I devised for the com-
plete rearrangement of the defences of Sydney,” said
Fordham.
“And were they accepted?”
No; not at the time, at any rate. The Secretary,
received me very coldly, and I could not understand it
in view of the fact that I had been told the authorities
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


were seriously considering the introduction of a new
scheme at Sydney.”
“Who told you that?”
“Goldstein.”
“Who told him?”
“A member of the Military Council.”
“Did he tell you his name?”
“No; he never mentioned it, and I did not ask, as I
presumed he had reasons for not telling me.”
By jove! he had reasons too. He is as cunning as
a fox. Both Steinhertz and he, to my knowledge, have
tried everything in their power to get an introduction to
a certain member of the Council, but they have been
snubbed repeatedly.”
“Then that, too, was all lies?”
“Absolutely! Of course these were not the plans he
wanted you to sell?”
“No; he told me that the authorities had decided to
adopt a modification of my scheme; that the cost of intro-
ducing it had been already passed by Parliament in the
Defence Vote, and that it would be under way in a very
short time.”
Go on, this is fine. You were to sell the plans be-
cause they would soon be useless?”
“Yes; they were to go to Germany.”
“He admitted that?”
“Yes; they were to go to Germany to mislead the
authorities there. He tried to persuade me that I would
be doing my country a great service by so misleading the
treacherous Germans.”
“And what did you promise?”
“That I would sell the plans for £10,000.”
“What! do you mean to tell me that?”
Yes; but not the plans. When I found myself
driven into a corner I thought I saw a way out. I de-
cided that I would draft an entirely bogus set of plans
and sell them at the price he offered, so that in reality I
would be doing exactly as he suggested I should —mis-
leading the Germans!”
“That was clever; but do you think he would have
paid the money until he had made certain that he had
got what he wanted?”
“I never thought of that. I only saw a way of
crossing him, playing him at his own game, and I lumped
at it.”
CROSSED AND DOUBLED-CROSSED.


“And what do you propose to do now?”
“I don’t quite know. That is why I asked you to
come here. I had heard that you were interested in the
spying business, and it just struck me that you might
know something about Goldstein, or that you would be
able to find out for me.”
“You did the right thing, Captain. You’ve played
your cards well. Now I want you just to go on with
your idea as if you had never met me, as if you were still
ignorant of Goldstein’s real business. Draft your plans
and arrange when and where they are to be handed over.
But let me know in good time. Better make it as soon
as possible. I think that is all we can do just now, Cap-
tain. Are you in a hurry to get back to duty?”
“I’m due at noon, Inspector. It is now 11.30.”
“All right, you had better go. I’ll hang about for
a little. Any fishing lines about? That’s good. I’ll
try my hand at catching sharks for a while. It’s a hobby
of mine; only I wish they came from Berlin.”
* * *
WHEN he came off duty that night Fordham found
Goldstein waiting for him.
“Have you got them?” asked Goldstein.
“Oh, give me time, man. I can’t get everything in
a day. I spent several hours at Fort Denison this morn-
ing making investigations, but I cannot perform miracles.
There is absolutely no hope of my getting my hands on
the originals; they are in Melbourne.- But,l think I can
make complete sketches by, say, Friday night. I’ll have
to work all night to do even that, but my creditors are
making things very uncomfortable and I’ll be glad to get
relief. But it’s dirty business, Goldstein. I am afraid
to think of it lest I change my mind. I simply loathe
myself for stooping to it. Yet, there’s Marie to consider.
I cannot let her suffer. Poor girl, she is terribly worked
up about it. Yet she is such an innocent thing; she can-
not see the risk I am taking.”
“Tut tut, Fordham; don’t let yourself get that into
your head. There is absolutely no risk.”
“By the bye, Goldstein, how much of the £IO,OOO am
I to get?”
“Two thirds. I’m taking only a third.”
“That’s generous of you, by jove it is—very generous.
But there’s the £2,000 I am due you to come out of it.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


That will make it about £5,000 each. I suppose you’re
sure enough about your friend paying?”
“Absolutely.”
“On the nail?”
“Yes; as soon as the plans are handed over.”
“That will be Friday night then at, say, 8 o’clock.
But where?”
“At your lodgings, I suppose, unless you would pre-
fer to go somewhere else.”
“All right. But mind, Mr. Goldstein, I have your
word as a gentleman that not a cheep of this transaction
will ever come out?”
“Most certainly, my dear Fordham. In writing, if
you like.”
Punctually at 8 o’clock on Friday night, Mr. Gold-
stein and his friend arrived at Fordham’s house.
Marie met them at the door, and Fordham heard
her whispering to them as she showed them into the sit-
ting-room.
“How do you do, Mr. Goldstein?”
“My friend, Mr. Dolmuth, Captain Fordham.”
_ “Pleased to meet you. You’ve come about that little
business matter. We’d better get it through straight
away. Marie, you might give us a tune.”
“There is no danger of our being watched, I sup-
pose?” said Mr. Dolmuth.
“I sincerely hope not,” said Fordham, looking anxi-
ously around and closing the Venetian blind. “I am the
only one who has to fear that.”
“Then we can have a look at the plans?”
“Yes, certainly,” said Fordham, as he unlocked a
drawer and produced a roll containing half a dozen
sheets.
Dolmuth took from his pocket a small notebook, and
after looking well at it, commenced to study the plans.
Fordham turned pale and was just about to rise
from the table when Dolmuth suddenly levelled a re-
volver at his head.
“I thought so,” he said. “You cunning dog. These
are not the plans. Hands up! Now you’ll keep them there
till you give me your word that by this time to-morrow
night the original plans—you know where they are —will
be in my hands. And you will also sign this declaration,
CROSSED AND DOUBLED-CROSSED.


which, if you fail us, we shall have much pleasure in
handing to your commanding officer.”
Goldstein produced a single sheet of paper and laid
it on the table in front of Fordham. It read:
I hereby agree to sell to the German Gov-
ernment complete plans of the entire fortifica-
tions of Sydney for the sum of ten thousand
pounds.
“Sign it,” commanded Dohnuth, as he handed him
his pen.
Fordham was about to sign when there was a noise
at the window. All turned towards it as a shot rang out
and the revolver fell from Dolmuth’s shattered fingers.
Goldstein made a grab at the weapon, but he was too
late. Fordham had seized it and was standing with his
back to the wall covering both his prisoners.
Goldstein made an attempt to reach his pocket when
Fordham fired and he dropped like a log.
Other shots were fired outside, then the window flew
in, the blind was torn down and the faces of three police-
men, revolvers in hand, commanded the situation.
A few minutes later the door opened and in stepped
Inspectors Dunnett and Sinclair, with two more policemen
carrying Denbruch, handcuffed and bleeding profusely
from a wound in the head.
“Where’s Miss Falkenhyn?” asked Inspector Dun-
nett.
Fordham looked around. She had disappeared. An
officer was sent to search the house, but in vain. Marie
had escaped.
As the three wounded spies were being carried to a
coach in waiting for them, Goldstein turned his eyes to
Fordham.
“You damned Englishman!” he growled.
“Yes; but I played the game,” answered Fordham,
“and as cunningly as ever German played it.”
FOILED; THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


ll
% W as i
I f"lii Pill 11 IPO€Pi
s** p -tl |L >2k BlmBM %mBBB
I
s
IMJ
111
iB
9-«
If I
-;i:
a


VII.
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE TROOPSHIPS.
“W/HY, this is the best thing that has come our way
W for a long time,” said Inspector Dunnett, as he
walked up and down his office, holding an ur-
gent telegram at arm’s length and reading it over and over
again. He had been studying it for half an hour, and
the sheets of crumpled paper scattered about the floor
told how often he had copied and re-copied it.
“It is as plain as daylight,” he chuckled, as he
handed the slip to Sub-Inspector Sinclair. “I certainly
gave Steinhertz and his crowd credit for being more cun-
ning than this. But we’ll nab them this time, Sinclair.
We’ll nab him.”
“I don’t quite understand,” said Sinclair. “Cer-
tainly, as you remarked, there is no Ivy Corporation on
the Sydney Stock Exchange. I have rung up half a dozen
agents while you have been studying the wire, and none
of them ever heard of the concern. Still, you know, there
are plenty of private companies that never come under
the purview of the Stock Exchange. I will have the
company register looked up to-morrow morning if neces-
sary. But what’s your theory, Inspector?”
“Theory! There’s no theory about it. It is a plain
statement. Read the message. .
Wire crossed fourth Sydney agent asking
latest mine quotation concerned regarding Ivy
Corporation shares sell twenty twenty-one or
safe margin if other late purchases fall under
eighteen sell on ’Change October. — Father.
“By crikey! but it is a good job the Government
stopped the use of those codes; otherwise we should never
have got even thus far. That Steinhertz crowd has been


very busy of late, and they had us beat on the codes all
right.”
While talking he had been working on the telegram
with a blue pencil. “Now look at that,” he said, with a
self-satisfied air, as he handed the slip back to his under-
study :
Wires crossed fourth SYDNEY agent ask-
ing latest MINE quotation concerned regarding
IVy corporation shares sell TWENTY twenty-
one or SAFE margin if other LATE purchases
fall under EIGHTEEN sell on ’Change
OCTOBER. — Father.
“Splendid!” ejaculated Sinclair, “It’s simply splen-
did; but how did you discover it?”
“Simplicity itself! The third word gave the whole
thing away. He might just as well have written: ‘Read
•every fourth word!’ And it all fits in to a ‘T’ with that
chart you unearthed on your raid on Steldt’s warehouse
the other day.”
Inspector Dunnett produced from a big bundle of
papers a rough sheet on which was sketched a mere out-
line of Sydney harbour and its approaches.
“Look! here you are,” he said. “It is numbered
from 0 to 95. These figures puzzled me a bit when I
first saw them; but it is evident that this scrap of paper is
going to play a big part in elucidating the scheme Stein-
hertz has on hand this time. What were the figures
again? Let’s see: IV; that, of course, is 4; the y doesn’t
•count, 20: that’s 4-20. I thought so!”
“Then we are too late!” interjected Sinclair. “It is
■already a quarter past 4 and this is the 18th. Remember
Steinhertz’s agent received the wire between 10 and 11 a.m.
to-day!”
“I’m surprised at you, Sinclair. Don’t you see that
the figures refer to the first part of the wire?—not to the
date—to the words ‘Sydney Mine.’ Put a blue mark
under the 4 and the 20 on that chart. One is on the
north side and the other on the south side of the har-
bour, isn’t it?”
“Yes, by jove! But how ”
“Never mind how for the present. See if Constable
Allardyce has come back from Garden Island with that
chart I sent him for.”
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE TROOPSHIPS.


“Captain Elrick to see you, privately, Inspector,’"
announced a messenger a few moments later.
“Ah, Captain! This is Inspector Sinclair. He is-
working with me on this case. I thought you would
come in person. It is never safe to trust such documents,,
even to a constable, eh?”
“What documents?” asked the Captain. “I suppose-
you mean myself. lam the only document I have brought
-and a pretty live one it is too. We never commit those
things to paper, you know. At least, not in a way that
you could understand them. I believe I may be able to-
help you, though!”
“You know where all the submerged mines are laid
and controlled from, then?”
“Yes.”
“Have a look at that! See the figures underlined
4 and 20, I think. What do you make of them?”
“Good God, Inspector! There are spies or traitors
about. A line drawn between 4 and 20 connects two por-
tions of the principal submerged mine field. Is that all
the wire says?”
“Yes, I think so, Captain, as far as the mines are-
concerned.”
Then if that is all they have got we are compara-
tively safe. The figure 4 on that chart represents the
northern section of the outer field. If both were tam-
pered with we could connect up the remaining sections
and still have a complete barrier that would account for
any hostile vessel attempting to enter the harbour. But
let’s look at the wire again. ‘Wire crossed fourth Sydney
agent asking latest mine quotation .’ ‘Crossed fourth!"
What does that mean, Inspector?”
“Oh! that is only the key to the message. ‘Read
every fourth word,’ it means.”
“Sure that’s all?”
“Apparently.”
“Let me see that chart again. By gad, it’s not!
They’ve got the whole field. Four times four, four times
twenty 16-80. Crossed! Don’t you see it, Inspector?
The figures are crossed. They should read 16-20 and
4-80. That covers the whole mined area. My God!
we’re in a fix, with the German cruisers still at large in
the Pacific. And they are going to blow it up on the
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


18th. That’s to-day, with all the transports ready to sail
and our fleet away somewhere among the islands. Whew!
I wonder how long we have. I see it says ‘late 18.’ ”
“Officer from the G.P.O. with letter for you, In-
spector,” announced the messenger.
“Just a moment, Captain. I arranged with the
Censor to watch for any message directed to any one of
Steinhertz s agents around Sydney. He has appar-
ently got something. Let’s see!”
Can send consignment Tweed on or before
third sorry have no red flannel in stock light
supplies other lines no shipment till war over.
“Look’s harmless enough, doesn’t it? But its un-
signed. Let’s try the fourth word test. Gad! but this
gets interesting. TWEED THIRD RED LIGHT NO
WAR. What do you make of it, Captain?”
God knows! I cannot stop to think. Something’s
got to be done and that quickly. Meet me here at 6.45,
Inspector. That will give me an hour and a half.”
* * *
WITHIN twenty minutes wireless messages were
flashing from Garden Island to the Staff Head-
quarters in camp and thence to every troopship
in Sydney harbour.
“Disembark men return to camp at once,” was the
message that startled the officers.
Thence onward the bustle and consternation on the
water was extraordinary. Everybody was asking ques-
tions to which no one could reply. The troopships at the
wharves soon were clear of their freight, but it was long
after dark before the last of the men on the vessels out
in the fairway were conveyed ashore.
Shortly after 6.30 Captain Elrick was back at Police
Headquarters, where he found Inspector Dunnett still in
his office.
“I have not been idle since I left you,” said the Cap-
tain.
“So I understand,” replied Inspector Dunnett “Nor
have I. I have got thirty good men on the job now; and
what is as important, I think I have solved the message
of the second telegram. Tweed is the alias of someone
in the Service who, at some pre-arranged spot, is to show
three lights, the last of which will be red, to let the spy
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE TROOPSHIPS.


who is to explode the mines know that the coast is clear
and that he may expect no opposition.”
“Seems very probable,” replied the Captain. “But
how are we to find out where that pre-arranged spot is?
And, even if we find it, what can we do? It will be ton
late. The signal will have been given.”
“Quite so, Captain. But we do not want to stop it..
I have my plain-clothes men out in every likely place to'
follow up the light if they see it. What we have to do is
to prevent the blowing-up of the mines. Now, how can
that be done, Captain? Is it possible for anyone to switch
on the current or otherwise fire the field except from the
Fire Control Base?”
“Not that I know of, unless an enemy vessel carry-
ing some extraordinary apparatus such the Emden is
said to have manages to elude the Signal Station and risks
itself in the attempt. But I have instructed Watson’s
Bay that no vessel of any description is to enter the har-
bour after 6.30 to-night.”
“And I have arranged for the Water Police to patrol
the harbour from The Heads to Woollooniooloo!”
“Good! And Colonel Horsham will be here with a
score of picked men from the Intelligence Corps in a few
minutes. I thought of suggesting that they take duty at
The Heads.”
“Capital! There is only one point left. Who is in
charge at the Fire Control Base to-night?”
‘ ‘Engineer-Lieutenant Boscombe. ’ ’
“Have you communicated with him?”
“No; not yet. But I think he is all right. Only he
may need assistance.”
“Ah! Here’s Colonel Horsham! I’ll leave you to
explain things to him, Captain; Sinclair and I must be
off.”
“The password, Inspector, is Yarrawa. You may
need it.”
As the two detectives reached Fort Macquarie where
a steam launch was in waiting to convey them over the
harbour, they saw a multitude of craft of all kinds rush-
ing to and from the big ocean liners that lay out beyond
Fort Denison, their myriad lights glimmering but faintly
through a misty rain. As each boatload of troops arrived
at the wharf it was apparent that something unusual was-
happening. Most of the men seemed out of temper and
many of the officers were no better. They had just been
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


sitting down to dinner after a most strenuous day when
the peremptory message that had upset their equilibrium
had arrived.
“If this is what they call breaking us in,” said one
trooper, “it is all damned rot. This sort of tomfoolery
may suit the English Tommy, but it is no good to Aus-
tralians. Do you wonder that we have had so many de-
serters? Three times we’ve been all ready to leave when
some fool officer at Headquarters has suddenly taken it
into his head to show his authority by countermanding
the order.”
“Still, you never know,” said his camp-mate. “Per-
haps the Germans are still hanging about the Pacific.
And, after all, it is better to spend another week or so in
dear old Sydney than to be torpedoed by one of the
Kaiser’s twopenny tubers without ever having had a
chance to give him one.”
“I’m darned well sick of it, anyhow,” said the other.
“It’s enough to break the spirit of a dingo. There’s not
a man amongst us who is not itching to get at the Kaiser’s
throat; yet they keep us here on a chain like a lot of
poodles spoiling for a fight. Look! I tell you straight,
if we don’t get at the enemy soon we’ll be getting at each
other. And what’s the good of having a Headquarters
staff if they
“B Company! F-a-1-1 in!”
* $
THE rain was falling in torrents when Inspectors
Dunnett and Sinclair reached the spot at which
they had decided to land. It was now after 7
o’clock and as dark as pitch.
“We had better make straight for the Fire Control
Station,” said Dunnett. “It’s a terrible night to be out
in, but it should suit our plan.”
In the darkness the two officers lost their bearings a
dozen times as they scrambled over rocks and through
what at times seemed almost impenetrable scrub. They
almost stumbled against several of the Intelligence Corps
men and had some difficulty in passing them.
Nearly half an hour must have gone before they saw
the light of a sentry’s cigarette glowing and waning under
an overhanging rock where he was taking shelter.
“Watch him,” whispered the Chief Inspector as he
pulled Sinclair back a little. “He may be in it. Stay
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE TROOPSHIPS.


there till I return. I’ll get nearer the track that leads to
the entrance. Boscombe is due in about a quarter of an
hour. Watch him tool”
Creeping along stealthily, Inspector Dunnett got to
within ten yards of the passage leading through the rock
to the Control Base when he Heard a rustling noise some
way back. Then someone came close up behind him and
he sank into the long grass just as the figure passed.
“Halt! Who goes there?” rang out the voice of a
sentry just ahead.
There was no response, but Dunnett heard a sharp
click, a groan and the sound of something heavy falling.
He moved nearer, then, just as the newcomer entered
the dark passage, there was another click and a curse, and
someone came rushing past. Dunnett, still crouching,
had only time to put out his hand and upset the run-
away when he heard the voice of Captain Elrick.
“Stop! spy! stop!”
“He is safe here,” answered the Inspector, as he
threw his weight on to the already handcuffed spy.
“By heavens! that was quick work, Captain,” said
Dunnett, as he withdrew a silent revolver from his pri-
soner’s pocket. “Let us get him inside; he may not be
alone.”
“Gad! and it’s Boscombe!” said the Captain, as he
turned his electric torch on the face of the struggling pri-
soner. “But I could have sworn he cursed in German
as I slipped on the cuffs. Poor devil! What brought you
to this, Boscombe?”
The prisoner made no reply. He did not even con-
tinue to struggle as they carried him along the passage
and down to the switch room. Soon he was roped and
bound securely to await the morrow morning.
“I wonder what has come of Sinclair and the other
sentry,” said Dunnett. “You’d have thought they would
have come up when they heard the row! Is it possible
that ——- Where’s that revolver? Six-chambered —-
three chambers empty! ”
The two men stared at each other.
Just then a shot was heard outside and a voice came
down from the passageway.
“Yarrawa! Open or I’ll blow you in!” it yelled.
“I’m Boscombe! Yarrawa! For God’s sake, open!”
FOILED; THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


That’s mighty like Boscombe’s voice!” said the Cap-
tain. But what the devil does it all mean? Watch this
fellow. I’ll go aloft.”
A few minutes later Captain Elrick was back with
Boscombe, carrying between them the limp figure of In-
spector Sinclair.
“Is he dead?” gasped Inspector Dunnett, as he
looked at Sinclair, then from Boscombe to the motionless
prisoner on the floor.
“Not a bit of it,” said Boscombe, “but I knocked
him out pretty solidly after he had had a pot at me. But
who’s the dead ’un on the floor. He’d pass for my twin
brother!”
“Dead!” exclaimed Elrick and Dunnett simultane-
ously.
Sure enough he was dead, stiff as a ram-rod—poi-
soned.
“I am hanged if I can believe I am yet awake,” said
Boscombe. “Everything seems too terrible to be true.”
But where have you been, Boscombe?” asked Cap-
tain Elrick.
“I hardly know myself,” replied the Lieutenant. “I
seem somehow to have been out of it all and to have been
suddenly pitch-forked into it in the last act. About 6
o’clock I went into the hotel as usual to have a refresher
before dinner. I met a foreign chap there whom I have
often seen about the place. He seemed a very decent
sort, talked a lot about the war and asked me to drink a
bumper to King George and the success of the British
arms. I had two or three with him and the barmaid who
joined us.”
“The barmaid! Who was she?” asked Dunnett.
“I don’t know her proper name,” said Boscombe,
“but the fellow who shouted for us usually calls her Marie,
I think. Marie Boelger, or something like that.”
“Exactly- —I thought so,” said the detective; “but
go on with your story, Boscombe. You said you had a
few drinks?”
“Yes; then I went out with that foreign chap. But I
don’t remember anything more. When I awoke I was lying
in the yard behind the hotel, drenched to the skin, just as
you see me. I went into the pub. to have a warmer, when I
saw the time: It was after 8 o’clock. I felt dazed, but
I started to run, and, knowing the track like a blind man,
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE. TROOPSHIPS


I never stopped till I got up above where I saw the sentry
lying in a heap. I realised that something was far
wrong, so I simply bawled out the password. Then there
was a shot and I turned to face the chap we carried in.
I landed him a beauty before he had time to speak.”
“It was a beauty, too,” said Sinclair, who was quickly
recovering at the expense of Dunnett’s flask. “I thought
you must be the fellow who fired at the sentry I was.
watching. My word, it was a good shot, with a silent
revolver too. He dropped like a stone, and no doubt I
would have been treated to the same fate only I got in
first. The extraordinary thing was that when I went to
see if I could do anything for the sentry, the fellow I had
shot disappeared. He was dead all right, because I
rifled his pockets and took some papers and his revolver
after I had shot him. I was searching around for the
body in the darkness when I saw someone rush past, so-
I followed and fired again.”
Had Sinclair returned a minute earlier he would have
seen two masked men, carrying the body down to the side
of the hill. It was Kruppman, Steinhertz’s secretary- —-
shot through the heart.
“So, Captain, we have baffled Steinhertz again,”
said Inspector Dunnett. “But what I should like to
know is what game he really had on. Did he expect to
blow up one of the transports as they were leaving, or —”
“Let’s see if these papers Sinclair captured can throw
any light on the point,” suggested Captain Elrick.
During the remainder of that night Captain Elrick
and the two Inspectors racked their brains into confusion
in attempts to decipher the various signs and figures con-
tained in the, captured notebook and papers. But it was
not till after sunrise that Inspector Dunnett jubilantly
announced that he had got the key.
Most of the references related to the movements of
the transports and the positions of the harbour mines, but
one letter showed in a nutshell what were the intentions
of the spies. It was from Steinhertz in Melbourne, and
read:- —
Instruct T.S. to wire position of mines.
Will get in touch with Tweed Heads by wireless .
They will show red light after two green lights
to-morrow afternoon if scheme has succeeded.
Warships will steam south full speed and enter
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


harbour immediately after mines explode. Will
find positions of transports if they have not left
by that time.
“So that was their dastardly game-—to blow up our
troopships in our own waters. By heavens! but those
Germans are daring! You were a bit out about the
Tweed Heads part of the plan, Dunnett, but it has
worked out all the same.”
jjc s|c
As Dunnett and Sinclair arrived back in the city at
7 o’clock in the morning the first thing that met their eyes
was the posters of the daily papers; —
GERMAN CRUISER SUNK BY JAPANESE.
ACTION OFF TWEED HEADS.
HOW DUNNETT SAVED THE TROOPSHIPS.


VIII.
DUNNETT’S GREAT COUP.
OU were right about those cases Steinhertz has
I been despatching all over the place,” announced
Sub-Inspector Sinclair excitedly, as he rushed into
his chief’s office. “The Customs authorities tell me they
have just received a cable from Capetown, where one of
the German liners is interned, advising them that a num-
ber of cases consigned to Steinhertz and Company have
been found to contain revolvers, ammunition, and hand-
grenades. They have confiscated the lot. What are we
to do, Inspector?”
“To catch Steinhertz red-handed if possbile—but to
catch him. It seems extraordinary that he is still at
large, especially as I am absolutely convinced it was he
who planned the daring escape of Marie Boelger, Den-
bruch, and Goltz from the concentration camp at Liver-
pool. They are all at their old games again under vari-
ous disguises. Only to-day I succeeded in locating them
in a poor quarter at Botany. Let us spread our net as
wide as possible. We may be able to bag the lot. You
go to Steinhertz’s store this evening, taking Plain-clothes
Constable Allardyce with you. The store will be closed,
of course. Get in somehow and break open as many of
the cases as you think advisable. If Steinhertz arrives
on the scene arrest him on a warrant. I’ll detail a suffi-
cient number of men to the vicinity to ensure your safety.
Once you have secured what proof you require, come
straight to the railway station, but not later than 7.1 S.
Meet me on the Melbourne Express, A 2 compartment.”
Half an hour later Sinclair and Allardyce were at
the store on the harbour front. Only the old German
watchman was in charge.
Sinclair produced an order to search the premises,


v


but the watchman refused to admit him, unceremoniously
banging the door in his face.
All attempts to force it proved unavailing.
Meanwhile the watchman was busy inside. From
under an old case near the door he produced a tin of
kerosene, and, running with it to the far end of the
store, he climbed up on top of a pile of cases, emptied it
over them, then jumped to the floor and applied a light
where the oil was trickling down. In another moment
he had regained the door.
“What do you want?” he demanded, as he unbarred
the heavy door. “Why do you keep knocking? I tell
you I cannot let you in without an order from my master.”
Before he had time to utter another word, Allardyce
had hurled him into the gutter,
Sinclair at the same moment removed the outside
padlock and the two officers were just about to enter
when there was a deafening roar, followed by a series of
sharp explosions. In another minute smoke was belching
forth and flames were rising everywhere. Sinclair made
several attempts to enter, but the density of the powder-
smelling smoke and the continuance of the explosions
effectually debarred him.
“Baffled!” cursed the Inspector, as he turned to
arrest the watchman. He had gone.
* * *
SIMULTANEOUS with the raid on Steinhertz’s store
Inspector Dunnett had planned a much bigger coup.
In the course of a search of a suspect’s residence he
had found the key to one of the codes used by the spies,
and he now utilised it to the following effect on special
“Berlin” watermarked paper secured from the same
quarter: —
E r r < rn lyj *=> rooj<-
(ry j l<= => a yoja<= y *= j
lkr {j va E u j l=>
u r njv<lrr n o < r a
Air a r {Aron.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


The interpretation of the mysterious-looking hiero-
glyphics which he entered in his note-book was:—
We are watched. Police raiding our store
to-night. Position serious. Am going Mel-
bourne Express. Reserved A 3
Copies of this message were despatched to Goltz,
Denbruch, Goldstein, and Marie Boelger. To Steinhertz
himself Dunnett wrote: —
nrroor-j y orj i/
oyAyjyryjL^^^y^rc
/|c[ 3 £;cVaJVDf < A U
rr~ndv< LrryiOirAArij
j <- r a z? q
Deep plot trap you at store to-night. Leav-
ing with others Melbourne Express. Booked
A3.—P.L.
“We are going to succeed this time,” chuckled Dun-
nett to himself, as he read the messages over half a dozen
times. “He cannot fail to respond to his own code. His
letters call it the ‘square’ code. I should think so; every
letter is formed out of a crossed square and a crossed circle
thus: —
i no
A&COB r a M M L
I'JOXA y VAP3FI B
N oporstuvwy y Z
“Looks like a game of o’s and x’s. By jove it was
lucky I found the code signatures too. They just finish
the thing off beautifully. I must not take any risks, how-
ever; Steinhertz is too wide awake. I’ll send half a dozen
men to watch the store, several to the spy’s residence, a
couple to his office, and as many to the German Club,
and I’ll take a squad with me to the railway station. I
must also make sure that the telephones to the Club and
DUNNETT’S GREAT COUP.


the residences of the individuals with whom we have to
deal are out of order till after the train leaves. It is now
6.30. Sinclair will be at work by this time.”
“Exchange! Give me City 42X0. Hello! Is that
Mr. Steinhertz’s office. This is the Water Police Station.
We have just arrested an armed man at your store. Says
he is an employee. Will you ask Mr. Steinhertz to come
along personally as soon as possible to identify him and
to arrange about the protection of the store. The door
has been broken in. . . What! Dunnett? Oh dear,
no!. . . Why ?. . . Really... I never heard it said
before... Yes; at the store. Good-bye.”
“By jove!” exclaimed Dunnett, as he hung up the
receiver. ‘That should do it. He recognised my voice.”
* * *
STEINHERTZ was sitting at his desk pondering over
tne coded message when the telephone bell had rung.
So Dunnett’s on it all right,” he said. “Expects to
draw me to the store where they will show me the contra-
band cases and arrest me. Ha! Ha! But how the devil
did Denbruch find it out? And why didn’t he call in-
stead of sending me this note? Been shadowed, I sup-
pose.”
“Kruppman! Who brought this note?” .
“The lift boy, sir!”
“Find out who gave it to him!”
“He’s gone, sir; only a few moments ago.”
“Damnation!”
“Exchange! Give me 450, please... Yes, quick.
Engaged ? —then give me 288. Hello! Hello!.. . Ex-
change! Am lon 288?. . . Well, I cannot get an an-
swer. Will you try to raise them for me?... Thank
you. Hello!. . . Hello!. . . Hello. ..
“Kruppman! There’s something wrong. Rush
round to the Club and bring back with you any of our
men you find there. Who’s that at the door?”
“The watchman from the store, sir.”
“Whew! so they are at the store all right? Come in,
Busch! What’s wrong?”
The old fellow stood panting for a few seconds ere
he could speak a word.
“The police!” he ejaculated at last. “At the store.
I fired it!”
“Good! Were you followed here?”
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


“I think so, sir; but I didn’t wait to see.”
“Damn you! Why did you come here?”
“Kruppman! My curate’s outfit. I must get clear
at once.”
Within a few minutes the keen, exacting business
man had been transformed into a docile curate, pale and
begoggled, with a slight halt in his walk. In his travel-
ling bag were tracts and sermons covering a pile of the
most valuable documents he possessed. He limped out
of the office and stood at the top of the stairs, thinking.
Then he turned back and sent Kruppman down the lift
to investigate.
“The place is watched,” said Kruppman on return-
ing. There are several policemen dressed as labourers
hanging around.”
“Then we cannot risk going out by the door,” said
Steinhertz. “You will have to lower me to the roof of
the next building. It’s our only chance. Quick!”
The Secretary produced a coil of rope, the end of
which Steinhertz pulled through the handle of the port-
then, tying a knot around the handle he en-
circled his waist with the loose end. Half a minute later
he was being lowered gently by Kruppman and Busch.
Once on the lower roof he released himself and his kit,
and made off across building after building till he reached
the end of the block. From there he surveyed the posi-
tion and decided that it was safe to descend through a
trap door and down to a back street. Limping along to
the corner of the block he shuffled up to a policeman and
asked if he could get a taxi for him.
In response to a double blast of the policeman’s
whistle a motor car came gliding along.
“To the railway station,” said Steinhertz calmly, as
he entered the taxi.
On arrival at platform No. 1 Steinhertz looked
around for his confederates. Not one of them was to be
seen. Still holding on to his heavy bag he limped along
till he came to the saloon numbered A 3. It was occu-
pied by two old and two young men, apparently of the
farmer class. As soon as Steinhertz entered, one of them
rose and said: —
“Pardon me, sir! but this compartment is engaged.”
“All right, Goltz!” said Steinhertz. “You have a lot
to learn yet.”
DUNNETT’S GREAT COUP.


“Thank God, you’ve come!” ejaculated Denbruch,
rising. “We were beginning to think we had been
tricked.”
“Why? What has happened?” asked Steinhertz.
“How did you unearth the plot? My personal staff
had no knowledge of it.”
“What plot?” gasped Denbruch in consternation.
■The train moved slowly out of the station before any
explanation could be made.
Steinhertz was frantic. “Didn’t you send me that
’square' code message?” he demanded.
“No, sir!” said Denbruch. “There was no time to
communicate with you after receiving your urgent mess-
age. I tried to get you on the ’phone but failed.”
“Good God, man! I sent you no message. I—-—”
“Quite true!” interrupted Inspector Dunnett, as he
and Sinclair stepped into the compartment, revolvers level.
“What have you to say for yourselves?”
“This is monstrous, Inspector Dunnett,” began Stein-
hertz. “Simply monstrous. There has been a terrible
mistake somewhere and somebody will have to pay for
it.”
“Oh, no! No mistake your reverend sir. Business
men do not rush off to Melbourne suddenly, disguised as
curates, for nothing. Nor do ladies usually travel in
men’s clothing without cause,” he said, as he looked
straight into the eyes of Marie Boelger. “As for your
farmer friends here, I only hope they feel comfortable
without their high collars and top hats.”
“But we haven’t time to discuss the ethics of
dressing now,”, continued Dunnett. “We are at Red-
fern. The train is being held up till you find it con-
venient to empty this compartment.”
As the five excited foreigners stepped on to the plat-
form, the curate swung suddenly round, fired straight at
Dunnett, and, with Marie Boelger, jumped on to the op-
posite line and made for the tunnel. Marie was quickly
brought down, but Steinhertz reached the tunnel. The
others, seizing the opportunity, attempted to make off
in other directions, but Dunnett’s squad were closing in
and all of them were captured. Steinhertz was still miss-
ing, but the Inspector did not seem to be the least bit ex-
cited. Then-several shots were heard in the direction of
the tunnel and a few minutes later the erstwhile curate
FOILED : THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


was carried out by three policemen wounded in the head,
and minus his coat, hat, and spectacles.
Handcuffed, each between two constables, the quin-
tette and their valuable baggage, were soon on the way
to the police barracks.
* jk j£c
A FEW days later it was a dejected group of
Germans that faced the court-martial that was to
decide their fate in the Military Commandant’s
tent.
The trial lasted only a little over two hours. Dun-
nett produced papers, plans and photographs he had cap-
tured on the spies and others he had recovered from
Steinhertz’s office. The evidence was of the most damn-
ing nature throughout. Inspector Sinclair related the epi-
sode of “The Naval Despatches,” the daring attempt to
blow-up the Australia by an infernal machine, and the
“Saving of the Transports,” whilst Inspector Dunnett
told the story of the attempt to secure the plans of Syd-
ney’s fortifications, and related some of Steinhertz’s pri-
vate history during the past decade.
All the prisoners pleaded guilty and none of them
asked for mercy. Even Marie Boelger declared that she
felt no remorse for the part she had taken in the business.
She would follow the same career to-morrow if she were
permitted. It was life to her.
The summing-up of the Court was brief and pointed.
The prisoners are all guilty of the basest treachery
and most diabolical intrigue,” said the Commandant,
Whilst being naturalised subjects of His Majesty King
George and enjoying equal privileges with his most loyal
subjects, they admit having aided and abetted the King’s
enemies, to wit, the German Emperor and the German
Government, by supplying them with information inimical
to the interests of His Majesty’s lieges. They have proved
themselves traitors to the Oath of Allegiance to which
they subscribed, and, therefore, have rendered themselves
liable to the extreme penalty of the law.”
The decision of the military panel was unanimous
and the Court passed the sentence of death on all five.
* * *
AT sunrise next morning five blindfolded and
shackled figures were led one by one to the out-
skirts of the camp.
UUNNETT’S GREAT COUP.


A clergyman came to perform the last rites, but they
rejected him.
A firing party of six was marched to a point twenty
paces off, and the command was given.
Within half an hour a dozen soldiers were busily
engaged filling in the excavations that had been made
only a few hours earlier. The spies were no more. Their
mission was ended. But there were many others waiting
to fill their places—able men and cunning women, just as
keen and as willing to give their lives for the Fatherland
as those whose shoes they were to fill.
Dunnett’s work had only just begun.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


IX.
STEINHAUER—THE MASTER SPY.
THE most dangerous man in the world at the present
moment, so far as Great Britain is concerned, is
Georg Steinhauer, the Kaiser’s Master Spy—a
man of tremendous ability, wonderful resource, and fiend-
ish cunning a typical Prussian of the most arrogant
kind. Than Steinhauer there is probably no man alive
who has a more thorough knowledge of the inside working
of the entire British naval, military and commercial sys-
tems. These are well-known facts! A fact that is not
so well-known is that it was this same Steinhauer who
organised the German Secret Service in Australia on the
basis on which it stands to-day. It was in 1909 that he
first came to this country. He was lost sight of for a few
months, then he turned up in company with the notorious
Dr. Armand Karl Graves, along with whom he toured the
Commonwealth, visiting every State capital and many of
the smaller towns and outlying districts as well. The
following copy of a document from Scotland Yard sums
up the official knowledge of the visit
Steinhauer—alias Rickmers —known to his intimate
friends as Tony —was in Australia with Karl Graves
and others in 1909-10. Authentic evidence is to hand to
the effect that Steinhauer’s main object was the appoint-
ment throughout the Commonwealth of people prepared to
supply information, and during the time he was in Aus-
tralia many such appointments were made. These people
received payment according to the value of the informa-
tion supplied.
In December, 1910, Steinhauer and Graves left Aus-
tralia for Ceylon and India, ostensibly with the object of


engaging hotels and making other arrangements for the
visit of the Crown Prince of Germany to these countries.
Then he went back to Germany and, in May, 1911, paid
his memorable visit to England as a member of the suite
of the Emperor William. Scotland Yard had, of course,
known of him for years, but as the result of that visit
it gained a greater respect for his audacious cunning than
it ever entertained previously —a respect based not so
much on the cleverness of the system of espionage he had
established throughout the British Empire, as on the fact
that he was the only German spy who had ever spent a
night under the same roof as the King, at Buckingham
Palace. More than that, he actually shook the hand of
King George to whom he was presented by his imperial
master. It has been stated generally that when Scotland
Yard learned of the amazing feat of this supreme exponent
of espionage it was flabbergasted. It is more probable
that it was as well aware of the fact that he was there
as it was that the Kaiser himself was in England.
Officially the object of the Emperor’s visit was to
attend the unveiling by the King of the Queen Victoria
memorial. The real purpose was a very different one, one
that was intimately connected with the fact that Stein-
hauer was a member of the suite. During the ceremonies
this übiquitous gentleman was seldom seen. His duties
were of a character that took him to strange haunts in
the East End of London, to quiet little hostelries in cer-
tain seaport towns, and even to the principal naval base
in Scotland. After each of these trips he returned to
Buckingham Palace to report progress. He had few days
in which to work, yet he succeeded during his visit in
establishing a new code; he received exhaustive reports
from every leading German spy in England, and he
arranged, with the approval of the Kaiser, to have every
item of naval or military information collected in the
United Kingdom sent by direct or indirect route to Stein-
hauer, Potsdam. That was how he was known to the less
important secret service agents. Beyond that they knew
little whatever of him—such is the secrecy under which
they work —except that he was a handsome, well-groomed
man of about forty, always imaculately dressed, and as
affable as a youthful lover. When the Kaiser was leaving
England he expressed the “delight the visit had been” to
him. Was it any wonder? Never before had he been
able to probe into every detail of the British war machine
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


and to investigate on the spot Britain’s position of pre-
paredness, or unpreparedness, for the war he had even
then planned to force her into.
Those who know him declare that there is absolutely
nothing of the junker type about Steinhauer. He conies
of good burgher stock, and the early part of his career
differed not a whit from that of thousands of other civilian
servants of the German Empire. After serving his time
in the army he became a non-commissioned officer, and
eventually graduated into the Berlin Police Department..
From the outset of his employment as a policeman, how-
ever, he displayed so marked a talent for detective work
that he speedily attracted the attention of high govern-
mental authorities. In the Secret Service he found his
groove and soon was drafted into the special department
that deals with naval affairs. In a short time he was head
of this department. Realising that Great Britain was
the power from which the Fatherland had most to fear he
concentrated his energies on the British branch of the ser-
vice with such satisfactory results that within eighteen
months he was appointed chief of the branch. That was
just over five years ago. It was not until two years later
that he rose'to the position he holds to-day—the Kaiser’s
Master Spy. Without him and the encyclopaedic know-
ledge he possesses in regard to everything worth know-
ing from a military and naval point of view neither the
Kaiser nor his staff, nor his army, nor his navy, nor his
aerial fleet, could have done what they have done during
the past twelve months. His central office is situated in
the imperial palace at Potsdam. Whether he is there
now, or is conducting' his sinister campaign from some
centre outside the Empire is something Great Britain
would give much to ascertain. For information that may
lead up to his capture the War Office has offered a reward
of £50,000.
_ The devices originated by Steinhauer to aid the ac-
tivities of his subordinates are too numerous to be detailed
here. It was he who invented the system of signalling by
automobile and bicycle headlights from points on the
British coast to submarines and other vessels at sea. It
was he who realised the value of disguising his spies in
the uniform of Boy Scouts or Scoutmasters. His genius
found a way to signal by hidden wireless from the very
heart of London, to conceal stores of petrol for German
-aeroplanes in the Scottish Highlands, to bribe road-
STEINHAUER—THE MASTER SPY.


builders to construct hidden highways in direct line from
one strategic point to another.
The following letter, which recently fell into the
hands of the British Secret Service, is interesting as show-
ing the manner in which Steinhauer conveys instructions
or information to his agents. It was intercepted in
Britain and our copy is reproduced from Science Siftings.
Do not take it ill if I, as an old criminologist and de-
tective, give a few suggestions. I have always had success
if I mention a similar name. The people then think in-
voluntarily of the correct, F, and you can in all safety
make your inquiries with the apology that the person con-
cerned has given you or your firm large orders, such as
furs, automobiles, or in respect to a horse.
If one has given you information, then you ask how
he looks, and how old he is, whereupon you say: “Ah,
then he is not the gentleman whom I mean, because he has
a full beard, looks dark, and is bigger.” Then you just
convey the contrary exactly, in order to convince the
people that F is not meant, so that nothing comes out from
the inquiry.
The interpretation of this letter may afford the reader
as much pleasure as it did the British Secret Service agent
into whose hands it fell.
**. ■ ■ *
A SCOTLAND Yard report regarding Dr. Karl
Graves—who, it will be remembered, having trans-
ferred his services from Germany to Britain, re-
cently published a book on “The Secrets of the German
War Office—states:-
Dr. Karl Graves left Australia on the R.M.S. Otranto
in December, 1910. He disembarked at Colombo, stat-
ing his intention to survey hotels in Ceylon and in India
to be visited by the Crown Prince of Germany. Dr. Karl
Graves spent four years in Australia, where he practised
as a doctor, but he had no Australian diploma and was
said to have conducted many illegal operations. He in-
formed Mr.
( British ) Government, that Germany would be the owner
of Australia within five years.
The “truth” of that accurately-timed prophecy is at
present demonstrating itself on the heights of Gallipoli.
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


X
FACTS.
JUST as this volume was going to press the public of
INew South Wales were treated to the most outspoken
dissertation on The Enemy in Our Own Land that
has yet been made public. It was a discussion in the
Legislative Assembly on “the necessity of further limiting
the freedom of action of persons of German extraction.”
Mr. C. G. Wade, leader of the Opposition, in moving
the adjournment of the House, said he brought the matter
of the employment of Germans in the Public Service for-
ward in no spirit of unfriendliness towards the Govern-
ment, but in the hope that the Government would take to
heart the information that he desired to impart, realise the
gravity of the situation, and take, action to remedy the seri-
ous evil now menacing this State and the whole of Aus-
tralia. There was no need to deal with the straight-out
enemy subject in this discussion, as he assumed that all
unnaturalised Germans were accounted for. His idea
in dealing with the subject was to induce the Government
to change its policy on the question and deal with all in-
dividuals of German extraction in a way to place them
under conditions so that they would not be able to do any
harm to the Empire.
German people naturalised in this country were held
under German law to be at the call of the German Empire
in military service against this country. After all, blood
was thicker than water, and whilst he did not condemn
the men here holding strong views in favour of the Father-
land, the very fact that there was no obligation either by
law or conscience for them to be loyal to Australia or the
Empire was the strongest reason for allowing no German
or his son to be in a position to do mischief.


Under a law passed in 1913, and which came into force
on January 1, 1914, no individual, German-born, could be
said to be under any legal or conscientious obligation to
serve the country of his adoption against the country of
his birth, and, as children followed their father’s nation-
ality, when a German in this country decided to become
a German subject with allegiance to the Kaiser, his son’s
allegiance went to the Kaiser, too. An official of the
Commonwealth had said that Germans employed here had
acted as secret agents of some society acting for the pur-
pose of securing the predominance of the German race.
Such Germans could not be expected to show respect and
loyalty to Australia, such as was to be desired from per-
sons in the Public Service of the State. Men should not
be in a position where there was likely to be a conflict of
duty.
Men born of German parents had gone to the front
with the Australian forces, and trouble had been caused on
that account. Out in Gallipoli a German had been found
wearing an Australian uniform. Australian men
and officers were sniped from day to day, and
a party of men was picked out to find the
sniper. They found this German in Australian uni-
form, and made mince-meat of him in a few minutes. Mr.
Sabiel, a Sydney chemist, had one son in charge of men
with the Australian forces and another son a military doc-
tor. Mr. Sabiel was strongly pro-German. What could
be the impression produced in the minds of the soldiers
and the public men when they learned that a man who had
control on the battlefield was the son of a German and
that another son had the power to attend and dispense
for them?
At a State school in the country, where there was a large
German population, the Union Jack was formerly flown
seven days a week; but the German parents made a com-
plaint, and the flag had been hauled down. There was one
thing that should be put foremost, and that was the para-
mountcy of the Empire, and, with that in view, we should
put the enemies, naturalised or not, in a place where they
could do no harm.
SIR Joseph Carruthers, late Premier of New South
Wales, in the Legislative Council recently appealed
to the Government to take action to prevent The
Enemy m Our Own Land supplying liquor, drugs, etc.,
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


to the people, and especially to our soldiers. In selling
beer and dispensing medicine, he said, he saw a grave
danger. This war had shown us that people who be-
longed to the German race were capable of going to any
extent and of sinking to any depths to injure the British
people, whom they considered their enemies. When we
paid regard to what the Germans had done on the battle-
field, poisoning our soldiers and using every scientific
device to effect their purposes, it needed but a short stretch
of _ the imagination to think that they would do the same
things here. In his own mind, he believed that German
agents sowed the seeds of typhus in Servia. And there
w r as a suspicion in the minds of many people that all was
not well with regard to the mysterious diseases which had
broken out in the military camps in Australia. We were
face to face with an enemy who would not hesitate to
stoop to any devilish device to injure our people and our
cause. But a few minutes’ walk from the Legislative
Council Chamber was a chemist’s shop kept by a German,
and on the window was displayed the British coat-of-
arms' and the notice, “By Special Appointment to His Ex-
cellency the Governor-General.” It was a notorious fact
that that chemist had a house in a fashionable quarter
tenanted by a man who had lately been interned. It was
remarkable that such things could be. That man’s house
was' occupied in all probability by a German spy. His
license should be taken away immediately. “The posi-
tion is altogether too serious,” continued Sir Joseph. “Dr.
Kane, who recently returned from the front, told me that
one man fighting in the trenches was found to be signal-
ling to the battleships to drop their shells 75 yards short.
This was noticed by those around him, and other men in
the trenches got hold of him, pulled him down and gave
the correct signal. What would have been the result of
the shells from our battleships falling 75 yards short? It
would have meant that the shells would have fallen into
the trenches amongst our own men. That man was taken
away and court-martialled. Again, two spies were
brought in a ship the other day to be court-martialled here
instead of being tried on the spot, where they would have
been subjected to better and more drastic methods.”
Sir Joseph Carruthers also read extracts from a peti-
tion that was presented to the German Parliament by
German residents in the different business centres of Aus-
tralia. Among other things the petitioners said; —
FACTS.


We have here in Australia seen how England’s navy
is always ready and prepared to protect her commerce and
the merchant ships, and how the certainty of this protec-
tion of late years from England has called into existence
a number of remunerative commercial and plantation en-
terprises in the South Seas. We have also noticed with
regret and shame how the large sacrifices of the German
pioneers in the South Seas have been deprived of health,
life, and capital, and their well-earned reward lost to
them because our weak fleet was not able to protect at the
crucial period. . . If it becomes the principle of our Im-
perial policy to rely on the good services of another power
to protect our interests abroad, we must forego any serious
opposition to that power in her efforts at commerce and
colonisation. We, the undersigned, and many thousands
who dwell in the interior, and are therefore not able on
account of the long distances to sign our respectful peti-
tion are proud of being Germans and will always be ready
with all our might to defend our country and guard her
honour. We may expect, therefore, that our grand Father-
land, for whose unity many of us have fought on the
French battlefields, will recognise as its duty the protec-
tion of its sons abroad, where not the right but the might
prevails; and such protection can only he afforded by a
formidable fleet.
“As a consequence of those proposals,” continued Sir
Joseph, “we had a few years ago in the South Pacific
that fleet consisting of the Scharnhorst, the Gneisenau,
the Nurnburg, the Leipsic, the Dresden, and the Emden.
The German Government also sent out, shortly afterwards,
a Consul-General who travelled not only through this
State but right through Australia, met the Germans, and
told them that he had largely been sent in response, to
their petition. Later still we had the proclamation by
the German Government which the Consul-General com-
municated to the people here —a proclamation which
amended the regulations and provided that notwithstand-
ing the naturalisation papers signed by Germans here they
were not denaturalised; they belonged to a dual national-
ity and their first obligation was to their Fatherland. That
is the real position. The Germans who have treated as
a scrap of paper that which bound them in honour with
regard to Belgium, have given an example to every Ger-
man to similarly treat every scrap of paper, and only use
it to his own advantage—even in the case of these natural-
isation papers.”
FOILED: THE ENEMY IN OUR OWN LAND.


Producing a poster referring to recruiting, a poster
which he said he would not readl to save Hansard being
disgraced by such references, Sir Joseph Carruthers said
that actions like the circulation oaf such a poster sapped
and undermined the efforts of all members of Parliament
and others to urge recruits to joim the colours. How did
they know that the poster was nott printed and circulated
by some German spy in our midst?
Mr. J. D. Fitzgerald, Vice-President of the Execu-
tive Council, referred to the commercial intrigues of the
enemy. Any Australian firm which made a penny piece
out of trading with the enemy during this crisis was ap-
parently composed of citizens different from what he
thought the Australians were. He objected to any discrim-
ination being shown between Austrians and Germans. He
would shut them all up, for they had no right to be at large.
The Germans desired to get a footing in Australia. Some
time ago a German doctor visited Sydney in connection with
town-planning, and he (Mr. Fitzgerald) showed the visi-
tor round the environs of Sydney. The doctor, before he
departed, proposed that Germans should be allowed to
establish colonies in the State under the German flag. He
told the doctor that that was impossible, but the doctor re-
plied: “It is a great idea; you will have German Kulture
introduced into Australia under the German flag, and I
want you to be associated with it. It is a great idea, and
out of it we will get great credit.” The loyalty of the
Germans in Australia was based upon this miscalculation:
- —They had always been under the impression that eventu-
ally Australia would fall under the sway of Germany.
They had not the slightest doubt that their fleets in these
seas would at once overpower ours, and that they would
easily take possession of an unprepared country, just the
same as they thought they would gain possession of Eng-
land.
FACTS.


TO KHAKI
YOUR COMRADES AT
GALLIPOLI ARE CALLING YOU
THIS IS NOT THE TIME FOR
FOOTBALL AND TENNIS MATCHES
'S SERIOUS
SHOW THAT YOU REALISE THIS
BY ENLISTING AT ONCE
