

Follow the Red Foot prints
SOUVENIR OF THE
SYDNEY HOUSING
EXHIBITION
8th to 28th AUGUST. 1944


Because it is your guide to this Exhibition
What it is all about
O There i& no need to wait until after this war is won before we get together on HOME PLANNING. The
earlier we do get together and plan nnr bnilding projects, the more easily will we achieve smooth and rapid
transition from active service to building and‘Other peace-time works. Needless to say, getting together
at present will just be to make PLANS . . . we cannot start the bnilding yet—neither nor man-
power is available because defence is claiming them. But directly these are available BUILDING will
begin. So on to our planning ... we invite you to see this exhibition as often as you can and keep this
booklet for future reference. Follow the red foot marks and you will watch the growth of communal life
from the first house to the city. The sponsors of this Housing Exhibition, knowing that hundreds upon
hundreds of Australians are planning to build homes in the post-war period, offer them this opportunity
of viewing the ways in which they can plan and build in wiser fashion than has ever been done before. We
are concerned about humanity and the way it lives. A nation is judged by the well-being of its citizens, the
quality and beauty and use of its buildings and the soundness of its plans for the future.
To help you comprehend the disaster which has resulted from lack of town planning, we have prepared a
series of panels (described in this booklet on pages 4 and 5) to show you the growth of cities . . . and we
have shown how by TOWN PLANNING every citizen can live in an environment of beauty.
Tbis is the story of the housing of humanity ... we know it will evoke thought and ultimately action from
Australia’s future home planners.
Give us YOUR OPINION by filling in the questionnaire on the last page of this booklet.


TYPICAL OF CONGESTION’S RESULTS
O Civic-minded travellers looking from the windows of trains
coming from outlying suburbs turn away as the trains pass
through the areas from Sydenham on. Row upon row of
dilapidated dwellings pack this area. Backyards measuring
6ft. by about 10ft.; corrugated iron fences, patched, rusted
and broken; lavatories a few yards from the back bedroom
windows; mud instead of garden, and broken down laundries
if laundries at all. No wonder children stray from such un-
lovely surroundings.
Freedom from drudgery anil dignity are the right of working
women, yet amenities there are none, in these houses. Con-
gestion such as is shown in this typical photograph blights our
nation. Congestion causes:—
DISEASE • 9 Without adequate number of rooms the common cold
sweeps through the family leaving weakness and de-
bility in Its train . . . and the next disease has ample
scope to settle.
DRUDGERY ; 9 Lack of modern housework appliances makes the
young homemaker a family drudge within a year she
either loses all desire to take part in community
activities or she drops her responsibilities and seeks
entertainment by neglecting her home.
DELINQUENCY; O Neglected children or even children in unlovely homes
seek excitement and beauty in doubtful ways away
from parental control ... children from the bad homes
are often the children who arrive at the Court protesting
defiance at a world which* doing nothing to encourage
eitiaensblp' condemns them.
A PLAN SOLVING THE PROBLEM
• Here slums have been eliminated . . . children play in safety,
and the expert’s idea is to have schools and hospitals centralised
and playgrounds planned with a sense of the FUN of life . . .
perfect housekeeping on the nation-wide scale is not beyond
Australia’s reach ... it commences with PLANNED towns.


JUST "GROW'D" LIKE TOPSY
THE DIRE RESULTS OF UNPLANNED CITIES
ARE OBVIOUS —but to get a simple idea
of how this happens follow the panels in
numerical order . . .
| p This shows you YOUR daily life - . . how we “make
do” with inconveniences—in peace-time we live on an
average of sixty to seventy years—mostly compromis-
ing with conditions which could be prevented.


It is no good being selfish and thinking of our OWN
home first —300,000 homes have to be built in Australia
. . . before we know where we are we could become the
builders of future slums —if we did not plan for ALL.
0 NEW neighbourhoods are collections of new houses
—if we plan together these can become model neigh-
bourhoods.
Homes are just the beginning—they are not enough—
we must have SCHOOLS where children are intro-
duced to SOCIAL LIFE. Social Iife—PLAYGROU NOS
planned with the sense of the FUN of life;
HOSPITALS mean health—the right of every citizen.
5 This is not an architect’s dream —it is a planned
COMMUNITY HEALTH AND RECREATION
CENTRE . . . and it would immediately help to elimin-
ate the causes of delinquency.
U COMMUNITY HEALTH AND RECREATION
CENTRES can be built into new neighbourhoods; in-
deed, new neighbourhood planners should place one
first on the Necessity List.
7, COMMUNITY HEALTH AND RECREATION
CENTRES can be incorporated into existing neigh-
bourhoods. too, by building them in our parks.
g_ One HALF of our people live in ou* six largest cities—
this is because we like living in communities—we like
working and playing with our fellows.
0 See how our cities grow—from bullock trail to con-
glomerations of factories and dwellings and roads
criss-crossing dangerously.
10. Failure to PLAN our cities has resulted in parks and
playgrounds being forgotten this is one of the
reasons for our slums.
11. Our cities must be planned—this is our nearest peace-
winning job. Cities should be built on estates which
have been designed to enhance the beauty of the land-
scape, not cutting out views and with roads chopping
across in grid fashion because we are too lazy to be
artists.


Town Planning Results in Model "Personal” Home
Mass housing sounds as intimate as tons of coal or gross weight in flour, but mass housing as far as
YOU are concerned means YOUR home amongst many, and we have brought five different house
units for your inspection (across the floor—following the red foot marks) . . . tell us if you like
them or which ones you think suitable for your needs. Fill in the questionnaire. Of course,
some people will like flats in parkland areas as designed in America . . . some people prefer bricks
to limber . . . and some two-storey styles to the bungalow types. The main thing to remember,
however, is that all ultimate “city comfort” depends on the overall planning of the entire
community.


TWO
THINGS
BEFORE
YOU GO
"U.S. Housing in War
eoce "
demonstrates all
the steps leading up to to-day's ideas.
This exhibit presents all the advances that
have been made In targe scale public
housing as an Indication of what the future
holds. Cross the Hall for "US. Housing
in War and Peace."
"The City 11 —an outstanding Him on town and regional
planning Is shown dally from 12 until 2 p.m. Tickets are avail-
able ot the counter free of charge.
Lectures have been arranged on such subjects as "Town
Planning" and "Pre-fabrication" to be delivered each evening
by both American and Austraflan lecturers. Inquire at the
counter for further particulars.
% The Exhibition Is sponsored by a Committee convened by the Ministry of Post-war Reconstruction in collaboration with the US. Govern-
ment Department of War Information,
The following organisations are represented on the Australian
Committee:
Reconstruction and Development Institution of Surveyors.
Division, Premier’s Department
of NSW Building Industries Congress.
Local Government and Housing Building Trades Group, Labour
Department. Council.
Housing Commission of N.S.W. National Fitness Council.
Forestry Commission of N.S.W. Sydney City Council.
Rural Bank of N.S.W. Sydney County Council.
Royal Australian Institute of Archi- Local Government Association,
tects.
t , f . rw , .. N.S.W. Association of Co-operative
Town and Country Planning fnsti- „ ~
duilaing Societies,
Modern Architectural Research Registrar of Co-operative Building
Society. Societies.
InsMuhon of Engineers. Workers' Education Association.
The Committee wishes to express its thanks for the assistance given
by:
The War Service Homes Comm s- James Hardie & Co. Pty. -Ltd.
sion.
- . . . Sydney & Suburban Timber Mer-
uepr. of Interior. , ... . ..
chants Association.
The Vlclorian Housing Commission. r .. , B . , .. . ,
* Council of Brick Manufacturers.
Australian Gas Light Co. ** , 0 , . . .
Cement & Concrete Advisory Asso-
Mr. John Scarborough. ciation.
Mr. Frank Heath, F.R.A.I.A. Plate Glass Merchants Association
of N.S.W.
The Colonial Sugar Refinery Co.
W. V. Taylor, Lane Cove.
Masonite Corporation (Aust.) Ltd. Sanifary Ware Manufacturers of
Mort's Dock Engineering Co. Ltd. N.S.W. (Earthenware and Fire
Clay).
Master Builders' Association of
N.S.W. Australian Window Glass Pty, Ltd.
Howie Moffat & Co. Pty. Ltd. Paint Manufacturers' Commits*.
Sterling Varnish Co. Australian Plaster Industries.


Wholly set up and pointed by Macdonald & Masterson, Sydney.
