

"Follow the King"
BY
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART, M.D., LL.D., D.Sc.
Professor of Physiology and
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine in the University of Sydney.
Formerly President of the Board of Health and
Medical Adviser to the Government of New South Wales.
Extract from the Cable Messages, Sydney “ Daily Telegraph,”
November 24, 1910.
KAISER ON DRINK.
TEMPERANCE MEANS VICTORY.
BERLIN, Tuesday Afternoon. —The Emperor of Germany, address-
ing the Military Cadets to-day, urged them to become abstainers.
Victory in the next war would, he foretold, go to the nation with
the least consumption of alcohol.
“It leads to everything that is wrong and works counter to everything that is right.
This drink business is a bad business.”—(Governor Hodges of Kansas.)


“ Follow the King.”
Ist Resolution.—“ That all present pledge
themselves to follow the example of His Ma-
jesty the King, in abstaining from alcohol
as a beverage, and in banishing it from their
households, during the period of the war.”
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
Let me begin by dissecting the resolution,
which I have been given the privilege of put-
ting before the meeting:
“All present,”—because this is a meeting
of those who, having had the matter under
consideration, have deliberately come to the
conclusion that what is here proposed is a
desirable course of action. Naturally, the
resolution does not affect teetotallers so
much as persons who like myself have been
in the habit of taking alcohol in some form
or other more or less habitually and perhaps
daily.
“ Pledge.”—l do not propose that we shall
sign any document, but that we shall give
our word and abide by an honorable under-
standing, that what we SAY we will do, we
SHALL do. Our word shall be our bond!
“ Example.”—As we follow the King, we
hope that others, influenced by HIS exam-
ple may also be influenced by OUR argu-
ments. “Abstaining from alcohol as a bev-
erage.” This does not exclude its use under
medical advice properly obtained: I would
add in written form and for a definite period,
so that it shall be seriously considered ad-
vice, no mere cursory “word by the way,”
lightly given and lightly treated. Sir Thomas
Lauder Brunton tells of a lady having be-
come a chronic drunkard by medical advice;
her prescription had done service for twenty
years, during which it was always made up
again. The prescription must therefore be
for a definite period only.
“Duning the Period of the War.”—lt is not
asked that we pledge ourselves for an INDE-
FINITE period, but only during a time when
every member of the body politic should keep
himself at his highest state of efficiency, a
SIR THOMAS A. STUART.
time when it is an act of treason to our
country to do anything to lessen our indi-


vidual efficiency. What anyone is to do
after the war is left quite an open question.
It is to this last aspect of this many-sided
question, personal efficiency, that I shall
chiefly direct your attention, for I desire to
confine our attention to the immediate busi-
ness of the hour. I shall ask the question
and answer it —does alcohol help healthy
men in a normal condition of mind and body
to do their daily work? Does alcohol make
healthy men under ordinary conditions more
efficient? or does it make them less effi-
cient? For we must never forget, that ef-
ficiency of the citizen is necessary to the
efficiency of the State. The efficiency of
the nation is made up of the efficiency . of
the individuals and, therefore, if I can show
you that a man who desires to use his entire
force on behalf of himself or of his fellow-
men, can do so best and longest by entirely
avoiding the uce of alcohol, then there need
be no hesitation in “following the King”!
The extent to which alcohol can act as a
food for healthy men is negligible and need
not detain us here. Alcohol, when it is taken
strong, e.g., whisky “neat” or not too much
diluted, has a certain action on the lining of
the canal, and through this cn the nervous
system, but this action is exerted before its
absorption and is of a passing nature and
may also be secured by a drink of some
warm liquid which is pleasant to the taste,
e.g., beef-tea, soup, etc., or by hot tasty food
—then the evil later effects are avoided. The
effects to which I wish now particularly to
refer are what occur after its absorption—
these are the effects which matter. As to
the action of large doses, I do not need to
prove anything—have we not all, alas! seen
these effects too often, and seen how they
vary in different men—one is made senti-
mental, another bellicose, a third, to the re-
lief of his neighbours, is sent to sleep. What
we have to deal with is the effect of com-
paratively small quantities. I will quote
from the Text-book by Professor Cushney,
a well-known author on pharmacology, the
science of the action of drugs, who deals
with the subject simply as a scientific mat-
ter, wit+iout prejudice either one way or an-
other. Speaking of Alcohol, which is placed
in the group of narcotics, he says: “In small
quantities it generally produces a feeling of
well-being and good-fellowship along with
increased confidence in the powers, mental
and physical, of the subject of the experi-
ment.” Do we not perceive in these words
the key to the lure of the drug in early stages
of its effects —the seeking for company in
which to display the supposed enhancement
of mental and physical powers! Cushney
goes on: “Larger doses are followed by a
certain amount of excitement, marked by
laughter, loquacity, and gesticulation. The
face becomes flushed and hot, the eyes
brighter and livelier, the pulse accelerated.
Even at this stage self-control is partially
lost and the will-power is weakened. The
speech may be brilliant, but it often betrays
the speaker; the movements are more
lively, but they are often undignified. The
loss of self-control is often indicated, fur-
ther, by furious outbursts of anger and un-
reasonableness, or by indulgence in maudlin
sentimentality and sexual fancies. The sense
of responsibility and the power of discrimin-
ation between the trivial and the important
are lost, and the individual has no regard for
the feelings of others or the ordinary con-
ventions of life.” Was there ever penned a
finer description of the earlier stages of al-
coholic intoxication? “In vino n eritas” is
the Latin proverb. When in liquor men lose
the results of education and experience, they
forget their caution, their self-restraint is
impaired, and then they are seen in their
true colors, in their natural character. In
the later stages the scene is changed. Now
is the period of reaction, of depression, of
gloom, of weakness—have we not all seen it!
Truly efficiency cannot exist along with in-
dulgence in alcohol, which a group of the
foremost medical men of the day, in 1907, in
England, declared to be one of the “most
fruitful sources of poverty, disease, and
crime.” I may add here that it is this loss
of self-control, which is the real explanation
of the fact that men, after alcohol, sometimes


dare to do what they would otherwise avoid,
and thus do great deeds, and have we not
read in the present war of the Germans hav-
ing plied their men with ardent spirits be-
»
fore sending them on some desperate ven-
ture? They wanted the men to lose their
self-control, and this is how they secured it.
This was what we call Dutch courage, that
is, “Deutsch” or “German courage.” For all
that these men were probably naturally
brave men, but the alcohol did not make
them more brave; it only made them reck-
less! The truly brave man is the man who
knows and appreciates the dangers and faces
them all the same.
As examples of how efficiency in various
kinds of work is affected by alcohol, let us
first take a kind of work, not requiring much
intelligence. It has been proved again and
again that troops endure extremes of climate
and march farther and are in better condition
at the end of the day, when the alcohol ra-
tion is omitted. Again: If you read the ac-
counts of the wonderful journeys of Mawson
and his companions in the recent Antarctic
Expedition, you will read that an expedition
thought out by the aid of the best know-
ledge of the day, in every department and
down to the smallest detail, so as to secure
the maximum working capacity and endur-
ance of each member of the party, for in-
stance in the dragging of the sledges, omitted
alcohol from the dietary. They used it once
a week only, and Sir Douglas Mawson says,
“The most bigoted teetotaller could not call
us an intemperate party. On each Saturday
night one drink per man was served out, the
popular toast being ‘Sweethearts and Wives.’
The only other convivial meetings of our
small symposium were on the birthdays of
each member, Midwinter’s Day and King’s
Birthday.” This, was in my opinion the ra-
tional use of the “wine when it is red" and I
think that teetotaller as I have been for the
last four weeks, even I would have regard
to the dreary surroundings of such a party,
and would turn my blind eye to the proceed-
ings, if taking the glass of wine was taking
something they liked. It was a luxury pure
and simple, and they never regarded it as any-
thing else. That was in a cold country—now
let me take you to hot countries! Let me
tell you of my old school-fellow, the African
Traveller, Joseph Thomson, who afterwards
laid down his life for Africa, and who, on one
of his wonderful journeys, took among his
stock of medicines some bottles of castor-oil
and some bottles of brandy. These were car-
ried on the heads of native porters for thous-
ands of miles, and when he got to the end of
his journey the castor-oil was all gone, but
the brandy was ALL there, not a drop had
been touched! And three years ago, when I
was in India, I saw no drinking. Our coun-
trymen there have found out the true reason
of so many cases of “liver” in the bad old
days, and have had the good sense to drop
the everlasting “pegs.” Lastly, among our-
selves in training for all sorts of athletics,
for cricket, football, boxing, rowing, running
and so forth, the use of alcohol is barred.
Let us now consider work of a more de-
finitely intelligent character; by carefully
planned and accurately performed experi-
ments it has been shown that one ounce of
alcohol, corresponding to about a glass of
whisky, diluted with water has a pronounced
effect, and this is a much smaller dose than
is habitual with many men, who would be
shocked if you called them even moderate
drinkers. Again; It was found that type
setters do less work and make more mis-
takes when they had this amount of alcohol.
Here the work is not hard —the man has but
to put forth his hand and transfer the type
to the composing stick, but the experiment
is valuable, because the number of types
set can be so easily counted and the mis-
takes show up at once in the printed matter.
Noyv, is good shooting a less accurate opera-
tion than type-setting? Surely not! It In-
volves the judgment of distance by the eye
and this has been proved experimentally to
be impaired by alcohol. And must not the
shooting often be carried out under the most
adverse conditions? Not in the comparative
comfort of the printer's shop. The question
has been fully answered. First as to sport:


In Scotland on the moor it is well-known that,
when a man has had “a glass or two” of
wine to lunch, his bag in the afternoon is
likely to be smaller than it was in the fore-
noon! Second—at the shooting range the
marksman makes fewer bull’s-eyes when he
has had a drink. If that is so in the com-
parative peace and comfort of the butts
what is likely to happen in the cold of the
trenches, or in the heat of battle! It might
happen that the man in the opposite trench
is a teetotaler, and in that case the toper,
careless about exposing himself, might pay
for his drink with his life, and General Biri-
wood told his men, our men, the other day,
that it is as much their duty to preserve
their own life as to take that of the enemy!
Lastly, it has been shown that the gun-
layers in the Navy secure fewer hits if they
are even slightly under the influence of al-
cchol and it is upon these hits that the
safety of the Empire depends!
I come now to operations of a purely in-
tellectual character, the results of which can
be submitted to the most rigid proof, namely,
first, adding up rows of figures; a clerk
added more slowly and made more mistakes
after the alcohol, and yet the clerk himself,
as in the case of all similar experiments
thought he had been doing better! Second,
the memory was impaired—it needed 50 pe-
cent, more repetitions to memorise worda
and numbers. It is this impairment of the
memory which, to some extent, accounts for
the well known terminological inexactitude
of men addicted to alcohol. They do not
always mean to tell lies, but they simply c'o
not remember the truth. Just taking the
general experience of everyday life, would
any of you employers of labor put a man on.
who applies for a job and even smells of
liquor? I think not, for you know by Ex-
perience that drink kills a man’s efficiency
and reliability in every particular And the
pity of it is that the man himself does not
realise his condition, his position. I will now
therefore, direct your attention to the effects
of alcohol on the higher attributes or man.
As you know, in the Ascent of Man in evo-
lution there has been a gradual development
of the intellectual and moral qualities, those
that distinguish man from the brutes —fore-
thought, judgment, reflection, prudence and
self-control, the sense of responsibility and
conscientiousness. These qualities occupy
the highest place in the hierarchy of the
bcdiiy activities, and they are the last to be
acquired in the development and education
of the species and of the individual. They
are functions of the nerve-cells of the brain,
and it is the first part of the body to be at-
tacked by the drug; changes in the nerve
cells can be seen by the aid of the microscope.
These, therefore, are the qualities first af-
fected. Here you have the reason why the
Admiralty officials have to tell us, that the
repairs on the warships have in many cases
been so badly done, that it was impossible
to think that they had been ■ “ by sober
men. It seems almost unthinkable, that so
many of the men should be so devoid of the
sense of responsibility, so careless of the
safety of their fellows, the sailor-men afloat,
and of the safety of the : r co mtrv and all
because they probably could rot resist the
drink as they went to their work, that drink
which spoiled their efficiency for the rest of
the day. But the : r self-control was lessened
and they could not realise the position. While
we are asking that the publie-heuses should
be closed at six in the evening, v\e must see
to it that they are not opened till ten in the
morning! Fancy our not being aPie in this
State to buy a loaf of bread or a piece of
meat till eight in the morning, and yet we
can go and get drunk at six. AnJ at the other
end of the day, why shouTd the seller of the
necessities and conveniences of life have to
close at 6, while the publican keeps open till
11—long after most people should be in
bed. It is estimated that 90 per cent, of the
excessive drinking takes place after 6. And
the man who has had too much drink in the,
evening is not efficient next day. It is in-
tolerable—but it is another story, which I
shall have to leave for the presmt, though
I may remark that it is the plain fact, which
we may too frequently verify, that many men


who would not otherwise think of drinking,
Uii they pass one drinkshop after another,
have the idea of drinking awakened in their
■ - °' J scio..gly in the end that p craving
then arises so imperious that the/ satisfy it
almost at any cost. This clearly is a case of
temptation. Let us therefore remove the
tempter. Our ally, Russia, recognised these
things in the first days of the war, and sac
rificed a revenue of ninety millions of pounds
per annum by abolishing the sale and manu-
facture of vodka, spirits, but she was thus
enabled to mobilise her army weeks before
the enemy reckoned upon her being able to
do it, and what has not this meant to us all!
Even in these short months what a change
has been wrought in the social conditions of
the Russian people! The dwellers on the
land are more industrious, better dressed and
better fed. The productivity of their labour
has been so greatly enhanced that it is just
as if Russia had added millions of labourers
to her resources, without the expense of
maintaining them. Savings bank deposits
are enormously increased. Crime is rarer.
There are fewer accidents and less disease.
France, also, has totally probated for all
time the manufacture and sale of absinthe,
which, like alcohol, is a nerve-poison, and
the French Academy of Medicine is trying
hard to limit the sale of alcohol in all its
forms.
The British Government is at its wits’ end,
and yet a review of the cablegrams of the
last few weeks shows that there is too much
ground for Mr. Lloyd George’s statement,
that strong drink is a stronger enemy than
either Gernjany cr Austraia in all their shin-
ing armour! Net all of them, of course, but
sections of the men in many important
trades connected with the war are doing less
work than they would do in times of peace,
owing to the higher rates of pay and shorter
hours they now exact. They are slack and
inefficient, and are doing poor work and bad
work, because of the drink they buy with
the extra money. This is what is said in the
White Book just issued by the British Go-
vernment. Out of 118 men engaged in mak-
ing submarines no less than 58, one-half
failed to turn wp, and out of 8000 employees
of one firm, 1800 faile’d to turn up on the day
after Easter Monday. And yet have we not
read again and again the bitter cry of the
men at the front for more munitions! Men at
the front, if they have nothing id shoot with,
are there only to be shot at, and are as much
the victims of the slackers at home as of the
enemy in the field. I have elsewhere stated
that alcohol *s a nation-destroying substance.
U there not ample grounds for my statement
in what I have here set forth? Our whole ex-
istence as a free nation may be settled by a
few capital ships. Everything about these
must be free from the slightest suspicion of
inefficiency. Let us take a lesson from our
enemies. The whole population of Germany
is working like a machine, it is said. From
what I know of Germany and the Germans,
I believe this statement to be the exact
truth.
You probably have read these statements
m the newspapers, and rejoiced as I did that
the British Government, at the suggestion of
many Admiralty officers and other deeply
interested authorities, was going to intro-
duce a measure of prohibition in the areas
adjacent to the munition factories. And al-
though I admit the many difficulties that
confront the practical legislator, we cannot
but read with dismay that ‘as a result of
negotiations with those interested in the
liquor trade, Mr. Lloyd George has with-
drawn his proposed liquor taxes," and that
“in view of the evidence that much of the
mischief ... is due to cheap and fiery spirits,
the Government, AFTER CONSULTING
THE SPIRIT TRADE, proposes to abandon
the taxing proposals and substitute the pro-
hibition of spirits under three years old. The
Government had reached AN AGREEMENT
WITH THE BREWERS for encouraging
light beers, but the Irish members would
not accept. The Government has therefore
withdrawn the beer duties in order to avoid
a controversy." Why was the trade always
consulted? And why is it so much opposed
to the taxes? Because the trade knows that


these taxes would diminish the consumption
of spirits! A cablegram said'that half of the
distilleries in Edinburgh would have to be
closed, and an Irish leader declared that the
only trade, that is the trade of distilling left
in the South of Ireland, would be ruined!
“The trade” is so all-powerful that they
downed one of the most earnest and power-
ful Chancellors of the Exchequer that the
United Kingdom ever had. Then as to this
talk about fiery spirits, bad whisky, doctored
drink. We hear the same thing in this State,
and we constantly hear So and So’s condition
put down to evil spirits of this liquid kind,
but I am in a position to say that such state-
ments are mostly nonsense. During the four
years that I was President of the Board of
Health, the analyses of the liquor samples
taken from the public houses by the inspec-
tors passed through my hands and practi-
cally never was any deleterious addition
found. The only adulterant we used to find
was watei —and that was NOT deleterious.
Our drinks here are good liquor so far as
their composition goes, and yet we see the
same bad results here as anywhere else. It
is not bad drink, but too much drink that is
the trouble! There are, of course, different
kinds of alcoholic drinks —beer, wine, spirits,
and each has its own specific action depend-
ing upon what else is there besides the alco-
hol, but they may all produce the typical ef-
fects of alcohol —it is to the use of spirits,
however, that most of our remarks really
apply, for it is then that the alcohol is con-
sumed in its greatest degree of concentra-
tion. Probably an amount of alcohol vari-
able in different cases, but always a small
amount, might be taken daily by healthy men,
yet it might be difficult to prove that it had
any really injurious effect but then it
should be clearly understood and remem-
bered that it is a luxury; that it can be done
without perfectly well; that it should be in
very diluted forms—not over say 4 per cent,
of alcohol, and that it is peculiarly apt to
lead to larger and injurious amounts being
taken, and that this is a real danger.
In all that I have said I am expressly ex-
cluding the use of alcohol as a drug in medi-
cal practice. There are cases of disease in
which in one form or another it is still used
with benefit. Further, there are circum-
stances in the life of even the healthy man
when alcohol in one or other of its forms
may be useful. But with such cases as
these, e.g.,' old age, overwork and fatigue,
I am not now concerned. To a certain and
limited extent it may act as a food, but
these cases’ too, come under the care of the
medical man. I repeat that I have all along
been referring to healthy men in the cir-
cumstances of life from day to day.
Drinking alcoholic liquors is largely a
habit into which men fall, not always be-
cause they like the stuff, but just because
they see others do it and they have not the
moral courage to stand out. The abomin-
able habit of “shouting” is responsible for a
great deal of drinking—the idea at the bot-
tom of it is laudable enough—one doesn’t
like to be considered mean—the pity of it is
that the application of the principle leads to
such disastrous results. New South Wales
annually spends £8,000,000 (eight millions
of pounds), on alcoholic beverages, and when
the crime, disease, insanity, poverty and
misery arising therefrom are taken into ac-
count, and the cost of police, judges, prisons,
hospitals, asylums, and so on is added
to this —and if the loss resulting from
.the lost time and general industrial ineffi-
ciency are added as well, what an appalling
sum it makes! If it were only spent in
railways, roads, irrigation, schools, and the
many other agencies for the progress of the
State and the uplifting of its people, what a
happy land this sunny land would be! And
it is so easily possible that I see it coming
some day. It lies with us to bring it sooner.
I know that the lost taxes would have to be
raised in some way, but the money saved by
the State would be considerable, and the
increased productiveness of all our indus-
tries would far more than make up for the
loss
May I here point out, which is too often
forgotten, that it will not do merely to close


the public houses, and leave the men who
have been in the habit of frequenting these
places without any place in which to spend
their leisure time. A great social effort must
be made by our people to learn how to amuse
ourselves in a rational way. “Ab hoste do-
ceri,” let us learn from the enemy; it is a
familiar observation that we take our pleas-
ures sadly, and when we visited the conti-
nent of Europe we saw that it is only too
true. It will not do just simply to close the
public houses with their light and glitter and
company, and leave the working men to spend
their evenings in comfortless homes or on the
streets—often wet and dirty. The homes
must be mad comfortable, wives taught to
cook appetising meals, to keep themselves
clean and tidy, and to control their children.
The streets clean, open spaces for recreation
provided, places of wholesome amusement
and so forth, but, above all, the people must
be educated to desire all these things, and
when that is accomplished these things will
soon be provided. But this is a social re-
volution! Yes, it is, it is nothing less, and
yet it has to be faced. In Germany it has
been to a great extent accomplished, and
we must do it too, and begin now. Let me
quote from a leading article in the Melbourne
“Age”:—“With Britain sober, the four cor-
ners of the world may come in arms with-
out hope of conquest; with a great propor-
tion of Britain’s population given to habitual
drinking— to the ruin of manhood, the de-
basement of national ideals, the enfeeble-
ment of physique, intellect, and character-
national life and liberty are never safe.
When half the world is awake to an over-
whelming danger, the people of Australia, or
of this State, cannot afford to remain
asleep.” We must strain every nerve, for the
enemy has shown a marvellous resourceful-
ness and marvellous resources, and though
we cannot imagine him successfully walking
over the whole world, we do see a still un-
beaten Germany.
A word as to my personal position in the
matter, I was 28 years of age before I knew
much more than the taste of liquor. For 30
years I have habitually had wine, generally
once a day—just a glass to my dinner, but
when the call came I felt that I could not
honestly expect the workers in the munition
factories and the soldiers who were fighting
for me in the field to abstain from alcohol,
as I have proved to you they should for the
sake of efficiency, unless I did myself ab-
stain, and I urge, that if we are to expect
the men at the front, not only to exercise this
self-denial, but also to undergo hardships
and risk their lives as well, surely they may
expect us to exercise that self-denial only!
I have been asked, since this meeting was
announced, why should we exercise this self-
denial? I make answer, because abstention
from what is an indulgence is at all times
a wholesome discipline, and because in this
crisis in the history of our country, the ut-
most personal efficiency and the conserva-
tion of the national resources should be the
aim of every man and woman, as “Eye-
Witness” on the 7th of March said that it is
with our allies—“every man, woman and
child is doing his or her part.” Surely it
would be an encouragement to our sorely
tried soldiers and sailors if they felt sure
that those also who stay at home are doing
each his and her “little bit.”
My Lord Mayor, I propose that in this
matter all present follow the example of His
Majesty, King George the Fifth!


The Worker Print, Sydney.
