

Health Sodetjj of |tciu South tSali's.
ftsil
Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto
FOOD
AS CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH.
A LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW WALES
On the 13TH August, 1877,
AT THE
FREEMASONS’ HALL, YORK STREET, SYDNEY
THE HEY. WILLIAM FHEJNCH CLAY,
.
M.A., M.D., &c., &c., &c.
William Charles Windeyer, Esq., M.P, in the Chair.
-SgCIIIEJ)
PRINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET




No. 6.] [March, 1878.
Health J&mdg of |lfui Jsouth ISalos
Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto.
FOOD
AS CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC HEALTH.
A LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
On the 13TH August, 1877,
AT THE
FREEMASONS* HALL, YORK STREET. SYDNEY,
THE LEV. WILLIAM FHENCH CLAY,
M.A., M.D., &c., &c., &c.
William Charles Windeyer, Esq., M.P., in the Chair.
JSghtog:
PRINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET.


THE HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM MONTAGU MANNING.
THE HONORABLE THOMAS HOLT, M.L.C.
A. T. HOLROYD, M.A., M.B.
CLEMENTS LESTER, Australian Club.
.Hwwlarji:
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY, 64 Margaret Street.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY.
1. The diffusion among all classes of plain information on
the subjects of Health and Disease, particularly as these are
connected with cleanliness, ventilation, and infection.
2. The prevention of adulteration of food and liquors.
3 The removal of noxious influences by means of legisla-
tion, and by a legitimate pressure upon the executive authorities.
“ Prevention is better than Cure.'’


Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto.
The following Lecture, delivered on the 13 th August, by the
Rev, W. French Clay, M.A., M.D., is the Second of a
Series of Lectures in connection with the Health Society of
New South Wales.
Dr. Clay said:
It is not a mere figure of speech to say that the substance of
the living body, is, while life lasts, in a slow state of combustion;
and that like a lamp, if it is to be kept burning and shining, it must
be continually supplied with fuel, in proper quantity and quality.
The fuel designed to feed the lamp of life is food: and just
as the light of a lamp varies in permanency and power, in beauty
and brightness, according as it is or is not fed with fuel in suitable
quantity and quality ; so the lamp of human life burns with more
or less brilliancy and effect as it is, or is not supplied with food in
suitable quantity and quality.
All will admit, that if as individuals we are to enjoy health
and discharge the duties of life, we must have a proper supply of
wholesome food: and as it is with individuals so with communities.
No community or nation can long maintain its position in the
scale of being, unless the public health is good, and one of the
foundations on which that rests is food in proper quantity and
quality.
It is found by experience that ‘ errors in diet.’ and the con-
sumption of bad food, whether from adulteration or decomposition,
be it solid or fluid, is a frequent and fruitful source of weakness,
discomfort, pain, disease and premature death.
Ignorance lies at the root of many of these errors —and hence
the importance of those placed at the head of communities—
public institutions—schools —families, &c., trying to communicate
to those committed to their charge,—sound, practical, reliable
information on the subject of food.
As a member of the Health Society of N.S.W. I therefore
propose, after a few general remarks, to draw attention to some of
5-S 77


the leading articles ot food, noting their relative values, and the
best modes of preparing them to sustain the body in health and
strength —and lastly to offer a few suggestions as to the best
dietary for infants and children, as being the foundation on which
alone the physical well-being and vigour of the future generation
can be built up.
Food subserves two principal purposes —
i. The production of heat.
2. The laying down of tissue and the replacement of it
when consumed.
Accordingly we find two classes of food provided—
i. Heat generators which, consisting largely of carbon, are
called carbonaceous foods, ex. gr. sugar, starch, oils
and fats.
2. Tissue formers which consisting largely of nitrogen
(the element parted with by the body in its varied
movements and operations) are called nitrogenous
foods, ex. gr. wheat, flour, oatmeal , fish , flesh and
fowl, beans, peas, and lentils.
But not only has the body power to utilize these foods and
make them subservient to the production of heat and the laying
down and replacement of tissue; but it has also the power to
store up some of these materials for future use.
The storage of material takes place only to a limited extent,
and varies more as the constitution of the individual than as the
amount of food taken.
Some ex. gr. eat largely but yet store up little —while others
eat moderately and yet accumulate largely.
This store of material is composed almost entirely of fat, and
it enables the body partly, to meet the wants of the system, either
when the supply of food fails, or when the appetite for food fails.
All experience indeed goes to show that a moderate accumulation of
fat tends to defend the body from the attacks of disease, and
when the attack is successful, to sustain the system during the
attack. At the same time it must be borne in mind that a large


accumulation of fat tends to obstruct the proper actions of the
vital organs of the body, and renders the body itself weighty and
unwieldy. A large storage of fat also implies a considerable
increase of blood in the body above the natural standard—the
consequence of which must be undue distention of the blood
vessels, and consequently pressure upon, and congestion of, the
brain—lungs—heart and other vital organs.
Hence the importance of those, whose tendency is to accu-
mulate largely, using sparingly, fatty, starchy, or saccharine food.
As regards the laying down of tissue to effect the growth and
increase of the body—that has its limit; for while the full
development of certain parts of the body does not take place till
after youth; yet it is found that nearly the whole of the process
of the laying down of tissue is accomplished during infancy and
youth, or not at all.
Hence the importance of those who have the management of
the young, being in possession of rational information on the
subject of food.
What then, it may be asked, is the minimum quantity of
carbonaceous and nitrogenous, i.e, of heat forming and flesh
forming food, daily required to maintain the body in health ?
It varies with the age, sex, and occupation of the individual,
as also with the climate and season of the year.
As regards age—an infant, weight for weight, requires six
times as much as an adult; while a youth of 14 or 15 years needs
fully as much as, an adult.
The female sex as a rule requires less than the male; while, as
regards occupation, idleness needs considerably less than work.
Cold seasons and climates call for a larger consumption of
food than do warm.
In seeking to ascertain the quantity of food required daily to
maintain health, it is evident that we can only arrive at general
conclusions, and express the result in terms of a general average.
The subject has been experimentally investigated with much
care and perseverance by several eminent men, notably Dr.


Edward Smith and Dr. Lyon Playfair, and the result of their
investigations is that the minimum daily quantity of carbon and
nitrogen needed to maintain the body of an adult man in health is
4,000 grains of carbon
and 200 grains of nitrogen.
Taking these numbers as expressing the minimum necessities of
the adult male body, we can ascertain by chemical examination
how the different kinds of food can be combined to meet the
necessary requirements of the body.
The following extract from a table constructed by Dr
Letheby will show at a glance in what proportion these necessary
elements exist in some of the leading articles of food
Grs. per Pound.
CARBON. NITROGEN.
2nds Flour ... 2,700 116
Oatmeal 2.831 136
Rice 2,732 68
Peas 2,699 248
Sugar 2,955
Mutton I,9°° iB 9
Beef 1,854 184
Butter 4,S 8 5
Potatoes — 22
But in addition to the nitrogenous and carbonaceous elements,
certain saline and mineral substances are also necessary to the
effective working of the vital functions ex. gr. potash, soda, lime,
iron, phosphorus, sulphur, &c. —hence the need of our partaking
of some of those foods containing these elements.
Phosphorus is found in combination with lime, soda and
potash, in most animal and vegetable foods.
Sulphur is contained in the fibre of flesh, white of egg, and
cheese.
Potash is found in most fruits and vegetables.
Sodium in common salt.
Iron in many vegetables —ex. gr, carrots, cabbage, potatoes,
peas, mustard and cucumbers.


But we must not omit to mention, in speaking of food in
connection with public health, the importance of a full and
wholesome supply of water.
It is found that the average adult, in ordinary health, at a
medium temperature and using moderate exertion, will in one way
or another consume about five pints of water daily.
Hence we see the great importance for a community like ours,
and in a climate like ours, of a pure, permanent and full supply
of water.
Having then expressed in general terms the minimum average
quantity of heat-forming and flesh-forming food required by an
ordinary adult male, we will next examine some of the leading
articles of food —noting their relative values and best modes of
preparing them for the effective sustentation of the health both of
body and mind.
Let us commence with farinaceous foods. First and foremost
we place wheat.
A grain of wheat may be divided into two parts —
ist. The bran or outer covering.
and 2nd. The inner kernel, meal or flour.
The bran consists of several layers, the outer of which consti-
tutes the bran proper, while the inner go under the name of ‘sharps.’
The outer layer, or bran proper, is glazed over with silica i.e.
flint—it is therefore perfectly indigestible and only a source of
irritation when introduced into the stomach.
The inner layers, however, possess a nutritive value
households or seconds flour, in which the sharps have/been left,
is evidently the form most fitted for the the body.
Those who eat what is called brown bread Anould see to it
that they are supplied with bread made of house
or seconds,
and not of firsts to which only bran proper has been added.
From a medical point of view bran proper can only act as an
irritant, and the continued use of bread made in this way i.e. with
bran proper, has been known to give rise to a very troublesome
form of indigestion.


The two proximate elements of wheat flour are — starch the
heat generator, and gluten the flesh or tissue former .
The starch is enclosed in cells, and it is found that, before the
starch can be acted upon by the saliva and stomach, the cells must
be ruptured.
When water is added to flour the starch cells absorb it, and
if sufficient were added the cells would burst ; but, in preparing
flour for food in the form of bread or pastry, the water added is
insufficient and therefore it becomes necessary that sufficient heat
should be supplied to expand and rupture the starch cells, and
this of course is done in the process of cooking.
The contact of the saliva with the starch being necessary for
its digestion and transformation, it becomes of the utmost im-
portance that, in mixing fatty matter with flour to form pastry, it
should be done with much care and delicacy in order that the
resulting compound may be light and so easily masticated that the
saliva may come into contact with every particle of starch.
The great indigestibility of pastry depends to a very great
extent on the neglect of this precaution.
But the chief use of wheat flour is to make bread with.
The element that enables us to form the light, spongy, porous
article of food we call bread is gluten. This element operates by
its glutinous character, in detaining the carbonic acid gas liberated
in bread fermentation, until the loaf is baked.
The property of gluten which enables us to make it subser-
vient to bread making is, that it is insoluble in water.
It is found however that, when flour is damaged and so made
injurious to health, the gluten becomes soluble and so the flour is
no longer capable of being made into a loaf; but strange to say
certain salts have the power to render the gluten again insoluble.
The bakers of Belgium, it is said, first took advantage of this
knowledge, and baked with damaged flour by adding sulphate of
copper to the dough. Alum is said to have a similar effect, and
although this latter, which is used a good deal by London bakers,
may be only used on account of its bleaching properties yet it


certainly would be desirable in any future legislation, on the
subject matter of public health, to make it penal for bakers to mix
either sulphate of copper or alum with the dough.
The most common method of vesiculating, or diffusing
carbonic acid gas through dough, is by fermentation.
This is effected by some kind of yeast —e g. brewers' yeast
(residue after fermentation of beer); or German yeast (residue
after fermentation of rye in making hollands; or bakers' yeast
(mixture of potatoes, flour and water raised to 8o°); or Leaven
(i.e. old dough in a state of fermentation).
The addition of any one of these to newly made dough
starts fermentation in it. A small quantity of free sugar that
exists in flour is decomposed and changed into carbonic acid and
alcohol. The heat of the oven drives off the spirits, while the
carbonic acid detained by the gluten is spread through the mass in
the form of vesicles or bubbles, and when baked the ordinary
loaf is the result.
A company was once formed in a densely populated part of
London to utilize the alcohol and so sell the bread cheaper. The
company soon came to grief, as the people would not buy the
bread, for they said the gin had all been taken out of it.
There are two other methods of vesiculating dough —
ist. By baking powder.
2nd. By forcing carbonic acid gas by machinery through
the dough, forming what is called aerated bread.
As regards baking powders (at least those in common use),
they are all composed of tartaric acid and carbonate of soda,
together with some potato flour, and when the mixture is sold as
egg powder it is coloured with turmeric. When these powders
are mixed with the flour and water is added an effervescence takes
place.
Carbonic acid gas is given off, and tartrate of soda is formed,
which remains in the dough.
This salt of soda gives a rather unpleasant flavour to the
bread; while a continued consumption of it is not necessary or


desirable for health—hence the use of baking powders can only
be recommended when good yeast cannot be obtained.
Bakers’ bread should not, as a rule, be eaten till the day after
it is made, for new bread is not only difficult of mastication but
also of digestion, owing to its glutinous nature.
The negative characteristics of good bread are that it should
not be flaky, crummy, or sodden.
The positive characteristics of good bread are that it should
be sweet to taste and sweet to the smell.
Oatmeal is a very valuable article of food —weight for weight
its nutritive value is greater than wheat flour. It requires, how-
ever, to be well cooked, or the starch cells are not broken.
The gluten form of nitrogen does not exist in such proportion as
fits it to be vesiculated into bread, but very good cakes can
be made with it, either with or without leaven.
The best method of preparing oatmeal for food is by stirring
it into boiling water until it becomes of the consistence of hasty
pudding when it is called ‘ porridge.’ If this be boiled further for
a short time the Scotch call it ‘ brose.’
Both of these preparations, eaten with milk and a little salt,
form a most excellent and nutritious food —for children as well as
adults.
When the husk of the oat is entirely removed, it goes
under name of grits or groats, the chief use of which is to make
gruel.
This gruel is an excellent beverage when the system,
exhausted by labour, requires fluid nutriment. It is highly recom-
mended in training books for those who would excel in rowing,
running, or other athletic sports. In one book it is spoken of as
the iron prince of health and strength.
Gruel seems to have been largely consumed in London coffee
houses some 180 years ago —as appears from an advertisement in
the London Gazette of August 13th, 1695 —to the effect that
water-gruel was always ready at the Marine Coffee House, Birchin
Lane, from 6to 11 o’clock in the morning.


Maize or Indian Corn —This, though rich in flesh-forming
material, does not make good or palatable bread.
When deprived of its gluten, i.e. of a great portion of its
nitrogenous element by treating it with caustic soda and afterwards
drying it, it is sold under the names of oswego, maizena, corn-
flour. A very expensive form of food for the consumer, though
very profitable for the producer.
Rice. —The proportion of gluten in rice being only from 6 to
7 per cent, its flesh-forming powers are small. It cannot be made
into bread, but when boiled it forms a good combination to
equalize other foods rich in nitrogen—especially with poultry
veal, or fish, and more especially when these are cooked with spices
and condiments in the form of curry.
Boiled with milk and eggs, rice makes a digestible, nutritious
and wholesome dish—especially for children.
Peas, beans, lentils. —The nutritive value of these is very
similar, and when they are well rooked they form a very valuable
food—in fact the most nutritious of all vegetable foods; for they
contain double the amount of nitrogen that wheat flour contains,
and more than an equal quantity of carbon. A very high
testimony to the value of this food is to be found in the Book o
Daniel. During the Babylonish captivity, Daniel is recorded to
have appealed against the king’s diet and asked for pulse :
Cap. i.— l 2. Prove thy servants, 1 beseech thee, ten days; and let them
give us pulse to eat and water to drink.
13. Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king’s meat: and
as thou seest, deal with thy servants.
14. So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.
15. And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and
fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king’s
meat.
Sago, tapioca, arrowroot. —These consist almost entirely of
carbonaceous i.e. heat-forming material. From the absence of the
flesh-forming element, viz. nitrogen, they are much less valuable
for food than wheat-flour or oatmeal; so that unless they are mixed


with milk and eggs they are of little value as food except to dilute,
as it were, other foods rich in nitrogen. They do very well there-
fore, especially sago and tapioca, to thicken some kinds of soup.
Vegetables. —Of all none so valuable as the potato. Its value
depends very much however on its kind, its maturity and soil on
which grown. That ‘kind’ is best for food which when cooked
is mealy and easily broken down by pressure.
Young potatoes, though palatable, are not so valuable for
food as the mature, owing to the starch cells not being developed.
Potatoes grown on a dry light soil are found to be the best
for food, as they are less watery and contain more starch than those
grown on a wet clayey soil. The potato requires to be well
cooked—boiled, steamed, or roasted. Perhaps boiling them in
their skins is best, certainly most economical. Potatoes contain a
very valuable antiscorbutic principle.
In 1781 Sir G. Plane pointed out the beneficial effects of their
use in this respect among the seamen of the Royal Navy; while
Dr. Bayley in his enquiries into the diseases of prisoners found
that wherever potatoes were used scurvy was unknown. Hence
the importance, from a sanatory point of view, of encouraging the
growth and use of the potato.
Other vegetables ex. gr. the carrot, cabbage, onion, turnip,
&c. all possess a common value as regards antiscorbutic properties,
and differ only slightly in their nutritive values which are small
and much less than the potato.
Ripe fruits. —Apples and oranges, pears, peaches, melons and
pineapples are valuable more on account of their antiscorbutic
properties than as nutrient foods.
Sugar exists in most farinaceous foods, in vegetables and
fruits, as also in milk.
Sugar is a valuable heat-forming food which is easily digested.
It also possesses fattening and flavouring qualities.
It is moreover valuable for preserving fruit and curing meat.
In curing meat it not only assists the salt, but imparts a pleasant
flavour.


Treacle is sugar in a form which cannot be crystalized.
It possesses therefore the same properties as sugar and is
especially used in America for curing purposes.
Fat in one form or other is diffused through all animal foods,
and in form of oil, through nearly all vegetable foods. Taking
milk as a standard and regarding the proportion of fatty matter
found in it, it would appear that 28 % of our food should consist
of fatty matter in some shape or other.
Hence the importance of supplying the young with a
sufficiency of it. There is a great temptation with those ignorant
of this fact, for economy’s sake to substitute treacle or jam for
butter. We may with impunity in an emergency cut off sugar,
treacle or jam, but it is found by experience, that if we do so
as regards fatty matter, the health is sure to suffer in the long run.
Animal food. —Flesh-meat is very similar in composition to
our own bodies, and hence it is readily converted into our own
tissues. It is made up of a nitrogenous element, the lean —and a
carbonaceous, the fat.
The lean consists of solid matter and certain juices in which
the flavour chiefly resides —these are both necessary to healthy
nutrition.
The digestibility of meats varies. Poultry and game are
generally placed at the head of list, next mutton, then beef, and
lastly veal and pork.
Experience leads to the conclusion that as a rule beef and
mutton are best suited for regular meals, while other meats should
only be used occasionally.
In cooking meat the great object is to present it to the palate
in an agreeable, and to the stomach in a digestible form—hence
as little as possible should be destroyed by heat, or removed by
water, while no part should be rendered much harder than before
cooking. In roasting a joint it is not possible to have the heat
equally distributed through the mass, as the outer part is
necessarily nearer to the fire than the inner, and hence it arises
that some of the juices are evaporated and some of the solid parts


are partially destroyed. This, however, is not a disadvantage if it
can be kept in proper limits, for it has the effect of coagulating
an external layer of albuminous matter, and thus preventing the
escape of the interior juices. These juices thus confined expand
under the influence of heat, and so tend to separate the fibrous
parts of the meat and thus facilitate future digestion. Hence the
best way to roast or bake meat is to subject it at first to a com-
paratively high temperature. When this has been done for a short
time then to reduce the heat and keep it steady till the meat is
done.
When meat is boiled the heat can be more easily distributed,
but as the hot water dissolves the juices it is important first to
plunge the joint into boiling water, which will have the effect of
coagulating a thin layer of albumen and so preventing the further
escape of the important juices. This having been effected, the
vessel in which the joint is must be removed a short distance from
the source of heat and the contents kept at a temperature of about
iBo° till done.
Boiled or stewed meat is found to be more digestible than
roasted ; but as the water draws out the salts —the water in which
the meat has been boiled (unless it is salt meat) should be used
(as in France) at the same meal as the meat. Salted meat is not
so wholesome as fresh—as the salt not only draws out the juices,
but hardens the fibre. Moreover, salt in large quantities is
injurious to health.
Fish. —Its nutritive value is much less than meat. It is, how-
ever, light and easily digested; but should not, as a rule, be used
to the exclusion of meat. In those countries where fish is eaten
in large quantities, and little or no meat to be had, the general
health suffers and a scorbutic state is engendered.
Milk. —Good unadulterated milk is, next to bread, as conducive
to the health of the adult as any that could be named; while for young
children it is the essential food on which life and health depend.
The two chief elements of milk are—(i) casein or cheese, and (2)
the fat or butter. The other elements are sugar of milk, lactic


acid and some valuable salts. New milk is the most perfect food in
nature, and is capable of supplying all the needs and necessities
of the body in infancy, youth and old age.
Cheese. —lts nutritive value is not precisely determined. If we
regard only its component parts, we find that the nitrogenous or
flesh-forming material much exceeds that of animal food; while
in specimens in which much cream is incorporated there is an
abundance of carbonaceous or heat-forming material.
There has, however, always existed a wide spread belief that
cheese is not easily digested, and it has been determined experi-
mentally that when much cheese is eaten a large portion of it
passes away without having been acted upon at all by the stomach.
But there is also another wide spread idea about cheese which
seems to be well founded, viz. that it promotes the digestion of
other foods. Shakespear seems to have been familiar with this
idea, for in the play of Troilus and Cressida he makes Achilles
say “ why my cheese!—my digestion.” The idea that cheese
promotes the digestion of other foods seems founded on experience
—so that we may on the whole fairly conclude from all we know
of cheese that, while it is well to eat a small quantity both for
food and digestion, it would not be good to eat a large quantity or
make it a substitute for meat.
A few words on one or two substances that have come to be
regarded by some as articles of diet, and to which certain hidden
virtues have been ascribed— tea and alcohol.
(i.) Tea.—lts properties depend on—
1. A volatile oil which gives it its flavour.
2. A peculiar substance called “ theine.”
3. Tannin, which gives it a certain astringency.
The nourishing power of tea is insignificant and not worth
mentioning.
It is, however, a powerful agent and acts rapidly on the
nervous system.


Its power for good Dr. E. Smith says consists in—
I, Its exhilarating power.
2. Its power to increase respiratory process.
3. Its power to promote the transformation of starchy andfatty food.
4, Its tendency to increase action of skin , and so by inducing perspi-
ration to lessen heat of body.
All know how powerfully sometimes both tea and coffee act
on the brain. In some cases, tea especially acts so injuriously
that medical men have frequently to suspend or forbid its use.
On the whole Dr. E. Smith sums up all that can be said for
and against tea, and which may be found in his work on practical
dietary p.p. 106, 107 :
‘ Tea may be useful to the corpulent, the over fed, after a full
meal, at end of day when food accumulated, when digestion and
vital changes slowly, for the old, for hot climates, for the sedentary,
for those who do not perspire freely, for those who eat much
starchy food, for soldiers on the march in hot climates, and as a
restorative in cases of drowning, or wherever it is desired to
increase the respiratory functions. Tea may be hurtful in the
absence of food, after a long fast (as at breakfast), to the poor and
ill-fed, the spare, and the young. It is not adapted to sustain
exertion, to prison dietaries, to low ’temperatures, nor to hot
climates when the appetite is defective and the skin active, nor to
those who perspire too freely, neither should it be taken with our
principal meal.
Alcohol is the product of the fermentation of cane, grape or
malt sugar, and forms basis of all spirits, wines and beers.
It is a most powerful stimulant to the nervous system.
If it be regarded as an article of food it is the most danger-
ous we have to deal with.
When taken in large quantities it acts most injuriously on the
brain, heart, stomach and liver.
If it be employed as an article of diet it should never be
taken apart from other solid food.
When taken in quantities beyond what is needed for the


healthy stimulation of the nervous system it poisons the blood and
produces incurable affections of the brain, stomach, liver, kidneys,
and heart —leading often to painful and lingering disease, and
often to premature death.
The temptation to the consumption of alcohol in form of ardent
spirits in this city is very great, and it is to be hoped that, in the
interests of the public health, in any future legislation on the
subject, provision will be made for a better supervision of and a
stricter limitation of the number of those establishments, where
in many instances it is to be feared the most impure and poisonous
compounds are retailed.
In conclusion, suffer me to make a few brief suggestions as
to a dietary for infants and children.
The proper food for children is, of course, the milk
of the mother. Failing that, a suitable substitute—failing
that, milk only, without the addition of bread, arrowroot,
flour, biscuit, or any other substance except sugar. The
reason is—milk contains all the necessary elements for
nutrition—while the absence of a certain substance in the juices
of the stomach of the infant almost entirely prevents the trans-
formation of starchy matter, so that any farinaceous substance
swallowed leaves the body unacted upon, and in its passage is
only a source of constant irritation. The practice of feeding
infants on bread, or biscuit, or grits sopped in sweetened water,
to which only a little milk has been added, is fraught with the
most dangerous consequences and frequently leads to fatal
results.
Some nurses attempt to feed infants on cream and sugared
water under the impression they are giving a food richer than
milk. This is a grievous error— cream is only fat, which in itself
alone is quite unable to sustain life. In the absence of the
maternal supply or its natural substitute, the best plan is to mix
pure cows’ milk with one-third water and add a little sugar, and to
let the infant have at least three pints in twenty four hours. More
danger in giving too little than too much.


This dietary should be continued as a rule for the first year
of life.
During the second year milk again should form a large part
of the diet, which should consist entirely of milk and farinaceous
foods.
During the remainder of childhood milk if possible should
enter largely into the dietary, to which may be gradually added
bread and butter, potatoes and gravy, some soup and meat —until,
as years increase, the diet is gradually assimilated to that of the
adult; never forgetting that milk is the most perfect food in nature
and may be used with advantage throughout life from infancy to
old age. Hence it is clear that if the health of the rising genera-
tion is to be strong and vigorous—fitted to contend with the
attacks of diseases and bear them well when attacked —milk in
good quantity and quality should be supplied; and to this end
facilities should be given and arrangements made to utilize the
large supplies of milk that might be brought down from the
country into Sydney.
I would take this opportunity to urge on all parents and
guardians to combine together to have this important work
accomplished.
The future of this favored land depends much, under God,
on the physical vigour and strength of its people, and there can
be neither vigour of mind or strength of body unless the founda-
tion is duly laid in supplying our children with food, i.e. milk in
proper quantity and quality.
The old proverb is— ‘ Take care of the pence and the pounds
will take care of themselves I
We say—Take care of the young, in the matter of food and
diet, and when they become adults, they will be able to take care
of themselves.








