

vBf SI
«S


MOTHERS!
YOUR HEALTH IS DOUBLY IMPORTANT
Daily cups of delicious 'Ovaltine' give you renewed energy,
strength and vitality. 'Ovaltine' lays the foundation for baby s
happy healthy growth because it contains all the natural goodness
of rich barley malt, full-cream milk and health giving eggs.
'Ovaltine' has an abundance of proteins to replace body tissue,
carbohydrates to regenerate energy, calcium to build bone and
teeth, iron to replenish the blood, phosphorus to reinforce the
nerves and vitamins to give resistance against ailments.
For expectant and nursing mothers there is nothing
"just as good" as 'OVALTINE'.
MB
OVALTINE 0 !!
THE FOOD YOU DRINK FOR HEALTH AND STRENGTH
* . *; *s


FOOD AND NUTRITION
» ——— 1
FOOD and NUTRITION
Issued
QUEENSLAND HEALTH EDUCATION COUNCIL
With Acknowledgments to the N.S.W. Department of Health
Consider food Value as Well as
price*
What food should we eat, and
how much of it? The Queensland
Health Education Council, in this
booklet, sets out some facts which will
help to answer these questions. The
answers are important, because the
maintenance of full, robust health de-
pends to a great extent on the wise
choice of the right kinds and quantity
of food.
Eating is very much a matter of
habit. We eat certain foods for pre-
ference, partly because we like them
better, partly because we are used to eating such foods. Among the
foodstuffs which are available, there is opportunity for a considerable range
of choice, according to individual taste, because the essential requirements
can be met by various combinations of different foods. But in order to
choose wisely, we must know which foods are essential for normal health
and growth, which groups of food are equivalent, so that we may sub-
stitute one for another, and what quantities of each are required by
persons in different age-groups and engaged in different kinds of work.
Food serves three main purposes in the body
(1) To supply energy.
(2) To provide for growth and the repair of bodily wear audi
tear.
(3) To regulate the various functions of the body, and to pro*
tect against disease.
In choosing a diet which is adequate to serve these purposes, we
must bear in mind that different groups of foodstuffs perform different
functions in nutrition, and that some items from each group must bs
supplied in order to provide a well-balanced diet. Once this is accom-
plished, the remaining items required to satisfy the appetite can be left
to individual preference. ' First, eat what you ought, then eat what
you please. .
Some Physiological Facts
The human body may be likened to a machine, inasmuch as it is
capable of performing work and requires fuel (food) in order to carry
out such work.


Here Is oily
one
ELECTROLUX
* A famous name on a
world-famous refrigerator
. . . no name has gone so
far around the world nor
means so mucn in homes,
because it stands for
IDENTIFIED QUALITY.
The buyer of an Electrolux can always depend upon the
refrigerator living up to all that stands behind the name
plate. In the latest Electrolux, we offer what we
honestly believe is the finest refrigerator made.
Electrolux is the choice of the majority and the demand
is a good deal greater than the present production of
the Electrolux Works, but, despite continued shortages of
material, the delivery position is steadily improving.
Having to wait a little for your Electrolux possibly means
some temporary inconvenience, but lasting satisfaction
will reward your patience.
Electrolux is the Refrigerator Worth Waiting *
Sole Distributors for Queensland:
DALGETY AND COMPANY LTD.
(Incorporated in England.)
Rockhampton Townsville
Brisbane
Get full details NOW I


During the process o£ digestion of the food eaten, the more complex
food substances are split up by digestive ferments in the mouth, stomach
and intestines into simpler substances which are absorbed into the body
The human body in certain
respects is like a machine.
and thereafter are either stored, built up
into the tissues or consumed by a process
analogous to the burning of coal or oil-fuel
in an engine. The burning up of fuel gives
out heat, and it is necessary for life that
the temperature of the human body should
remain fairly constant, that is, at about
98.4 degrees Fahrenheit.
The difference between a "warm-
blooded" creature such as man and a
"cold-blooded" animal like the frog is that
man is provided with certain mechanisms whereby he can keep his temper-
ature constant, irrespective of whether he* is at the South Pole or in the
stokehold of an ocean liner. The frog's temperature, on the other hand,
varies with his environment; if the water or the atmosphere is warm, he
is warm; if they are cold, he is cold to a corresponding degree.
The human being can regulate his temperature on the one hand by
burning more fuel—either fuel stored in the body, or fuel taken in the
form of food—and on the other hand by dissipating heat from the body
in various ways, such as the evaporation of sweat.
In cold climates the body tends to lose more heat, and to compen-
sate for this both the desire for musculai activity and the appetite for
food are increased. Ihe heat loss is diminished by a contraction of the
blood-vessels of the skin, and the use of warm clothing. Nevertheless, in
hot climates as well as in cold, energy is required for the performance of
work, and for the functioning of the various organs of the body. Fuel
in the form of food is required to supply this energy, as well as for other
purposes.
There is constant activity of one sort or another going on in the
body, even when the individual is resting or asleep, such as breathing,
beating of the heart, digestion and so forth.
Meaning of Terms
It is desirable to indicate the meaning of some of the terms in com-
mon use in dealing with food and nutrition, since it is impossible to avoid!
their use even in a pamphlet intended for non-technical readers.
Temperature is a measure of the relative intensity of heat.
that is, the degree of concentration of heat in a given mass of material. It
is not a measure of the total quantity of heat.
There are two temperature scales in common use. The
{•eaUgrade thermometer—used in all spcientifie investigations—•m


A NUTRITIOUS FOOD
FOR THE
WHOLE
FAMIL Y..
Processed
CHEDDAR CHEESE
Yes, Rex Cheddar Cheese is
a "cut lunch" favourite and
a very tasty addition to
those salads of yours. The
highly nutritious value of
cheese has been acclaimed
by eminent dieticians and
when you serve Rex you are
serving the best quality
pasteurised cheese.
Obtainable in
5 LB. BLOCKS
8 OZ. PACKETS
REX
CANNED
MEATS
All the deli-
cate flavours
retained in
canning . . ,
truly canned
goodness.
PINEAPPLE
HAMS &
BACONS
Are re-
nowned for
a high stan-
dard of qual-
ity
the best.
Ask Your Grocer For Them
MUTTON AN® FOSOITT JOKES
Bist. of 44 Pineapple'" & "Rex* 9 Hams , Bacons# Small goods 9
Canned Meat # etc*


graded between 0 (the freezing point of water) and 100 (the boiling
point of water). The Fahrenheit thermometer—the ordinary thermometer
—is graded between 0 (with the freezing point of water at 32 deg. i and
212 (the boiling point of water).
A calorie is the unit by which the quantity of heat is
It is the quantity of heat required to raise one kilogram (1,000 grams,
i.e., 2 lb. 3 oz.) of water one degree Centigrade in temperature. Scien-
tifically it is known as the "large calorie," since there is a "small calorie"*
which is only 1 /1,000 of the former.
A calorie is a unit of measurement like the inch or the pint and is
not a constituent of the food. It is a measure of the capacity of the food
to produce heat and energy in the body.
Milk (per pint) 375 Jam (per lb.) 1,296 Cheese (per lb.) 2,001
Bread (per lb.) 1,040 Rice „ 1,640 Cocoa », 2,215
Beef „ 1,096 Flour „« 1,600 Butter „ 3,600
Honey „ 1,290 Mutton ,» 1,780 Dripping „ 4,219
Oram: Sometimes spelt gramme, is
one of the units of weight of the metric
system.
Thirty grams are approximately equal
to one ounce.
Kilogram: Is 1,000 grams,
equivalent to 2 lb. 3 oz. (approx.).
Protein : Constituents of food-
stuffs containing nitrogen necessary for
growth and for repair of tissues. Exempli-
fied by lean of meat and white of eggs
from which all water and mineral constitu-
ents have been removed.
There are many proteins and they
vary m food value. Each protein is a com- 1 like budding- stone*
! i , i •!«. ! i| r in a complicated structure*
plex substance built up by the assembly or
a number of chemical constituents which have been likened to "building
stones." Initially, these "building stones" are all derived from plants.
Certain important "building stones" are absent or very scanty in the pro-
tein of certain vegetables ordinarily consumed for food.
Proteins containing all these essential "building stones" in compara-
tive abundance are regarded as high-grade or first-class. Since they are
abundant in protein derived from animal sources, the protein of meat, fish,
egg, cheese and milk, is first-class, though not all animal protein answers
this description. For instance, gelatin, the protein constituent of jellies
and soups, is "low-grade" protein, since it lacks some most important and
indispensable "building stones." It is suitable as an ingredient of a mixed
dietary, but is not sufficient, fay itself, to maintain life or health. Beef teai


WEEK
• To ■ ensure bat> y' s AiBillllllllllB^^^^fe
steady growth follow
the lead of more
sham »hiw apiiPrfl. "
wan tnree genera-
Biscuits at meal- " \ j
times. Rich in whole -
grain nourishment
and fortified with ;||f^
plete nourishing food I I
that can be served as a L _mmr™
gruel to the very young
or spread with butter and j|lL#*™
Marmite for toddlers. From all I
liiii 1 V" IP Write TODAY for your free
Ir Era ® in copy of the famous **Book
I IllnlM About BabiesWritten by
a medical authority it is packed with useful
advice for the young mother. The Sani-
tarium Health Food Company.
D§D HE «■ Hi§i
PBIPP Write TODAY for your free
k 01 h ■ copy of the famous Book
1 llkk 4bout Babies Written by
a medical authority it is packed with useful
advice for the young mother. The Sani-
tarium Health Food Company 9


and meat extract possess very little food
value. They contain little or no protein
and consist mainly of flavouring and
salt.
Vegetable protein is derived directly
from "pl an t" sources, e.g., wheat-flour
peas, beans, potatoes, carrots, etc. Pro-
tein of this type is generally inferior in
food value to animal protein and is there-
fore regarded as "second-class."
Each gram of protein yields
4 Calories.
1 hese foods supply first-class
proteins.
Fat: The term is self-explanatory and is exemplified by suet, lard,
olive oil, butter, dripping, etc.
Animal fat (except lard) is of more value in a diet than vegetable
fat, such as olive oil, for it usually contains Vitamins A and D, which
are absent from vegetable fats and oils, except when specially treated.
It is for this reason, among others, that butter is of greater value as
a food than a margarine made exclusively from untreated vegetable oils.
Each gram of fat yields 9 Calories.
Carbohydrates : Exemplified by sugars, starch, and the like.
They are indispensable sources of energy, though their vitamin and mineral
content may be low or absent. [he fuel content of bread, cereals, fruits
and vegetables is mostly carbohydrate.
Each gram of Carbohydrate yields 4 Calories.
Mineral Matters: » n connection with food these are repre-
sented by common salt (sodium chloride) and compounds of calcium,
phosphorus, iron, iodine, etc. Most are required only in small amounts,
but are essential for the normal growth and functioning of the body. Some
of the minerals can be absorbed only in the presence of certain vitamins.
Vitamins are chemical substances present in certain foodstuffs
in minute quantities; they are essential for growth and maintenance of
health. Man obtains them both from the
vegetable world and from the flesh of
animals
There are four principal vitamins:
Vitamin A: Necessary for growth,
healthy eyesight, health of mucus
membranes. It is present in consider-
able amounts in fish oils and fat, but-
ter, egg-yolk, milk, cheese and liver.
Green and yellow leaf vegetables such
as spinach and carrots and yellow
fruits contain a substance which is
converted in the body to Vitamin A.
Three forms of carbohydrate**


tg
BUILD
UP ON
BENGERS g*gH|
She is growing -— she bairns /y/
up energy fast! She meeds F
nourishment while she sleeps?
yet her digestion must rest® W
in a cup with digestive rest"
—can be assimilated without
strain. It feeds and soothes, * &
Benger's Food
THE MOST NOURISHING AND DELICIOUS BEDTIME DRINK
1J . What made make
n| Junket f
J It' s logical that the experience and research
ft behind Benger's Food should be devoted to
bringing you a creamier, more nutritious, easier-
■ \\ / 7 1*' 110-digest junket. The result — smooth, delicious
\ Vpl Benger's Junket —comes in five flavours?
Banana, Strawberry, Milk £ hocolate, Coffee and
jgflj Vanilla.
||pll BBNGER'S JUNKET IS EVEN EASIER TO DIGEST


Vitamin B: One of the factors upon
which normal growth, appetite, health
of nervous tissues, are dependant
Vitamin B is not a simple substance,
but consists of several vitamins, each
of which is a specific protection against
certain deficiency diseases such as
beri-beri and pellagra. It is present
in whole grain cereals (i.e., those
from which the germ and skin has
not been removed by milling, polish-
ing, etc.), meat, especially liver and
kidney, yeast, milk, nuts, cheese, egg
yolk and fruit and vegetables, espeo
These foods supply Vitamin A J r •. 't |
and are "protective". ? k a , n . d / ru,t and vegetables, espec-
ially dried peas and beans.
Vitamin C: The factor which prevents the development of scurvy.
It is present in varying degrees in fresh fruits, tomatoes and green leaf
vegetables, potatoes, carrots, etc.- It is most abundant im black cur-
rants, paw-paw and citrus fruits, e.g., lemons and oranges.
Vitamin D: Essential for the effective utilisation of calcium (lime•■),
which is to be deposited in the bones and teeth of the body. In its
absence the lime cannot be utilised, the functions of the body run badly,
the bones and teeth are not properly formed, and the condition of
rickets may supervene.
This vitamin is found in fish-oils and
in fats, egg-yolk, milk, butter and liver. Its
distribution in foods is somewhat similar to
that of Vitamin A, with which it is often
closely associated. Exposure to the rays of
the sun or the rays from the sky can in part
take the place of Vitamin Din food. The
skin contains a substance which is converted
into Vitamin D when it is exposed to the
direct rays of the sun or to ultra-violet light.
Nutritive Values of
Various Food Constituents.
These foods supply Vitamin &>
From what has been said it will be evident that all foodstuffs can
be resolved by chemical analysis into certain constituents which may be
summarised as follows:
(a) Proteins, (b) Fats, (c) Carbohydrates, (d) Mineral matters*
(e) Vitamins, (/) Water.
These various constituents must all be present in any diet which is
to be regarded as adequate and satisfactory, but their total amounts and
iheir proportions in a diet demand special consideration hereunder.


if
I 10 FOOD 'AND NUTRITION
•
,
■
f i
1 LOOK
JHb for these
I '
M LABELS
1
1
A
•
* r
LACKERSTEEN'S
TOMATO SAUCE
AND
MARMALADE
i
V
»•
FAMOUS
100 YEARS " 1 ' wll IjW
*
•


ljjl^
The Requirements of
Satisfactory Diet
For practical purposes there are five
requirements which need to be considered.
They relate to: —
(1 ) The daily calorie intake per person.
(2) fhe daily quantity of animal
(first-class) and vegetable (second-
class) protein.
(3) The proportion between the pro-
tein, fat and carbohydrate of the
diet.
(4) The daily supply of minerals.
Food requirements Vary with
the amount of work.
(5) The daily vitamin content of the diet.
111®! "
(1) The Daily Calorie Intake pep Person.
i-i lb univ f sall y that an adult requires,, more food than a
child of, say, three to four years of age.
It is also common knowledge that strenuous exercise, laborious work
or any other form of muscular activity will show the need for additional
food by an increased appetite.
On the other hand, large variations in food requirements occur among
individuals whose energy output is about the same. These variations
depend upon several factors, such as the height and weight of the individ-
ual, conditions of work, climate, and muscular activity of the body, etc.
Normal Requirements
for an Adult Male
* .
On the assumption that a man of aver-
age stature doing moderate muscular work
represents the normal adult male, calcula-
tions of his food requirements have been
1 made by various scientific workers, who have
taken into account the ordinary mixed diets
in common use which have satisfied large
numbers of people in the climates of Britain,
Office worker requires less United States and other countries.
It is usually accepted that a food intake of 3,000 to 3,400 calories
per day represents for those climates the adequate requirements of an
average adult male doing moderate work, though, of course, a diet for
an individual making but little muscular effort will require a smaller in-
take, and a diet for a very hard-working individual will require a some-
what larger food intake.


I ENGINE DRIVER? NURSE?
One Day...
j 1
And if youVe a wise parent, you !j
won't try to map out your || i Mijj
kiddies" careers for them. Let
them gradually decide for them- 1 |||||
selves. They'll be much hap« || |1|| | ||j||f j
However, when the time comes || 1||
for their training, your children | |i|| fill
will still look to you to find the
enable them to do the work they
want.
A carefully selected Assurance
Policy with the M.L.C. will en-
sure that the future you decide
for your children will be ful-
filled. The cost per year is not
great. And when the children
begin their chosen training*
they'll be grateful to you for
£ the foresight that made it pos-
sible.
Telephone B 1551 or write to?
jt ( 4
The
MUTUAL LIFE
and
CITIZENS'
Assurance Co. Ltd.,
Commercial House *
Cnr. Queen & Creek Streets*
Brisbane.
Manager for Queensland—
G. E. ALLEN* A.F.I.A.


Ages
Adult Male * ♦
9 9
a a
1.
<>, Female ®»
9 9
9 9
<
Child, 13-15 (Boy)
*> 9
» 9
,9 13-15 (Girl)
9 9
59 9
1
» 10-12
S> 9
9 9
■
*> 7-9 © «
9 9
9 a
01 4-6 e o
*1 jf%
f» 9
» a
oi . 1 -3 «•
9 9
"9 <•>
9., under 1 year
• •
e a
Old person (65 years and
over)
0-
•
IT"' nr n •
•
The daily requirements of the average man, viz., 3.000 to 3,400
calories, have been taken as a basis from which the requirements of women,
children and old persons may be calculated.
It is obvious that a young child requires fewer calories than a man,
and that as the child s age advances the quantities of food required will
increase.
We can express the needs of women and children as fractions of the
requirements of the average man, which are taken as unity (i.e., 1.00),
The fraction of unity representing the requirements of an individual
(woman, child or old person) who needs less than 3,000 calories per day,
is known as the individual's equivalent "man-value."
TABLE 1. —"MAN-VALUES" AT AGES.
From Table 1 it is easy to calculate
the total "man-value" of a family. An
example will make this clear.
A family consisting of husband and
wife and five children, aged 13, 10, 8, 6
and 2 years, has a total "man-value" of
5.32 viz., the sum of 1.0 + 0.83 + 1.07
+ 0.83 + 0.66 + 0.53 + 0.40. In other
words the family will require 5.32 man
rations, i.e., 15,960 calories (3,000 X
532) per day.
Child of iwo requires half m
many calories as mother.
Man-value
Calories, per day
1.00
3,000
0.83
2,500
1.07
3,2,00
0.93
2,800
0.83
2,500
0.66
2,000
0.53
1,600
0.40
1,200
0.3 (aver.)
0.75
100/K.G,
2,250
(2) The Daily Quantity of Animal (First-class) j
Protein and Vegetable (Second-class)
Protein.
The energy value (i.e., the number of calories) of food is only one of
leyeral factors which have to be considered in formulating a suitable diet)


*l5edei
Leave it to your Berlei Foundation
give you the smooth, well-proportioned line
that brings you compliments from admiring
4
c
1
to give you
©yes. Leave it to your Berlei, too, to give you that gentle
support so essential to your health and vitality.
Ask for a personal fitting at your favourite store-
then know the true meaning of
correct support.
YOUR FOUNDATION OF BEAUTY


If the number of calories were the
only factor to be considered, we could
simply choose those foods which supply the
greatest number of calories for the smallest
amount of money.
The calories required daily by an
average man could be supplied in the form
of bread and jam, but it is known that such
a diet is not satisfactory for any lengthy
period, even for a man, and children can-
not grow satisfactorily on this diet.
The reason why such a diet is un-
i'hildren require a higher pro- satisfactory is that it is badly balanced in
portion of proteins than adults, regard to the various nutritive constituents,
since the calories are supplied principally
by carbohydrates (starch and sugar) and it is almost completely Jacking
in protein, fat, mineral matter and in some of the vitamins.
A satisfactory diet must be made up of proteins, fat and carbo-
hydrates in proper proportions, together with sufficient quantities of vita-
mins and minerals.
One hundred grams (approx. 31 oz.) of protein will supply about
13 per cent, of the total daily calorie needs of the average man, and this
amount of protein in his daily diet may be regarded as liberal.
1 o supply this amount would be a simple matter if the protein from
one source was as good as that from another. Proteins of animal origin—
milk, cheese, eggs, meat, fish, etc., have in general a higher nutritional
value than the proteins derived from vegetable sources —peas, beans,
carrots, etc.
For this reason, proteins from animal sources are called first-class
proteins, whilst those of vegetable origin are classified as second-class.
Physiologists have laid it down that the protein supplied daily should
contain a certain proportion of animal (first-class) protein.
At least 30 per cent, of the protein eaten by an adult should be
supplied by animal sources.
The protein requirement of a child is higher in proportion to size
than that of an adult, because in the child proteins are required to provide
material for growth.
During infancy, pregnancy and lactation high-class protein is required
•—two-thirds of the protein taken at such times should be derived from
animal sources. _ If one serving of meat, fish or cheese, together with three-
quarters of a pint of milk and one egg are taken each day, the normal
adult will obtain his full protein requirement. During infancy, pregnancy
and lactation the additional protein required is most easily and satisfac-
torily consumed as extra milk.


> S?
<gr JT~~~
I
||;
Kir I
I! <'pi iv.vy
When you buy
'or baby
buy NYAL • .
Among the 168 dependable Nyai Family Medicines there ft
a complete series of products specially for baby. Like all
Nyal Medicines, these products must pass exacting laboratory
tests to ensure purity and effectiveness. For your protection
the formula of every Nyal product is plainly printed on the
package. That is why your chemist can recommend Nyal
Medicines with confidence, because he knows just what
one contains and what it is intended to do.
*
■olC
1
I
I
NYAL MILK OF MAGNESIA
Ask for "Nyal" when you buy Milk of
Magnesia. You can be sure of its .
Its pleasant flavour makes if easy for baby
fo take. Regular or Sweetened — 1/6.
NYAL iABY SOAP
Specially made for baby's tender skin, Nyal
Baby Soap is pure, mild and delicately
perfumed. Contains soothing
Adults, too, find it a luxurious complexion
soap 11d. fjfKjj
NYAL lABY OIL
A companion product fo Nyal Baby
Powder, Nyal Baby Oil helps to keep
baby's skin soft and free from skin irrita-,
fions. Antiseptic, soothing—
NYAL BABY POWDER
After baby's bath use this fine, smooth
powder. Actually resists moisture pre-
vents chafing. Antiseptic, soothing, refresh-
ing. Make sure it's "Nyal" Baby Powder
1/s{.
NYAL COMPANY SYDNEY


50 grams of First-class Proteins are supplied approximately by—*
6-4/5 oz. Cheese.
1 Eggs.
9 oz. Meat. oz. Mackerel.
12£ oz. Mullet. 10 oz. Whiting.
7 oz. Ham: 10 oz. Bacon (cooked)
1\ oz. Fowl. . 2, pints 8 oz. Milk.
(3) The Propertied between) the Protein, Fat,
and Carbohydrate of the Diet.
A tropical climate 5 a
different diet from a cold one.
It has been already pointed out that,
weight for weight, fat will supply more
than twice the number of calories obtained
from carbohydrates. This is evident from
the fact that one gram of fat will yield
9 calories, whereas an equal weight of
carbohydrate will yield only 4 calories.
It may, at first, be thought that fat
would be an excellent means of supplying
the bulk of the calories required in a diet?
or that it is a matter of indifference
whether they be supplied by fat or by
carbohydrates.
Although the human body is very
flexible in utilising fat and carbohydrates
together there is a limit beyond which the
body cannot utilise them singly.
If it were thought to obtain from fat all the energy necessary
for the body, the limits of fat absorption would be overstepped and nausea
and diarrhoea produced. The fat consumed would not all undergo the
normal chemical processes whereby it is assimilated, and harmful results
would follow.
If, on the other hand, carbohydrate foodstuffs were adopted as the
exclusive source of energy, the consumption of a large bulk of food would
be necessary, which by its mere weight
and volume would uncomfortably over-
load the stomach and intestines, and in
most people would be liable to produce
flatulence and distension.
It is evident, therefore, that a certain
proportion of fat and carbohydrate is
desirable; in fact, scientific investigation
has shown that it is not only desirable but
essential, because fat cannot be satisfac-
torily utilised in the body in the absence
of carbohydrate.
Eskimo 9 6 diet h miiei t®


»
.
•
•
s
[
\4r
i
f®
wSL •• v '- j •'
j
iCJSiPl
flr ll' !
& Mm
1 WM\ hj
I Xf .S'l'.V.f »I4B« * "'nl 1
1»
Kllli
l S
HL
i
A* %
SWTS:
and I 1
®*
8too
HANRO
;
asG»
Ik Durable
j|i Snug Fitting
'.*/'» * '•''J2gp$fo ||
»T In
M «£? Pure Wool
111// K Or ■
Gotton
M : ' > > M
Sizes 1 to 8
S RIBBED 3 VESTS
KNITTED PANTS
for
CHILDREN
itoranteed Unshrinkable
\
1
! k
. \
; \
i
i
.> x
<
V
wnntendedl by Health Centres
and made by
(Ausi) KNITTING MILLS
PTY. LTD.
I8ENDIG0, VIC.


eao .
The actual proportion in which these two constituents should be eaten
varies within wide limits. 1 hus, the Eskimo takes a large amount of fat
compared with carbohydrate, because his environment does not produce
plant products; and, moreover, fat is a concentrated fuel. The Bengali
eats much carbohydrate because cereals can be grown cheaply in Bengal
and he is poor.
Experience and scientific investigations have shown that the follow-
ing proportions are adequate for the normal adult male: 100 grams (3£
oz.) protein, 100 grams (3| oz.) fat, and 400 grams (14 oz.) carbo-
hydrate per day. Departures from these figures, owing to climate, kind
of work (mental or physical), personal
taste, etc., are, however, not incompatible BEEF
with adequate nutrition. \
YOLK
We may restate these weights of the
nutritive constituents in terms of calories,
thus: —10 to 15 per cent, of the total
calories may be obtained from protein,
20 to 35 per cent, from fat, and 55 to 65
per cent, from carbohydrate.
(4) The Daily Supply of u " e *
KIDNEY
mineral Matter.
Foods rich in iron*
The human body contains about
7 lb. of mineral matter, of which about five-sixths is stored in the bones.
These minerals are, therefore, important building material for the body,
and even though they may not be regarded as food, they are just as
important to the body's economy as any other of the nutritive constituents
of a diet.
The chief mineral substances calling for consideration are—calcium
(lime), iron, phosphorus, iodine, and chlorine.
Though these minerals supply no energy, they are of great import-
ance in regulating the production of energy in the body. The calcium
is essential in bringing about muscle contraction; iron is essential for the
chemical processes of the various tissues and helps to form the red colour-
ing-matter of the blood. Foods rich in iron are liver, kidney, egg-
yolk, apricots, treacle and green leafy vegetables. During pregnancy the
demand for iron is increased, for not only must a blood-supply be provided
for the baby, but also a reserve of iron sufficient to last six to nine months
after birth.
* * VIA 9 *
lodine is required for the production of the secretions of the thyroid
gland which govern certain aspects of the chemistry of the body. Ihe
amount of mineral matter in an ordinary mixed diet, about 20 grams per
day, will supply the body's requirements of these minerals. Chlorine is
rarely lacking, since common salt (a compound of sodium and chlorine)
enters into the preparation of most foodstuffs. JJnder certain conditions,,
however, a shortage of calcium, phosphorus and iron may arise.


WttZm srara&M ®-f . M&SbBu SnEfl I yss&RB
* :" ■;
'if?'i ' I . " ; 'V'V > g§p " ■•/.. 'M^- T *""" '
' jBg WjgBm HB
J
s a
uii cream
POWDERED MILK
NO PRESERVATIVES ADDED. Trufood is pure fresh
milk, whole milk, in powdered form. lt # has all the
vitamins and food vahie of new country milk. Easy to
m ° m —-and n© waste whatever! You use Just as much
§& little as yon need and keen the rest till later.
k
f '*


Besides being all-important in many vital processes, calcium is essen-
tial for the formation of the bones and teeth of a growing child, and a
lack of it may bring about the condition of rickets. As bones and teeth
These are the best sources of
calcium.
are formed in the child prior to birth, it
will be readily understood that the mother
requires extra calcium during pregnancy.
Foods rich in calcium are cheese, milk,
eggs, green leaf vegetables, such as cab-
bage, and nuts, in that order. As milk
contains a large amount of calcium, the
mother who is breast-feeding her infant
must make sure that she is eating enough
calcium-rich foods to supply the baby's
requirements. Dried whole milk and skim
milk powders are two sources for calcium
in its most valuable form, but owing,
perhaps, to ignorance these foodstuffs are
too frequently neglected.
The importance of milk and eggs as foods for growing children as
well as for the mother during pregnancy and lactation will be apparent
from these facts.
Phosphorus is extremely important as a building material in the body,
and is therefore indispensable for growing children and pregnant and
nursing women. The best way of providing it in the diet is by the use of
milk, cheese, eggs, and green vegetables. In leaf vegetables, milk and
cheese, phosphorus is combined with calcium. The cow gets her calcium
and phosphorus from the leaf vegetables (grass, clover, lucerne) which
she eats.
Whole-grain cereals contain considerable quantities of phosphorus
but partly in the form of phytic acid, which interferes with the normal
absorption of lime and iron.
(3) The Daily Vitamin Content of the Diet.
The individual's requirements of the various vitamins necessary for
the maintenance of robust health varies to some extent, according to the
varying proportions of one or other class of foodstuffs in the diet. For
example, a little less Vitamin B is required if the fat content of the diet
is high, and a little more when it is low. The requirement of each vitamin
also varies somewhat according to the age of the individual.
Certain of the vitamins cannot be stored in the body, so they must
he supplied daily in the requisite quantity.
An excess of one vitamin cannot compensate for lack of another,
and the best possible safeguard against a shortage of one or more of the
vitamins is to eat as great a variety of foodstuffs as possible.
It is fortunate that the foods which are useful in supplying mineral
matter are generally useful in supplying vitamins. For example, cheese,
milk, and green leaf vegetables which supply calcium also supply Vitamins


m
BABY: Now you've had a swing at being me, how do you like it?,
MUMMY: Honey, does your skin ever get so uncomfortable?
BABY: Often! That's why I need cooling sprinkles of satiny-soft
Johnson's Baby Powder to keep me happy all day • . . Then I need
gentle smooth-overs with Johnson's Baby and Toilet Cream when-
ever chafes or skin irritations happen along.
Johnson's Baby Powder
Johnson's Baby Cream
(lufuirmt dbotvnmn
0 pty. u LTD.
1087


A and B, and in addition cheese and milk supply Vitamin D; fish
liver and roe —which supply iodine, also supply Vitamins A and D;
wholemeal, which supplies phosphorus, also supplies Vitamin B; liver and
egg-yolk, which are good sources of iron, supply also Vitamin A. Vita-
min B is rarely absent from any but the worst-balanced diet and it may
be assumed that if the diet contains whole-gram cereals and is satisfactory
as regards Vitamins A, C, and D, it is
probably complete as regards B.
Foods which are useful in supplying
mineral matter and vitamins are often
spoken as as "protective foods, i.e., foods
that protect the body from the deficiency
diseases.
These protective foods are:
Milk and Milk-products (butter,
cheese, etc.).
Fresh raw vegetables and fruit.
Meat, fish (fish liver oils).
Whole-grain cereals.
These foods are essential
during chitdhood, pregnancy
and lactation.
It will be seen that if a diet contains protective foods like dairy
products, fish, eggs and fresh salad vegetables in adequate amounts, there
can be little risk of deficiency in its vitamin and mineral contents.
Some Facts Concerning Certain
Foodstuffs
etc,—"The principal nutritive constituents
Meat, Poul
of meat and other animal products such as poultry, fish and rabbits are
protein and fat, and it is largely as a compact and easily digested source
of first-class protein that meat is of value; and it has, in addition, a con-
siderable mineral content, especially of iron. Liver, kidney and heart
have a high nutritive value and are usually low in price. They contain
Vitamin A and Vitamin B as well .as protein and iron.
The lean of meat is readily digested, is rapidly absorbed, and has
a high biological value. Fat meat (if liver and kidney be included) is one
of the few articles of diet on which life can be supported alone for con-
siderable periods. Stefansson, the Arctic explorer, proved this, and the
fact is also borne out by the diet of the Eskimo race.
From an economic view, meat is an expensive food, and it is
physiologically wasteful. Its costliness, however, can be reduced by
selecting die cheaper "cuts." These are equal in nutritive value and
flavour to the dearer kind, though often inferbj in tendernssi, and m
require longer and more careful cooking,


'I
I
*
\
i »v
4> • V


Cod-liver oil is the most important
food source of Vitamin D.
Fish* —The value of fish as a
source of energy depends mainly on
the amount of fat which it contains.
As a source of building material, fish
•is, with some exceptions, somewhat in-
ferior to meat, owing to the smaller
proportion of protein. There is no
ground for the belief that fish (or any
other food) is specially valuable as
"brain-food."
EggS, —These are valuable
because of their content of first-class
protein and fat. They are rich in iron
and phosphorus and provide Vitamin A and small quantities of Vitamin
D. When reasonably priced they should be used extensively, especially
for children, as they contain all the factors necessary for growth.
Milk. — Milk is a most valuable food, especially for infants, and
is as near a perfect food as possible. It contains the various nutritive con-
stituents in proper proportion for the development of bone and teeth
structure. Whilst invaluable in many respects for balancing a mixed diet,
its bulk and price would not permit its use as the sole foodstuff of a diet
for older children or adults. There is a considerable difference between
cow's milk and human milk in the proportion of the constituents, and so
the former should be modified before use as the sole food for babies.
The question whether milk should be consumed in its raw state or after
some process of pasteurisation or scalding has agitated the public mind
for years.
Where milk can be obtained from a healthy and perfectly clean
cow, is handled in a cleanly manner by
clean, healthy individuals, and stored in
clean vessels, there may be no objection to
the consumption of such milk in its natural
state. . These ideal conditions, however, are
difficult to attain, and there are many possi-
bilities of contamination between the cow
and the consumer.
Hutchison and Mottram state: —
"There is every reason to advocate
the habitual application of pasteurisation
or scalding (in a double saucepan) to
milk before it is consumed as food, and
one looks forward to the day when the
drinking of raw milk will be considered
Milk is invaluable for obtaining
balanced diet
as barabarous a custom as the eating of raw meat is at present. . . . One
need have no fear, therefore, that the great advantage of boiling is pur-
chased at the cost of any noteworthy diminution of digestibility ©f
dbsorptioa, 98


ONE M
Box PACKET 9
of 11
= -C "
jjr /vxm
Pasteurised
ALTH plus FLAVOUR
There is little use in a food being nutritious unless it is eaten
and enjoyed. MAXAM CHEESE . . . made from the rich produce
of the dairy lands of Sunny Queensland —is a magnificent food
and it's delicate flavour is pleasing to almost every palate.
Children love it!
A four-course poultry dinner;-
Bowl of soup; serving of fish*
liberal plate of poultry, with
es and two other vegetables;
pie and cream*
PROTEIN & FATS (Energy
and growth).
VITAMINS A & B (Protec-
tion).
AND PROVIDES MORE THAN
THREE TIMES AS MUCH
CALCIUM & PHOSPHATES
for bone and body building
Pasteurised C/t££Si
AUSTRALIA'S FINEST FLAVOURED CHEDDAR


EPWDERED |||I
IMIIA HI
"
PTI it T r if)
laimlll
It may be added that scalding will not destroy the important Vita-
mins A, B and D contained in the milt.
Skim milk is a valuable source of first-class protein and minerals in
the diet though often disregarded and despised. Yet it supplies these
constituents at a cheaper price than any other food in common use. (Too
frequently it is regarded as "pig s food," and in certain districts, where it
is readily available it is fed to animals or wasted,
©wing to the unreasoning prejudice of the public).
It is deficient only in fat, which can be compensated
for by butter or even dripping in the diet.
Its mineral content (calcium and phosphorus)
is extremely valuable to the body, and since in-
adequate diets are liable to be deficient in both lime
and phosphorus, the value of skim milk as a supple-
mentary food is obvious. In either liquid or dried
(powdered) form the value of this much-neglected
foodstuff can hardly be over-emphasised (and it is
A Valuable source
of first-class protein
and minerals,
hoped that the facts mentioned will assist in its better recognition).
Milk does not contain much carbohydrate, so it is best used in
conjunction with some cereal food, such as porridge.
An interesting illustration of the high calcium content of milk and
cheese as compared with other common foods is given by the following
chart
AMOUNT OF CALCIUM IN 4d. WORTH OF EACH FOOD
MILK
CHEESE
BEEF
WHITE
BREAD
CABBAGE
CARROTS
OATMEAL
ORANGE
BANANA
It will be observed that bread, butter, and skim milk furnished, at
» cost of 4d., more calories (i.e., heat and energy) than were obtained
from a restaurant lunch at about four times the price.
Observations made on a group of school-children in Scotland showed
that the addition of from three-quarters to one pint of milk to the daily
diet caused a rate of growth and weight twenty per cent, greater than that
©f children who did not receive extra milk or who were given its calorie
equivalent in the form of biscuits. •


/
%ytsM
28 FOOD AND NUTRITION
I I. I I MiIMBMMBBBMCBM—■■miiii una limn—■—a——■ I I I I————B—aaw—KwasmaKßamm——=a—
The Super Table Margarine is made from
SPECIALLY TREATED vegetable oils and rats.
Even though stocks are often scarce, thousands of
people are eating "Merra-lea" for the first time, and
are delighted to know that margarine is so good.
But, of course, the secret is in the brand—
"MERRA-LEA"*
REMEMBER! When normal conditions return
you can be sure of obtaining ample supplies of a
good wholesome product by simply asking your
grocer for


Separated milk (machine skimmed) was found to be quite as effec-
tive as whole milk, which confirms the high opinion of its value expressed
above.
The general consensus of opinion upon the value of milk as a food
for young children is so strong that it should be included in the diet of
every child in order to maintain health and normal growth.
Between the ages of one and five years 1 \ pints of milk per day for
each child may be regarded as a desirable minimum requirement.
Between the ages of 5 and 10 years at the very least one pint per
day is required. These quantities could, with advantage, and, wherever
possible should, be increased, particularly in the case of the older children.
Butter, Dripping, Margarine. —So far as the produc-
tion of energy is concerned, there is no difference to the body between
these three foodstuffs. One pound of beef dripping will supply more
calories than one pound of butter (as it contains less water) and usually
at less than half the cost. Animal fat (excepting lard) will also supply
Vitamin A, though not Vitamin D,*to the same extent as in the case of
butter. Margarine made from animal fat is a wholesome, nutritious
foodstuff, possessing the good points of dripping in a more palatable form.
Margarine made from vegetable fats is a good fuel, but, unless specially
treated, it lacks vitamin value.
Cheese ., —Weight for weight cheese will provide three times the
number of calories yielded by moderately lean meat and at much lower
cost. Further, as it is one of the protective foods, its value in a diet is
obvious. It must also be remembered, however, that cheese is a food,
the cost of which is based more on flavour than on nutritive value. Cheese
costing 4s. per pound will usually provide no more, perhaps less, nutriment
than cheese sold at Is. sd. per pound.
Fresh Fruit and Vegetables.— As a source of energy
fruit and vegetables depend mainly on their sugar or starch content, which
varies greatly from green leafy vegetables (which cofttain very little) to
potatoes and corn (which contain a great deal). Root vegetables and
legumes (peas and beans) are valuable as sources of second-class protein,
but require to be supplemented by meat, cheese, milk or other foods of
Fresh fruti and Vege-
tables are rich m
minerals.
animal origin.
Fruits and vegetables—particularly green,
leafy vegetables—are rich in minerals, especially
iron and calcium. Their greatest value, how-
ever, is as a source of vitamins. Green, leafy
and yellow vegetables and yellow fruits contain
a substance called carotene, which is converted
in the body into Vitamin A« All vegetables
and fruit contain some Vitamin C. Legumes
and nuts are useful sources of Vitamin B. The
undigested, residue of ripe fruits and vegetables
assists to maintain normal elimination from the


H CO?]s\
M \
PXVIvj »«<«V
u
* ■'
I
ml
I m " M. t-y-' I
la* ril *ALM
, •!?& if
I •*••!.'*»« /'••.•Ml
Hp
¥-\
Some FL AKED, some TOASTED, some POPPED
IPftii
mm
l«vM 111' J»* I
|jg|
ALL PACKED FULL
OF NUTRITION
Corn Flakes. Specially grown white
Australian corn . . . full of energy value . . «
crisp . . . and N flavour perfect
Kellogg's Rice Bubbles. The merry '"snap
crackle pop" breakfast food
crackle pop" breakfast food
that children love to listen to
. . . and love to eat.
Kellogg's All Bran
The breakfast food that re-
lieves constipation. Not a
purgative but a natural, nut-
sweet food.
Kellogg's Whole Wheat Flakes
Made from the finest Australian wheat
crammed with nourishing vitamins. Like
Kellogg's breakfast foods, ready to
serve instantly.
A NOTE FOR BABY. When baby is right to
have whole wheat biscuits in his diet, be sure to give
him KELLOGG'S Whole Wheat Biscuits just right
for tiny tummies.


bowel. Contrary to popular belief, most fruits and vegetables are not
acid forming, in fact they serve to reduce the acid content of the blood.
Bread and Cereals. — Grain foods are the cheapest and
most widely-used source of energy in the diet. They form the basis of
the diet in almost every country in the world. Cereals contain carbo-
hydrate and second-class protein, and their value is greatest when eaten
with milk or made into puddings with eggs and milk.
The whole-grain products, whether as bread, breakfast porridges,
like oatmeal and wheatmeal, or unpolished rice, contain more Vitamin B
than highly-refined products. In the latter, removal of the outer coat of
the grain diminisheT the Vitamin B content.
Ihe standard of bread in Qld. is controlled by legislation which
defines the composition of brown and wholemeal bread. Wholemeal bread
is made from flour which must contain at least eighty per cent, of whole-
meal flour and is usually a richer source of Vitamin B than brown bread,
in making which the flour must contain only 60 per cent, of wholemeal
flour. . Similarly brown bread, because of its content of wholemeal flour
is a richer source of Vitamin B than bread made from white flour only.
Nevertheless, Australian white flour retains a good deal of the Vitamin B
of the whole grain.
Patent Food Preparations.
There are continually placed on the market numerous proprietary
foods which are widely advertised and for which special claims are made.
These preparations are usually expensive, their nutriment is not, as
a rule, proportionate to their cost, and in purchasing them one should
recognise that they represent a concession to the palate and not an
economical method of obtaining calories for energy production. They have
usually very little to recommend them, however great their vogue.
There is no such thing as a special brain food, nor is there any
particular food which will stimulate the secretion of milk in a nursing
mother.
If the body is healthy and is supplied with the various nutritive
constituents of a balanced mixed diet, it will carry out its functions as
efficiently as its inherent capacities will allow.
No aspect of the food question is so exploited at the present time
as that relating to vitamins. There should be no need, and there is not
any need, for the use of expensive preparations alleged to contain one or
another vitamin in concentrated form except for the treatment of patho-
logical conditions. A total or partial lack of vitamins in an unsatisfactory
diet will produce ill-effects, but this is no justification for excessive con-
sumption of vitamins and . for a disproportionate expenditure on costly
preparations alleged to contain them. Much better results will be obtained
more cheaply by attention to sound dietetic prin i,,les,


If unable to breast-feed, watch baby
gain health and strength on a diet of
Robinson's Patent' Barley with cow's
milk. At weaning time the ideal food
is Robinson's Patent' Groats.
isr "my book", a complete
guide to infant feeding, will
be sent if you write Reckitt & Colman
CROATS llPili (Australia) Ltd., Department M.B., Box 2515,
G'P'O'* Sydney, and enclose 1 \d. stamp for
return postage,
*
N
... .m /isgi
a
ROBIN SON'S
'PATENT
BARLEY & GROATS


MV£|EF|
Food Requirements and Meal Planning
Where the amount of money available for the purchase of food is
aot strictly limited, the choice of a diet may be safely left to the individual
taste, provided that due regard is paid to procuring as a foundation the
foods listed in the protective diet.
Where it is necessary to provide an adequate diet at a small cosi p
It is essential that considerable thought be given to the question; other*
wise the diet will probably not conform to the requirements*
A meal chart helps in planning
a balanced family diet
The construction of a dietary table is
not a simple matter, but when the cost must
be kept as low as possible the difficulty is
increased. Where money is short there is
a natural tendency to economise in the more
expensive foods, so that the diet is apt to be
deficient in first-class proteins and also in
minerals and vitamins as a result of meagre
purchases of dairy produce and green
vegetables and fruit.
This will prove a serious fault where
young and growing children are concerned,,
since, with them, first-class protein, minerals
and vitamins are more urgently essential than in the case of adults.
If a diet is to be adequate and protective as regards these factors,
it should include the food in the following five groups each day:—
(I) At least one serving of meat, fish, poultry, rabbit or cheese.
(2) One serving of fruit and two servings of vegetables. (One
serving of fruit should be orange or other citrus fruits, paw-paw
or tomato, and one of the vegetables must be of the green leafy
or yellbw variety.) These are in addition to potatoes, which
should be eaten at least once daily.
(3) Eggs—l each day if possible, otherwise 3or 4 per week,
(4) Milk 1 \ pints milk for children, f pint for adults.
Dairy Produce —Butter, ration 6/7 oz.
(5) Whole-grain cereals and bread.
Other foods, such as starches, sugars, and additional fat, may be
added to satisfy the appetite. If the income is limited, bread and cereals,
such as oatmeal and wheatmeal, are the cheapest sources of energy*
providing foods.
In these days of rationing it is easier and safer to plan the meafi
several days, preferably a week, in advance, as then the diet is more
likely to be well balanced. What is to be eaten at one meal will obviously


ea sprinkle* Weat Harts on your J.
breakfast cereal each day. Packets '
'/"' Canisters 2/6 from all Chemists.
' PV22JU).
f.
"<ya -
4»*


depend on that to be eaten at the other two. It is better to have fairly
even distribution throughout the day, if possible, as well as over the seven
days of the week.
The following is a suggested plan for a day's meals for people
engaged in different types of employment.
MEAL PLAN
Breakfast
L Fruit —Fresh or stewed
I Cereal —Whole-grain, or toast or
G bread, with butter.
H Beverage—Tea, coffee or milk.
T
M Fruit —Fresh or stewed.
E Cereal —Whole-grain or toast or
D bread and butter.
I Eggs or Meat —or some protein
U substitute.
M Beverage—Tea, coffee, milk.
H Fruit- —Fresh or stewed.
E Cereal —Whole-grain.
A Meat or Eggs, or some protein
V substitute
V Toast or bread and butter.
Beverage—Coffee, tea, milk.
Lunch
Nutritious Soup Cream soup
with vegetables
Salad—Fruit and/or vegetable.
Bread —Whole-wheat, with butter
and cheese.
Beverage—Milk.
Soup—Thick vegetable soup, or
Vegetable Plate with cheese or
meat.
Dessert —Fresh fruit or light
sweet.
Bread —Whole-wheat, with butter.
Beverage-—Tea, coffee, milk.
Soup—Thick vegetable broth or
Salad Plate, with fruit and
vegetables.
Meat or other protein, e.g., egg
or cheese savoury.
Dessert —Fruit or light sweet.
Bread —Whole-wheat, with butter.
Beverage—Tea, coffee, milk.
Dinner
Meat or Fish or other protein
food.
Vegetables—Potatoes, yellow
or green leafy.
Bread Whole - wheat with
butter.
Fruit.
Beverage—Tea, milk, coffee.
Meat or Fish or other protein
food.
Vegetables—Potatoes, yellow
or green leafy.
Bread Whole-wheat, with
butter.
Dessert—-Fruit, custard, or
very light sweet.
Beverage—Tea, coffee, milk.
Meat, Fish, Fowl or other
protein food, such as
eggs, cheese, dried beans.
Vegetables—Potatoes, yellow
or green leafy.
Salad —Fresh fruit or vege-
table.
Dessert —Custard or any other
pudding.
Bread Whole-wheat, with
butter.
Beverage—Tea, coffee, milk,
The type of meal which should be eaten depends on the
activity of the individual. People whose occupations are sedentary and
who are deprived of exercise should follow the list headed Light.
Those who stand all day and are fairly active should follow the
"Medium" group.
The people who are doing hard physcial labour all day—for
instance, agricultural or factory workers —need the extra food set out in
the "Heavy" groupings.
In summer, it may be or advantage to include more vegetables and
fruit, whilst in winter additional fat may be taken as concentrated fuel.
School Lunches
" The midday meal which children have at school is as important as
the other two meals of the day and is as deserving of as much care and
attention. A good lunch must be nourishing and it must be tasty so that
will be eaten. When lunches are to be carried they should be carefully
packed to prevent spoiling.


jiii ij i j
I I A ni
liiS |||||||
DELICIOUS
HEALTH "vgS |NT— r 11
• Ennn 111
rvvv««»
The well-balanced diet should include plenty of IB
tasty Eta Peanut Paste . . . it's the ideal health "food Ml
for growing children and active grown-ups. jlll
The golden-brown goodness of tempting Eta Mil
Peanut Paste is chockful of essential food elements Mill
—proteins, carbohydrates, minerals and vitamins in 'mm
generous proportions, and easy to digest. itll
Serve it often—for health- and pleasure. HH
PASTE
lj | | I 11 1 NUT FOODS PTY. LTDoe


w« wmnhwmiM I winn IDIIHIIII.I N
f. Grated cheese and finely chopped Peanut butter and Minced raisins
celery. grated carrot, with lemon juice*
2. Mashed hard cooked egg with Liver-loaf or Mashed or sliced
Vegemite or Marmite. minced liver, . banana.
3c Mashed brains and parsley. Peanut butter and Chopped dates and
shredded raw cream cheese,
cabbage.
aw ' ■ ■ ir 1 ■ i .i .i i ii ■« ■ ■ ' ' ■ ■■■■■ ■ " " u " ■
4o Grated cheese and carrot mixed Vegemite or Mar- Sweet corn*
with a little mayonnaise. mite and cress.
nr.. || ,,| i| 11 II - —<1 ■■ ■ .i T ' ' I I ■ III I IIW1 'I !■■■—HI. .g
OIL ri ■ n I II I ■ 1 I ■ ■ ■ ■ II K JH 1 II ■ -i- m* . . . .
5. Mashed hard cooked egg with Tomato slices. Peanut butter
chopped bacon. with honey.
fUi. limn 1 ■■ I " 1 ————I' 1 "" 1 ' J 11 ' 1 — 1 ■
6. Minced rabbit in a little white Mashed green peas Minced raisins and
sauce with chives. with cheese sauce. grated apple.
» . . . . ■— 1
7. Cheese with spaghetti and tomato Peanut butter. Mashed dates with
puree. orange juice.
1 .iii ii ii il tin I ■ i J I i r ,i 1 «1l»'. in ■ ij*j in nil 1 1 111 1 mm \ ' 'VI
8. Mashed fish in white sauce with Grated carrot. Vegemite or Mar-
grated cheese* mite with chopped
nuts.
9c Mashed egg seasoned with curry Baked beans. Grated raw apple
and chopped celery. with currants,
10. Sliced cheese and pineapple. Vegemite or Mar- Mashed bananas
mite and shredded and peanut
lettuce. butter.
For a packed lunch brown or wheatmeal bread with suitable sand-
wich fillings, some raw fruit or raw vegetables and a glass of milk provides
a well balanced, satisfying meal.
General Hints on Lunch Preparation
(1) Do not skimp fillings but make them moist enough to prevent
crumbling and not so moist that they ooze out the edges or
make the bread soggy.
(2) Vary the milk drink; if necessary by adding flavouring and if
possible in winter substitute a hot drink such as cocoa or soup
made with a milk base.
(3) White, brown or wheatmeal bread can replace one another for
variety—a mixture is a good rule.
(4) If it is essential for your child to buy his lunch at other than
a supervised tuck shop, take the precaution of checking with
him what he purchases.
(3) Wrap the lunch carefully in greaseproof paper—each item
separately for preference to prevent mingling of flavours.
SUITABLE SANDWICH FILLINGS FOR TEN DAYS
The addition of a piece of fresh fruit and a milk drink to the above suggestions
provides an adequate lunch for each day.


Milk in its most
appealing form •
Milk is the most perfectly balanced
food of all —and in Peters Ice
Cream, you have milk in its most
appealing form. Many children
do not drink as much milk, as
they should, so it is wise to allow
them plenty of Peters Ice Cream.
Peters Ice Cream —equal to three
times its weight in rich full cream
dairy milk—and so easily digested.
PeterS ICE CREAM
THE HEALTH FOOD OF A NATION
} >
**■ v


Ice Cream : It's I*lace in the Diet
From the nutritional point of view, ice cream is an excellent food.
It is a milk food, and contains all the important nutrients found in milk.
These include good quality proteins for body building, fat, and the fat
soluble vitamins A and D. It contains the important minerals calcium
and phosphorus, which are needed for development of strong bones and
lt also contains small amounts of two of the B-group of vitamins,
thiamin and riboflavin.
The fact that it is so generally acceptable is important in nutrition,
because it can be used to replace a certain amount of milk in the diet
where people dislike milk. Children who refuse to drink milk will usually
eat ice cream with relish.
Housewives appreciate ice cream because it requires little preparation.
Home-made varieties can be prepared in advance and left in the
refrigerator till required.
In hot weather, it will tempt a tired appetite, and not only provides
important nutrients itself, but encourages consumpion of other foods which
can be eaten with ice cream. It is particularly useful in feeding invalids
when their appetite is poor, and food must be attractively served as well
as nutritious.
One ounce of ice cream provides approximately the same nutritive
intake- of minerals and vitamins as 1 J ounces of milk, but costs approx-
imately three times as much. When there is only a limited amount of
money to spend on the family food, ice cream is not recommended. It
is more desirable to spend the money available on whole milk or powdered
milk.
In other cases its popularity enables ready absorption of milk where
otherwise children are often very difficult to persuade to drink milk.
Tine luffedt of Cooking
Reasons for cooking foods:
(1) The food is rendered more pleasing to the eye.
(2) The flavour is improved, thereby making it more palatable.
(3) The food is softened by altering its texture, as in meat, or by
breaking down the cell walls of plants, thus making the foods
easier to chew and enabling the digestive juices to penetrate
into them.
(4) Cooking kills parasites and micro-organisms.
(5) It delays putrefaction and preserves the food.
(6) The warmth imparted by cooking aids digestion,, as warm food*
are more stimulating than cold.


•Jm\
SOME SOUND ADVICE FROM HILDA HOUSEWIFE
""The JJJeai Mat* if out '
(ja& Stov** i*
EacH flick of the trigger give© a certain light Jjr
( there are hundreds of flicks before a new llllllPlit
flint is necessary. With a " Firefly " Gas Lighter you save labour
. e „ expense . • . and banish " dead " matches in the kitchen.
Remember—the "Firefly" ne y er fails.
not kit to tko A
SAYS HILDA j


Some food Values are spoilt by
cooking too long at high tempera-
turesa Cooking time should be
regulated,
The foregoing are good reasons
for cooking food, but it is essential that
we should eat —
(a) Some fresh, raw foods, as
salad vegetables and fruits.
(b) Some foods requiring mastica-
tion, as celery, crisp apples,
dry toast, or crisp bread crusts.
The Effect of Heat upon
Foods
When heat is applied in the cook-
ing of foods, it is very necessary that
the correct temperature and time for
t, cooking should be known, because
some foods—for example, meat——are spoilt by cooking at high temper-
atures or for too long a time. The term "boiling" is incorrect when
applied to meat and eggs.
|
i
The water may be boiling when the meat is put in, but this is for
the purpose of coagulating the surface albumen sufficiently in order to
prevent the escape of the meat juices.
This coagulation can be effected at a temperature below boiling point,
but allowance has to be made for the cooling down of the water by the
immersion of a large piece of cold meat. After the surface has been
sealed by coagulation the temperature should be reduced to simmering
point. Eggs may be put into boiling water, but their proper cooking can
be effected by immediately turning off the heat, covering the
and allowing the eggs to stand in the water six minutes.
J'
v*
It is desirable that the white should be completely coagulated and
not fluid.
The Ceekiiig eff Vegetables
(I) Prepare vegetables immediately prior to cooking—if vegetables must
be prepared in advance, wrap in a damp cloth.
(2) Shred green vegetables to reduce cooking time.
(3) Add the vegetables to the smallest possible quantity of boiling water.
(4) Keep covered; use a saucepan with a tightly fitting lid.
(5) Cook for the shortest possible time—till just tender. 10 minutes is
usually sufficient with greens.
Alternatively, to keep vitamin and mineral losses to a minimum, the
vegetables may be steamed, using a small amount of water.


For a Great Variety of Dishes
RINOLDI MACARONI SPAGHETTI VERMICELLI
All Grocers can supply "RINOLDI"
fHHNHHMHi si


Effect of Heat on Vitamins
Drying, heating, preserving and milling have varying effects upon
vitamins.
Vitamin A is fairly stable, and is not destroyed by the ordinary cook-
ing processes. The loss on canning is also negligible, but holding or
storing green vegetables for any length of time results in a great
decrease in Vitamin A.
Vitamin B is soluble in water, and is easily lost with careless methods
of cooking, particularly from vegetables if the water is thrown away.
The addition of soda to vegetables is very destructive to Vitamin B,
and although the vitamin group is not affected by ordinary cooking or
canning processes, considerable loss occurs from cereals when they are
subjected to the high temperatures involved in some milling processes as in
patent breakfast foods.
Vitamin C like vitamin B, is dissolved out of vegetables, etc., by
water and the same cooking precautions must be taken to preserve
it. Moreover, the longer the vegetables are cooked and left to keep
hot the greater the loss of the vitamin.
Methods ©f Cooking
There are seven methods of cooking, viz., roasting, baking, boiling,
stewing, steaming, frying and grilling.
Two kinds of heat are employed in these methods—
(a) Moist heat—Boiling, steaming, stewing, frying.
(b) Dry heat—Roasting, baking, grilling.
The following are the disadvantages associated with cooking some;
foods.
(a) Loss of mineral matter and flavouring substances.
'(b) Loss of vitamins.
(c) Over coagulation of proteins, causing toughness.
With cuts of meat which contain large quantities of connective tissue
(fibre or gristle)—methods involving moist cooking are more satisfactory
as moist heat helps to soften the gelatin. Protein foods generally, such
as meat and eggs, are more tender if cooked at low temperatures for a
proportionally longer time.
The greatest losses occur in boiling, as a large quantity of water is
used. Some flavour and mineral matter are extracted and often thrown
away with the water.
Particular care must be exercised in the cooking of Vegetables to
minimise the loss of vitamins and minerals which are dissolved by the
water.


PREGNANCY
Provide extra Protein,
Vitamins and Minerals
with BEMAX ★
Bemax meets the progressive need for a wide variety of nutri-
tional factors- —in particular Vitamin 81, iron and first-class
protein.
LACTATION
Build up mother and
improve the milk
with BEMAX ★
A maternal diet enriched with Bemax is quickly reflected in the
quantity and quality of the breast milk.
Bemax helps the child by improving the mother's post-natal
condition and by providing the young life with a variety of
protective factors.
In addition to being the richest and most reliable source of
Vitamins B 1 and E, Bemax contains a high proportion of
Vitamin B 6 and of valuable mineral salts.
BEMAX
Obtainable from all Chemists
Sole Consignees:
FASSETT & JOHNSON LTD.
36-40 Chalmers Street, SYDNEY
A PRODUCT OF VITAMINS LTD., LONDON,


3-4/Kg.
1.0
6
1500
0.4
0.6
4
30
400-800
40
1.0
7
2000
0.6
0.9
6
35
400
50
1.0
8
2500
0.8
1.2
8
50
i3
' iS
60
1.0
10
3500
1.0
1.5
10
60
70
1.0
12
4500
1.2
1.8
12
75
w
hpjr "
-.1
>'-v ■
-
RECOMMENDED DAILY ALLOWANCES FOR
SPECIFIC NUTRIENTS*
{Revised 1945.)
Committee on Foods and Nutrition, National Research Council, U.S.A.
—5 cn ■»
E tn
£ E
E E f £5 w *d*
jG TO * E 13
c i- # cq c u °n
en «» . < w ™ m
t? EE = = I «
»—« J"* »
S^»EEigs-e
*0 c ™ ftiooo
if _Q <_> O
» Jr J~, JT" »«— *—» I/)
o >-< » i— cc 2: <c
♦—l
cT
c
E
nj
>
V)
<u
)«M
o
w
o
Man (7o Kg.)
Moderately actiye
3000
70 0.8 12 5000 1.5 2.0 15 75
Very active
Sedentary
4500
2,0 2.6 Z0
2500
1.2 1.6 12
"" " """■*"*"' ""*"""" *" ""* ""iwiii ' x—ra*m i Maiß ' aa ' n ' ,W ' lnß;!gi '''*"'"'''' l "'' B "" waß " M "^*"'" a " aw ** l * ,l,M^^
Woman (56 KgJ
Children up to 12 years:
Under 1 yea rt 100/ Kg.
1 - 3 years tt 1200
4 - 6 years 1600
7 - 9 years 2000
10 -12 years 2500
IVloderately active
2500
60 0.8 12 5000 1.2 1.6 12 70
Very active
Sedentary
3000
1.5 2.0 15
2100
1.1 1.5 11
Pregnancy (latter half) 2500
Lactation mn
85 1.5 15 6000 1.8 2.5 18 100 400-800
100 2.0 15 8000 2.0 3.0 20 150 400-800
3000
Children over 12 years?
Girls, 13 - 15 years 2600
80 1.3 15 5000 1.3 2.0 13 80
75 - 1.0 15 5000 1.2 1.8 12 80
85 1.4 15 5000 1.5 \ 2.0 15 90
16 - 20 years 2400
Boys, 13-15 years 3200
***
16 - 20 years
3800
100 1.4 15 6000 1.8 2.5 18 100
** 1 mg. thiamin equals 333 1.U.; 1 mg. ascorbic acid equals 20 I.U.
'** c^tenT 6 " 15 ' eSS " PTOVided 35 Vitamin A '' 9 reate ' if Prided chiefly as the pro-vitamin
t Needs of infarns increase from month to month. The amounts given are for aonrrmmnteiu .. a
The amounts of protein and calcium needed are less if dVrived from breast milk m ° nthS *
" modTrafacUWty' 35 " 1 f °' th 6 middie year in each 9 rou P (as 2 < 5, 8, etc.), and for
Ut Vitamin 0 is undoubtedly necessary for older children and adults. When not available from sunshine
rt should be provided probably up to the minimum amounts recommended for infants,


m
03
5
S
s®
q» -
•as
o
e
u
e
o
SI
PS
»s
PS
S
o
©
e
e
s
ttS
o
"
; "> V,,..
S
.
/
1
t
i
\
,-rt
»
i
i
[
W
r
j
V
L- "**•' ff'r. •' I
'
•V \* .
-K
.•
/"■ ':
iJ-x
.
m *:
&&
r VW '
* f? .. •
SSI
| V!" ; X
1®
*
J *
1
f
> : 'V-
I '■ .. ,/'•••
t ■ •' •*
♦
' > " ■
'
■ i
'
• 1 ' v ;
1
JA
...' ; '
-v f.
I
.
j
•
r-- ">.v ••
inn
0
'
<•
9
•
w
t; -V-
I'.-
■ i
> • . -.
f . •
. ■ ' ,
ISSffi
1 ••
--
I i ■
®v : if:.
f : '
[
j- v ; f;
i ? ' '
i
}-►•••
1
1 .
' '
i ' - •
' - -" '
'
'K.
•. -
-
•
♦
\
ll
1
1
ir.fi
v:li
vA
* # * A
•m
#•
ia|
'
■
■
. ...
■
mm
-V®*-
"
T« V
—
PS
o
Ml
*!C
o
S
■ ©
BEANS Raw \
Cooked
BRUSSELS
SPROUTS Raw
Cooked
POTATOES Raw
*x$
J*
©
O
O
t i
CARROTS Raw
- 1
3
*
S 05
o
UJ
O
<
03
m
.<
U
2 2 to#
.5 -S fel
£ £ »2 1
o-
"g
Jf
i o o §
■>• <3 tx c
4
tf
(»
5
S
a.
>


Meat, fish J I I
low! 4 OZS. i
MKillc 1 pt. ./'
Dried peas and J I
beans 11 ozs. I
Cheese 1 02 llBI PROTEIN
3 egg 1| ozs. !
Oatmeal 1 oz. g|gl ( j I ' *
Whole wheat [
cereal 1 oz. |S| |
Liver 4 ozs. iMBWMBBW|[|^
• I I I I I ft I
Meat 4 ozs.
peas . 11 ozs.
syrup 1 oz. j I
beet 31 ozs. ™i
rrrr mo*
One egg 1f ozs. i
Oatmeal 1 oz. jg|g|g !
Wholemeal
Bread 2 ozs. B&aHH
*9 !
■
Potatoes S ozs. IWHBM
\ I
i
1 1 o2« , |
Diagrams showing the percentage of the daily require-
ments of Protein and Iron supplied by average servings of
several foods.
25% 50% 75% 100%
Potatoes
Raisins 1 oz*


Mir HIM HHP ■MMOMMUilll I III
FOOD.
UB MMMMRNMRN—— 1.1, -M I ' iinnm
MEAT
FISH
SUMMARY OF PRINCIPAL CONTRIRUTIONS
OF EACH FOOD GROUP
PROVIDES
Protein, iron, vitamin B, calories.
Protein, iodine, vitamin D in oils,
calories.
Protein, calcium, vitamin A,
vitamin B, calories.
MILK and CHEESE
Protein, iron, vitamin A, calories.
EGGS
Iron, vitamin B, vitamin C,
calories.
POTATOES
VEGETABLES
Calcium, iron, vitamin A, vitamin
B, vitamin C.
(especially green
and yellow)
Iron, vitamin A, vitamin C."
FRUITS (especially
citrus fruits)
Protein, calcium, iron, vitamin B,
calories.
BREAD and CEREAL
(Wholegrain)
FATS and SWEETS
Butter
Other fats
Sugars.
Calories.
Vitamin A, vitamin D, calories.
Calories.
Calories.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by ' Truth ' and Sportsman Qfid/ana*
for the Queensland Health Education «. „


v
.
HERE ARE ~J
J HELPERS
lS^
r
Steelo, for pots and pans . . .
it makes aluminium look like
new in next-to-no-time. 9 pads
per carton .. . enough for
2 months.
STEELO
I ||M| Queen Bees Wax cleans as it
■J * shines. It's non-smearing and
•.I•I • I • •
it polishes easily. Save time,
and save work, too, with
Queen Bees Wax
★
It's quicker and cleaner to
• */! polish men's, women's and
*children's v shoes with.
Bostock's, the shoe polish in
'' a tube. All colours. Bostock's
asts longer, saves waste.
BOSTOCK'S
Shoe Polish in a Tube
OBTAINABLE AT ALL STORES
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRAUA
A/ r mra fey


When a lamp fails, leaving gloom,
When a lamp fails, leaving gloom,
Never rob another room.
Have a Philips 'spare' on hand
Because —as you tvill understand
To rob one room to light another
r
»/
«
*
Ge/s yon nowhere —does it, mother?
l_ 28
MADE IN AUSTRALIA
