

FOOTBALL
And Souvenir of English Team
Edited by'TheCynic'oTThe Deferee
HP
_'Pv&liskccl
keferee
9 Sydney 1


We’re taking our
It’s Fine
Own Medicine
in other words we make ALL OUR PURCHASES
from exactly the same stocks which we offer our
clients.
What is good enough for them will suit
ourselves.
One of the several advantages of making ALL
your purchases at one store is that you
in travelling about; the assistants speed your
passage from one department to another; owing to
the magnitude of our enterprise, you get a better
selection; and the scope of our activities enables
us to quote you lower prices.
Remember! we’re out for business, and are at
your service, whether you pay cash or desire
accommodation.
Marcus Clark & Co. Ltd.
Central Square, SYDNEY
SAVE TIME AND MONEY
WE SPECIALISE IN MEN’S MATTERS.
THE FIRM THAT
“KEEPS FAITH,”


FOOTBALL ANNUAL
1920
SOUVENIR
OF
ENGLISH TEAM,
Edited by “The Cynic’
of the Referee
Published by The Referee
Sydney


PREFACE.
Many years rich in football in Australia have passed without a fitting
record in print, apart from the newspapers. These years, as a rule, were
prolific in brilliant football by the clubs, by the States, by International teams,
and by the inimitable New Zealanders under the old Rugby Union banner,
and later under the Rugby League. It is to be regretted that there is no
record in book form of these stirring times.
This is a story In the printed word and in picture of the best in our foot-
ball, the idea being to make it worthy of the national character of the game,
and incidentally an appropriate souvenir of the first English team to play in
Australia after the Great War.
Rugby has always been THE football in New South Wales and Queens-
land, from the days when the brothers R. A. and W. M. M. Arnold established
it: Once or twice the Australian game threatened to compete seriously for
public favor. But the Sydney boy is nurtured on Rugby, the Melbourne boy
on his own game, and when the magic touch of brilliant players in highly-
organised teams links up with International matches on the one hand and
great club finals on the other, the allegiance is never likely to be impaired.
Rugby is specially featured in these pages. But the Australian game is
not neglected. And the British Association game (Soccer) is lightly touched
upon. The high cost of paper and production has imposed restrictions in
these directions.
The handbooks issued by football governing bodies have been merely
guides to the current season, with the rules, fixtures, and lists of officials,
now and then amplified by some statistics. The later New South Wales
Rugby Union books were more diversified, and here and there gave a brief
report of some of the more important matches or tours. But there is room
for a more comprehensive and pictured story of the best things in each year,
and it is hoped footballers will find it in this volume.
J. C. DAVIS.
Editor Referee
The Referee Office,
Sydney, May, 1920.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Preface 10
English Northern Union Team:
Programme 12
Managers 12
1014 Team’s Results 12
■Mr. J. Wilson and -Harold Wag.-talf .. 13
Mr. S. Foster and Gwyn Thomu* .. 14
Ben Gronow 15
English Players ~ 16
Description of Players 19
Fastest Man in Sydney Rugby .. .. 20
Rugby League in 1919 21
New Zealand Rugby League Team .. .. 23
Records of Players 23
Results of Matches 23
v. New South Wales .. 24
v. New South Wales (Second 'Match) ~ 28
v. Tamworth 30
v. Northern Branch 30
v. New South Wales (Third Match) .. 30
v. New South Wales (Fourth Match) .. 32
■Records of N.S.W. v. New Zealand .. 35
Scorers in New South Wales Matches .. 36
v. Queensland 36
v. Queensland (Second Match) .. .. 36
Queensland v. New Zealand Records .. 36
■Managers’ Report ~ 36
Australian Rugby League Team in New
Zealand .. .. 37
v. New Zealand ~ -. .. .. 37
v. New Zealand (Second Match) .. 38
v. New Zealand (Third Match) .. .. 39
v. New Zealand (Fourth Match) .. 41
Scorers in Four Tests 41
v. Waikato .. 41
v. Auckland .. •. .. . > • • 42
v. Hawke’s Bay 42
•Goal Kicking Match .. .. .. -. 42
v. Wellington .. 43
An Appreciation .. .. .. •. 43
New South Wales v. Queensland in 1919 .. 44
First Match in Sydney .. ..44
Peace Day Carnival: Second Match .. 47
In Queensland •» • • 30
v. Queensland Records 51
A.T.F. v. Combined Country ~ .. 47
Newcastle Team in Queensland .. .. 51
Ne w South Wales R.L. Club Premiership .. 52
Positions at End of First Round .. 59
Premiership Table, 1919 .. •- -6/
List of Premier Clubs 67
Scorers for the Clubs 67
Second Oracle Premiers 1 Record •• 6<
Second Grade Premiere, List of ..67
City Cup Matches 69
City Cup Winners Each Year .. .. 69
City Cup Scorers .. •• »• •• 69
League Cup •• •• -■ •■ 69
Third Grade Premiers .. ■. 69
Rugby League Competition Winners .. 76
Rugby League Officials 76
Page.
RUGBY UNION IN' 1910:
Lest \Ve Forget 73
A.I.F. Team in King's tup .. .. 79
A.I.F. Team in Australia ”9
N.S. Wales v. Queensland W>
Great Public Schools Premiership .. 83
Sydney University v. Duntroon •• 82
„ ' v. Combined ScliooU.. $-
~ „ v. Brisbane l'niversity 83
Combined Schools v. United Services .. S 3
W. M. M. Arnold 84
N.S.W. R.U. Premiership 84
~ Officials 84
Passing of F. Henlen 77
AUSTRALIAN RULES:
Victorian Grand Final « 86
Victoria v. South Australia .. .. 87
Victorian Association Final .. .. 87
George Vautin’s Reminiscences .. . • 88
Goal Kicking Record 88
•Dave McNamara .. . 90
Interstate School Boys 91
Paddington Win Sydney Final .. .. 91
Melbourne G.S. Premiers 91
South Australian Premiership .. .. 91
Magarev 'Medallists 92
•BRITISH ASSOCIATION 92
ILLUSTRATIONS.
English Team** Managers 13
Captain and Vice-captain IS
English Players 14
l5
lB
, 17
lB
Harold Hordcr ~ .. ~ .. ~ 20
New Zealand Team in Australia .. .. 22
N.S. Wales Rugbv League Team .. .. 26
H. R. .Miller 45
Queensland R.L. Team 49
Sergeant E. R. Larkin, ILL.A. .. .. 58
H. Sunderland .. 67
Sprint Finishes, 50 and 100 Yards League
Championship 68
Frank Burge •• •• 70
L. A. Cubilt 71
Balmain R.L. Premiers, lf)l-> .. .. .. 73
Major 4. F. McManamey 78
A.I.F. Forward* 81
Sydney Grammar School 85
Dave McNamara 90
CARTOONS.
Dally M 21
N.S.W. v N.Z, Cartoon .. .. • •• 24
West's Left Wing 62
WaU v. Hordor 72
Western Suburbs in the Mood .. .. 7*2
Wall v. -Messenger Goal Kicking .. .. 74
R. R. Craig .. 75
H. R. Miller 76
Frank Score* a Try .. 77
FOOTBALL ANNUAL


June.
6.—Metropolis,
at Sydney.
0. —New South
Wales, ai Sydney.
Wales, at Sydney.
12. —New South
If. —Queensland,
at Brisbane.
23.—Queensland
Country Centre.
26. —Australia (First Test), at Brisbane.
Julv.
3.—Second Test, at Sydney.
10. —Third Test,
at Sydney.
•Points.
F. A. Receipts,
South Australia..
Adelaide
W r .
101-0
Metropolis ., ..
Sydnev
L.
10—38
£2797
New South Wales
Sydney
I*
3—1IV.
2913
Queensland .. ..
Brisbane
W.
18—10
608
Ipswich
Ipswich
w.
45—8
136
Oueensland .. ..
Brisbane
W'.
22—8
620
Northern District
Newcastle
w.
35—18
170
Australia
Sydney
w.
23—5
1725
Australia
Sydney
L.
7—12
2647
Western District
JBathurst
w.
42—8
51
Australia
Sydney
W'.
14—6
1763
IN
NEW' ZEALAND.
Wellington Wellington
w
. 14-7
2 r »8
Hawke's Bav Hawke’s Bav
w.
30—7
246
Taranaki .. Eltham
w.
43—11
86
Wanganui .. Wanganui
w.
57—12
115
Auckland .. Auckland
w.
34—12
0(4
N. Zealand Auckland
w.
16—13
671
IN AUSTRALIA.
New South Wales
Melbourne
w.
,21—15
525
434—196 £1
5,935
ENGLISH NORTHERN UNION TEAM, 1920.
The English Northern Union team of
1920 is the third to visit Australia. The
first, in 1910, was captained by James
Lomas, a remarkably powerful and able
centre three-quarter and an adept left-
foot '-'■‘al-kicker. The second, in 1914,
was captained by Harold Wagstaff,
leader of the present band of tourists.
The last team finished their Austra-
lian tour on the eve of the Great War,
leaving a fine impression. They de-
veloped into a tremendously powerful
combination, and though the Metropolis
and New South Wales—the same teams
under different names—defeated them in
the early matches, the tourists won the
rubber against Australia. The final
success—l 4 to 6 at the Sydney Cricket
Ground —was accomplished by a pheno-
menal exhibition of grit, staying power,
and colective §kill ever shown on a
football field in this country. They
finished the struggle with eleven men,
who outstayed, outpaced and outplayed
the home thirteen. Their captain, Harold
Wagstaff, that day starred as the finest
footballer of the year. His brilliancy,
versatility and judgment and his inspir-
ing leadership arc likely to be never for-
gotten. The forwards of 1914 were a
very fine lot, skilled and organised *n
the strenuous work of the scrummage,
expert as backs in the open and possess-
ing the staying power of mountain
brumbies. If the 1920 team now with us,
and fine fellows all, prove equal to their
predecessors of 1914, the Australians
will need to rise considerably higher
than the Blues of six years ago did. And
this is expected of them.
THE MANAGERS.
Mr. J. Wilson, of Hull Kingston
Rovers, came from the border district
of Scotland whence he went to Hull
in 1901. He is president of the York-
shire County, and honorary secretary
and treasurer of the Northern Union
League. As a long-distance cyclist, he
represented England in the Olympic
Games at Stocxholm in 1912. He won
the 50 miles Yorkshire championship in
1912, and the 100 miles in 1913. His
last great race was in 1914, when
from scratch, over 100* miles of road,
he won in 4hrs 59min.
Mr. Sidnev Foster has been connected
with the Halifax Club for 27 years, and
represented Halifax on the Yorkshire
County Union and Northern Union Com-
mittee in 1910. In 1914 he was elected
vice-president of the county and presi-
dent in 1915. a position he held until
1919. Mr. Foster is an athletic en-
thusiast, and for a number of years held
the secretaryship of the Halifax festival,
and also represented his club on the
Northern Counties A.A.A.
NAMES OF THE PLAYERS.
Full-backs: Gwynn Thomas and Alfred E.
W ood.
Three-quarter Backs: Harold Wagstaff, Daniel
Hurcombe, W, J. Stone. Joseph Doyle, Evan
Davies, Cyril Stacey, S. Stockwell, J. A. Bacon.
Half-backs. John Rogers, U. Lloyd, Ernest W.
Jones, John Parkin.,
Forwards: A. iMilnes, J. Cartwright, Joseph.
Bowers, W. Cunliffe, E. J. Skelhorne, G. Rees,
A. Gronow, Herman Hilton, Frank Gallagher,
Douglas Clark, W. Reid and A. Johnston.
ENGLISH TEAM’S PROGRAMME.
At the conclusion of the Australian tour
matches will be played against New Zealand (at
Christchurch. Wellington and Auckland), Auck-
land (Auckland), West Coast District (Grey-
mouth), Waikato (Hamilton), and North Island
(Napier). From the Dominion the team will
leave for England.
REMUNERATION OF THE PLAYERS.
While on board ship 15/ per week is allowed
each player as pocket expenses; and £2 for each
week on land, with an extra allowance of £lO
at the conclusion of the tour. Kach wile re-
ceives £2 per- week and 7/6 for each child
while the husband is away; and single men with
heme responsibilities recehv consideration by the
Council according to their responsibilities. In
addition, one-third of the profits accruing will
be equally divided amongst the players.
RECORD OF ENGLISH TEAM IN 1914.
Seventeen matches were played, and (excluding
the exhibition at Adelaide, which is given above
as a match). 14 were won and three lost. 434
points to 196.


Mr. J. WILSON, Secretary-Manager, and HAROLD WAGSTAFF, Captain of the English Team.


Mr. SIDNEY FOSTER, Manager, and GWYN THOMAS, Vice-Captain of the English Team.


BEN GRONOW, the Champion Goal-kicker of the Northern Rugby Union.


D. Clarke, E. W. Jones, W. Cunliffe, J. Cartwright, G, Rees, J. A. Bacon, E. J. Skelhorne, W. Reid, II. Wagstaff.


J. Rogers, J. Parkin, Gwyn Thomas, F. Gallagher, A. E. Wood, Evarr Davies, H. Hilton, D. Hurcombe.


J. Doyle, W. J. Stone, C. Stacey, A. Milnes, B. Gronow, J. Bowers, W. Johnson.


PARTICULARS OF THE PLAYERS.
H. Wagstaff O. Thomas, J. Rogers and D.
Clark were members of the 1914 team.
HAROLD WAGSTAFF (captain), centre three-
quarter, aged 28. 12st 81b. Developed early,
and before reaching 21 had won evep- playing
honor in the Northern L T nion. The Hudders-
field champion is the finest Northern Union
three-quarter England has sent to this country.
Not so rugged as burly James Lomas, but more
artful, trickier on his feet. Australians who
witnessed the final test match in 1914 on the
Sydney Oricket Ground will rank him with the
champions of all and every period. A foot-
ball artist to his finger tips.
GWYN THOMAS (Wigan), full-back. Came to
Australia with Wagstaff’s first team. Is 27 years
and about 12Jst. Made his name in the Rugby
Union with London Welsh, Cardiff, Glamorgan
and Mid-’lescx. As full-back, is versatile and
venturesome, preferring to keep an eye on possi-
bilities in attack to following the stereotyped
ideas.
ALFRED E. WOOD (Oldham), full-back, So
rears, list 84b. Was a member of the 1914 team
in Australia. A Rugby Union International for
England against Wales, Scotland and Ireland.
Classed as a daring defender, a sure field, by
no means inclined to be too orthodox, and is
a good goal-kicker.
DANIEL HL'RCOMIBE (Wigan), aged 26. 10-1
21b, Centre three-quarter of a brainy type.
Has made good all round with Wigan, and now
regarded as their leading player.
W. J. STONE (Hull), 20 years, list. A Glou-
cester boy. An artist as centre three-quarter;
tricky, slippery and enterprising.
JOE DOYLE (Barrow), centre three-quarter,
29 years, and just over 10st. )) hen W. Batten
did not turn out in the trial match at Leeds
in February, the selection committee invited
Doyle to take his place, and his display was
such that he was invited to make the four.
If on the light side, he Is lull of fire and
possesses remarkable speed from 100yds to a mile.
His long, raking stride, clean fielding, low
tackling, and big heart have taken him over
many obstacles.
EVAN DAVIES (Oldham), centre three-quarter.
Came from Llanellv (the Wallabies know the
place). Brilliant in attack, a player cf good
experience, and the best attacking man in Old-
ham’s team.
CYRIL STACEY (Halifax), left wing three-
quarter, 23 years, 10st 71b. A tricky runner,
has a clever side-step and features the run andi
short kick, off which he has scored many tries.
Played with Royal Naval -Depot team during
the war.
S. STOCKWELL (Leeds). Strong, fast, clever
left wing three-quarter. Developed during the war
period.
.1. A. BACON (Leeds), wing three-quarter. Is
similar in build to H. Gilbert, and of the same
type, fast for a big man. and takes tome
stopping when near the line.
JOHN ROGERS (Huddersfield), scrum half-
hack, aged 27, list. If not a huge success on
the last tour in Australia, his form in England
since has been phenomenal, and he is classed by
J. D. Campbell (E.S.) as the finest attacking
half he has played against. Ills speed from
the pack is amazing, and a menace to the opposi-
tion. “If he plays up to form, he ought to
be the success of the tour," is the opinion of
the old Sydney three-quarter back.
H. LLOYD (Halifax), scrum half-back, list.
Good under any condition. Quick on the ball,
smart to get into his stride, and varies his
tactics Nothing orthodox about him. He can
take the rough work in characteristic Welsh
fashion.
E. W. JONES (Rochdale), 12st 6lb. The finest
five-eighth in the Northern Union. A great
player; big, fast, a fine swerver, a thorough
footballer, and full of resource. Also a great
defender, and with Johnny Rogers as a partner
will be very hard to stop in any class of match.
(Wakefield Trinity), list, flve-
eighth. Was a great player three or four rea-
sons back. Still very able all round, and if
l:e strikes his be* form will be very prominent.
A. iMILNES (Halifax), big forward, I3st. High-
ly successful hooker; never beaten; good dribbler
and great tackier.
JOSEPH CARTWRIGHT (Leigh), forward, 14*.
In club football is a hooker of the finest
class and good in the loose. Captains tie
Leigh Club.
JOSfPH BOWERS (Rochdale Hornets), forward,
15st 61b. First-class front-row scrummager;
tremendously powerful; solid tackier; has been
playing 14 years.
IV. CUNLIFFE (Warrington), 13*. Solid front-
row scrummager. Best try-getter for his club
this season; formerly with Wigan.
E. J. SKELHORNE (Warrington), 12st 71b. A
strong scrummager, deadly tackier and fine
dribble*.
G. REFS (Leeds), 29 years, 13st. Good all-
round forward, adaptable to any position. Will
bo the utility man, as he can play anywhere
with success. He is of similar type to Bluey
Watkins, always popping up and joining in pars-
ing rushes. Sure to be one of the favorites of
the tour.
A. JOHNSON (Widnes), forward, 6ft high and
13st 21b. Brilliant scrummager; usually plays in
second row.
IV. REID (Widnes). 13*. Dashing forward,
excellent in the open. Able to play in the back*,
being a versatile footballer.
BEN GRONOW (Huddersfield), 14st. First-
class second row forward. Finest goal-kicker in
the Northern Union. Kicked just 147 (a record)
goals this season, 128 in 1912-13, and 140 in
1914-l;i. Gronow is a clever forward, who re-
peatedly helps Huddersfield backs to make tries
as a result of his accurate transfers.
HERMAN HILTON (Oldham), 21 years, 13st.
One of the most brilliant break-away forwards
in the Northern Union. Can play half-back.
FRANK GALLAGHER (Dewsbury), 24 years,
13st Olib. A wing-forward who has learned the
art of breaking from a scrummage at the pre-
cise moment. One of the most brilliant for-
wards in the team.
DOUGLAS CLARK (Huddersfield), 28 years
14*t lllb. A wing-forward of all-round excel-
lence as he demonstrated with the 1914 English
team.


FASTEST MAN SEEN IN SYDNEY RUGBY ?
Who was the fastest runner carrying
the ball seen on a Rugby football field
in Sydney?
This question is often asked. But it
is not easy to reply definitely. Among
the great runners in Rugby have been
W. T. Macpherson, Nigel Barker and
Stanley Rowley, all amateur cham-
pions of Australasia, all brilliant runners,
and George Smith, the flying New Zea-
lander. Nigel Barker strikes the writer
as having been the fastest in football
carrying the ball. Among the pro-
fessionals were W. H. Williams, E. A.
Martineer, Frank Surman, Jack Marsh,
L. A. Cubitt, H. Border, I. Stuntz and
C. Rogers. Williams, the fastest runner
of all, did not play in important Rugby:
he played a lot with the Referee Office,
in Wednesday Rugby in the early nine-
ties.
If will be admitted that one man
may be faster than another on the run-
ning track, yet under active football
conditions this may be reversed. The
man who appears to have been the fast-
est in football is N. C. Barker and E.
A. (Tot) Martineer was probably next
to him under the conditions specified.
But Border is more difficult to catch or
grab than anv other noted sprinting
footballer has been. Be is the trickiest
runner among the men of great pace of
this or any other generation we have
seen on the Rugger field in this country.
HAROLD BORDER


The Rugby League in 1919
The Rugby League had one of us
best seasons in 1919. War influences
had lifted, and with the return of the
A.I.F. men from the zones of strife, the
spirit of the players quickened and
public interest, which had been keen all
through the war, culminated in immense
gatherings at the greatest matches.
The clubs had a most interesting cam-
paign, with premiership honors going
to Balmain and the City Cup to Western
Suburbs.
The New Zealand team, in their earlier
matches drew enormous attendances,
and showed excellent football. The
gates were records, the £3012/4/ at the
first match being the greatest sum ever
taken at football in the Southern Hemis-
phere. Three days later, £2559 was taken
at the second match.
The Queenslanders, fresh from two
wins against New Zealand, drew a
record crowd for one of their matches,
and their football was one of the most
interesting expositions seen in Sydney in
a match in which they have figured.
The teams which toured in Queens-
land reported growing enthusiasm and
public interest, and altogether the sea-
son was one of exceptional success with
much of promise in the shape of younger
players coming to their best.
The tour of the Australian team in
New Zealand emphasised pre-eminence
in this form of Rugby by the Austra-
lians, who had a career of success,
though the game is not played generally
in the Dominion, and the tour, owing
to the liberality with which touring
players are treated by the Rugby League,
was not a financial success
Apart from match-winning by the
representative teams, perhaps the most
attractive feature of the season, in the
public mind, was the dazzling brilliancy
in attack shown by Harold Horder, the
flying wing three-quarter. The younger
of the two more noted Horders differs
from any other three-quarter back of
any period as strikingly as H. H.
Messenger did. One of the fleetest men
even seen on a Rugby field, he takes
in the position quickly, and, as he
fields the ball with the precision of a
Gwyn Nicholls, dodges with the skill of
a Stanley Wickham or a Spragg, and
has swerves all his own, he is one of
the most dangerous scoring men we have
ever seen. With it all, Harold Horder
is quite unselfish, and is just as prone
to make an opening for a— supporting
player in a better position as any of
the recognised crack centre three-
quarters. He is a better player and a
stronger man than when he donned the
light blue against the English team of
1914. This he will probably demonstrate,
if the men in front of him are good
enough to get a fair share of the ball
for the backs to juggle with, against the
English team of 1920.
L. A. Cubitt, the Eastern Suburbs
three-quarter, was also dazzling in
attack. A very fast runner, he handles
the ball with splendid accuracy, backs
up with instinctive judgment, and has
a perplexing side-step with the pace up.
Besides, he is quick and tricky on his
feet at close quarters. In some of his
best moments Cubitt has been as attrac-
tive as Horder, though he has lacked
the latter’s initiative in forcing or sight-
ing the opening. He has filled out into
a powerful man, and increased weight
has led to stiffening in his defence, where
formerly it showed signs of weakness.
The spectacular football of these two
three-quarter backs were features of a
very interesting season.
The Rugby League, in its most excel-
lent control of the game on the field, in
its considerate treatment of the players,
in the quality of the game it handles,
and in its business arrangements, is bet-
ter suited to Australian ideas of foot-
ball, and how to organise it, than the
Rugby Union ever was, or can be, with-
out changes advocated for twenty years
and more being made. But the Rugby
League has important fields still to ex-
ploit, one being ground-building for its
juniors. Everything is possible to the
League if, some day, it incorporates in
its constitution a rule providing for the
control of its clubs by amateurs.


NEW ZEALAND RUGBY LEAGUE TEAM IN AUSTRALIA, 1919.— Back row: S. Walters, W. Williams, W. T. Somers, J. Rukutai, H. E.
Tancred, A. Waddell. J. W. Parker, J. H. Drown, E. Herring, C. McCarthy. Second row: W. G. Walsh, A. .J. McGreger, I. Stewait, W.
J. Mitchell (captain), H. Oakley (joint manager), J. Clark, W. Wilion, H. B. Laing, W. J. Davidson. Front row: A. MeClymont, A. E.
Matthews, A. Ferguson (referee), N. B. Levien (joint manager), J. Ifwerson, E. Cloke.


RESULTS OF MATCHES
For.
Agst.
F.
A.
T.
G.
T.
G.
■New South Wales
Lest
18
23
o
6
5
1
New South Wales
Lost
9
20
3
0
4
4
Tamworth .. ..
Won
21
13
9
3
3
2
Newcastle .. .
Won
11
8
3
1
• o
1
New South Wales
Lost
31
39
7
5
9
6
New South Wales
Lost
19
22
5
2
0
2
Ipswich
Won
11
8
3
1
3
1
Queensland .. .
Lost
13
21
3
2
6
4
Queensland ,. .
Lest
13
10
3
2
4
2
Rockhampton
Won
23
0
6
4
0
0
Toowoomba .. .
IV on
42
12
10
6
3
Summary; 11 matches, won
5,
lost
6, and
scored 211 points
(49 tries
and
32
goals)
to
187
K43 tries and 29
goals).
New Zealand Rugby League Team
in Australia, 1919.
RECORDS OF THE MEN (24).
MR. HARRY C. OAKLEY.—Law’ accountant.
Kails from Auckland. Has been connected with
the League game since its inception. In 1910
was an Auckland representative on tour ta the
Bluff. Was three years secretary of the Pon-
sonby United Club. After this, secretary to lh-»
Auckland League for three years, and next sec-
retary of the New Zealand League the last six
wears. Mr. Oakley is therefore some worker.
MR. N. D. LEVIBN (joint manager).—Repre-
sents Nelson on the New Zealand Executive, and
is on the staff of the A.M.P. Society in New
Zealand. He lived in Sydney from 1887 to
1893, and was secretary and playing member of
the old Zcalandias; also played for Wentworth,
captained by Sid Brown, when they won the
Junior championship. On his return to New
’Zealand played for the Nelson Club as captain,
and is a life-member. Represented his province
in Rugby from 1894 to 1899 against Marlborough,
Wellington, Manawatu, Wanganui, and Tara-
naki. and has also represented Nelson at cricket,
rowing and cycling.
JAS. CLARK (vice-captain).—‘Auckland (Pon-
■sonby Club). Ape 81, height oft 9in. weight
18st. Forward. Visited N.S. Wales in 1*313. Re-
presented (New Zealand in 1913 and 1914, and
Auckland in 1913-1914. Rugby Union, repre-
sented Otago 1909 and Auckland 1911.
W. J. DAVlDSON.—Auckland (Citv Club). Age
22, height sft lOin, weight list 51b. Three-quarter-
back. Fast and tricky, kicks with either foot,
•good place-kick.
K. IFWERSON.—Auckland (Grafton Club). Age
■26, height sft lOin. weight list. Three-quarter-
back. Can play in any position in the backs.
A brilliant member of the 1913 New Zealand
•team. Represented New Zealand against the Eng-
lishmen in 1914. and Auckland 1913, 1914, and
1918. Auckland (Rugby Union) in 1912.
H. B. LAlNG.—Auckland (City Club). Age 26,
bright sft 7in, weight l?bt. Three-quarter-back.
Plays either centre or wing.
W.M. J. MITCHELL (captain).—Canterbury
(Federal Club). Age *2B, height sft Sin, weight
13 s t 61b. Three-quarter-back. Plays centre and
•full-back. (Member of the New Zealand team of
1913, and represented New Zealand in 1911 and
1913, and Canterbury in 1911. 1912, 1913. and
1914 (League). Represented Canterbury Rugby
Vnion in 1909, 1910 and 1911, and New Zealand
in 1910.
C. McCarthy.—Hawke’s Bay. Age 24, height
sft “in. weight ICst Iftlb. An ideal full-back.
Powerful left-footer. Represented Hawke’s Bay
League 1912, 1913 and 1914.
A. McCLYMONT.—Auckland (Ponsonby). Age
2T, height sft Tin, weight 10st. Five eightu.
The lightest man in the team, also the trickiest.
Has a famous corkscrew run. Represented Auck-
land League in 1913, 1914 and 1918.
A. J. McGREGOR. —Auckland (Grafton). Age
26, height sft 4in, , weight 10st 61b. Three-
quarter-back. Good all-round man. Represented
Auckland League in 1917 and 1918, and Rugby
Union for seven years, and north Island in 1909,
1910, and 1911. A member of the New Zealand
R.U. team in America in 1913. Comes of a
famous football family.
JAS. RUKUTAl.—Auckland (City Club). Age
40, height 6ft, weight 13st 61b. Forward, in
fine form, and, considering his age, is a marvel.
He was a rep. in the native team in Australia
in 1909, and represented New Zealand League in
1911 and 1912. He has been playing League
football for 10 years, and has represented Auck-
land on many occasions.
W. T. SOMERS. —Auckland. Age 20, height sft
llin, weight. 12st 71b. Forward, front row. A
young player of great promise; his first appear-
ance in rep. matches. Is fast and a grafter. The
youngest member of the team, and one of the
cleverest.
HENRY E. TANCRED. —Wellington (Petone).
Age 22, height 6ft 2in, weight 15st. Forward.
Came over from the Rugby Union this season.
Is considered by Wellington critics to be the
finest forward seen there for many years. He is
surprisingly fast for his weight, is a deadly
tickler, and altogether a splendid all-round
forward.
A. WADDELL.—Auckland. Age 33, height 6ft,
weight 14st. Forward. A cool and dogged
player; always in the right place at a critical
moment. One of the most experienced players
in the team, having played for the St. Helen’s
Club, England, from 1910 to 1914. Rugby Union
rep., Auckland, 1909, and North Island for the
same year.
WILLIAM WlLSON.—Wellington. Age 29,
height sft 6lin, weight list 71b. Three-quarter-
back. A vounger brother of the famous Ranji
Wilson. The most versatile Player in t s e
team, and can play in any position except half-
back. He is very fast, with a peculiar long,
swinging stride. Is a splendid kick, and a
deadly tackier. Famous for his flying tackle.
WILLMM GEORGE WALSH.—Auckland (Pon-
sonby Club). Age 26, height sft sin, weight 10s 1 :
101 b. Half-back. Another of the younger mem-
bers. Is reco<rni«ed as the best half in the Do-
minion. 'Particularly pood in the serum. He
is fast and verv tricky. Represented Auckland
in 1914 and 1918.
STAN WALTERS.—Auckland. Age 29, height
sft loin, weight 13st. Forward. Is a fine all-
round stamp of forward. V-’s!ted Australia with
the New Zealand teams of 1912 and 1913. Is a
powerful player, a strong kick, and a sure
tackier.
WILLIAM WILLIAMS.—Age 21. height sft llin,
weight 12st 71h. Forward. Originally chosen us
the first reserve by the selectors, and great dis-
satisfaction was exnressed outside. However, he
was subsequently taken in plare of Hadden, who
was unable to get leave. First atmearance in
ren. honors. He is fa s t, a splendid’,kick with
either foot, and a good tackier.
J, W. PARKER. —Wellington (Petone Club).
Ape 32. height oft llin, weight 13st 71b. For-
ward: front-row man. but cap play in any pack
division. League ien. for Wellington* Taranaki
and Marlborough; Rugby Union rep., Marl-
borough. 1911. Is a very fine forward. Learned
his football in Australia as a lad playing for
North Sydney.


A. E. MATTHEWS.—AuckIand (North Shore
Club). Age 28, height 6ft Sin, -weight lOst 71b.
Five-eighth. Plays centre three-quarter or five-
eighth. Joined League in 1914. Previously played
under Rugby Union, captained the Junior Reps,
for two years; played half for the University
Senior Grade.
IVE STEWART.—Auckland (City Club). Five-
eighth. Age 24, height sft Tin, weight lOst 101 b.
One of the younger players. His first appearance
In big matches. Fast and tricky and handles
the ball well. Very active and uses his head.
Sure kick and good tackier. He also plays a
good game as half-back. In Rugby Union had
six years’ experience in senior grade football,
and represented Bay of 'Plenty Union 1912 and
1913.
J. B. BROWN. —West Coast (Kohinoor Club).
Age 30, height 6ft lOin, weight list 101 b. For-
ward, second row. Member of one of the latest
centres to join the League. Represented West
Coast (Rugby Union), 1914.
ERN2ST W. CLOKE.—Auckland (Newton
Club). Age 27, height sft Sin, weight list
121 b. Plays three-quarter or five-eighth. Recent
convert to League, having been a member of
the Marist Brothers’ team in 1915 (winners of
Rugby Union championship).
ERNEST HERRlNG.—(Auckland (Grafton Club).
—Age 21, height sft 9in, weight 12st 41b, For-
ward. One of the youngest members of team and
recent convert to League, having been a member
of the Railway team (winners of Rugby Union
championship, 1917).
N.S. Wales Wins, 23 to 18.
Though it was 35 years since the first
football team had come across from
New Zealand, this was the first:
that found it necessary to make a detour
from Auckland to Melbourne on the way
to Sydney. It was caused by the hold-
up of shipping through strikes. After
their . experiences on a slow-moving;
steamer (the Barentz) across the Tas-
man Sea and detention in Hobson’s Bay,
owing to a few cases of pneumonic-
influenza on board, they were piloted to
Sydney overland on the Thursday by
Mr. Secretary H. R. Miller, of the
Rugby League, and reported all fit.
Mr. Miller stated that when the team
had their training run on the Colling-
wood ground in Melbourne on the Wed-
nesday, the day they were permitted to
land by the health authorities, the
Collingwood officials had a surprise or
two in store for them. Six of the club*
trainers were in attendance, and the men
were hot-bathed and massaged, and after
their training, hot-bathed, cold-showered
and massaged again. The training hall
embraced a bootmaker’s plant and a


miniature chemist’s shop. What they
might have if ever they take on Rugby
is hard to imagine—possibly a relay of
doctors, wooden legs and crutches. But
that was not all. The club committee-
room adjoining the training hall was a
vision of luxury, furnished exquisitely in
polished oak, the walls covered with
pictures which practically provide a his-
tory of the club from its earliest days.
All the Rugby men were astonished witn
the evidences of luxury in these football
furnishings and training arrangements.
They were also very pleased with the
attention shown them by Collingwood.
BEATEN IN OPENING MATCH.
A perfect day, turf relieved of its
dry-weather flintiness, a crowd that
packed tightly into every part of the
Sydney Cricket Ground, and looked what
it was, one of the greatest ever seen at
a football match there—4s,ls7, with a
record gate of £3012 for Australasia.
This and the New Zealanders rising to
great heights in the second half, after
an initial spell of electric attack by the
Blues, gave post-war representative foot-
ball in Australia a magnificent send-off.
These were the features of the open-
ing match of the New Zealanders with
New South Wales. The stand sections
of the ground never before held so many
people. So thick were they stacked that
very many risked going over the rail-
ing of the top storey ot the ladies’
pavilion to sit on the short, sloping
corrugated iron balcony with nothing
but the small gutter to break progress
if they had slipped down the short in-
cline. If anyone had gone over the top
it would have meant death. Other
ardent spirits climbed from the ladies’
pavilion on to the iron roof of the
grandstand, and from that perilous
eminence watched the game. Many, too,
scaled the high iron-railed fence mounted
by barbed wire separating the ladies’
pavilion from the grandstand, and came
into the reserve, where there was more
space and a better view of play, for the
big lawn fronting the stand was thronged
as thickly as the stand itself. The police-
man there was unconcerned. It was a
wonderful crowd—wonderful in orderli-
ness and in spirit of fairness. The State
Governor, Sir Walter Davidson, and a
Government House party attended.
The New Zealanders filing on chanted:
Niu tireni ngungurn mai nei. (New Zea-
land expects you to do your best.)
Au, au, au. (We shall, we shall, we
shall).
Hopu te pavra hopu te tangata. (Take
the ball and collar the man.)
Ka mau ka tai ki turaki. (When you
have collared your man, trip him and
throw him to the ground.)
After that they moved toward the
Blues. Exhorted by the hardy Rukutai,
they yelled the weird Maori war-cry,
stamping fiercely. Three hurrahs for the
Governor, and off they sprinted for the
battle.
NEW SOUTH WALES (Light Blue, with Wara-
tah on Breast). —L. Wall (Balmiifi), full-
back; H, Horder (South Sydney), P. Cona-
ghan (Balmain), Bay Norman (Eastern Suburbs),
and L. Cubitt (Eastern Suburbs), three-quarters;
A. Blair (South Sydney), five-eighth; A. Hallo-
way (Balmain), half-back; R. Latta (Balmain),
F. Burge (Glebe), A. Oxford (South Sydney),
W. Schultz (Balmain), C. W, Prentice (Western
Suburbs), and V. Ryan (Newtown), forwards,
NEW ZEALAND (Black, with White Kiwi)!—
C. McCarthy (Hawke’s Bay), full-back; W. Wil-
ton (Wellington) (replaced in second half by W.
Davidson, of Auckland), W. J. Mitchell (Canter-
bury), K. Ifwerson (Auckland), and A, J. Mc-
Gregor (Auckland), three-quarters; B. Laing
(Auckland), five-eighth; W. Walsh (Auck-
land), half-back; J. Clark (Auckland), iI. E.
Tancred (Wellington), W. Williams (Auckland),
J. Rukutai (Auckland), W, T. Somera (Auck-
land), and S. Walters (Auckland), forwards.
The captains were A. Halloway and W. J.
Mitchell; referee, T. J. McMahon; and touch-
judges, A. Thornton and I. Doyle.
There was no wind, and the ground
was in fine trim, the centre being a
shade slower than the other parts. Mit-
chell won the toss from Halloway, and
the home team kicked off from the
southern end. The New Zealand for-
wards looked a much bigger lot than
the homesters, the brawn and muscle ’of
a few, notably the huge Tancred, being
very impressive. The game had been
buzzing up and down the field for ten
minutes; then inside the home 25, with
the Blues on the defence, their forwards
heeled to Halloway, who whipped it in-
field to Blair. Possibly the Blacks ex-
pected that astute young man to punt,
as everyone else did in the defence posi-
tion. But he shot off diagonally down
the field, cutting clean through between
Laing and Mitchell. He is speedy, and
at the 25 sent it high out to Conaghan,
who gave it to Horder Inside half-way.
The dasher sprinted from there with
only the full-back ahead, though others
were sprinting from the other side of
the field, and one was showing pace
behind him. Horder side-stepped Mc-
Carthy, and, going on, found Wilson
coming across diagonally from the right;
but he had too much pace for the
Maori, who took a tremendous dive
through the air to get him by the heels
or ankles. But he got only the turf,
and none envied him. Horder went on
and scored in a good position. Oxford
a goal. New South Wales, 5 to nil.
Penalties were awarded the New Zea-
landers in fair to good positions, but
Ifwerson and McCarthy did not reveal
the art in this work later to be shown
by Ifwerson. This led to Mitchell him-
self taking the ball and trying his foot.


NEW SOUTH WALKS RUGBY LEAGUE TEAM AGAINST NEW ZEALAND IN SYDNEY, 1919.— Back row: L. Wall, J. Kerwick, R.
Townsend, R. Latta, A. Oxford, W. Schultz and H. Horder. Second row: F. Burge, C. W. Prentice, F. Ryan, A. Halloway (captain), A.
Johnson, A, Bolewski, and L. A. Cubitt Front row; P. Conaghan, and A. Blair.


with the result that two points went to
the Blacks from a really good kick from
the left wing.
The home team worked down to the
left corner. Halloway whipped the ball
in-field to Blair, who was smothered. It
went to earth, and Norman foot-passed
it across in front of goal to the other
wing, where Cubitt, dashing up, fielded
it very adroitly without curbing his pace
too much, and shot over the line, scor-
ing in good position. Oxford failed at
goal. N.S.W., 8 to 2.
Right through the first half the home
team showed the greater nippiness all-
round, and once the ba:l got into the
open looked very dangerous. Despite
this, the Blacks were playing finely,
their forwards putting great ginger into
it, with the tackling excellent. McGregor
and Wilson, on the wings, were showing
nippiness and enterprise, and Ifwerson
was very lively. However, the home
backs were faster. At half-way on the
left wing Prentice, from the ruck, sent
a high pass out to Horder near touch.
He at once slipped by McGregor, and
his pace carried him through before two
others were able to jamb him on the
touch-line. Then he side-stepped an-
other and sped at top pace toward the
f"ll-back, pursued by McGregor, who Is
also very slippery. It looked as if Horder
would be overtaken from behind when
trying to dodge the back man. but he
ran to him at his top, keeping the
distance a few yards from his pursuer,
and then side-stepped very quickly, and
just managed to keep his hee's free from
the tackier. Going on he scored the try
and then the goal—l 3 to 2 at the change.
Wilson, who had made the big dive
into mother earth, did not come on in
the second half, the home captain, A.
Halloway, agreeing to Davidson, a very
sneedy three-quarter, taking his place.
This is not according to Cocker, never
allowed in club football, and it is to
be hoped will not be regarded as a
precedent. Within four minutes of the
kick-off the New Zealand backs had
the ball at half-way. It went from
Walsh to Laing to Mitchell, but a fine
tackle by Norman upset the combination,
and the ball was lost and dribbled
through. Blair and Conaghan got it out
to Cubitt, who moved off with it and
when pressed passed to Burge, who
dashed in from the 25, chased by David-
son. He scored in- good position after
crossing the line, and Horder landed the
goal.
With the score 18 to 2, the position
of the New Zealanders was not inspir-
ing to them. Ryan was adjudged to
have followed up off-side, and Ifwerson
landed a brilliant penalty goal from we 1
beyond the 25 on the wing. 18 to 4.
The Blacks followed within- a few
minutes with far their most brilliant
burst in passing. From half way they
ran at great speed, backing up perfectly
on the right side. The movement veered
to the right wing, and when Horder
tackled Ifwerson he gave it, right on the
touch-line, to McGregor, who finished a
great effort by scoring wide. Ifwerson
a very fine goal. 18 to 9.
Penalties continued to be awarded to
the New Zealanders for scrummage
breaches and off side. Ifwerson missed
one, but another, in better position, he
turned into a goal. 18 to 11. The
home backs made some good movements,
but penalties were still frequent, Hallo-
way finding it not easy to evade them
when he put the ball into the scrum-
mage. The Blacks worked down to the
right corner. There, from a scrummage,
half-back Walsh, who had put the ball
in on the blind side, at once fielded it
and whipped it to Laing. The three-
quarters were started in a diagonal
movement for the left corner. Mitchell
and Ifwerson were in 1;, and finally
Davidson, who shot over in the corner.
The goal kick by Ifwerson was a dandy,
from the 25 right on the touch line. It
was now 18 to 16, the New Zealanders
having run up a break of 14 points, two
tries and four goals.
The home team clapped on the pace
and the game hummed. The backs got
in a beautiful movement from a scrum
well outside the 25. It went from
Halloway to Blair, on to Norman and
Conaghan, and finally to Horder, who
streaked along the touch-line and shot
over in the corner, scoring in fair posi-
tion and then converting it—23 to 16.
The Blacks came again. In one burst
the ball was kicked beyond the home
backs, and it bounced high close to goal.
Ifwerson, in trying to field it and dive
over, knocked it across the goal line
some yards, and then came down with
an opponent, who had also tried to get
the ball. Ifwerson’s hand went up in
appeal, and the referee awarded a free
kick apparently for illegal tackle. When
Ifwerson landed the goal the scores were
23 to 18.
The home team’s victory, viewed from
the intrinsic quality of the football of
the two sides, was even greater than
the five points’ margin suggests. In the
first spell they were much the cleverer
in combination, and far the nippier in
the backs. But in the second half the
New Zealand forwards rose to it and
beat the home men; their backs, supple-
mented by Davidson coming on in place
of Wilson rose with them, and Ifwer-
son’s goal kicking attained the excel-
lence of Dally Messenger’s. With the


points going up through these brilliant
kicks, and two tries, the aspect of the
game changed, so that the crowd which
had seen the scores 13 to 2 against the
Blacks, and was then prepared for a one-
sided success, was worked up to a high
pitch of enthusiasm.
In their efforts at this stage, the
New Zealanders showed the finest in
pluck and fighting football but they were
also lucky, as the referee was lenient
to their breaches, and unreasonably
severe on the home team, so much so
that for a period the Blues seemed not
to know what to do to please the official.
It was in the second half that the New
Zealand backs, occasionally supplemented
by some of the forwards, revealed bril-
liancy and powers to combine that sur-
prised everyone, and it was then glorious
to see the home backs rise to it with
them and return brilliancy with brilli-
ancy. .It reached the summit of excel-
lence in Rugby. As time drew near,
excitement was very keen, for anything
might have happened.
Though he had not been in the bes
of health through the week, Harold
Horder rose to the occasion, and gave
one of the finest displays of the scoring
wing three-quarter game ever seen here.
He scored three tries, and in the second,
in which he had to beat three men, the
quickness, trickiness ana resource,
especially when he side-stepped the full-
back and had simultaneously to keep
sufficiently ahead of pursuer to evade
the low-diving tackle, brought down the
house. The home backs played very
finely all round, their combination, pace
and individualism being the great fea-
ture in the game. Every back proved
that his selection was well merited. Both
teams played the game in an ideal spirit,
though the referee and touch-judges
were rather lenient in enforcing the
rules.
Second Match—N.S. Wales Wins
BY 20 TO 9.
The following Monday was another
beautiful day for sport, a trifle warm,
perhaps for the man in a hot game of
Hugger. Quite early in the day crowds
began to pour into the Sydney Cricket
Ground. The Rugby League had pro-
vided several preliminaries in the shape
of President's Cup matches between com-
bined district junior teams. The crowd,
to a cursory glance, looked even a trifle
larger than that of Saturday, but as a
matter of record it was over 6000
less (38,884), and the gate over £SOO
less (£2559/2/6). This was in a measure
due to the interference of the police,
who for some inscrutable reason gave
orders that the gates were to be closed
about 2.30 p.m., apparently on the
ground that the full holding capacity
had been reached. That this was not
so was seen by the manner in which
the terraces were thronged, but not
packed, as they have been at times.
The New South Wales selectors deter-
mined on the same team taking the
field. But on Monday, when the men
filed out, Ray Norman was leading them
as captain, and A. Johnston, the West-
ern Suburbs scrum half, was in the
place of Halloway, who had been
knocked about a good deal on Saturday,
his back being injured. The New Zea-
landers selected the same forwards, but
omitted the captain, Mitchell (centre
three-quarter), and played McClymont
as five-eighth, sending Caing back to the
centre position. Mitchell had been
somewhat slow off the mark on the
Saturday, though the turf in the centre
where he played was slower than out
on the wings. But soon after starting
Laing had to retire with an injured knee
and Mitchell came on. He got two of
their three tries and his judgment and
pace were good.
XKW SOCTH WALES.—L. Wall (ißalmaiu),
full-back; H. Horder (South Sydney), iP. Cona-
ghan (Balmain), Hay Xorman (Eastern Suburbs),
an.] L, f'ubitt (Eastern Suburbs), three-quarters:
A. Blair (South Sydney), five-eight; A. John-
ston (Western Suburbs), half-back; R. Latta
(Balmain), F. Burge (Glebe), A. Oxford (South
Sydney), W, Schultz (Balmain), C. W. Prentice
(Western Suburbs), and F, Byan (Newtown),
forwards,
XEW ZEALAND. —C. McCarthy (Hawke’s Bay),
full-back; W. ,1, Davidson (Auckland), B. Laing
(Auckland) (relieved by W. J. Mitchell in the
first half). K, Ifwerson (Auckland), and A. J-
McGregor (Auckland), three-quarters; A, Mc-
Climont (Auckland), five-eighth; W. Walsh
(Auckland), half-hack; J, Clark (Auckland)
(capt.), H. E. Tam-red (Wellington), W. Wil-
liams (Auckland), J. Rukutai (Auckland), IV.
T. Somers (Auckland), and 8. Walters (Auck-
land), forwards; T. .1. McMahon, referee.
The second game was quite different.
It was harder and slower, with the New
South Wales forwards taking the honors,
and the backs deteriorating in the r
combination, the centre three-quarters
failing in attack, though all were sound
in defence.
J. Clarke captained the New Zea-
landers, who kicked off from the southern
end. The Blacks worked to the 25 on
their right wing. There the Blue pack
heeled, and Johnston sent a rais-directed
pass on the blind side to Horder, who
failed to get it cleanly. McGregor toed
it forward along touch, and kicked high
over the line. Blair beat the Blacks by
a few yards to the ball, but it bounced
so high that the little fellow could not
reach it as he sped through, and Me-


Gregor, coming up behind, caught it as
it was dropping and went down for the
try. It was very quickly done, and
neat. Ifwerson failed at goal from a
very difficult angle. New Zealand 3 to
nil.
Mitchell came on at this stage in
place of Laing. The Blacks worked into
the 25, and in a storming attack, with
full speed and pressure applied, the ball
was fielded by Blair near goal. He
punted out beyond the Black three-
quarters, but far short of McCarthy.
Horder, whipping off after it, beat the
New Zealanders to it, though McGregor
got close to him. In a few strides he
was free from all save the full-back, who
was down near halfway. He ran round
McCarthy on the shore side and then
sprinted for home. Tancred, the giant,
in-field a bit further, sprinted after him.
and showed remarkable speed for a man
of his size. Horder did not risk trying
to improve his position, resting content
with scoring a few yards in from the
corner. His fielding, dash, and elusive-
ness when confronted by the full-back
brought forth the cheers. A neat kick
by Oxford landed the goal, and New
South Wales led by 5 to 3 within, eight
minutes of starting. In the loose one of
the Blacks held on to the jersey of an
opponent to prevent his getting to the
ball, and the touch-judge sighted the
•offence. Oxford placed a very fine goal.
1 to 3.
The New Zealanders, playing very
aggressively in the forwards, worked in-
side the 25. There full-back Wall fielded
it on the left wing, and as McGregor
came at him on touch he short-passed
in to Horder, who shot off a few yards,
and then short-punted beyond the bulk
of the players. He streaked after it, and
shot down the centre, veering slightly
to the right. He passed to Shultz, on
to Ryan, and finally it went to Burge
•well out on the right wing, and he
sprinted in from about the 25 to score
in fair position. Oxford failed at goal.
10 to 3.
The Blues were going all out for goal
on the right wing. The inside backs
had got it to: Cubitt, who was grabbed.
Davidson snapped the ball from his
hands and shot away. Nearing the 25
he met Blair (a short man), and jumped
clean over his head, though Blair had
not gone down for the tackle. Full of
thrills, the rest of this spell was hard-
fighting football, but it slowed up a bit
through the breaking-away forwards
scotching the half-back of the home
team, who helped them by being too
slow in picking up and whipping it out.
Within three minutes of starting the
second half New Zealand scored their
second try. From a scrummage at half-
way Johnston sent it sharply to Blair,
who tried to beat through the defence,
but he was downed, and the Blacks
dribbled it on. Near the 25 it was
kicked across to the right side of goal,
and Mitchell, sweeping up, judged the
bounce nicely and swinging on with-
out loss of pace got over on the right
wing—a very good try. Ifwerson made
a fine kick, but it hit the bar and fell
back. 10 to 6.
The brilliancy of Horder had evidently
impressed the New Zealanders, for when-
ever they were on their own side of
half-way, Clarke detached himself from
the scrummage to supplement wing three-
quarter McGregor’s efforts to smother
the flier. The New . Zealanders were
now showing the effects of the hard
game on Saturday, for they had not
sufficient sparkle to turn the errors of
some of the home backs into tries.
Conaghan and Cubitt both dropped their
passes here. Eventually a penalty
against Norman for off-side gave Ifwer-
son a chance to hit the bullseye from
easy position, but it was not his day
out in this department.
A burst by the home team finished in-
side the 25, and when the scrummage
was formed some of the New Zealand
forwards were still making their way
back to position from down the field.
The ball was hooked and heeled by the
Blues, and Johnston’s pass, meant for
Blair, found Tancred arriving just in
time to gather in the ball and try to
get away with it. But the referee
whistled, and penalised him for off-side.
The New Zealanders were now more
regularly exploiting the high punt for
their attack, having found it successful;
but had hit upon it rather late. Once,
following a rush by the forwards, Blair
failed to stop them, and Ifwerson short-
punted toward the goal. The Blacks
bustled and worked it on, and Mitchell
went over at the goal post with a try
that should have brought five points, but
Ifwerson missed the opening. 12 to 9.
The home backs got into their stride
a few minutes later, but Cubitt was
again flung out on the corner post.
Full-back McCarthy struck it hard with
his knee, and after several minutes’
stoppage, had to be assisted from the
field. Horder fielded the ball on his
own side of halfway, and shooting off,
cut some men right out by sheer pace
and dodged two others. Coming to the
last man he in-passed to forward Ryan,
who sped on from inside the 25 and
scored in good position. Horder a goal.
Some little time later Johnston burst
through from a scrummage beyond half-
way, and running straight along the left
wing, gave it to Burge outside the 25,
and he sprinted away from pursuers to


score on the wing. Horder’s fine kick
missed the opening. New South Wales
20 to 9, or four tries and four goals
to three tries.
HOW THE GAME WAS WON.
The New South Wales forwards won
the game by superiority in scrummaging
and in the loose; they had more system,
and were faster, and successfully coped
with the rushing and rucking tactics of
the New Zealanders. Ryan was the best
all-round forward, with Burge the most
dangerous scoring man. The New Zea-
land forwards worked very finely at
periods, but, as on the Saturda*’ they did
not cultivate the open passing game with
any confidence, appearing to fear the
pace and ability of the home backs.
The New South Wales backs as a body
did not enhance their reputation. Wall
and Horder. however, did so, the full-
back, save that he ran too much and
weakened his kicking in the second
half, playing very finely. On the form
of these two matches Horder estab-
lished himself as the greatest scoring
wing three-quarter seen in Rugby foot-
ball of any code in Sydney at any time.
He is a different type from some of
the best scoring men of long ago, notably
Bob Whiteside and C. G. Wade. One
has never seen any man in League or
Union combine express speed with such
high attacking qualities. Most sprinters
are sprinters first and footballers second.
With Horder he is the footballer first
and the sprinter second. Some of the
New Zealand - backs, notably Ifwerson,
McGregor. Mitchell, Davidson and Mc-
Carthy, shaped very ably. And so did
half-back Walsh. They showed flashes
of brilliancy in concert.
WIN AT TAMWORTH.
Third match, Tamworth; Wednesday.
June 11, 1919. New Zealand won by
21 points to 13, their weight and experi-
ence turning the scale. Half-time, New
Zealand 8 to 5. Ifwerson (2), Stewart
(2), and Herring were the try-getters,
Ifwerson converting three. For the
losers, E. Tanlin (North Sydney) scored
three tries, and Jones and Yates a goal
each.
FOURTH MATCH—NORTHERN BRANCH.
N.Z. WON 11 TO 8.
At the Show Ground, Newcastle.
2s EW ZEALAND.—C. McCarthy, full-hack;
Pk Clokc, K. Ifwer.snn, B. Laing and W. J.
Davidson, three-quarters: A. iMcClymont, five-
eighth: W. Walsh, half-back; J. W. Parker, J.
•Rukutai, IV. Williams, S. Walters, A. Waddell,
and J. Clark (capt.), forwards.
NORTHERN DISTRICT.—A. Gibb, full-back;
E. Wrighr, W. Coleman, C. Dunn and F. Bricn.
three-quarters; J. Coleman (capt.), five-eighth;
S. Towers, half-back; 11. Williams, J. Mitehi-
fon. W. Robiiwon, J. Quinn, J, Mattich and A.
Faber, forwards.
Ifwerson scored a try, and at half-
time it was 3 to nil. Owing to the New
Zealanders having to catch the Sydney
train the game was quickly resumed.
Quinn forced his way over the line and.
Gibb converted. 5 to 3 in favor of New-
castle. The spectators were at fever
pitch. Rukutai, making a good run,
passed to Walsh, who scored between
the posts. New Zealand 6-5. Ifwerson.
again scored, again Davidson converted-
-11 to 5. Quinn again got over for the
home team.
N.S. Wales Wins Third Match
BY 39 TO 31.
The third match with New South
Wales fell flat. Though the New Zea-
landers had had a week in Sydney to
prepare for the event, the match seemed
to arouse little enthusiasm- There were
a few causes, the main one being that
the programme had little variety, and
even the public which swallows its
football in big gulps and then comes
up for more, has shown that it can
have too much of a good thing. 'I he
match was played at the Agricultural
Ground, and, no doubt, this, too assisted
to diminish the size and to cool the
enthusiasm of the crowds, for there are
many who will not go to the Agricul-
tural Ground to watch first-class foot-
ball while the Sydney Cricket Ground
is idle.
Twenty thousand people turned out
on a splendid day for the game. They
saw a first half colorless.' ihe New
Zealanders led at the interval by 10
to 8, but apart from the work of their
in getting possession of the
ball, and a few isolated pieces of play,
their football was very little better than
that of the home team. In the second
half the New Zealanders ran their lead
to 18 to 8, and in doing so looked
like thoroughbreds. Here the home team
started to day real football. They put
on 18 points very auickly, try following
try, with the Blacks looking a beaten
lot. New Zealand • put on a penalty
goal. Then followed 13 points by New
South Wales, which gave them a run
of 31 to 2 at one period, during which
they were all sprinters. The Blues
then shut up ; and the Blacks finished
with a run of 11 points, the scores be-
ing 39 to 31 at the finish, with the home
team winners. The game puzzled every-
one.
NEW SOUTH WALKS (Sight hire, with
kangaroo on breast).—A, White, full-back:
11. Herder, P. Conaghan, H. Gilbert, L. Cubitl.
i I:ke-unarter-; A. Blair, five-eighth; A. Hallo-
v\;iy, half-back; E. Courtney, A. Fraser, A.
Oxford, W. Schultz, C. W. Prentice, and F.
iOan, forwards.
\KW ZEALAND (black, with kiwi on
I.exist ).—C. McCarthy, full-back; W. J. Davidson.
W. .T. Mitchell (c.), J. Stewart, A. J. Mc-Grc-
inu', three-quarters; H. Ifwerson, five-eighth; W.
W;d>h. half-back; H. E. Tanered, J. W. Parker.


,1. '(.lark, J. Kukntai, W. ‘Williams. S. Walters,
f.awards.
Keferee, T. J. McMahon; touch judges, W.
NJH and A. Farrow.
The New Zealanders were all out to
win from the start, but the home team
seemed to be out merely not to lose. The
New Zealanders had trained zealously
throughout the week, and given special
attention to the tactics requisite or suc-
cess in this form of Rugby. They played
from the Northern end, the sun shining
in the faces of the home team. From
the start it was clear that the Black
scrummagers were getting possession of
the ball, and when they did not get it
Rukutai and a friend or two were skir-
mishing most enterprisingly between
Halloway and his live-eighth, Blair, ob-
livious of the law, with the referee ob-
livious, too. As the Blue pack did not
get the ball often in the first half-hour,
the skirmishing did not occur too often.
First try came to the home team. Ox-
ford got it from the Blacks at half-
way, and made a straight line for goal.
He passed to Fraser, on. to Horder, who
met the full-back, McCarthy, at the 25,
ten yards in from touch, but as he.
dodged to the right he swept into the
arms of a converging New Zealander.
However, Horder managed to pass it out
to Courtney, and he struggled on. closely
pressed by a burly youth, and just got
over the line to score the trv. One of
the original Kangaroos of 1908, Court-
ney must have felt a glow of pleasure
with his success. Oxford failed at goal.
3 to nil.
With New Zealand getting possession
of the ball, their backs were not whip-
ping into it with the expected cohesion
and pace. Once a force down beat them
by inches. Then a free-kick against
Cubitt for tackling Davidson after he
had lost the ball should have brought
points. Next the Blacks toed it across
the line, but Horder swept oast the n,
fielded it, and though chased by the
speedy Tancred, he turned in goal and
sped out near the posts, and, dodging
and swerving, ran it out and gave it
to Gilbert, who kicked far down the
field with the result that McCarthy was
collared within ten yards of his goal-
line. This was a little spice, and the
benchers chirped.
Back the Black forwards came. In
front of the goal-posts Halloway got
the ball and passed out toward Blair,
but Ifwerson, the five-eighth, watching
like a cat, sprang into the breach, inter-
cepted the ball and shot over at the post.
McGregor made a grubber kick. 3 all.
Things went on verv drablv, with the
Blacks getting the ball and doing noth-
ing of moment with it. though trying
very hard. From the tenth free-kick
awarded to the Blacks, Ifwerson landed
an easy goal. 5 to 3.
The Blacks next got a well-deserved
try while a Blue napped. They had
worked the ball into the 25 and then on
along the ground. Full-back White was
there with it all to himself; he leisurely
watched it as it came to and crossed
the goal-line, intending to then force it
down. Little Walsh all the time >as
shooting up like an india-rubber ball,
and as the football crossed the chalk
mark into in-goal, he dived swiftly and
astonished the Blue by getting his hand
on it just in the nick of time. Ifwerson
landed the goal, and White seemed quite
pensive as the points were being hoisted.
10 to 5. The crowd laughed and ap-
plauded the energy of the New Zealand
youth. Kallowav, on the left wing, got
the ball from the secrummagers and
whined it in to Blair, who shot off
diagonally at his best pace and, cutting
out one or two, gave it to Gilbert, who
ran it on well and then passed to Cubitt,
whose speed carried him away from
Davidson, who had been drawn in to
Gilbert. Coming to McCarthy, Cubitt
dodged him and then went on dodging
one or two in-goal to better the position.
Oxford a goal. N.Z. 10 to 8 at half-
time.
It was drab from start to finish,
neither team showing anything approach-
ing sustained representative form. Four-
teen penalty kicks had been awarded the
New Zealanders and seven to the home
team. From the tenth the Blacks
kicked a goal, but as it was awarded five
yards in front of the posts they could
scarcely miss it.
The shadows from the stands had
crossed the playing field when the teams
came forth again. This time the New
Zealanders had the sun in their faces,
especially along their right wing. They
started with a buzz of success in which
there was a thrill in individualism.
Tancred picked it up behind the scrum-
mage —where Walsh had got to one did
not notice—and he whipped it out to
wing three-quarter Davidson, who ran
past Cubitt, who did not attempt to lay
a hand on him. Davidson is very fast,
and so is Cubitt, who trailed him for
some yards, but did not attempt a tackle.
Coming to White, Davidson high jumped
partly successful. He came down on his
haunches, and then passed in to Ruku-
tai, who took a low one with relish,
and shot over the line there on the
left wing, ten or a dozen yards in from
touch. A verv nice try. Ifwerson faileu
at goal. 13 to 8.
It looked bad for the Blues. Hallo-
way swept the ball out to Blair from a
half-way scrummage. Blair shot off, cut-
ting through the defence straight, but
somewhere near the 25 he slung the ball
away. It went back many vards almost
to half-way. Here the nimble McGregor
fielded it, and shot off for home and


glory. Horder swept across from the
wing and got him, out McGregor, find-
ing the enemy upon him, slung a pass
out to Mitchell, who has a good head
for position, and he took it and shot
over the line on the right wing. Ifwer-
son landed the goal. New Zealand leads
18 to 8.
From this moment the Blues became
a different team. They started to run as
racers, and to combine like a team of
stars. The pack heeled on the left wing
to Halloway, and away it went to Blair,
who showed fine speed before he gave it
to Conaghan, thence to Giioert, who
sped down the right wing supported by
Cubitt, who took the pass, and nicely
finished the movement with a try. Ox-
ford a goal. 18 to 13.
The Blues were at once on the line
in the right corner. Here the Blacks
clung to the ball as to life, and a penalty
saw Oxford landing a clinking goal. 18
to 15. Within two minutes it was 18
all. Horder had seen very little of the
ball hitherto. Now he got it from a
mate between his own 25 and half-way
on the left wing. He started fast, and
dodged one man. Another, very speedy,
got close to him, and went low sideways
on for the tackle; he caught Horder by
an ankle, and the flier stumbled, but,
keeping his feet, he kept going, and
managed to keep clear of two others who
tried to bring him down, and scored a
try that made the crowd chirp. Oxford
failed at goal.
The New Zealanders were evidently
afraid of losing possession. They were
trying miserable little cross-kicks in the
kick-off, and it did not pay. From one
of these Oxford kicked through them,
and Conaghan. getting to the ball, was
soon streaking along the left touch-line.
He did not seem to make great pace,
but was too fast for the full-back, and
scored out there. Oxford failed at goal.
21 to 18.
The Blacks kicked off decently next
time and the ball was sent into touch
close to goal by White failing to catch
it clean. But the Blues were still in
the mood to dazzle. Worked across the
field inside the 25. it was rushed out a
bit. Blair fielded it and ran it on be-
fore giving it to Horder on the touch-
line, and he ran from midway between
his 25 and half-way. and scored,
though Davidson, who had come across,
chased and kept close to him. Horder
landed the goal—26 to 18. A penalty
goal to Davidson made New Zealand
20. Blair netting it from Halloway, at
half-way, kicked through, and fielding it
smartly, swept down the right wing. He
passed to Fraser, on to Cubitt, who did
the finishing work. Horder failed at
goal. 29 to 20. Once more the Horder
flying act was performed down the left
wing. He was running in with Hallo-
way alongside him, evidenw not going
at his top. Tancred sped after him and
tackled him right across Halloway from
behind. Horder came down, out Hallo-
way went on to score the try and Hor-
der the goal. 34 to 20.
The Blacks tried an oblique kick-off
the forwards bunched on the left
wing, but Oxford jumped and took the
ball in the air. broke throusrh, and kicked
oyer full-back McCarthy’s head. Run-
ning after it he fielded the ball in front
of goal, and as he was tackled passed it
out to Prentice, who shot over at the
posts. Horder a goal. 39 to 20.
The*’ had put on 31 points to 2 in
this run, and redeemed themselves. Now
it was the turn of the New Zealanders,
who ran up 11 points. Tancred, with the
alertness of a half-back, started a move-
ment among the backs, following a
scrummage on the right wing, and it
closed with Mitchell over the line on
the left wing, and Davidson goaling.
Davidson ran past Cubitt once again, and
as he swept after the ball which he had
kicked in-goal, Cubitt illegally interfered
with him, but Walters had followed the
ball and the scoring of the try ended
the episode. Davidson missed an easy
shot at goal. Finally Ifwerson got an-
other try, .and the game ended 39 to 31.
New South Wales scored nine tries
(3 by Cubitt, 2 by Horder, and 1 each
by Courtney, Conaghan, Halloway, and
Prentice), and six goals (3 each by Hor-
der and Oxford). New Zealand scored
seven tries (2 eaqff by Ifwerson and Mit-
chell and 1 each by Walsh, Rukutai
and Walters) and five goals (3 by If-
werson and 2 by Davidson).
The game calls for little comment.
The Black scrummagers seemed to get
possession as they pleased in the first
half, and their backs did but little with
it. The Blues did not seem to bother
much until they were ten points behind.
Then they showed that they were a
rattling good side, and that the Blacks
did not look quite so masterly in r-he
pack as they had appeared to be.
N.S. Wales Wins Fourth Match
BY 22 TO 19.
The New Zealanders played their
fourth match with New South Wales on
the following Monday at the Sydney
Cricket Ground. The day was clear and
crisp, but a breeze pined from the south
and helped the Blacks in the first half,
and the home team after the interval.
The attendance was smaller than that of
Saturday at the Agricultural Ground,
the falling off in enthusiasm evidently
being not so much due to the visitors
having been defeated three times as to
the quality of the play of the home
team being so moderate throughout the


first half in the third match, and this
generating a feeling that they were too
good for the visitors. About 18,000
people attended. The home selectors
determined on Saturday night that the
team which had figured in the third
match should again strip for this one,
but on Monday Hallowa” Cubitt and
Fraser were out, the Balmain forward
and Cubitt being attacKed by influenza.
In their places were Johnston, beuind
the pack, A. Bolewski. as right wing
three-quarter, and J. Pye in the for-
wards. These changes weakened the
combination of the team, whose form
throughout the first half, against the
breeze, was very moderate, though
several men were shaping snlendidlv.
Strange to relate this was the best
contest of the tour. The New Zea-
landers shaped ver" well, their com-
bination revealin'- glimpses here and
there of finer collective effort than they
had previously shown, though they were
wanting a bit in opportunism and sus-
tained pace as a team. They estab-
lished a match-winning lead in the first
half, and if they could have kept going
at top-pace, and sharpened up their
half-back and five-eighth play they
would nrobablv have won. But though
they led by 16 to 8 the forwards tired
a bit, and were defeated by 22 to
19, with plav becoming very interest-
ing as the minutes sued on and the home
team were making their winning run.
The Blacks went very close to snatching
it out of the fire in the closing moments,
so close that if they had done so every-
one must have acknowledged that they
had deserved it, for they fought it out
with fine grit, never losing hope, though
the forwards had become leg-weary in
the trial.
NEW. ZEALAND.—C. McCarthy, full-back; W.
Wilson, W. J. Davidson, L. Stewart, A. J.
McGregor, three-quarters; K. Ifwcrson (retired
injured and replaced by McClymont), five-eighth;
W. ‘Walsh, half-back; J. .Kukutai, J. W. Parker,
S. Walters, H. E. Tancred, W. Williams, J.
( I a r k (capt.), forwards.
N.S.W. —A. White (W.S.), full-back; H. Horder
(S.S.), J. Conaghan (B.), «. Gilbert (W.S.)
{(apt.), A. Bolewski (G.), three-quarters; A.
Blair (S.S.), five-eighth ; A. Johnson (N.), half-
back; F. Ryan (N.), C. Prentice (W.S.), W.
Sidiultz (B.), A. Oxford (S.S.), J. Pye (G.),
E. Courtney (W.S.), forwards. Referee, Mr. T.
McMahon.
Verv shortly after the kick-off the
New Zealanders became very aggressive.
Ifwerson, the five-eighth, intercepted a
blind-side pass by the home half-back,
and, getting through smartly, dodged
full-back White and scored a fine try,
which he failed to convert. 3 to nil. A
few minutes later the Blue backs had
the at half-way. Bolewski lost it,
and Wilson, fielding it, broke through
very fast down the left wing. Before he
came within ten yards of White he
started to swerve, and when he got to
White the tackle put him off his balance,
but he passed in to Davidson, who ran
on and scored close to the corner. It
was a good try, engineered bv a nippy
player well-supported. Ifwerson failed
at goal. New Zealand had thus, within
the first six minutes, twice penetrated
the defence.
The home team plugged into it in the
forwards, and the game became very
keen, but somewhat close for this type
of Rugby. It was hard and strenuous,
and not so clean as the earlier games,
there being a fair amount of illegal
holding by the forwards in the ruck,
with one lot no better and no worse
than the other. But more of it should
have been seen by the officials.
The Blacks made scarcely as much
use of the wind for engineering attack
as they might have done. Still, they
were doing well, and the home team did
not get within striking distance of the
goal-line very often in these stages.
New Zealand really ought to have piled
up more points, as some of the home
backs were shaping weakly. Johnston,
behind the pack, was missing the ball,
which many times shot past him on the
ground, with the Blacks getting to it.
Blair, the five-eighth, was slinging his
passes anywhere, once, in the loose,
slinging the ball out to the fanned
Blacks without a soul near them, and
with his own backs fanned out on the
other side. New Zealand should have
scored there, but they were slow to
realise the position, and by the time they
had got within striking distance of the
line the Blues had gathered in bunches.
The Black forwards were playing finely,
with Tancred the star. They scored
next. McClymont, who had just before
taken the place of Ifwerson (injured
left collarbone), landing an easy penalty
goal. New Zealand 8 to nil.
Many of the spectators were chafing
as they watched the right wing three-
quarter vainly endeavoring to get into
the combination. They thought he was
Cubitt, and could not understand his not
being in the proper position to get the
ball from Gilbert, or, having got there,
his drooping it, or otherwise doing weak
things in attack, for which Cubitt is not
noted. White, the full-back, was also
playing a peculiar game. Time after
time he tried to make ground by run-
ning, and the Blacks generally managed
to grab hm. His judgment was weak,
and the New Zealanders, finding that he
did not care to kick, made no apologies
about bundling him to Mother Earth.
The wonder is the Blacks did not put
the finishing touches on this fine play,
and add a few more tries. But Gilbert
and Conaghan were playing brilliantly
in the' centre, and this atoned for weak-
ness elsewhere. All through the first
half their work was a treat, and if the
Blacks had been served as well, there
it would have been good-bye to the
prospects of the Blues at half-time.


With the score 8 to nil against them,
some of the Blues began to pick up their
form, notably Johnston, who took a
lot of warming up. He now began to
get the ball into his hands and to whip
it out smartly to Blair. In one of these
moves at half-way, Blair set the three-
quarters going for the left. Conaghan
passed well to Gilbert, who carried Hor-
der with him, and running stra'ght,
gave it to the flier. The Blacks rushed
for Horder from all directions, but well
inside the 25, as they were converging
on him, he in-passed to Gilbert, who
shot through untackled and scored a
very fine try. Oxford failed at goal.
The Blues repeated the performance
a few minutes later. From Johnston to
Blair it went. The youth slipped ahead
a bit and gave it to Gilbert, and the
big man made a fine run before send-
ing it to Conaghan, who ran it through
to score by one of the prettiest indivi-
dual moves seen in the game. He beat
three men, dodging and bluffing them
on his way to the goal-line from a
rather difficult position. Horder failed
at goal.
A few minutes later they got the ball
out to Horder on the left wing, and
seeing himself blocked, the flier punted
over the enemv for his fleet follow-up
and the try. But Tancred and a fellow
forward converged on Horder, one giv-
ing him the hip and the other the
shoulder, with the result that he went
down and laid there wounded like
crushed thing. The touch-judge ran in
and a warning finger shook at Tancred
as the referee awarded the penalty kick.
A try would have been a better decision,
for, in a position like that of the moment,
Horder generally emerges with a try.
Oxford landed the goal and it was 8
all.
The Blacks warmed up to it. and made
some good rushes for goal. Thev were
troubling the Blue backs with the ball
on the ground now and then. Presently
they broke away from close to half-way
after thev had got the ball from a
fumbled Blue pass. Davidson was in it,
and McGregor, finally getting the ball,
beat White and got over; McClymont a
goal. 13 to 8. Things buzzed for a few
minutes, with the Blues threatening to
do things. But the threats were eirmt'.
White mulled a few times and got diffi-
culties all round him. Then Bolewski
missed a pass from, his centre and in a
twinkling Parker set off with the ball
in his grip. He tried to up pace, but
did not seem to be a sprinter. Harm
Wilson, sizing up the position quickly
set off after him, and by the time
Parker came near full-back White, Wil-
son was there to take the pass and go
on and score a rattling good try, which
Davidson failed to convert.
Thus New Zealand led by 16 to 8 at
half-time, and deserved it, and a few
points which they did not get.
A little more collective pace and they
must have had the Blues in a most awk-
ward position. Each side had been
awarded six penalty kicks.
Changing ends, the home team started
to sprint faster. Within two minutes
they scored a try. Horder fielded the
ball at half-way, and in an instant burst
through. McCarthy stood awaiting him
inside the 25, and as he sprinted down
Davidson sprinted too, diagonally con-
verging toward the full-back for the pur-
pose of nailing Horder down when he
dodged to the right. If he had tried
the left side dodge he would have got
in clean perhaps, but he got there all
Hght. McCarthy just touched him, but
Horder kept his pace sufficiently to steer
dear from Davidson, and he then scored
in good position. Oxford failed at goal.
16 to 11.
There was to be no cake-walk now, as
on Saturday, for the Blacks stuck to
them fast. The Blues attacked vainly
in the right corner. Worke*d out to
half-way, McCarthy, the full-back, tried
a run, a thing he had rarely done in
these matches, for the purpose of en-
gineering attack. This time he did well,
his men swept down the field
diagonally from the left wing, crossed
the centre, and kept going. There was
a momentary halt, but Walters had it,
and finally it went to the agile Wilson,
who sprinted through with the try—a
very good ‘one—to which no goal was
added by Davidson. New Zealand, 19
to 11.
Shortly afterwards Davidson missed
an easy shot at goal for a penalty
against Pye for off-side. Then the
home team started again. Once Pve
was clean away, well supported, but he
forgot about the men on the open side
supporting him. He was not a cog in
the wheel. Next? little Blair sneaked
awav. snlendjdly supported, and, strange
to say, he did exactly the same thing as
Pve had done —threw the ball to the
Blacks, with Blues waiting for it open-
mouthed. In his case there was no
excuse, for he was one of the cogs.
The Blue forwards by this time were
giving the ball to Johnston in goodly
doses, and that youth had thawed some-
what. He evidently needs a good
bumping and flattening out now and
then to warm his fingers and lubricate
his joints, for bv this time he was play-
ing good football, though in working the
blind side he seemed oblivious to the
fact that Horder was there like an ex-
pectant cat. But once he got through
along the blind side, inside the 25, and
when he sent the ball to Horder on the
touch-line, the latter had his pace up,
and the try was there for the taking,
but somehow the sure-fingered one lost


XRW SOUTH
WALKS v.
NEW
ZEALAiXD.
N.S
. Wales.
Xew Zealand.
T.
0.
PtS,
T.
a
Pts.
ioos-x.s.w... .
2
6
18
0
10
1608—X.S.W... .
3
2
13
2
,■>
10
1900—X.S.W... .
a
4
26
5
2
21
iw»—*x.aw... .
7
3
27
4
4
20
isoe—x.z. .. .
2
1
8
4
4
20
1911—X.S.W... .
9
4
35
2
10
1911—X.S.W... .
6
4
26
2
■>
10
19H— X.S.W.'.. .
7
9
39
1
<■)
7
191-2—X.S.W... .
7
3
2J
2
i
q
19.12—X.Z. .. .
1
2
7
->
12
1912—X.S.W... .
2
4
14
1
0
3
1912-X.S.W... .
4
S
18
2
>>
10
1913—X.S.W... .
5
1
IT
3
3
15
1913-<X.S.W... .
<
5
81
-2
3
12
1613 —X.Z. .. .
3
1
11
3
4
IT
1613—X.S.W... .
6
8
34
2
o
10
1613—X.S.W... .
7
6
33
3
5
19
1913—X.S.W... .
12
11
58
3
4
IT
1919—X.S.W... .
v5
4
23
2
6
18
1919—X.S.W... .
4
4
20
3
0
0
1919—X.S.W
9
6
39
7
5
31
1919—X.S.W... .-.
6
2
22
5
2
19
Twenty-two matches
plavcd, X
S.W.
won
19,
X.Z. 3. X.S.W.
points to 308 (62
scored 546
tries and
(120 tries*
61 goals).
93 goals)
the ball. However, the bouncing
Courtney was trailing him, and fielding
it on the verge of touch he ferreted his
way to the chalk-mark in the corner,
and there with head bent he fairly
horned his way to the line, despite the
opposition of an opponent and the very
close proximity of another, and planted
the ball down in goal. Brains in foot-
ball scored there. Oxford failed at goal.
New Zealand, 19 to 14.
The Blacks saw the points going up.
but they were not done with. They
bucked in vigorously and tried to turn
defence into attack. They were doing
well, but by this time the early errors
by home backs were almost eliminated.
Bolewski was feeling himself in the team
work, the only man now uncertain being
full-back White, who would persist in
trying to Border his way ahead, only to
slip down or be brought down uncere-
moniously. When he did kick high he
forgot to follow up, otherwise he might
have made a name for himself with a
ball that now and then dodged his vis-a-
vis. However, the finest try of the game
was presently scored. Slightlv on the
defensive side of half-way the Blue pack
gave the ball to Johnston, on to Blair, to
Conaghan and Gilbert, who ran it beyond
half-way and gave it to Border with
his pace up and his vis-a-vis drawn off
slightly. Whenever Horder got the ball
all the Blacks seem to make un their
minds to gather from every point of the
compass. Well, this time they arrived,
but he ran clear of the first, swerved from
the second, and cut in a shade from the
third. He must have eyes in the back
of his head. Finally he dodged Mc-
Carthy and by this time was within
ten yards of the goal. Big Tancred was
all the time sprinting down for his
life with a view to catching the flier
as he wisped this way or that in evad-
ing the touches of wily antagonists.
But Harder had got over and scored
before Tancred arrived. He must have
seen the big fellow coming, for as he
scored he deftly turned on the ground,
and when Tancred dived he missed Hor-
der, hit the hard turf, and for a moment
or tw’o nursed his knee. There was no
need whatever for Tancred’s dive, see-
ing that Horder had got the try. Ox-
ford landed the goal, and the scores were
19 all—the first time in the game the
Blacks had not led.
There was still plenty of time for either
side to win. The Blues attacked a lot
in the right corner. Here Johnston emu-
lated the ostrich b" burying his head in
among the scrummagers after getting the
ball. On the other wing he passed in to
Blair, but the Blacks were about in
swarms. Eventually Rukutai, in his
exuberant efforts to get hold of Johnston
or Blair as they were watching behind
the scrummagers, got off-side, and every-
one saw it—even the referee. This time
Bolewski was signalled to try his foot
at goal-kicking, but his windage was bad.
The home half-backs finished the day
much better than they started it. They
had been doinn- finely for some time,
Johnston handling the ball as_though his
fingers had been used to nothing alse all
his life. Now from a scrum a bit
beyond half-way Johnston beat Rukutai
in his pass out to Blair, who cut the
three-quarters out by through
straight. He had done this before and
given the ball to the enemy. But this
time he ran to McCarthy, and iust as the
full-back went for him he sent it back
on the short side to Courtney, who took
it at top speed, and sprinted the 10 or 15
yards with the energy of youth, a simi-
larly burly Black vainly trying to gather
him in from behind. Courtney, in a sense,
is a greater wonder even than Rukutai.
Oxford failed at goal, and New South
Wales led for the first time, and, as it
happened, really the only time that
counted, for no further scoring was done.
They went close to adding another try.
But the Blacks went closer still. White
was collared outside his 25, and the
Blacks hurried it off for goal. After a
few moments of uncertainty, over the
line it went. White dived on it, but did
not touch it with his hand. A Black
kindly missed it, and then a Blue did the
trick—close shave. 22 to 19. Well, if it
had been 22 all no one would have be-
grudged the honors to the Blacks. Tak-
ing the game all in all, they were just
as good as the winners. In patches the
Blues were inferior; in patches they
were superior to anything the Blacks
showed.
HOW THE POINTS WERE SCORED.
New South Wales, in winning the four


NEW ZEALAND V.
QUEENSLAND.
N.Z.
9
N.Z.
9-
T.
G.
T.
(r.
1906—New Zealand
.. 34
12
.. 10
2
4
1*
1908—New Zealand
.. 43
10
.. 11
5
<>
1006—Drawn .. ..
12
12
*>
«3
2
3
1909—New Zealand
.. 40
25
.. 10
5
5
.»
1909 —New Zealand
.. 27
19
7
3
3
5
1911—New Zealand
.. 24
13
.. 6
3
3
2
1911 —Queensland ..
.. 13
23
.. 3
2
■7
4
1911—New Zealand
.. 18
14
.. 4
3
4
1912 —New Zealand
.. 15
8
.. 3
3
2
1
1912 —New Zealand
.. 16
10
.. 4
g
2
2
1918—New Zealand
.. 39
5
.. 9
6
J
1919—Queensland ..
.. 13
26
.. 3
2
6
4
1919 —Queensland ..
.. 13
16
— 3
4
2
Summarv: 13 matches:
N.Z.
won
9, Queens-
land 3, and 1 was drawn.
N.Z.
scored
107
points (75 tries 41
goals) to 193 points (41
tries
35 goals).
matches, scored 104 points to 77, or 24
tries and 16 goals to 17 tries and 13
goals. The try-getters were: H. Horder
8, L. A. Cubitt 4, F. Burge and E. Court-
ney 3 each, P. Conaghan 2, and F. Ryan,
H. Gilbert, A. Halloway and C. W.
Prentice; and the goal-kickers, H. Hor-
der and A. Oxford 8 each. For the New
Zealanders, the try-getters were, W. P.
Mitchell 4, K. Ifwerson 3, A. J. Mc-
Gregor 3, W. J. Davidson and W. Wil-
son 2 each, and W. Walsh and S.
Walters 1 each; the goals were kicked
by K. Ifwerson 8, W. J. Davidson and
A. McClymont 2 each, and W. P. Mit-
chell I.
New Zealanders in Queensland
SEVENTH MATCH —QUEENSLAND.
At Davies Park, Brisbane, June 23, 1919;
10,000 present. Queensland won by 21 points
-tries by Johnson (2\ Paten (2), Potter, Thomp-
son, and goals by Paten (2), Thorogood (2) —
to 1* -tries by Ifwerson (2) and Davidson, and
Ifwerson and Davidson a goal each. L. H.
Kearney, referee.
■NEW ZEALAND—C. McCarthy, full-back; W.
Wilson, W, Davidson, :A. McClymont. A. J.
McGregor, three-quarters; K. Ifwerson, five-
eighth; I. Stewart, half-back; W. Williams, J.
W. Parker, S. Walters, A. Waddell (injured and
relieved by E. Herring), H. E. Tancred and J.
Clark, forwards.
QUEENSLAND. —T. Sweeney, full-back; W.
Paten, C. Thorogood, J. Maguire, N. Broadioot,
three-quarters; T. Bath five-eighth: I). Thompson
half-back; N. Potter. R. C. O’Donnell, P. Moran,
N. Johnson, E. McGrath, W. Richards, forwards.
This was the greatest day in the his-
tory of the Q.R.L. A score of 24 points
to 3 at half-time against the visitors
delighted local enthusiasts. With a
beautiful day there was a record crowd
and a record gate of more than £lOOO.
The visitors were quite outpaced in the
first half, but had much more of the
game in the second, during which If-
werson played sparkling football.
Thompson, the Queensland caotam,
playing half, was the brains of the
Queensland side, and throughout the
first half had the New Zealanders
guessing as to his moves. He was great-
ly assisted by C. O’Donnell, the South
Sydney rake, who gave him the lion’s
share of the ball. The local three-
quarters made very few mistakes, the
tackling particularly being extremely
sound. Toward the finish thev were
rather resting on their oars. The for-
wards were much lighter than the visi-
tors, and but for O’Donnell this might
have presented a winning chance to New
Zealand, though the locals were very fin”;
in the loose work. The New Zealand
backs were not impressive, especially
in tackling. The whole team had noth-
ing like the characteristic New Zealand
defence. For Queensland, nearly all the
scoring was done by the three Xpswich-
ites, tries being got by Johnson (2) and
Thompson one and one goal.
QUEENSLAND WINS AGAIN.
In Brisbane, the question of the week
was: Can Queensland repeat the dose?
New Zealand had four hard matches in
Sydney, and a hard game at Ipswich
on the Thursday preceding the first
Queensland match, and some were stiff
and sore in the first contest. As a re-
sult of the defeat, they decided to can-
cel their intended visit to Rockhampton
during the week and devote all their
time to getting into the best possible
shape for the return contest. Never-
theless Queensland scored another vic-
try, 16 to 13. There were about 12,000
present, two new stands erected the pre-
vious week being filled.
NEW ZEALAND.—McCarthy, full-back ;
McGregor, Davidson, Ifwerson, Clarke, three-
quarters ; Mitchell (e.), five-eighth ; Stewart,
half-back ; Rukutai, Waddell, Tancred, Williams,
Somers, Walters, forwards.
QUEENSLAND.—W. Fewin, retired, and re-
placed by Sweeney, full-back ; N. Broadfoot. .1.
McCosh, ’j. Maguire, W. Paten, three-quarters ;
C. Thorogood, five-eighth; D. Thompson <c. !,
half-back ; N. Potter, C- O'Donnell, P. Moran,
M. M. Bichards, N. Johnson, P. Olsen, forward-:.
New Zealand opened the scoring and
led 8-5 at half-time. Afterwards the
combination of- Queensland backs was
the controlling influence of the game,
with Thompson, assisted by two other
Ipswichites, again most prominent, and
Thorogood fulfilling early promise.
Shortly before full time the Queensland
backs clinched victory, the final scores
being 16-13.
NEW ZEALANDERS AT HOME.
The managers of the New Zealand
League team—Messrs. H. Oakey and
N. B. Levien—placed their report be-
fore the New Zealand Council on Sep-
tember 9. Copies, after discussion, were
distributed to every League concerned.
The balance returned to Auckland by
the tour was £1197/16/4, and, compared
with previous tours, the managers said
this was highly satisfactory when the


RESULTS OF
THE
TOUR.
Point::.
For.
Agst.
iF. A.
T. G.
T. G.
New Zealand .
. Won
44—21
10— 7
£—f>
New Zealand .
. Lost
10—23
■7 •>
5-4
New Zealand ,
. Won
34—23
8— 5
5—4
New Zealand -
. Won
32— 9
8- 4
0— I
Waikato
Won
58— 5
14— S
1—1
Auckland .. .
. Won
32— 8
8— 4
2—1
Hawke’s Bav
. Won
67— 4
15—11
0—2
Hawke’s Bav .
. Won
73— 7
17—U
1—2
Wellington ..“
.. Won
93 — 5
21—15
1—1
Sunu»mrv: 9 matches, won S, lost 1, and scored
443 points (103 tries, 67
goals)
to 9S (18
tries.
2 2 goals).
extra heavy expenses incurred are
brought into consideration. Absolutely
abnormal conditions prevailed. The
number of matches arranged was larger
than in previous visits on account of
there being no prospects of getting a
passage home, as returned soldiers and
nurses had first call on shipping ac-
commodation. An extreme amount was
paid in wages, the Government tax ab-
sorbed £123/9/2, and the extra expense
incurred by travelling via Melbourne
spent another £IOO. Further than this,
although the first gate in Sydney was a
larger one, the next two only realised
about £6OO, and the grand Sydney gate
total was only a little in advance of
1913. If the circumstances had been
normal for the visit, the proceeds must
have constituted a record.
The itinerary of the matches as laid
down in New South Wales appeared to
the managers to be badly arranged. The
test matches took place on Saturday and
on two successive weeks, and were much
too strenuous for any touring team, the
reason given being that, as those days
fell on public holidays, they were apt to
draw big gates. In their opinion coun-
try matches could well be cut out, as
very little extra gate money was gained
and the strain bn the players was too
much.
Further recommendations by the
managers were that two more backs
should be included in the touring teams,
and that tours between Australia and
New Zealand should be alternate, and
not be made each successive year, as at
present and no tours be made on years
British teams come out. Nine resolu-
tions were passed at an Interstate and
Dominion conference, and they dealt
with tours, fixtures, control and parti-
cular motions regarding residential
qualification of players.
Australian Rugby League Team
in New Zealand.
New South Wales and Queensland
combined to send the first Australian,
as differentiated from N.S.W., team to
New Zealand. The party consisted of
Messrs. C. H. J. Upton (Glebe) and
Walter Webb (Eastern Suburbs) as
managers, with the following team,
selected by Messrs. E. Mead, A, Burdon
and H. Flegg (N.S.W). and H. Sunder-
land and J. Morgan (Queensland): T.
Sweeney (Q.), H. Border (S.S.), R.
Vest (W.S.), L. A. Cubitt (E.S.), W.
Paten (Q.), J. Robinson (Balmain),
H. Gilbert (W.S.), C. Fraser (Balmain),
R. Norman (E.S.), C. Thorogood (Q.).
A. Johnston (Newtown), D. F. Thomp-
son (Q.), A. Halloway (Balmain), N.
Potter (Q.), C. W. Prentice (W.S.), C.
O’Donnell (Q.), W. Schultz (Balmain).
F. Ryan (Newtown), R. Townsend
(Newtown), A. Oxford (S.S.), F. Burge
(Glebe), R. Latta (Balmain), J. Ker-
wick (S.S.), J. Watkins (E.S.). It
was a good team, quite representative
of the strength of the League in Aus-
tralia. This team had a splendid tour,
though a few men were not physically
fit on reaching New. Zealand. Owing
to the shipping strike they had to leave
via Newcastle, where they were held up
for several days. When they worked
into form their football became dazzling,
the backs impressing critics wherever
they played, with H. Horde- and L. A.
Cubitt the tricky, sprinting three-quar-
ters, piling up the tries.
NEW ZEALAND DEFEATED IN FIRST
MATCH BY 44 TO 21.
The Australians reached Wellington
on Friday, August 22, by the steamer
Essex and played the first match of their
tour next day. The task was regarded
as formidable, as they were called upon
to play a test match against the pick
of the N.Z. League—men who had been
in training for a fortnight to work up
combination in an endeavor to re-
trieve the reputation lost in Australia.
A few of the Australians were suffer-
ing from poisoned legs, including Fraser.
Thompson and Rav Norman. But they
won by 44 to 21. The public was highly
pleased with the match, and the Mayor
of Wellington (Aid. Luke), an interested
spectator, conveyed his congratulations
to the Australians. Among the specta-
tors also were Viscount Jellicoe, many
of his officers, and a great many of
the crew of the New Zealand, Sir Joseph
Ward, Mr. Massey (Premier), and Mr.
Myers (Attorney-General).
NEW ZEALAND.—Dutty, back; lies, Bradley
(capt,). Inver-on, Morris, three-quarters; Lang,
five-eighth; Neal, half-back ; Walters, Lowry.
Williams, Avery, King, Scott, forwards,
AUSTRALt-A.—Sweeney (Q.), back ; Border
(S.S.W.), Gilbert (N.S.W.), Cubitt (N.S.W.),
Robin e on (X.S.W.), three-quarters ; Johnson
CN.S.W.), five-eighth; Halloway (capt.) (N.S.W.).
half-back ; Prentice (N.S.W.). O’Donnell (Q.i.
Ryan (N.S.W.), Burge <X.S.W.), Oxford
(X.S.W.), Watkins (X.S.W.), forwards.


The match was played on the Basin
Reserve before a big crowd. Play opened
briskly. Horder started a burst, in
which Johnson and Robinson partici-
pated. The ball came back to Horder,
who made a sensational run from half-
way and scored. Oxford goaled. Aus-
tralia, 5 to nil.
Splendid football by the N.Z. for-
wards carried the ball to midfield, where
Ifwerson, following fast, gathered it in
the loose, and, outpacing the opposition,
scored. Dufty converted the try. 5 all.
The Australian backs, playing brilliantly,
repeatedly figured in passing rushes,
Robinson, Gilbert, and Horder being
prominent. Oxford picked up close to
the N.Z. line, forced his way over, and
scored second try, but missed the goal.
Australia, 8-5. New Zealand, playing
desperately, changed the scene of opera-
tions to the other end, where Dufty
landed a good goal from a penalty. Aus-
tralia, 8-7.
Horder, racing at his top and swerv-
ing magnificently, beat man after man,
until he had passed seven, and then
streaked for the line, scoring a try
amidst tremendous enthusiasm. Oxford
landed the goal. Australia, 14 to 7. In
the fast and exciting play, Gilbert
picked up in the loose beat the N.Z. de-
fence, and scored near the posts. Ox-
ford goaled. Australia, 18 to 7.
The Australian three-quarter line was
quickly in action in the second half.
When looking certain to score Horder
was brilliantly tackled by Ifwerson. Then
N.Z., rallying finely, attacked strongly.
Here, following a loose rush, Ifwerson
scored his second try, but failed at goal
from a difficult angle. Australia 18 to 10.
The New Zealanders, back and for-
ward, were playing with great dash, and
prevented the fleet Australian backs from
making much progress. Sweeney (Q.),
however, grabbed the ball in the loose
and made a fine run for the N.Z. line,
where he passed to Gilbert, who scored
the try in the corner. Oxford goaled
with a magnificent kick. Australia 23
to 10.
Dufty drooped a magnificent goal from
the field. The Australians rushed into
the N.Z 25. There Morris, the N.Z.
three-quarter, got the ball, and, eluding
the defence, kicked down the field. Ifwer-
son raced after the ball, and, gathering
it in, again ran brilliantly and scored
between the posts for Duftv to kick the
goal. Australia 23 to 17. It was Ifwer-
son’s third try. Great excitement.
The Australians rose to the occasion.
Pulling themselves together, they threw
the ball about as if it were a live elec-
tric wire. Horder ran it from behind
his own line and passed to Johnston,
on to Burge, and the big forward, with
his great pace, scored. Oxford failed at
the: goal from a difficult angle. 26 to 17.
Ifwerson made another great run,
which carried the New Zealanders into
the Australian 25, where the visitors were
penalised, and Dufty, from outside the
25, kicked the goal. Australia, 26 to 19.
A moment later a kick by Dufty dur-
ing an Australian burst was charged
down by Watkins, who picked the ball
up and raced over, for Oxford to con-
vert. Australia 31, N.Z. 19.
Heeled to Halloway. he passed to
Johnston, to Gilbert, to Cubitt, who
dummied and dodged his way through
the opposition, running right through
them and scoring between the posts. It
was beautiful work that the crowd was
not slow to recognise. Oxford goaled,
Australia, 36 to 19. The Australian
backs were passing brilliantly, and the
same players who figured in the last
movement immediately got going, and
Cubitt, out-distancing the field, again
scored, but Horder failed to convert.
Australia 39, N.Z. 19.
New Zealand was game to the last,
and once Sweeney saved in magnificent
style, and the) crowd cheered the effort.
Watkins was also very prominent, and
often saved his side. Williams, of N.Z.,
was paying strict attention to Watkins,
and was at times unduly rough on the
N.S.W. forwards. Dufty, with a
beautiful kick, landed a penalty goal,
which brought New Zealand's score to
21.
Burge missed a pass in a handy posi-
tion, but Ryan secured the ball and
scored, Burge retrieved his mistake by
landing the goal. Australia 44, N.Z. 21.
From this out play continued fast and
brilliant, but the Australians dominated
the situation.
Australia scored 10 tries Horder 2,
Cubitt 2. Gilbert 2, Oxford, Burge, Ryan,
and Watkins (1 each) and 7 goals (Ox-
ford 6 and Burge 1). New Zealand
scored 3 tries, all by Ifwerson, and 6
goals, all landed by Dufty.
Ray Norman (N.S.W.) was in hospital
with a poisoned knee.
New Zealand Wins Second Test
BY 23 TO 10.
The second test match between Aus-
tralia and New Zealand was played at
Christchurch, in the presence of 6000
people. The game was not as spectacu-
lar as that at Wellington. It was al-
most a wretched exhibition of Rugby.
The turf was very treacherous. New
Zealand won by 23 points to 10, and
there is no doubt that the better team
was successful on the day. The Aus-
tralians criticised the referee. Some of
his decisions were considered a joke
from their standpoint; his interpretation
of the laws being very puzzling.


AUSTRALIA.—T. Sweeney (Q.). full-nark ;
H. Hinder (X.S.W.I, L. CuMtt (X.S.W.), H.
'Gilbert (X.S.W.J, J. Paten (Q.), three-quarters :
A, Johnston (N.S.W.), injmed and rejdaced by
Thorogood (Q.), and A. llallowav (X.S. \V.),
half-backs; Vi. Schultz (X.S.W.). L O’Donnell
(X.S.W.), C. Prentice (X.S.W.), Potter HI-). F.
Burg© i X.S. tv. ), J. Watkins {X.S.W.), for-
ward s.
XRW ZRALAXIL— Dufty, full-back ; lies, Brad-
ley, Tfwerson, Sanilcrs, three-quarters ; ‘Morris,
Pollock, half-backs ; Hallcnder, Lowry, Williams,
'Walters, Avery, Scott, forwards.
Walters first scored for N.Z., but
Dufty failed at goal. Border quickly
followed suit by landing a penalty goal,
and N.Z. led by 3 to 2. Dufty kicked
a penalty goal for N.Z. and at this
stage Johnston, the five-eighth, was
injured and was replaced by Thorogood,
of Queensland.
Walters scored his second try for
N.Z., but it was not converted. Before
half-time Hallender added a try, which
Ifwerson converted, and at half-time
N.Z. led by 13 to 2. Soon after resum-
ing, Bradley marked, and Ifwerson
kicked the goal. Then Walters scored
his third try, and Williams was soon
■over with another. N.Z., 21 points to 2.
Border increased the visitors’ score
with a try, and after Bradley had kicked
a goal for N.Z. Border again scored, and
converted the try. N.Z. 23 points to 10,
at which it ended.
At one stage the game became a
scramble, with New Zealand having the
better of matters, and receiving many
penalty kicks. Watkins was repeatedly
cautioned for alleged unclean tackling.
The Australians became nonplussed by
the referee’s decisions. Be gave a
demonstration as to how the ball should
be played by both teams. Border cleared,
and when tackled passed to Cubitt, who
beat several opponents. The referee
whistled, and the ball was recalled and
handed by Cubitt to Border to play the
hall. Queer sort of football this. The
referee instructed Gilbert how to pass.
Bradley, when ten yards off-side, got
hold sent the ball to Walters, on to Mal-
lender, who scored. After another try
by Walters, Ifwerson’s kick sent the
ball over the centre of the bar, but the
referee for some unaccountable reason
disallowed the goal, though both touch
judges lifted their flags. Penalties were
frequent against the Australians, and the
referee was continually cautioning them.
The referee awarded a penalty for a for-
ward pass, and Bradley goaled. Ballo-
wav placed the ball ten yards beyond
half-way and kicked off. Play went on
for some time, during which the touch-
judge held up his flag. The ball was
brought back and re-kicked from half-
way. In turn Watkins, Burge, and Pot-
ter were cautioned. Walters, again
playing off-side, got the ball and passed
to Avery, who scored. At last Australia
received a penalty kick, but it was
recalled, Cubitt being declared off-side.
Cubitt was on the wing, with Horder
in the centre. The local League was to
blame for selecting as referee one who
meant well,' and was conscientious, but
was not conversant with the game as
played in Australia.
"The Referee” correspondent with the
team discussed the match thus: “It was
played on Sydenham Park, Christchurch,
an open public park. Permission was
granted to charge admission, and also
to rope in the playing area. About 6000
people paid for admission. Many of the
Wellington people who had seen the
Australians give such S, brilliant display
the previous Saturday, had come across
to see the second test, but along with
others were sadly disappointed. It was
a very bad exhibition of Rugby League,
and developed into a scramble, common-
ly termed bung rules in Aussie. The
rulings of the referee, Mr. A. Brunsden,
were hard to follow, and nonplussed
the Australians, who were badly rattled,
and were beaten by a better team on
the day. Many funny incidents hap-
pened. The referee stood in the field
and showed the teams how to play the
ball. He also allowed Halloway to place
kick-off from 10 yards past centre. Play
went on for several minutes when it
was brought back and kicked off from
the centre oh the touch-judge drawing
the referee’s attention to the mistake.
Horder fell clear of a tackle, and passed
to Cubitt. who ran 30 yards, but was
whistled back and told to give the ball to
Horder to play. Mr. Brunsden contends
that the man who has the ball when on
the ground must play it himself (only)
and allows no other player to play the
ball. He also awards free kicks for
passing forward. There were 63 scrums
in the game. At the half-time interval
the Australians expressed a wish for the
referee to come in the dressing room
and explain rulings. He refused the re-
quest, and called Halloway outside
amongst the spectators and talked to
him.
Australians Win the Rubber,
SCORING 34 TO 23.
The third Test match was played on
the Auckland Domain, in the presence of
21,000 people, on September 7. This is
a record attendance for New Zealand.
Australia won by 34 to 23, thus secur-
ing the rubber, having won the first
match by 44 to 23 at Wellington, and
lost the second by 23 to 10 at Christ-
church. The game was a fine display of
Northern Union rules. The N.Z. team
was very fit, and superior to that which
had toured Australia.


AUSTRALIA. —C. Fraser (X.S.W.), full-back :
H. Horder (N.S.W.), L. Cubitt (X.S.W.), .1.
Robinson (N.S,\V.;, C. Thorogood (Q-). three-
quarters ; A. Johnston (N.S.W.). five-eighth; A.
Halloway (X.S.W.). half-back ; >V. .Schultz
(N.S.W.), C. O’Donnell (Q.), F. Ryan (N.S.W.).
R. Townsend (N.S.W.), J. Watkins (N.S.W.), F'.
Burge '(N.S.W.), forwards. Holloway retired hurt
and Thompson took his place.
NEW ZEALAND,—C. Dufty, full-back ; ».
Macgregor, lies, W. Davidson, K. It'werson, three-
quarters ; G. Bradley, five-eighth ; W. Walsh,
half-back; A. Scott, S. Walters, W. Williams, H.
Avery 7 , S. Lowry, T. Haddon, forwards.
The weather was ideal, but the ground
was soft and greasy. New Zealand
kicked off with the breeze, and at once
attacked strongly. The N.Z. forwards
toed it through with irresistible dash.
Watkins made a valiant effort to save,
but his kick was charged down, and
Avery, picking up, scored after ten
minutes’ play. Ifwerson converted with
a fine kick. N.Z., 5 to nil. Horder,
getting the ball, beat several opponents,
but lost his footing when looking dan-
gerous. Here Ifwerson intercepted a
pass, and, running through, sent the ball
on to Avery. Once more Horder was
brilliant in tackling the N.Z. forward,
bringing him down five yards from the
Australian line. On top of this Ifwer-
son landed a goal. N.Z., 7 to nil.
Horder immediately afterwards failed
with a penalty shot, but the ball was
run out, and Watkins, gathering well,
sent to Johnston, to Cubitt, who mulled
the pass. Robinson was handy, and, pick-
ing up, passed to Burge, who fended
Dufty and scored. Fraser failed at goal.
Then Halloway got the ball away on
the blind side to Horder, who kicked
over the line, and, following fast,
scored a fine try, which he failed to
convert. N.Z., 7 to 6.
Watkins saved Australia with a great
individual effort, a burst which brought
forth a tornado of cheers. Ifwerson
grabbed the ball, and sent it on to Had-
don, to Walters, who scored. It was
a fine movement. Ifwerson failed at the
goal. N.Z.. 10 to 6. Averv was penal-
ised, and Horder landed a fine goal. 10
to 8. At this stage Halloway was injured
in the leg and was replaced by Thomp-
son, of Queensland, while Johnston took
over the captaincy.
Cubitt brought down the house when
he intercepted and ran 40 yards down
the field to Duftv, who dropped him.
Burge, however, with his great pace, was
handy, and. getting the ball, whipped it
back to Cubitt, who scored under the bar
for Horder to convert. Half-time. Aus-
tralia, 13 to 12.
New Zealand was quickly into stride in
the second half and Macgregor was rac-
ing off when Watkins tackled him. From
a loose ruck Thompson got the ball to
Johnston, who fumbled it. and the N.Z.
forwards, like greyhounds on a hare,
charged down to Fraser, who saved
grandly, finding the line with a kick
which gained 40yds. It was thrilling
work. Johnston and Thompson now-
changed places, the N.S.W. man work-
ing the scrum.
The Australian backs got going in a
brilliant passing dash, in which Thomp-
son, Johnston, Cubitt and Thorogood
figured. They raced right through to
the N.Z. last line of defence, before
Horder came into the picture. As the
flying Australian streaked for the line
the great crowd rose in its excitement-
as a try seemed certain. But lies, the
N.Z. three-quarter, who is extremely fast,,
overtook the Australian and brought him
down.
Ten minutes after this half had been
in progress Watkins was ordered off the
field. In attempting to gain a stronger
grip of an opponent, Watkilis’ open
hand came in contact with the face of
his opponent. A caution would have
met the case as the incident, apparently-
was quite accidental. From loose play
Ifwerson kicked through, but Robinson
fielded the ball, and with a grand ser-
pentine run. beat several opponents and
scored under the bar. It was a fine
individual effort, and Horder converted-
-18 to 12.
Inspired by the brilliancy of the Aus-
tralians, the N.Z. backs now came to
the attack, and in one movement Brad-
ley, Ifwerson, Davidson and lies gained
50 yards, Australia attacked in turn.,
Thompson and Cubitt shooting through.
The latter passed to Robinson, who sent
a reverse pass to Cubitt, who missed
the ball and Macgregor, securing, a fine
passing rush took place between Brad-
ley, Ifwerson, Haddon and Walters, and
back again to Macgregor, who capped a
movement from goal line to goal line-
with a try. Shortly afterwards N.Z.
again attacked, and after several knocks-
on had taken place without being pulled
up, Macgregor scored again, and the
scores were 18 all. The excitement was
intense, and the feeling was imparted to
the players, who became almost in-
spired. ,
Thompson, Johnston, Cubitt and Hor-
der figured in a fine movement, but Hor-
der was thrown into touch. The N.Z
forwards worked the ball back, and
Bradley, with a penalty kick, landed the
goal. New Zealand, 20 to 18.
Johnston attempted to wont his way
through, but lost the ball, and Avery
picking up. scored. Ifwerson failed at
the goal. N.Z.. 23 to 18. The Austra-
lians played up superbly. Townsend.
Schultz. Rvan and Burge in the van
carried it to the New Zealand line and
Thompson picking u" raced over, for
Horder to convert. 23 all.
Australia, with 12 men were playing
with fine dash and Johnston Thompson
and Cubitt knocked at the door. Cubitt


intercepted was tackled and roughed on
the ground by Walters, who was ordered
off the field. Dutty, in defending, ...cxea
a grubber, and Border, fielding the ball,
beat lies and scored, but failed to con-
vert. Australia now took charge of the
game, and in a movement in which
Thompson, Johnston, Thorogood and
Cubitt participated, Cubitt scored under
the bar and Border converted. Johnston
centring, Burge got hold, but was
tackled on the line. From the scrum,
Johnston dived over with a try. Border
failed at goal. Australia winners, 34 to 23,
Australia Wins Fourth Test Match
BY 32 POINTS TO 2.
The fourth test match was played on
the Auckland Domain on Saturday,
September 14, in ideal weather, and in
the presence of 15,000 people. The
ground was in excellent order. The
referee was Mr. A. Ferguson, who was
in Australia with the New’ Zealand team,
and on his return adversely commented
on the refereeing in some of the Aus-
tralian centres.
AUSTRALIA.—C. Fraser IX.S.W.), lull-back;
H. Border (X.S.W.), L. Cukitt IX.S.W.) (in-
jured and replaced bv J. Robinson. X.S.W.), R.
Norman (N.S.W.), R. Vest (X.S.W.), three-
quarters ; A. Johnston (X.S.W, I. five-eighth; H.
Thompson (Q-), half-back ; W. Schultz (N.S.IV.).
C. O’Donnell (Q.), F. Burge (N.S.W.), R.
Townsend (N.S.W.), J. Watkins (N.S.W.), A.
Oxford (X.S.W.), forwards.
NEW ZEALAND.—Dufty, full-back : lies, K.
Ifwerson. W. Bradley, Ma'cgregor, three-quarters;
Laing, five-eighth ; Stewart, half-back; Haddon,
Williams, Wallers, Avery, Somers, Bass, for-
mards.
New Zealand attacked at the start, but
in his own 25 Cubitt snapned up the
ball and sent it to Border, who ran well
and then kicked. The ball was toed
■over the New Zealand line, and Burge,
who followed fast, beat lies and scored.
In this movement the visitors covered
over 75 yards. Border missed the goal.
Following on this Burge found the line
with an excellent kick. Then Thompson
and Johnston joined in a passing move-
ment, during which Johnston cut out
Norman by sending out a long, high
pass to Cubitt, who beat several men
and scored cleverly under the bar. Bor-
der goaled. Australia, 8 to nil.
Fine work by the home pack aroused
the crowd to great excitement, and Wat-
kins was cheered for saving in great
style. Bowever, New Zealand came
again, but the work was nullified when
Uuftv missed an easy penalty shot at
goal. Johnston dashed round the blind
side and runnin- to the full-back passed
to Border, wno scored, but failed to
convert. Australia, 11 to nil.
In some hot work Cubitt was injured,
the cartilage of his nose bein'” broken.
Be was replaced by Robinson. At half-
time Australia led 11 to nil.
Quickly getting into their strides, and
with Watkins the star, Australia attacked
on resuming. From a scrummage the
ball was heeled to Thompson, who sent
to Johnston, to Norman, to Robinson,
to Vest, who ran well and scored a try,
with Macgregor hanging on to him.
Border failed at goal. Fraser grabbed
the ball, beat several men, and passed
to Border, who scored a great try, which
Burge converted from the touch-line
with a brilliant kick.
The Australians, going great guns,
once more attacked. Thompson started
a burst in which the whole of the backs
handled the ball. New Zealand sent
them back, and home supporters were
elated when Ifwerson landed a fine goal
from a penalty, thus making New Zea-
land’s first—and what proved to be
their only score. Watkins, Burge and
Johnston gained fifty yards passing most
brilliantly. Each side was now play,
iris five forwards. Once again Aus-
tralia attacked and Watkins sent the
ball to Robinson, who missed it. John-
ston was handy, passed to Norman, to
Vest, who scored his second try, but
Burge failed at the goal.
Johnston once again shone, and passed
to Watkins, to Norman, to Robinson, to
Vest, who centred. Burge fielded the
ball finely, and running from half-way
scored. Be capped the movement by
converting the trw. Australia, now play-
ing with wonderful dash, stormed the
home line, and a superb passing bout
ended in Border racing over, after
Thompson. Johnston, Norman and Wat-
kins had handled the ball. Burge con-
verted. Australia, 32, New Zealand 2.
SCORES IN FOUR TESTS.
In the four test matches the Austra-
lians scored 120 points (28 tries and
18 goals! to 73 (14 tries and IS goals).
B. Border scored 9 tries, B. Gilbert
3, F. Burge 5, R. Vest 2. L. A. Cubitt
4. and J. Watkins, J. Robinson, G.
Thompson, A. Oxford and A. Johnston 1
each. Border kicked 8, Oxford 6, and
Burge 4 goals.
Waikato Beaten by 58 to 5
The Australians defeated Waikato 58
to 5 at Steele Park. Bamilton, scoring
14 tries (Ve«t 4. Robinson 2, Latta 2,
Ballowav, Patten, Gilbert, Norman,
Rvan, Prentice 1 each) and 8 goals
(Norman 3. Balloway. Prentice, Ker-
wick. Potter, Sweeney 1 each). Fifteen
hundred people were present. A.
Thompson, the referee, was sent from
Auckland. The party had two days at
Rotorua —weird and wonderful. All were
well by this time. D. Thompson had
returned by the Maheno to Australia,
his leave from the Commonwealth Bank
having expired.


Australia Defeats Auckland
BY 32 TO 8.
The Australians defeated Auckland on
September 20 by 32 to 8. The Auckland-
ers had been very keen on downing the
visitors. A week earlier 16 players
were selected and housed at one of the
principal hotels. Here they were coached
systematically in between training hours.
AUCKLAND. I). Davidson, full-back ; Mac-
grcgor, McClyuiont (injured and replaced by
Delgrosso), Ifwerson, C. Davidson, tliree-nnarters:
Stewart, five-eighth; Client, half-back; Malters.
Lawries, tVilliants, Avery, Mitchell, Bass, for-
wards.
AUSTRALIA. —C. Fraser, full-back; Tl. Harder.
L. A. Cubitt, J. Robinson, R. Vest (injured and
replaced by H. Gilbert), three-quarters; A. John-
ston, five-eighth; A. Halloway. half-back: At.
Schultz, C. O’Donnell, F, Burge. R. Townsend.
A. Latta, J. Watkins, forwards.
Weather was fine; ground in excel-
lent order. The game was hard, and
was witnessed by 18,000 people. Mr.
A. Ball was the referee.
Immediately after the kick-off Ifwer-
son failed at goal from an easy shot,
and Avery, following fast, secured the
ball and was almost over. He was wea
tackled by Halloway. Horder then made
a fine run, but tripped and fell and lost
the ball. Ifwerson snapped it un, but
was stopped by Watkins when lookin'
dangerous. Australia was penalised and
Ifwerson opened the scoring by land-
ing a fine goal.
Inspired bv this earlv success. Auck-
land attacked in finj style, and keeping
the pressure up, just failed to score on
several occasions. Nothing daunted, the
Australians threw the ball about. Vest
injured his ankle, and was replaced bv
Gilbert A fine movement in which
Robinson. Latta and Cubitt figured ended
in Cubitt dummying his way through
and scoring a try; Burge failed at goal.
Here McClvmont. of N.Z.. was injured,
and was replaced by Delgrosso, David-
son going up into the three-quarter
line. The Auckland full-back carried
the ball into Australian territorv. but
from a ruck Watkins toed it through
and Schultz joining in, thev reached
the full-back, who saved. From a scrum
Horder lost the ball, which was snap-
ped up and sent to Williams, to Averv,
who scored. After the kick-off the ball
was sent over the Australian line, but
Fraser ran it out and passed to Cubitt.
The three-quarter shot straight ahead,
kicked over the N.Z. full-back’s head,
and, following on again, scored a good
try, which Norman converted. Another
fine movement among tne Australian
backs saw Gilbert cross the line to score
between the posts, Norman converted.
Half-time, 13 to 5.
Soon after re-starting, from a scrum
the Auckland forwards rushed the ball
at the toe to Fraser, who picked it off
their feet and darting through like a
flash, beat several men, before passing
to Burge, who went on and scored, Nor-
man failed at goal. Robinson missed a
pass, and Ifwerson, snapping the ball
up, ran to Fraser, and sent it to W.
Davidson, who looked certain to score.
Cubitt, however, came fast, and brought
him down a vard from the line. The
Australians now dominated the game.
Burge scored two tries in succession,
the second of which Fraser converted.
Cubitt next ran through the onoosition,
and nassed to Gilbert, who scored under
the bar for Fraser to convert. Once
more Auckland attacked, and Robinson
failing to field the ball. Macgregor picked
it up and passed it W. Davidson, who
scored. Immediate)” afterwards Hailo-
way ran through his field and passed
to Burge, who scored again. Austra-
lia. 32 to 8.
Australians Defeat Hawke’s Bay
BY 67 TO 4.
The Australians defeated Hawke’s Bay
at Mac Lean Par*. Napier, on September
27, by 67 to 4. The weather was idea'
and typically Australian, which suited
the visitors admirably. Attendance 5000
HAWKK'S BAY,—Fulforrl, fvr!)-back: Reefy.
Jackson, Pompey. Mannhi"- three-quarters: Mc-
Carthy, Seymour, halves; Fitzgerald, Beach.
Crowley-, Selby, Downing, Burrows, forwards.
AUSTRALIA.—Sweeney ((?.), full-back: (filbert
(X.S.H.). Xortnan (X.S.tV.), ('irl)itt (N.S.W.i.
Thorogooti (Q-), three-quarters ; Fraser
(X.S.tV.). Ilalloway (X.S.W.), halves; Ryan
(X.S.AV.). Prentice (X.S.W.). Burge. (X.s. u
Oxford (X.S.TT.). Kerwiek (X.S.tV,), Watkins
(X.S.W.), forwards.
The Australians scored 31 to nil in the
first half and won bv 15 tries and 11.l 1 .
eoals to 2 goals. Cubitt petting 6 tries
Fraser 3, Gilbert, Burge. Ryan, Thoro-
good. Kerwiek and Norman one each
and Oxford II goals. McCarthv kicked
two -senalty goals for Hawke’s Bay. Mr
G. Proctor was referee.
GOAL-KICKING MATCH.
In a “-oal-kicking competition for gold
medals, Australia won. Hawke’s Bay
was represented bv McCarth- Kelly and
Jackson, and Australia by Burge, Frase 1 '
and Thorogood. The Australians were
royally entertained bv the Petone Club.
An impromptu match provided a great
deal of amusement to players and specta-
tors alike. Burge filled the role of half
back, with Halloway hooking in the
scrum. After the match the Maoris
again entertained the visitors with hakas
while four Maori maidens gave a poi
dance. At night the Australians were
the guests at the Orphans’ Club, and on
Sunday were taken by the Hawkp'= P
League to Tangoio, where the Maoris
entertained them in the old Maori style.
In a second match with Hawke’s Bay


the Australians scored 73 points (17
tries, 11 goals) to 7 (a try and 2 goals)
Wellington Beaten by 93 to 5.
The Australians played the last match
of their tour at Newtown Park, Welling-
ton, on Saturday, October 4. There were,
onl” 1000 present. The game was a
walk-over for the Australians who piled
up 93 points to 5.
IV KT.LlXGTOX.—Henderson. Me.ires. Bradlev,
Whatley. Morris, Pollock. Kruse. ChiWe, Dnsk'e,
IV*we, Scott, Fheffer and Green.
-U'STRALlA.—Sweeney, Vest, Horder. Cul iit.
KoMnson, \oriiian, Holloway, Schultz, Premier,
Ky>m, Burge, Kerwick and Watkins,
From the start Australia dominated
the game, and in the first half Watkins
(2) Vest, Robinson (2), Halloway.
Cubitt (2), Prentice, Horder (2), scored
tries: of which Burge converted four
and Norman 2. At the interval Australia
led by 45 points to nil. The same
state of affairs applied in the second
half, and Horder, Burge, Ryan, Cubitt
(3) Vest, Sweeney, Halloway and Nor-
man scored tries, of which Burge con-
verted nine. They scored 21 tries and
35 goals to a try and goal. Altogether
Burge landed 13 and Cubitt scored
five tries. The Australians left Welling-
ton by the Maheno for Sydney on
October 8.
The Australians demonstrated that the
standard of plav in the Northern Union
game in New Zealand was much inferior
to that of the Rugby Union. The scor-
ing of 235 points to 16 in three matches
against Hawke’s Bay and Wellington
proves that those strongholds of Rugger
are not giving many men of note to
the League. It is, however, clear from
the defeat of Auckland bv 32 to 8, fol-
lowing the defeat of New Zealand by
32 to 2, that the Australians worked
into a very fine combination. As there
was a very fair proportion of the
younger order of players in the party,
the experience on the tour may be found
of great value this season, with the
Englishmen on tour in Australia.
Appreciation of Australians.
Akarana, writing the Editor from
Auckland, paid this compliment to the
Australian team:—
“Aucklanders have now had the -lea-
sure of watching the Australian KugDy
League football team in action, and have
been greatly entertained and edified
thereby. They have clearly demonstrated
their superiority over the local players.
Very little League football has been
played outside Auckland, but here players
have had ample time to develop their
game, and excuses cannot be made on
the ground of inexperience. The plain
truth is that our "lavers have not grasped
the match-winnin" essentials of the game.
The material is good, but the style of
play is below the standard. The ob-
ject lessons, as demonstrated by our
visitors, should show good results next
season. One feature of the Australian
pla- is their speed in attack. The whole
team is prepared to take advantage of
any opening which comes their way.
This is not a new feature in New Zea-
land football, but is a point which bears
repeating. I would say the most strik-
ing feature of Australian play is their
method of opening u-i the game. The
accepted standard here has always been
to run as far as possible through your
onnonents and rely on your supports get-
ting into position to carry on the at-
tack. The Australian method differs,
inasmuch as the opening player does
not necessarily run through his oppo-
nents, but by speedy manceuvring en-
deavors to place his team in a favorable
position for attack. Your inside men
are adepts at this game, and its value
was clearly demonstrated on many oc-
casions when a clever shift left the Aus-
tralians masters of the game, and, bar-
ring accidents, in a position to score.
“The standard of Australian team play
is greatly superior to what it was under
Union rules. The individual players are
very evenly balanced, and with the ex-
ception of Horder it would not be fair
criticism to single out any players. Hor-
der is all that we have been led to ex-
pect, and takes rank as a great player
under any standard, it would be in-
teresting to see him, tried against some
of our old Rugby Union teams, say of the
early nineties. Personally, I think he
would survive the test with credit. He
gets up speed faster than any player I
have seen, and I consider shows as good
pace as George Smith or Frank Sur-
man at their best. In the concluding
game here he played o —*osite our local
flier, G. Davidson, but very little of the
play went to their wing, and one could
not get a line on their chances in a test
of speed. Davidson is very fast, but is
quite young and cannot yet compare with
Horder in football experience. David-
son is an amateur runner. In con-
clusion, I must say that I think Aus-
tralian success is due to the very high
standard of club football as played by
your Sydney clubs. Practice makes per-
fect, and representative football cannot
rise much above the club standard.”


Won.
P.
T.
G.
P.
T.
G.
Sydney
. N.S.W.
33
7
6 .
. IS
4
3
Sydney
. N.S.W.
12
4
0 .
. 7
1
2
Brisbane .
. N.S.W.
24
6
3 .
. 10
2
2
Brisbane .
. N.S.W.
13
3
2
. -10
2
2
New South Wales v. Queensland
In Rugby League, 1919.
A metropolitan team defeated a Brisbane team
at Davies Park. Brisbane, by 31 to S on Peace
Day. C. Fraser (8), F. Burge (3), and C. Tye
scored tries, and C. Fraser 3 goals, and Burge
and P. Boys one each for Sydney. Hull 4 goals
for Brisbane.
The New South Wales v. Queensland
Peace Day (July 21, 1919) match at the
Sydney Cricket Ground—the fourth on
the ground that day—was the centre of
unusual interest, or possibly curiosity,
by the Public, it being evident to a
greater degree, perhaps, than in any other
match in Sydney between the States under
the Rugby League. The Queenslanders,
very hopeful of winning, brought along
the thirteen which had defeated the New
Zealanders in the first match, and which,
it is held, played a finer game than the
thirteen of the second match. It was
one of the fastest contests between the
two States seen in Svdney. It was also
keen and spirited, with many bursts of
attack by the visitors in the second han
—though the quality of the football was
second rate in some directions. The
home team ran un 28 points to S in the
first half, six tries and five goals to
a trv and goal. The score was 20 to nil
after twenty minutes. What was the
reason of it? The home backs were get-
ting a fair share of the ball, and their
combination in attack was much sharpet
than the defence against them, quickly
as the Queenslanders moved about. The
tackling of some of the latter’s backs
was not up to the mark. They went
too high.
But the 30,000 people thoroughly en-
joyed the game, the spirited football of
the visitors after the interval relieving
the game of the earlier suggestion that
it was to be a runaway affair. Neverthe-
less, the home team was far too clever.
New South Wales marched out in dark
blue jerseys breasted with a kangaroo
emblazoned on a broad light blue back-
ground. Queensland wore the red, white
and blue of Mullineux’s British Rugby
Union team and of the Eastern Suburbs,
and looked very neat and trim. These
changes from the States’ orthodox colors
of light blue and maroon are a legacy
from the war, jerseys of the correct
colors being unobtainable. Prior to
starting the game the teams were lined
up on the sloping bicycle track fror
ing the pavilion, and with officials ol
the League and a number of the New
Zealanders in their kiwi-banded straw
hats, a fine photogranh taken, with the
officials in front on the grass, and the
New Zealanders, Queensland and New
South Wales teams in separate lines
behind and up the stoning track, with
a yard or so between each line. Mr.
H. R. Miller has become very keen on
collecting photographs for the League
club rooms, and this historic occasion
was too good an opportunity to be passed
without getting a fitting photographic
souvenir to perpetuate the event. Earlier
in the day the A.I.F. team and the Com-
bined Country also had to pose, so that
the photographers had a ver- busy Peace
Day with footballers. P. Conaghan stood
out of the home team with a '— injured,
and Ray Norman played inside centre
three-quarter in his place. The captains
were A. Halloway and D. Thompson, the
referee T. J. McMahon, and touch judges
C. Hedlev and T. Dickenson.
NEW SOUTH WALES (Navy Blue with
Kangaroo on Light Blue Shield). —L. Wall
(Balmain), full-back ; Harold Horder (South
Sydney), R. Norman (Eastern Suburbs), L.
A. Cubitt (Eastern Suburbs), R. Vest
(Western Suburbs), three-quarters ; A. Blair
(South Sydney), five-eighth; A. Halloway (Bal-
main), half-back; J. Kerwick (S.S.), J. Pye
(G.) A. Oxford (8.5.), W. Schultz (B.), C.
W. Prentice (W.S.), F. Ryan (X.), forwards.
QUEENSLAND (Red. White and Blue).—T.
Sweenev (W.S.), ifull-bacK; N. ißrcadfoot
(Carlton), J. Maguire (W.S.), C. Thoro-
good (Coorparoo), W, Paten (Ipswich),
three-quarters; T. Bath (Carlton) (injured and
replaced by J. ‘McCosh), five-eighth; D. Thomp-
son (Ipswich), half-back; W. Richards (W.S.),
E. McGrath (Valley), M. Johnston (Ipswich), P.
•Moran (Carlton), C. O'Donnell (Carlton), N.
Potter (W.S.), forwards.
The home team kicked off from the
Paddington end, the day being bright and
devoid of wind. The turf looked parched,
but three games had already been played
upon it that day. Within a minute
the home backs were moving goalwards
with the ball. Out on the left wing
Blair gave it to Horder, who dashed
through on the fringe of touch, in one
of his lightning spins for the chalk mark;
but full-back Sweeney brought him down
inside the 25. Penalties against the home
team at once punctuated play.
Seven minutes of fast, merry football,
with the home team predominating, was
ended by first try. The backs had been
making merry but at the 25 the Queens-
land backs had it, only to lose it. Nor-
man got it from them, cut through, ran
Vest into good position, and when the
pass came the new man took it well
and shot through very fast, scoring on
the right wing. Oxford, by a fine kick,
made it S' to nil.
Both sides were making the '•ace warm,
with the Queensland forwards hopping
about in a more business-like way than
usual. Still the home team, with better
lubricated back machinery, were more
dangerous. The forwards worked almost
to the 25, fronting goal. There one of
them slung out a pass from the loose
to Norman, on the left; he moved off


H. R. MILLER, Secretary N.S.W. Rugby League.
on that s|de very smartly and whipped
it to Cubitt, who sent it on to Horder
at the 25, and a very sharp run through
along touch saw the flier score second
try out on the left wing. The move
was too fast for the defence. Another
brilliant kick by Oxford made it 10 to
nil.
Within a few minutes the N.S. Wales
forwards, bv fast footwork, bustled their
way through the Queensland backs, and
nearing goal Prentice picked it up and
went hard for the try, which, though
tackled, he scored alongside the goal-
posts. Oxford a goal—ls to nil. Two
minutes later it was 20 to nil, the backs
executing a choice piece of work at top
speed. Halloway -ot it from the scrum-
mage, well outside the 25, and whipped
it in to Blair, on to Norman, who
burst through and gave it to Cubitt,
who, supported by Horder on the out-
side, swept down the wing, and before
Teaching the 25 sent it out to him. Hor-
der, while at his top, ran to the full-
back, and then whipped it back to Cubitt,
who went on, veering in a trifle, and,
though tackled from behind, scored in
good position for Oxford to goal. Thus
in 22 minutes the home team had scored
20 points, the backs making excellent use
of the few opportunities that came their
way. The- combined with the pace of
the wind.
QUEENSLAND SCORES A PENALTY.
The eighth penalty kick awarded
Queensland produced a goal, Paten land-
ing it from the right wing. This was
followed by their first try. The forwards
had been disposed to play the quics
break-away game characteristic of
Queensland in the old days of the Rugby
Union. Now and then these tactics had
bustled the home backs, and now they
provided an opening. Some quick and
determined work of this nature, in which
the inside backs joined, ended in Thoro-
good breaking through fast and nearing
goal whipping a long pass across to John-
ston, a forward, who took it nicely and
dived over the goal-line on the right
wing, half-way out to the corner. Paten
missed this effort at goal; 20 to 5 and
applause for the visitors.
Potter and Richards were very con-
spicuous in the loose and open for
Queensland, and with a little better judg-
ment in the backing up, things might
have gone more with the visitors. The
fifth try to the home team was got by
Horder after a choice piece of combina-
tion. The forwards gave it to Hallo-
way between half way and the 25, and
the passim? went to the left from Blair
to Norman, to Cubitt, who gave it to
Horder when very close to touch. Hor-
der was able to keep just clear of the
side line and score very wide out. Ox-
ford missed goal, the first time in five
efforts. 23 to 5.


Before the interval the sixth try went
up. Cubitt finished some sharp work by
the inside backs by running it dow
the right wing and sending it on to
Vest, who made a fine run. In the cor-
ner he was tackled, but lost no time in
playing the ball. It was picked up ■
one of his mates, and then short, low
passes in saw it go from Norman to
Cubitt, who flashed over the line, scor-
ing about half-a-dozen yards in from
the corner. Oxford a goal—his fifth in
six shots. 28 to 5.
With a fair share of the ball the home
backs had proved too slippery and cleve;,
though some of the visitors, notably
Paten, showed pace and tackled well.
Thorogood, centre three-quarter, and
Thompson, half-back, as well as full-
back Sweeney also shaped soundly. Six
tries and one goal to one try and one
goal, however, left no room for question
as to which was the better side. Mr.
McMahon did not unduly interfere with
rhythm of play after the first 10 minutes,
though he awarded 11 penalty kicks to
Queensland and four to the home team.
A few minutes before the halt Bath, the
Queensland five-eighth, retired injured,
and McCosh took his place, Thorogood
playing five-eighth.
FAST UP AND DOWN THE FIELD.
The second half provided the loosest
football seen for a few years. The pace
was exceptionally /fast, but the com-
bination in attack suffered severely, and
this, allied with the fact that the referee
let things go where Queensland was * on-
cerned tended to develop a type of gams
not usually seen. It was the fast-as-thc-
wind-sort of Rugbv we used to see in t';e
Country Week of the Rugby Union about
fifteen years ago, with heaps of round-
the-neck tackling, and flashes of swift
passing. Quite earlv Border missed a
try by inches, Cubitt’s delaying of the
pass not giving him time to evade Paten,
who made a good, clean, low tackle.
Sweenev was hurt in this movement on
the goal line.
Fast footwork by tne Queensland for-
wards broke through down the centre.
Inside the 25 it was picked up l.y half-
back Thompson, and some sharp work
saw Thorogood go over hard in the
corner, with Cubitt (who tackled him
with Border) temporarily knocked cut
by striking his head against the comer
post. Richards failed at goal. 28 to S.
This success snurred the visitors on
for they came very fast and executed
their most brilliant movement of the day.
From their own 25 they rushed down
the field, chiefly on the left wing, at their
top, passing finely, the backing up hap-
pier than it had been in any other of
their movements. Paten, Thompson,
McCosh and Thorogood were in it. In
the corner, however, it ended in touch.
They were now getting the ball practi-
cally every time a scrummage was
formed, whether it went into the scrum-
mage or not, and the home team were
again being penalised freely. Once the
referee put the whistle to hxs mouth and
halted as a Queenslander made a palp-
able off-side breach, but he let it go,,
and some very swift passing and run-
ning with Richards, Potter and Thomp-
son in it ended only on the fringe of the
goal-line.
The Queensland three-quarters had
the ball passing at half-way, after get-
ting it from their scrummagers. The
passes went to the left, but between
Maguire and Broadfoot they lost it,
and Cubitt. fielding it, fiddled through,
supported bv Vest. But he had evidently-
determined to try for one on his own.
The Queenslanders converged toward the
wing, and Cubitt side-stepped inside
three of them one after the other as
they were coming over, and then scored
at the goal-post. Oxford a goal. 33
to 8.
From this point to the close the game
was in favor of Queensland. The pack
time after time heeled it or got it to
Thompson, and if the backs had been
as sharp as\ the home men tnev must
have waltzed in with tries. Queens-
land were playing with the buoyancy
of expectant victors in the face of cer-
tain defeat. The home backs had the
ball on the defensive side of half-way
but Horder slung it into space. Thoro-
good getting it, sped fast for goal in
a few yards from touch on the right
wing. Here Thompson, McCosh and Pot-
ter helped it on and over the line for
Potter to score the try, which Paten
converted. 33 to 13.
The last try was scored by Queens-
land. It had a droll but clever and
unexpected start by scrum-half Thomp-
son. A scrummage was formed outside
the home 25 on the Queensland right
w : ng. Thompson, on the blind side,
“put it in"—but it did not go in, though
the law says it must. He at once
fielded it—was that not off-side, Mr.
McMahon? —and ran round behind his
pack as though intent on sending it on
to Thorogood, on the open side. But
he stopped dead, hesitated as though per-
plexed, and suddenly wheeled round and
sped along on the blind side, from wh'
the round-the-pack defence had gone.
He sprinted down there and passed it
in to Potter, who had broken away from
the scrummage and supported him with
fine judgment. Potter ran in to score a
most astutelv engineered try. Paten
failed at goal. 33 to 18.
The home team had the best of fo-
rest of the game, and went close to
scoring more than once. In one of these
efforts Horder crossed the line, but was
recalled, Oxford, who had passed in to
him, having been forced on to the
touch-line by Richards' tackle. Horder
was down later close to the goal-line.


and, having his collarbone fractured,
had to leave the field just before the
finish.
In this half Queensland scored 13
points to 5, and took the honors in play,
such as they were.
Queensland possesses a number of very
lively players in this team, and a few
who ought to go far in Rugby. The
scrum-half, Thompson, was admirable all-
round, and Paten, the right wing three-
quarter, is a good ’un. He is very fast,
and a much sounder tackier than most
of the other three-quarters who figured
in this match. Though Thorogood
played ably, the inside backs, as a body,
were disappointing in attack, consider-
ing the opportunities they had. The
home men lined up to them, and they
might have employed the short punt and
follow-up more to break through where
passing failed so often.
It is very difficult to judge the Queens-
land pack of scrummagers. When losing
the ball in the first half they broke
quickly, and some of them did not
bother about the off-side law» In the
second half they got the ball, and the
side was much the more aggressive for
that. Now, in Rugby, it is the rule
for the aggressive side to be penalised
oftenest. And ”et in this game Mr. Mc-
Mahon saw things thus; Eleven penalty
kicks in each snell to '"'■eensland, or
22 in all; and four in the first and three
in the second to N.S.W., or 22 to 7.
The referee, as a matter of fact—and
touch-judges C. Hedley and T. Dicken-
son also—were too lenient. C. O’Po-’-
nell, the Queensland hooker, is a Syd-
ney man, and the home team know all
about his methods and merits, but the
fact remains that they rarely saw the
ball or felt it when skirmishing for it
with their feet in the scrummage. The
Queensland men may never again get
such a feast of the ball.
The Queensland team, through their
manager, Mr. H. Sunderland, expressed
a desire to - N.S.W. a second match,
under an impression that they did not
show their real form in the first half,
owing to nervousness in the backs. It
was arranged for them, but they had to
wait over the week for it.
N.S.W. RUGBY LEAGUE PEACE DAY
CARNIVAL (JULY 21, 1919).
(League’s share of the gate given to the
Patriotic Fund.)
President’s Cup semi-finals (between combined
team- of the different Juion Unions) commenced
at 11.30 a.m. Newtown defeated Annandale
]-, 1 li. For the former Heath and Austin scored
tries, and Hutchison kicked three goal-. For
Annandale, Littlejohn scored two tries, and
AVardley kicked two goals. We-tern District de-
feated South Sydney 7-5, For former, Bunyan
scored a try and Taylor kicked two goals. For
South Sydney, Gerrard scored a try and King
kicked a field goal.
A.I.F. DEFEATED COMBINED COUNTRY.
In this match the soldiers showed
the better combination, as might be ex-
pected, seeing that they are principally
Sydney players. They won bv 18 points
(two tries by Upham and one each by
Watkins and Easterbrook, and three
goals by A. Bolewski) to (try by Brien,
converted by Field). Referee, L.
O’Malley.
A.I.F.—L, Shelly (S.S.), full-back; P. Upham
(A.), V. Farnsworth (X.), R. Farnsworth (W.S.).
anil H. (Maunder (N.S.), three-quarters; A.
Bolewski (G P ), five-eighth; P. Regan (G.), half-
hack; T, Quinn (Newcastle), W. F.asteibrook
OT.H,), .1. Redmond (W.S.), H. Hancock (N.S.),
E. E. Brookes (X.), and •/. Watkins (c.), for-
wards,
COUNTRY.—Bert Wilson (Goulburn), full-
back; J. Fields (Gerringongt, E. Brien (New-
castle), C. Plowman (Orange), and C. Scott
(Tanrworth). three-quarters; E, Evans (Orange),
five-eighth; W. Yates (Tamworth), halt-back;
C. T. Minnett (Kiama), H. Williams, J. Quinn
(Newcastle), K, Reed (Orange), B. Robin-on
(Tamworth), A. Baber (Newcastle), forwards.
In the fourth match of the da-> N.S,
Wales defeated Queensland bv 33 to 18.
SECOND QUEENSLAND MATCH.
Second match: At the Sydney Cricket
Ground, Monday, July 28, 1919. N.S.Vv.
won by 12 (4 tries) to 7 (1 try and 2
penalty goals).
The enthusiasm of the Queensland
team and their ardent manager, Mr. H.
Sunderland, merited a better reward than
to have the fine weather break on Sun-
day night. Monday morning still found
rain pouring, and it rained all day. Nine
days’ wait in Sydney for this was not
bracing. The Queenslanders had worked
themselves into splendid fettle for this
return match, for which they had speci-
ally asked, with a view to further demon-
strating that they were vastly improved
and that several of their players were
worthy of selection in the Australian
combination to tour New Zealand. If
the day had been fine probably eight or
ten thousand people would have turned
out, and the game would have been
the finest ever seen oetween the League
forces of the two States. The demnition
damp notwithstanding, four thousand
people did attend—a fine attestation of
nublir enthusiasm on such a day with
H. Horder and L. A. Cubitt and other
spectacular performers like P. Conaghan
and A. Blair not in the Blue. This time
the home team strutted about in the
favorite old blue jerseys, and looked the
part better in them than they had a
week earlier in the navy blue.
In a fine contest, spirited throughout
on a very sloppy ground, with slimy mud
on the wickets, the Queenslanders with
the wind led by two penalty goals to
nil in the first half. Changing ends the
home team put on four tries, and then
Queensland added their first. The visi-
tors were thus beaten by 12 to 7 by a
team better seasoned and equipped for
the conditions, in a game which -ilea >' d


everyone, and again stamped the men
from the North as the best combination
we have seen in the Rugby League colors
of their State.
NEW SOUTH WALES (Light Blue).— L, Wall
(Balmain), full-back; R. Vest (West. Suburbs),
Ray Nonnan ('Eastern Suburbs), H. Gilbert
(Western Suburbs), J. Robinson (Balmain),
three-quarters; C. Fraser (’Balmain), flre-
cighth; A. Halloway (c.) (Balmain), half-back;
F. Ryan (Newtown), C. Prentice (Western
Suburbs), W. Schultz (Balmain), A. Oxford!
(South Sydney), F. Burge (Glebe), J. Watkins
(Eastern Suburbs), forwards.
QUEENSLAND (Red, White and Blue).—T.
Sweeney, full-back; W. Paten. J. McCosh, J.
Maguire, N. Broadfoot (retired hurt and replaced
by (Beavis), three-quarters; C. Thorogood, ftve-
cighth; D. Thompson (c.), half-back; W.
Richards, E. McGrath, N. Johnson, P. Moran, C.
O'Donnell and N. Potter, forwards.
Referee, T. MoMahon.
With ball still dr - and light, Thoro-
gqod kicked a great goal from the right
wing at halfway, the breeze helping it on.
Nothing to compare with it was done
in the rest of the game. The visitors
were freely penalised for breaches, but
this was inevitable after their second
half experiences of the first match. Then
the referee gave them too much latitude,
and some had to be pulled back to a
reasonable recognition of essential rules
of pla«. It might have been hard on
them, seeing that so much off-side rojml
the scrummage and other breaches had
been allowed to oass unchecked a 'reek
before. However both sides were kept
close to the laws, and penalties were very
numerous throughout this half, 11 beii.g
awarded to Queensland and 12 to ‘the
home team.
New South Wales had sliehtlv the best
of the actual play, but failed to score,
the nearest to a try being when Ryan,
finishing a breezv movement by the
backs, supplemented by the forwards
down the left wing, was diving over
the line with the ball, when it was
knocked from his hands and an opponent
forced down. Thomason landed a capi-
tal goal from a penaltv. and Queens-
land’s 4 to nil was the score at the
interval. The visitors made very effec-
tive use of the breeze for gaining
ground. Time after time, when the home
team worked toward the 25, they put a
hefty foot to the ball and sent it right
back to Wall, or bevond him. But thev
were a trifle deficient in tactics, for
the kicks were far too hard to allow
of their own men following up, and it
meant losing possession of the ball. O*’
such a day the high, shorter kick must
have paid better, for the Oueenslard
backs were the faster lot in this match.
Rain poured heavilv during the inter-
val, and the ground became worse than
ever in the centre, with the ball a"d
going very heavy. The home team s-ior.
started to put on the pressure, 'hough
Queensland was showing team v >rk
superior to anything we had ever 3 'fere
seen from them. Thompson, behind the
pack, was excelling himself, ind the
scrummagers were getting the ball more
regularly than in the first half. Thej-
needed possession now for the h 'me
team, with the breeze, were always dan-
gerous.
The first trv came from a half-way be-
ginning. There Halloway passed out to
the right to Fraser, who ru-hed across
the centre almost at right angles to
touch along the mud patch, and, by
long pass out to wing three-quarter
Robinson, cut out his centre,'. Robinson
took it well, and after making some
ground, punted high beyond his man.
Following smartly he fielded the Pounc-
ing ball and dashed ahead, supported on
the inside by Gilbert, to whom he trans-
ferred at the 25. Gilbert carried it on
and sent another pass in to Norman,
who dashed on and scored in a splendid
position about ten minutes from the
start. Fraser missed a very easy shot at
goal. Queensland, 4 to 3.
Both sides missed penalty kicks at
goal, Oxford from in front at the 7i,
almost a certainty for him on a dry day.
Keeping up the pressure the home pack
had Queensland cornered in the left
angle. Here the ball came out from the
scrummagers on the short side, and
Vest, fielding it went hard for the *.y
in the corner. Paten faced him squarely
there, and bent for the tackle, but Vest
pushed right over the top of him,
and coming down in-goal, scored a first-
class try. No goal. N.S.W., 6 to 4.
Some little time later Hallowav varied
the pass out to eraser, who was not
handling the ball here very soundly. The
half cut through round the open side of
the pack and with Watkins helpin''- him
along, he went over the line to score
third try, which really seemed to be as
much due to Watkins as to the skipper.
Wall failed at goal. 9 to 4. Wall, tak-
ing a punt out from inside the 25.
kicked high down the, right wing, and
following up, tackled Sweeney a few
yards from the corner. The ball went
over the goal-line, and Wall, hopping
after it. scored fourth try —an unusual
performance for a full-back. It only
shows the unenterprising among full-
backs what is possible by quick-footed
following after judicious high punting.
The Queenslanders showed their be;t
form of this spell after this rebuff. Now
getting the ball regularly from the pack,
Thompson was making ground, fre-
quently by grubber-kicking through the
home backs on the open side. He also
did well when working along the blind
side, and in these moves demonstrated
that he is a player of splendid parts,
exceedingly versatile. However, these
penetrative moves brought no tries, the
supports not getting to the ball. He
had found Fraser, now and then, dis-
posed to hold off his man. So coming
round the packed forwards with the hall


The successful Queensland Rugby League Team which twice defeated New Zealand in 1919.


on the open side, and finding the xor-
wards not getting to him, he moved to-
ward Fraser, the five-eighth, and that
nimble young man sheered off to watch
the Queensland five-eighth. Thompson
carefully cut through straight, and was
off like a shot, and when pressed further
on kicked the ball. W-ll fumbled it on
the ground, and in a twinkling the quick-
moving stripes had kicked on and over
the goal line. In the swift rush for it,
MeCosh scored at the goal post. But
Thompson failed at goal from straight in
front. 12 to 7. Though Queensland
spurted now, the home team was play-
ing very solidly and were aggressive
when the finish came.
The New South Wales forwards were
solid rather than brilliant. Their scrum-
maging was nothing out of the common,
hooking successfully only in spasms, but
their tackling was clean and sound.
Their footwork on the heavy ground
was not as good as it ought to have
been. The backs showed better com-
bination than their opponents, especially
in the three-quarter line.
Queensland was superior at scrum-half
on the whole, for there is no question
that Thompson stood out among their
backs, showing excellent form all round;
he allied with -uick thinking niopiness
not often associated with the man who
works the scrum. He is the best scrum-
half I have seen in the Queensland colors
for over 20 years. Their pack was also
more proficient in getting possession of
the ball and in quick heeling. A fine
game for such a day was the general
verdict, with defence of the home team
admirable.
N.S. Wales Team in Queensland.
The team that visited Queensland
after the City Cup final was:
K, P, Rigney (Newtown), C. Ogle (Glebe). G.
Potter (Balmain), V. Sheehan (South Sydney),
Paul Boys (Xewtown), C. Border (South Sydney),
H. C'aplcs (Eastern Suburbs), E. Taplin (North
Sydney), A. Blair (South Sydney), G. Robinson
(Balmain), S. Kaufman (Eastern Suburbs), C.
Tye (Western Suburbs), H, Watt (Balmain), ill.
Linklater (Eastern Suburbs), A. Fraser (Balmain),
.1. Pyc (Glebe), B. Gray (Glebe), W. Joass
(Western Suburbs), A. Faull (Xorth Sydney), R.
Farncll (Eastern Suburbs).
NEW SOUTH WALES WINS BY 24 TO 10.
At Davies Park, Brisbane, September -9, 1910,
0000 present.
XF.W SOI'TH WALKS.—K. P. Ripnev. full-
back; C. Ogle. V. Border (e), 11. Caples, G.
Potter, three-quarters; A, Blair, five-eighth;
S. Kaufman, half-back; B, Gray, W. Joass, A,
Fraser, J. Pye, 11, Watt, C. Tye, forwards.
QrFFXSLAXD (Yellow and Black).—J.
.Sweeney, full-back; X, Broadfoot, J. Bolborrow,
R. Silver, J, Gordon, three-quarters; D. Thomp-
son (c). five-eighth; -31. Flanagan, halfback; J.
Stevens, L, Woods, P. Moran, Stanley, 11.
Jacques, E. McGrath, forward*.
The Sydney men led at half-time by
8 to 7. Tries were scored by C. Her-
der (3), C. Ogle, A. Blair, G. Potter;
and goals by Horder (2) and Ogle.
Stevens and Holborrow scored tries and
Holborrow two for Queensland.
Flanagan, the Queensland scrum-half
(the A.I.F. Rugby Union olayer) re-
tired injured in the second half. The
visiting pack, for whom Watt, of Bal-
main, hooked, the backs a good
share of the ball, and the backs were
very lively, showing fine combination at
good speed, with C. Horder. Blair, Potter
and Ogle in admirable form, and Kauf-
man behind the nack feeding them ably.
Queensland missed C. O’Donnell, as
hooker, and the incessant following-up
Potter, the break-away forward.
N.S.W. WINS BY 13 TO 10.
The last of the Interstate Rugby
League matches for the season, played at
the Exhibition Grounds, Brisbane, on
October 4, 1919, was won by N.S. Wales
13 to 10. At half-time Queensland led
10 to nil. Bennett scored two tries and
Hull two goals for Queensland; Shee-
han scored two tries and C. Horder one
and two goals.
NEW SOI'TH WALES.—E, Taplin, full-back;
V. Sheehan, A'. Honler, G. Potter, P. Bo\>,
three-quarters; S. Blair, five-eighth; G. Robinson,
half-back; A. Gray, J. Pye, IV. Joass, A. Fanil,
H. Watt, R, Farnell, forwards,
QUEENSLAND.—HuII, full-back; Broadfoot,
Bennett. Holborrow, Gordon, three-quarters: Mo
Brian, five-eighth; Thompson, half-hack; fMoran,
Sigley. Stevens, McGrath, Stanley, Barnes, for-
wards.
The Sydney combination played three
matches in Queensland, winning all. They
finished their programme at Armidale on
the Wednesday on their way back, when
they won by SI to 11, the game being
controlled by Mr. John Quinlan. The
impression by the Sydney men was that
Queensland Rugger has at last made
distinct improvement. In the last match
the New South Wales team was noth-
ing like the best that could have been
fielded, seven men who had never won
their caps being apparently given places
to allow of their getting the honor. It
meant weakening the side, and it is fext
that on the actual play Queensland haa
a good grip of the game leading, as
they did, by 10 points at one stage, and
should not have lost. But they lost
their heads, and helped the visitors to
turn the tables.
Among the Queenslanders who showed
best form was E. Stanley, a big forward,
a hard scrummager, fast, and a good
tackier; he is considered to possess great
possibilities. N. Broadfoot, wing three-
quarter, also showed excellent form.
For New South Wales G. Potter, the
Balmain three-quarter, was brilliant all-
round on the wing. V. Sheehan was


3 90S —Svtl.,
X.S.W.
42*0
3912— Sycl.,
X.S.AV
05-9
♦ . ,,
37-8
yy yy
32-4
»» ,,
12*3
3912—liris.,
ff
27-12
1930—Bj is.,
40*21
yy yy
21-17
32*38
3915—Syd.,
53-9
„ tf
19-3
yy >»
,
39-6
3931—6yd.,
M
35-9
1919— „
33-19
»» »»
49-0
yy yy
12-7
„ ,,
„
32*8
Seventeen
matches: all won bv
Xcw
South
Walce.
GOLF SHIRTS
We have a large selection of Golf
Shirts to select from. Made of
Cambric, Zephyr, and Tabalco
Cloths. All made with the rein-
forced neckpiece and in all sizes.
With or without collar to match.
• The prices range as follows:
9/6, 10/6, 11/6
12/6, 14/6, 16/6
FLANNELETTE PYJAMAS
Our own special make from good
serviceable materials, in numerous
patterns. Sizes: Men’s and
O.S. Men’s
Price 14/6
SOCKS
AH Wool, Knitted, 2-Ply Half-
Hose. Colors: black, navy and
grey. The sizes are 10", 10J", 11".
These are extra good value
Priced 3/11
All sizes
Black CASHMERE HALF-HOSE
5/6, 5/11, 6/6, 6/11
AH Sizes
Tan CASHMERE HALF-HOSE
Price 5/11, 6/11
Large Variety of Men’s and Boy’s
COAT SWEATERS
V Front and also Austral Collars.
Colors : grey and navy
The prices are :
Men’s, 18/6, 21/-, 25/-
Boy’s, 11/6, 12/6, 14/6
BALL & WELCH
George Street
SYDNEY
(The House for Reliable Goods at a
Moderate Price)
very good, but C. Ogle, on the wing,
showed no cleverness of the nature mark-
ing Potter’s football. Bert Gray was
the star forward, with Fraser, of Bal-
main, revealing fine abilities. Pye was
also a splendid forward. Among the
others, veteran W. Joass was a wonder
in tackling. Rigney’s full-back play in
the first State match and at Armidale was
a treat. Caples, as centre three-quarter,
was excellent, superior in the combina-
tion work to C. Horder, and better than
he had been for the Eastern Suburbs
Club. Faull, the young North Sydney
forward, played finely in the second
State match, and G. Robinson and
Kaufman, as halves, were good. “Alto-
gether,” reported my informant, “the
form shown on this tour by the younger
men, taken in conjunction with that in
New Zealand, makes me much more
sanguine as to the possibilities of New
South Wales against England than 1
was a few months back.”
NEW SOUTH WALES v. QUEENSLAND.
Newcastle Team in Queensland.
Though there was a division of forces
in Newcastle and two Rugby League
bodies flourished as rivals, a Newcastle
team in Queensland played three matches,
winning all and scoring 73 points to 15.
They reported a fine time. In the
match with the Valley Club at Brisbane,
the score was 10 to 5 in favor of the
home time at one time, but the visitors
finished winners 12 to 10. Sports Ob-
server thereupon remarked that “the
crowd at this stage ran on the field, and
it was impossible to view the game from
the Press table.” Crowds right through
Australia became a bit ugly in the last
few weeks of the 1919 season.
Considering that the Rugby League
forces were divided into two distinct and
rival bodies in 1919, these performances
by the representatives of one of these
bodies were very good. This year har-
mony again prevails, the rivals having
united, and as the suspension of D.
Davis, over which the cleavage occurred,
has been lifted by the N.S. Wales
League, the Northern Districts promise
to put into the field a team to compare
with its best of any earlier period. The
district —Newcastle and Maitland —has
produced many striking Rugby players,
some having made big reputations in
representative football.


New South Wales Rugby League
Premiership, 1919.
FIRST ROUND—MAY 10, 1919.
Western Suburbs defeated South Sydney by 25
(7-2) to 9 (1-3) at Agricultural Ground ; 25.000
present. Half-time scores : W.S. 13, S.S. 4. -For
West Joass, McPherson, Burns (2). Collins. Red-
mond and McGowan scored tries, ami McPherson
kicked two goals. For South Sheehan a try and
Oxford three goals. T. McMahon, referee.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins, P. Burns, R. Vest, H. Gilbert, three-
quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; G. Mc-
Gowan. half-back ; C. Tye, W. Joass, C. W. Pren-
tice. W. Easterbrook, E. Courtney (retired in-
jured and replaced by J. Rcidy, who was sent
off in the second half), and J. Redmond, for-
wards.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, fu!l-biv*V ■ Y.
Sheehan, W. Rowley, C. H order. H. Horder,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Ander-
son. half-back ; W. Groves. P. Horne, A. Oxford,
J. Davis, H. Holmes, J. Kerwick, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Newtown by 19 (5-2)
to 3 (1-0) at Sydney Cricket Ground : 2500 pre-
sent. At half-time Eastern Suburbs led 6-3. For
the winners Cubitt (3), Wright and Lees scored
tries ; W. Messenger converted one ami kicked a
penalty goal. A. Farrow, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back :
W. Messenger, L. Cubitt. Ray Norman fc.), G.
Wright, three-quarters ; H. Caples five-eighth :
S. Kaufman, half-back ; R. Linklater, C. Lees.
A. Bawden, R. Farnell, R. Batchelor. J. Duffy,
forwards.
NEWTOWN.— E. P. Rignoy. full-back ; Paul
Boys, G. Bain, R. Cockburn, W. Cockhurn.
three-quarters ; F. Seymour, five-eighth ; A.
Johnston, half-back ; G. H. Ciamhaek. E.
Franks, R. Townsend, F. Ryan, H. Deeble, W.
Palmer, forwards.
Balmain defeated North Sydney by 20 (4-4) to
6 (0-3) at Birchgrove; 4000 present. T. DicKen-
son, referee. At half-time Balmain led 15-2.
For winners Halloway (2), J. Robinson and
Schultz scored tries ; Miller (3) and C. Fraser
kicked goals. For the losers Ward kicked three
penalty goals.
BALMAIN. —L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. .Fraser, G. Potter, three-quarters:
G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway (rapt.),
half-back ; A. Fraser, W. Schultz, R. Miller. H.
Matts, N. Russell, R. Latta, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—H. Waterhouse, full-back ;
H. Peters, O. Sherrett. E. Taplin, G. Sparkman,
three-quarters ; R. Ide, five-eighth ; J. King,
half-back : R. Dunworth, T. Jones, J. Faull, G.
Steen (capt.). W. Gourlay, J. 'Ward, forward-
Glebe defeated Annandule by 2d (5-5) to 7
(1-2) at Wentworth Park ; 2000 present. At half-
time Glebe led by 21-3. For winners Ogle (2).
Leggo (penalty). Scannell and Gray scored tries,
and A. B. Burge (3), L. Burge and Quigley
kicked goals ; tor losers Eves scored a try and
Hughes kicked two penalty goals, h. O'Malley,
referee.
ANNANDALE-—E. Griffith. full-back ; S.
Hughes, W. Geoghegan, P. Upham, J. Bain,
three-quarters ; P. MeGuinness, five-eighth ; E.
Usher, half-back ; G. Eves, O. Shirley, S. Perry.
T. Dasrg, E. Burdett, W. Haddock, forwards.
GLEBE. -N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Leggo. M.
Seanncll, D. Brolly. C. Ogle, three-quarters ; G.
Reynolds, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back ; A.
Gray. A. B. Burge. L. Burge, E. Swinson, J.
Knight. S. Quigley, forwards.


All Sports
are catered for by
Grace Bros.
Sports Dept.
Justas your mothers, wives,
sisters or sweethearts know
Grace Bros, as the “Right”
Shop to get the “Right”
Goods at the “Right ”
Prices, so you should get
acquainted with our Sports
Department on the Second
Floor, Broadway Building,
Here you will find every
requirement needed in the
Sporting World.
We carry one of the finest
stocks in Sydney and
you’ll find the prices just
a little below those charged
elsewhere.
The next time you require
sporting goods of any
description
Try GRACE BROS.
Sports Department
Second Floor, Broadway
Building
Grace Bros. Ltd.
Broadway, Sydney
“Sure to get it at Grace Bros."
SECOND GRADE.—GIebe defeated Annandale
19 to 5, Western Suburbs defeated South Sydney
14 to 3, Eastern Suburbs defeated Newtown 9 to
nil, North Sydney defeated Balmain 8 to nil.
THIRD GRADE.—Sydney defeated Randwick 11
to 3, Redfern United defeated Western Suburbs
16 to 2, Mascot defeated West Sydney 20 to 7,
■Glebe defeated Lidcombc 26 to nil, Balmain de-
feated Marric-kviile 28 to S, South Sydney de-
feated Newtown 14 to 2, Alexandria defeated
Eastern Suburbs 7 to 3.
SECOND ROUND—MAY 17(Very Wet).
Balmain defeated Western Suburbs 15 (3*3) to
2 (0-2) at Sydney Cricket Ground before about
10,000 sjjectatm-s, At half-time Balmain led 5-2.
For Balmain G. Robinson and J. Robinson scored
tries, P. Conaghan n penalty try, and Miller
(3) and Wall kicked goals. For West, McPher-
son a goal. T, J. McMahon, referee.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
C. Fraser, P. Conaghan, G. Potrer, three-quar-
ters ; (i. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway (c.),
half-back ; R. Miller, H. Watts, W. Schultz, M.
Russell, A. Fraser, R. Latta, forwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Matthews, P. Burns, H. Gilbert (c.), R. Vest,
three-quarters; A. McPherson, five-eighth; G.
McGowan, half-back ; C. Tyt*, W. Joass, C. Pren-
tice, W. Easterbrook, E. Courtney, P. A. Mc-
Cue, forwards.
Glebe defeated Eastern Suburbs by 13 (3-2) to
10 (2-2) at the Agricultural Ground ; 4000 pre-
sent. At half-time East led by 8-3. For the
winners Swinson, Leggo and L. Burge scored
tries, and Bolewski kicked two goals. For the
losers Cubitt scored two tries, and W. Messenger
kicked two goals. T. Dickenson, referee.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; A. Bolewski,
T. Leggo, M. Scannell (retired injured and re-
placed by P. Regan), C. Ogle, three-quarters ;
W, Reynolds, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back;
A. Bnrge, A. Knight, E. Swinson, F. Burge, L.
Burge, J. Pye, forwards.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R Adams, full-back ;
W Messenger, R. Norman, L. Cubitt, G, Wright,
three-quarters ; H. Caples, five-eighth ; S, Kauf-
man, half-back ; R. Batchelor, J. Bawdon, B.
Linklater, J. Duffy, K. Famell, C. Lees, for-
wards.
South Sydney and Annandale drew 8 points
(2-1) to 8 points (2-1) at Wentworth Park; 500
present. At half-time South Sydney led by 5
to 3. For South Sydney Blair and H. Horder
scored tries, and H. Border kicked a goal. For
Annandale Usher and Upham scored tries, and
Usher kicked a goal. A. Farrow, referee.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, full-back ; C.
Blinkhorn, Rex Norman, C. Border, H. Horder,
three-quarters ; V. Sheehan, ftve-eighth; A. Blair,
half-back ; J. Kerwick, H. Holmes, J. Baker, W.
•Groves, G. Moore, P. Horne, forwards.
ANNANDALE—E. Griffiths. full-back ; S.
Hughes, W. Geoghegan, P. Upham, J. Bain,
three-quarters ; S. Parker, five-eighth; E. Usher,
half-back ; O. Eves, S. Perry (replaced by J.
Wooll), G. Jolly, E Burdctt, W. Haddock, T.
Dagg, forwards,
Newtown defeated North Sydney by 5 (1-1) to
•2 (0-1) at North Sydney ; 1500 present. New-
town led by 5 to nil at half-time. For New-
town Bain scored a try. Boys converted; for
North Ward kicked a penalty goal. L. O’Malley,
referee.
NEWTOWN,—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; P.
Boys, R. Cockburn, G. Brown, W. Cockburn,
three-quarters ; G. Bain, five-eighth ; A. John-
ston, half-back ; E. E. Brooks, W. Palmer, F.


Ryan, R. Town-end, E. Franks, G. H. Clam*
back, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY —H. Waterhouse, full-hack ;
H. Peters, E. Taplin, C. Sherrelt. W. Johnson,
three-quarters ; B. Denham, five-eighth ; J.
King, half-back ; Fault, G. Green, T. Jones, W.
Gourlay, J r Ward, Greenwood, forwards.
SECOND GRADE.—Western Suburb* defeated
Balmain 4 to nil. Glebe defeated Eastern Suburbs
8 to 5, South Sydney defeated Annandale 2 to
nil, Newtown drew with North Sydney 2 all.
THIRD GRADE.— Redfern United defeated
Randwiek 35 to nil, Balmain defeated Eastern
Suburbs 7 to nil. South Sydney drew with Alexan-
dria 2 all. Glebe defeated Mascot 2 to nil, Mar-
rickville defeated Western Suburbs 18 to 2, Syd-
ney defeated West Sydney 6 to nil, Lidcombe de-
feated Newtown 8 to 2.
THIRD ROUND—MAY 24, 1919.
South Sydney defeated Glebe by 18 (2-6) to
14 (2-4) at the Agricultural Ground ; 16,000
present. Half-time scores, S. Sydney 7, Glebe 5.
For South H. Horder and Blair scored tries,
Oxford 5 goals and Hallett 1 ; for Glebe Brolly
and Leggo tries, Bolewski 3 goals and A. B.
Burge 1 goal. T, McMahon, referee.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett (c.), full-back ;
W. Sheehan, Rex Norman, C. Horder H. Horder,
three-quarters'; A. Blair, fi»e-eighth ; E. Ander-
son, half-back ; W. Groves, G. Moore, A. Oxford,
H, Holmes, J. Baker, J. Kenvick, forwards.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; T, Leggo, G.
Reynolds, D. Brolly, C. Thompson, three-quar-
ters ; A. Bolewski, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-
back; E. Swinson, F. Burge, A, Knight, L.
Burge, A. B, Burge, J. Pye, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated North Sydney by 23
(5-4) to 5 (1-1) at North Sydney Oval ; *2500
pre-ent. At half-time Eastern Suburbs led by
10 to nil. For East Wright (2), Messenger, Far-
nell ami Larkin scored tries, and Messenger con-
verted 3 and kicked a penalty goal ; for North
Sydney Ward scored a try and converted it.
W. Neill, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back ;
W. Messenger, J. Larkin, R. Norman, G. Wright,
three-quarters ; H. Caples and S. Kaufman, half-
backs ; R. Linklater, J. Duffy, C. Lees, R. Far-
neil, H. Bawden, S. King, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back ; H.
Peters, Sid Deane, O. Deane, H. Waterhouse,
three-quarters ; C. Sherrett and J. King, half-
backs ; A. Faull. G. Green, T. Jones, J. Green-
wood, J. Ward, W. Gourlay, forwards,
Balmain defeated Annandale by 37 points (9-5)
to 2 (0-1) at Birchgrove Oval ; *2OOO present. At
half-time Balmain led by 19 to 2. For winners
C. Fraser (3). G. Potter (2), Halloway, A.
Fraser, J. Robinson and Latta scored tries ; G.
Robinson (3) ami C. Fraser (2) kicked goals.
For Annandale Usher kicked a penalty goal. T.
Dickenson, referee.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back; J. Robinson,
C. Fraser, P. Conaghan, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters; G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway
(capt.), half-back ; R, Latta, M. Russell, A.
Fraser, R. Miller, H. Watts, W. Schultz, for-
wards.
ANNANDALE.—E. Griffith;*, full-back ; S.
Hughes, W. Geoghegan (capt.), P. ITpham, J.
Bain, three-quarters ; S. Parker, five-eighth ; E.
Usher, half-back; G. Eves, G. Jolly, J. Woolley,
K Burdett, W. Haddock, T. Dagg, forwards.
Western Suburb* defeated Newtown by 11 (1-4)
to 6 (0-3) at Sydney Cricket Ground 2400 pre-
sent. At half-time 4 all. For the winners Vest
a try, McPherson 4 penalty goals; for losers P.
Boys 3 penalty goals. A, Farrow, referee.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. While, full-back ;
W. Matthews, P. Burns, H. Gilbert (capt.), R.
Vest, three-quarters ; A. 'McPherson, five-eighth;
G. McGowan, half-back ; C. Tye, W. Joa», C.
W. Prentice, W. Easterbrook, E. Courtney, W.
Lucas, forwards.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; Paul
Boys, R, Coekburn, G. Bain, W. Cockburn (re-
tired injured and replaced by Roger*), three-
quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. John-
ston (capt.), half-back ; E. E. Brooks, F. Ryan,
E. Franks, W. Palmer, R. Townsend, G. H.
Cla mback, forwards.
PREMIERSHIP POlNTS.—Balmain G, Glebe 4.
Eastern Suburbs 4. Western Suburbs 4. South
Sydney 3, Newtown 2, Annandale 1, North Syd-
ney 0.
SECOND GRADE.—North Sydney defeated E.S.
2 to nil, Balmain defeated Annandale 10 to nil.
Western Suburbs defeated Newtown 7 to nil.
Glebe defeated South Sydney 12 to 5. Positions
of Clubs : Glebe and Western Suburbs 6, N.S.
5, E.S., S.S. and Balmain 2, Newtown 1, and
Annandale 0.
THIRD GRADE.—South Sydney defeated Eastern
Suburbs 16 to 2, Glebe drew with Sydney 3 all.
Redfern United defeated West Sydney by 24 to
nil, Balmain defeated Western Suburbs by 29 to
nil, Mascot defeated Newtown by 5 to nil, Lid-
combe played a draw with Alexandria 8 all,
Marrickville defeated Randwick by 29 to nil.
Positions : Redfern L'nited and Balmain 6, Syd-
ney, Glebe, and South Sydney 5. Mascot, Mar-
rickville and Alexandria 4, Lidcombe 3, Eastern
Suburbs, West Sydney, Western Suburbs, Rand-
wick and Newtown 0.
FOURTH ROUND—MAY 30, 1919.
Balmain defeated South Sydney by 24 (6-3) to
8 (2-1) at Sydney Cricket Ground ; 25,000 pre-
sent, Half-time scores : Balmain 13 to 5. For
Balmain G. Robinson, Potter, Halloway, C.
Fraser, Latta and Conaghan scored tries, of
which Miller (2) ami Fraser (1) converted three.
For South Sheehan and H. Horder scored tries,
Oxford converting the former’s. T. McMahon,
referee.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters ; G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway,
half-back ; K. Miller. W. Schultz, A. Fraser, H.
Watts, M. Russell, R. Latta, forwards.
SOUTH SYDNEY'.—H. Hallett, full-back ; V.
Sheehan, C. Horder, Rex Norman, H. Harder,
three-quarters; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Ander-
son, half-back ; W. Groves, A. Oxford. J. Baker,
G. Moore, H. Holmes, J. Kerwick, forwards.
Glebe defeated North Sydney by 16 (4-2) to 8
(2-1) at North Sydney Oval ; 2000 present. At
half-time Glebe led by 13 to 2. For winners
Brolly, Ogle, F. Burge and Leggo scorer! tries,
and Bolewski kicked two goals. For North
Sydney Jones and Peters scored tries, and Ward
kicked a penalty goal. J. T. Black, referee.
GLEBE. -N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Leggo. A.
Bolewski, D. Brolly, C. Ogle, three-quarters ;
E. Gallagher, five-eighth ; W. Benson (replaced
by P. Regan), half-back ; F. Burge (c.), L.
Burge, A. B. Burge. J. Pye, J. Knight. E. Swin-
son, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY'.—E. Taplin, full-back ; H.
Peters, 11. Waterhouse. O. Sherritt, O. Deane,
three-quarters ; B. Denham, five-eighth ; J. King,
half-back ; J. Ward, J. Greenwood, A. Faull, T.
Jones, G. Green (c.), L. Morris, forwards.
Newtown defeated Annandale by 6 (2-0) to 3
(1-0) at YVenfworth Park. At half-time New-
town led 6 to 3, For winners Ryan and Rogers
scored tries; and for losers Hughes scored. C~
Hedley. referee.


The New Soulh Wales Rugby League
ESTABLISHED 1907.
WHAT IT STANDS FOR AS A NATIONAL GAME.
I?UGBY LEAGUE owes its unparallelled position in the football
history of New South Wales to-day because it provides a form
of football with a powerful appeal to boys and men who play it, and
to the people. It sets science, combination and individual excellence
upon a high plane. It eliminates many of the avenues along which
the foul player meanders at will under the old code, unseen by the
eye that halts and unpunished by the powers-that-be.
This has long since been recognised by the public, which by its
splendid patronage has made it possible to realise the many ideas —
we may say ideals—which have culminated in the welfare of the
players being safeguarded as they never were before, and the institu-
tion of interstate, inter-dominion and international matches, upon a
basis that happily combines sound business control with healthy
sentiment.
The Rugby League is a game for every class and all classes to play.
It is not a caste game. Any game which brings together, on the field
of sport, men and boys of every type, must be a nation-builder, for
the hour that calls upon the manhood of a country to put aside its
playthings and come to grips with the common enemy.
The Great War proved that it is essential that every class in a
community should understand and appreciate the worth of every
other class. And real sport, such as is provided by the Rugby
League, is one of the finest mediums for achieving this end.
The Rugby League recognises, with the Cricket Association and
the Board of Control, that international sport must not be
carried on at the expense of the flower of its exponents. Therefore,
it provides that the men who give their time in this way shall not be
losers in any direction. That this is wise for those concerned, and
for the nation, there cannot be any shadow of doubt. It is the only
sane way in which a democracy can enter into international sport,
without putting an unfair strain and temptation upon the men who
make that sport.
The Rugby League takes this opportunity of thanking the public
for the support which has made the game what it has become to-day.
In return, it means not to rest with present success, but to go on to
soundly establish the game in every corner of the State and beyond
it, and to assist the schools and the juniors to play football under the
best of conditions.
H. R. MILLER,
Secretary New South Wales Rugby League.
Phillip Street, Sydney.


Footballers!
The healing properties
of the Wonderful
Australian Eucalyptus
Tree are concentrated
in
GUMLYPTA
Training Oil
To Keep the Muscles Pliant
To Prevent Chills
To Relieve Strains and
Sprains
Hundreds of Footballers use it
DO YOU?
GUMLYPTA
Training Oil
is sold in
2/- Bottles
and at
18/- per Gallon
Obtainable at all Chemists
and Storekeepers or direct
from
Gillard Gordon Ltd.
13 Bridge St., Sydney
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; P.
Boys, G. Bain, R. Coekburn, A. Rogers, three-
quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. John-
ston, half-back ; F. Ryan, W. Palmer, E. E.
Brooks, J. McCue, R. Townsend, G. H. Clam-
back, forwards.
ANNANDALE.—-E. Griffiths, full-back ; S.
Hughes, J. Bain, P. Upham, W. Geoghegan,
three-quarters ; A. Butler, five-eighth ; E, Usher,
half-back ; G. Eves, G. Jolly, S. Perry, E. Bur-
clett, W. Haddock, T. Dagg, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Western Suburbs by
19 (3-5) to 10 (2-2) at the Agricultural Ground;
4000 present. At half-time Eastern Suburbs led
13 to 5. For the winners Cubitt (2) and Mes-
senger scored tries, and the latter kicked 5
goals. For the losers Prentice and Test scored
tries, which were converted by McPherson. X.
Dickenson, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back ;
W. Messenger, Ray Norman (capt.). L. Cubitt.
G. Wright, three-quarters ; H. Caples, five-
eighth ; S. Kaufman, half-back ; H. Linklater,
R. Batchelor. S. King, J. Duffy, R. Parnell, C.
Lees, forwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins, P. Burns, H, Gilbert (capt.), R.
Vest, three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth;
G, McGowan, half-back ; C. Tye, W. Joass, C.
W. Prentice, W. Easterbrook, E. Courtney, W.
Lucas, forwards,
PREMIERSHIP POlNTS.—Balmain 8, Glebe 6,
Eastern Suburbs 6, Western Suburbs 4, Newtown
4, South Sydney 3, Annandale 1, North Sydney 0.
SECOND GRADE—South Sydney defeated Bal-
main by 10 to nil. Western Suburbs defeated
Eastern Suburbs by 5 to 4, North Sydney defeated
Glebe by 11 to nil. Newtown defeated Annan-
dale by 5 to nil.
THIRD GRADE.—Balmain defeated Randwick
30 to nil, Sydney defeated Newtown 9 to 3, Mar-
rickville defeated West Sydney 12 to 2, Glebe
defeated Redfern United 12 to 10, South Sydney
defeated Lidccmbe 24 to 5, Eastern Suburbs de-
feated Western Suburbs 7 to 6, Mascot defeated
Alexandria 9 to 3.
FIFTH ROUND—JUNE 14, 1919.
-Balmain defeated Glebe by 15 (3-3) to 5 (1-1)
at Agricultural Ground. About 10,000 present.
For Balmain Conaghan (2) and Potter scored
tries, and C. Fraser (2) and Miller kicked penalty
goals. For Glebe Gray scored a try and Quigley
kicked a goal. T. McMahon, referee.
BALMAIN.—J, Craig, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, G. Potter, three-quarters;
G. Robinson, five-eighth; A. Halloway (c.), half-
back ; W. Schultz, R. Miller, A.' Fraser, H.
Watts, F. Maguire, W. Ryan, forwards.
GLEBE,—N. Proctor, full-back ; E. Ogle, A.
Bolewski, G. Reynolds, H. Thompson, three-quar-
ters ; E. Gallagher, five-eighth; P, Regan, half-
back ; H. Angus. J, Pye, A. Gray, S. Quigley,
A. Johnson, S. Pert, forwards.
South Sydney defeated Newtown by 23 (5-4 to
10 (2-2) at Sydney Cricket Ground ; 2000 pre-
sent. For the winners H. Border scored 3 tries
and Blair and Rowley 1 each. Oxford converted
3 tries and kicked a penalty goal. For the
losers Johnston and Gillespie scored tries, and
Paul Boys converted one and kicked a penalty
goal. T. Dickenson, referee,
SOUTH SYDNEY.—L. Bheeley. full-back ; H.
Horder, R. Norman, W. Rowley (capt.), V.
Sheehan, three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ;
R. Anderson, half-back; G. Moore, A. Oxford,
W. Sheehan, Horne, W. Groves, H. Holmes, for-
wards.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; Paul
Boys, G. Bain, A. Rogers, C. Russell, three-


. . THE . .
SYDNEY
SPORTS
GROUND
The Home of Football
Athletics and Cycling
Was dedicated for Athletic Sport
and has become most popular for
the Training of not only the
Runner and Cyclist, but the man
who would keep in good health by
taking those exercises which
have proved most
conducive to
“ keeping
fit”
®
A well-equipped arena for athletic
games
Commodious dressing rooms and
necessary gymnastic appliances
Hot and cold water baths and
showers
®
Season Tickets range from
2/6 Monthly, but
better still.
Become a Member
Entrance Fee: Two Guineas
Annual Subscription:
One and a Half Guineas
Year commences from date
of joining
Members entitled to all Training
Privileges, entrance to all Public
Functions held on the Ground,
and TWO LADIES' TICKETS
®
Call and see me at the Ground
first opportunity
L. HARVEY, Secretary.
quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. John-
ston, half-back ; E. E. Brooks. W. Palmer, F.
Ryan, J. Main, H. Deeble, G. H. Clarabach, for-
wards.
Western Suburbs defeated North Sydney by 51
(11-9) to nil at St. Luke’s Park ; 2000 present.
At half-time Western Suburbs led by 33 to nil.
Collins (3), Macauley '(2), Gilbert, Vest, Burns,
Prentice. Joass and Courtney scored tries, and
Macpherson kicked nine goals. Referee, W.
Neill.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W.Collins, H. Gilbert (capt), P. Bums, R.
Vest, three-quarters ; A. Macpherson, five-eighth;
K. Farnsworth, half-back ; J. Reidy, W. Easter-
brook, W. Joass, C. F. Tye, C. W. Prentice, E.
Courtney, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin (c.), full-back ;
I). Garlick, O. Deane, C. Maunder, Hannan,
three-quarters ; C. Sherritt, five-eighth ; J. King,
half-back ; A. Faull, T. Jones, Finch, L. Morris,
J. Greenwood, Edwards,, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Annandale by 27 (5-6)
to 12 (2-3) at Wentworth Park. For East Baw-
den (2), Cubitt and Burton (2) tries, and Mes-
senger 6 goals ; for Annandale Hughes and Jolly
tries, and Hughes, Shirley and Upham goals.
A. Farrow, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back ;
H. Bawden, W. Messenger, L. Cubitt, K. Burton,
three-quarters ; G. Wright, five-eighth *, S. Kauf-
man, half-back ; R. Batchelor, W. Tijou, S.
King, J. Duffy, R. Parnell, C. Lees (capt.), for-
wards.
ANNANDALE.—E. Griffiths, full-back ; S.
Hughes, Pidcock, D. Comerford, P. Upham.
three-quarters ; A. Butler, five-eighth ; E. Usher,
half-back ; O. Shirley, J. Woolley, G. Jolly, W.
Haddock (capt.), S. Perry, G. Eves, forwards.
SECOND GRADE. —Eastern Suburbs defeated
Annandale by 5 to 2, Glebe defeated Balmain by
21 to 3, Newtown defeated South Sydney by 12
to XI, Western Suburbs defeated North Sydney by
10 to nil. Competition Points : Western Suburbs
10, Glebe 8, North Sydney 7, Newtown 5, Eastern
Suburbs 4, South Sydney 4, Balmain 3.
THIRD GRADE.—Eastern Suburbs defeated
Lidcombe by 12 to nil, Alexandria beat Sydney
by 16 to 5, Western Suburbs defeated Bandwick
by 19 to 3, Balmain defeated West Sydney by 41
to 2, Newtown forfeited to Redfern United.
SIXTH ROUND—JUNE 28, 1919.
Balmain defeated Newtown by 23 (5-4) to S
(0-4) at Wentworth Park; 2000 present. At half-
time Balmain led 10-0. For winners J. Robin-
son (2), Conaghan (2) and Latta scored tries,
and C. Fraser (3) and Miller kicked goals ; for
Newtown Bain kicked three penalty goals and
Rigney a field goal.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
C. Fraser, P. Conaghan, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters ; G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway,
half-back ; W. Schultz:, H. Watt? 1 , U. Miller, M.
Russell, G. Cummings, R. Latta, forwards.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; Paul
Boys, G. Harris, F. Seymour, H. Brown, three-
quarters ; G. Bain, five-eighth; A. Johnston,
half-back ; E. E. Brooks, F. Ryan, Clark, Kelly,
Dceble. J. Main, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated South Sydney by 16
(4-2) to S (2-1) at Sydney Cricket Ground ; about
SiXK) present. Half-time scores : East 6, South
f». For East Kaufman, Wright (2) and Cubitt
scored tries, two of which were converted by
Norman ; for South Holmes and Anderson tries,
the former being converted by Oxford. T. Mc-
Mahon, referee.


SERGEANT E. R. LARKIN, M.L.A.,
Who Fell at Gallipoli, June, 1915.
PRO PATRIA MOR !
By H. C. DOUGLAS in The Referee.
Vacant for ever his old place by our
side;
For, shod with silent sandals, with
his peers
He ranges now the meads of knightly
pride
Across the Bridge of Spears.
He found the path that Wilding’s feet
had trod;
Thither Swannell’s homing spirit
rushed
From the plains of valor to the peaks of
God.
Where all the warring’s hushed.
Where such as lived in manly virtue’s
ways;
Stepped still breast-forward, true and
straight and clean;
Though stumbling, never shirking, wear
the bays
Of conquerors, ever green.
Where those who strove for Honor and
the Game—
Rather than from mere lust of
wealth and power—
Who foreswore ease and dalliance,
winning fame
In battle, not the bower;
Find surcease from the striving and the
strife.
He who softly stole from us to those
Stood bravely at the crossways of his
life.
And then as bravely chose.
The roads were four. Three lay warm
and bright
With promise of fulfilment; but the
last
From the cold, clear star of Duty drew
such light
As guided them who passed.
The sun adown one highway's length he
sav.’
Kiss goldenly the good work of his
hands.
Athwart another path swung wide the
door
Where watchful Demos stands.
A home where love of wife and sons
was king
The third road lit, with a soft glow all
its own;
He steeled his heart ’gainst every
beckoning
And sought the fourth —alone.


PREMIERSHIP
TO
END
OF FIRST J
SET.
W.
L.
n.
F.
A.
T.
G.
T.
G.
Balmain ..
6
0
i
137
34
31
22
4
11
East. Suburbs
5
1
i
117
54
25
21
12
9
Glebe
4
3
0
90
78
18
18
14
18
West. Suburbs
4
3
0
133
60
29
23
10
15
South Svdnev ..
3
3
i
110
121
22
22
29
17
Newtown .. ..
3
4
0
38
90
9
13
18
18
North Sydney..
1
6
0
59
160
11
13
36
26
Annandale .. ..
0
6
1
44
146
10
7
32
25
EASTERN SUBURBS. —K. Adams, full-back ; G.
Wright, Ray Norman, L. Cubitt, R. Burton,
three-quarters ; H. Caples, five-eighth ; S. Kauf-
man, half-back ; W. Tijou, H. Bawden, S. Pearce,
R. Batchelor, K. Farnell, C. Lees, forwards.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—L. Sheely, full-back ; V.
Sheehan, W. Rowley, R. Norman, H. Horder,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Ander-
son. half-back ; W. Sheehan, W. Groves, H.
Holmes, G. Moore, A. Oxford, J. Kenvick, for-
wards.
North Sydney defeated Annandale by 14 (2-4)
to 9 (3-0) at North Sydney ; 1000 present. At
half-time Annandale led by 6 to 5. For North
Johnson and Jones scored, and Callaghan kicked
4 goals ; for Annandale Haddock (2) and Upham
scored tries. A. Farrow, referee.
NORTH SYDNEY. —H. Waterhouse (relieved by
Callaghan), full-back ; H. Peters, E. Taplin, O.
Deane, Hannan, three-quarters ; Edwards, five-
eighth ; Johnson, half-back; A. Faull, E. Jones,
J. Greenwood (replaced by Maunder), J. Dun-
worth, L. Morris, R. Dunworth, forwards.
ANNANDALE. —Fitzgerald, full-back ; Hughes,
J. Parker, J. Bain, P. Upham, three-quarters ;
E. Usher, five-eighth ; A. Butler, half-back ;
Haddock, G. Jolly, G. Eves, O. Shirley, J.
Woolley, Graves, forwards.
Glebe defeated Western Suburbs by 8 (2-1) to
5 (1-1) at the Agricultural ; 3000 pre-
sent. At half-time Glebe led by 8 to nil. For
the winners Leggo and Sturton scored tries, and
Bolewski converted one ; for West McPherson
scored a try, which he converted. T. Dicken-
son, referee.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; J. Sturton, T.
Leggo, M. Scannell, C. Ogle, three-quarters ; A.
Bolewski, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back ;
E. Swinson. J. Pye, L. Burge, A. Johnson, F.
Burge, A. Gray, forwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—R. Vest, full-back ;W.
Collins, R. Farnsworth, H. Gilbert (capt.), T.
McCauley, three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-
eighth ; G. McGowan, half-back ; C. Tye. C.
Prentice, W. Joass, W. Easterbrook, A. Red-
mond, J. Reidy, forwards.
PREMIERSHIP POlNTS.—Balmain 12, Eastern
Suburbs 10. Glebe 8, Western Suburbs 6, South
Sydney 5, Newtown 4, North Sydney 2, Annan-
dale i.
SECOND GRADE.—Eastern Suburbs defeated
South Sydney by 17 to 13, Western Suburbs de-
feated Glebe by 11 to 3 ; North Sydney defeated
Annandale by 6 to nil ; Newtown defeated Bal-
main by 5 to 4.
THIRD GRADE. —Randwick forfeited to Eastern
Suburbs ; Redfern United defeated Alexandria by
10 to nil ; Marrickville received forfeit from
Newtown ; Mascot defeated Lidcombe by 12 to
5 ; Balmain defeated Glebe by 20 to nil, Western
Suburbs defeated West Sydney by 11 to 10.
SEVENTH ROUND—JULY 4, 1919.
Balmain and Ea«tern Suburbs drew, 3 all (one
try eaph), at the Sydney Cricket Ground ; about
17.000 present. At half-time there was no score.
Halloway scored a try for Balmain, and Wright
a try for Eastern Suburbs. A Farrow, referee.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
C. Fraser, P. Conaghan, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters ; G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway,
half-back ; W. Schultz, H. Watts, M. Russell, A.
Fraser, R. Miller, R. Latta, forwards.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back ;
G. Wright, E. Connerton (relieved by McKel-
lar), Rav Norman, W. Messenger, three-quarters ;
H. Caples, five-eighth ; S. Kaufman, half-back;
W. Tijou. S. Pearce. H. Bawden, R. Linklater,
R. Farnell, J. Watkins, forwards.
South Sydney defeated North Sydney by 36
(8-6) to 24 (6-3) at North Sydney Oval ; 2000
present. At half-time North led 13 to 11. For
South Horder (2), Kerwick *(2), Baker (2),
Vaughan and Blair scored tries, and Oxford
kicked 6 goals ; for North Peters (3), Faull (2),
and Dumvorth scored tries, and Jones converted,
three. T. Dickenson, referee.
SOUTH SYDNEY,—O. Lindsay, full-back ; H.
Horder, R. Norman, V. Sheehan, C. Blinkhorn,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Ander-
son, half-back ; J. Baker, G. Moore, W. Groves,
A. Oxford, H. Holmes, J. Kerwick, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back ;
Spackman, O. Deane, Maunders, Peters, three-
quarters ; J, King, five-eighth ; R. Ide, half-
back ; A. Faull, G. Green, T. Jones, Gourlay,
R. Dumvorth, L. Morris, forwards.
Western Suburbs defeated Annandale by 29'
(7-4) to 3 (1-0) at Pratten Park ; 1000 present.
At half-time Western Suburbs led by 16 to nil.
For winners Vest (3), Macauley (2), Prentice
and Collins scored tries, and McPherson kicked
4 goals ; for Annandale Graves a try. W.
Neill, referee.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins T. Macauley, P. Burns, R. Vest,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; R.
Farnsworth, half-back ; J. Reidy, W. Joass. W.
Easterbrook, C. Tye, C. W. Prentice, J. Red-
mond, forwards.
ANNANDALE. —N. McGuinness, full-back ; S.
Hughes, D. Fitzgerald, S. Parker, J. Bain, three-
quarters ; E. Usher, five-eighth ; A. Butler, half-
back ; G. Eves. E. Bates, T. Dagg, R. Graves,
W. Haddock, E. Burdett, forwards.
Newtown defeated Glebe by 15 (3-3) to 9 (1-3)
‘at Wentworth Park ; 2000 present. At half-
time Glebe led 7 to 2. For the winners Bain,
Brown and Paul Boys scored tries, and P. Boys
3 goals ; for the losers F. Burge scored a try,
and A. B. Burge 3 goals. L. O’Malley, referee.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; Paul
Boys, G. Bain, G. Harris. H. G. Brown, three-
quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. Johnston,
half-back ; E. E. Brooks, D. Kelly, J. Main, W.
Palmer, G. Clamback. F. Ryan, forwards.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; D. Brolly, T.
Leggo, N. Sturton, C. Ogle, three-quarters ; A.
Bolewski. five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back ; L.
Burge, J. Pye, E. Swinson, N. Johnson, A. B.
Burge. F. Burge, forwards.
SECOND GRADE. —Glebe defeated Newtown by
39 to 3, Eastern Suburbs defeated Balmain # by 3
to nil. South Sydney defeated North Sydney by
5 to 4, Western Suburbs defeated Annandale by
36 to 2. Positions of teams : Western Suburbs
14, Glebe 10, North Svdney 9. Eastern Suburbs
8, Newtown 7, South Sydney 6, Balmain 2, An-
nandale 0.
THIRD GRADE. —Randwick forfeited to West
Sydney, South Sydney defeated Redfern United
by 5 to 3. Balmain defeated Newtown by 38 to
3, Alexandria defeated Marrickville by 20 to 3,
Mascot defeated Eastern Suburbs by 22 to 4,
Lidcoml>e and Sydney a scoreless draw. Glebe de-
feated Western Suburbs by 21 to 3. Positions :
Balmain 14, Glebe 12, Mascot 12, South Sydney


11, Redfem United 10, Alexandria 8, Marrick-
ville 8, Sydney 7, Eastern Suburbs 6, Western
Suburbs 4, Lidcombe 4, West Sydney 2, New-
town 0, Randwick 0.
EIGHTH ROUND—JULY 12, 1919.
Western Suburbs defeated South Sydney by 18
(4-3) to 8 (2-1) at Sydney Cricket Ground; about
5000 present. For West. Collins, Courtney, Pren-
tice, and Vest scored tries, and McPherson three
goals ; for South, Blinkhm-n and H. 11 order trio-.
Oxford a goal. Referee, W. Neill.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—D. Lindsay, full-back ; H.
Horder, R. Norman, C. Horder and C. Blinkhorn,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Ander-
son, half-back ; J. Barker, P. Horne, H. Holmes,
C. Moore, A. Oxford, and J- Kerwick (c.), for-
wards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—iA. White, full-back ;
W. Collins, H. Gilbert (c.), T. McCauley, R.
Vest, three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth;
(». McGowan, half-back ; C. Tye, W. Juass, C.
Prentice, W. Easterbrook, E. Courtney and J.
'Redmond, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs drew with Newtown, 15 (3-3)
to 15 (3-3), at the Agricultural Ground ; 4000
present. For East, Wright (2) and Watkins scored
tries, and Messenger kicked two goals and Nor-
man one ; for Newtown, Ryan and Gillespie (2)
scored tries, and Bain and Paul Boys (2) kicked
goals. A. Farrow’, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—R. Adams, full-back ;
W. Messenger, L. A. Cubitt, Ray Norman, and
G. Wright, three-quarters ; H. Caples, five-
eighth ; S. Kaufman, half-back ; H. Bawden, S.
Pearce, .1. Watkins, R. Farnell, R. Linklater,
and J. Batchelor, forwards.
NEWTOWN.—E. Rigney, full-back ; Paul Boys,
G. Bain, G. Harris, and H. G. Brown, three-
quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. Johnston,
half-back ; E. E. Brooks, D. Kelly, J. Main, W.
Palmer, J. Clambach, and F. Ryan, forwards.
Glebe defeated Annandale by 9 (1-3) to 2 (0-1)
at Wentworth Park ; 1000 present. For Glebe,
Ogle scored a try, and A. B. Burge (2) and Bo-
lewski kicked goals; for losers, Fitzgerald kicked
a goal. Referee, T. Dickenson.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Leggo. M.
Scannell. D. Brolly. C. Ogle, three-quarters ; A.
Bolewski, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back ; F.
Burge, L. Burge. A. B. Burge, J. Pye, S. Pert,
«nd E. Swinson, forwards.
)ANNANDALE. —N. McGuinnes.. full-back ; A.
McGuire, D. Fitzgerald, T. Parker, J. Bain,
three-quarters; E. Usher, five-eighth ; A. Butler,
half-back ; G. Eves. T. Dagg, J. Woolley, E.
Burdett, W. Haddock, and R. Graves forwards.
Balmain defeated North Sydney by 41 (9-7) to
8 (2-1) at North Sydney Oval. For the winners,
C. Fraser (2). Conaghan (2), Schultz (2), Hallo-
way. J. Robinson, and Watts scored tries, and
O. Robinson kicked goals. For losers, Green and
Gourlay scored tries, and Jones kicked a penalty
goal. Referee, L. O’Malley.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, and G. Potter, three-
quarters ; G, Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Hallo-
way,* half-back ; Cummings, W. Schultz, A.
Frasef, H. Wetts, M. (Russell, and R. Latta, for-
wards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back ; H.
Peters, O. Deane, H. Waterhouse, and H.
Maunder, three-quarters; J. King, five-eighth;
R. Ide, half-back ; A. Faull, T. Jones, R. Dun-
worth, G. Green, L. Morris, W. Gourlay, for-
wards.
PREMIERSHIP POlNTS.—Balmain 15, Eastern
Suburbs 12. Glebe 10, Western Suburbs 10, South
Sydney 7, Newtown 7, North Sydney 2, Annan-
dale i. *
SECOND GRADE. —Eastern Suburbs defeated
Newtown 9 to 2, Glebe defeated Annandale 22 to
nil, Western Suburbs defeated South Sydney 11
to 4, North Sydney defeated Balmain 18 to 3.
THIRD GRADE.—Mascot defeated Sydney 10 to
2, Glebe received forfeit from Randwick. Mar-
rickville defeated South Sydney 3 to nil, Western
defeated Alexandria 19 to 6, Lidcombe defeated
Redfern United 10 to 3, Eastern Suburbs defeated
West Sydney 11 to nil, Balmain defeated Alex-
andria 8 to 6. Competition points : Balmain 10.
Glebe 14. Mascot 14, South Sydney 11. Redfern
United 10, Marrickville 10. Alexandria 8, Eastern
Suburbs 8, Sydney 7, Western Suburbs 6, Lid-
combo 6, West Sydney 2, Newtown 0, Randwick 0.
NINTH ROUND—JULY 26, 1919.
Western Suburbs defeated Balmain by 21 (3*6)
to 18 (2-6), at Agricultural Ground; 7000 present.
Half-time scores ; W.S. 14. Balmain 11. For
Western Suburbs, Courtney, Tye, and Collins
scored tries, and McPherson (5) and White kicked
goals ; for Balmain, Russell and A. Fraser tries
and Wall and C. Fraser three goals each.
WESTEiRN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins. H. Gilbert (c.), P. Burns, R. Vest,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; G.
McGowan, half : C. Tye, W. Jcass, C. Prentice,
J Rcidy, E. Courtney and J. Redmond, for-
wards.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters; G. Robinson,' five-eighth; A. Halloway
(c.), half-back ; K. Cummings, H. Watts, W.
Schultz, M. Russell. A. Fraser, and R. Latta,
forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Glebe by 15 (3-3) to
11 (3-1) at Sydney Cricket Ground ; 5000 present.
At half-time E.S. led 5 to 3. For the winners,
Wright (2) and Norman scored tries, each of
which Messenger converted. For the losers, A.
Burge, C. Ogle and F. Burge scored tries, Bo-
lewski converting the last. Referee, T. Dicken-
son.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—W. Freeman, full-back;
W. Messenger, Ray Norman (c.), E. Tate. G.
Wright, three-quarters; H. icaples, five-eighth;
. S. Kaufman, half-back ; H. Bawden, S. Pearce, J.
Watkins, R. Farnell, R. Linklatcr, C. Lees, for-
wards.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Lcggo, D.
Brolly, J. Sommer, C. Ogle, three-quarters ; A.
Bolewski, five-eighth: E. Benson, half-back; E.
Swinson, J. Pye, L. Burge, V. Johnson, F. Burge,
A. Burge, forwards.
South Sydney defeated Annandale by 18 (4-3)
to 10 (2-2) at Wentworth Park ; 500 present. At
half-time Annandale led by 10 to 3. For S.S.,
C. Border. Vaughan, Lawrence and Oxford, tries;
Oxford converted two and kicked a penalty goal.
For Annandale. Geoghegan and Hughes tries ;
Usher converted both. Referee, L. O’Malley.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, full-back ; G.
Vaughan, C. Horder, W. Rowley, V. Sheehan,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth : W. J.
Hucker, half-back ; J. Berwick, J. Baker, A.
Oxford, G. Moore, J. Lawrence, P. Horner, for-
wards. • »
ANNANDALE.—N. McGuiness, full-back ; S.
Hughes, D. Fitzgerald. W. Geoghegan. p. Upham,
three-quarters ; E. Usher, five-eighth : A. Butler,
half-back ; G. Eves, A. Jolly, E. Burdett (re-
placed by J. Woolley), T. Dagg, W. Haddock,
R. Graves, forwards.
Newtown drew with North Sydney 10 (2-2) to
10 (2-2) at North Sydney Oval ; 1500 present. For
North Sydney Faull and Denham scored tries,
and Ward converted both ; for Newtown. Brown
and V. Farnsworth scored tries. Boys kicked two
goals. A. Farrow, referee.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back : Paul
Boys, G. Harris, W. Cockburn, H. G. Brown,


Football Time is Rexona Time
Footballers Swear by
REXONA- —The Rapid Healer
oxvear by
JWXO7UI
the Rapid
floater.
Football players every-
where will find Rexona of
the greatest value, and no
training or dressing room
is complete without a pot
of (his Rapid Hea ing Oint-
ment. It is invaluable as
a rub down, and promptly
relieves sprains, and takes
the stiffness out of over-
worked muscles. Rtxona
heals cuts wounds, and
gravel rash ; rent ves the
discoloration and sore-
ness from bruises and
knocks of all descriptions.
Rexona, the Rapid Healer,
is a reliable and quick-
acting panacea for all
possible accidents of the
football field. Remember,
Rexona is a complete fi:st-
aid cabinet itself, so fool*
bailers be sure to keen a
pot of Rexona handy for
all emergencies.
ALL AUSTRALIA USES REXONA
Never a day passes but that Rexona scores another triumph over
those serious troubles of life—sores, bad legs, piles, eczema, pimples,
'blotches, burns, nasal catarrh and rheumatism.
The dainty triangular pot of Rexona, the Rapid Healer, contains
a combination of the most curative, antiseptic, soothing and healing
properties known to Science. Rexona is the skin remedy of the age,
because it destroys the harmful germs that may be present in a sore,
pimple, or any abrasion of the skin, thus preventing any contagion of the
blood, and at the same time causes a new healthy skin to grow. Rexona
immediately reduces the inflammation and pain; it acts as a distinct
stimulant to the pores of the skin, and sets up a healing action that
immediately increases day by day. Bad leg sores that have resisted
every other treatment succumb almost immediately to its wonderful
influence, while for Piles there is nothing its equal.
REXONA- The Rapid Healer
Price 1/6 and 3/-


Te/ephone Cify 734-.
Office.
Bookbinders.
Paper Rulers,
Stationers ex?
Te/ep/>one C/fy 8590
Works.
S 5
(03
Mo^J
'Ted
PRINJEF
, •*> whim ■ wrrusi i c
FINE ART PRINTERS | Central
"Chalmers House"
20-24 Chalmers Sr.
Opposite Entrance
Rly., Stn.
PRINTING!
TAT HEN ordering your printing, we
will be pleased if you will consider
us in the matter. Our new premises
are situated at the above address, and
we are in a much better position to exe-
cute your orders than heretofore. We
specialise in color worK of all Kinds
and our plant is replete with the latest
machinery. Your requirements can be
carried out to your satisfaction and
with promptitude. Our Ruling and Bind-
ing Departments are also fitted out with
additional facilities for your conven-
ience, and any orders will receive our
prompt attention.
MORTON’S LTD.
CHALMERS STREET,
SYDNEY.


three-quarters ; V. Farnsworth. five-eiirhth ; V,
Turner, half-back ; E, K, Brooks, W. Palmer, G,
•Clamback, W. Townsend, J. 'Main and F. Ryan,
forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back ; H,
Peters, H. Waterhouse. O. Deane, 11. Maunder,
three-quarters; B. Denham, five-eighth; J. King,
half-back : A. Faull. G, Green, L. Morris, W.
Gourlay, J. Ward, T. Jones, forwards.
SECOND GRADE.—GIebe defeated. Eastern Sub-
urbs by 15 to 8, Western Suburbs \lefcated Bal-
main by 11 to 5, South Sydney defeated Annan-
dale by 15 to 7, North Sydney defeated Newtown
by 14 to 6. Positions of teams : Western Suburbs
18 point*. Glebe 14. North Sydney 33, Eastern
Suburbs 10, South Sydney S, Newtown 7, Bal-
main 2, and Annandalc 0.
THIRD GRADE—Eastern Suburbs defeated Syd-
ney 12 to 7, South Sydney forfeited to Balmain,
Glebe defeated Western Suburbs 47 to nil, Lid-
tombe defeated Marrickville 8 to 2, Randwick
forfeited to Newtown.
TENTH ROUND—AUGUST 2, 1919.
Newtown defeated Western Suburbs by 10 (2-2)
to 5 (1-1) at the Agricultural Ground. About 6000
i-resent. Half-time scores, Newtown 10 to nil.
For Newtown, Townsend (a penalty try) and
Clamback tries, and Bain twe goal* ; for West.
Tve scored a try, which was converted by
McPherson. T. McMahon, referee.
NEWTOWN—E. P. Rignev, full-back; P. Boys,
G. Bain, G. Harris, H. G. Brown, three-quarter*;
W. Gillespie, five-eighth : A. Johnston, half-
back ; E. E. Brooks, J. Main, R. Townsend, W.
Palmer, G. Clamback and F. Ryan, feiwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins. H. Gilbert <c.), P. Burns. R. Vest,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; R.
Farnsworth, half-hack ; C. Tye. W. Joass, C.
Prentice, J. Reidy, E. Courtney and J. Re:l-
mond. forwards.
Glebe defeated South Sydney by 22 (4-5) to 10
(2-1) at Wentworth Park ; 5000 present. At
half-time Glebs led by 9 to nil. For the win-
ners, F. Burge (2). L. Burge, and Bolewski
scored tries ; Bolewski kicked four goals and A.
B. Burge one. For the losers, Blair and Vaughan
scored tries, which Oxford converted. A. Thorn
ton. referee.
GLEBE.—D. Brolly, full-back : G. Reynolds,
T. Leggo (injured, and icplaced by Regan),
R. Summers, and C. Ogle, three-quarters; A.
Bolewski, five-eighth ; E. Benson, half-back ; E.
Swinson, J. Pye, L. Burge, B. Grav, F. Burge,
and A. B. Burge, forwards.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, full-back ; G.
Vaughan, W. Sheehan, C. Ilorder, ami C. Blink-
horn three-quarters ; W, J. Hucker, five-eighth
A. Blair, half-back ; J. .Baker, P. Horne, J.
Lawrence, G, Moore, A, Oxford, and J. Kerwick,
forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated North Sydney by 33
(7-6) to nil at the Sydney Cricket Ground ; 3000
present. For East, Wright (3), Lees, Kaufman,
Parnell and Cubitt scored tries. Messenger kicked
six goals.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—IV. Freeman, full-back ;
W. Messenger, U. Norman. L. Cubitt, G.
Wright, three-quarters; H. Caples, five-eighth;
S Kaufman, half-back; C. Lees (injured and
replaced bv H. Bawden), S. Pearce, R. Farnell,
J. Duffv, R. Linklater, J. Watkins, forward*.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back; <H.
Peters. O. Deane, H. Waterhouse, H. Spack-
man, three-quarters ; B. Denham, five-eighth; J.
King, half-back ; G. Green, A. Faull, L. Moms,
R. Dunworth, W. Gourlay, -T. forwards.
Balmain defeated Annandale by 25 (5-5) to 5
(1-3) at Birchgrove. For winners Conaghan (2),
Potter, C. Fraser and Miller scored tries; C.
Fraser (3) and Potter converted tries, and Wall
kicked a penalty goal. For Annandale Woolley
scored a try. and Usher a goal.
BALMAIN,—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters ; G. Robinson, five-eighth ; A. Halloway,
half-lack: R. Latta, M. Russell, A. Fraser, C.
Russell, H. Watts, W. Schultz, forwards.
ANNANDALE.—S. Parker, full-back; S. Hughes,
J. Upham, D. Fitzgerald, J. Bain, three-quar-
ters ; E. Usher, five-eighth ; A. Butler, half-
back ; W. Stuart, J. Woolley, A, Jolly, O.
Shirley, W. Haddock, R. Graves, forwards.
PREMIERSHIP POlNTS.—Balmain 17, Eastern
Suburbs IC, Western Suburbs 12, Glebe 12, New-
town 30, South Sydney 9, North Sydney 3, An-
nandale 3.
SECOND GRADE.—Balmain defeated Annan-
dale by 19-2 ; Western Suburbs defeated Newtown
by 8-5, Eastern Suburbs played a draw, 3 all,
with North Svdnev, Glebe defeated South Sydney
by 10 to 2. ‘
THIRD GRADE.—Sydney and Redfern United
drew, 8 all. South Sydney defeated Western
Suburbs by 6-5, Mascot defeated Marrickville by
27-2, Newtown defeated West Sydney by 17-0,
Glebe defeated Eastern Suburbs by 29-9, Balmain
defeated Lidcombe by 36-0, Randwick forfeited
to Alexandria.
ELEVENTH ROUND—AUGUST 9, 1919.
Balmain defeated South Sydney by 13 (3-2) to
11 (3-1) at Agricultural Ground. For the win-
ners Potter (2) and C. Fraser scored tries, two
of which G. Robinson converted. For the losers
Vaughan and 'Baker (2) scored tries, one of
which Oxford converted. T. Dickenson, referee.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; J. Robinson,
P. Conaghan, C. Fraser, G. Potter, three-quar-
ters ; G. Robinson, five-eighth; A. Halloway
(c.), half-back ; K. Miller, W. Schultz, A.
Fraser, H. Watts, M, Russell (sent -If the field
in the second half), R. Latta, forwards.
SOUTH SYDNEY—D. Lindsay, full-back ; (I.
Vaughan, V. Sheehan, C. Border, C. Blinkhorn,
three-quarters ; A. ißlair, five-eighth ; E. Svvin-
nerton, half-back ; J. Baker, P, Horne, J. Law-
rence, G. Moore, A. Oxford, J. Kerwick, for-
wards.
Glebe defeated North Sydney by 17 (3-4) to 2
(0-1) at N.S.. For Glebe Bolewski, Gray and
Pert scored tries, Bolewski (.3) and A. Burge
kicked goals. For North Ward kicked a goal.
A. Thornton, referee.
GLEBE.— D. Brolly, full-back ; E. Leggo, W,
Summers, A. Bolewski, C. Ogle, three-quarters;
P. Regan, five-eighth; W. Benson, half-back. A,
Gray, J. Pyc, L. Burge, A. B. Burge, S. Pert,
A. Swinson. forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY—E. Taplin, full-back ; H.
Peters. J. Ward, M. Waterhouse, H. Maunder,
three-quarters ; B. Denham, five-eighth ; J, King,
half-back ; A. Faull, G, Green, T. Jones, L.
Morris, R, Dunworth, W. Gourlay, forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Western Suburbs 5 to
nil at S.C.G.. W. Cubitt scored a try, con-
verted by W. Messenger. T. McMahon, referee.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—W. Freeman, full-back;
W. Messenger, L. Cubitt, Ray Norman (c.), G.
Wright, threc-nuarters; H, Caples, five-eighth;
S. Kaufman, half-back ; R. Batchelor, S. Pearce,
J. Watkins, R. Faroe]], K. Linklater, J. Duffy,
forwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins. H, Gilbert (c,), P. Bums, R. Vest,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; G.
McGowan, half-back ; C. Tye, W, Joass, C. Pren-
tice. J. Reidy, E. Courtney, J. Redmond, for-
wards.
Newtown defeated Annandale by S (2-1) to 5
(1-1) at Wentworth Park. For winners Brown


The Referee
Stands apart among sporting
newspapers
Its descriptive reports and
Illustrations of the
English Football
Team's Matches
Will be a fine thing for you to
send to your friends in the Old
• Country, in other States or in
the Country
The “ Referee” is Published
EVERY WEDNESDAY
Price: FOURPENCE
It is THE Authority on every Sport
The Arrow
Is the Sportsman’s Popular
Week-end Paper
It features breezy notes on every
sport
Personal Paragraphs and
Illustrations are also features
Published:
Every Friday Morning
PRICE TWOPENCE
136 - 138 CASTLEREAGH ST.
Telephones: Business, City 509.5
Kditorial. City 8090
S»>92
Address
Business communications to the Manager
literary communications to the Kditor
and Hard* scored tries, and G. Bain kicked a
penalty goal ; for Annandale J. Bain scored a
try and Usher kicked a penalty goal. Referee,
A. Farrow.
NEWTOWN.—P, Boys, full-back ; G. Harris.
G. Bain, V. Farnsworth, H. G. Brown, three-
quarters; W. Gillespie, five-eighth ; A. John-
ston, half-back ; G. Clamback, J. Main. R.
Townsend, F. Ryan, H. Deeble, E. E. Brooks,
forwards.
ANNANDALE.—S. Parker, full-back ; P. Mo-
Guinness, D. Fitjgerald, P. Upham, J. Bain,
three-quarters; E. Usher, five-eighth ; A. Butler,
half-back ; G. Eves, G. Jolly, T. Dagg. R.
Graves, W. Haddock, J. Woolley, forwards.
SECOND GRADE.—Eastern Suburbs defeated
Western Suburbs by 6 to nil (their first defeat).
Xewtown defeated Annandale by 13 to 2, Glebe
defeated Xorth Sydney by 12 to 31, South Sydney
defeated Balmain by 9 to nil.
THIRD GRADE.—Western Suburbs defeated
Lidcomc 3 to nil, Alexandria forfeited to West
Sydney, Eastern Suburbs defeated Redfern United
13 to 3, Glebe defeated Xewtown by 35 to 13,
Mascot defeated Balmain by 10 to nil, Marriok-
ville defeated Sydney by 13 to 8, Randwick for-
feited to South Sydney.
TWELFTH ROUND—AUGUST 16, 1919.
Glebe defeated ißalmain by 21 (3-6) to 12 (4-0)
at Agricultural Ground. For Glebe Ogle (2) and
f.eggo scored tries, one converted by Bolewski;
A. Burge (3) and ‘Bolewski (2) penalty goals.
For Balmain Proust. Robinson, Love and R.
Craig scored tries. T. J. McMahon, referee.
GLEBE.—D. Brolly, full-back ; T. Leggo, A.
Bolewski, E. Summers, C. Ogle, three-quarters;
P. Regan, five-eighth; W. Benson, half-back; E.
Swinson, J. Pye L..Burge, S. Pert, A. Burge, a.
Gray, forwards.
BALMAIX.—L. Wall, full-back ; R. Proust, P.
Conaghan, J. Craig, J. Love, three-quarters ; C.
Robinson, five-eighth ; G. Potter, half-back ;
R. Miller, E. Cummins, A. Fraser, H. Watts, M.
Russell, R. Craig (capt.), forwards.
Eastern Suburbs defeated Annandale by 28 (6-3)
to nil at Wentworth Park. For Eastern Suburbs
Wright (2), Copies (2), Batchelor and Duffy
scored tries. Messenger converted four and kicked
a penalty goal. A. Farrow, referee.
EASTERX SUBURBS.—W. Freeman, full-back;
G. Wright, E. Tate, W. Messenger, R. McKellar.
(retired, and replaced by R. Adams), three-
quarters ; H. Caples, five-eighth ; S K.aufman,
half-back ; J. Duffy, R. Batchelor, W. Tijou, H.
Bawden, S. Pearce, R. Linklater, forwards.
ANNANDALE—S. Parker, full-back ; J. Bain,
W. Geoghegan, D. Fitzgerald, P. Upham, three-
quarters ; X. McGuinness, five-eighth ; E. Asher,
half-back ; G. Eves, J. Woolley, G. Jolly, T.
Dagg, W. Haddock. R. Graves, forwards.
Western Suburbs defeated North Sydney by 21
(5-3) to 9 (1-3) at North Sydney. For West Mc-
Cauley (3), Burns and McPherson scored tries,
and Connelly (2) and McPherson kicked goals ;
for North Jones a try and Ward (2) and Jones
kicked goals. A. Thornton, referee.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full back ;
W. Collins, P. Burns, W. Connelly, T. Mc-
Cauley, three'-’quarters; A. McPherson, five-
eighth ; G. McGowan, half-back ; C. Pye. W.
Joass, J. Reidy, W. Easterbrook, J. Redmontf,
E. Courtney, forwards. *
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin. full-back : H.
Peters, B. Denham, J. Ward, Claremont, three-
quarters ; O. Deane, five-eighth ; J. King, half-
back ; A. Faull, T. Jones, R. Dunworth, G.
Green, J. Greenwood, W. Gourlay, forwards.
Newtown defeated South Sydney by 17 (3-4) to


12 (2-3) at S.C.G. For winners Gillespie, R.
Coekburn and Turner scored tries, and Paul
Boys kicked 4 goals; for losers Sheehan and
Vaughan scored tries, and C. Horder (2> and
Holmes kicked penalties. F. Norman, referee.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; Paul
Boys, R, Coekburn, G. Harris, H. G. Brown,
three-quarters ; W. Gillespie, five-eighth; D. Tur-
ner, half-back; E. E. Brooks, D. Kelly, J. Main,
W. Palmer, G. Ciamback, H. Deeble, forwards.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—D. Lindsay, lull-back ; G.
Vaughan, V. Sheehan, C. Border, C. Blinkhom,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth; E. Swin-
nerton, half-back ; J. Baker, P. Horne, J. Law-
'rence, G. Moore, W. Groves, H. Holmes, for-
wards.
SECOND GRADE.—GIebe defeated Balmain by
"20-5, Eastern Suburbs defeated Annandale by 12-5,
Newtown defeated South Sydney by 9-2, North
Sydney defeated Western Suburbs by 6-2,
THIRD GRADE—South Sydney defeated West
Sydney by 21-15, Balmain defeated Sydney by
44-2, Alexandria forfeited to Glebe, Marrickville
defeated Redfern by 6-5. Eastern Suburbs de-
feated Newtown by 10-0, Mascot defeated Western
Suburbs by 17-10.
THIRTEENTH ROUND—AUGUST 23, 1919.
Balmain defeated Newtown by 18 (4-3) to 5
(1-1) at Sydney Cricket Ground. For Balmain
Potter (2), Russell and Watts scored tries, one
of which was converted by Wall, and Wall kicked
a penalty goal and a field goal; for Newtown Gil-
lespie a try and Boys a penalty goal.
BALMAIN.—L. Wall, full-back ; G, Potter, P.
Conaghan, J. Craig, J. Love, three-quarters; R.
Proust, five-eighth; G. Robinson, half-back ; R.
Miller (retired hurt and place taken by Bennett),
H. Watts, E. Cummins, M. Russell, A. Fraser,
R. Craig (c.), forwards.
NEWTOWN.—E. P. Rigney, full-back ; P.
Boys, R. Coekburn, W. Coekburn, H. G. Brown,
three-quarters ; W. Gillespie (c.), five-eighth ; D.
Turner, half-back ; E. E. Brooks, W. Palmer, W.
Ryan, G. Ciamback, H. Deeble, D. Kelly, for-
wards.
South Sydney defeated Eastern Suburbs by 15
(3-3) to 12 (2-3) at Agricultural Ground. For
winners Vaughan, Sheehan and C. Horder scored
tries, and Horder kicked three goals; for the
losers Wright scored 2 tries and Messenger 3
penalty goals. T. McMahon, referee.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, full-back ; G.
Vaughan, R. Fusedale, C. Border, V. Sheehan,
three-quarters; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Swin-
nerton, half-back ; J. Baker, P. Horne, W.
Groves, G. Moore, J. Lawrence, H. Holmes, for-
wards. , „ , .
EASTERN SUBURBS.—W. Freeman, full-back;
W. Messenger, R. Adams, E. Tate, G. Wright,
three-quarters ; H. Caples, five-eighth ; S. Kauf-
man, half-back ; R. Batchelor, S. Pearce, W.
Tijou, K. Farnell, R. Linklater, J. Duffy, for-
wards.
Western Suburbs defeated Glebe by 10 (2-2) to
8 (2-1) at Wentworth Park. For winners
Macauley scored two tries, McPherson converted
1 and kicked a penalty goal. For Glebe Ogle and
Leggo scored tries, and Bolewski converted one.
Referee, A. Thornton.
GLEBE.—D, Brolly (injured and replaced by
G. Reynolds), full-back ; T. Leggo, E. Summers,
A. Bolewski, C. Ogle, three-quarters ; P. Regan,
five-eighth; W. Benson, half-back; B. Gray, L.
Burge, A. B. Burge, J. Pye, S. Pert, E. Swin-
son, forwards.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins, W. Connelly, P. Burns, T. Macauley,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; G.
McGowan, half-back ; J. Reidy, C. Tye, W.
Joass, E, Courtney, W. Easterbrook, J. Red-
mond, forwards.
Annandale defeated North Sydney by 8 (2-1) to
5 (1*1) at North Sydney Oval. For winners
Hughes and Geoghegan scored tries, Bain con-
verting one; for North Sydney Bullock scored
a try and Stenning kicked a penalty goal.
ANNANDALE.—Coraerford, full-back ; Hughe?,
Bain, Fitzgerald, Upham, three-quarters ; Me-
five-eighth ; Usher, half-back ; Geo-
ghegan, Haddock, Dagg, Jolly, Eves, Woolley,
forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY,—TapIin, full-back ; Peters,
Ward. Stenning, Bullock, three-quarters ; King,
five-eighth ; Denham, half-back ; Faull, Green,
Jones, Greenwood, Dunworth, Gourlay, forwards.
SECOND GRADE.—GIebe defeated Western
Suburbs by 8-0, South • Sydney defeated Eastern
Suburbs by 26-5, Newtown defeated Balmain by
4-3, North Sydney defeated Annandale by 17-4,
THIRD GRADE.—Marrickville defeated Eastern
Suburbs by 8-0, Glebe received forfeit from South
Sydney, Redfern United forfeited to Balmain,
Western Suburbs defeated Sydney by 25-3, Lid-
combe defeated West Sydney by 19-0.
FOURTEENTH ROUND—AUGUST 30, 1919.
Balmain defeated Eastern Suburbs by 13 (1-5)
to 4 (0-2) at Agricultural Ground. For Balmain
Robinson a try and Wall 5 goals; for East Mes-
senger 2 goals. Referee, T. McMahon.
BALMAIN.—L. W r all, full-back ; J. Love, J.
Craig, P. Conaghan, G. Potter, three-quarters ;
R. Proust, five-eighth ; G. Robinson, half-back ;
W. Ryan, E. Cummins, A. Fraser, H. Watts, M.
Russell (retired injured and place taken by
Chapman), R. Craig, forwards,
EASTERN SUBURBS.—H. Caples, full-back; W,
Messenger, E. Tate, B. Adams, G. Wright, three-
quarters ; R. McKellar, five-eighth ; S. Kaufman,
half-back ; B. Batchelor, S. Pearce. B. Farnell,
R. Linklater, W. Tijou, J. Duffy, forwards.
Glebe defeated Newtown by 31 (T-5) to 5 (1-1)
at Wentworth Park, For winners G. Gray
(2), Leggo, Regan, Ogle, Bolewskl and L. Burge
scored tries ; Bolewskl converted 4 and Proctor
kicked a field goal. For Newtown Turner scored
a try and Boys kicked a goal. T. Dickenson,
referee.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Leggo, A.
Bolewski, E. Summers, C. Ogle, three-quarters;
P. Regan, five-eighth ; W. Benson, half-back; B.
Gray, A. Gray, L. Burge, J. Pye, S. Pert, E.
Swinson, forwards.
NEWTOWN.—E. Rigney, full-back ; H. R.
Brown, G. Harris, G. Bain, P. Boys, three-quar-
ters ; E. Gillespie, five-eighth ; D. Turner, half-
back: E. E. Brooks, J. Main, G. Ciamback,
D. Kelly, W. Palmer, W. Deeble, forwards.
Western Suburbs defeated Annandale by 31
(7-6) to 12 (4-0) at St. Luke’s Park, Concord.
For winners Reidy, Collins (2), Stettler, Con-
nelly, Joass and Easterbrook scored tries; Mc-
Pherson kicked 5 goals. For losers Geoghegan,
Upham and Haddock (2) tries.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Connelly, P. Burns, L. Stettler, W. Collins,
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; A.
Bossi, half-back ; J. Reidy, W. Easterbrook, J.
Redmond, C. Tye, W. Joass, E. Courtney, for-
wards.
ANNANDALE,—J. Comerford, full-back ; S.
Hughes, W. Pldcock, W. Geoghegan, P. Upham,
three-quarters ; T. McGuinness, five-eighth ; E.
Usher, half-back ; J. Beaumont, W. Haddock,
G. Jolly, T. Dagg, G. Eves, N, McGuinness, for-
wards.
South Sydney defeated North Sydney by 24
(6-3) to 10 (2-2) at S.C.G. For South Border
(2), Blair, Fusedale, Holmes and Baker scored


All the English football photographs and most
of the others in this book were taken by Mr.
W. Kimbel, the Referee photographer. The car-
toons are by Arthur Mailey.


W.
L.
D.
For.
Agst.
Pts.
•Glebe
12
2
0
184
79
24
Western Suburbs
n
3
0
126
48
22
North Svdnev.. ..
8
4
2
106
53
18
Eastern Suburbs
8
5
1
©7
84
17
South Svdnev ..
7
7
0
114
105
14
Newtown
6
7
1
78
105
13
Ralmain
2
12
0
58
126
4
Annandalc ..
0
14
0
31
189
0
LIST OF SECOND
GRADE PREMIERS.
1908—Eastern Suburbs
191i—South Sydney
1999—Eastern Suburbs
1915—Balmain
■?910—Eastern Suburbs
1916 —Balmain .
1911—Eastern Suburbs
1917—South Sydney
1912—Glebe
3918—Glebe
1913—South Sydney
3919—Glebe
THIRD GRADE.—Balmain defeated Mascot in
"the semi-final by 5 to 3.
FIRST GRADE PREMIERSHIP
TABLE,
1919.
W.
L.
D.
F.
A.
T.
G.
T.
G.
Ps.
Balmain ..
11
2
1
277
109
39
50
17
29
23
E, Suburbs
9
3
2
229
108
47
44
22
21
20
Glebe .. ..
9
5
0
209
134
41
43
26
28
18
'W. Suburbs
9
5
0
239
130
51
43
24
29
18
Newtown..
6
6
2
123
186
23
27
38
36
14
S. Sydney..
6
7
1
208
223
44
38
49
38
13
N. Sydney..
1
12
1
103
314
19
23
70
52
3
Annandale..
1
12
1
80
270
20
13
58
48
3
RUGBY LEAGUE
PREMIERSHIP.
Tear. Winners.
Kunners-up.
1908 —South Sydney
Eastern Suburbs
1909—South Sydney
Balmain
1910—Newtown
South Sydney
1911 —Eastern Suburbs
Glebe
1912—Eastern Suburbs
Glebe
1913—Eastern Suburbs
Newtown
1914—South Sydney
Newtown
1915—Balmain
Glebe
1916— Balmain
South Sydney
1917 —Balmain
South Sydney
1918 —South Sydney
Western Suburbs
1919—Balmain
Eastern Suburbs
tries; Fusedale (2), Border kicked goals. For
N.S. Morris (2 tries) and Jones (2 goals). A.
'Farrow, referee.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—H. Hallett, full back ; G.
Vaughan, V. Sheehan, C. Border, R. Fusedale,
three-quarters ; A. Blair, five-eighth ; E. Swln-
nerton, half-back ; J. Baker, P. Horne, G. Moore,
J. Lawrence, H. Holmes, W. Groves, forwards.
NORTH SYDNEY.—E. Taplin, full-back ; J.
Ward, H. Peters, C. Hughes, H. Maunder, three-
quarters ; S. Jones, five-eighth ; J. King, half-
hack ; L. Morris, G. Green, J. Dunworth, B.
Berecry, J. Greenwood, A. Faull, forwards.
SECOND GRADE.—GIebe defeated Newtown by
15 to 10 (the win gave Glebe the premiership for
the second successive year, and the third time
since the League was founded), South Sydney
defeated N.S. by 7-4, W.S. defeated Annandale by
7-2, E.S. defeated Balmain by 11-2.
MEN WHO SCORED FOR THE CLUBS.
BALMAIN'.—Tries (59) : P. Conaghan 10, A.
Halloway 6, J. Robinson 6, K. Schultz 3, U.
Miller 1, C. Fraser 8, G. Robinson 4, G. Potter
‘9, A. Fraser 2, R. Latta 3, H. Watts 2, M. Rus-
sell 2, R. Proust 1, J. Love 1, R. .R. Craig 1.
Goals (50) : C. Fraser 17, R. Miller 9, 0. Robin-
son 8, L. Wall 13, P. Conaghan 1, G. Potter 1,
and J. Robinson 1.
EASTERN SUBURBS.—Tries (47) : G. Wright
17, L. A. Cubitt 11. C. Lees 2, W. Messenger 2,
R. Farnell 2, H. Bawden 2, J. Burton 2, R.
*Caples 2, J. Larkin 1, S. Kaufman 2, Ray Nor-
:man 1, J. Watkins 1, J. Duffy 1, and R.
II. SUNDERLAND, Secretary of the Q.R.L.


RUGBY LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIP AT SYDNEY CRICKET GROUND (28/8/1918).— Top; T. Boland (second on left) winning 50 yards.
Cunningham (second on right) was placed second, and Herder (fourth from the left) third. Bottom: Horder (on right) winning the 100 yards
from Hughes (left), with Cunningham (next to Horder) third.


THE CITY CUP
WINNERS.
Winners.
Runners-up.
1912—South Sydney
Glebe
1913—Glebe
North Sydney
1914—Eastern Suburbs
South Sydney
1915 —Eastern Suburbs
Glebe
1916 —Eastern Suburbs
Glebe
■1917—Balmain
South Sydney
1918—Western Suburbs
Newtown
1919—Western Suburbs
Glebe
Batchelor 1. Goals (44) : W. Messenger 41,
Ray Norman 3.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—Tries (51) : A. Mc-
Cauley 9, W. Joass 3, A. McPherson 3, P. Burns
4, W. Collins 9, J. Redmond 1, G. McGowan 1,
R. Vest 7, W. C. Prentice 4, H. Gilbert 1, E.
Courtney 3, C. Tye 2, J. Reidy 1, L. Stettler 1,
W. Connelly 1, W. Easterbrook 1. Goals (43):
A. McPherson 40, A. White 1, W. Connolly 2.
GLEBE.—Tries (41) : C. Ogle 9, T. Leggo 8,
M. Scannell 1, A, Gray 2, A. B. Burge 1, L.
Burge 3, £. Swinson 1, A. Bolewski 3, D. Brolly
.2, F. Burge 5, Sturton 1, B. Gray 3, S. Pert 1,
P. Regan 1. Goals (43) ;A. Bolewski 25, A. B.
Burge 14, L. Burge 1, Quigley 2, Proctor 1.
NORTH SYDNEY.—Tries (19) ; H. Peters 4, J.
Ward 1, T. Jones 3, L. Morris 2, Johnson 1, A.
Faull 3, J. Dunworth 1, Gourlay 1, Green 1, Den-
ham 1, Bullock 1. Goals (23) : J. Ward 11,
•Jones ( 7, Callaghan 4, Stenning 1.
ANNANDALE.—Tries (20) : S. Hughes 4, G.
Eves 1, E. Usher 1, P. Upham 3, Jolly 1, W.
Haddock 4, R. Graves 1, W. Geoghegan 3,
Woolley 1, J. Bain 1. Goals (13) :PL Usher 6,
5. Hughes 3, P. Upham 1, Hurley 1, Bain 1,
•Fitzgerald 1.
SOUTH SYDNEY.—Tries (44) : H. Horder 9, R.
Vaughan 6, S. Blair 6, Baker 5, V. Sheehan 4,
C. Horder 4, J. Kerwick 2, C. Blinkhom 1, J.
Lawrence 1, A. Oxford 1, W. Rowley 1, H.
Holmes 2, W. Anderson 1, R. D. Fusedale 1.
■Goals (38) : A. Oxford 27, C. Horder 6, H. Hor-
der 1, H. Hallett 1, H. Holmes 1, R. D. Fuse-
dale 2.
NEWTOWN.—Tries (23) : W. Gillespie 5, H.
•G. Brown 3, G. H. Clamback 2, G. Bain 2, P.
Boys 1, F. Ryan 2, Rogers 1, Johnston 1, V.
Farnsworth 1, Harris 1, R. Cockburn 1, D. Tur-
ner 2, F. Townsend 1. Goals (27) :P. Boys 19,
G. Bain 7, E. Rigney 1.
CITY CUP—FIRST ROUND (6/9/l9).
Balmain defeated South Sydney by 19 (3-5) to
18 (4-3) at the Agricultural Ground. At half-
-time South Sydney led 8 to 7. For the winners
-Potter, Halloran and Proust scored tries; Wall
kicked 6 goals. For the losers Vaughan (2),
Horder and Baker scored tries; Horder kicked
3 goals. T. McMahon, referee.
Glebe defeated Eastern Suburbs bv 18 (4-3) to
17 (3-4) at S.C.G. For Glebe Ogle (3) and B.
•Gray scored tries, three of which were converted
by Bolewski ; for East Connerton, Caples and
Wright tries (two converted by Messenger), and
Messenger kicked 2 penalty goals.
Western Suburbs defeated Newtown by 18 (4-3)
to 5 (1-1) at St. Luke’s Oval. For West Mc-
Gowan, Easterbrook, Stettler and Connelly scored
tries, and Connelly kicked three goals; for
Newtown Brookes a try and Paul Boys a goal.
A. Farrow, referee.
North Sydney defeated Annandale by 18 (4-3)
to 10 (2-2) at North Sydney Oval. For winners
■ Jones, Peters, Murphy and Deane scored tries;
Jones and Ward converted one each. Ward also
kicked a penalty goal. For Annandale Hughes
and Geoghegan scored tries, and Usher kicked
*2 goals. W. Neill, referee.
THE LEAGUE CUP—FIRST ROUND.
GRADE.—South Sydney defeated Bal-
'main 21-4, Western Suburbs defeated Newtown
9-5, Glebe defeated Eastern Suburbs 8-7, North
Sydney defeated AnnandaJe 10-3.
THIRD GRADE.—FinaI : Balmain defeated
Glebe 3-2. Hall scored a try and Brolly a field
goal. Winners of Third Grade : 1908, Sydney;
1909, South Sydney Federal; 1910, Sydney ; 1911,
Leichhardt ; 1912, South Sydney ; 1913, South
Sydney Federal; 1914, 1915, Eastern Suburbs ;
1916, Balmain ; 1917, Eastern Suburbs ; 1918,
South Sydney ; 1919, Balmain.
CITY CUP SEMI-FINALS (13/9/19.)
Western Suburbs defeated Balmain by 15 (1-6)
to 12 (2-3) at Agricultural Ground; 14,000 pre-
sent. For winners Burns scored a try, Con-
nelly (4) and McPherson (2) kicked goals ; for
the lowers J. Craig and Conaghan scored tries,
and Wall kicked three goals. T. McMahon,
referee.
Glebe defeated North Sydney by 28 (6-5) to 7
(1-2) at S.C.G. For winners B. Gray (3), Sum-
mers, Benson and Pye scored, tries; A. Gray (3),
Bolewski and B. Gray goals. For North Sydney
Stenning a try and Ward converted it. Ward a
penalty goal. T. Dickenson, referee.
SECOND GRADE.—League Cup Semi-finals :
South Sydney defeated Western Suburbs by 16
to 8. At full-time each side had scored 8
points, and 10 minutes extra was played each
way. South added a further 8 points. North
Sydney beat Glebe 20 to 8.
CITY CUP FINAL (20/9/19.)
Western Suburbs defeated Glebe by 14 (2*4) to
10 (2-2) at Agricultural Ground ; 12,000 present.
T. McMahon, referee. Half the proceeds are
donated as a testimonial to S. <». Ball, J. Quin-
lan, E. Mead, G. Brennan, J. Edwards, as pioneer
officials of the League.
WESTERN SUBURBS.—A. White, full-back ;
W. Collins, P. Burns, L. Stettler, W. Con-
nelly (sent off the field in the first half),
three-quarters ; A. McPherson, five-eighth ; G.
McGowan, half-back ; H. J. Leddy, J. Reidy, W.
Joass, J. Redmond, E. Courtney, T. Tye, for-
wards.
GLEBE.—N. Proctor, full-back ; T. Leggo, E.
Summers, A. Bolewski, C. Ogle, three-quarters ;
R. Stirton, five-eighth ; P. Regan, half-back ; L.
Burge, A. Gray, M. Henry, J. Pye, B. Gray, E.
Swinson, forwards.
For Western Suburbs Connelly and Stettler
scored tries, and McPherson (3) and Connelly
kicked penalty goals. For Glebe L. Burge and
Ogle scored tries, A. Gray converted one and
kicked a penalty goal.
LEAGUE CUP FINAL (30/9/’l9).—South Syd-
ney 11. defeated North Sydney 11. by 10-7 at
the Agricultural Ground. For the former Law-
rence and Lane scored tries, and Courtney
kicked 2 goals. For N.S. Callaghan scored a
try and kicked two goals. T. Dickenson,
referee.


FRANK BURGE, the great try-getting forward, in his first season and as he is today.


LESLIE A. CUBITT, the brilliant wing three-quarter, in his early days in the First Grade
and as he is to-day.


H. HORDERS BRILLIANT RUN
WALLL QRABS THE S UBSTANCE BUT
TACKLES THE SHADOWN


[?]
[?]
[?]


74
CARTOON.


BOB CRAIG, THE VETERAN AND SECRETARY OF THE BALMAIN
RUGBY LEAGUE CONSTELLATION.


HORACE R. MILLER, Secretary of the N.S.W.
League.
N.S.W. RUGBY LEAGUE OFFICIALS, 1920.
Patron, Hon. Fred Flowers, M.L.C.;
president, Hon. J. J. Smith, M.L.C.;
vice-presidents, Messrs. J. Quinlan, C.
McDougall, W. Kelly, A. Latta and W.
A. Cann. The sub-committee are:
Management, S. G. Ball (chairman) j J.
Quinlan, L. Dargan, W. J. Chaseling,
and R. R. Craig; trustee, J. Quinlan; Ap-
peals and Protest Board, R. Lennon, E.
Dermody, H. Kelley; Judiciary, W. Kelly,
A. Latta, C. McDougall; Schools, R. L.
Cuthbertson, A. Latta, C. Upton, W.
Webb, C. McDougall; Grounds, L. Dar-
gan, J. Quinlan, C. Upton; Selection, E.
Mead, A. Burdon, H. Flegg; Referees’
Apointment Board, E. Mead, A. Bur-
don, H. Flegg, A. Ballerum, E. J.
Hooper.
COMPETITION WINNERS, 1919.
The winners of the many competitions
under the N.S.W. Rugby League in 1919
were: First Grade Premiership, Balmain;
City Cup, Western Suburbs; Second
Grade, Glebe; League Cup (junior),
South Sydney; Third Grade, Balmain.
Junior Leagues.—Annandaie: A Grade,
Stanmore. Balmain: A Grade, Arline;
B Grade, Balmain Fitzroys. Eastern
Suburbs: A Grade, Paddington Olives;
B Grade, Paddington. Glebe: A Grade,
Haymarket Junior. Newtown: A Grade,
Erskineville Kia-Ora; B Grade, Cam-
denville. North Sydney: A Grade, Mil-
son’s Pt. Waratah; B Grade, Blue’s Pt.
Kinkora. South Sydney: A Grade, Red-
fern Iona; B Grade, Redfern lona.
Western Suburbs, A Grade, Homebu§h;
B Grade, Summer Hill. Western Dis-
tricts: A Grade, Parramatta Endeavor;
B. Grade, Westmead Boys’ Home. St.
George: A Grade, Arncliffe Wanderers;
B Grade, Banksia Waratah. Southern
Districts: A Grade, Liverpool Wan-
derers; B Grade: Fairfield Juniors.
President’s Cup: Newtown. Schools.—
Metropolitan Catholic Schools: A Grade,
North Sydney; B Grade, St. Benedicts.
Christian Brothers’ Primary Schools:
Lewisham.


PASSING OF FRED. HENLEN.
The noted wing-forward of the Rugby
Union died late in November, 1919. He
finished his football career in the Rugby
League, playing with Newtown in the
early years and later acting as referee,
including a few of the representative
games in which New Zealand teams
figured. Fred Henlen was still on the
sunny side of fifty. A grand specimen
of the physical man when I last saw
him a few months prior to his death.
He stood well over 6ft, with the straight-
sapling-like build of his best football
days thickened immensely; yet it was not
ill-fitting. Fred Henlen came down from
Bathurst in the early nineties and played
with the Randwick Club, then champions
of the metropolis, under the leadership
of James McMahon—himself a very
powerful man. Rival wing-forwards
found Henlen the toughest of.the tough,
his strength prodigious, and a surprise,
because of his seemingly slender build.
His uncommon height, reach and
strength were supplemented by sound
knowledge of wing-forward science and
tricks, derived from the past-master,
Tom Elison, the originator of the posi-
tion. Ellison was one of the most
formidable members of the celebrated
Maori Rugby team of 1888, the pioneers
of International football, in which the
Dominions figured in England. The
shorter men of Henlen’s time who played
in the position—P. M. Lane, of the
Wallaroos, and “Billum” Edwards, of
Newcastle Carlton—to mention two,
were as hopeless as boys against him.
Cool as an icicle, he generally had Paddy
Lane rattled, and the more his nimble
rival and friend fumed, the more Hen-
len smiled, chivvied and checked him.
Edwards, the Newcastle crack of the
period, was a short, sturdy, nimble
player, who, like the Wallaroo celebrity,
passed away many years back. These
men were handled bv Henlen as a man
of twenty-one would handle a boy of
fourteen.
Among the men Henlen astonished
was W. McKenzie, the famous “Off-
side” of New Zealand, who came across
with two representative teams, and is
now residing in Melbourne. Amusing
stories have been told of their first meet-
ing on the field in 1893. “Off-side”
came over with a big reputation, and it
was no bubble. Henlen was a stringing
and a novice by comparison. The New
Zealander, a wag in football, introduced
himself to Henlen by preferring brief
and breezy advice prior to play start-
ing. He told the youth if he valued
his neck to give him a wide berth. “Off-
side” was tall, wiry and very strong,
and he could take a knock with the
best of them. But the battle had not
been going long before he found him-
self up against a snag, and as it pro-
gressed, “Off-side” became the man dis-
posed to give the other fellow plenty of
room. It was a rough go. But it was
characteristic of the pair that they did
the city together that night the best of
friends, all smiles, attired in frock coats
and wearing bell-toppers.


Lest We Forget
Major James F. McManamey, presi-
dent of the New South Wales Rugby
Union left for the fighting front in
June, 1915, and fell on Gallipoli on Sep-
tember 5, killed by shrapnel. He was a
man of whom every Rugby Unionist was
proud. He held every position in the
game, from representative player and
selector of State and Australian teams,
to president of the Union, and was the
ablest referee one ever saw. It is safe
to say that no man in the history of
Rugby Union football in this country
has been held in greater esteem by those
in the game or those who line the
pickets and fill the stands.
Educated at All Saints’ College,
Bathurst, and at Sydney University,
where he graduated, he first played Rug-
ger at the College, and later at the
University. He was one of the forwards
in the first New South Wales team ever
got together, that of 1882, which de-
feated Q island. He played with the
Universr ntil 1886, and then retired
to referee. In those days there were two
umpires as well as a referee, and the
umpires as a rule were active men. In
his entire football career Major Mc-
Manamey won golden thoughts from
players and officials of New Zealand,
Queensland, British teams, and those of
New South Wales by his fine qualities
as a man and by his profound knowledge
of Rugby, its laws and its traditions.
MAJOR J. F. McMANAMEY. President of the
N.S.W.H.U., killed on Gallipoli, 1915.


Rugby Union Football in 1919
THE A.I.F. TEAM.
The New South Wales Rugby Union
had practically suspended operations dur-
ing the currency of the war, and was
not in a position to place highly
organised teams against the A.1.F., as
its forces had been seriously depleted
by the ravages of war. The most interest-
ing purely local football of 1919 was that
.of the Naval and Military Colleges,
the Combined Great Public Schools,
and the matches for the schools’ premier-
ship. The schools showed excellent
form on the whole, with enthusiasm as
keen as ever. The clubs did not recover
to any appreciable degree, but are doing
much better in 1920.
The great matches in 1919 were those
played by the Army teams in England
for the King’s Cup. This coveted trophy
fell to the New Zealanders, whose sole
defeat was administered by Australia.
The forwards of the A.I.F. appear to
have beaten the great New Zealanders
at their own game. Their success in
this particular match won for them
tardy recognition from English critics,
and created keen desire by Australian
enthusiasts to see the pack at work.
This was met by the A.I.F. team play-
ing a series of matches in New South
Wales and Queensland, in which the
valor of their forwards was enhanced.
Nothing better has probably ever been
seen in Australia than the forward play
of this team. They were a great set of
men, powerful, fast, and a clever, co-
ordinated machine which never lost the
power to reveal match-winning or try-
netting individualism when the occasion
demanded it. Their backs collectively
were not in the same class, otherwise
their matches in Australia, instead of
providing routs for the opposition, would
have been slaughter.
A.I.F. TEAM’S RECORD.
Trench Team v. French Army, won 3-0; South
Africa, won 9-8; Leicester, won 8-6; Mother
Country, lost 3-6; South Africa, won 8-5; Royal
Air Force, lost 3-7; Canada, won 33-0; New
Zealand, even 6-5; Devon, won 11-3; R.N. D.,
won 14-10; Maestag (Wales;, won 18-3: PiH
Harriers (Wales), lost 3-12; Abertillcry (Wales),
won 1-3; Ogmore Vale (Wales), lost 3-6; Corn-
wall (Wales), won 9-0.
IN SOUTH AFRICA—Xata;, won 34-3.
IN AUSTRALIA.—N.S.W., won 42-14; Austra-
lia, won 28-18; New England, won 36-11;
Queensland, won 38-7; Queensland A.1.F., won
30-3; Australia, won 20-13; North-West Union,
won 52-6; Australia, won 22-6. -Totals, 446-156.
A.I.F. Rugby Union Team in
Australia
Bringing from overseas a set of for-
wards with a reputation for unusual
strength and brilliance, the A.I.F. team
quite realised expectations at the Sydney
Sports Ground on Saturday, July 3,
when they defeated New South Wales
by 42 to 14. The big fellows put plenty
of dash into their work, and their com-
bination was very fine. Well-condi-
tioned, they moved with the precision
of a machine, and possessed other ad-
vantages that the opposing eight could
not be expected to hold. The" were
very ably led by Lieut. W. T. Watson,
M.C., the N.S.W. and Australian repre-
sentative forward. The pack snowed
superb form, their work in the tight be-
ing far too good for anything thev were
U” against and their open work showing
off the combination magnificently. Thgy
rose ta Wallaby and All Blacks heights.
But the backs collectively were in a
different class altogether.
New South Wales wore maroon, owing
to the A.I.F. colors being practically
similar to the State’s usual jerseys—the
rising sun being substituted for the
Waratah.
A.LF.—Gunner Rankin (Vic.), full-back; Sgt.
D. Suttor (N.S.W.), figt. S. Egan fQ.) (injured
and replaced by Cpl C. Stennbig, N.S.W.), Lieut.
Pountney (N.S.W.), and Gunner Bosward
(N.S.W.), three-quarters; C.S.M. Buchanan
(N.S.W.), five-eighth; Pte. Flanagan (Q-), half-
back; Sgt. O. Sec (N.S.W.), Lieut. E. Cody
(N.S.W.),* Lance-Cpl. J. Thompson (0.). <pi.
Dunn (N.S.W.). Sgt. W. Bradlev (N.S.W.), Sgt.
G. Horsey (N.S.W.), Q.M.S. IBond (N.S.W.), and
Lieut. W. T, Watson (N.S.W.) (capt.), forwards.
NEW SOUTH WALES.—L. J. Dwyer (Orange),
full-back; E. Sheppard (Un:.), L. W. Wogan
(G.-B,), Dr. K. Garrett (G.-B.), and A. V. Mayne
(G.-B.), three-quarters; R. D. Hodgins (Man-
ning River), five-eighth; N. 'Ming.lv (Manly),
half-back; W. W. Gwynne (Uni.), G. R. McKay
(Cambridge), D. Loudon (Uni.), E. Fahey (E.S.)
(capt.), J. Holdsworth (ELS.), R. Friend (G.-‘B.),
G. Marshall (Uni.), and A. Gregg (Uni.), for-
wards. Referee, T. H. Bosward.
Dunn, Horsey (3). Bond. Codv, Suttor
(2), Pountney scored tries, Buchanan
four goals, Stenning a goal from a mark,
and Rankin dropped a goal for the
A.I.F. Hodgins and Mayne scored
tries, Hodgins dropped a goal, and Min-
kicked two goals for N.S.W.
N.S. WALES II. V. A.I.F. RESERVES.
In the fast and interesting reliminary
game the N.S.W. Second Fifteen defeated
the Reserves of the A.I.F. by 25 to 11.
F. W. Carr (2), D. Hodgins (2), E. T.
Carr, Bond, and Kilner scored tries,
Kilner converting two for the winners.
Elliott (2) and Rvan were the losers’
try-getters. Leahy converted one.
A.I.F. DEFEATS AUSTRALIA BY 28 TO 18.
All the features of Rugger that the
A.I.F. team demonstrated in their first
match were again shown at the Univer-
sity Oval on Saturday, August 12, when
thev defeated an Australian fifteen by
28 to 18, in the presence of 14,000 people.
The vigorous forwards kept up an in-
cessant attack. They did the purely


For
Agst.
F.
A.
T. G.
T. G.
A.I.F
Lost
.14
42
2 3
9 6
Queensland
Won
32
<14
8 4
4 I
Queensland
Won
30
13
8 3
3 2
Queensland
Lost
24
25
7 1
7 2
Queensland 11.
Won
42
12
10 6
4 0
Queensland
Won
17
8
5 1
2 1
forward work, then backed up, chipping
in with the backs, and moved like three-
quarters. Midway through tne second
spell there was a remarkable instance
of this, when a string of eight players
handled the ball in a ~assing rush and
practically every alternate soldier was
a forward, whose work did not suffer
when compared with that of those from
whom greater flectness and trickiness
are expected. Nor was this an isolated
instance, though it was probably an out-
standing example of the sustained work
of the forwards. They were moving
from kick-off to no-side.
A.I.F. —Gnr. Rankin (Vic.), full-back; Sgt. D.
Suttor (N.S.W.), Cpl. Stenning (N.S.W.), Lieut.
Pountney (N.S.W.), and Gnr. Bosward (N.S.W.),
three-quarters; C.S.M. Buchanan (N.S.W.), five-
eighth; Pte. Flanagan (Q.), (injured, and re-
placed by Lieut. S. Rvan, N.S.W".), half-back;
Sgt. G. See (N.S.W.), Lieut. B. Cody (N.S.W.),
Lance-Cpl. J. Thomson (Q.), Cpl. Dunn (N.S.W.),
Sgt. W. Bradlev (N.S.W.), Sgt. G. Horsey
(N.S.W.), Q.M.S. Bond (N.S.W.), and Lieut. W.
T. Watson (N.S.W.) (capt.), forwards.
AUSTRALIA.—E. Francis (Q.), full-back; E.
Sheppard (Uni.), L. W. Wogan (G.-B.), V.
Mooney (Q.), and A. V. 'Mayne (G.-B.), three-
quarters; N. Mingay (Manly), five-eighth; A.
Walker (E.S.), half-back; P. (Murphy (Q.), A.
Cotter (Q.), IF. Kreutzer (Q.), E. Fahey (E.S.)
(capt.), J. C. Ives (G.-fi.). R. Friend (G.-B.),
C. Thompson (E.S.) and A. Gregg (Uni.), for-
wards.
It was 11 to 8 in favor of A.I.F.
at half-time. Sec, Stenning (2), Bond,
Thompson, Bradley, Watson (2), scored
tries, and Buchanan 2 goals for A.I.F.
Wogan (2) and Mayne scored tries,
Mingay 3 goals (one penalty), Wogan
1 goal for Australia. Mr. T. H. Bcs-
ward was referee.
A.I.F. Defeats Australia
BY 22 TO 6 IN CLOSING MATCH.
The A.I.F. made their exit as a team
in keeping with their earlier form. In
eight games in Australia they were un-
beaten, scoring 446 points to 155.
In the concluding game at the Sports
Ground dn August 1, they defeated Aus-
tralia by 22 to 6, scoring all their points
in the first term, but even after the
interval thev had quite as much of the
play as their opponents. The Diggers*
team was altered from those which
played in Sydney previously, but the
A.I.F. reserves were very capable and the
loss of the cracks’ was not severely felt.
Suttor was replaced in the three-quarter
line by Stenning, and Cody and Horsey
in the forwards gave wav to O’Toole
and Ormiston. In no previous game did
Sydney Rugby Union enthusiasts see the
A.I.F. backs play so ably. This was
primarily due to the clean heeling by
the forwards —unusually clean for a
3-2-3 pack.
A.I.F. —Gnr. Rankin (V.), full-back; Cpl. Sten-
ning (N.S.W.), Pte. A. Lyons (Q.), Lieut.
Pountney (N.S.W.) Gnr. Bosward (N.5.W.),.
three-quarters; C.S.M. P. Buchanan (N.5.W.),.
five-eighth; Pte. Flanagan, half-back; Sergt. G.
See (N.S.W.), (Lieut. W. O’Toole, Lance-Cpl.
J. Thompson (Q.), Cpl. Dunn (N.S.W.), Sergt.
W. Bradley (N.S.W.), Lieut. Ormiston (N.S.W.),
Q.M.S. Bond (N.C.W.), Lieut. W. T. Watson
(N.S.W.), (capt.), lorwards.
AUSTRALIA.—R. L. Raymond (University)*
(injured and replaced by V. Mooney, Q.), full-
back; A. V. Mayne (Glebe-Balmain), J. Flynn
(Q.), L. W. Wogan (G.-B.), K. M. Sheppard
(Uni.), three-quarters; N. (Mingay (Manly), five-
eighth; A. Walker (E.S.), half-back; J. O’Sulli-
van (Q.), J. C. Ives -(G.48.), P. Murphy (Q.)*
C. Fox (G.-B.), E. Fahey (E.S.) (capt.), (R. M.
Friend (G.-B.), C. Thompson (E.S.), R. (Breen
(Q.), forwards.
Bradley, Stenning, Ormiston, See, Bos-
ward, Pountney scored tries, and
Buchanan 2 goals for the A.1.F., and
Breen and Murphy for Australia.
N.S. WALES RUGBY UNION IN 1919.
N.S. Wales Defeats Queensland
BY 32 TO 14.
New South Wales and Queensland
met on Monday, August 4, at the
Sydney University Oval, the Mother
State winning by 32 to 14. A game
interesting and fast, with the Maroons
showing up splendidly until the second
half was very well advanced, when their
defence crumbled.
Tries were scored by Maync, Mingay*
Gwynne (2), Watson (2). and Shepherd,
and 4 goals by Mingay for N.S.W. For
Queensland, Kreutzer, Layton (2), and
Clarkson scored tries. Thompson a goal.
QUEENSLAND.—T. Mooney, full-back; J.
Liddy, T. Lawton, V. Mooney, V. C. Clarkson,
three-quarters; S. Ryan, five-eighth; J. Flana-
gan. half-back; B. O’Sullivan. R. Murray, J.
Thompson, B, Horzig, P. Murphy (c.), P. Gren-
ning L. Lvons, S. Kreutzer, forwards.
NFW SOUTH WALKS. G. C. Walker
(YjM.C.A.). full-back; E. Sheopard (Uni.). D.
Hodgens (Manning), L. W. Wogan (G.-B.), A*
V. Mayne (0.-B.), three-quarters; N. Mingay
(Manly). P. Buchanan (A.1.F.), half-backs; G.
See (A.1.F.), J. Ives (G.-©.), F. Gwynne (Uni.),
J. W. Bradlev (A.1.F.), A. (A.I.F.),
W. T. Watson (A.1.F.), J. Bond (A.1.F.), R.
Friend (G.-B.),
New South Wales Wins
BY 30 TO 13.
At Sports Ground, August 9. At
the interval N.S.W. led by 27 to nil.
Later, the Maroons made a better fight,
adding 13 to 3, but were beaten by 30
to 13.


A.I.F. RUGBY UNION SCRUMMAGERS. 1919, AS THEY PACKED IN:—Back row: Sgt. G.
See, Lieut. E Cody, and Lance-Cpl. J. Thompson. Second row: Cpl. Dunn and Sgt. W.
Bradley. Front row: Sgt. G. Horsey, Q.M.S. Bond, Lieut. W. T. Watson (c.).
NEW SOUTH WALES.—J. H. Doswar.l
(A.1.F.), full-back; A. V. (Mayne (G.-B.), D.
Hodgins (Manning), L. W. Wogan (G.-B.), K.
M. Sheppard (Uni.), three-quarters; P. Buchanan
(A.1.F.), five-eighth; N. Mingay (Manly), half-
track; A. Ormiston (A.1.F.), J. Bond (A.1.F.),
W. T. Watson (A.1.F.), J. Bradley (A.1.F.),
K. Fahey (E.vS.), F. Gwynne (Uni.), J. C. Ives
(G.-B.), *K. Friend (G.-B.), forwards.
QUEENSLAND, —V. Mooney (injured, replaced
by T. Mooney), full-back; H. Kellaher, J. P.
Flynn, S. Ryan, J. Lyons (injured, replaced by
J. Liddy), three-quarters; M. J. McMahon, five-
eighth; J. Flanagan, half-bacs; B. O’Sullivan,
R. Murray, J. Thompson, B. Herzlg, P. Murphy,
W. Breen, A. Webster, S. Kreutzer, forwards.
Gwynne, Mayne (2), Sheppard, Ives,
Hodgins, Bond, Ormiston got tries.
Mingay (2) and Wogan goals for N.S.W.
Liddy and Ryan (2) tries and McMahon
2 goals for Queensland.
Queensland Defeats N.S. Wales
BY 25 TO 24.
After the showing by the Queensland
team in Sydney, it was not anticipated
that N.S.W. would be beaten in the re-
turn series. The result of the contest
at the Brisbane Cricket Ground on
August 23 was a surprise, especially as
N.S.W. led by 15 to 8 in the first half,
during which Mayne (2), E. W. Carr,
Chambers and Bond scored tries, none
being converted. Williams obtained two
tries for Queensland, and Lawton con-
verted one. Up to this stage N.S.W.
had considerably the better of play, but
tries by Fowles, Murphy, Flynn and
Thompson, the last being converted by


Lawton, gave Queensland a lead of
22-15. A goal to Buchanan and try to
Louden reduced this advantage to a
point. Tries to Grenning (Q.) and E. T.
Carr, and the game ended 25 to 24 in
favor of Queensland. J. Holdsworth,
the Eastern Suburbs forward, was subse-
quently sent to Brisbane to reinforce
the New South Wales team.
OUEENSLAND (Black and Gold). —V. Mooney,
full-back: F. Williams, J. llalferty J. P. Flynn
ic ) J Liddv three-quarters; T. Lawton, fave-
eiihth- S. A. Kvan, half-back; W. Brten, 8.
Kreutzer, C. Fowles, V. Grenning, P. Murphy,
j*. O’Sullivan, H. Murray, J. Thompson, ifor-
wards.
NEW SO I'TFI WALES (Navy Blue).—O.
Humphrevs, full-back; A. V. Mayne, K. Cham-
bers E. W. Carr, E. T. Carr, three-quartern;
P. Buchanan, five-eighth; N. (Mingay, half-back;
W. T. Watson (c.), J. (Bond, C. Thompson, *K.
Friend, E. J. Fahey, E. U. -McKay, D. Louden,
and J. Gwynne, forwards.
N.S. Wales Defeats Queensland
BY 17 TO 8
At Brisbane Cricket Ground, August 30,
1919.
NEW SOUTH IVALES. —P. Buchanan, full-
back; A. V. Ma.vne. R. Chambers, E. W. Carr,
and E. T. Carr, three-quarters; N. Mingay, five-
eighth; 0. Humphrey, half-back; T. Eyre, J.
Bond, W. T, Watson (c.), E. J. Fahey, R.
Friend, 1). Louden, J. Holdsworth, G. R. McKay,
forwards.
QUEENSLAND, —J. HaUerty, full-back; J.
Liddy, V. Mooney, J. P. Flynn (c.), P. Wil-
liams, three-quarters; T. Lawton, five-eighth;
Dr. L. W. 'Gall, half-back; G. Fowls-, S.
Kreutzer, W. Breen, P. Murphy, B. O’Sullivan,
R. Murray, L, Kent and J. Thompson, forwards.
Referee, J. England.
In the first spell McKay, Holdsworth,
and E. W. Carr scored tries, Mingay
converting one. Soon after resuming,
the home team scored a converted try
and had N.S.W. on the defensive tiTl
near the end, when Mayne and Mingay
obtained tries. On the Wednesday
N.S.W. defeated a second Queensland
fifteen by 42 to 12. The brothers Carr
had a field day. E.W. scored four tries
and E.T. three. Mayne scored twice
and Louden once. Mingay converted
four and Buchanan two. For Queens-
land, Dunshea (2), Brazier, and Liddy
were the scorers.
Sydney University Defeat
Combined Schools.
BY 30 TO 21.
Sydney University defeated Combined
Great Public Schools at the University
Oval by 30 to 21. For Schools, Wallace
(2), Reid, Michelmore and Coyle scored
tries; Hesslein converted one and Shee-
han two. For the winners, McLeod (2).
Loudon (2), Gwynne (2), Flattery, and
Fraser scored tries; Loudon converted:
two and Fraser one.
COMBINED SCHOOLS. —iM. B. Hes-elein, full-
back (S.G.S.), H. IV. Reid (T.S.C.), A. C. Wal-
lace (S.G.S)., W. J. Sheehan (T.K.S.), D, G.
Munro, three-quarters; J. J. Allman (S.J.C.),
(capt), five-eighth; J. ,F, Corry (5.1. C.), half-
back; J, L, Coyle (5.1. C.), .1. A. Vivers
(C.E.G.S.), H. C. Michelmore (T.K.S.), H. G.
Taylor (T.S.C.), W. H. Carr (N.C.), A. B,
F,rby (T.K.S.), H. Powers (S.J.C.), U. L. Hodg-
son (N.C.), forwards.
UNIVERSITY,—V. Johnston, full-back; 0. Noth-
ling, A. Callan, J. Flattery, K. B. Fraser, three-
quarters; A. McLeod, five-eighth; J. Morgan,
hah’-baek; D. Loudon (c), H. iHingst, F.
Gwynne, N. Sligar, A. Gregg, G. B. Hall, G.
Marshall and F. Slatterthwaite, forwards.
The Schools Defeat Services
After two successful annual visits to
Sydney the United Services—a combina-
tion of the cadets at the Royal Australian
Military and Naval Colleges were de-
feated by the Combined Great Public
Schools by 22 to 12. In 1917 the premier
team (The King’s School) were beaten,
and in 1918 the first of the engagements
between the Army and Navy and the
Combined Schools was won by the
Cadets in a thrilling finish. With time
drawing close in that match, the
Schools had the lead by 16 to 5, and
were thought secure from defeat, but
gradually the Services, playing irresis-
tibly, wore them down till a remarkable
try by A. B. MacDonald, who practi-
cally jumped over the arms of two
tacklers, brought the totals level, and
a similar try by the same player gave
them victory by 18-16.
The latest contest was not so exciting,
but was nevertheless full of interest from
kick-off to no-side. Unfortunately the
United Services team is chosen on a sys-
tem of proportional representation rather
than positive merit. The cadets at Dun-
troon and Jervis Bav meet annually, and
the winning team is permitted to have
eight representatives in the Services side,
the loser having the remaining seven. As
the leaving age at the Royal Naval Col-
lege practically coincides with that of en-
trance at Duntroon. the Navy cadets
have hardly the physique of those at
the Military College. Duntroon won
easilv last Winter, yet seven of the Navy
secured places in the side!
That two biw Service colleges draw
widely from Australia was evident from
the different parts their representatives
owned allegiance to. Every State in the
Commonwealth (exceot Western Austra-
lia) and the Dominion was represented.
In the Vice-Regal enclosure were Sir
Ronald Munro Ferguson and T.adv Fer-
guson, Admiral Viscount Jellicoe and


W.
L.
1>.
For
Agst.
Pt>.
Grammar
. 6
0
1
270
22
13
The Scots’
. 6
1
0
119
81
12
The Kind’s
4
2
0
147
m
8
St. Joseph’s
4
2
0
116
92
S
St. Ignatius
. 3
3
1
99
79
7
Newington
•7
5
0
102
110
4
t'.K.G.S
. 1
6
0
49
150
Syd. -High School ..
. 0
7
0
22
331
0
G.P.S.
PREMIERS.
Lady Jellicoe, Sir Walter and Lady
Davidson. Sir Francis Newdigate-New-
degate (Governor of Tasmania) and Com-
modore Dumaresq, C. 8., and Rear-Ad-
miral E. P. F. Grant, C. 8., R.N., Rev.
Bro. Edwin (hon. sec.).
The game was the preliminary to the
return between New South Wales and
Queensland, and Rugby Union legislators,
players of the past and present, -«cie
there galore. By winning, the Com-
bined Schools are entitled to hold —until
defeated —the Forsayth Shield, a hand-
some trophy donated by Mr. J. C. M.
Forsayth, of Vaucluse.
UNITED SERVICES. —C. M. Thomas (Army—
Vic.), full-hack; H. P. Middleton (Navy—N.S.
Wales), S. H. Spurgeon (N. —Vie.), H. H. Wells
(A. —Vic.), and D. L. Wilson (A. —N.S.W.),
three-quarters; A, 'B. Macdonald (A. —N.S.W.),
capt., five-eighth; IV. 11. Williamson (N. —
N.S.W.), half-back; K. R. Robertson (A. \.Z.),
T. F. Ilavmen (N. —().), A. D. Casey (N.—Tas.),
D. T. (Maxwell (A—N.Z.), F, B. Morris (N. —
Vie.), A. W. Greville (A.—N.Z.), H. H. Pigott
(A. —N.S.W.), and R. S. Pearson (N. —S.A.),
•forwards.
The Combined G.P.S. team was exactly
similar to that which was defeated by
University on the Wednesday.
Tries were scored by Reid, Wallace
(3), Munro; oenalty goal and 2 goals
by Hesslein for Schools; and tries bv
Macdonald, Greville and Pigott, and
penalty goal by Webb for U.S.
Duntroon Defeats Sydney
University
If any proof were needed that the
United Services fifteen against the
Combined Schools was not chosen
according to merit it was provided at
the University Oval on the Monday,
when one of the component parts (The
Army) defeated University, who shared
with Glebe-Balmain the leading posi-
tion in the metropolitan premiership,
i'here were many military cadets playing
whose omission from the combination
which had faced the Schools would be
inexplicable if merit alone had counted.
The Duntroon cadets, lacking a bit in
finish, but very fiery, fairly broke Up the
Blue and Gold forwards, and after lead-
ing 15-6 at half-time, won by 23-11. The
Governor-General, General Parnell and
Captain Broadbent were present.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN .MILITARY COLLEGE—
Campbell (X.S.W.), lull-back: F. Batley (N.Z.).
P. -M. Pitt (Q.), H. Wells (Vic.), D. E.
Wilson (N.S.W.), three-quarters; A. B. Macdonald
(N.S.W.), five-eighth; G. M, MeCaskill (N.Z.),
half-back: A. W. Greville i('N.Z.), R. B. Hone
(S.A.), H. B. Pigott (N.S.W.), D. T. Maxwell
(X.Z.). J. A. M. Clachan (N.Z.), V. Sudgen
(N.Z.), J. Brooke (N.Z.), R. P. Robinson (N.Z.),
forwards.
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.—O. Nuthllng, full-
back; E. Sheppard, A. Callan, R. L. Raymond,
J. Sullivan, three-quarters; A. Robinson, fLe-
eighth; J. -Morgan, half-back; D. Loudon (capt.),
1L Hingst, J. Foote, N. Sligar, A, Gregg, S.
Satterthwaite, G. Marshall and B. Hall, for-
wards.
Wells dropped a goal from a mark,
and a little later the ’Varsity backs were
overwhelmed, and Robertson passed to
Wells, who scored. 6 to nil. Wilson—
an old High Schools boy—quickly rushed
over, and it was goaled. 12 to nil.
Passing between MeCaskill and Macdon-
ald brought a try to Wilson. 15 to nil.
Before half-time Morgan and Sligar
scored for University. Duntroon, 15 to
6. Resuming, ’Varsity livened, and
Hingst scored a try, which Sullivan
converted. By good tackling and bust-
ling forward play Duntroon overran the
’Varsity. Maxwell and Pigott scored,
and MeCaskill converted one. Royal Aus-
tralian Military College winning by 23
to 11.
N.S.W. Great Public Schools
Premiership, 1919.
WON BY SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
M9O, 1891, 1592, 1893, 1891, 1893, The King's
School; 1896, Newington College: 1897, 1898, 1899,
Sydney Grammar School; 1900, Newington Col-
lege; 1901, 1902, 1903, The King's School; 1901,
1905, 1906, 1907, St. Joseph’s College; 1908, 1909,
Sydney C. of E. Grammar School; 1910, The
King’s School; 1911, 1912, Newington College;
1913, 1914, The King’s School; .1913, 1916, Sydney
Grammar School; 1917, The King’s School; 1918,
St. Joseph's College; 1919, Sydney Grammar
School.
Brisbane University Defeated
BY SYDNEY UNIVERSITY.
Brisbane University football team did
not create a very good impression in the
first Inter-’varsity game at the Univer-
sity Oval on August 13—30 to 10. They
were outclassed by Sydney University.
Rugby Union football was at a stand-
still in Queensland throughout the war,
and the ’Varsity suffered more than any
of the other teams, many of whose
members played with League clubs until
the Union was ready to resume. In
addition, the Brisbane representatives
have been playing the modified rules
sanctioned by the Queensland R.U., and
the change to the proper code did not
make for improvement in their form.
They were physically far from the
equals of the Blue and Gold, and gave


w.
L.
©.
Points.
F. A.
Pts.
University .. .1 .
.. 13
1
0
310
133
26
Olebe-Balmain ..
.. 10
4
0
227
156
20
Manlv
.. 8
6
0
206
146
16
©astern Suburbs
.. 5
9
0
195
133
10
Cambridge .. ..
10
0
130
259
8
V.M.C.A
.. 2
12
0
6S
327
4
a very poor display. Lawton, the repre-
sentative player, was the best back,
sound in handling the ball and a power-
ful kick. For the winners, Fraser (2),
Hingst (2), Nothling, Jacobs and Din-
ley and McCarty scored tries, McCarty
converting three. For Brisbane, Clark-
son obtained two tries, Lawton convert-
ing both. C. E. Morgan referee.
W. W. M. Arnold.
Mr. William Munnings Montague
Arnold (Monty), the Rugby Union stal-
wart, who died at Stradbroke, Paterson
River, Maitland, on March 6, 1919, aged
68, looked bright and strong when I
met him in the paddock at Randwick’s
classic heath a few months earlier.
Monty Arnold and his brother, Mr.
Richard Arnold, were in at the genesis
of Rugby in this country. They saw it
develop from a healthy seedling into a
giant oak, then wither away a bit, the
result of piled-up affluence following tre-
mendous popularity, allied with a lack of
vision among the men who were steer-
ing the wheel when it was on high waves
of popular enthusiasm.
My first recollection of Monty Arnold
was in days when he was very big and
I was small. Standing well over 6ft.,
straight as a towering eucalypt, he had
bright red hair and was a commanding
figure of a man as referee in the field
of play. This was years after he had
forsaken the jersey, for I never saw him
play, even in the years when the great
club matches were decided on the open
Moore Park, and when Wallaroo and
University were walled in by crowds
which heeded not the touch-line.
Monty Arnold was a man of strong
opinions, and of forceful speech at
Rugby meetings. Shall we ever forget
his fierv verbal encounters with Mr.
Lewis G. Abrams, the one a towering
giant, the other a slim son of Lilliput;
the one as full of fight and. as imper-
vious to criticism as the other, both
striving for the one goal, as they saw
it from widely diverging angles?
Monty Arnold played in the Wallaroo
forwards with his brother in the years
before Intercolonial Rugger was estab-
lished in 1882. The Wallaroos were
formed in 1870 by the brothers and a
few others of their time, who were im-
pressed with the national possibilities of
the game as compared with the more
confined outlook in the Australian game,
which, popular in Victoria, was derided
in hostile quarters in Sydney.
In 1877, Sir Joseph Carruthers, then
hon. secretary of the Sydney University
R.U. Football Club, proposed the repeal
the laws of Rugby with a view to evolv-
ing a code “to provide against the fre-
quency of scrummages, and otherwise
allow of more display of football proper.’ -
Anathema to the brothers Arnold and
other Wallaroo men, this was thrown,
out. When the old cosmopolitan clubs
in 1900 made way for the district clubs,
in keeping with the innovation success-
ful in cricket, the Arnolds, who strenu-
ously opposed every move, transferred
their allegiance to the North Sydney
Club, but were as ardent as ever in their
admiration of The King’s School football.
Rugby Union football in Australia
owes a very great deal to Richard and
Montagu Arnold, and it is a very great
pity that its lustre was ever dimmed,
for it had created traditions in sport in
this country second only to cricket’s.
Though Australian-born, Richard Arnold
was educated at Rugby, hence his early
and abiding love for the English game.
That school, more than any other, influ-
enced the beginnings of football in Aus-
tralia, for it was there, too, that T.
W. Wills,' the Victorian cricketer, who
was practically the founder of the Aus-
tralian game of football, was educated.
Clearly he did not carry away from
Rugby impressions of football similar
to those of Richard Arnold.
If the spirit of the Arnolds live in
Rugby Union football of the future, the
Rugby League will never kill it. And
if so, some day its sponsors may gradu-
ally come to feel with more delicate
precision the democratic Colonial pulse.
They may then administer the great
game with the spirit, enthusiasm, pro-
gressiveness and breadth of all that is
best in Australian sport. But for this
to come about, the Rugby League will
have to slumber. And it has taken very
few winks in its thirteen years of exist-
ence.
NEW SOUTH WALES RUGBY UNION.
PREMIERSHIP TABLE.
New South Wales Rugby Union Officials:
President, Hon. H. Y. Braddon, M.L.C.; vice-
presidents, Mr. T. Duggan, Mr. J. J. -Davoren,
Mr. W. A. Gordon. Mr. H. D. Wood, Dr. H. M.
Moran, Major W. F. (Matthews and Mr. F. J.
Herlihy; hon. treasurer, Mr. C. A. Fairland;
secretary, Mr. A. R. B. Palmer. Headquarters:
6 Bligh-strcet, Sydney.


SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL, Great Public Schools’ Premiers of N.S.W., 1919:— Back row: W. Crossing, G. B Wilkinson R Loudon.
R .K. Renwvick, J. V. Vandenberg. Middle row: L. Moore, R. E. Ludowici, M. B. Hesslein, A. C. Wallace (c.). D. G Munro. N.S. Lanadon,
F. H. Ludowici. Front row: C. Saxton, F. Bayldon, J. M. Rossell.


W.
I).
L.
Points.
K. A.
Pt*.
t ullimiwooil .. .
. .. 13
0
3
1243
761
d2
South Melbourne
.. 12
0
4
1111
7uf)
43
Carlton
. .. lb
0
6
1144
901
40
Kiehmoml .. .
. .. 10
0
6
inss
916
40
V itzrov
.. y
1
«
1074
8.57
3.3
K**en<lon
7
0
9
924
977
23
Si. iiilda
T
0
9
772
1094
23
• u-c-loiijr
. .. 3
1
12
794
1076
14
Melbourne .. ..
0
10
647
-1.506
0
THE
fix.ua
w.
D. L.
F.
A.
Collinjarwood ..
2
0 1
1ST
173
l.'k-imiond .. ..
2
0 1
200
1S2
South -Melbourne
0.
0 1
.59
73
Carlton
0
0 1
46
64
Australian Rules Football
VICTORIAN LEAGUE PREMIERSHIP.
Collingwood Eclipse Richmond
in the Grand Final
The Victorian League premiership
was won on October 11 by the minor
premiers, Collingwood, who defeated
Richmond 11 goals 12 behinds to 7 goals
11 behinds. It was a fitting climax to
a good season, and the honors went to
the best team of the year. The game
as an athletic spectacle was not a suc-
cess. It dragged wearily towards the
close, when a Richmond debacle set in;
at a time, in fact, when Richmond, tak-
ing a line through the previous week’s
game, was expected to recover. In the
previous match, the rather humiliating
display of Collingwood, as a prospective
premiership team, gave rise to contro-
versy. With the double game—a final
and a grand final—and with the added
revenue an additional game brings, there
invariably arises a suspicion in dubious
minds that the team with the double
chance, should 'it be defeated, is not out
to win. Collingwood is not a team of
that calibre, and no charge can be laid
against any other club. It is refreshing,
nevertheless, to hear the frank admis-
sions by Collingwood’s managers as to
the cause of their team’s defeat. It was
over confidence. The team regarded
Carlton as their hardest contending fac-
tor; but that team having been dis-
missed, Richmond to Collingwood was
an easy nut to crack. The shell, how-
ever, was strong; its fibre was firm, and
the sweets of victory consequently went
to the underrated side. It is such false
valuations that bring spice to the sport,
although, at the same time, opening the
flood gates of criticism.
Collingwood literally smiled all through
the grand final game. There were a few
tense moments, a number of critical
situations, and occasions when supreme
pressure had to be applied; but the
Magpies always “looked the side"- —big,
husky, and strong, and with the lighter
men frisky, pacy and clever. Richmond
shared the burdens and the successes up
till half-time and well into the third
quarter, but then Collingwood went
ahead, and Richmond fell back, mere
broken reeds. In the first quarter the
scores were: Collingwood, 1 goal 5 be-
hinds to 1 goal 2 behinds; but the figures
are not a reflex of the play, for Colling-
wood were superior everywhere but for-
ward.
Thorpe had a watchful eye on the
crack forward, Lee, and he checked him
well in the air, but in ground play Lee
had the call. Bayliss, a beautiful left-
foot kick —the best, perhaps, in the
League—scored for Richmond, and Lee,
off a free-kick, obtained Collingwood’s
goal for the quarter. It would be in-
teresting to know how many goals Lee
has this season scored from free kicks.
He is an adept at securing them, sure,
but the majority of them are deserved.
The second quarter was more fruitful
both in goals and good play. The situa-
tion in a general sense improved, and
Richmond were only four points to the
bad at the long interval. Seddon scored
a lucky goal for Collingwood—a dribble
that went through unguarded posts—
Bayliss scored again for Richmond, Lee
obtained the third for Collingwood, and
in the ding-dong play that ensued three
more goals were registered. Two came
from a tricky fair-haired youth in Don,
of Richmond, and Curtis, a great high
mark, secured Collingwood’s fifth.
Summarised, Collingwood’s play was
stronger, and they found the open spaces
better. Richmond were quite as fleety,
but they stopped at trifles. Their players
were over-anxious for free-kicks which
never came. Strength and pace were
well blended, consequently the football
was now interesting.
Moffatt, the Goliath of the Richmond
side, who was a great factor in the ruck
the previous week, was well guarded,
first by McCarthy, Collingwood’s cap-
tain, and then by Walton, one of the
crack men of the team, both of whom
have bulk. A harvest of free kicks went
to Moffatt, but the strain told on the
burly Richmondite as the game wore on.
Lee scored for Collingwood after a
delay about the posts, and some clip-
ping football was then witnessed by
Richmond’s half-backs, Huggard, Hislop
and Parkinson. They individually and
occasionally collectively worked the play
up, but only for the forwards to fail.
Harley, however, got them a goal eventu-
ally, and Richmond looked like coming


on. It was a feeling that quickly-
vanished. Walton scored again for Col-
lingwood, and Twomey soon after added
the eighth goal. Richmond were then
in a fix. The points were all against
them, and on the play they did not look
like making them up.
From this stage out there was very
little about their play to flatter their
supporters. More goals came to each
team, but Collingwood always had the
strong upper hand. Since the League
was established in 1897 the Woodsmen
have won the premiershi- on five occa-
sions, four times they have been runners-
up, six times third, and five times fourth.
They have missed a place on three occa-
sions only.
R. Lee, with a grand total of 56 goals,
easilv won the goal-kicking competition.
He secured three of the number in the
grand final, and missed four chances to
score by points. He was again the best
forward on the ground. Collingwood’s
leading players were McCarthy, Twomey,
Pannam, Walton, Hughes, Curtis and
Laxton; Richmond’s best were Huggard,
Hislon. Herbert, Don, Harley, Thorpe
and Hall. Elder’s umpiring was again
good. About 47,000 people witnessed the
game, a total of approximately 100,000
for the last two matches. The receipts
for the final matches aggregated close on
£BOOO, a record for League final games
in Victoria.
Victorian Association Final
FOOTSCBAy DEFEAT N. MELBOURNE
Notwithstanding the immense counter-
attraction at the Carlton-Collingwood
game across the way, 20,000 crammed
into the East Melbourne Ground, paying
£771 to witness the Association final
between North Melbourne and Footscray
on September 27. North Melbourne have
been at the top of the tree unchallenged
for years, but, like Rome of old, their
glory has begun to fade. Possibly the
men who have borne the brunt of the
fray are feeling the weight of years.
Anyway. Footscray had little difficulty
in snatching the Premierhip, after a
contest in which the winners led from
end to end. although in the middle of
the match North managed to get within
a point or two of the ± ricolors. Scores,
Footscray 8.17 (65), North Melbourne
6.7 (43).
Footscray owe their triumph princi-
pally to the helo of Morgan and Howell,
the South Melbourne trans-
ferred to Association footbaTl. Morgan
in the season has kicked the astonish-
ing total or over 70 goals, while Howell
has been the champion ruck man of the
competition, a position, however, he
would have occupied had he remained
with the League. Indeed, it is tolerably
certain that had South Melbourne re-
tained these two men, they would have
won the Victorian Premiership. Others
who did well for the winners were Pat-
terson on the wing, Martin roving, Ed-
wards back, Ford half-back. Craddock
(who kicked four goals), Morgan back,
Greaves and Banbury forward. North’s
rover, Hardy, for whom so many of the
League clubs have angled unsuccessfully,
was in fine form, and received an ova-
tion at the close, a rare occurrence
from the supporters of a beaten team.
Victoria Defeated South Australia
IN GREAT FINISH AT ADELAIDE.
The Interstate match Victoria v. South
Australia was played on the Adelaide
Oval on Saturday, July 5, in perfect
weather. The attendance, about 25,000,
was the largest recorded at an Inter-
state game in Adelaide, with a gate ex-
ceeding £IOOO. A great number of people
entered without paying owing to the
collapse of one of the gates. It was
a grand game—in doubt until a few
minutes before the close. Victoria won
by a goal, playing particularly fine in
the last quarter
The game was fast and open through-
out, and played in a fine spirit. South
Australia were the first to score, though
the Victorian backs demonstrated in the
first few minutes that they were a
powerful division. Eicke and O’Brien
shone out in that department, and the
St. Kilda man was the best nlayer on
the field. South Australia kicked 3-2
before Victoria scored. , The visitors sel-
dom had the ball more than a few yards
over the centre line during the first quar-
ter of an hour. Before the quarter closed,
however, they instituted powerful attacks]
which overcome all opposition. Eicke,
Fitzmaurice, O’Brien, Ogden, Rattray,
Laxton and Lee were conspicuous in
forwa'*d movements, which resulted in
Furnell and Lee each getting a goal be-
fore the quarter ended. South Australia,
3-4; Victoria, 2-0.
In the second quarter Victoria no
longer seemed inferior in speed, and ap-
plied their weight in a fair and effective
manner. Moriarty, at centre half-back,
was a lion in the oath of the visitors, but
the Victorians kent South Australia from
scoring in the quarter, and added 3-3 to
their own tally. Dayman (S.A.) was
hurt and partlv incapacitated. The Vic-
torians scored five goals before thev
missed a shot or got a behind. Lee
was in great form. At half-time Victoria
led by 5-3 to 3-4.
South Australia put on a goal within a
few seconds. They continued aggressive
and passed their opponents, play mov-
ing with marvellous rapidity. The


Victorians were hard on the defensive,
but could not hold their spirited antagon-
ists. South Australia put on 3 goals in
5 minutes, and led at three-quarter time —
8.8 to 6.4.
In the last quarter the Victorians were
assisted by the breeze. They developed
a magnificent finishing game. The Ade-
laide backs strove valiantly, and kept
them from scoring for several minutes,
then Lee sent a place-kick through.
Eicke, exceptionally brilliant, marked
over all opponents. The quarter was
well advanced before Victoria scored
again, then Laxton kicked a goal, and
the deficit was only 2 points. Excite-
ment was intense, but it was seen that
the Victorians were wearing down the
wonderful defence of the South Austra-
lians. Quick, well-judged hand ball
started the visitors goalwards again, and
Walton put his side in the lead. South
Australia made a might effort to re-
cover, but Victoria was still in the
ascendant, and Won a spectacular and
hotly contested game by a goal. Vic-
toria’s superioritv was in their use of
weight, cool judgment, an?" ability of the
■forwards. With a forward like Lee the
South Australians would probably have
won well.
The goal-kickers for Victoria were
Lee (5), Farrell, Rattray, Laxton, Wal-
ton; and for South Australia Sibley (3),
Dayman (2), Congear, Robinson and
Dewar. O’Connor’s umpiring did not
satisfy the Victorians, who were dis-
satisfied at free kicks for kicking in the
ruck.
GOAL-KICKING RECORD.
Robertson kicked 14 of the 29 goals
South Melbourne scored against St.
Kilda. There is an Adelaide perform-
ance which takes precedence over any
in the This stands to the credit
of A. (Bos) Daly, who succeeded C. W.
G. Woods at goal sneak for the Nor-
woods in the 90’s prior to the estab-
lishment of the district system. Norwood
met Adelaide at Kensington Oval, and in
a total of 29 goals Bos Daly (brother of
the invincible Bunny) contributed 15, a
tally which has never since been reached.
GEORGE VAUTIN
Brilliant Tasmanian Discusses
Giants, Past and Present,
in Victoria and Tasmania
(BY BOB DAWES—“OLD-TIMER”)
Nearly 29 years passed since I had last
seen him. He thought I wouldn't know
him, and had a yarn prepared for me.
But as he entered the room I exclaimed :
•‘Hullo, George, old chap ! Glad to see
you !’* And we “shook.’*
It was George Vautin—Nugget, we
called him—who for many years in Tas-
mania and Victoria delighted spectators
and confounded opponents by h:s skill
on the football field. In The Referee I
have stated that George Vautin was the
trickiest and prettiest player ever seen by
me in a long association with the game.
That opinion is shared by hundreds.
If players and spectators of the matches
at Hobart in the brave days of old were
asked who was* the most graceful foot-
baller who ever appeared on the local
grounds, one name would, in almost
every instance, be given—“ George
Vautin.”
Like most of us, George has dispensed
with his moustache, and_his hair is not,
of course, so black nor so profuse as it
was. Still, he has_ much more thatching
than many of his age. George is 50. A
trifle thinner than when he performed so
brilliantly on the field, he still possesses
a pair of broad shoulders, and is as
straight as a ramrod. His eyes do not
shine with their pristine brightness, but
that could hardly be expected. Con-
stantly at use every day in dispensing
medicines (for George is a chemist) does
not tend to increase the brilliancy of
one’s orbs.
CRACK PLAYER AS A BOY.
Every boy in Hobart “took off his hat’’
to George as the crack player. We looked
upon him as quite a super-lad, and he
took part in representative matches when
he had scarcely discarded knickerbockers
—and not only played in reps., but was
always one of the stars when great foot-
ballers were numerous in the tight little
isle.
We went to the same school—vhe City
School, when the Rev. F. Shann'and Mr.
T. R. Marsden were the joint masters.
The latter was a football enthu c iast, and
was manager of the team from Tasmania
which visited New South Wales in 1890.
George Vautin and I were members of
the combination.


George was in the first Tasmanian team
which visited Victoria (1887), and was
also with the 1889 reps.
IDOL OF FOOTBALL FANS.
The number of tricks, dodges and turns
he invariably unfolded in all his games
made him the idol of the public. He was
also speedy. But what caught the eye
more than anything in his rare football
stock-in-trade was grace of movement.
Beautifully built, symmetrical limbs, and
always neatly costumed, he presented a
picture to take the eye of anyone who
claimed to be a judge of manly form. In
action he riveted the attention by the
easy—and at times speedy—manner in
•which he eluded opponents ; frequently
made them ‘‘look silly.”
When the late Mick Grace was in
Sydney coaching our boys, he told me
an amusing story of how George tricked
an opponent. “We (Fitzroy) were
playing Essendon,” said Mick, “and the
ground was very muddy. George had
"the ball, and one of our fellows hurled
himself at the elusive one and, in the
certainty of. having got him, made a re-
mark the reverse of complimentary. But
George dodged, and, missing him, our
chap’s force caused him to fall. He
ploughed up the ground with his
shoulder, and the fellows in proximity
laughed heartily at his discomfiture.”
THE LENGTH OF THE MAITLAND GROUND
George gave an amazing instance of
his brilliance in the match Tasmania
played at Maitland. The skipper asked
him to try to run the length of the
r ground, the rest of us to shepherd him.
He secured the ball right back, and un-
folded one of the trickiest and most
dazzling runs ever accomplished. His
■ opponents were not top-notchers, but
- there were 20 good and strong. George
fairly roused the spectators into enthu-
siasm as he beat one after another of
his foemen by his wizardry. He wound
up by a shot for goal, but the ball passed
just outside the post. I am inclined to
the opinion that Melbourneites did not
see George at his best. Although young
when he went there—about 22—he had
been playing big football for about six
years, and some of the keenness which
he had to the full in his teens had some-
what waned when be left the isle to
play for Essendom However, his form
was brilliant in Victoria, and the scribes,
when speaking of him. usually described
him as the Meteoric Vautin. He would
have made an ideal centre three-quarter
at Rugby.
“I still attend the matches,” replied
George to a question, ‘‘but the players
of to-dav are not so brilliant as they
were a quarter of a century ago. For
instance, I think the team Essendon
fielded in 1893 would easily have beaten
the crack teams of last season.
“Eicke, of St. Kilda, was the best all-
round player in Victoria last year, his
high marking for one of his height being
a revelation. Hughes f Collingwood)
and Herbert (Richmond) were two
clinking ruck men. Herbert reminds
me of Joey Tankard. His display in
the semi-final was something out of the
box. Laxton (Collingwood) is a top-
notch all-rounder.
DICK LEE AND THURGOOD.
“Dick Lee is undoubtedly a great for-
ward. His goal record year after year
plainly shows that; but I would not
compare him with Albert Thurgood.
You see, the big fellow could notch
goals from distances that Lee could not
kick. If I live to be a hundred,’’ said
George, “I don’t believe I shall see Thur-
good’s equal as a forward. He kicked
goals from distances considered to be
impossible, even to men wno were taking
part in the big matches -Saturday after
Saturday.”
AMPY EDWARDS SUREST MARK.
Vautin agrees with an oft-repeated
statement of mine that Ampy Edwards
was the surest mark he had ever en-
countered. “I have seen all the aerial
champions, but Edwards possessed the
most adhesive pair of hands of the lot,”
Nugget went on. ‘T have repeatedly
given this answer to the question in Mel-
bourne. It is always cropping up. You
saw Commotion Pearson when we were
in Melbourne on that tour in 1889? Well,
he marked splendidly. Still he brought
down only a few dazzlers in a match,
whereas Edwards was doing the trick the
whole afternoon. Did you ever see a
better mark than Ampy’s against South
Melbourne in 1888, I think ? (I shook
my head.) The ball dropped right in
the mouth of the goal. Up sprang all
the crackerjacks, among them Peter
Burns, the idol of the football world at
that time. But Edwards could always
calculate to a nicety the time to rise, so
that when he was at his highest the bail
would reach his hands. And he did it
on that occasion. He flew into the air
like a bird, marked clearly from the
bunch, and punted an easy goai- Two
of the best marks Victoria has produced
were Hughie Gavin and Joe Hogan.”
I showed George a letter from Harry
Wilson, written not long before the old
Northern representative died, stating
that he had seen all the great players, but
had never seen the equal of Ampy Ed-
wards as an arial artist.


THURGOOD BEST ALL-ROUNDER.
“It crops up nearly every Saturday in
the football season, and opinions vary.
But I really think that Albert Thurgood
was the best all-round player I have
ever seen. He could take any place and
shine with a brilliancy not approached
by anyone else. Then his marvellous
kicking made him such a match winner.
Fred McGinis ? Yes, he was a wonder.
Every time he handled the ball he did
some service with it for his side. He
picked his man and unerringly passed
to him—the best ever at that phase oi
the game. His name will be known as
long as the game lasts as one of its
greatest rovers.
CHARLIE EADY THE CRACK BACK.
“One could hardly call Charlie Eady
an all-rounder, for the simple reason that
he played in only two places—back and
roving. As a back he stood, like Katisha’s
tooth, alone. His high marking, short
Dave McNamara, the
Victorian, whose 86yds
Ift is world’s record
for a kick with the
Kugby ball.
runs, and long, low kicks, which so often
reached his half-forwards, made him a
veritable Gibraltar in defence. It was a
heart-breaking job for opponents to re-
peatedly work the ball forward and then
see the big fellow spring in the air, mark,
and return it. Hughie Gavin was the
next best defender. He was an absolute
genius at extricating himself from tight
positions.
“No list of great footballers would
be complete which did not include Dick
Condon—Collingwood’s champion. He
was fully equipped and knew the game
from A to Z. And what a head he had-
—a star indeed I told George that
Dick was in Sydney ; had been living
here for a few years, in fact.
"I must not forget to mention Dookie
McKenzie, who was my beau ideal of a
footballer. And there was the brilliant
Percy Trotter, who was well in the
limelight for two seasons. Amorg great
players must be included Peter Burns,
Jack Baker, and Jack Worrall—all old-
time clinkers. They were clever in every
department of the game. There was my
playmate, too, the late Dr. Colin
Campbell. As you know, we played
against each other in North and South
matches, and afterwards were together
with Essendon. Colin was a most dash-
ing player.
“And poor old Mick Grace ! What a
gem ! When Fitzroy beat us in a pre-
miership final in 1898, I said we were
vanquished by one man—Mick Grace. By
the way, I often see Cleary and Mailing,
who were a wonderful combination in
the nineties.
HAPPIEST DAYS IN TASSY.
“My happiest football days were spent
in Tasmania. We had some great times,
didn’t we ?” We did indeed.
I asked him to enumerate some of
the cracks there. “There were quite a
number of good ones,” he said, “among
them being Vere Harris, Billy Cundy,
Tommy Ryan, Peter Lovett, Charlie
Barlow, Audy Stuart, Charlie Goddard,
Billy Ward, Kenny Burn, Tommy
Hehir, Wobbler Seabrook, and Dicky
Langford.”
A W. G. GRACE INCIDENT.
George was also a representative Tas-
manian cricketer being a dashing bats-
man, and, like nearly all high-class Aus-
tralian footballers, a clinking field. He


M.
W
L.
D.
Points.
F. A.
Pts.
Sturt
12
10
2
0
771
564
20
West Torrens ..
12
9
3
0
602
560
18
North Adelaide..
12
7
5
0
610
471
14
Port Adelaide ..
12
6
5
1
695
544
13
South Adelaide
12
4
7
1
576
653
9
West Adelaide ..
12
4
S
0
633
843
8
Norwood
12
1
11
0
549
852
2
North Adelaide
Second
5 2
Round.
1 2
190
153
4
West Torrens ..
3
1
1
1
107
113
3
Port Adelaide ..
1
0
1
0
35
59
0
Sturt
3
1
1
1
104
131
3
top-scored for the Tasmanians against
XV. G. Grace’s team. He hit the G.O.M.
of cricket out of the ground. W.G
walked down the pitch and said : “Let
me handle your bat, sonny.” He took it
from George and swung it round, saying
as he did so : “It’s to heavy for you,
isn’t it ?” “No,” replied George, “I like
a heavy bit of wood.” W.G. was so im-
pressed with George’s display that he
thought Nugget would, if he practised,
get to England with an Australian
Eleven. George once made 87 not out
in a North v. South match, and his
highest score for East Melbourne was
254 against Richmond. I saw him give
a delightful exhibition of free hitting
•against Tom Kendall, who was a crack
bowler. I never saw any other bats-
man treat Tom’s bowling in such cava-
lier fashion. Tom kept wheeling them
up and smiling the while as George
belted him to the fence or over it.
WAS A SPEED MERCHANT.
George was also a fast' runner, and
won many races. I well remember com-
peting against him in the under 14 years
at the City School. George won fairly
comfortably. But on that day he also
vanquished the seniors, and won quite
a heap of trophies. Later on in his career
he also did well in races.
While in Sydney on his trip George
spent many happv hours with his quon-
dam club mate, Billy Crebbin, who has
been living in Sydney for some years.
The reminiscential tap was turned on
with a vengeance. For the benefit of
those who did not see him on the field,
Billy Crebbin was Essendon’s centre-
man for a number of seasons. Only a
little fellow ; but he loomed large for
the Same Old in many an important
match.
INTERSTATE SCHOOLBOYS’ MATCH.
The N.S.W. State School team on August 6 de-
feated the Melbourne boys by 5-6 to 1-10. The
goal-kickers for Sydney were McCure, Stiff, Mac-
Kay, Sherwood and Flynn. On August 30 they
defeated Victorian Schools at Melbourne by 8-8
to 7-8. The N.S.W. goal-kickers were Curry (3),
Flynn (2), Rodgers, Kell and Coglan.
A reconi September heat—92.3 degrees—pre-
vailed in Sydney on September 27. The foot-
ball debut of the visiting Victorian State
Schools’ team was, therefore, made under un-
congenial conditions. Owing to an enclosed
ground being unprocurable, their match, with a
local team selected from Metropolitan schools
playing the Australian code, was played on the
well-kept Domain area. From start to finish the
Sydney schoolboys showed superiority, and won
comfortably by 10-18 (78) to 4-6 (30). The Syd-
ney boys won the whole of the four games
played-y-three in Melbourne and one in Sydney—
a unique record in these matches, which were
initiated in 1905.
PADDINGTON WIN SYDNEY FINAL.
A stiff southerly tempered the bright sun for
the challenge final between East Sydney (miner
premiere) and Paddington at Erakineville Oval.
The attendance was good. At quarter time East
Sydney led by 2-1 to 0-1, and at half-time by
5.2 to 2.3. The third quarter showed East Syd-
ney, 7*o to 4-5, Shortly after the final quarter
opened, a brace of goals in rapid succession by
brought Paddmgtor. within striking dis-
tance of East Sydneys' score. This lifted the
game at one bound into the region of great-
ness. Each player l>ecame a vital force in re-
siKmse to the situation and the deafening roars
of the now thoroughly excited onlookers. East
Sydney supporters breathed relief as a 'beauti-
ful run by Newton was crowned with a fine
goal. A dominating mark by •Mclnemey (now
following) swung play into Eastern territory,
where Milton goaled. Then the Paddington
triumph came. East Sydney fought gamely, but
were overwhelmed. Scoring four goals in the
last eight minutes, Paddington ran out winners
by 11-10 (76 points) to 8-8 (36 points).
The season opening inauspiciously, but closed
with a brilliancy unsurpassed in the history of
the League. The whole series of final games
provided good contests. Though Paddington
played brilliantly throughout the final round
their i>erformance, taking the season as a whole,
did not merit premiership honors. Of 15 matches
they won seven and lost eight. East Sydney
(runners-up) won 10 and lost four, while New-
town, occupying third position, won 31 and lost
three. The extra match played by Paddington
is accounted for by their inclusion in the chal-
lenge final.
MELBOURNE GRAMMAR SCHOOL
PREMIERS.
In the premiership of the Victorian Public
Hchools, Melbourne Church of England Grammar
School had an unbeaten record, an honor they
had not secured since 1905. They defeated
Xavier College in the closing game by 15 goals
21 behinds (111 points) to 8 goals io behinds
(58 points). It was full of interest until the
third quarter was well advanced, when Grammar
went ahead. For the winners, Duigan (3), Cord-
wer (4), Croft (3), Larrett (2), Bretherton,
Mollison and Richardson were the goal-kickers,
ami for the Xavier, Hurley (5) and Cooke (2)
were successful.
In the other finishing game, Wesley over-
ran Geelong ■College by 26 goals 21 behinds (137
points) to 1 goal 2 'behinds (8 points). The
goal-kickers for the winners were Cook (11),
IMackav (3). Newman (3), Bedgood (2), Dixon
(2), fhackeray <2), Scott, Tulloch and Feather-
*tone. Wesley finished nmnere-up for the
premiership.
South Australian Football.
STURT PREMIERS FOR 1919.
STURT DEFEATS NORTH ADELAIDE.
A remarkable football season in South
Australia closed when Sturt defeated
North Adelaide for the premiership in a
play-off owing to the teams having tied
with 5.9 each ten days earlier. Thirty-
five thousand people attended the Ade-
laide Oval, and it ranks as the biggest


crowd ever gathered at one time for any
function in the historv of South Aus-
tralia. In the opening quarter North
Adelaide scored three behinds to two,
and at half-time were 1.4 to 3 behinas.
At three-quarter time they turned with
the game apparently in their grip with
their score 2.6 to 4 behinds. Sturt made
a remarkable recovery, and won right
on the call of time. With a minute to
go, Golding had a shot for goal, but it
fell short, but Beatty immediately secured
and recorded a behind. This brought
the scores: Sturt 2.5, North 2.6. With
but six seconds to go G. Nicolle marked
in front of goal. He kicked true, made
history for himself, and incidentally
won the premiership for Sturt, the scores
being; Sturt. 3 goals 5 behinds; North
Adelaide, 2 goals 6 behinds.
WEST TORRENS AND N. ADELAIDE TIE.
Football lovers were treated to an ex-
citing climax in the second round final
on Saturday, September 13, when West
Torrens and North Adelaide met for the
right to play Sturt for the major premier-
ship. However, so evenly matched did
they prove, that the privilege could not
be decided, each scoring 2 goals 3 oe-
hinds. The scores indicate a mighty
defence by both' the Blue and Gold and
Red and White, and ho matter which
wins in the play-off, it will probably be
found that Saturday’s game was really
a better test of merit than that in
which Sturt participates for final honors.
Still. Sturt has the best record for the
season, win or lose in the grand final,
and it would be harsh on the Double
Blues to have to take second place on
the result of one game.
MAGAREY MEDAL WINNERS.
The Magarey medallist is D. Moriarty,
of the South Adelaide Club. Each year
the trophy is presented by Mr. W. A.
Magarey for “the fairest and most bril-
liant player,” the umpires deciding. The
Magarey medal winners in the different
seasons are: S. Malin (Port Adelaide),
A. Green (Norwood), P. T. Sandland
(North Adelaide), T. Mackenzie (North
Adelaide and West Torrens), J. Mack
(Port Adelaide). S. Wave (Sturt), J.
Tierney (West Adelaide), R. Head (West
Adelaide), S. Hocking (Port Adelaide),
H. V. Cumberland (Sturt), D. Low
(West Torrens), T. Leahy (North Ade-
laide), J. Ashley (Port Adelaide), F. M.
Barry (South Adelaide), and D. Moriarty
(South Adelaide).
St. Peter’s School Collegiate defeated
Prince Alfred College in the annual
match on Adelaide Oval by 15 goals 11
behinds to 8 goals 16 behinds. The
contests were originated in 1883, and
Prince Alfred has won 25 and St.
Peter’s 12.
British Association.
The X.S. Wales season, the fust after the war,,
was very successful, with 'Balmain Fernleigh
taking metropolitan honors and winning the
State championship. Enthusiasts organising the
Soccer game are very hopeful that by the war
effects their game will eventually reap a good
harvest. Many who have played the game in
tlie Old Country are coming out to the differ-
ent States, and bringing with them their
enthusiasm for the eleven-aside football. The
objective of the ruling powers is a visit from
an English team, after the manner of those which,
haw tourned in South Africa or South America,
ami, after that, the tour in the Old Country
by an Australian team.
STATE CHAMPIONSHIP FINAL.
The final of the State championship (Gardiner
Cup) drew the biggest Sydney Soccer crowd of
the season to the Sydney Sports Ground on’Mon-
day, October 6. There was (pure a feast of
footer, for at noon Annandale and Pynnont
played off the final of the <C Grade Junior com-
petition. The former won 2-1 after' extra time
had been played. The match following was the
final of the B Grade junior competition, which
went to Balmain, who defeated Leichhardt 4-1.
However, all eyes were on the big event, and
as the teams filed out rounds of applause were
fired at them in appreciation of the efforts they
had put forward to secure a position in the final
of such a notable event.
BALMAIX FERXLEIGIL—F. Storey, goal:
Fisher and Batten, full-hacks; Ferricr (capt.),
Leadbetter and Ferguson, half-backs; Lazonby,.
Adams, Porter, Hancock and Yabsloy, forwards.
WEST WALLiSEXD. —McKenzie, goal; Lee and
James, full-backs; Coutts. Sneddon (capt.f, and
McKay, half-backs; Smith, Kaiser, Coates, Sinr
elair and McLauchlan, forwards. Mr, W. A,
Wright had control of the whistle.
After the first quarter of an hour it was
quite apparent that the Sydney team was the
better-conditioned. They continuaEy bombarded
the visitors’ goal during the first session, which
closed with the home side leading- 2-0. The
second half was dull, but more even than the
first. In it Fcrnleigh added another goal, and
when Referee Wright called no-side West Walls-
end had failed to register. Balmain Fernleigh
did not belie the reputation they had made in
winning the Sydney First League premiership.
STATE PREMIERS.
1880 nut 1886, Granville; 188-, Hamilton;
1888, Caledonian.'; 1889 and 1890, Pvrmont Ran-
gers; 1891, Parkgrovc; 1892, Minmi; 1893 and'
1894, Pynnont Rangers; 186“, 1896 and 1897,.
Balmain; 1898, Pynnont Volunteer; 1899, Pyr-
inont Rangers; 1900 and 1901, Wed Wallsend;
1902, Pynnont Hovers; 1903, Pvrmont District;
1904, Granville; 190,1, Balmain; 1906, Glebe;
1907, Broadmeadow: 1908, Pynnont; 1909, Adams*
town; 1910, H.M.S. Powerful; 1911, Balmain;
1912, Balmain; 1913. Annandale; 1914, Granville;
191.5, Balmain; 1916 and 1917, not contested;
1918, Weston; 1919, Balmain Fernleigh.


\
%


giiiiiiiiHiiiiimiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiinminj.
3
Sr
wmm
i
mm
1
mu
SJ
m
j*
j
£
Anthony Hordern;’
For Sporting Requisite;
REQUISITES FOR YOUR FAVORITE OUTDOOR
SPORT ARE BEST BOUGHT AT ANTHONY
HORDERNS’, WHERE NOTHING BUT THE
PRODUCTS OF MANUFACTURERS RENOWNED
FOR THE EXCELLENCE OF THEIR GOODS ARE
OFFERED AT PRICES THAT ARE THE LOWEST
IN THE LAND.
Cricketers
Footballers
Harriers
Swimmers
Surfers
Billiardists
Tennis Players
Wo supply everything needed by
Bowlers
Hockey Players
Cyclists
Golfers
Croquet Players
Lacrosse Players
Boxers
Quoit Players
Polo Players
Fishermen
Skaters
Anglers
Fencers
Baseballers
s
s
I ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS LIMITED I
Brickfield Hill
Sydney
nlillllllllllllllilllllllllilllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllilllllllHUIIIIli;
Wholly set up and printed in Australia for the Sunday Times Newspaper Co., Ltd.,
by Mortons Ltd . Printers. Chalmers Street. Sydney.
