

FOOTPRINTS
A MEMOIR OF
THE LATE
ALEXANDER HAY


FOOTPRINTS


Photograhed Deberham. Brighton,
g




FOOTPRINTS.
& lEemotr of tl)c Hate
ALEXANDER HAY,
ONE OF THE FATHERS AND EARLY COLONISTS OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
HIS WIDOW.
' Footprint'' on the sands of time.
Lonckellow.
LONDON:
ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
1899.


JlclJitaleli
TO OUR CHILDREN.


‘ May we so live, we dread
Not here to die ;
So die, we dread not
Afterwards to live.’
BAILEY'S Festus.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
INTRODUCTION ------ xiii
PART I.
THE STORY.
EARLY HOME LIFE - - - - - 3
PIONEER COLONIST - - - ■ IQ
MAN OF AFFAIRS - - - - - 37
ACTIVE POLITICIAN - - - - - 47
INTERLUDE.
THE OLD COUNTRY REVISITED - - 65
PART 11.
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES.
NEW RELATIONSHIPS - - - - - 75
LATER VISIT TO GREAT IiRITAIN - - - 93
VIEWS ON WORSHIP AND TEMPERANCE - - 103
PERSONAL HABITS AND CHARACTER - - - 111
EPILOGUE.
THE ‘PASSING TIME’ ■ 123


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Alexander hay - Frontispiece
THE PALACE RUINS, DUNFERMLINE -To face page J
THE ABBEY AND KIRKYARD, DUNFERM-
LINE - - - - - „ 19
THE COTTAGE WHERE ALEXANDER HAY
WAS BORN ON JANUARY 12, 1820
(SINCE MUCH MODERNIZED) - - „ „ 27
ADELAIDE IN THE EARLY DAYS - ~ „ 30
ADELAIDE IN THE NINETIES - - „ 59
DUNFERMLINE IN MODERN DAYS - „ „ 71
THE HOUSE ON THE MOUNT - „ „ 79
HALL AND STAIRCASE, MOUNT BRECKAN ~ „ 82
LINDEN - - - - ~ „ 90
QUEEN MARGARET AND KING MALCOLM
CANMORE - - - - „ 100
‘STANDING ON THE FRONT-STEPS’ - „ „ 116
MOUNT BRECKAN, WHERE ALEXANDER
HAY PASSED AWAY ON FEBRUARY 4, 1898 ~ „ 123
‘where the hindmarsh winds’ - - Page 132


INTRODUCTION.
ON February 4, 1898, I lost the friend who
was unspeakably near to me —the beloved
and honoured companion of my life during twenty-
six happy years. Ever since his death I have
entertained the thought of writing his life, but
until now have shrunk from the attempt, in the
fear that I might fail in full justice to a most un-
usual individuality. His was a sterling character.
With energy, activity, and powers of endurance
were united a marked simplicity, a beautiful
Christian humility, and the characteristic Scotch
reticence, the latter trait alone making the task
a more than difficult one.
As the wish has been expressed that I would
undertake the duty, and as I am anxious that
the memory of my late husband should be kept


fresh and green in the land of his adoption, and
that his immediate descendants should know
how bravely and how successfully the founder
of their family in Australia contended with and
overcame his early disabilities and difficulties,
and loyally and faithfully ‘ served his generation
according to the will of God,’ I am venturing to
make the attempt, and have gathered the follow-
ing memorials together of an unusually noble
and useful life.
The first portion of my husband’s life can
only be dealt with very briefly, as I am depen-
dent for information concerning it on little things
that he has occasionally told me, on the recol-
lections of the very few friends now living who
knew him in his earlier days, and on a Diary
which he kept during his young manhood, but
which is of comparatively little value for my
immediate purpose.
I did not know Mr. Hay until he had passed
middle life, but the freshness and vigour of health
were then still upon him, and youth was never
missed in him, despite his snow-white hair.
He died at the advanced age of seventy-eight,
leaving me—though many years younger—para


lyzed and prostrate, bereft of the strong staff
that had been my support for six-and-twenty
years.
The following pages do not profess to be any
more than a simple and faithful record of a truly
good and beautiful life. They are given to the
public in the hope that some few of those who
read them may be led to follow a grand example,
and make their lives like his, a conscientious
service to God and to man.
London,
November , 1898,


ERRATA.
Page 8, line 15; page 13, line 11 ; and page 14, line 13, for
‘ Noil ’ read 1 Noel.’
Page 33, line 4 , for ‘ wurleys’ read ‘wurlies.’
Page 59, last line, for ‘ Port Darien ’ read ‘ Port Darwin.’
Page 68, line 21, for ‘ invent ’ read ‘ inventor.’
Page 132, line under illustration, for ( hind marsh ’ read
‘ UI^DMARSH.’


PART I.
THE STORY.
‘ I remember the gleams and glooms that dart
Across the schoolboy’s brain,
The song and the silence in the heart,
That in part are prophecies, and in part
Are longings wild and vain.
And the burden of that old song
Is haunting my memory still:
“ A boy’s will is the wind’s will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts.” ’
LONGFELLOW




EARLY HOME LIFE.
I 2


THE PALACE RUINS, DUNFERMLINE.
Photographed by Norval, Dunfermline.


EARLY HOME LIFE.
Royal Dunfermline.
ALMOST beyond, but really within, the
parish of Dunfermline, a historical town in
the ‘ kingdom of Fife,’ the subject of this memoir
was born, on January 12, 1820, just seventy-
eight years ago. At that time the town, or rather
the city, was a prosaic manufacturing centre,
woven ‘ damask ’ being the chief article of com-
merce. The trade continues in Dunfermline
still, but in those older days the weaving was
done by hand, and it is now done by machinery.
But in the long bygone days a royal Court had
been held in Dunfermline. Margaret of England
spent in this city the happy years of her married
life. She had become the wife of King Malcolm
Canmore, and tradition reports that she taught
him the Gospel, and many important things con


nected both with religion and with civilization.
Margaret, we are told by her confessor, was a
very pious and charitable woman, but very fond
of dress and jewellery. She was constantly
followed when out of doors by a train of beggars,
and when she had emptied her purse in giving
alms to them —a purse which King Malcolm had
the greatest difficulty in keeping filled—she would
take off her ornaments and give them also.
The ruins of the palace where the royal couple
are understood to have lived are still in a fair
state of preservation, and, in conjunction with
the abbey, form as fine a set of ruins as are to be
seen in Scotland. The scenery around Dunferm-
line is romantic, and Sir Noil Paton, one of our
best-known artists, has immortalized it by intro-
ducing it into several of his pictures.
The influence on young Hay of the picturesque
surroundings and historical traditions which are
associated with the place of his birth, was seen in
after-life in many ways, but more especially in his
architectural and artistic tastes.


A Widow’s Home.
Peter and Susan Hay, the father and mother
of Alexander, seem to have been young people
who entered on the responsibilities of married life
without much thought of what the future might
bring. After but a few years of happy companion-
ship, the husband died, leaving his young widow
with two children, Robert and Alexander, expect-
ing again to become a mother—the child proved
to be a daughter, and was named Susan —and
with very little means. The poor widow must
have had a hard struggle in her efforts to feed
and clothe and educate her little family.
I have often heard my husband speak of his
mother with the greatest love and veneration,
telling me how bravely she bore her burdens, and
how she strove to bring up her children to be
good, sacrificing herself in order to give them
every possible advantage that was within reach of
her very narrow means.
One of the children had died in infancy, but
those who were left to grow up into life turned out
conspicuously well. And that they did so should
afford encouragement to other mothers who are


placed in similar circumstances. Perseverance
in doing motherly duty to the children is sure to
gain its reward in the character and in the
success of their mature lives.
In the Diary to which reference has already
been made, Alexander Hay wrote the following
sentences concerning his mother;
‘ My father died when I was three years old,
and left my mother to provide for us by her own
industry, which she never failed to do in a manner
that shall ever awake feelings of respect, love, and
veneration towards her who nursed me in my
infancy, and set before me in youth an example
of morality and religion which, if I follow, shall
both lead to my happiness in this world and in
that which is to come.’
The Hay Ancestry.
That the Hay family were of ancient lineage it
is hardly possible to doubt, after all that I have
heard concerning them. And, indeed, this was
shown in the grand head, the noble face, and the
strong and refined hands of the subject of this
memoir. They were related, in a distant degree,


to one of the oldest Scotch families, but at the
time of Alexander’s birth their branch of the
family was exceedingly poor. My husband has
more than once told me that his father’s mother,
who was a dear old woman, and very fond of her
dead son’s children, used to say that their grand-
father ‘ had gran’ people.’ Our youngest child
was named Helen, after her great-grandmother.
The grandfather was a fine old man who, in the
fashion of his age, wore knee-breeches and gaiters.
At the time about which I am writing, he had
become blind, and though he helped the young
widow in all the ways he could, his powers were
very limited, as he was himself comparatively poor.
How little the boy Alexander could have
thought at this time, when living in a small
cottage, and daily watching his mother toiling
and striving to make both ends meet, that one
day he would stand in a noble hall of his own
rearing, every stone of which had been pur-
chased by the products of his own work of brain
and hand, that he would be the owner of broad
lands stretching round about him, that his flocks
and herds would range over thousands of square
miles of country, that the choicest works of art


would adorn his houses, that he would sit in the
councils of his adopted country, and largely help
to establish her laws !
Early Physical Hindrance.
During his boyhood Alexander Hay suffered
somewhat seriously from an attack of ophthalmia.
This was a cause of grave anxiety, both to him-
self and to his mother. It kept him away from
school for a considerable time, and seriously
retarded his education. His mother used to
save up money enough to take him to Edinburgh,
so that she might obtain for him the best possible
advice.
Ah, anxious, self-denying mother! could you
have lived to see your boy in after-years the
upright man of business, the far-seeing politician,
the leader in commercial enterprise, the genial
and generous host, and the consistent Christian,
you would have thought that your labours and
anxieties had been well repaid.
But did she not see ? Can we doubt that our
dear ones, who have passed beyond our vision,
do really see us and watch over us ? I would


rather believe, with Marie Corelli, that they do
see us, and are really round about us, only our
eyes have now but a limited vision, and we only
see a small part of our environment.
The interruption of his school training by this
weakness of his eyes was a source of the greatest
regret to him throughout his life, and he often
spoke of it to me in his later years. But with
indomitable persistency he set to work to master
the disability it involved, and to learn all he
possibly could. Sir Noil Baton had at one
time a drawing-class for boys, and this he
attended, and to this in part may be attributed
the good taste which he had in artistic matters.
He was a subscriber to Chambers' Journal from
its first number, and he continued to take it in
up to the close of his life.
Alexander Hay as a Boy.
It is easy to picture the boy in those early
years of his Scotch home-life. Curly dark hair,
a ruddy complexion, thoughtful blue eyes, and a
pleasant, good-tempered mouth. An open-faced,
intelligent, lovable boy, always cheerful, and fond


of outdoor occupations. I think of him wander-
ing about the lovely ruins of the Palace and
Abbey of Dunfermline, and the romantic glades
that surround them, thinking of the old days
when the saintly Margaret and her husband
dwelt within those halls, and worshipped together
within that abbey; or it may be of his good,
painstaking, loving mother, and making earnest
resolutions that, if it might be so, he would
become a successful business man, but that, in
any case, he would serve the God of the good
Queen Margaret, and of his mother.
Sir Noil Paton was one of the companions of
his boyhood, and in writing to me a short time
since, he said : ‘ My recollections of him, in the
now far-distant time, remain entirely bright and
pleasurable.’
Fikst Essays in Business Life.
Young Hay had to begin very early to earn
his own living, and he started work in some con-
nection with the damask business of the town. In
his Diary he rather pathetically says: ‘ After
having a little education, I went to learn weaving


with my uncle John.’ There he seems to have
remained for some years, and then he was taken
into the factory of a cousin of his mother’s, a
Mr. Erskine Beveridge. Later on his brother,
Robert Hay, became the head of a large and
lucrative business of the same kind. This brother
died some years before I knew my husband,
but I know his widow very well, and esteem her
highly. She still lives in the beautiful house
—Witch Brae—overlooking Dunfermline, which
Robert Hay built. Only a few days since I
received a letter from her, in which the following
sentence about Alexander occurs: 1 1 remember
him so well, the nice bright face, with such a
benevolent expression.’ The two brothers were
devotedly attached to each other.


THE ABBEY AND KIRKYARD, DUNFERMLINE.
Photographed by Nprval, Dunfermline.


PIONEER COLONIST.
2—2




PIONEER COLONIST.
Farewell to Scotland.
IT cannot be regarded as a surprise that Alex-
ander Hay, on reaching young manhood,
without a living father, without money at com-
mand, and without influential friends to aid him,
should look to a new country as a hopeful sphere
for his energy and enterprise. We can be sure
that, as he was inspired throughout his life by
the strongest religious principles, he took this
matter to God, asking Him to direct his steps
in the important change which he was contem-
plating.
To illustrate his lifelong practice of seeking
God first, I may mention what one of his business
friends has told me since his death. The incident
occurred at a bank board meeting, at which both
were present. Some slighting remark had been


made in connection with a religious matter, and
he immediately replied:
‘ All I can say is, that I have never gone into
any matter of business, or, indeed, anything, with-
out first asking God’s blessing on it’
His mother, and, indeed, all his relations, strongly
disapproved of his leaving Scotland, and going to
such a distant, almost unknown, and altogether
outlandish, part of the world. But there is a
record of his grandmother spinning and weaving
the material, and making up for him night-shirts
and other things. This was in the second year
of the Victorian era, when our now aged Queen
was in the freshness of her youth ; when railroads
were just being constructed; when lucifer matches
had recently been invented; when an ocean
steamer was a rara avis, and far-distant and
barbarous Australia was a place that was men-
tioned with ‘ bated breath.’ But Alexander Hay
had one very marked characteristic which he
retained throughout his life, and which made him
such a valuable and successful pioneer colonist.
It was a firm determination to persevere in what-
ever course he considered to be right. He acted
ever upon the Scriptural principle, ‘ Whatso


ever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
might.’
To London and Adelaide.
An Australian colony had recently been started,
and a gentleman who was greatly interested in its
prosperity was at this time visiting Mr. Beveridge.
He talked a great deal about the prospects of the
colony, and spoke so enthusiastically that he
greatly interested young Hay, and decided his
future plans. That the colony of South Australia
is to-day in every respect better, by reason of
young Hay’s decision to make it his sphere of
labour, may with every confidence be affirmed.
A connection of the family, writing to me a
short time since, said:
‘ I have a very distinct recollection of seeing
him walking along the street of Dunfermline a
short time before he left. He was a well-made,
fine-looking young man, stout for his years, and
of a fair and ruddy complexion. Emigration was
not then so common, and it was thought a very
brave thing for him to go away to the other side
of the earth.’


Just sixty years ago Alexander Hay bade fare-
well to his mother; it turned out to be a final
farewell. Never again were her tender arms to
embrace him; never again was her kind face to
smile on him; never again was her gentle voice
to sound in his ears.
He journeyed by sea to London, as the ship in
which he proposed to sail for Adelaide started
from that port. In those days the times for
sailing were very uncertain, and passengers were
often kept waiting for days, and even for weeks,
together. On this occasion the young emigrant
had to remain in London for a whole month
before the ship was fully loaded and ready to
sail.
We can imagine how the bright intelligent
youth would spend his time in seeing the various
interesting sights of the great Metropolis. My
husband one day told me that a Commissioner of
the new colony kindly let him shelter and sleep in
a large empty house of his. The young man was
entirely alone in the house night after night. It
must have been a very strange and trying experi-
ence for him. A lad, fresh from his mother’s
warm and cosy cottage, left all alone in a big


THE COTTAGE WHERE ALEXANDER HAY WAS BORN ON JANUARY 12, 1820 (SINCE MUCH MODERN IZED).


London house! The noisy never-resting city
would at first keep him awake through all the
early hours; then, towards the time of dawn, there
would come a lull; but the furniture would creak,
and make weird echoes in the empty rooms, and
stories of midnight burglars and desperate cut-
throats would be sure to come into his young
head. But when telling me about that time, this
was all he said:
‘ There, I often think what a strange thing it
was, sleeping in that house by myself.’
His sunny and hopeful disposition enabled him
to rise above that darkness and fear, as it enabled
him to rise up out of every dark experience in his
life. And we may be sure also that he knew he
was not really alone, since his mother’s God and
his own God was with him.
Ocean Sailing long ago.
The ship sailed at last. On November 25,
just within a month of his arrival in London,
began what proved to be a long and tedious
voyage. He has given a sufficient account of it
in his Diary, and I transcribe it precisely as he


wrote it, asking my readers to remember that it
is the work of a very young, and somewhat im-
perfectly educated, young man. It gives a very
fair idea of what a passage to Australia was like
sixty or more years ago ;
‘ Left London on the 25th November, in the
barque Planters. We lost sight of land on the
3rd December. We went through the Bay of
Biscay between the nth and 14th, and came in
sight of Madeira on the 23rd, from which time
we had favourable winds till we crossed the
Equator on the nth January, 1839. A short
time after we crossed the line a mutiny took
place among the sailors, by which the passengers
had to work the ship for a fortnight, till we got
into the harbour of Rio de Janeiro. We came
in sight of Cape Frio on the 22nd, and entered
the harbour of Rio on the 27th, which is one of
the most beautiful harbours I have ever wit-
nessed. We left Rio on the 3rd February.
After we had left a few days they discovered
that the oil on board was nearly exhausted, and
they determined to call at the island of Tristan
d’Acunha for a fresh supply. We had very
strong winds and dull weather when we came


about the latitude of the island, so that they
could not get a sight of the sun at 12 o’clock
to know how to steer the vessel. So they
steered for Algoa Bay, in Southern Africa.
When we came in sight of the Cape of Good
Hope, on the 12th March, when they found that
we were opposite Table Bay, and the wind blow-
ing very hard from the south-south-east, so that
we were obliged to tack about there for the
space of a week before we could double the
Cape. We entered Algoa Bay on the 22nd, and
the caps of the masts being found unsafe to go to
sea wuth (owing to their rotten condition), they
had to stay and refit them, so that it was the
3rd of April before we left it. We arrived at
Port Adelaide on the 15th of May, 1839, and got
on shore on the 18th.’
It is almost impossible now to believe that it
could have taken from November 25, 1838, up
to May 15, 1839, to get from London to Adelaide.
We live now in golden days of ease and luxury;
everything is ready to our hands. But it may
be doubted whether these times of ease and
luxury can produce such men as the Pilgrim
Fathers of America, or the Pioneer Fathers of


Australia. It is not among the curled darlings
of the world, or among those who have always
lived delicately, with their easy-chairs and feather
beds, that we must look for the moral stamina
that made such pioneer colonists as Alexander
Hay. The men of power in their after-life are
men who have had to bear the yoke in their
youth.
Adelaide in the Year 1839.
When Alexander Hay landed in South Australia
the colony was in a most primitive condition.
There were no proper roads, and the long dreary
drive in a bullock-dray, or the long and weari-
some walk from the port to the town of Adelaide,
must have been very rough and frightfully dusty.
In the township there were only a few tents,
slab huts, and wooden houses, scattered about
through the ‘ scrub.’ Only lately a story came
to my ears that is connected with the first few
years of the settlement. A gentleman who had
but just arrived from England, coming in the
course of his journey through the waste scrub
upon a lad who was looking after a flock of


ADELAIDE IN THE EARLY DAYS.


sheep, asked to be shown the way to Adelaide.
The boy, looking up in innocent surprise at the
request, immediately answered, ‘ Why, this is it!’
The aborigines and their ‘ wurleys ’ swarmed
about the place. I can remember the time,
many long years after this, when King Tenberrie,
who was the chief of the Murray blacks, used
to walk about the streets of Adelaide with his
head in the air, and looking every inch a royal
personage. But the natives are now very rarely
to be seen in the town, and, indeed, the race is
fast disappearing before advancing civilization.
The few who remain are sadly deteriorated by
the intermixture of bad white blood.
Even in 1839 the surroundings of Adelaide
would be pleasant, for in the month of May the
grass would be green. Now Adelaide is as fair
and beautiful a city of the plain as can be seen in
any part of the world, with its eastern background
of noble hills, its four miles of terraces, extending
completely round the city, and its park-lands
encircling the whole. It is situated on a wide
plain, the ground beyond the city, toward the east,
rising gently up to a fine range of hills, which
is known as the Mount Lofty Range. The
3


highest of these hills is 2,300 feet above the level
of the sea. The city is divided into two portions,
that on the plain being the business part, and
North Adelaide, upon a slight eminence, forming
the residential quarter where most of the pro-
fessional and wealthy business people live. The
river Torrens separates North from South Adelaide.
It is not a wide river, save when flooded by an
excessively wet winter. It may, indeed, be spoken
of as a mere stream with high banks. About
thirty years ago a dam was built, so that there
is now a fairly broad stream of water retained
within the banks. The city has splendid public
buildings, shady squares, and wide streets. Its
Botanical Gardens, which owe so much of their
beauty to the late Dr. Schomburgk, are almost
unrivalled. And there is abundance of room for
well-nigh unlimited extension.
When young Hay first saw the place, it was
hardly two years old, and the heart of the Scotch
lad may well have sunk within him when he found
himself landed in such a wilderness, without one
relation or friend within his reach.
From his Diary I learn that he at once sought
for work, and obtained some very soon. He felt


that he had come out, not to pick and choose, but
to do his best with whatever offered. And in this
his example may be properly held up for imitation
by any young people who may be thinking of
trying their fortunes in a new country. He has
said:
‘ Make up your minds to use either your head
or your hands in any way that is opened out
before you. Never think of waiting until some
occupation that is quite to your taste shall turn
up. It turns up to those who have taken any-
thing at first, not to those who hang their hands
in idleness while they wait for it to appear.’
3—2




MAN OF AFFAIRS.




MAN OF AFFAIRS.
Early Business Endeavours.
THE Diary reports that young Hay obtained
work almost immediately after landing at
Port Adelaide, but as it did not prove to be con-
genial, in that his employer failed to act up to his
strict agreement, he only remained at it for a short
time. He then made an engagement with the
South Australian Company, and was to receive
fifteen shillings a week and his keep. This was
soon raised to one pound a week. He says in the
Diary that, as he was ‘ strong and healthy, he
could have been very happy and contented, but
that some ignorant man employed at the same
place made his life unbearable.’ He therefore
left the company, and for a little time entered
the service of a merchant. Then he entered into
partnership with a friend (probably a fellow


passenger), and they commenced merchanting on
their own account. He says* of this venture;
‘We did very well, paying the greatest atten-
tion to our business.’
He seems, however, with Scotch prescience, to
have quickly discovered the limit of possibility in
this enterprise, so he and his partner amicably
separated, and he again took employment with
the South Australian Company.
Farming at Gumeracha.
Just at this time the Diary ends. It appears
that about 1840 he left Adelaide, and took up
some land at Gumeracha, which is a very beauti-
ful district, situated about thirty miles from
Adelaide. There he began farming operations
on his own account. It may safely be affirmed
that, with characteristic Scotch carefulness, he
had already saved some money. In the Diary
he mentions that some fifty pounds was due to
him on the dissolution of his partnership with his
friend, and he would be sure to have saved a part
of his weekly earnings.
Farming, in those early days of South
Australian history, must have been very hard


and anxious work. The ‘ scrub,’ which is a low
growth of bushes that covers all the ground
between gum-trees, which often grow to a great
height, blackwood, native pines, and other kinds
of timber, would all have to be cleared before any
tillage work could be done. The roughest of
slab huts would be the only shelter from the rain
and the heat.
Some twenty years later this district of Gume-
racha returned Mr. Hay unopposed as its member
in the House of Assembly.
Whether the farming proved a financial success
is not certain, but he seems to have continued at
it for a few years, and then he returned to
Adelaide, and commenced what proved to be a
lucrative business on his own account.
Young people are often, and very properly,
warned against changing from one occupation to
another, and failing to stick to any one thing
long enough to ensure success. But there is no
rule without exceptions. And it should be borne
in mind that what applies to a settled and
organized society may not equally apply to a
young and unformed colony, where all the various
abilities of men are called into exercise, and each


man has to find out, by personal trial and ex-
perience, what he can do for the best. Young
Hay would not have reached the position which
he subsequently attained if he had been satisfied
to remain in his first humble situation.
While carrying on his regular business in
Adelaide, he was also buying large cargoes of
different kinds of merchandise, and quantities of
wheat and other grain. These he sold again at
a reasonable profit. He probably never spent all
his income, but each year saved a portion, and,
with excellent judgment, invested his savings in
land, which was then rapidly increasing in value.
He regularly reserved a portion of his profits
for the maintenance of the worship of God,
and for the assistance of those who were in
need.
In the year 1845 Mr. Hay married his first wife.
I did not know the lady, but I have been assured
that she was a most excellent wife and mother,
and it is questionable whether a woman can
attain to anything higher than that. A number
of children were born during the first period of
Mr. Hay’s married life, but at least half of them
died in infancy. Four of them were alive when


I married their father. Of the three who are still
living, I cherish the most pleasant memory of
their uniform kindness and attention to me during
the many happy years of my union with their
father.
During the time that he was in active business,
gold was discovered in the colony of Victoria, and
all classes of the male population rushed to try
their fortunes at the diggings. Mr. Hay, however,
regarded the matter with Scotch self-control, and
was not carried away by the passing excitement.
He probably made more money by remaining
quietly at his post.
Alexander Hay had in his veins, as has already
been intimated, the gentle blood of a long line of
ancestors, but this was well mixed with the
stronger blood of the hardy yeoman class of
society. Noblesse oblige was the characteristic
tone of all his relationships; but from his yeoman
ancestry he inherited his iron constitution, and
his firm determination to push forward in life,
but to gain success only by strictly honourable
means. He had much of the familiar Scotch
self-reliance and far-seeing vision, and these


enabled him to take the best possible advantage
of the opportunities that opened before him.
Brave, hardy Scots! dear you are to me, and
dear you ever will be. Surely every wife with a
Scotch husband will be willing to speak of him as
one of the most unselfish and one of the best of
men. And surely every child of a Scotch father
will be willing to affirm that he is one of the
best of fathers. One of our children has an
autograph book, with quotations under the names.
Under her father’s signature are the following
lines:
‘Few things have failed to which he set his will:
He does his most and best.’
TENNYSON.
‘ His head by time completely silvered o’er
♦ * * * *
But strong for service still, and unimpaired.’
COWPER.
Sheep-farming.
In later years Mr. Hay went in largely for
sheep-farming. He bought large stations at high
prices, and for a time made considerable profits.
One ran was in South Australia, but the others


were in New South Wales. Now, owing to the
want of ‘ fixity of tenure,’ the rabbit pest, the
wild-dogs, the terrible droughts, and last, but by
no means least, the ‘ free selector,’ who walks
into the run and picks out the eyes of it,
squatting has become anything but a lucrative
occupation. Unless legislation comes in for the
relief of the squatter, that business will soon take
its place among the things of the past.
Soon after Mr. Hay had purchased the station
in South Australia, someone laid claim to a well
on the estate, which had, of course, been included
in the purchase. In connection with this, some
blackmailing was attempted, and a cartoon
appeared in the Lantern, representing Mr. Hay
as a shepherd in kilts, with a crook in his hand.
The words underneath, as nearly as I can
remember them, were these: ‘ Na, na; ye’ll na
cam near th’ well’
Mr. Hay had, in fact, but a very slight Scotch
accent. The r’s were rather pronounced, and
there was a little peculiarity in the enunciation
of the th, but otherwise no one (from his accent
alone) would have suspected that he came from
‘ bonnie Scotland.’ Probably this was a con


sequence of his having left his native country so
early in life, and he was not one ever to affect it.
Public Business Relations.
Mr. Hay became, during the course of his long
life, a director of many public companies. For a
long period he was associated with the Boards
of the Mutual Provident Society, the South
Australian Gas Company, the South Australian
Insurance Company, the Land Mortgage and
Agency Company, and the Commercial Wharf
Company. He was chairman of the Mutual
Provident Society for some twelve or more years.
He was also for a few years a director of the
National Bank, and for some twenty years chair-
man of the Bank of Adelaide. He was vice-
president of the Zoological Gardens, and a trustee
both of the Wyatt Benevolent Fund and of the
Savings Bank.


ACTIVE POLITICIAN




ACTIVE POLITICIAN.
Citizen Interests.
SOON after settling down in Adelaide, Mr.
Hay became one of its prominent citizens.
Local and national politics took up a great deal
of his time and attention. He was indeed an
enthusiast in political matters, especially those
that were in any way associated with religion.
He held very strong views on the question of
the relations of Church and State. He was de-
cidedly of opinion that the State had no function
in connection with supporting the worship of God.
After a struggle, this question was settled for good,
and there is now no State aid to religion in South
Australia. At first, after the passing of the Act, the
members of the Church of England felt somewhat
aggrieved, but they are ready now to acknowledge
that the principle has been found to work out, in
its practical applications, very satisfactorily, and
4


the various churches of the colony are, as a whole,
fairly well maintained.
Mr. Hay was also a member of the City
Council and of the Road Board. A little later
than this he became one of the proprietors of the
South Australian Register, and was for some time
closely associated with that newspaper. He had
in his possession bound copies of the first two
years’ issue, as these contained the story of the
founding of the colony. He mentioned to me
several times that he intended to give these
volumes to the Public Library.
A short time ago I received a letter from a
leading man connected with the Register, which
closes with the following words : ‘ I need hardly
add that we deeply sympathize with you in the
death of that “grand old colonist,” and “useful
servant of the State,” your husband.’
Member of the House of Assembly.
About 1855 Mr. Hay unsuccessfully contested
a seat for Parliament, but in 1857, as soon as
‘ Responsible Government ’ was in force, he


secured a seat, and was returned for Gumeracha,
where he had begun his farming operations.
I feel sure that, in relation to the political
opinions of the country at that time, he would be
classed as a Liberal; but political matters passed
through so many changes during the following
years, that his sympathies ran more with the
Conservatives in connection with the politics of
the colony, and with the Liberal Unionists in
connection with the politics of the British
Empire.
Commissioner of Public Works.
Mr. Hay had only been one or, at the most,
two sessions in the Assembly, when he was
invited to accept a portfolio. He became
Commissioner of Public Works. Through the
courtesy of the secretary of the Royal Colonial
Institute, of which Mr. Hay was a Fellow for a
great many years, I have been permitted to
examine the South Australian Hansard, in which
his speeches are reported.
The following is a portion of a speech which
Mr. Hay delivered while he was in office. A
4—2


notice had been brought forward in the House,
proposing to borrow money for the making of
roads in the remoter districts of the colony.
In a lengthy speech by Mr. Sutherland in
favour of the loan, it was urged, among other
arguments, that this plan had been tried in
the Highlands of Scotland, and had been found
to work most successfully; some 1,185 miles of
road having been constructed there, of which
the repairs only averaged ten shillings a mile.
It was also argued that the value of the land
would be increased by roads running through it,
that settlers would be encouraged, that revenue
would accrue from the settlers, and so the money
would soon come back into the Treasury.
The Commissioner of Public Works, replying
to the above arguments, said that ‘perhaps it was
better to go on spending what they could from
the revenue, and not to borrow at present. As
to what had been said about making roads in
Scotland by means of borrowing money, they had
no other mode, as there was no land fund there
as there was here. Here one-half of the revenue
of the colony was devoted to public works, of
which roads and bridges formed a very important


part. He thought the present system better than
going further into debt. As to borrowing money
to give employment, he regarded that as a dan-
gerous policy. By that very plan labourers were
attracted, who were thrown out of employment
as soon as the works were stopped; and either
they had to go on borrowing again, or great dis-
content ensued. The true prosperity of South
Australia would follow from the occupation of the
people in those industrial pursuits which were upheld
by private capital, and which were of a continuous
nature. He was friendly to giving as much money
as possible to public works, and to economizing
for that purpose all departmental expenditure, but
he objected to any further loan, and hoped that
the motion would be lost/
It was lost by a vote of twenty to three.
Official life, however, was not much to his
taste. He had too strongly marked an individu-
ality, and too much love for freedom of action, to
like being tied up with several other persons in
political matters. So, after having been a member
of the Cabinet for nearly two years, he resigned,
and took the opportunity afforded by a time of
leisure for visiting his native land.


Legislative Interests.
Several Ministries invited him to join them, but
he invariably refused. He had a great deal to do
with the passing of Torrens’ Real Property Act
during his second session in Parliament. This
Act was passed in the year 1858. He had the
greatest confidence in its wisdom, and all his own
property was put under the Act.
Views on Education.
In connection with free and unsectarian educa-
tion his view was, that every boy and girl should
be taught to read, and to write, and also the rudi-
ments of arithmetic. But the State educational
system of South Australia has developed in a very
remarkable way, somewhat beyond the expecta-
tions of those who initiated it.
I cannot refrain from giving my own opinion,
that while, in common with other State school
systems, it has many valuable features, there is
one which cannot fail to cause the religious
sections of the community very grave anxiety.
I refer to the absence of any clause in the Act


making the daily reading of a portion of the Bible
compulsory. There is a clause which permits those
children to stay away from the Bible-reading
whose parents positively object to their presence
when the Bible is read. It seems to me to be a
fatal mistake to attempt to exclude this priceless
book from our State schools.
The following passage is taken from a letter
which Mr. Hay wrote to a friend who lived in
another colony, on the subject of his sons’ educa-
tion. After apologizing in his usual courteous
way for giving trouble, he says ;
‘ I want you to get me the best information you
can about what I am led to believe are your two
best public schools. I did think of sending my
two boys to Harrow early this year, but I now
believe that it will be better for them and our
family if they can get their school education in
this or your colony, to prepare them for entering
Cambridge University.’
Mr. Hay took endless trouble in inquiries as to
the capabilities of the head and other masters in
the different schools. No trouble or expense was
ever spared in connection with the education of


his sons. Over and over again he said, ‘ I want
my sons to have a thoroughly good education.’
The thought of what he ‘ might have done ’ with
better chances at starting seemed to rankle very
deeply.
Interest in Practical Legislation.
The liberalizing of the land laws in the interest
of the farmers was the most valuable legislation
to which he gave the initiative, and mainly
through his instrumentality the Bill was carried
through.
This measure —which, being interpreted, means
the selling of the Government lands on credit
instead of for cash—was naturally a most popular
one, and, putting aside his many other services,
should of itself serve to keep his memory green.
The legalizing of marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister was introduced by him, and carried
through Parliament mainly owing to his per-
sistency. Not that the idea in itself was one
which he could approve, but as he saw no moral
harm in it, and, with his intense love of justice,
felt the needless disability under which the


ADELAIDE IN THE NINETIES.


children of such marriages are placed, he put all
his energy into carrying the Bill. It is a remark-
able fact, and worthy of note, that there have
been fewer of such marriages, in proportion to
population, since they were made legal.
Mr. Hay also took an active part in carrying
through the scheme of the Overland Telegraph
Line, which was to connect England and Australia.
This was the work of the South Australian colony,
which may well be proud of the service it has
rendered to the world in connection with this
undertaking. Perhaps there were few moments
of his life so bright as that on which he received
one of the famous series of congratulatory missives
from the head of the Telegraph Department (the
present Sir Charles Todd), announcing in jubilant
terms that ‘ they were throughand referring to
him as one of the charmed circle of the few
greater ones to whom the ‘ long line ’ owed its
origin.
I may quote here a portion of a speech (reported
in Hansard) which he delivered at this time, as it
is very characteristic of him. The speech was
given on the Bill for the Overland Telegraph
between Port Darien and Adelaide—a measure


which he valued so highly as to be able to say
concerning it, ‘ that there was nothing on the
paper of more importance to the future prosperity
of the colony.’
Hansard reports: ‘ Mr. Hay intended to sup-
port the amendment [that South Australia should
carry over the line at its own expense, exclusive
of half a share from the other colonies]. He said :
They did not see Queensland going to the other
colonies to ask them to join them in constructing
a line along the north coast. No; they were
gradually pushing on their line, independently of
the other colonies. And why should not they take
the same course as Queensland ? It was as if
they adopted the resolution of the Government,
naturally saying that South Australia should not
do the work. Such vacillating policy would con-
trast very unfavourably with the energetic action
of Queensland. Independently of the telegrams,
he believed it would be a very great benefit in
opening up the country, and the sooner they did
it the better.’


Parliamentary Record.
On February 26, 1857, when he had not yet
completed his thirty-seventh year, he was elected
as a colleague of the late Sir Arthur Blyth, to
represent Gumeracha in the first Assembly, under
Constitutional Government, of that House, which
consisted of thirty-six members. He was re-elected
in March, iB6O, again having Sir Arthur Blyth as
his colleague. In December, 1861, he resigned
his seat, and was succeeded by Mr. A. B. Murray.
He was absent from the third Parliament, but
when Mr. Murray withdrew, in June, 1867, Mr.
Hay stood for the vacancy, and was returned.
He headed the poll on April 21, 1868, the second
place being taken by Mr. William Sandover.
In April, 1870, Mr. Hay transferred his services
to East Torrens, the duties of membership being
shared with the late Mr. Henry Hay Mildred.
Mr. Hay finally retired from the Assembly at the
dissolution of the sixth Parliament, on November
23, 1871.
The attraction of politics continued strong,
however, and on April 3, 1873, he was elected
fourth on the poll by the whole colony as a


member of the Legislative Council. Retiring by
rotation on February 2, 1881, Mr. Hay was, on
May 29, 1882, once more returned to the Council
by the whole colony, at the last election under
the old system. In May, 1891, Mr. Hay stood
for the Southern division, but was defeated, and
so went back, with little reluctance, to private
life, after a Parliamentary career extending over
nearly thirty years.*
The New Guinea Subsidy.
From an outside source I have received the
following; ‘ While delving among the musty
records of old Adelaide debate, I came upon
this speech (delivered by Mr. Hay in the Legis-
lative Council), which is so strongly and strangely
characteristic of him that it would seem quite
worthy of insertion. The Chief Secretary had
intimated to the House, in answer to a member
who had questioned the propriety of paying the
annual subsidy of £1,500 as the colony’s share
to the carrying on of the Government of the then
new colony of New Guinea, that the £1,500 had
been merely placed on the estimates because
* See the South Australian Press.


the Government concluded themselves pledged
to do that much. There had been “ a sort of
implied promise to pay,” by the late Government,
though no time was specified. But it was in
the power of the House, concluded the Minister,
to decide whether it should be withdrawn.
‘The Hon. A. Hay differed from the Chief
Secretary in his dictum as to the possible with-
drawal of the subsidy, as it was a matter of
honour. The colony should not have been a
party to promise to pay a portion of the subsidy,
unless they intended to continue to grant it. It
was like doing something under false pretences.
The Home Government said in effect, “We shall
take possession of New Guinea, make it a colony,
and send a Governor there, providing the colonies
contribute £1,500 a year towards its government.”
If the colony agreed to pay its share towards this,
then it could not withdraw. His own opinion
was that they never ought to have done such
a thing. But having agreed to it, they should
continue to grant the sum —at any rate, for some
years. . . . They had made the offer, and were
bound to carry it out.’*
* Hansard.


He was defeated at the election of 1891 by a
Labour candidate, and he felt the defeat very
keenly in view of the services he had rendered
to the colony. To have been engaged in active
politics from his early manhood, and then to
be put aside in favour of an utterly untried man,
was certainly a bitter experience. But he never
by word or deed showed any ill-feeling. His
friends at Port Elliot, Goolwa, and Port Victor,
were stanch to him, and he might readily have
secured another seat, but from this time he
refused to undertake another contest.
His public political work, he felt, was now
done.


INTERLUDE.
THE OLD COUNTRY REVISITED.
1 Strange to me now are the forms I meet
When I visit the dear old town ;
But the native air is pure and sweet,
And the trees that o’ershadow each well-known street
As they balance up and down,
Are singing that beautiful song,
Are sighing and whispering still;
“ A boy’s will is the wind’s will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts.” ’
LONGFELLOW.
5


INTERLUDE.
THE OLD COUNTRY REVISITED.
MR. HAY, as previously mentioned, had
very little taste for official life; and
this, added to a most earnest desire to rest his
eyes once again upon the scenes of his boyhood,
doubtless influenced him materially in resigning
his portfolio of Public Works. Be this as it
may, in 1861 he retired from his position in the
Ministry, and left Adelaide with his family on
a visit to Great Britain.
When, twenty years before, Alexander Hay had
left his native town, he was little more than a lad,
poor and unknown. Now, having barely reached
middle life, he walked again the streets of old
Dunfermline—a successful man of business, a
well-tried politician, and a respected and most
useful citizen. What must have been the feelings
5—2


of the two brothers when they were again united,
after so long a separation! How much they
would have to recall of their old life in the old
days; of the good mother, who had gone out
of their life for ever; of the old country and
of the new, and of the rival merits of each !
tit was, however, but a reunion for a few
years. Robert Hay caught a chill, and, after
a short illness, died early in the year 1864. His
brother was with him at the time, and helped
his wife to nurse him. Writing to me in after-
years, about that sad time, she says: ‘lt was a
great comfort to me to have him near at that
time.’ Robert Hay lies buried in the Abbey
grounds, where his father and his mother have
their resting-place.]
Having settled his family in the old country,
Mr. Hay returned to South Australia, to look after
his affairs. It must have been upon his way out
that he travelled through Italy with Mr. Ridley, the
invent of the South Australian reaping-machine.
I have often heard him speak with pleasant
memory of this trip, and of the great enjoyment he
derived from his first sight of that most beautiful
of countries. Victor Emmanuel had just been


DUNFERMLINE IN MODERN DAYS.
Photographed by Norval, Dunfermline.


crowned King of Italy, and the whole country
was heaving with unrest and interest. It was
Easter time, and Mr. Ridley and my husband
contrived to be among the crowd before St. Peter’s
at the moment of the Pope’s blessing. Concern-
ing which they were wont to say that, albeit
the stanchest of Protestants, they both felt the
better for the aged gentleman’s benediction.
A little while after his return to Australia,
Mr. Hay was requested to lay the foundation-
stone of the Stow Memorial Church, which
was built in memory of the Rev. T. Q. Stow.
It is a beautiful building, and has been likened
to a small cathedral. In after-years he laid
several such ‘ stones of beginning.’
It may be mentioned here that, of Mr. Hay’s
many and close friends, there was no one he
valued and esteemed so highly as the late Mr.
Thomas Greaves Waterhouse. An unbroken tie,
dating back to the pioneer days of both gentle-
men, was made strong by an ever-increasing
sympathy of opinion and outlook. This kind
of feeling extended also to Mr. Waterhouse’s
eldest son, who was always a favourite with
Mr. Hay.


PART II.
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES.
‘And if at times beside the evening fire
You see my face among the other faces,
Let it not be regarded as a ghost
That haunts your house, but as a guest that loves you —
Nay, even as one of your own family,
Without whose presence there were something wanting.’
The Golden Legend.




NEW RELATIONSHIPS.


THE HOUSE ON THE MOUNT.
Photographed by A. F. Humberstone, Port Victor.


NEW RELATIONSHIPS.
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES.
EARLY in the year 1871 1 became acquainted
with Alexander Hay, and of the period
intervening between that time and the closing of
his life I can speak with the authority of intimate
companionship and perfect sympathy.
In the year 1872 it was my privilege to become
his wife, and never —from the day I stood beside
him at the altar to the night when I closed his
eyes for ever—had I cause to be anything but
proud and happy at being such. He was infinitely
the larger and better half. At the time of our
marriage he was full of business and politics,
taking the keenest interest in all such matters, but
never forgetting the concerns of religion.
Prospects were very bright in the colony at the
time, and he was very prosperous. We had a


beautiful home on the rise of the hills, which was
named Linden. It was English-looking and park-
like. The garden and the grounds were laid out
with a rambling old-world taste. One splendid
tree, which Mr. Hay had himself planted, towered
high above the house. It was a pine of a some-
what rare kind.
I may mention here that he had a large number
of trees planted at Mount Breckan before our
second house was built there, and he had planted
a very large number at Linden. But he was also
fond of cutting down trees. Many a small trouble
I have had over the removal of some dear old
favourite. Of course, the cutting down was
always done for some strictly useful purpose, but
he certainly had quite a Gladstonian interest in
cutting down trees.
We had many brilliant gatherings at Linden,
both in the house and in the grounds, and it is
hardly possible to imagine a happier life than that
which we lived at this time. We had our four
children, and to them we were both devoted.
Writing to his sister-in-law about this period,
Mr. Hay said ; ‘ I dare say they talk about
the “ old man rocking the cradle,” but all I


can say is that the children make me very
happy.’
To give an idea of his great love and kindness,
which never flagged or failed, I may record the
following incident: When our eldest child was
about six months old, we were staying at a
delightful watering-place on our south coast known
as Victor Harbour. We were sitting on Granite
Island, which is connected with the township of
Port Victor by a jetty, and before us was spread
out one of Nature’s fairest scenes. There lay a
distance of something like half a mile between the
mainland and ourselves. The sea was so ex-
quisitely blue that the far-famed Mediterranean
could not bear a comparison with it. As a back-
ground to the opposite shore there was a fine
range of dark-blue mountains, and the country
was coloured a delicate green, for it was still the
early spring-time, and the great heat of the sun
had not yet browned the grass, which grew almost
down to the water’s edge. In the midst of this
there nestled a mount, rising about 100 feet above
the level of the sea. It had bracken ferns grow-
ing all up its slope. It would be difficult to find
a more lovely situation than this hill presented.
6


My eye being attracted to this spot, I said in
quite a casual way : ‘Now, I should just like a
house on that mount.’ In his quiet, assured way
he answered: ‘ Well, we’ll see; perhaps you
may.’ To my surprise, from that time he set to
work; he bought the section which includes the
mount, and now there has been built on this site
one of the most beautiful houses in Australia,
described by the press, at the time of his death,
as the nearest approach to a Scotch baronial
castle in the colonies.
Mr. Hay had great taste in architecture, and
many private houses and public buildings besides
his own houses owed much of their beauty and
convenience to his suggestions. He employed an
architect of great ability in the erection of the
house at Port Victor, but the staircase, with its
beautiful arches instead of a dead wall, was
expressly designed by him.
It may interest some persons to be told that
the section on which this house stands belonged
originally to the first Governor of South Australia,
the late Sir John Hindmarsh. In the starting of
the colony it was laid out as a fine city, with
terraces running all round the face of the mount,


HALL AND STAIRCASE, MOUNT BRECKAN.
Photographed by McCann, Adelaide.
6—3


and the streets were to have been named after the
leading men of the day in England, and the
cathedral was to have stood precisely on the spot
now occupied by our house. Many people, in
those early days, thought that this ought to have
become the capital of South Australia. The
name suggested for the city was that of Alexan-
dria, which is associated with the English Royal
Family.
Had we known this at the time of our purchase,
we should in all probability have given the place
this name, if only because it bore a similarity to
Mr. Hay’s Christian name. In the meantime,
however, we had named the place Mount Breckan,
spelling the second word in the characteristic
Scotch way.
In a curious way Mr. Hay showed his character
and training in his driving. He was a most
fearless driver. He allowed no ordinary obstacle
to stand in his way if he wished to go to any
place that was off the beaten track. Many
a time—to use the familiar phrase—my heart
was in my mouth when we were passing through
very doubtful places.
On one occasion Mr. Hay drove me—it was


not many years before he died —from the Yanka-
lilla Road in a bee-line through an almost path-
less wilderness of scrub to the parallel road along
the Hindmarsh Valley. He was very anxious
that a proper road should be made in order to
open up the country. Our vehicle was a heavy
express. A track had been traced, but with no
approach to metalling, and something had been
done to a ford in order to make it passably safe.
We got on fairly well until we came to this part,
and then we found that the temporary crossing
had been washed away by some recent floods;
and there lay the stream before us, with a bank
on the one side to go down which was well-nigh
as steep as the roof of a house, and a bank of
the same kind on the other side to go up; and
the evening was getting dark. I demurred to the
venture, but he said :
‘ Put your trust in me. You know that you
have never yet had an accident when I was
driving you ’ (which was true in more ways than
one). Saying that, he gathered the reins firmly
into his hands, and down we went with a rush,
but safely, reaching, eventually, in triumph to the
top of the opposite bank.


Our first festivity at Linden brought us into
a rather unlooked-for publicity. It was perhaps
unique in being a private garden-party that gave
rise to a Parliamentary debate. It was held in
the year 1873, and, though large, it was really
small when compared with the enormous gather-
ings which subsequently took place in the same
grounds.
But this first fete bore only a very private and
social character. The subject of this memoir
being at the time a member of the Legislative
Council —and there being very little work on the
notice paper of the House for the day fixed—the
sitting was adjourned to the next day with the
apparently unanimous consent of all the members.
But on the morning of the day a leading article
appeared, in one of the daily papers, on the sub-
ject ; while on the day following a hotly-serious
(though comical) debate took place in the Upper
Chamber on the propriety of the ‘ adjournment,’
the Lantern, the comic paper of the time, adding
fuel to the fire by rather aptly describing and
picturing the ‘ Honourable Members of the Upper
House ’ as disporting themselves at Linden upon
‘ Gosseamer - Hay-ricks.’ It was only recently,


when looking through the South Australian
Hansard, that I realized what a real excitement
this garden-party had caused.
We had a great many dinner-parties in the
early years of our married life. On one occasion
I remember announcing before a number of people
that I had told the old man who supplied us with
‘ game ’ that he must get me some. I did not
remember that it was the close season.
‘What!’ said Mr. Hay immediately, ‘ I make
the laws and you break them ?’
The proper arrangement of the guests at the
dinner-table was his chief anxiety. With his
courteous ideas, he wished everyone to occupy
the seat of honour; but this was, of course, im-
possible.
At one of these dinner-parties held at Linden,
one of Adelaide’s most favourite charities, the
Home for Incurables, was started. Mrs. Farr,
the wife of Archdeacon Farr, and my father, the
late Dr. Gosse, were especially interested in it;
and Mr. Hay gave the first donation.
In the year 1885 we had an immense Cale-
donian gathering, to which all the members of
the South Australian Caledonian Society, with


their wives and families, were invited. With
them we also invited the members of the Young
Men’s Christian Association; and, indeed, all
Adelaide was there, the number adding up to a
total of four thousand souls.
Immediately after this ‘ gathering of the clans ’
—for it was at the time of my husband’s close
connection with the Caledonian Society—in lieu,
perhaps, of a more lasting memorial, Mr. Hay
was raised to the dignity of a ‘ pedestal ’ in the
comic paper of the day; while the following
beautiful verses appeared in one of the daily
papers to his honour :
‘ Oh ! in our memories long shall live
The last St. Andrew’s Day,
And long shall live the memory
Of honest Alick Hay !
’Tis said among the farmer folk,
As harvest-time draws nearer,
Hay will be dear, but—in your ear —
Our Hay cannot be dearer.’
Long after these moving times, when the ‘ past
president ’ had ceased to take an active part in
the concerns of this ‘ society,’ on some still, warm
evening, when we would be either walking the
long verandah or sitting reading in the library with


open doors, the distant sound of bagpipes would
come to us from half a mile away, growing gradu-
ally louder and nearer. And soon the large
‘ pipers’ band ’ of the society would stride up the
drive and in at the gate, come to serenade once
more their old chief. And once again old Linden
would ring with gruff Scotch cheers—and, it
may be, other ‘ cheer ’ beside.


LINDEN.
Photographed by McGann, Adelaide.


LATER VISIT TO GREAT BRITAIN.




LATER VISIT TO GREAT BRITAIN.
LATER on, in the year 1886, Mr. Hay was
appointed Honorary Commissioner to the
Colinderies Exhibition. He and I came to-
gether to England, and we had a very delightful
holiday time. He had the honour of being pre-
sented to the Prince of Wales at a levee held
on the Queen’s behalf. And we had together the
unique honour of lunching at Windsor Castle,
and afterwards being presented to Her Majesty,
in a more private way than the usual Court pre-
sentation.
It would be impossible to give in detail an
account of the kind attentions which we received
during this visit. Amongst other things, there
was a Highland banquet, presided over by the
Duke of Buccleuch. At this banquet Mr. Hay
was asked to return thanks for the visitors ; and
this he did in one of the best speeches I have


ever heard him deliver, though I have heard
many. He was not what would be called a
fluent or eloquent speaker, but he was always
listened to because he was known to have
decided opinions, of a good common-sense
character, and the courage to speak them out.
On this particular occasion he became really
eloquent.
It will be remembered that in the year 1886
there was a strong feeling in the country both for
and against Mr. Gladstone’s Home Rule Bill for
Ireland. Mr. Hay was strongly opposed to it,
and fully sympathized with the so-called Liberal
Unionists. He was accustomed to say that ‘ one
great federated empire ’ is the true policy for
Great Britain and her dependencies ; and this
was the subject of his speech when returning
thanks for the ‘ visitors ’ at the Highland
banquet.
He roused great enthusiasm on this occasion
by dwelling on the prospect of future unity of
empire as emphasized by the then offers of assist-
ance to the Home Government, in the shape of a
contingent of volunteers from New South Wales,
saying that he felt sure that such help would


always be forthcoming from any of the Australian
colonies when required.
One thing he earnestly desired that never came
to him: he longed to be, at least for one session,
a member of the federated Parliament of
Australia.
Travelling hither and thither, and the rush
and excitement of the London season, proved
to be too much for him, and on reaching Scot-
land he became ill, for the first time during my
association with him. Dr. M. Anderson, of
Glasgow, prescribed for him, and he soon
recovered his usual health and strength ; but he
continued to use Dr. Anderson’s prescription in
times of need up to the close of his life.
During this visit Mr. Hay was consulted by the
then Secretary of State for the Colonies, on the
advisability of the Northern Territory being
annexed to Queensland, and, as far as I can
remember, he was in favour of the transfer. It
belongs now, as it did at the time, to South
Australia.
7


Sir Noel Paton’s Picture.
It was on this same visit to the ‘ old country ’
that Mr. Hay requested Sir Noel Paton, the great
Scotch painter, who had once been his boy-friend,
to paint a picture.
Mr. Hay gave him his choice of a subject, either
from Scott’s novels or from ancient Scottish
history. Sir Noel chose one from the latter,
taking a scene from the lives of Queen Margaret
and King Malcolm Canmore, who were Sovereigns
of Scotland in the eleventh century.
The royal couple are depicted in a beautiful
and romantic glen not far from their palace.
Margaret is seated lower down than her husband,
and she seems to have just caught him as he was
going away hunting, for the weapons of the chase
are lying about. He is a noble-looking man of
colossal size, clad in the half-barbarous fashion
of the age, and it displays to the greatest
advantage his well-developed frame. His eyes
are cast down, and apparently he is looking at
his beautiful wife, and listening with the fullest
attention to what she is saying to him.
The Queen is fair, with bright red-brown hair


hanging down her back, and confined round the
head with a sort of crown or circlet, which is
set with enormous jewels. Her eyes are of
the deepest blue, and they are raised to her
husband’s face with a most earnest and pleading
expression. Her magnificent mantle of blue is
embroidered all round the edge with gems, and
is worn over a robe of white satin. One little
foot is seen peeping out from her dress, and
coupled with the tiny bluebells nestling under the
bank near by, it instinctively calls to mind those
familiar lines written by Scott of that other, sweet
Scotch heroine:
‘ E’en the slight harebell raised its head
Elastic from her airy tread.’
On her lap, with her right hand keeping it
open, is a book of the most wonderful workman-
ship. The artist told us that it was painted from
the actual book that Margaret used to read to the
king. This volume is a copy of the Gospels, which,
after having been submerged for untold years,
was found shortly before this picture was painted.
The position of the Queen’s left hand must not
be left unnoticed. It rests upon her husband’s
7—2


hand in a most persuasive manner. In a
criticism of the picture which was sent to the
Times from Edinburgh just after its completion,
the following words were used : ‘ The action of
the hand is a sermon in itself.’
This picture is certainly one of the gifted
artist’s noblest productions, and whether it is
viewed near or from a distance it is equally
impressive.
The careful detail of the painting is especially
noticeable in the exquisite little bluebells in the
corner, painted in expressly by Sir Noel for his
old friend to remind him of Scotland.


QUEEN MARGARET AND KING MALCOLM CANMOKE.
(From a photograph presented by Sir Noel Paton.)
Photographed by Doig and Mckechnie, Edinburgh.




VIEWS ON WORSHIP AND
TEMPERANCE.




VIEWS ON WORSHIP AND
TEMPERANCE.
Interest in Practical Religion.
MR. HAY took the keenest interest in all
religious movements of a really practical
character, irrespective of their connection with
particular denominations. He began his life as a
Presbyterian, and when he went to Australia he
identified himself with that body. Finding, how-
ever, but little life and enterprise in the local con-
duct of its services, he became attached to the
Rev. T. Q. Stow, the father of South Australian
Congregationalism. He joined Mr. Stow’s church,
and remained a member of it for more than a
quarter of a century, taking the liveliest interest
in the progress and success of that church.
During the last five-and-twenty years of his life
he attended the services of the Church of England,


both because this church was much nearer to his
residence at Linden, and because I belonged
to that form of worship. There was, how-
ever, no form of Protestant Church enterprise
which he did not liberally support, both with his
money and his advice.
Connection with Societies.
Mr. Hay was one of the leaders in establishing
the Australian branch of the British and Foreign
Bible Society. He was the president of the
Adelaide Young Men’s Christian Association.
During the time that he was in office the fine
pile of buildings which is now occupied by the
association was built and opened. Out of compli-
ment to him, I was asked to lay the foundation
or corner stone. In the address that was
presented to me on this occasion, the .following
reference was made to him ; ‘ The association is
to be congratulated on having as its president one
who is so highly esteemed, and so widely known
and respected, as your husband, the Hon.
Alexander Hay, upon whom all who are engaged
in earnest Christian and philanthropic work can


ever depend for warm sympathy and practical
support.’
He was the pioneer chief of the South Australian
Caledonian Society. During the time that he was
actively connected with it, we had many gather-
ings of the clans at Linden, where there was a
large lawn ■ suitable for such assemblies. The
spirited strains of the bagpipes, and the men
dressed in the familiar kilts, made the sons and
daughters of Scotland think that for a time they
were back again in their native land.
Views on Temperance.
When Mr. Hay arrived in South Australia as a
young man he was a strict teetotaler. He had
not actually taken the pledge, but he abstained
from all alcoholic drinks, and this, I take it, was
one great reason of his success in life. It is said
that in the early years of the colony there was a
terrible habit of ‘ nobblerizing.’ All business trans-
actions were begun and ended with a ‘ nobbier,’
and if a young man was not able to say that he
never took anything of the kind, he was almost
bound to make shipwreck of his life. Many a life


of a fair promise came to grief through the influ-
ence of this evil habit, and does so still. And the
dreadful power of drink, as witnessed by him in
the early days of his uphill fight, seems to have
deeply sunk into his mind.
In later years Mr. Hay became less strict, but
in this he preserved the moderation which was
characteristic of all his relations.
In this connection may be mentioned a some-
what singular and unusual thing which Mr. Hay
did about two years before he died. At Linden
there was a vineyard of about nine acres, and in
previous years very good wine had been made
from the fruitage of it. Some ten or twelve years
before the making of wine on the estate had been
given up, but the grapes had been sold to other
people for manufacture. During the year 1896 he
had the whole of the vines rooted up, and when
someone remonstrated with him for thus destroy-
ing good property, he replied : ‘ I hope no one
who comes after me will ever plant them again
and make wine.’ Many a time I have heard him
say: ‘No young man should drink during busi-
ness hours or between meals.’
Mr. Hay must have been an active Justice of


the Peace for over forty years. He was also a
most favourite trustee or executor, taking the
same pains and generous interest in the affairs
of those entrusted to his care as in matters of
more personal concern. Latterly he complained
that he found such responsibilities too heavy for
him, and refused many such requests.




PERSONAL HABITS AND CHARACTER.




PERSONAL HABITS AND CHARACTER.
FROM his boyhood to the close of his life
Mr. Hay was a great reader. Some of his
favourite authors were Walter Scott, Burns, Nor-
man Macleod, George Macdonald, Dean Farrar,
Dr. Raleigh, lan Maclaren, and Dr. Barrett.
Latterly he became interested in such books of
history and travel as the ‘ Life of Marlborough ’
and Nansen’s ‘ Farthest North.’ We were read-
ing together ‘ Darkness and Dawn ’ at the time he
died. Many happy hours have been spent with
him reading books that will now ever be dear to
me by reason of their having been associated
with him.
He was a man of prayer. Many a time I have
seen him on his knees at other than the usual
morning and evening seasons. He used daily a
devotional book, which had been his companion
for six-and-thirty years. I found my name and
8


the date of my birthday in it, my eldest son’s
name, and some others. The late Dean Vaughan’s
‘ Family Devotion ’ he was very fond of, and I
found a copy at Linden with my second son’s
name in it. He gave many copies of this book
away to friends.
The teaching concerning the ultimate and
universal salvation of mankind, through the death
of Christ, found great favour with him. And this
was doubtless in part the reason for his interest
in the writings of George Macdonald and Dean
Farrar.
It has been suggested to me to call Mr. Hay a
‘ Puritan father,’ instead of a ‘ pioneer ’; but this
I cannot do. When we consider the date and
country of his birth, with its strict ‘ Sabbatarian-
ism ’ and general religious narrowness, Mr. Hay
seems to have been singularly tolerant, and even
broad in his views. He liked that in everything
God should be honoured, and he was not afraid at
any time or in any place to express his desire.
He would never do any business on the Sunday,
but, if anything, he was more cheerful on that
day than on any other. Then, he saw no harm
in going to theatres or balls, or entertainments of


the kind ; but such things were not matters of
great personal enjoyment to him. He attended
them chiefly for my sake.
Mr. Hay was always ready to give advice and
assistance in a fatherly spirit to everyone who
came to him in need. His servants were always
well paid, and he took a great interest in their
private concerns, advising them to save, and
telling them how best to invest their savings.
At the time of his death, his coachman had
been in his service for thirty years, his house-
keeper for twenty-seven, another servant for
twenty-one years, and the rest for fairly long
periods.
To all of them he left a gift by his will, propor-
tioned to their length of service. One of them
pathetically said to me :
‘ He seems to have taken care of all of us.’
This memoir would be very incomplete were
no allusion to be made to Mr. Hay as a landlord
and the owner of two beautiful estates.
He has so thoroughly identified himself with his
two homes at Linden and Mount Breckan, that it
becomes almost impossible—even for those out-
-B—2


side the family circle —to picture either place
without his loved and honoured presence moving
in daily round about the grounds, giving orders
for the performance of even the most insignificant
duties, and watching their fulfilment with the
greatest interest.
Either home, in losing him as its master, has
lost also its central figure, and its originator and
designer. How easy it is to understand the
interest felt by him in both these places, when we
remember that he had watched them from the
beginning—a beginning of aboriginal scrub and
waste-land —and had seen them grow to what they
became under his fostering care !
His greatest delight—more particularly in his
later years—was walking up and down the long
verandah at Linden and the terrace lawn at Mount
Breckan, or standing on the front-steps of the
last-named place, looking out at the exquisite
view of ‘ Southern ’ sea and ‘ Hindmarsh ’ river
which was spread out below him, and over his
own broad lands lying between.
As a landlord he took a special and peculiar
interest in all his tenants, helping them in every
way in his power, both with his custom and his


STANDING ON THE FRONT-STEPS.


advice. He was most careful about the character
of those to whom he let his houses. Many, both
able and willing to rent a house on his lands, were
refused because he did not approve of their mode
of life, though this latter fact applies more to his
city property.
At Mount Breckan and in the neighbourhood
there were a number of tenants; and it was quite
amusing to see the way in which they would flock
up to the house from the village, as soon as they
knew he was there, to consult him about their
affairs. It was more than a repetition of the old
English squiredom: it was something after the old
patriarchal manner of life.
As an illustration of his great and simple love
for these adopted homes of his, and for his people,
I quote from one of his letters received by me
when on a visit to England with my eldest son and
daughter:
‘ I was taking my usual walk up and down the
verandah at Linden last night, and wished you
were beside me. I don’t think you will find many
prettier places than Linden.’


MOUNT BRECKAN, WHERE ALEXANDER HAY PASSED AWAY ON FEBRUARY 4, 1898.
Photographed by MeGann, Adelaide.


EPILOGUE.
I pledge you in this cup of grief,
Where floats the fennel’s bitter leaf !
The Battle of Our Life is brief :
The alarm—the struggle—the relief,
Then sleep we side by side.’
LONGFELLOW.


EPILOGUE.
THE ‘ PASSING TIME.’
MR. HAY was exceedingly careless about
his own health, probably because he had
been so strong all through his life. But this
indifference became a serious matter as years
increased upon him. Dr. Hayward, his medical
attendant, who was also a personal friend, had
advised him not to go upstairs or up steep hills
more than was absolutely necessary; but none of
us could keep him from doing what was thus
virtually forbidden. He was also told by the
doctor that he should avoid going up to town in
the hot weather, when we were staying at Mount
Breckan for the summer. But when I used to
beg him not to go, he would reply, ‘ My dear wife,
it is my duty to go.’ Only a month before he


died a personal friend of his, who was staying
with us at Port Victor, said to him :
‘ Now, Mr. Hay, I wouldn't go much up to
town in the summer if I were you.’
His reply was ; ‘No, I don’t mean to; I sup-
pose I’m getting an old man now.’
Very shortly after this, and in the most oppres-
sively hot weather that we have experienced for
years, he did go up to Linden, and remained
there for some ten days. How I begrudge those
ten days! They seem to have been a robbery of
my life’s happiness.
There was some pressing and particular busi-
ness that he was anxious personally to attend to.
As a friend said to me afterwards, ‘ It was not for
himself that he was working; he certainly was
the most unselfish person I ever knew.’
From this visit to Linden he came back to me
only to die. He ‘ fell asleep,’ it may truly be said,
for nothing could be more peaceful than the closing
of his beautiful life. Truly, ‘the path of the just
is as the shining light, that shineth more and
more unto the perfect day.’ And it was the ‘ per


feet day’ to him, but for me it was a long ‘night
of weeping.’
During the last day —which we little thought
was to be the last—he spoke very'seldom. All
that he did say was in keeping with the spirit of
his whole life, but much of it was of too private
and sacred a nature to be recorded here. He
was extremely weak in body, but in full possession
of all his mental faculties.
We heard, after his death, that the day before
he returned from Linden to Mount Breckan he
had attended four or five Board meetings, and
at one of these he had been specially thanked for
his devoted services. On returning to his own
office, he said (with a spirit of foreboding that sets
us thinking) to a great friend and former partner
(the author of ‘ Paving the Way ’): ‘ Don’t you
try to do too much, Newland.’
On the following morning he was very anxious
about catching the train, saying, ‘ I must get
home.’ He was at one home; but this shows
that the home of his heart was with those whom
he loved.


In the presence of such an individuality as has
been portrayed in these pages, but very imperfectly,
how can the atheist or the unbeliever really think
that as soon as the breath has left the body there
is an end to the soul ? Surely he will meet me on
that other shore, and with his kind and loving
hands will again, as of old, lead me in all that is
noble and good.
The comparatively sudden ending of this good
and useful life was felt throughout the colony.
All who knew him felt that they had lost a father
and a friend. On the morning of the day when
his body was removed from Mount Breckan to
the station, to be conveyed to Linden, nearly
all the male inhabitants of Port Victor came
up to the house, in order to show their respect
for him by following his remains. This delicate
attention greatly touched the family. The flags
in the district were placed half-mast high. The
floral offerings were almost overwhelming, and the
coffin was laden with them.
Allusions were made to Mr. Hay on the follow-
ing Sunday in many of the city churches, and I


venture to quote the following passage from the
sermon of the Rev. T. M. Boyer, Vicar of St.
Augustine’s, Port Victor. After having referred
to the combination of the Christian and the
gentleman, the Vicar went on to say: ‘ One such
gentleman and Christian has recently been sum-
moned from amongst us. Your last mark of
respect for his life and character —your following
his mortal remains at a time most unusual [the
time of departure from Mount Breckan had been
fixed as early as four o’clock in the morning]
testifies to your appreciation of the good, the
noble, and the true, which characterized his life.
Foremost at all times stood his honoured name
for benevolent and humanitarian purposes. In
whatsoever capacity of life we view him—whether
as legislator, bank director, landlord, or employer
of labour —his probity, his straightforwardness,
his honour, and his honesty, rest unsullied;
whilst his simple, unostentatious piety, his deep
interest not only in the welfare of this church,
but in that of many others, as well as in every
religious question of his day, will always secure
for his memory the loving remembrance of his


fellow-men. And, after all, is not this the greatest
monument that a man can have ?’
‘ Sleep, living voice ; for thee sleep is not death ;
Thy life outlives the life of dust and breath.’
On Tennyson!s tomb, by his son.
Outside Testimony.
Letters and telegrams of sympathy and appre-
ciation came in immense numbers.
I give the testimony of three whose opinions—
in the first instance, from the highest judicial
capacity, and a consequent knowledge of men ; in
the second, from a capacity for quiet observation
born of travel and experience; in the third,
from a widely-known probity and a high dignity
in the Church —seem to invite a large measure of
attention. ‘ln the first freshness of our grief,’
says the first, ‘ let us be thankful that he was
what he was, and that he lived so long.’ The
second: ‘He was always my beau ideal of a
Christian gentleman.’ And the third : 1 You will
find, as time goes on, he will be increasingly
appreciated.’


From the weaker, but no less appreciative,
side of life come the two following : ‘No one, I
think, was ever so good and kind,’ and, ' His
was indeed a true Christian life, whose sweet
influence will never die.’
While from the Adelaide Advertiser comes the
following appreciation:
‘He was a universally popular man, and,
although he had been before the public eye as a
politician and in other capacities for more than
forty years, everyone spoke well of him. His was
a most genial nature, and to his companions in
train or coach travel he chatted most pleasantly
concerning the early days of the colony, when by
his own efforts he built up the wealth which he
used with such open-handed hospitality in later
life. He was of the best stamp of pioneer
colonists. He was consistently honourable and
upright in his dealings, so that while he gained
riches he retained respect.’
And now, as a parting word to those who,
having followed me through the foregoing pages,
still feel themselves in the dark as to the reason


for their publication. Let me remind them of the
sentiment so aptly and so sweetly expressed by
Longfellow in the well-known words :
‘Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.’
‘WHERE THE HIND MARSH WINDS.’
KUioi Stock , 62, Paternoster Koiv, London.
