





FOE
HOME USE
Recipe Book containing
useful information in
selecting, mixing and
general uses of Wines,
Spirits and Liqueurs.
E. G. G. SMYTHERS PTY. LTD.




COCKTAILS.
HINTS. —For instructions we have taken
the wineglass as measure. This represents
2 oss. liquid and applies to all recipes in this
book.
ICE. —When obtainable, should be used in
preference to water, as it aads greatly to the
excellence of the Cocktail, cracked being bet'
ter than crushed ice.
Cocktail glasses should be large enough to
permit the serving of Cocktails, and, at the
same time, should not be over three-quarters
full, so as to avoid spilling.
Use only the best ingredients.
BAMBOO COCKTAIL.
Half fill shaker or mixing glass with Ice.
\ wineglass Sherry, -J wineglass Italian Ver'
mouth, 3 dashes Angostura Bitters.
Shake, strain, and serve.
BRANDY COCKTAIL (Fancy).
3 dashes Maraschino, 3 dashes Angostura
Bitters, 2 dashes Orange Bitters, 1 portion
Brandy.
Fill with Ice, mix; strain into cocktail glass,
the rim of which has been moistened with
piece of Lemon, and dipped into powdered
Sugar.
SMYTHERS COCKTAIL.
Three parts fill shaker or mixing glass with
Ice. 3 dashes Bitters, U3 wineglass Smythers'
Dry Gin, L3 wineglass French Vermouth,
1'3 wineglass Italian Vermouth, 1 slice
Orange.
Shake well, strain, and serve.


COUNTRY COCKTAIL.
Half fill shaker with fine Ice. 1 teaspoon
of Syrup, 4 dashes Angostura Bitters, wine'
glass Marcelain Brandy, 1 wineglass Richard'
son Port, 1 Egg.
Mix well, strain, grate Nutmeg on top, and
serve.
CHAMPAGNE COCKTAIL.
Use thin tumbler.
1 lump Loaf Sugar saturated with Fernet
Bitters, 1 lump of Ice, I piece of Lemon Peel.
Three parts fill with cold Champagne, stir,
and serve.
FIFTY-FIFTY
Half fill shaker or mixing glass with fine
Ice. 3 dashes Fernet Bitters, \ wineglass
Smythers’ Gin, \ wineglass French or Italian
Vermouth to taste.
Mix, strain, and serve.
GIN COCKTAIL.
Use shaker or mixing glass.
3 dashes Bitters, 3 dashes Syrup, 3 dashes
Maraschino, 2 dashes Lemon Juice, 1 wine'
glass Smythers’ Dry Gin.
Fill with Ice, mix, and strain into cocktail
glass, the rim of which has been moistened
with piece of Lemon and dipped in powdered
Sugar.
MANHATTAN COCKTAIL (Harveys).
Use shaker or mixing glass.
3 dashes of Syrup, 3 dashes Bitters, -J
wineglass Italian Vermouth, wineglass
Harvey’s Whisky.
Fill with Ice, mix, strain; add a small twist
of Lemon Peel.


MANHATTAN DRY.
Same as Manhattan, leaving out Syrup,
and serve with Olive.
MARTINI DRY.
i wineglass Smythers’ Gin, i wineglass
Italian Vermouth, J wineglass French Ver'
mouth, 3 or 4 dashes Bitters.
Add crushed Ice, shake, and serve with
Lemon Rind or Olive.
MARTINI COCKTAIL (Sweet).
3 dashes Syrup, then same as Dry Martini.
Serve with Cherry.
OYSTER COCKTAIL.
Use tumbler.
A few dashes of Lemon Juice, 1 dash of
Tobasco Sauce, 1 teaspoon of Vinegar, a few
dashes of Tomato Catsup, six Oysters with
their liquor.
Season to taste with Pepper and Salt, mix,
serve with small fork in glass.
RUM COCKTAIL.
3 dashes Fernet Ritters, 2 dashes Syrup,
3 dashes Maraschino, 3 dashes Lemon Juice,
1 wineglass Red Heart Rum.
Fill with Ice, shake, and strain into cock'
tail glass, rim of which has been moistened
with pure Lemon and dipped in powdered
Sugar.
WHISKY COCKTAIL (Fancy).
Use shaker.
3 dashes Maraschino, 3 dashes Bitters, 1
wineglass Smythers’ Whisky.
Fill with Ice, and mix till very cold. Strain
into cocktail glass, the rim of which has
been moistened with Lemon Juice and dipped
in powdered Sugar.


ANGLERS’ COCKTAIL.
Fill a tumbler with chipped Ice, put in
two or three drops of Angostura Bitters, \
of Orange Bitters, and 3 or 4 drops of Rasp'
berry Syrup; add a \ wineglass of Gin; then
stir well and strain.
BOMBAY COCKTAIL.
Fill a tumbler with chipped Ice, put in 3
or 4 drops of Angostura Bitters, 4 or 5 drops
of Curacao, and 2 drops of Plain Syrup; add
\ wineglass of Marcelain Brandy.
Stir well with long spoon, strain off, and
put in a piece of Lemon Peel.
CHAMPAGNE COBBLER.
Take a large soda-water glass and fill with
chipped Ice. Put in a teaspoon of Sugar,
squeeze half a Lemon in; add half a liqueur
glass of Brandy, ditto of Curacao, fill up with
Champagne.
Decorate with fruits in season, dash the
top with Claret, and serve with straws.
FISHERMAN’S PRAYER.
Fill a J-pint tumbler with chipped Ice.
Put in i teaspoon of powdered Sugar, squeeze
half a Lemon in; add a liqueur glass of Rasp-
berry Syrup, \ wineglass of Red Heart Rum.
Shake well; decorate with fruits in season,
and serve with straws.
GIN SLING.
This is a favorite drink.
Fill a -J-pint tumbler with chipped Ice.
Put in a liqueur glass of plain Syrup, squeeze
half a Lemon in; add half a glass of Smythers’
Gin, and fill up with Soda. Then place a
slice of Lemon and Orange on top.


RED HEART RUM COCKTAIL.
This recipe will make 4 Cocktails.
2 cocktail glasses of Red Heart Rum, 1
cocktail glass Gin, J cocktail glass Grenadine.
Add the juice of a Lime or Lemon, and
ice well.
RED HEART HIGHBALL.
Put 2 or 3 lumps of Ice in a tumbler, |
gill of Red Heart Rum, and fill up with cold
Soda Water. A slice of Lemon Peel may be
added if desired.
MILK PUNCH.
Fill the shaker half full of broken Ice. 1
tablespoon of Sugar Syrup, J gill Red Heart
Rum, \ gill Brandy. Balance rich Milk.
Shake well and strain into a tumbler, with
grated Nutmeg on top.
Rum and milk is stated by an eminent
dietetic authority to be the most powerful
restorative known to man.
HOT SPICED RUM.
Put into a tumbler 2 or 3 teaspoonsful of
Sugar and dissolve in a little boiling water;
add 1 gill Red Heart Rum, 1 piece of Butter
as large as a small walnut, 1 teaspoon of
Spices, Cinnamon, cloves.
Fill a glass with boiling water. Stir up
well, and serve. An infallible remedy for a
cold.
PLAIN EGG NOGG.
Fill the shaker full of broken Ice and add
1 fresh Egg, 1 teaspoonful of Sugar Syrup,
gill Red Heart Rum, the balance rich Milk.
Shake well, and strain into a tumbler; add
grated Nutmeg on top.


CHINESE COCKTAIL.
Fill the bar glass \ full of broken Ice and
add 1 or 2 dashes Angostura Bitters, 3 dashes
of Maraschino, 3 dashes of Curacao, 3 dashes
Grenadine, \ gill Red Heart Rum.
Stir up well, strain into cocktail glass; add
a Cherry and squeeze Lemon Peel on top.
JAMAICA RUM JULEP.
Dissolve 4 or 5 tender sprigs of Mint
with sugar and water until flavor of Mint is
well extracted. Strain carefully into the bar
glass; add Ice and % gill of Red Heart Rum.
Shake well, and strain into mint julep glass.
The glass is prepared as follows: Use a
tumbler or balloon wineglass filled with fine
chipped Ice. Insert 2 or 3 sprigs of Mint
with the leaves upwards, and which have
been dipped into powdered sugar beforehand.
Decorate tastily with Berries, Pineapple,
Banana, Orange, etc., according to season.
APERITIFS.
GIN AND BITTERS.
2 or more dashes Bitters in liqueur glass.
Fill with Smythers 1 Dry Gin. If using sweet"
ened Gin, 3 or 4 dashes Bitters.
SHERRY AND BITTERS.
1 portion Sandeman’s Sherry, 3 or 4 dashes
Bitters.
PUNCHES.
In mixing punches containing milk or eggs,
the eggs should be partially whisked and
added very carefully, stirring all the time.
When hot wines or spirits are used they
should be poured slowly over the milk and
partially beaten eggs.


When champagne or sparkling waters
(soda, etc.), they should not be added till
the last moment before serving.
Sweeten carefully. It is easier to add than
to take away.
CAMBRIDGE PUNCH.
In 2 quarts of Milk heat slowly 1 wine'
glass Syrup, peel of 2 lemons, about 1 doz.
bruised Bitter Almonds.
When mixture is well brewed, strain and
allow to simmer whilst the following are
added, stirring all the while.
The whites of 3 Eggs whisked in a little
cold Milk, 1 pint Marcelain Brandy, 1 pint
Red Heart Rum, 1 tablespoon Fernet Bitters.
Sweeten to taste; then mull the Punch to
froth, and pour into warmed bowl, and serve
in hot punch glasses.
CHAMPAGNE PUNCH.
Use large glass jug.
1 teaspoon Syrup, 3 slices Orange, 3 slices
Lemon, 1 rind Lemon, 1 slice Cucumbei, 1
teaspoon Bitters, \ wineglass Brandy, \ wine'
glass Maraschino, \ wineglass White Curacao,
1 wineglass Smythers’ Amontillado Sherry,
I quart Pommerey Champagne, 1 bottle Soda
Water; add 2 or 3 lumps Ice.
Ornament with fresh fruit or mint, and
serve in tall champagne glasses.
CIDER CUP.
Same as Champagne Cup, substituting
Cider for Champagne.
CLARET CUP.
Same as Champagne Cup, substituting 2
bottles Claret for Champagne.


CLARET PUNCH.
Put in a large bowl 3 tablespoons Syrup,
1 tablespoon Bitters, 3 Oranges (sliced), 3
Lemons (sliced), 1 Pineapple (sliced and
quartered), 2 wineglasses Marcelain Brandy,
2 bottles Smythers’ Claret.
Stir gently; add 2 bottles Appollinaris.
Serve in punch glasses or cups.
EGG NOGG PUNCH.
Use bowl holding 2\ gallons.
1 lb. White Sugar, 20 fre§h Eggs.
Separate yolks and beat till thin as water;
add Sugar, mixing with spoon. Then add as
follows;—
2 qts. Prunier Brandy, l-g pts. Smythers’
Old Rum, 2 tablespoons Bitters, 1J glass rich
Milk.
Mix well with ladle, stirring all the time
while pouring in Milk. Sweeten with Syrup
to taste, beat whites of Eggs to stiff froth,
and pour over the mixture. In serving,* dip
out with ladle, and put little of white on top
of each. Sprinkle with Nutmeg. Serve in
punch glasses.
HOCK CUP.
Same as Champagne Cup, substituting 2
bottles of Hock for Champagne.
SAUTERNE CUP.
Same as Champagne Cup, substituting 2
bottles Sauterne for the Champagne.
GIN PUNCH.
2 teaspoons Syrup, 4 dashes Lemon Juice,
4 dashes Bitters, wineglasses Smythers’
Gin, 6 dashes Soda.
Shake well, strain into punch glass, dress
with fruit, and serve.


HOT WHISKY PUNCH.
Dissolve lump of Sugar in little hot water
in warmed punch glass. 3 or 4 dashes Fernet
Bitters, 1 wineglass Harvey’s Whisky, 1 piece
Lemon Peel twisted and dropped into glass.
Fill up with hot water, grate Nutmeg on
top, and serve.
MILK PUNCH.
Half fill mixing glass with some Ice. 1
teaspoon Syrup, \ glass Brandy, 3 or 4 dashes
Angostura Bitters, wineglass Smythers’
Long Pond Rum; fill up with Milk.
Mix and strain into tall glasses. Serve
with grated Nutmeg on top. This can be
served hot by substituting water for Ice by
heating almost to boiling point after the in'
troductibn of milk.
EGG NOGGS.
HINTS.—When ingredients include them,
always gradually pour hot wine or spirits
oyer eggs or cold milk—never the reverse;
and, if liquid is stirred when doing so, eggs
and milk will not curdle.
Do not break eggs into a drink, as, by
doing so, you fail to detect any doubtful eggs.
EGG NOGG.
Half fill a mixing glass with fine Ice. 1
Egg whisked separately, 1 tablespoon Syrup,
3 dashes Bitters, 1 wineglass Whisky, Rum,
or Sherry, as desired.
Fill with Milk. Shake and serve with
Nutmeg on top.
SHERRY FLIPS.
Half fill a mixing glass with fine Ice. 1
teaspoon Syrup Grenadine, 4 dashes Bitters,
1 Egg (whisked separately), 1J wineglass
Smythers’ Amontillado Sherry.


Mix, strain. Serve in punch glasses, with
grated Nutmeg on top.
This drink can be taken hot (if water is
substituted for Ice) by heating the lot slowly
■ —not boiling.
LONG DRINKS (Coolers).
Generally speaking, long drinks should be
served with ,Ice in them, accompanied by
straws.
If desired, drinks can be ornamented with
fruits when drinks are strained—-fruit to be
added after straining.
CLARET LEMONADE.
Use large mixing glass.
f tablespoon Sugar, 6 or 8 dashes Lemon
Juice.
Half fill with water and a little Ice. Mix
and shake well; pour into a tumbler; add one
or two pieces of Ice. Ornament with fruit
in season. Top off with \ teaspoon Bitters,
and i glass Claret flowing on top of Lemon'
ade. Serve with straws.
JOHN COLLINS.
Into a tumbler drop 2 or 3 lumps of
cracked Ice. 1 teaspoonful Syrup, 4 or 5
dashes Lemon Juice, 4 or 5 dashes
tura Bitters, 1 wineglass Smythers 1 Gin.
Fill up with Soda, and serve.
NON-ALCOHOLIC PARTY
DRINKS.
SHUT EYE.
Into a tumbler put the rind only of one
Lemon, bruising slightly with mixing spoon,
and add 1 teaspoon Syrup, 1 teaspoon Angos'
tura Bitters, 3 or 4 pieces of Ice.


Stir and fill up—half with Cider and half
with Dry Ginger Ale. Serve.
LEMON FAN.
Few pieces of Ice in a tumbler. Add I
teaspoon Fernet Bitters, 1 bottle Lemonade.
Stir and serve. This is simple and a thirst'
quencher.
MT. BUFFALO COOLER.
Beat an egg and pour it into a thin
tumbler. 1 teaspoon of Syrup, 4 dashes-
Bitters, juice of 1 Lemon.
Fill up with Cider; sprinkle Nutmeg on
top, and serve.
WINES.
Although most persons have preferences-
and ideas concerning wines, it is often ad'
visable to place reliance on your wine mer'
chant. Similarly when dining out, the assist'
ance of wine stewards of good class hotels is.
always valuable.
When purchasing wines for home use, it
is advisable to order a quantity of half
bottles to satisfy occasions when half bottles
will be sufficient.
STORAGE. —All wines should be laid on
their side. The horizontal position prevents
corks becoming dematuralised and unduly
porous; keeps wine alive and in good com
dition.
So that the natural color of the wine may
show, it is wiser to use clear glass.
SERVING. —Most wines to he served at
round about the temperature of the room,
particularly clarets, burgundies; while white
wines (sauterne, Graves 1 ) can be a shade
cooler than the temperature. Champagnes-
and sparkling wines to be cold.


It is best not to fill glasses, but to have
them of generous size and crystal clear glass.
When serving champagne or sparkling
wines do not open bottles till ready to serve.
Sherry is the least affected wine by smoking.
Informal meals, where one wine only is
served, sauterne or champagne are usually
the best.
For a formal dinner the usual sequence is
with—
Hors-d’Oeuvres: Dry Sherry, Vermouth,
and Bitters.
Oysters: Chablis, Graves 1 .
Soup: Brown Sherry, Madeira.
Fish: Sauterne, Chablis, Graves’, Porphyry.
Entrees: Claret, Burgundy, Chiante.
Roasts: Burgundy, Claret.
Game (white meat): Champagne,
Game (red meat) : Burgundy, Claret.
Sweets: Madeira (cool).
Coffee: Liqueur Brandy, Benedictine
Liqueurs.
DOMESTIC USES.
ORANGE JELLY.
1 pt. Water, 1 pt. Orange Juice, 4 oz.
Lump Sugar, 2 oz. Gelatine, juice 2 Lemons.
Bring to boil and simmer 10 minutes. Cool
slightly; add a teaspoon Bitters, and strain.
LEMON JELLY.
To 1-J pts. water add \ pt. Lemon Juice,
6 oz. Lump Sugar, 2 oz. Leaf Gelatine, and
the shells and slightly beaten Whites of two
■eggs.
Bring to boil and simmer for 10 minutes.
Cool slightly; add 1-J teaspoons Angostura
Bitters, strain and serve when cool. Quantity,
1| pints.


If packet jelly is preferred add one tea'
spoon of Bitters to the pint.
STEWED PRUNES.
Before stewing these in the usual way and
after the Prunes have been soaked about 8
hours, add 1 teaspoon Angostura Bitters.
Usual proportion 1 teaspoon to 1 lb. (suit
to taste). This flavoring for Prunes gives
an entirely new character.
PUDDINGS.
FIG PUDDINGS.
Mix well 6 oz. finely chopped Suet, 4 oz.
Flour, 4 oz. Sugar, 4 oz. Breadcrumbs, good
pinch Salt, pinch of Nutmeg, and 8 oz. finely
chopped Figs.
Beat 2 Eggs and -J pt. Milk, to which add
\ 'teaspoon Angostura Bitters. Pour this
gradually into the dry ingredients, mixing
thoroughly. Place in greased basin and
steam 2\ hours. Serve with sweet sauce.
APPLE CHARLOTTE.
To juice 1 Lemon add \ teaspoon Bitters.
Stir; then peel, core, slice 2 lbs. Apples, and
fill a buttered pie dish with alternate layers of
Apple sprinkled with Lemon Juice and Sugar,
and thin slices of Bread and Butter, the last
layer being Bread and Butter. Cover with
greased paper, and bake in moderate oven for
an hour.
WHITE SAUCE.
White Sauce for Puddings (rich). —Mix
to smooth paste 1 dessertspoon of Cornflour
and a little Milk. Put J pt. Milk in sauce'
pan; add pinch Salt and bring to the boil.


Pour gradually over the cornflour paste, stir-'
ring. Return to saucepan, add \ teaspoon
Bitters, sweeten to taste. Simmer gently, stir-
ring continuously for 5 minutes. Lemon Juice
to taste can be added if desired. Quantity,
little over | pt.
SAUCES.
CUSTARD.
Mix to smooth paste 1 teaspoon Cornflour
with little Milk; add 1 pt. Milk and teaspoon
Angostura. Simmer slowly, stirring con-
tinuously for five minutes, and add 2 02,.
Sugar. Allow to cool a little; add 1 Egg
previously beaten. Heat again, gently stirring
for a few minutes. Do not let the mixture
boil or thicken unduly. Allow to cool and
serve as desired.
PEARS AND RICE.
To -J lb. rice add 1 pt. Milk, 2 oz. Castor
Sugar, a pat Butter, pinch Salt, and grated
rind of \ Lemon. Cook slowly until rice
is tender. Cool slightly, and stir in the
previously beaten yolks of 2 Eggs. Complete
the cooking and press the mixture in flat-
topped round mould, and turn out on a hot
dish. Rapidly boil the Syrup from 1 tin
of preserved Pears until about half remains
and add \ teaspoonful of Angostura Bitters.
Put in the Pears and let them become
thoroughly heated; then arrange them in a
heap on top and around the rice, adding
Syrup as desired. Sprinkle with Castor Sugar
and cover with the stiffly whisked whites of
Eggs. Sprinkle heavily with Castor Sugar,
and bake in moderate oven until the meringue
is hardened and slightly browned.


MUTTON BROTH. t
Remove fat from 1|- lb. neck Mutton, and
cut in small pieces. Fill a stewpan with a
quart of cold water and add. Meat and Bones,
a little Salt, a tablespoon of Pearl Barley
(which has been blanched), and bring slowly
to boil. Skim well and simmer for an hour;
then add 1 Carrot, \ Turnip, 1 Onion, and
a small strip of Celery, all cut into dice, and
simmer very gently for 2 hours. Strain and
remove fragment of bone before returning
vegetables to the pan. Add a dessertspoon
of Angostura; bring to boil and sprinkle with
Parsley.
JUGGED HARE.
As soon as the hare is received, entrails,
liver, etc., should be removed. After this
wipe and pepper the inside well, hang up
the hare. When required, skin and truss it
for roasting. Half roast it, basting con-
tinuously; half an hour to an hour is neces-
sary according to age. Then cut the hare
into small pieces and place them in a stew-
jar with an onion stuck with cloves. Add
Pepper and Salt and Lemon Juice, and pour
over sufficient stock to cover. Put a lid on
the jar and allow the contents to simmer for
about 2\ or 3 hours. Then take out the
pieces, placing them in a hot dish, and to
the gravy in the jar add a glass of Port Wine
and a teaspoon of Angostura (or more to
taste), and more seasoning if required. When
about to boil strain the gravy over the hare,
and serve as quickly as possible. Forcemeat
balls may accompany the Hare. Red Currant
Jelly is served separately. .


INVALID BEVERAGE.
BARLEY BROTH.
Cover 2 03. Pearl Barley with cold water
and boil for a minute or two. Strain, put
Barley in jug, and 3 lumps Sugar, the pared
rind of \ Lemon, and 1 pt. boiling Water.
When cold, strain, add 1 teaspoon Bitters.
Can be served with Soda Water if desired.
GRAPE JUICE.
Pour 1 pt. water over 2 lb. grapes. Simmer
slowly for 5 minutes, strain through cheese
cloth, add teaspoon Bitters, sweeten to taste.
Serve cold.
LEMON WATER.
Put the thinly pared rind of 1 Lemon, the
strained juice of “2 Lemons, Sugar to taste
into jug. Add 1 pt. boiling Water, cover,
and allow to stand till cold. Strain and add
1 teaspoon Bitters. Serve hot or cold, as
preferred.
OATMEAL WATER.
Stir to smooth paste 2 tablespoons fine Oat-
meal in teacup of cold Water; then pour into
2 pts. of boiling Water. Stir well, add pinch
Salt, and boil for 30 minutes. Strain, add
one teaspoon of Angostura. Serve hot or
cold, as desired.








