

FOR
PEACE
BY
JAS. R. C. HIGMAN


FOR PEACE
BY
JAS. R. C. HIGMAN.
Rannock,
COOLAMON, N.S.W.,
Australia.


Copyright throughout the British Empire
First Edition .... 1000 Copies
A pril, 1942
Second Edition . . . 1000 Copies
July, 1943
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney
for transmission by post as a book


FOREWORD.
This book is the outcome of a life’s experience
(written during the Author’s 71st year), about 12
years of intensive study of the causes and incidence
of the great depression which is pressing so hardly
on, if not ruining the Primary Producer, and “spare
time” taken from a very fully occupied life.
In the most concise language the Author is
capable of, it gives the only practical solution of the
man-made ills we are suffering from — war, economic
mal-adjustment, class dissention, industrial unrest
and Church disunity. The cure for all these ills is
to be found in these pages, and the Author relies on
every reader to apply his or her share of the cure.
If this is done we can look forward to a world worth
living in, otherwise these ills will oppress us more
and more. Which is it to be?
Jas. R. C. Higman.
April 6, 1942.




CHAPTER I.
The Lost Peace.
As these lines are being penned more than half
the peoples of the world are actively engaged in
war, with all that art, science, wealth and industry
can give devoted to the destruction of life and all
that makes life worth living. Without question we
have lost the peace.
During the first Great War our leaders told us we
were fighting to end war and make the world safe
for Democracy. We now know that all the blood
and treasure that was then poured out did not have
the result anticipated. This time we realize that all
we can attain by military force is to prevent might
from domineering over right, to punish and restrain
those who use their pledged word simply to deceive,
and to prevent the world being terrorized and
enslaved by those who practise such a policy and
try to enforce it by military power.
No real peace could come to a world dominated
on such lines, and the writer assumes confidently
that totalitarianism with all its might will be over-
come. Otherwise the world reverts to the grand
old rule, the simple plan, that he shall take who has
the power and he shall keep who can; and the new
world order will be the great disorder. Lying,
treachrey, and the rule of brute force do not make
for peace.
We need to realize that peace and war are not
objectives in themselves for right-thinking people.
Both of them are by-products of the way in which
men think and act towards one another. People
who regard war as desirable and a worthy thing
in itself can scarcely be classed as right thinking.


Unfortunately even a few such can cause trouble.
One person can start a fight, and it will then take
two or more to stop it.
Wars have been engaged in as far back as his-
tory goes, and because of this some people think
they will never cease. If this idea is correct, then
this world has become a place no longer fit for
human beings to live in. If our knowledge, science
and invention is to be used to destroy one another,
then all our so-called progress is but building a
Frankenstein to destroy ourselves. The object in
writing these pages is to show that peace can be
achieved and maintained simply, and easily and cer-
tainly, though perhaps not quickly.


CHAPTER II.
If we are to see our problem aright, we must
first take at least a hasty glance at the world in
which we live. Some astronomers think we are liv-
ing in an expanding universe. One thing is cer-
tain, we are living in a rapidly contracting world!
It took about twelve months for a person to reach
Australia from England and return a letter home
eighty years ago. To-day we can send day-old
chicks from Sydney to Java, big bombers are cross-
ing the Atlantic from America to England in seven
hours, while we can sit in our own homes and listen
to our King, or the Prime Minister of England or
the President of the U.S.A. speaking to us from the
other side of the world. This means that the Nations
of the world are rapidly being drawn together into
one people with one destiny. Under such circum-
stances, national boundaries count for little, and will
progressively count for less. To meet this, the New
Order must be a World Order.
In the next place, let us note that this world
is not a come-by-chance. The great universe of
which it forms so small a part is all under law. So
is every atom which enters into the composition of
this earth, not only the rocks and earth and water,
but also the air and gases lighter than air. The
water and air surrounding the earth, even what
goes to compose the air, depend upon the weight
of the earth, its distance from the sun, and the
speed at which it is travelling through space. And
all these factors put together determine the tem-
perature. If there was anything haphazard about
any of these things, even a comparatively slight
alteration, life as we know it would cease to exist


on this earth. We also see that from the positive
and negative electricity, which form the atom to the
farthest confines of the universe, there is law
actively at work, beautifully balanced, marvellously
adjusted.
But Life on this earth has brought in a new
factor, sometimes not in harmony with the reign of
law as we see it in what we call the material world.
We distinguish what we call moral and spiritual law
from the laws which govern the universe. But
though we can break these laws we cannot destroy
them. The present war, for instance, is an outwork-
ing of the law that the nation which does wrong
will suffer for it.
After the first World War the League of Nations
was formed to act as a tribunal to adjust differences
between nations, and otherwise regulate international
relationships in the interests of humanity. It was
handicapped from the start by the fact that some of
the large Nations—notably the U.S.A.—either did
not join up or resigned when its decisions did not
suit them.
It had defects which largely stultified its power.
For one thing each nation, little or big, was re-
garded as a sovereign State. The result was that
one or two small countries could block important
decisions. And the League had no armaments to
enforce its decisions. Even sanctions broke down
because they could not be enforced. In spite of all
this, the League did much good work.
In 1931, Japan, a Member of the League, decided
on aggressive action against China, another Member
of the League. At that time Great Britain, the lead-
ing Power in the League, was appealed to to apply
sanctions against Japan, the U.S.A. declaring that
it would co-operate. Had this been done, it is now
fairly clear that Japan would have been deterred
from entering on the path of aggression which she


has followed ever since, and which has now ended
in a clash with Great Britain and U.S.A.
To put it bluntly, Great Britain preferred power
politics to action by the League of Nations. Already
this has proved disastrous. The world looking on
learned that if a Nation were powerful enough, it
could flout the League of Nations and get away with
it. Italy built up its strength and seized Abyssinia,
and Germany built up its military power with even
bigger aims in view. By these actions, all these
countries have brought the Nemesis of total war
upon themselves. The law 1 of retribution has worked,
and worked quickly. Vain and boastful men, backed
by the armed might of great nations, could not
escape it, neither could those who did not see the
implications of what they did. Some may regard it
as the irony of fate that Great Britain has had to
stake its very existence to defend weak nations when
it could have done it so easily if it had acted at the
right time. Rather let us thank God there is a
Nation with courage to risk all rather than that
liberty, tolerance and international good faith should
be swept from the earth and their opposites become
the “New Order.”
Since, then, there is a “Providence which shapes
our ends,” a law—and law connotes a law-giver—
which, if obeyed, will give us peace with security of
liberty and freedom, and constant advancement in
the arts, sciences and industries which make life
worth living, it is ours to obey and really live; or
go on as we have been doing and reap discord,
unrest, depression, war and the destruction of our
finer sensibilities. As a man sows, so shall he reap,
and what a nation sows that it also will reap. How
are we to convert the present trend towards destruc-
tion into building a better world? How? YES
HOW?


CHAPTER III.
The Single (Land) Tax.
Everywhere people are looking for a “New
Order.” Some Nations are trying to bring in “New
Orders” by war. Some are looking to the States
or some political system to bring it in. Some seem
to think that destruction of the present order will
evolve a new and better order. Most people are
very confused as to what they mean by “New
Order.”
Plenty of methods are being advocated for
bringing in a new order. Let us look at and try to
analyse some of those being advocated by more or
less organised bodies or parties, to see how far they
would effect a just relation between men and States.
For so long as men feel that they are being wronged
and treated unjustly, they will resent it and there
will be divisions, strife and war.
There is one acid test by which one may know
whether any “New Order” will work for peace or
not, and that test is to enquire, “Is it honest in
itself, and just to all concerned?” If it is, then
peace will be its product, while anything that is
unjust will surely produce discord and strife. This
is just as certain as it is that oaks grow from acorns.
In making the following analysis of each of the
various theories or systems, it must be clearly under-
stood that no attempt will be made at an exhaustive
criticism, as that would require at least one book
on each subject. All that will be attempted will be
to pick out the good from the bad, so that the good
may be used in our final solution.
Let us study, first of all, the Single Tax theory,
put forward by Henry George during the latter half


of the nineteenth century. This idea is being advo-
cated by many good and sincere people with “the
conviction that the principles expounded by Henry
George offer the only true basis of Economic Free-
dom and Social Justice, and that their application
will remove involuntary poverty, promote industrial
and international peace, make all other reforms
easier of accomplishment, and generally contribute to
the welfare of humanity.” (See preface to “Social
Problems” published by the Henry George Founda-
tion of Great Britain, established January, 1929.)
This is a great and sincere claim, and if it
were in process of being carried out, the writer
would be quite content. That such a result cannot
be reached by a single tax on land has, strangely
enough, become evident in the last twelve years!
On page 110 of “Social Problems,” Henry George
argues that depressions could not become widespread
if land were available. In the last twelve years, the
whole world had the greatest and most widespread
depression ever known, with primary products in
abundance, and in ten out of those twelve years the pri-
mary producer has been getting less than the cost
of production. This applies particularly to the
greatest and most widespread of the primary indus-
tries, the wheat industry. But practically all other
primary industries have shared in it. The writer
knows of no exception unless it is a local, protected
and governed industry like sugar and rice-growing
in Australia. These sheltered industries are favoured
at the expense of the general public, wisely or
otherwise. During the last 60 years, more especially
the last 20 years, the economic relation of the mass
of the people to primary production has completely
changed. With a steadily decreasing rural popu-
lation, there has been a steady increase in primary
production, till the glut has resulted in such low
prices to the producers that they cannot maintain
even a living standard. If there ever were “con-
tented peasants” on the land, they are not there any


longer. And neither a single tax nor all the taxes
in the world will put them there!
The central idea of the Single Tax plan is to
gradually reduce till extinguished all other taxation
and in its place collect all public revenues from the
land.
Henry George’s argument is that it is popula-
tion which gives value to land, that the land belongs
to the present generation, that no person or govern-
ment has any right to make land private property,
that we need have no qualms about taking from
landholders what does not belong to them, that the
holding of land by individuals is a monopoly of the
people’s rights which, practically speaking, leads to
all the economic ills that we are suffering from, that
to avoid dislocation and chaos, all present land
tenures be still recognised, but the “ground rent” be
taken for Government revenues and in this way reim-
burse those who have no land for the value they
have given the land by their presence, and relieve
Capital and Labour from taxation. The “ground
rent,” it is explained, is only that value given to
land by population, . and not the value given to it
by capital and labour.
Now all this and the supposed results of such a
policy are set forth by Henry George in a logical
and persuasive manner, with high ideals, bold
denunciation of evils, and a strong appeal to the
best sentiments of his readers, with the result that
his followers to-day regard him as little or no less
than inspired, and his works the last word in poli-
tical economy and social reform.
Space forbids traversing the arguments for the
Single Tax, and a simple statement of the facts as
we find them to-day will have to suffice.
As a matter of fact, there are two kinds of land
value, its value for production and its value as a
speculation, though in practice where one leaves off
and the other begins is probably beyond the wit of
man to define. The value of any given piece of


land may depend on the policy of a country, or the
genius and enterprise of a man on the other
side of the world. Its productive value will
depend on the market for its products. Even
more, its value may depend on the character of its
owner. Its value may even depend on its relation
to the country around it. It may be valuable be-
cause of the minerals or other natural products to
be obtained from it. In view of these facts, how
would it be possible to assess the value added to it
by “population”? It is a large diamond to a piece
of charcoal that Governments would assess it ac-
cording to their own requirements. And that would
mean oppression and virtual slavery for the unfor-
tunate owner. Since, as Henry George points out,
land is of no value till labour is applied to it, under
the Single Tax system those who applied their labour
to the land would be virtually slaves of the State.
The contention or promise that capital and
labour would not be taxed simply could not be car-
ried out, even if those in authority wished to do it.
In the next place, land is not only of no value
till labour and capital have been applied to it, but
the labour and capital must be continuous to main-
tain that value. This is just as true of a city block
as it undoubtedly is of a country farm. It is be-
cause he knows this that every man who applies
his labour and capital to land is anxious to own the
land. No man will spend money and labour on
land until he is assured of a title to it. And what
sort of a title to land would a man consider he had
if he knew that he would have to pay away all that
it was regarded to be worth—as land—above the
poorest or worst-placed land in use in the State?
Many men have overdrafts secured on their pro-
perty at the Bank. What would Banks think of
such a title? We know by the way they look at
leaseholds, on which they will make no advances.
In discussing Slavery in “Social Problems,”
Henry George contends that the man who owns the


land virtually enslaves the man who must live on
it. Having the State as your landlord would almost
certainly be worse than having an average land-
lord. One might put his case and get some sympathy
from the average landlord, but it would take years
to get the general public to understand one’s posi-
tion. It is safe to say that after twelve years of
distress, the people in the cities generally do not
understand what those in rural industries have been
and still are passing through. Would the shifting of
the incidence of taxation alter this? The answer is
“No,” because people are hard to convince of any-
thing which they regard as being against their own
interests. “There are none so blind as those who
will not see.”
The next point to be noted is that this would
be a class tax, levied on landholders only. I know
this will be disclaimed, because Henry George claims
that no one can live without land, and the products
of the land. But the point of the whole matter lies
in this, that some are landholders while others are
almost or altogether divorced from the soil. For
instance, how much land is required by entertainers,
singers, artists, judges and lawyers, doctors, preach-
ers and teachers, and the great army of public ser-
vants, industrial workers and distributors, politi-
cians and bookmakers to carry on their avocations?
Nearly all the big industries, such as milling, brew-
ing, ironworks and manufacturing, warehouses,
agencies and stores require but very little land in
proportion to the returns that may be procured
from them. In another category brickyards, metal
quarries and mines rob the land of its value. Yet
in these branches of human effort are to be found
the most highly paid, the most remunerative avenues
of human endeavour. Why should such escape or
nearly so from their responsibility to maintain the
body politic? Let us apply the acid test, “Would it
be honest and just to all concerned?” Even our pre-
sent taxation, with all its faults, is nearer to justice.


We need to remember that Henry George wrote
his books in a country where land was acquired by
simply taking possession of it. This tinges the whole
of his philosophy. Here in Australia the land has
been sold or leased by the Government, the Govern-
ment itself making the terms under the many land
tenures devised to meet differing circumstances. I
need hardly say that after the very early days were
passed, when some partiality may have been shown,
the terms were made quite hard enough for the
settler. I know this was so from experience. Even
if Henry George is right in arguing that the State
has no right to alienate its lands, the fact remains
that it has been done, and to practically confiscate
that land by demanding rent from it in addition to
the price paid for it would be to perpetrate another
wrong—and two wrongs do not make a right. I
know Henry George coins a special meaning for the
word “rent,” but it does not alter the fact. The
rates, taxes and death duties levied on land should
be quite sufficient to compensate the State for any
“wrong” it did itself by alienating its lands in the
way and to the degree it has done.
In “Progress and Poverty,” Henry George works
out what he calls the law of rent at great length.
Looked at in the light of present-day experience,
much of it reads like a senseless jargon. When a
farmer grows 10,000 bushels of wheat and has to
sell it at one shilling per bushel less than it cost
him to produce—out-of-pocket expenses only—can
all Henry George’s reasoning show him whether his
loss should be attributed to the fact that he is a
landowner, a capitalist or only because he is a
labourer? The fact is—for this is not a suppostious
case—that he is all three! And it seems obvious that
if it be impossible to show in which character he
loses, no one can say with certainty to which cate-
gory his gain should be attributed when he makes
a profit. Henry George regards “produce” and
money as synonymous terms. They are not so now


if ever they were so. When a farmer can eat up
to two bushels of wheat at an ordinary meal by
simply selling the wheat and using the money to
buy a meal, surely it requires no argument to prove
that there is something wrong, apart from the tenure
upon which land is held. And this was the normal
measure of values for several years after the depres-
sion started; indeed, except for a year or two when
there was a failure or partial failure of the world’s
wheat crop—something unprecedented—the same
conditions have ruled for the last twelve years.
Farmers have increased their production by about
5% and by so doing they have gone a long way to-
wards ruining themselves. If the Single Tax theory
were put into operation and it did what Henry
George claims it would do, that is, put more people
on the land, the result would be to still further
increase primary production and depress prices ac-
cordingly. And the wheat-grower is not alone in
this experience, for practically all primary producers
are having the same experience, though perhaps not
quite so consistently.
At the time when Henry George was writing
his books there was always a market for all that
men could produce, though at times it may have
been rather a poor market. To-day, with only 14%
of the population of New South Wales engaged in
production from the soil, we have chronic over-
production, and our problem is how we are to dis-
tribute this plenty in a way which will be just to
the producer and will ensure that the plenty reaches
those who have need of it—and that means every-
body!
One could write much, very much more to show
that the Single Tax would not give us peace and
plenty. We already have the plenty in super-
abundance—and we are fighting, and destroying it,
in the struggle to decide who shall control it and
how! The road to plenty is not the way to peace
unless it follows the path of Justice.


There is another thing which has altered com-
pletely since the time when Henry George was
working out his theory, and that is the requirements
of Governments. To-day Governments provide edu-
cation, law courts, police protection, transport facili-
ties, post, telegraph and telephone services, build
roads and bridges, provide water for cities and irri-
gation areas; shipping and docking facilities in har-
bours; carry on experimental farms and scientific
research; subscribe large sums to hospitals, libraries,
museums, parks, reserves; provide pensions and poor
relief; pay members of Parliament, plant forests, run
or subsidise many industries, and wage war, all sup-
posed to be in the interest of the general public.
Would it be fair to saddle the cost of all this on
one class, and one class only, even if it were
possible?
Henry George was influenced by the thought of
his age. The science of his day was greatly tinged
with materialism. It had dissected matter down to
the atom, which it regarded as the bedrock from
which all things are made. Thinkers in other fields
tried to follow a similar line of reasoning. Henry
George worked down to the land, which became his
“atom,” on which he built his economic theories. It
all looked very sure, as if nothing could be added
or taken from it. But at the beginning of this
century the atom was split up into molecules, and
then the molecules were found to consist of protons
and electrons—positive and negative electricity!
Thus the solid rock on which materialism was built
is now proved to be about the nearest thing we can
conceive to the spiritual—light, energy, power!
In the same way, the advancement of knowledge,
invention, industry and experience shows us that a
human problem cannot be solved by a merely mate-
rial change. Man is not the creature of circum-
stances—it is his to bend his circumstances to serve
his own ends! Let his ends be right or wrong, if


he sets himself to the task, soon his circumstances
will be serving him.
Since Henry George was an honest man, we
can find much in his works to help us towards the
solution of our problem.
One thing he points out is that where Govern-
ment activities and expenditure increase local values
the whole of that added value should not be reaped
by a favoured few. Of course, with his eye always
fixed on his bedrock atom, the land, Henry George
thinks only of collecting it back in the form of what
he calls “rent.” But surely the same principle should
apply all round equally. Look at the list of Govern-
ment activities on a previous page (14), then think
of the large numbers who have no occasion to own
land, and then ask if these should not also pay
“rent” to the Government which does so much for
them, making it possible for them to carry on their
avocations in peace and security.
Anyhow, public utilities serve two parties—
those directly served and the rest of the State or
the world, as the case may be. A bridge has two
ends, one resting on each bank of the river it
crosses. To start to build a bridge from one bank
only, and to stop half-way across, would not be
bridge-building, but putting up something that
would be a menace! To expect those immediately
affected to pay the whole cost of Government
expenditures, and to let others not so directly, but
just as surely, benefited go free, would be a similar
piece of asininity. Unfortunately that is a picture of
only too much of our building to-day! Of which
more anon.
And, lest it be overlooked later on, let me say
here that if a Government collects what is just
from those benefited by public expenditure, such as
railways, tramlines, bridges, etc., the money so col-
lected should not be treated as income, but for
what it is, capital, by using it to pay for the utility
which made the enhanced value. In this way, many


of our public utilities would be paid for in due
course, instead of being piled on to the national debt.
This should also apply to all moneys received from
sales of land. If this had been done, our Railways
would be free of debt and the freights and fares
could be greatly reduced.
As an honest thinker, though not facing the con-
ditions under which we live, naturally Henry George
expresses some ideas which will contribute to our
solution of the problem of how to get the best and
fairest distribution of the world’s wealth.
His arguments in favour of fair and free trad-
ing between nations are simply unanswerable. It
is evident that this world was not designed so that
man can supply all his requirements in every place.
If he were just an animal and nothing more, this
might be possible, on a low level, but man’s social
and spiritual requirements place him on a different
plane from the animal. And this social and expand-
ing life is no longer bounded by the parish in which
we live or the boundaries of the nation to which
we belong—we are citizens of one world, and not a
very big world either. We must live together or
destroy one another. We have all the means of
production, and can greatly increase it, to give all
we need to everyone. When we see nations banded
together with the clear policy and determination to
seize and exploit weaker nations and their products,
we see the wickedness and folly of such a policy
and we are ready to resist it to the death. If we
are logical and honest we will see to it that we do
nothing to bring about such a state of affairs. And
high tariffs, embargoes on trade and money manipu-
lation to favour one’s own nation at another nation’s
expense are certainly things which tend to result in
war under the urge of self-defence. Those denied
access to their requirements and those unable to
market their products are both denied what is just
and right, and provoked to use force to obtain justice.


This, probably, is the most fruitful of all the causes
of war. Our solution must meet this aspect.
Another thing which Henry George deplores is
the accumulation of enormous public debts. If the
harm of this was apparent in his day, what would
he think of the position to-day, seeing that the public
debts in some countries have been doubled every
ten years for many decades? If we go on much
further everyone will be living on interest —and then
what? Our solution must also meet this aspect.
Finally, Henry George points out that as men
come closer together and know one another better,
the social spirit develops and we have peace instead
of war.
Well, we have the means of this drawing to-
gether and better understanding of each other.
Association in equality is the law of progress. And
our solution must give this.


CHAPTER IV.
Social Credit.
The next theory to engage our attention is that
of Social Credit, as expounded by Major Douglas
and his followers. Here we have a theory which
regards the world as consisting of industry (mean-
ing the secondary industries), trade and business.
The primary industries, which figure so largely in
Henry George’s works, are almost entirely ignored
by Major Douglas. The whole theory centres in
money, and therefore Banks receive very special
attention.
Since money is so central in this theory, one
would expect to find in it the clearest possible defini-
tions of money and its uses, and possibly some
shrewd comments on how money may be or is be-
ing misused. Yet on all these points Douglas is
either altogether silent or what he says is far from
helpful.
For instance, in “Warning Democracy,” p. 129,
Douglas says: “I think that for ordinary purposes,
the simplest and most satisfactory conception of
money is that it is simply a ticket which enables the
holder to obtain goods and services upon demand.”
This evidently appeals to his followers, as they
are constantly referring to money as “merely a
ticket.” Now, everyone knows that a ticket is
extremely circumscribed in its use and action. If I
buy a ticket for a train journey I must use it on
the line and according to the dates stamped upon
it, otherwise it becomes worthless. I cannot use it
to obtain entrance to a Ball or a Concert. But
money may be used to buy a hundred things on
any day in the year. But whatever you buy with


money must be something which has already been
produced or is capable of being produced at once.
Even if a speculator buys his next year’s crop from
a farmer, he does not buy the crop as such, but
specifies the amount and the price to be given, and
the farmer has to take the risk of whether he can
produce the amount or not. It is really a sale with
postponed delivery.
But as one studies the matter it becomes clear
that the reason for which Douglas wants us to re-
gard money as a “ticket” is because he wants us to
regard the Banks as having a monopoly of the issue
of the “tickets.”
To this end, also, Douglas has to destroy the
real source of credit or money, namely, primary pro-
duction. In “Social Credit” he says: “There is extant
in the world, a common, if somewhat nebulous, idea
that whoever, for instance, grows a ton of potatoes
grows thereby in some mysterious way the purchas-
ing power equivalent to a ton of potatoes. ... If I
grow a ton of potatoes and exchange those potatoes
for five currency notes of one pound each, held at
the moment by my neighbour next door, all that
has happened is that I have five pounds which he
had before. My ton of potatoes has not increased
the number of pounds. ... If we imagine this five
pounds to be the only five pounds in existence, and
money to be the only effective demand for goods,
no one will be able to exchange any goods until I
part with, at any rate, a portion of my five pounds.”
(Pages 130-131.)
Here we see the Social Credit technique in a
nutshell —first state something which is or may be
true under certain circumstances and then expand it
into a general proposition!
To begin with, there is nothing mysterious about
growing potatoes. It simply means hard work and
some outlay on suitable soil. And when they are
grown, the grower may prefer not to sell them at
once, but may deliver them to someone who will


give him credit for a certain amount on them. The
farmer then draws cheques against that credit and
so makes his own money! Therefore the grower has
produced, in a manner not at all mysterious, pur-
chasing power by his produce. Even if the grower
sells his produce at once, provided he gets more for
it than it cost him to grow, the surplus is purchas-
ing power in his hands. And this is what Douglas
leaves out, notably in his A plus B Theorem.
But even a better illustration of the way Douglas
puts the cart before the horse is contained in “Social
Credit (pp. 61-62), where we have: “Perhaps the
most important fundamental idea, which can be con-
veyed at this time, in regard to the money problem
—an idea on the validity of which certainly stands
or falls anything I have to say on the subject— is
that it is not a problem of value — measurement.
The proper function of a money system is to control
and direct the production and distribution of goods
and services .* It is, or should be, an ‘Order’
system, not a ‘Reward’ system. It is essentially a
mechanism of administration, subservient to policy,
and it is because it is superior to all other
mechanisms of administration that the money control
of the world is so important.”
Just think of it! If money is not a measure of
value, what on earth is it for? If I give a man a
cheque for value received, why should I give it to
him unless it is a measure in the estimation of both
of us of the value given and received? If money
has lost this function, of what further use is it?
Douglas says it “is to control and direct the
production and distribution of goods and services.”
And this throughout the wide world! This, of course,
would mean that money power would be the
supreme power in the world! And who is to con-
trol and direct this money power? If the tone of
Douglas’s criticism is any guide, certainly not the
*ltalics not mine.


Banks! Douglas says the Banks “create” the money,
and if they are not to be allowed to control what
they “create,” who should?
Further, Douglas himself would seem to rule out,
or strongly deprecate, any centralisation by which
people would be compelled to work to a system or
be completely dominated by it. For instance, see
“Credit Power and Democracy” (pp. 145-6), “The
Control and Distribution of Production” (p. 23).
However, Douglas has written so much and put it
in such cryptic form that everyone can make almost
anything he likes out of it, which, perhaps, forms
one of its chief attractions.
The whole Douglas theory seems to depend on
his explanation of how Banks “create” money or
credit, and just there lies the sting of his attacks on
the Banks and Banking system.
Douglas is quite correct in arguing that both
money and credit are founded on faith. But surely
there is nothing new about this discovery! Every-
thing else that goes to make up our civilisation is
also and equally dependent on faith. We literally
live by faith. If we lost faith in one another, all
trade would cease, all transport come to a stand-
still, and murder and suicide destroy the race of
men from the earth! Perhaps Douglas does not rea-
lise that in trying to destroy faith in the Banking
system he would go a long way towards the destruc-
tion of society if he succeeded. He seems to be
under the impression that Banks do well under all
circumstances. In “The Control and Distribution of
Production” he asks: “Has anyone during this time
of industrial depression and labour distress noticed
any bank premises for sale?” Is it possible that
he has not heard of the hundreds of bank failures
which took place in the U.S.A.? The writer has
bought shares in only one bank, and that bank is
now closed and in process of liquidation, the shares
are valueless and may even prove to be a liability.
If banks can “create” money, why was this necessary?


In “The Breakdown of the Employment System
(pp. 6—7) we have this given us: “It is necessary
to be clear as to the origin of what passes for
money and to understand the remarkable powers
which are vested in the banking system and the
financier. Consider, first, legal tender, which, in
this country, consists of gold, silver, and copper
coinage, and Treasury Notes, to the approximate
value of, say, £400,000,000. It may be noticed, in
passing, that this money has only value by the con-
sent of the community of individuals we call the
nation; that is to say, by their willingness to accept
it in return for goods and services. It will at once
be obvious, from a superficial examination of the
accounts of banks, that there is a good deal more
money in the country than there is legal tender. The
deposits of the “Big Five” banks and their affiliations
alone represent about £2,000,000,000, and overdrafts
and bills discounted represent about £1,000,000,000
more. For practical purposes, all this money is
homogenous—the average individual would draw no
vital distinction between ten pounds in his pocket-
book and ten pounds in his current account with
one of the great banks. But it must also be obvious,
on a little consideration, that something curious
must have happened to enable, say, £400,000,000 of
legal tender to become at least £3,000,000,000 of
money, because as far as can be seen on a
cursory examination of the phenomenon, however
much £400,000,000 changes hands in the course
of trade, it still remains £400,000,000. Something
curious does happen—it is the creation of new
money, which ranks equally with legal tender
as purchasing power, by banks and financial
institutions.”
I have made this long quotation because a little
more than a “cursory examination” will show how
Douglas can leave out vital points and so make
things appear different from what they really are.
First of all, he quotes what is “legal tender,” which


he shows is only as 4 is to 30 compared with bank
credits. But he does not say that these bank credits
may be passed from one to another without draw-
ing a single penny of this legal tender. In another
place (see “Monopoly of Credit,” pp. 16-17)
he shows that over 99% of money passes in England
from one to another by means of cheques. These
cheques may not be “legal tender,” but they are
currency, and act for the same purpose in a much
safer and more convenient way than legal tender
does. And it is by leaving this out that he gets his
“something curious” happening, and he calls it “the
creation of new money,” which, of course it is, and
leaves us to assume that it is the Bank which
“creates” this new money, whereas, as a matter of
fact, it is a client of the bank who “creates” the
money (if you like the phrase), and the bank cancels
it after giving or transferring the money from the
account of the one who drew the cheque to the
payee or his account. Here is the simple explana-
tion of such phrases as “Money on its way to the
Bank for extinction,” “created money,” “money
created by the stroke of a pen in a ledger,” when
the money is transferred from one client’s account
to another client’s account, and, of course, “Money
destroyed by the stroke of a pen,” when it means
money transferred from the first client’s account.
All this is such usual practice, so open and above
board, so perfectly honest, that it seems amazing
that so many people can be misled or have their
thinking about it so confused that they can sub-
scribe to a whole system of so-called economics based
on such a perverted statement of well-known facts.
In a similar way, Douglas clouds the way in
which an overdraft is made and operated. In
“Monopoly of Credit,” pp. 16-17, he sets out to show
how it is done. He imagines a new bank started
with 10 depositors of £IOO each. No. 10, a manu-
facturer, gets a large order, to complete which he
finds he will have to pay out in wages, etc., more


than his £IOO before he can get a return. The
bank manager has discovered, meanwhile, that his
clients are using cheques rather than cash for most
of their transactions. With this in mind, we are
told, the banker allows No. 10 an overdraft of an-
other £IOO, to be repaid in three months, with £2
more as interest. Thus, we are told, the banker
creates £IOO of new money by a stroke of the pen.
In the wind-up we have No. 10’s employees paid,
the bank gets back its £IOO, plus £2, also created
by itself, and there is £IOO worth of goods on the
market, the money to buy which the banker
destroyed when he cancelled the overdraft! What-
ever sort of confused thinking have we here?
This looks much more like a loan for three
months than an overdraft. One does not pay interest
on an overdraft until he commences to use it, and
then only on his daily balance.
In the next place, a banker does not grant an
overdraft with his eye on the cash he has in hand,
but on the value of the security offered by the
client. In other words, he merely monetises a value
already in existence. And he does not pay himself
for doing this by creating money to do it, but takes
it from his client’s account. Finally, the money
must be already in existence to pay for the goods,
or the manufacturer would not have received the
order, and the goods were in his hands till he
delivered the order, so the money is either actually
or potentially in existence to pay for them. Fancy
an economy built on such a foundation as is dis-
closed by such reasoning or mis-statement of facts
as the above sample! And of such is the “new
economics.”
One could go on and on in like strain, but surely
this is enough.
But, it may be asked, what about the object of
those who believe in social credit, namely, to over-
come our imminent danger of being hag-ridden to
death by interest on towering public debts?


The answer to that is that whatever we may
think of the methods Douglas advocates to this end,
the end itself must be attained or an awful state of
affairs lies right ahead of us.
Even before this war started taxation had
reached a point at which it had become burdensome,
and was seriously interfering with the nation’s
industry and progress. In England, for instance,
taxation amounted to about £6O per family per
annum even before she commenced to re-arm. And
whatever the cost in human life may be, this war is
costing far more in money than any previous war.
And a very large amount of this money is being
borrowed.
How is the interest to be paid, and the money
returned to those who have lent it?
After the first Great War, two courses were
advocated, both of which caused very serious
trouble.
The first was repudiation. At the time this is
being written even the children are subscribing to
War Certificates, etc., and many elderly people are
putting their life savings into War Loans —can any-
one think it would be right to rob them of their
money by legal action Is it not the duty of the
State to protect its citizens, not to rob them?
The other method advocated was “conscription
of wealth,” a fine sounding name for another form
of State robbery. The strong presumption is that
those who have acquired wealth have done it under
the protection of the law, and if they have done it
lawfully, then the law should uphold and protect
them in the use and enjoyment of it. This, of course,
does not mean that people and corporations should
not be taxed according to their ability to pay out
of income, which is a very different thing from being
compelled to contribute out of capital. As a matter
of fact, by death and transfer or stamp duties,
Governments are taking quite enough out of estates
and real property now. If much more is taken in


this way, it will mean that wealthy people will
leave their children and dependants poor, and in
that case there will be no incentive for anyone to
save money.
But the question before us is: How is this
mountain of debt to be overcome and the burden of
interest reduced so that it may be borne?
The answer is: By the use of real credit, with-
out destroying our ability to produce. This can be
done simply, with little or no dislocation of our
financial institutions and resources, absolutely no
danger of inflation, and with gradual freeing of
money for industry, increasing employment, and,
consequently, the amount of goods and services we
may all use and enjoy.
During March, 1941, the writer sent the follow-
ing letter to several newspapers for publication,
and also to Mr. Fadden, who was Acting Prime
Minister of Australia at the time:
“Sir, —Just before the last Federal Election I
published an idea for financing the war, but so far
it does not seem to have received any consideration
from “the powers that be.” I have discussed the
idea with people in various walks of life, and the
only fault we can find with it is that, like every
other good thing, it could be misused, especially if
it were implemented too suddenly.
“The idea is that the Federal Government call
on the banks to approach their clients who have
capital—land, goods, factories, business or any other
asset—to guarantee a credit to the Government, the
guarantor to receive 1 per cent, for the credit, and
the Bank half of one per cent, for keeping the
account, per annum. Both the Government and the
guarantor to have the right to cancel the credit in
one of two ways: First, at the end of each five
years by giving three months’ notice, or second, by
giving one year’s notice at any time. Probably it
Would tend to stabilisation to have some of each.


“The advantages are that those who have capi-
tal would be able to do their bit, the Government
would get money at I£%, those who have capital
would be no poorer, while everyone else would be
better off, as they would not be taxed to find 3h%
for the money the Government needs, and must have,
to win the war.
“There would be no inflation, and there would
be no need for any more money in circulation than
at present, or, if it were found necessary to increase
the note issue, the clients of the Commonwealth
Bank could guarantee the extra issue required. This
idea is financially sound, and economically necessary,
and I am willing to back the Government on those
lines for £SOO, and more if it is needed later on.”
To the above I signed my name and gave my
address.
Some time later I met the Bank Manager, who
knows me, and I said to him: “Did you see my letter
in the Press on ‘How to finance the War?” “Yes,”
he said. “Can you see anything wrong with it?” I
enquired. “No!” he said, “there could not be any-
thing wrong with that.”
“Supposing,” I continued, “I were to offer to
back his credit for £SOO to any man who knows me
and who needed the money, do you think there is
a man in this district who would not accept and use
that credit?”
“I am sure there is not one,” he replied.
“Then,” I said, “is there any reason why the
Government could not do it?” at which he shook
his head.
Here, then, is a method by which real credit
could be supplied for Government purposes at a
very low interest. And yet, when brought into
operation on a large scale, possibly the interest could
be reduced below that I have suggested.
Instead of inflation, as soon as it was realised
that solid securities were behind all note issues,
bonds and Government loans, the result would be to


stabilise the currency of the country adopting it,
money for industrial enterprises would be provided,
and reproductive works of all kinds would become
cheaper, and employment and prosperity become
general. Insurance Societies and other financial
institutions would seek outlets for their money in
production and industry, instead of burying it in
Government loans and bonds. For when once a
Government borrows and spends a loan, to a very
large extent that money has lost its reproductive
power. We do not even expect roads and bridges,
war and many other Government expenditures, to
ever make a direct return. We realise that such
expenditures are necessary in the public interest,
and should not be commercialised to give advantage
to a few.
This method of financing Government loans is
shown to be necessary by the fact that it is being
seriously advocated that capital levies be made at
a low rate of interest to finance the war effort, such
levies to be repaid after the war. If this is done,
it will take money directly out of reproductive
industry and “bury” it as I have indicated. The
above suggested method would leave the means of
production in the hands of those who own and are
utilising them. The fact that I was backing a
Government credit would not make my land any
less productive or my business any less profitable.
Instead, I would share in the general advantages,
besides getting one per cent, on my capital. Backed
in this way, no Government would have any reason
for repudiating its responsibilities, and no temptation
to rob or exploit its citizens. If those who have
property or assets of any kind are willing to co-
operate with the Government in the manner sug-
gested, then we can look forward to peace and pros-
perity, but if Governments begin to rob their
citizens, that will be the beginning of the end of our
civilisation. It is quite clear the Government will have
to have the money one way or the other, and the better


way would be by the full co-operation of those who
have property in the manner suggested. If we do not
win the war, Germany’s might will be her right to
all property, and if we do win the war something
like this will have to be done, or it will take a big
proportion of the national income just to pay interest.
Here, then, is a method for using, not “social credit,”
which is little better than a figment of the imagina-
tion, but real credit, such as anyone could use and
profit by using. No one has ever heard of the man
yet who could cash his “Social Credit”! And for a
nation to do it would simply be a method of inflation
of its currency, and that would mean that its citizens
would have to pay proportionately more for their
requirements.


CHAPTER V.
Communism, National Socialism, Democracy.
We will now turn our thoughts for a brief
space to the consideration of the three forms of
Government at present locked together in World
War No. 2, namely, Communism, National Socialism
and Democracy. These are now undergoing the
acid test of war, though possibly war is not the
best test. Indeed, it might be said that the best test
of a Government is its power to give peace, not to
make war. This world has reached a stage of
development at which peace is necessory or we shall
destroy one another. So our main quest will be to
see whether these differing forms of Government
make for peace or war.
Communism has a splendid ideal—each contri-
buting according to his ability and all sharing ac-
cording to their need. If the methods used to attain
this objective were of the same high quality one
could only say of it, “That is Christianity in
action.”
After its collapse in the first war, the Com-
munists in Russia seized power, and set to work to
attain their ideal by setting up a dictatorship of the
proletariat, or under-privileged. In order to get a
“classless” society they “liquidated” (in plain Eng-
lish, murdered) all above the ordinary in wealth,
social standing, education or other advantage. Put-
ting their faith in the under-privileged only, they
destroyed the rest. One of the first results of this
was to reduce production to such a degree that it
is said that 25 millions of people perished from
starvation and disease caused by under-nourish-
ment. Having started by using force and injustice


to attain its ends, even up to the time that Germany
launched its attack against Russia just recently, that
Government has had to maintain itself by the same
methods. Russia has never had freedom, so its
people cannot be said to have lost it, and probably
they do not realise that they live in one vast
prison, in which they have to conform to the rules
of their totalitarian Government or perish! They
are not free to think or speak as they like, not
free to go where they will or engage in any occu-
pation that suits them, not free to hold any one
day sacred and holy, not free even to band them-
selves together to worship God and set those specially
fitted apart to lead their devotions, not even free to
speak their minds lest their words should be re-
ported and they should be “liquidated” or be sent to
some other place where they would be dead to all
who had known them.
Such conditions may be tolerable to Russians,
seeing they have many material advantages which
they lacked before; but as a world order, such con-
ditions would be intolerable. We who know and
love liberty would sooner die than live under such
conditions.
At the same time, we do wisely and rightly in
working and fighting in fullest co-operation with
Russia in resisting aggression. In doing this, we are
simply endeavouring to maintain for Russia the
same right we claim for ourselves, namely, the right
to live according to our own laws and culture, with-
out interference by a foreign power. If we fail to
maintain this right, then we shall come under the
dominance of the Nazi world order.
The Nazi conception of a world order is:
One dominant race—the German—and all other
races subservient and contributing to the dominant
race. This “order” to be attained by force of propa-
ganda and military power, the propaganda not
muzzled by being limited to the truth and the mili-
tary aims to be attained by total warfare.


It is no part of the object of the writer to
discuss what right the Germans may have to
dominate the world, what qualifications they have
shown for the task, nor even to ask whether they
would be any happier and consequently in a position
to make others happier if they succeeded in attain-
ing their objective. One thing is certain, because it
is in the very nature of things, what they had
attained by force they would have to maintain by
force, and that in itself is enough to condemn the
whole project. Such an “order” would be disorder
on a world scale.
Even in Germany the results of such an order
have become evident. Hitler started out as the
Leader of his people on their way back to national
stability, self-respect, and economic position. Very
soon he became a Dictator, maintaining himself in
that position by the most ruthless methods. He
seized power one step at a time, not allowing even
those who had served him best to stand in his way.
In the same way he seized one country after an-
other, till at last his design to dominate the world
was evident, and the choice had to be made either
to resist or live as serfs and slaves. And so the
dire struggle is on, and the issue is to be a new
world order, so far as brute force can decide the
issue. It is the fact that brute force was necessary
to develop and maintain this so-called National
Socialist form of government which is its condemna-
tion. The use of force lies at the very core of this
form of government, and since the evidence of
history shows that those who have made force their
policy have themselves been overcome by force,
may we not well ask, “Can Hitler escape the work-
ing of this law?”
It is true that Hitler and those who speak for
him endeavour to make out that we are retired
pirates and that it is sheer hypocrisy on our part to
condemn them for following a like policy. The
answer to that is that while a few Englishmen, like


Warren Hastings, for instance, may have followed
such a policy, what they did was so out of step
with what the nation required of its servants as to
put them in jeopardy of the law. It was not by
such means that the Empire was built up, but by
giving freedom to the oppressed, justice to the
wronged, and peace and security instead of war. In
the one instance, when Great Britain tried the use
of “the mailed fist” against her colonies in America,
she failed, and learned her lesson.
There remains the third large scale form of
Government in the world of to-day—democracy.
Democracy has been defined as “the largest
liberty that does not interfere with others, for the
individual, and the greatest power on the part of
the State, short of tyranny.”
Lincoln’s phrase, “Government of the people, by
the people, for the people,” is well known. He
fought a great war to give liberty to the slaves on
the one hand and to retain national unity on the
other.
Communism puts its trust in one section of the
people, destroying the rest and robbing its people of
all liberty that the State may be everything.
National Socialism takes over men and materials,
wealth and industry, and uses all to further the ends
of a privileged few, and its soaring ambition is to
seize the wealth of the world in the interest of a
few nations.
Democracy stands for equal freedom for all
men, equal opportunity according to ability, equal
justice, equal access to God, putting its trust in the
people—all sorts and conditions from the humblest
to those chosen for leadership and the king on the
throne.
It will be seen from this that democracy is
capable of giving a fuller, freer and richer life than
any other form of government. If it has not done,


or is not doing this for us, the fault is not in
democracy, but in the way in which we have used
or misused it. For, just as the best of ideals and
objectives may be spoiled by the methods used for
their attainment, just so may liberty be corrupted
into licence and government into tyranny or anarchy
by misuse.
There are several ways in which our splendid
liberty is being misused. Individuals and corpora-
tions are misusing it to make great profits for them-
selves, without regard for, or even thinking of,
those who are being impoverished by their operations.
Workmen, seeing or thinking that their employers
are making more than a reasonable profit, by strikes,
hold-ups and going slow, endeavour to get their
wages raised or other improved conditions. This
may be very human and natural, but two wrongs
do not make a right. If either, or both employer
and employee, succeed, the added cost is passed on
to the consumer, or if the consumer says, “No! I
will not pay it,” then the loss falls on all three.
This, then, is liberty used for destruction, instead
of construction. The more we have of this, the
nearer we will get to anarchy.
A far more serious mad-adjustment, though not
so widely recognised, is that between primary and
secondary industry.
During the let-us-borrow-and-spend-till-we-burst
period, during and after the first great World War,
the primary industries flourished and expanded their
operations. When the burst came some 12 years ago
and we entered on the great depression which has
lasted ever since, the economists assured us that
things would adjust themselves in about three years.
But they gave us no guidance as to what we should
do in order to bring about a stable economic situa-
tion. And so primary producers have gone on pro-
ducing more than the markets could or would


absorb, depressing the market to close to and at
times below the cost of production. For instance,
an increase of 5% in the world’s production of wheat
has resulted in a fall of about 50% in the price of
wheat. Yet every bushel of wheat makes as much
bread and gives as much nourishment as ever it
did. But as soon as the wheat leaves the hands of
the producer—and it is here we see the mal-adjust-
ment—it begins to make more than ever it did be-
fore for everyone who handles it till it reaches the
consumer. This is proved by the fact that bread,
biscuits, etc., cost just as much as they did when
wheat was twice the price.
What has happened to wheat has, more or less,
happened to most of the products of the land. The
exceptions are those that have been protected by
Government policy and those that contribute to
luxuries. The nett result is that those who are pro-
ducing the world’s necessities are an under-privi-
leged section of the people. Such is the foundation
of our present economic structure! How many of
us realise this? And how many are trying to get
a right adjustment? Probably not one in 1,000
compared with those who are trying to make money
out of the mal-adjustment. One of the objects of
this book is to reverse this position.
Our splendid democratic liberty is being mis-
used by so many and such large sections of the
community that it is no wonder that so many people
feel the need for a “new order” and some are carried
away by the different theories we have been examin-
ing. Even the Churches are not free from blame,
and therein lies the chief danger not only to
organised religion, but, which is far worse, to the
bringing in of the Kingdom of God on earth, the
reign of peace and goodwill.
“Well,” it may be said, “if Democracy is such a
splendid form of government, how can we make it
work as it should?”


The answer can be given in a few words, and
here it is:—By social honesty and co-operation.
Those few words, rightly understood and put into
practice, contain all that is necessary to give us a
Social Order that will make for peace on earth and
goodwill amongst men, without robbing anyone of
his rights and liberty. And I make bold to say, after
long study, that there is nothing else that will have
that result. The rest of this book will be devoted
to showing how this would work out.


CHAPTER VI.
For Christians Only.
Our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, came to the
world to give us a new world order. He called it
the Kingdom of God. In the mind of God, the com-
ing of Jesus Christ was to bring joy to the world.
(See Luke 2, 10 and 11.) And the angels announced
at His birth that He stood for peace and goodwill.
(See Luke 2:14.)
Joy, peace and goodwill, then, stand at the very
head of our programme as Christians. And Jesus
tells us (see Matt. 5:13) that we are the salt of the
earth, and warns ue of what will happen to us if
we lose our savour. And our savour is of Him;
without Him we can do nothing; we can neither
save ourselves nor do what is needed to make the
world sweet, pure and good, a worthy place for
human beings to live in. No man, and no system
devised by man, has ever given the world joy,
peace and goodwill, apart from Jesus Christ. And
it cannot be done completely and entirely except on
His terms and in Him.
Seeing that over 1900 years have gone by since
Christ came to earth, and so many millions of men
have professed to be His followers, it may be asked,
“Why is it we have not made more progress towards
Christ’s new order?”
Many answers could be given, but probably
lying at the root of them all would be found two
ingrained characteristics of the human mind.
The first is the urge to organise. As soon as a
great idea or a great leader appears, this comes into
action. One could cite countless instances, but suffi-
cient it is to say that Christ and the Christian reli-


gion were no exception, so far as His followers were
concerned. Immediately after His death and resur-
rection His followers began to organise themselves
into groups for mutual help, both spiritual and mate-
rial, with stated times and places for meeting.
But it is notable that, while Jesus Christ knew that
His followers would do this, He did not place his
reliance upon such methods. (I am not saying that
they were not both wise and necessary.) Unlike
Moses and other religious teachers, He wrote no
books, He organised no force. On the face of it,
it would seem as if He did not even take special
care to have His sayings and deeds recorded, yet
within a few years His followers were turning the
world upside down (because it was wrong side up!),
and in 300 years they had conquered the Roman
Empire, the conqueror of the world! Unfortunately,
then the second propensity of the human mind, to
which I shall refer directly, came into play. Mean-
while I want to point out what may seem strange to
many of you, that Jesus Christ held His Church as
of only secondary importance—it was a means to an
end, namely, the Kingdom of God on earth. If any-
one thinks that the Church to which he belongs
is the Kingdom of God on earth, I will ask such a
one to honestly consider this question. If all the
world became members of your Church, and such
as your members are now, would that be the King-
dom of God on earth? I love my Church, and I
know many saintly members of it, but—l could not
think so.
So far as we have it recorded, Jesus only spoke
of His Church on two occasions, and on one of
them it was in such ambiguous language that the
greatest cleavage in the Church has arisen on the
two different interpretations put upon what He said.
On the other hand, the Kingdom of God or the
Kingdom of Heaven was ever on His lips. In the
short prayer He gave us as a sample of how we
ought to pray, there is no mention of the Church,


but there are two references to the Kingdom, and
it is recorded in the Gospels in more than 50 places,
that Jesus made such references. For a few of
them, read Matt. 13. A study of the Scriptures will
reveal that the Kingdom of God does not come by
observation: it is not outward show, but inward
power. We are not in it, but it is in us; it grows
and works in and through us like wheat in a field,
like the seed of a mustard tree, like leaven in dough,
like treasure in a field or a goodly pearl to be
obtained even if it costs us all we have. Contrast
these requirements with our standards of Church
Membership, and it will be seen at once that the two
are not the same. While the Christian Church kept
its objective, the Kingdom of God, in view it was
invincible, and just in proportion as each branch of
the Christian Church is working to this end with
zeal and sincerity in just such proportion will God
make it grow, and so enable it to build up His
Church on earth and His Kingdom in men’s hearts
and lives.
For the first three centuries of the Christian
era people joined the Christian Church at the risk
of life and property, but when the Emperor of
Rome joined the Church, it became the popular
thing to become a Christian. Then came into full
play the second propensity of the human mind, when
the ideals and objectives of an organisation are
neglected or only used by its leaders to aggrandise
themselves. Even the Christian Church has not
escaped the blighting power of this propensity of
human nature.
Again and again this has happened down through
the centuries, and again and again God has called
the Church back to some sense of her mission, at
times by persecution and again at times by raising
up men of vision, loyalty and leadership. Which is
it to be for us? For it is clear that the Church has
again lost her way. This is shown in several ways
—by her divisions, by her lack of loyalty and enthu-


siasm even among those who are her ordained Minis-
ters and Priests, lack of conscience and concerted
action in the face of such evils as drink and gamb-
ling, unemployment and sweating and other economic
and social injustices, such as robbing the man on
the land by the unrestrained use of the so-called
law of supply and demand. “For if the Kingdom
of God is to replace the dominance of evil in this
world (and it is especially the fault of Christians
if it does not) then it will have to rule in all things
that touch human life and character. While Jssus
Christ put first things first—man’s soul and mind—
He did not neglect men’s bodies, and He expects His
followers to follow Him in this. In the picture of the
final judgment given us in Matt. 25:31 to end of
chapter, it is notable that Jesus does not consider
what men thought or knew, nor even what they
believed or disbelieved, but simply how they acted
towards one another, especially towards those who
were under-privileged. Knowledge is a good thing
so long as it is real and true, culture and good man-
ners will smooth our way; but it is what we have
of the spirit of Jesus Christ that saves us now and
for the future.
Jesus calls us to love Him supremely and follow
Him recklessly (see Matt. 10:37-39). And strange
as it may seem to those who have not tried this
way of life, the moment anyone obeys Him there
comes into that life the world’s desire—peace, joy,
goodwill, power.
Listen to the voice of Jesus: “Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world
giveth, give I unto you.” (John 14:27.) “These
things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might
remain in you, and that your joy might be full.”
(John 15:11.) “I have chosen you and ordained
you that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fruit should remain; that whatsoever ye
shall ask of the Father in my name, He may give


it you. These things I command you that ye love
one another.” (John 15, 16 and 17.)
And lest anyone should fancy that these words
apply only to professing Christians, compare Luke
10:25-37. Here we learn that the neighbour whom
we are to love is one of another nation —even a hos-
tile nation —another religion, another culture, one
who is down and out, one whom to befriend will
cost you something, may even endanger you. “This
do,” said Jesus, “and thou shalt live.” You see,
being a Christian makes you a power to be reckoned
with. If you have not got this power, or if you are
not exercising it, there is something wrong with
you. Take it to Jesus and get it put right. And
whatever He gives you, use it for Him. It is the
only way to keep it! Don’t be a Dead Sea.
The Jordan river flows through the Sea of
Galilee. Result: Freshness, fertility, life, beauty.
The same river flows into the Dead Sea, but goes
no further. Result: Bitterness, sterility, death!
Christians, yes, and Churches too, take heed!
In the previous chapter it was pointed out that
social honesty and co-operation will make for peace
and goodwill without robbing anyone of his rights
and liberty. While admitting that this falls short of
the Kingdom of God on earth, Christ’s new order,
yet it is a big advance on what we have, or any-
thing the world has ever had since the dawn of
history. And it is so very practicable that we can
all begin it immediately. What, then, does it mean
for you as a Christian?
It means just this, that you will think for and
of your fellow-men as Jesus did. And you will do
this regardless of what coloured skin they wear,
what language they speak or whether they live in
London or Labrador, New York or Old Cathay,
Canberra or Timbuktu. You will be honest in the
social sense, as distinguished from the legal sense.
It will be your working principle that all men, yes,
all men are entitled to share in the earth’s good and


plenty, as developed by science, invention and
industry in return for what man puts into it, be-
cause we are all children of our Father, God, and
He has made us neighbours—close neighbours now
—one to another.
And this brings us to our responsibility to each
other, namely, to co-operate with one another. It
is true that our civilisation has built up a large
degree of co-operation in the world’s work, but
ruthless competition and wasted energy largely
destroy the results and the distribution. Our co-
operation must be planned, co-ordinated, reasoned,
just. Of which more anon. What Germany is doing
for war to make slaves of the nations, we can, and
must, do for peace, liberty and plenty.
And this must begin at the house of God, the
branches of the Christian Church co-operating with
one another to prove their relationship with Christ
and one another. This is the way to convince the
world that Jesus is the Christ, the sent of God, and
it is the way to assure our hearts before God. (See
John 17:20-23.) In view of these words of Jesus,
can we blame our critics if they regard us as
hypocrites, or as not knowing the spirit we are of,
if we stand aloof from one another in the face of the
enemy or even fight among ourselves? What chance
would an army in the field have if its various parts
would not co-operate with one another, and even
opened fire on one another occasionally? Must God
bring us to a threat to our very lives as Christians
before we will awaken to our positions? It would
seem so. That threat is a live issue to-day. Any
form of totalitarian government must of necessity
prove to be such a threat. The cause we stand for,
Christ’s new order, the Kingdom of God on earth,
is at stake. “United we stand, divided we fall.”
And to be united does not mean that we must
throw all that each branch of the Christian Church
has stood for to the winds and have one organic
union. As things are at present, that is impossible.


We must be loyal to the truth, each as we appre-
hend it, or we really would be hypocrites. But,
while holding our individuality, we can —nay, we
must, if we are to be loyal to Him whose we are
and whom we serve—join with each other in unity
against the evils which are destroying both ourselves
and our neighbours, and to help each other bring in
the Kingdom of God on earth. There are many
things upon which the Churches should be able to
speak with one voice and work together to one end.
Take, for instance, Sabbath desecration, gamb-
ling, how to deal with the drink question, what
attitude the Government should take towards the
upkeep of hospitals, the clearing of slum areas and
the housing of the poor, the causes and remedy of
unemployment, and how to give a fair deal to both
producer and consumer. The day this is being
written a typical instance of this last has been given
over the wireless. A fisherman sent over 30 crates
of fish to Melbourne Market, and was brought nine
shillings in debt on the transaction, yet those fish—
or some of them—were being retailed at 1/3 each!
This is a common occurrence with all sorts of pri-
mary products, yet the explanation is always forth-
coming that the middleman is only making a reason-
able profit! It does not seem to occur to anyone to
investigate the whole system of distribution! Added
to all this—or even prior to it —the Churches should
put their own house in order. Owing to there being
many ministers on Chaplaincy work, there are a
number of vacancies. On the other hand, there is
much overlapping or duplication of work. A
Conference or Convention could deal with these
matters without affecting the integrity of each
Church participating. And the effect on “the man
in the street” would be wholesome indeed. He
would think the Churches were beginning to display
some sanity and awareness of the world we are
living in, at last! And, better still, the Universal
Church would be bringing and giving to the world


what her wonderful Lord and Saviour has given to
her! If Christians cannot display and bring to the
world Divine love and power, forgiveness and peace,
fellowship and joy, it is certain that nothing else
can, or will even try to do so. If Christ fails there
is no other name given under heaven whereby we
can be saved. Jesus saves for best use all that is
placed in His hands—soul and spirit, intellect and
sentiments, riches or poverty, all that concerns man,
in His hands becomes purified, ennobled, enriched,
lifted to a new level. But while God has given us
the possibility of having His riches in Christ Jesus,
and has made us the heirs of the ages, yet He does
not force it upon us, nor even compel us to make
a right use of it all. We can use it all to make a
hell upon earth, as we are doing, or to bring the
Kingdom of God to earth. Just as Christ entrusted
His salvation for the world to His followers, so God
in Christ trusts us to bring His Kingdom to earth,
and there is no other way in which it will or can
be done. In a few plain words, the Kingdom of
God will not be established in this world till we who
are Christians do it.
And we are in a position to take the first great
step towards it now, at once. Man’s extremity has
become God’s opportunity, working through all who
are His. We who are Christians must realise and
recognise that we are brothers and neighbours in
Christ; and this, of course, means that we will co-
operate with each other, with studied and planned
co-operation, for ourselves, for our fellow-men, and
for the bringing in of the Kingdom of God on earth.
Let me conclude this section by pointing out
that each one of us will have to take the responsi-
bility for what we do about this. Jesus lived and
died and rose again to be our Saviour. He can do
no more without our co-operation. Without that
He becomes our Judge. And we are not left in the
dark as to what His judgment will be like. (See


Matt. 25, especially verses 31 to 46.) “Inasmuch as
ye did it . . . inasmuch as ye did it not.” It will be
useless for us to plead what doctrine we held, what
errors we opposed, what we did for the Church, or
what the Church did for us. These things seem
very important to us, but the Judge of all the Earth
rules them out of court. Jesus emphasised two com-
mandments: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God”
and “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
(See Mark 12:30-31.) And said also: “A new
commandment I give unto you that ye love one an-
other; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another.” (John 13:34.) Whether or not we have
been obedient to these will decide our eternal
destiny. And let me say that not only will this be
true in the great Hereafter, but it is true here and
now. The Kingdom of God on earth, the destiny
of the human race, is at stake. What each one of
us decides to do helps to decide the issue, and there
is no escape for us—each one of us must choose.
Either we choose the way of social honesty, leading
to justice to and for all, and co-operation to attain
this, leading to peace and goodwill, or we reject
this and so stand for an ineffective and discounted
Church, a social system which disregards God’s
laws and man’s good, an economic system which
makes rich men richer and poor men poorer, gives
doles instead of justice to those who have pro-
duced the very necessaries of your life, sets
employers and employees against one another, giving
us class war and ultimately war, nation against
nation, till the whole world is embroiled. Further,
the choice we make is a real choice, not what we
say, but what we do!
If all who profess and call themselves Christians
make the right choice, and Christ Himself will reject
us if we do not, then this world is ready to go for-
ward to higher and nobler living, with prosperity
and peace shared in by all of every people and
nation—and I write this when the World War No. 2


is spreading over every continent and ocean of the
earth!
With John Russell Lowell we can say:
“Then to side with truth is noble,
When we share her wretched crust,
Ere her cause bring fame and profit,
And ’tis prosperous to be just,
Then it is the brave man chooses,
While the coward stands aside,
Till the multitude make virtue
Of the faith they had denied.
By the light of burning martyrs,
Christ, thy bleeding feet we track
Toiling up new Calvaries ever
With the Cross that turns not back.
New occasions teach new duties;
Time makes ancient good uncouth:
They must upward still and onward
' Who would keep abreast of truth.
Though the cause of evil prosper,
Yet ’tis truth alone is strong;
Though her portion be the scaffold,
And upon the throne be wrong—
Yet that scaffold sways the future,
And, behind the dim unknown,
Standeth God within the shadow,
Keeping watch above His own.”
And falling to our knees, let us pray:
Drop thy still dews of quietness,
Till all our strivings cease:
Take from our souls the strain and stress,
And let our ordered lives confess
The beauty of Thy peace.


CHAPTER VII.
For Employers and Employees.
In these days of mechanisation and industrialisa-
tion you have become the most numerous, and, con-
sequently, under the democratic system, the most
powerful section of the State and of the world.
Your actions also directly affect all others. And
this state of affairs will become more and more
accentuated. Every invention leads to other inven-
tions or makes other inventions possible. The great
advance of the last 100 years will probably be
eclipsed by the next 100 years —it certainly should
be in much less time than that! One hundred years
ago what men did with the land was what counted,
to-day what men do with machinery is the dominat-
ing factor.
Note that you employers and employees are
combined together. Please note this fact very care-
fully and face it honestly. The prosperity of you
both depends on this fact, even if you give no
thought to those who use your product. And let
me warn you that the interest of those who use
your product has become of very great importance
to you.
For the last hundred years you have been act-
ing like two cats with their tails tied together!
Have you no more intelligence with which to face
your situation than a couple of cats?
About 80 years ago my father left England and
came to Australia because a strike in his industry
was robbing him of his savings, and he could see no
hope of improvement. The position to-day is much
worse. There is no new country to which to go


where you may become your own employer. There
are hardly any industries left into which you can
enter without capital. Though you have tugged and
pulled against one another for a century or more,
you are more tightly bound together than ever, with
the position ever becoming worse. Is it not time to
drop “catty” methods and use a little honesty? If
you will only do that, co-operation will be the result,
instead of industrial chaos and class hatred.
You have made many efforts to settle your dis-
putes. Many, on both sides, have tried to do this
honestly. You would have had a large measure of
success long ago if it had not been that each of
you has wanted to put the matter right in his own
way, without help from the other. Whether made
honestly or not, all such efforts must fail. They are
the methods of Karl Marx, Hitler and Mussolini.
Such methods must fail, or at least be resisted, be-
cause they do not take into consideration the rights
and liberties of others. Surely it is time to discard
what has proved so abortive for so long in favour of
what appeals to common sense as the only real
solution, facing up honestly to our relations with
one another, and co-operating to live and let live.
And again I say, do not forget those who buy your
product. If you do they will find a substitute and
forget you! Every strike tends to have that result.
If you want to utterly destroy your market, just
cease production! Either of you can get that result
and destroy each other as well, but you must work
together to keep a profitable market, the means by
which you live. No doubt most of you can remem-
ber at least one instance in which it was found
after a strike was over, that the market for the pro-
duct had vanished, or almost so. So good are we
at finding substitutes in these days. And unduly
high prices through lack of co-operation may have
the same result. Thus what may appear to be an
improvement in the conditions in an industry may
prove to be its destruction.


Now for a word in the ears of each of you,
separately—first to employers.
As a rule, you employers are a privileged class.
You have capital and specialised ability or other
advantage. These entitle you to a greater reward
than those who accept a lesser responsibility receive.
But do not make a welter of it! You and your
employees have done something of service to your
fellow-men, but do not grasp at all you can get and
then spend it lavishly. Every action has its reaction,
and if you act so your employees will take it that
they should share in the rake-off, and strikes and
discontent will be always troubling you. If you
manage to get past your employees, then the Govern-
ment will take a large proportion of your gain. An-
other result will be to make those dependent upon
you very good at spending and very poor at earn-
ing, and that is the worst kind of poverty. All this
is apart from the question which has never been
answered, “What shall it profit a man if he gain the
whole world and lose his own soul ”
If, on the other hand, you are honest with your-
self, your employees and the public whom you
serve, you will not only make a living, but you will
live a life worth living, and make it easier for
others to do the same. In this industrialised age, it
largely depends on you whether we are heading to-
wards peace and plenty or towards unrest, discon-
tent, strife and war. If the latter, then we merely
build up our wealth and other good to destroy it
again. So long as many of us grasp at what we re-
gard as our own good, without accepting our due
responsibility to others, the fruit of it will be rotten
and bitter. And -as science, invention and industry
draw us closer and closer together, these fruits are
being partaken of by ever-increasing numbers.
Since, on the material plane, nearly all our troubles
are economic, in an almost overwhelming measure
the responsibility for whether we shall have peace
or war rests on the shoulders of the captains of


industry. My appeal to you is to do some honest
thinking, to do what you can do to obtain the fullest
co-operation, from the producer of the raw material
to the one who uses the finished product. Surely
this is not asking too much of you? Why make a
hell of what could be such a beautiful world? Make
no mistake about it, if you do you will be in it, as
well as those for whom you would not accept any
responsibility.
And now a word to those in employment. You,
too, are a privileged class. This may surprise you!
You may have been looking at your own limitations
for so long that you have overlooked the fact. But
if you are in employment under democratic con-
ditions, you certainly are a privileged person. Com-
pare your lot with that of those who have to work
for others in non-democratic countries, or with the
primary producers or the unemployed in your own
country, and you will see what I mean, and how
very true it is. For instance, how many dairymen,
whose milk and butter, cream and cheese you use,
working 12 and more hours a day, and seven days
a week, would think themselves well off if they
were receiving above expenses even the basic wage!
How very many farmers who produce the wheat
from which the bread you eat is made, would be glad
indeed if they could make a breadcarter’s wage after
paying expenses. There is no need to mention
fruit growers, vegetable growers, fishermen or other
primary producers. Until you reach the luxury or
near-luxury lines of primary production, the general
story is of those who are hardly able to make a
living, regardless of the hours they work or the hard
conditions they endure. Without the shadow of a
doubt, so far as money is concerned, those in con-
stant employment are a privileged class.
Now do not think that I am out to reduce your
standard of living in any degree. My object is to
show you how to build on a better and far more
secure foundation than that you are resting on at


present. The social structure at present is not fair
and just, and consequently it cannot last. Many of
you, sensing this, have turned your eyes towards
Socialism, Communism, Major Douglas’s social credit,
or Henry George’s Single Tax. We have examined
these and find they are all basically unjust in some
way. There remains social honesty and co-opera-
tion. These cannot fail! They do not depend on
political power or money power, or social or any
other kind of prestige, nor on what the other fellow
has done or can be compelled to do. They simply
depend on what you do yourself, and that is some-
thing within your own control!
Let us glance at the means you are using to
better your condition.
You form a Union of the workers in each
industry. Good! That enables you to deal collec-
tively with your employers. You use your collective
power also to coerce all the employees in an industry
to join the Union. No doubt you consider this
necessary, but in doing it you discard the principle
of co-operation for one of coercion. This may seem
a small matter to you, but it is a feather which
shows which way the wind blows. If you make
coercion your principle you immediately limit your-
self to your power of coercion. How can you expect
even those who are neutral or unattached (a very
numerous body), much less your employers, to agree
with you on such a policy?
In the next place you link your Unions together
and use the power thus gained not only for defence,
but also for offence. The writer has heard of such
a thing as a “general strike.” Of course, it was not
really a general strike, only a strike of the unions.
If those who provide your food and other neces-
sities also went on strike, you would see the logical
result. The whole thing is an attempt to coerce
those who have no direct interest in your dispute
to help you to obtain your ends. Such tactics


alienate sympathy and court defeat, apart from the
justice of your cause.
Finally, you organise on the political front. With
our democratic one-adult-one-vote system, your
great numbers and close organisation should give
you complete supremacy in this sphere. And this
you certainly would have if your policy were co-
operation instead of coercion. So long as coercion is
your policy you will be suspect.
How can you show the co-operative spirit?
The answer can be given in few words:
First, do not coerce your members—trust them.
Next, do not coerce your employer, but co-
operate with him to turn out a better and cheaper
product in ever-increasing volume.
And, finally, if you think your firm is making
an undue profit, build up your funds and buy a
good parcel of shares in your concern. If the
Unions combined for this purpose you could buy an
option on one concern after another, selecting those
that would give you the best return. Whether you
buy shares or the whole concern, you will acquire
a share in the management and the profits, which
you will have acquired justly.
Had you been doing this during the last 50
years, industry to-day would be in the hands of co-
operatives, and they would be employing the inven-
tors, managers, etc., to improve and build up their
business. Not Communism, not Nazi State control,
not any system of State control of land or finance,
but social honesty and co-operation, is the solution
for us all. And, once more, the Primary Producer
and the Consumer must be included.
While the above cannot be applied to employees
of the State nor those engaged on seasonal work,
such as shearing and harvesting crops, yet the spirit
of honest dealing and co-operation can operate in
them to great advantage to all concerned. So long


as we continue to shirk our responsibility towards
one another, in short-sighted fashion, seeking only
our own advantage, we shall have disruption and
dislocation of industry, injustices to other sections
of the community, reaching to all parts of the world,
class and industrial warfare, culminating in world
war. There is a law in all this which works as
surely as the law of gravitation. “God is not
mocked: what a man sows that shell he also reap.”


CHAPTER VIII.
Production, Secondary Industry, Consumption.
It is being glibly said to-day: “We have solved
the problem of production.” The reply to this is
“Yes!—if the world is able and willing to pay the
price.” At present it would seem as if the world
is neither able nor willing, and is in the way to be-
coming much less able, however willing. Here we
are faced by the riddle of our times, and on the
solution depends the world’s future. Are we going
to build up production and then waste and destroy
it through strife and war, or are we going to use
it for peace, plenty, and the satisfaction of human
needs? If the first, then “Vanity and vexation of
spirit” is written large all over it; if the latter, is
it not high time we were getting on with the job?
First, let us look at our production. Without
a doubt production has increased by leaps and
bounds during the last half century. For instance,
from the application of a given amount of labour,
the production of the land has been increased from
four to six times above what it was. Bigger and
better implements, the internal combustion engine,
scientific breeding of better, and better adapted,
plants and animals, the use of fertilisers and
experience of conditions of soil and climate, have
all contributed to this result. But with all this
increase of quantity and quality, the cost of each
unit of production has not been lowered, rather
increased. To-day it costs as much to produce a
bushel of wheat, a gallon of milk or .a pound of
butter, a case of fruit or a basket of vegetables, as
ever it did. The nett result is that to get the same
amount of production, five out of six men have


been eliminated, but the one left has to face the
costs formerly divided amongst the six. If he re-
ceived even one-fifth of the profit once shared by
the six he might be able to still carry on, but when,
as has become almost chronic during the past 12
years, the price of the product received by the
producer is actually less than it cost him to produce,
can we say truly that the problem of production
has been solved? On the material side, that is, the
side of what is physically possible, production has
been solved; but on the human side, the side by
which men live, it has been greatly complicated,
and unless we solve this latter, the former will
count for little or nothing. Yet while we have been
giving much thought to the former, neither thought
nor heart has been exercised on the latter till the
position has reached a crisis.
War-time control of production and prices dur-
ing war-time, and the world demand for all its
needs for a time after the war is over, may give
us a breathing time in which to face and solve this
problem, but will certainly be no solution in itself.
There is only one real solution, and that is social
honesty and co-operation.
Some people talk big things about what is
physically possible. They point to the way that
money is raised for war, and ask, “Can it not be
done equally well for peace?” with a hint that they
mean to see that it is done, or there will be
trouble!
There are several things which such people
leave out of all their thoughts.
For one thing, we are not pouring out our men
and our wealth on an enterprise to make money.
And such people seem to think that if we make suffi-
cient money we will have peace!
We are risking our lives, our material wealth
and money in order to preserve the chance of main-
taining the good we have, and handing it on with


improvements to those who shall come after us. If
your house is burning you do not act just as you
do when all is O.K. on the home-front. And you
would strongly suspect the sanity of those who
would expect you to do so!
Another thing which those people do not con-
sider is the fact that you cannot eat your cake and
have it too. The more we spend on war the less
there will be for peace. A child who can subtract
1 from 2 ought to be able to see that.
Another thing they need to look into is that
the more that is borrowed the greater the interest
hill. “Oh!” they explain, “we would not borrow it
at interest, but take it from the Social Credit.” And
there they lose sight of the fact that in the ratio
that the public credit is depleted, the purchasing
power of the “money” so “created” will be depre-
ciated, just as with any other kind of inflation. In
other words, such “money” will buy less goods, and,
after all, the goods, not the money, form the real
value.
Let me conclude these remarks by pointing out
the fatal error of those who think they can get
money for nothing, namely, they do not consider
sufficiently the soundness of the enterprise on
which they would spend it. If a thing costs you
nothing, whatever you get out of it is all to the
good, might well be their argument. It is sufficient
to say that whether you pay for your money in
interest or by inflation, you must pay. There is no
escape from that. And wild-cat schemes induced
by “cheap” money will make the final disaster all
the greater and more complete. All grandiose
schemes for settling men on the land, building “re-
productive” Government works which do not even
pay the interest on their cost, repatriation, making
employment and other vague schemes so airily
advocated, will need a better basis than that pro-
vided by our present system of production, pro-
cessing and financing to have any hope of success


How many of those, for instance, who are advocat-
ing putting returned soldiers on the land, realise
what a hopeless proposition it would be under
present circumstances? Do such people not know
that some 300 practical farmers in what is known
as the South-West of New South Wales, are accept-
ing £3OO each to walk off their farms; men who
before unprofitable prices ruined them, had up to
thousands of pounds worth of land and plant? And
this is not just an isolated or local case. So far as
wheat-growers are concerned, it is typical of what
is happening in nearly all the countries of the
world except a few who protect their farmers with
a high tariff. As a minimum, it requires about
£I,OOO worth of plant and £2,000 worth of land
to grow wheat, and surely no one in his right senses
would risk that with the prospect of working long
hours, facing the worries of drought, animal, vege-
table and insect pests, flood, fire, storm and blight,
to receive less than he could earn with his hands
in secondary industry. This is a very mild presen-
tation of the position of the wheat-grower, made
purposely so because he has a few “side lines” by
which he can mitigate his position somewhat while
his actual work and life on the farm are so varied
and interesting as to make him feel that he would
forego much rather than lose the joy of it all. And
that is one of the reasons why he has hung on all
these years. But I ask my reader, “Is it fair and
just that the wheat of which your daily bread is
made should be grown under such conditions? and
can you go on praying ‘give us this day our daily
bread’ and do nothing about it?”
Now let us turn our attention to the consumer.
Without someone to use or consume the product,
there would be no need of a producer, nor of those
who process or transport his product. The con-
sumer is the one served by all who have contributed
to the make-up and delivery of what he buys, and
he has to pay for that service. The important thing;


then is to give him his requirements as cheaply as
possible, yet so that all who render service shall
receive a due reward for what they do. Now it is
very noticeable that in these days, when raw or pri-
many products are so exceedingly cheap, the finished
product is, in most cases, as dear as ever, sometimes
even dearer.
Another, and perhaps the most important, thing
for us to remember is that while some of us are
producers, and many of us handle or process the
goods we use, we are all consumers. Whatever,
therefore, adds unnecessarily to the cost of his goods
is a dis-service to the consumer, that is, to all of
us. This is something we are very apt to over-
look, only thinking of others as consumers. When
we can buy cheap goods our money goes farther,
and we can buy more goods, giving employment
to more people. We can always increase our expen-
diture as consumers up to the limit of our income.
The writer hopes that these plain statements
will appeal to his readers as the simple truth which
cannot be gainsaid. If so, it is equally evident that
a state of affairs which, with ample and cheap
materials to work on and the most marvellous dis-
tributing agencies the world has ever seen, still puts
its goods beyond the reach of the consumer (the
universal man for whom it caters), must have some-
thing seriously wrong with it.
It has, and that wrong can be put right by-
social honesty and co-operation, and without these
it cannot be put right. One does not need to be a
prophet to be able to foretell with certainty what
will happen if we continue to violate these basic
principles. It is the working out of the law of
cause and effect. The results were bad enough in
the past, before the world had been drawn together
so much and before we had become so dependent
on one another. It staggers one to think what must
be the results now if we will not learn wisdom.


As an example of the difference in results between
the present system of the exploitation of the raw pro-
duct and the consumer, as against what could be
effected by honest co-operation, take the case of
wheat and bread.
It takes 48 bushels of wheat to make 1 ton
(2,000 lbs.) of flour. To produce this 48 bushels of
wheat the average Australian farmer has to have
about 10 acres of cleared land, half of it under
crop and half fallow. In addition, he has to provide
its proportionate amount of fencing, water for stock,
housing for machinery, stabling, chaff house and
silo, also its proportion of the purchase and upkeep
of a plant costing between £l,OOO and £2,000, to
say nothing of the cost of incidentals such as rates
and taxes, insurances and losses, or seed and manure.
From the time he starts his outlay of labour and
money about 18 months pass by before he sees
any return. He cannot work on “business” lines,
because neither his costs nor his returns are under
his control. And if he has to borrow any portion
of the capital he uses he has to pay interest on it.
For this outlay of money, time and labour, if he
receives 3/- per bushel for his wheat, his total re-
turn for the 48 bushels is £7/4/-. During the
past twelve years the price of wheat on at least
two occasions, has been less than half of that
amount, and seldom above 2/- per bushel, nett to
the farmer. After an exhaustive and costly inquiry,
Sir Herbert Gepp reported that it costs nearly 2/6
per bushel to grow wheat in Australia, and this
gave no return to the farmer for his capital.
Now let us follow that wheat till it reaches our
tables in the form of bread.
The writer has been told that wheat passes
through thirteen hands between the grower and
the consumer. If so, three at least of these are
unnecessary, except in the case of export wheat.
One thing is certain, not one of them would handle
or have anything to do with it unless he is making


something out of it. It is a system of profits for all
of them, without thought for either the producer
or the consumer. Each one of those who handle the
wheat adds to the cost, but only two add to the
value to the consumer, namely, the flour-miller and
the baker. The operations which turn wheat into
flour and flour into bread are both inexpensive.
Millers can grist wheat at a profit at from 9d to
1/3 per bushel, according to circumstances. A
baker’s costs are very little beyond labour and the
upkeep of an inexpensive plant.
Here in Australia there is an item which adds
to the cost to the consumer in the form of a flour
tax. This was introduced to compensate the
farmer for his high cost of production under the
policy of protection, upon which the Federal
Government depends for its chief source of revenue.
This tax is on a sliding scale, and is only applied
to the flour used in Australia. It has the effect of
keeping flour at about £l3/5/- per ton (2,000 lbs.).
So we have from the 48 bushels:
£
s.
d.
Farmer at 3/- per bushel
7
4
0
Tax (say)
3
0
0
Handling and Milling
(plus tax) —
Flour
13
5
0
Bran and Pollard .. ..
2
4
0
One Ton of Flour made
into Bread at 6d per
Loaf
33
6
6
And there still remain 880 lbs. of bran and pol-
lard to make profits for those dealing in and using
them.
What a wonderfully productive thing is wheat
—to all except the producer. Less than one-third
goes to the grower (supposing he receives the tax)
against his work and heavy costs, the other two-


thirds go in two inexpensive processes and other
intermediate costs and profits. This is a plain state-
ment of facts in regard to a commodity in which
everyone is interested, for we all eat bread. The
figures may vary a little at various times and
places, but the ultimate result works out approxi-
mately as stated. These are the results we get from
our present system of finance with profits the only
consideration and our fellow-men not in the
reckoning.
Now let us see what social honesty and co-opera-
tion would do.
First, the wheat-growing industry would have
to submit to some organisation. Sir Herbert Gepp’s
report says that about 50% of wheat farmers are
less than “efficient.” This may not mean that, on
the average, they are any worse farmers than the
other 50%, but that they are suffering from worse
handicaps. Such men would need encouragement
and (possibly) help to turn to something better.
This in itself would need social honesty and co-
operation. The result of this alone would be that
those left in the industry would be able to grow
wheat at a less cost per bushel. Economy No. 1.
Next, the wheat to be gristed in Australia
made available to each mill according to capacity,
etc., the millers to be paid (say) 9d per bushel to
grist the wheat and market its products. No out-
lay for the miller to stock wheat, and a full run for
his machinery assured. Economy No. 2.
Flour to be supplied to bakers free, except costs
of carriage. Bakers to co-operate with each other
for baking and distribution. Bread sold on “tick”
to be the baker’s own responsibility. A fair price
of bread fixed according to circumstances. After
deducting costs of transport and distribution and
his own fair remuneration, proceeds to be remitted
by the baker and miller to the growers’ wheat
pool to be distributed pro rata to the grow-


ers. This would give the maximum of co-
operation, and, consequently, the lowest possible
price for bread, allowing all concerned to make a
living, but no undue profits, and very little finance
would be required. The co-operation of bakers
would cut out overlapping, especially in distribu-
tion of bread. The author could quote an instance
where seven bakers served bread in one area, and
at least three of them secured their supplies from
a bread factory in that area! Go, think of it!
Seven bakers’ carts chasing one another around
the same streets, each driven by a man whose
award wage was £4/19/- per week! The farmer
was receiving less than two-fifths of a penny for
the wheat in the two-pound loaf, and the consumer
was paying 6d for it! (Farmers were receiving less
than 1/6 per bushel for wheat at the time.)
Under the co-operative scheme outlined above
the farmer could be paid 4/- per bushel for his
wheat and bread be sold at 4d to 4Jd per loaf, and
all in between well paid for their services.
For wheat and flour exported, the same system
could be used, with the co-operation of wheat-
exporting and wheat-importing countries. The pre-
sent cut-throat competition between wheat-export-
ing countries is both suicidal and aggravating to
all concerned. The result seems to be to build up
fortunes for men who gamble in the world’s food,
ruin the wheat growers and give dear bread for
every consumer.
Another method of co-operation is for those
who process the primary product to guarantee the
primary producer a certain price for each standard
of quality, and information given to the producer of
amounts that can be dealt with. This method applies
in the meat industry in the U.S.A. with satisfactory
results. The same method could be applied to
fruit, potatoes, the dairying industry, eggs and
poultry and other primary products peculiar to each


country. Fish, tomatoes and green vegetables are
much more difficult. Being perishable, they have to
be marketed as soon as they are available. At the
very least producers should be warned of a probable
glut in the market for perishables. If we must
have waste, surely it is better for the producer to
suffer it rather than have the expense of gather-
ing and preparing for market, freight and other
expenses all added to the cost of production for
little or no return. The vegetable grower who
sent a truckload of good cabbages to the Sydney
Market and received 9d in stamps as payment for
them, is a case in point. Many growers have re-
ceived accounts showing a debit.
If the co-operation of those who send perish-
ables to market went no further than to select a
keen man whom they could trust to watch the
market, give information of what was needed and
what was in over-supply, and make long-distance
forecasts, such as, for example, “The market next
year could absorb an increase otf tomatoes of
10%,” the results would pay them handsomely, if
only in preventing losses, and consumers would have
a steadier market, well supplied at reasonable
prices.
The above is put forward as samples to show
how social honesty and co-operation between the
primary producer, the middle man and the consumer
would work for the benefit of all.
My reader may ask, “Then how shall we do it ”
The simple and plain answer is, “Just start and
do it.”
No matter who you are or where you may be,
you are somewhere on this line—at one end of it
if nowhere else! And whether you wish to do it
or not, whether you will to do it or not, you will
work for social honesty and co-operation, or you
will work for the destruction of democracy, a
decent life, and Christian civilisation. We have


reached a stage in the world’s progress where there
is no neutral ground left. We either go forward
along this path to peace and plenty, or we revert
to jungle law, with wonderful means for mutual
destruction. We are conscripted by the world
position to march in one direction or the other!
We must either make democracy work—a real thing
—or compulsion of some sort will be forced upon us.
Now I hope and expect that the great majority
of those who will read this are, and have been,
more or less, anxious that other people should have
a “fair go,” with the “Englishman’s sneaking re-
gard for the under-dog.”
If this has been, or is, your attitude, I appeal to
you to stiffen it still further, and to carry on, fully
conscious of what you are doing to make the world
a better place to live in. If any of my readers have
not given much thought or care as to what lay out-
side his or her immediate interests, my hope is
that this book will throw a new light upon such a
manner of living, and that all such will join in the
work of building a new order in which peace and
plenty for all will abound. And do not think that
you cannot do much, or that what you do will
hardly count one way or the other. If, with your
eyes open and keen to seize your opportunity, you
do what you can, you will be surprised how much
you can do and what a zest it will give to life. If
you see something that needs doing, get to work,
and if you cannot do it yourself, get others to
help you. There are always those who are willing
to help if you show them the way. And be just
as ready to help others as to have them help you.
That is the spirit of co-operation without which we
are doomed.
Let me conclude this section with the advice
given by a pugilist when his pupil asked how to
strike the most effective blow. The terse reply was,
“Strike from where your hand is!”


Do not wait for Party or Government action.
Do not wait till others see things more clearly or
act more unselfishly. Do not wait for better times
or better people. God helps those who are helpers.
“Strike from where your hand is.” And follow it
up with an even better blow from where your other
hand is! The world will grow better or worse, and
you are contributing to the result. The little each
does makes the grand result. Develop the co-
operative spirit and exercise it in the affairs of life,
thus contributing to the making of a better world.


CHAPTER IX.
Political.
For anyone to ask politicians to be honest to-
wards and co-operate with their opponents may
look like a baby crying for the moon! But—the
reflection would not be on the one who made such a
request, but on those who would not listen to it.
There are some, deeming themselves very pat-
riotic, who will cry, “My country, right or wrong.”
When a politician comes before the electors, one
never hears him say, “My party, right or wrong.”
Every candidate tells the electors what he will do
for the good of the country—the State —if he is
elected, but when he reaches the House he acts as
if his party were the whole State, as if minorities
had no rights and deserved no consideration. Too
much of our legislation under our Party system is
strongly tinged with this attitude, setting up friction
with which it is hard to do away. It usually takes
many years to amend a law which is even generally
acknowledged to be unjust or has a big public
sentiment against it. Governments often get around
such a situation by not enforcing such legislation.
Now all this tends to bring law into contempt—a
bad thing for the State, and, bringing the Democratic
system into disrepute, opens the door to Nazism or
Bolshevism.
Another result of this utter lack of co-opera-
tion is that urgent legislation is delayed until at
last, with a recess or dissolution drawing near, a
number of Acts are rushed through in a few days
—more ill-considered legislation.


Probably as long as there are men on this earth
there will be varying political opinions, and men
will combine into parties to attain their political
ideals. Since there is no place on this earth to
which we can send our minorities, nor can they be
deported to the moon or Mars, or even the hottest
place in the sun, it is time we all joined together to
make a decent world by co-operating with one an-
other to that end. This does not mean being re-
creant to our party, because the good of our party,
whether large or small, is bound up with the good
of all other parties. The present war is being
fought to maintain the principle that no one section
of humanity shall have the right to lift itself up by
trampling down other men. This principle must
also permeate our political life or we shall proclaim
ourselves to be hypocrites and blind to our own
good.
This non-co-operation of parties in our Parlia-
mentary system has two such bad results as to
greatly minimise the good of democratic Govern-
ment.
The first is that it reduces the great majority
of the Members of the House to mere voting
machines and very costly machines at that.
Indeed, if after each election about three-quar-
ters of the seats in the House were fitted
up with electric voting machines capable of
saying “Aye” or “No,” or printing it on cards
delivered from a slot machine, according to a
button pressed by each Party leader, the result
would be just as sensible and effective as the pre-
sent sytsem, and much cheaper! This would be
“machine politics” carried to its logical conclusion!
The second bad effect of our Party system as at
present is that every time there is a change of
Government the House blows out about half its
brains and executive experience and ability!


No matter how good and effective a Minister
may be in his Department, out he goes! We are so
used to this that we take it as a matter of course.
If the House had a proper sense of its respon-
sibility to the country, it would co-operate to elect
the best men within its doors to administer each
Department and make him directly responsible to
the House. The Government —the majority —would
still decide its policy, and any Member of the
Ministry who happened to belong to a minority
would be able to explain to that minority the rea-
sons for the policy followed. With a spirit of co-
operation for the good of the country and the peace
of the world, this truly democratic system would
work to give the best results; without that spirit it
would fail. In human affairs, no system will give
better results than the men who work it.
If the men we elect to Parliament are such a
poor lot that they will not face things honestly and
co-operate in times of peace, surely we should see
to it that they do it in times of war. With the
greatest military power that the world has ever
seen in one man’s hands directed to the destruction
of our liberties and all the good our fathers have
handed down to us, yet here in Australia for over
two years we have had the spectacle of party
politics refusing to co-operate with their fellow-
citizens in other Parties to obtain the supreme war
effort. Our liberty of thought, liberty of the Press,
liberty to serve God, our political and national
liberty all at stake, yet party politics taking prece-
dence! If as the result we lose all, what can be
given as an excuse for such an attitude? Nay! If
we use our liberty in such a way, do we deserve it?
I am well aware that all the military power in
the world will not give these liberties to those who
do not deserve or appreciate them—but on the
other hand, military power can take away or destroy
them. Should we win through and maintain the


right to these liberties, surely we should see written
into our Constitution provisions that will provide for
and expect co-operation for our defence on the
political and industrial as well as the military front,
should war ever again be forced upon us. For lack
of co-operation, we are in jeopardy of losing our
liberties—and deserve to be! And if we lose them
it will be because we have not used them as we
should.


CHAPTER X.
International.
In this second Great World War we have an
example of what untruth and dishonesty as an
international policy can do to destroy the peace of
the world. Time after time Hitler gave his solemn
word and covenant, and each time he broke it
when it suited his purpose. We may grant that he
had a great ideal, that of placing his nation at the
head of the nations of the world. Had he matched
his methods to his ideal and succeeded, he would
have been classed as the greatest patriot of his age,
perhaps of any age. He did not know—or if he did
he ignored it—that unless the methods match the
ideal the one will destroy the other. It is just there
that many great men have destroyed themselves or
their work when they have attained to power. But
it has remained to Hitler to employ deliberate
duplicity simply to put at a disadvantage those
who would be bound by their word and bond. The
lesson for us in this is not that international pacts
are like pie-crust, made to be broken, but that they
should be made with due caution and then honoured
without hesitation. We cannot build international
peace on any other foundation.
After the first great world war the League of
Nations was formed. It was a great ideal, but it
was not given the means to carry out its ideals.
The very nation which formulated the idea failed
to honour it with its support. Each nation in the
League retained its “Sovereign rights,” which really
meant that each nation was free to go its own
way and disassociate itself from the League when or
as it chose. This “right” several powerful nations


exercised as the years went by, and they found they
could flout the League with impunity. In the final
result, Great Britain, relying too much upon the
League, disarmed to the danger-point, while Japan,
Italy and Germany armed themselves to the teeth
with modern weapons, and studied and exercised
themselves in the art of using them. They did this
under cover of the plea that they had to protect
themselves from the menace of Bolshevism and the
fact that the new giant Union of Russia, had
heavily armed itself, and, under its first leaders,
assumed a belligerent attitude, gave colour to the
plea. Unfortunately, British statesmen did not, or
would not, see that it was only a plea used to cover
a deeper design.
Even as this dangerous position was develop-
ing, small States and minorities were busy demand-
ing or asserting their “Sovereign rights,” presuming
on the power of the League of Nations to give them
liberty and justice, a power which, as we have seen,
did not inhere in the League. The League did not
protect China against Japan, Abyssinia and Albania
against Italy, or Spain against revolutionaries. In
France, irreligion, drink, an unbalanced economy
and luxury were destroying the heart of the nation.
Sheltering behind her Maginot Line, she gave her-
self up to a false sense of security. British and
French statesmen declared they wanted peace, which
Hitler interpreted as a sign of weakness, and the
opportunity for which he had been preparing. Seiz-
ing his opportunity, as he regarded it, fostering the
divisions in the countries around him, and lulling
those in power in those nations by lying protesta-
tions and pacts, he has struck suddenly, destroying
one after another, till nearly all Europe lies prone
at his feet. Drunk with power, and thinking to
obtain the resources for world-wide conquest, he
suddenly struck at Russia. Here, for the first time,
he has met a great Power, fully prepared, and no
“fifth column” to help him. As this is being written


it is too soon to know what the final result will be,
but already it is clear that the resources he expected
to seize have eluded him, while he must be using
up his own resources and those he has obtained from
occupied countries. Russia’s “scorched earth” policy,
so unselfishly applied, has proved wonderfully effec-
tive. The skill of her Generals, and the courage
and tenacity of her soldiers, have proved quite a
match for German efficiency. All this, together with
the strength and efficiency of Dominion Forces in
North Africa and Syria, must have been something
Hitler could not have foreseen and beyond anything
for which he bargained.
It is this world, with many millions of men,
using all the inventions and resources of our time
to kill each other on the land, on and under the
sea, and in the air, to which I am trying to point
the way to peace! “Silly”—“Hopeless!” do you say?
Neither one nor the other! This is the world for
which Christ died, and He knew what was in men.
If we were all as mad, or as bad, as the pessimists
seem to think we are, there would be no war, or
it would soon be over! We would all soon be either
gangsters or Quislings and Hitler would be left
without any enemy! Why are we fighting and to
what objects do we hope to attain?
It is generally thought that historic events can-
not be seen in their true perspective until some time
after they have taken place. But in this case we
cannot wait —the world is moving on rapidly and
we must go with it or suffer a, nasty fall. So let
us take our bearings, try to see what it is we are
aiming to secure, and consider what is necessary in
order to succeed. Of course I am assuming that we
shall win the war, and so retain the right to win the
peace which we so badly failed to do after World
War No. 1. Winning the war does not mean that
thereby we have won the peace. We won the first
world war, but instead of winning peace we sowed
the seeds of this second and even greater world


war. Can we not learn something from that? If,
on the other hand, Hitler wins, he will dictate the
terms, and they will certainly not be terms of peace
—unless it is the peace of a desert where no life is!
Many statesmen and others are telling us what
it is that we are fighting for, but, strangely enough,
they do not seem to realise that no war, no matter
how successfully waged, will give us these things.
All that this or any other war can do is to main-
tain the possibility of these things, and in the heat
of the struggle, we are in danger of losing some of
these things even if we win the war.
Let us look at a few of them.
Some tell us that we are fighting for our life,
meaning the way of life we have as opposed to the
way of life under Nazi or Fascist domination, or
even as co-operators in the prosperity of Japan!
Now, as has been pointed out, our way of life falls
very short of giving Justice to every section of the
community. If our way of life is going to mean
unemployment for a large section of the community
and almost worse than slavery for the primary pro-
ducers, the questions arise, “Is it worth fighting for
and how will winning the war set these things
right”
We got these things partly as a result of the
first great war. Is it not certain that after this war,
if we go on as before, these things will be much
worse?
War is not the remedy for these things, but
social justice and co-operation are. As Mr. S. M.
Bruce has said: “When the smoke drifts from the
battlefield, justice still waits to be done.”
Another object which we are told we are fight-
ing for is security. The truth is that this world is
not noted for security and all the wars of all the
ages have not produced it! The only way in which
this war could contribute to that end would be if
it convinced men with the German and Japanese
type of mind that war is not a paying proposition.


Three strong nations —Germany Italy and Japan—
are convinced that it is. Each of them can point to
cases in their own history where it succeeded. They
think they are strong enough to conquer the rest of
the world, relying on their own unity and prepared-
ness, and the lack of unity and preparedness of the
rest of the world. Herein lies the secret of how to
deal with such nations. They must not be allowed
to prepare for such an enterprise again, and those
who believe in liberty, fair dealing and peace must
be prepared to nip any such enterprise in the bud.
We will deal with this point further later on.
We are being told again, as in the first World
War, that we are fighting for democracy. This is
true, and we have shown previously that democracy,
rightly used, is the best form of Government. But
democracy will have to be made to really work, and
that means respect for one another’s rights—social
honesty and co-operation. Without these, democracy
will destroy itself, even if we win the war.
Democracy spells freedom. You cannot have one
without the other, and men who are denied the
opportunity to do their share of the world’s work,
and men who produce the things by which men
live yet are denied the just value of their product,
cannot be said to be free men. By giving us a false
prosperity through borrowing, expansion of credit,
control of prices, etc., war may do something to
correct this for the time being; but when the war is
over and the real position asserts itself, nothing but
social honesty and justice, and a full co-operation
to produce and distribute what we need as cheaply
as possible, will pull us through.
It is being said on all hands that we need a
new order. To this we can all say “Hear, hear.”
But we need to get a clear idea of what the new
order is to be. We cannot conjure it out of a hat
—it will be what we make it!
We can cross off the “New Orders” envisaged
by the rulers of Germany, Italy and Japan. Any


“Order” obtained and imposed by force could only
bring and give disorder. Our love of freedom is
inborn and no amount of force could drive it out of
us. The attempt to do so would mean disorder.
Therefore the new order, if it is to stand, must
do so on the firm foundation of the enlightened wish
and chastened will of the people. We will get this
only by realising the facts.
Are we really wishing for a new order, or is
it only talk as a counter-blast to the “new orders”
of the Axis partners? What have we in mind to
do about it, either now or when the war is over?
For instance, what plan have we to meet unemploy-
ment when war spending ceases? I have shown pre-
viously that the idea of placing our returned soldiers
on the land would be a costly tragedy. What have
they done that they should be condemned to com-
pete with men who know their job and yet have
been losing for the last twelve years? Give the
man on the land a stabilised market for each grade
of produce and then increase those who are pro-
ducers as the market will bear it. If you think to
open up markets abroad, you must open your doors
to trade, no matter where it comes from, for you
cannot have one-way trade. Some will argue that
that would lower our standard of living. The reply
is that it would lower our costs of living and would
raise the standard. It might cut out a few things
which can be produced in other countries under
more favourable conditions, but it would help all
the rest.
The papers say, and the man in the street
echoes it, that the Government is responsible for the
unemployed and should find employment for him.
This is merely a way of shirking our responsibility,
and it is a bad way. It is uneconomic to tax one
man to pay wages or a dole to another. The man
so taxed gets nothing for his money: it is a dead
loss to him. In many cases the money is spent in
such a way as to demoralise the one who receives


it and makes such unemployable. It is a mill for
making people unemployable. If, instead of paying
this money in taxes, the taxpayers, having a proper
sense of their responsibility towards others, were
using the money to give employment, the money
so spent would be benefiting everyone and demoralis-
ing no one. Once more we reach the basic cure—
social honesty and co-operation, a new order worth
having.
If, to meet the situation, the Government has to
find employment, if a man is a tradesman, supply
him with the tools of his calling, on hire or time-
payment. If he cannot find work, combine him with
others into co-operatives to carry out a line of work
—house-building, for instance—and let them work at
a fair contract price. This would build up some-
thing worth having, and, best of all, it would also
build up the men who were doing it. A few honest
and competent men supervising such gangs would
accomplish wonders, and it would all be paying for
itself as it went along. Private employers could not
complain, as the men would be available to them.
Younger men who have no trade or calling
could be sent to a technical college or other course,
and fitted for a life’s work, and if when qualified
private employment is not available, the same course
could be followed. The main object is to build up
the man; the work and the pay are only secondary.
I know this is directly opposite to the present trend,
but I also know that it is true and right. A
demoralised man is no good either to himself or the
State. To put an extreme case, it is better for a
man to have work and no pay than to have pay and
no work. Ask any primary producer you may
happen to know! If he is a thoughtful man—and he
has had much to make him thoughtful in recent
years—he will tell you that I am perfectly right.
Still others—and they are people whose words
are worthy of notice —tell us that we are fighting
for spiritual things, the right to our own conscience,


to worship and obey God. We are fighting to pre-
vent these things being taken from us, and God for-
bid that we should value these things so lightly as
to be unwilling to sacrifice ourselves to maintain
them. But that is all that military force can do for
us, and if we neglect or reject the source of spiritual
life and power, the author and finisher of our faith,
Jesus Christ, our only Saviour, we shall lose these
things whether we win the war or not. lam not put-
ting forward social honesty and co-operation as a
substitute for the Gospel of salvation in Christ
Jesus. There is no substitute for that. But social
honesty and co-operation is the least common
denominator, that which we can start to put into
practice here and now, at once, and from which we
can go on to higher and nobler living. Here is the
way, I make bold to say, the only available and
practical method for having a life worth living—
Justice, Security so far as that is attainable,
Democracy really working, a New Order of the
highest type, and spiritual life and freedom leading
us on in the path of true progress.


CHAPTER XI.
International (Continued) .
As a matter of history, we are at war with Ger-
many because Germany invaded Poland. Great Bri-
tain and France had pledged themselves to help
Poland with all their forces in case she was attacked.
Germany had a pact with Poland, and Herr Hitler
had assured Mr. Chamberlain, the British Prime
Minister, at Munich, that after the return of the
Sudeten, he would make no further claims in
Europe. So far from keeping his word, he dis-
membered Czecho-Slovakia, taking over intact her
great resources in coal and iron, the great Skoda
munitions factory and arms complete.
This accomplished, he turned his attention to
Poland, making several demands, notably a corridor
through to East Prussia, and the City of Danzig.
While negotiations were still in progress, having
made a secret pact with Russia, he attacked Poland
at several points. At last Great Britain and France
declared war. We entered this war simply to protect
the smaller Powers against aggression from larger
Powers who claimed that their might was their
right. We saw in the last chapter that a number of
things which are being claimed as our objectives in
this war cannot be attained by military power, but
this object to attain which we entered the war can
be attained in no other way, while we have to deal
with nations that disregard international law, their
own voluntary pacts and engagements, and use lies
to confuse and disarm those whom they are prepar-
ing to attack. Better for us to be destroyed as an
Empire and a Democracy than that we should com-
pound with such villainy. All unprepared as we


were, we had to fight or lose our national soul.
Even our bitterest enemies and worst caluminators
have had to admit that wherever Great Britain has
extended her power, she has given liberty and
justice to all alike. On the other hand, the Axis
Powers freely and frankly admit—glorify it as their
“aspiration”—that they intend to exploit the coun-
tries that come under their power. Up to the time
when this is being written they have given ample
demonstration of what this means for all who have
fallen into their power.
Assuming that the Allies win the war and dictate
the terms of peace, how shall such a situation as
this be met so as to give the groundwork, if not the
assurance, of an enduring peace?
The first thing must be to give liberty to all
those nations which have been overrun, even includ-
ing those that have not resisted aggression, or
almost invited it. But it must be a liberty with
limitations. It is a question as to whether those who
neither value nor cherish their liberty are worthy
of it. It is a certainty that those who will not co-
operate with others to retain their liberty should
not expect others to fight their battles for them.
We are in this war, facing the possibility of destruc-
tion, pouring out our national wealth like water,
losing our young and vigorous men, all because the
smaller nations of Europe would not co-operate for
their mutual defence. Had the Balkan countries,
for instance, joined together with Austria, Czecho-
slovakia, and Poland, in a mutual defence bloc,
and loyally stood by one another, not even the
might of Germany would have dared to attack one
of them. Such nations should be given their full
liberty, on one condition only, that is, that they
should honestly co-operate with one another for
their mutual benefit. To those of us looking on this
looks as simple as falling off a log, but when we
consider their mixed populations, religious differences
and political ambitions, it will be seen that it will


take time and patience, and possibly some coercion
to effect. How coercion can be applied to a free
people we will consider later.
The cases of Denmark, Norway, Holland, Bel-
gium and France are not in the same category as
the above. Leaving France aside for the moment,
those countries relied on a neutral attitude as their
security from attack. If they had been dealing
with a country whose word is its bond, this might
have proved well enough so far as immediate self-
preservation goes. As it turned out, it was just
what the enemy needed for their overthrow. It
exposed them to lying and unrestrained propaganda,
spying, organisation and arming of aliens and Quis-
lings, infiltration of “tourists” ready to seize strategic
points, confuse and sabotage the country at the
critical moment, then to sudden attack without
provocation or warning, to their swift undoing. It
is easy to be wise after the event, but surely we can
excuse those countries, steering what they regarded
as the straight course, from providing against such
treachery and villainy on the part of a country
which proclaimed itself as the greatest among
nations. Had those nations taken any action to
protect themselves, it would have been proclaimed
in Germany as an “unfriendly” action and formed
the excuse for attack which Germany was looking
for.
Now all this throws a glaring light on the
position of “neutral” countries. It seems to rule out
the whole idea of neutrality and emphasises the fact
that we are living in one not very big world. Can
a country be neutral when the question is, “Are we
to be governed by our own free Governments or by
nations turned bandits?”
To say you will be neutral in such an issue is
to lay yourself open to the marauder.
If it is argued, that the strong nations should
guarantee the neutrality of the smaller nations, not
only does it open such countries to attack, but


their position is such that it prevents those strong
countries from taking effective measures for their
protection before it is too late. It is only after the
attack has been made on those countries that they
can call others to their aid, and then it is too late
in these swift-moving days. It is evident that if
small countries are to retain their liberty and rea-
sonable security, neutrality is not enough. Honest
co-operation with those countries who believe in
freedom and a decent world to live in is the only
way, and that means giving up nationalism-run-mad.
In the days when the neutrality system was devised
the small countries could defend themselves for
long enough for others to rally to their aid, but that
is no longer possible. A better system to meet the
changed conditions must take its place.
Then what about France Poor France!
Trampled underfoot by the invader and torn by
dissension among her own people, she is indeed a
problem. One thing only is clear, she must be re-
stored to freedom and trusted to make a right use
of it. Perhaps under the stress of what she is pass-
ing through she will recover her national soul
before this war is over. Not so much what the
enemy has done to her as what she has done for
herself makes her case a most distressing problem.
Giving herself up to selfish ease and pleasure, irre-
ligion, gambling and strong drink have robbed her
of her vitality. She has sought the easy way and
has reached the hard way. What a lesson to those
who would follow in her steps!
So, then, when this awful war is over, provided
the Allies win, as we expect and believe they will,
they will then face the task of binding up the
wounds, giving liberty and justice to the oppressed
and such economic conditions to all as will allow of
the rebuilding of the social, religious, economic and
national fife of the whole world, regardless of what
part they have taken—or failed to take—in this
great struggle. This is the task which must be faced


and accomplished, unless we are content to have
this struggle recur until jungle law is uppermost
and civilisation completely destroyed. It looks a
superhuman task—and indeed it is a superhuman
task! Without God’s help and vitalising power we
cannot hope to do it. We can be certain that God,
Who withheld not His own Son, is more than ready
to give us all we need if we are ready and willing
to take it and use it rightly. We cannot expect God
to give us, and keep on giving us, these good things
if we use them for our own destruction. We would
expect an earthly father to have more sense than
to do that with his children!
Assured, then, of God’s help, we can face the
task with confidence, co-operating with Him for the
good of His world, if we will take that for our
object, as it is His.
We have seen in previous chapters that social
honesty and co-operation would save democracy from
its present shortcomings and make it really work,
would put Christians to the task of bringing in the
kingdom of God upon earth, would heal the breach
between employers and employees, lift our politics
to a higher plane, give us a life worth living, make
for justice in every field, give us more security
than anything else can do, make us decent towards
one another, and best of all, lay a groundwork for
that spiritual life without which we shall perish. If
all this is attainable—as it certainly is without any
delay and at no cost that should not be borne—
could not the same principles be carried into our
international relationships with like results? The
answer is that if all the nations would subscribe to
these principles and continue to do so, we could
convert our armaments into the tools and imple-
ments of peace. But while there is one nation pre-
pared to turn bandit, sufficient force will have to
be maintained by those who value peace and liberty
to deal with that nation in the only way that will
influence it, the use of force or coercion in some


form. And that is the fact we have to face and
provide for, no matter what we may think or wish
about it.
We have seen that the League of Nations, as
devised after the first World War, failed because it
could not enforce its mandates or decisions.
Several large nations were not loyal to the League
and preferred power politics, leading to war. The
smaller nations were greedy of their “sovereign
rights” and forgot their responsibilities.
In the face of all this, there are people who
are crying out for a federation of the powers who
want peace. Anyone who remembers the great
difficulty we had to get a federation of the States
of Australia will know how impossible of attain-
ment such an idea is. To advocate it would only
add another to the many things which divide us.
We all value our national freedom just as we do
our individual liberty. And if we are prepared to
treat one another with justice and deal honestly
with one another, there is not the slightest reason
for losing our national standing and liberty. The
British Commonwealth of Nations is united without
the loss of their individual liberty. We take it as
a matter of course that we will stand or fall to-
gether. We are united with a common language,
a common heritage of law and freedom, and one
well-beloved King and Queen. These advantages
would not inhere in a League of Nations co-operat-
ing with one another to maintain their liberty and
effectively stop aggression. The object of such a
League must be to maintain the fullest liberty for
every nation, so long as that liberty does not
infringe upon the rights and liberty of other nations.
Perhaps this objective could be attained in
several ways, but our experience should warn us
that we must provide against several things.
The League we have in mind must not be the
loose construction that the old League was. Those
who join it must be loyal to it and each other, not


merely enjoying its privileges while it suits them
and withdraw if they think they can gain their own
ends by doing so. The League must give great and
evident privileges, but those who join it must not
look upon it as an indulgent father to whom they
can always be crying “give, give,” and accepting no
responsibility for the power to give. That is not the
way in which a home, and the peace of a home, is
maintained. And this earth is the home of the
nations. If having “sovereign rights” means the
right to wrong other nations, then those “sovereign
rights” must either be voluntarily surrendered or
peremptorily denied.
Two men were arguing about liberty, and one
of them, getting excited, exclaimed: “Why! I have
liberty to hit you on the nose!”
“That,” said the other, “is just where you make
the mistake. Your liberty ends where my nose
begins!”
And that is just where the nations have been
making the mistake down through the ages. There
is no longer room on this earth for such foolishness.
How, then, is this foolishness to be stopped?
Our experience shows us that we cannot alto-
gether depend upon pacts—the word—of one another.
Though those that agree to unite for co-operative
action against aggressors must do so of their own
free will, yet it will be necessary to penalise any
one or more of those nations who would turn from
that objective in order to get its own way regardless
of how it would affect others.
It should be part of the pact for co-operation
that any nation withdrawing from the pact, either
in word or deed, should be “sent to Coventry” by
all the rest, without any hesitation or quibbling,
and all trade with that nation cease absolutely till
it was ready to honour its word and stand by its
obligations. If that nation then took up arms to
try to get its own way by force, it should know that
within a few hours, or even minutes, of its doing so


many thousands of aeroplanes would be engaged in
the work of destroying its cities and Government
works. This may seem very drastic, but, if neces-
sary, something very drastic will have to be done,
rather than that we should have a world war every
25 years or so. If one nation were made an example
of, the people of other nations would see to it that
it did not happen to them.
The nations united for co-operative action
would, of course, have an army, navy and air force
sufficient to deal with any position that might arise
from the nations that did not join their League.
This Military Force would be under an unified con-
trol and trained to act together. The studied
objective of this Force should be not the good and
the liberty of one nation only, but the good and the
liberty of all.
In order to have as little cause of friction as
possible, there should be free trade or something
approaching it between all the nations in the
League, a stabilised currency, and a system for
settling disputes that would act quickly and with as
much justice as can be attained by experts freed
from national or political bias. Such men may be
hard to find, but they would be worth their weight
in gold—and then some! And such men can be
found if we are looking for them. The important
point is that any disputes that may arise between
nations or large sections of men should be settled
quickly, before those concerned have time to get
sore about the matter in dispute. To get this result
a few reliable experts, who have devoted themselves
to studying and settling the world’s problems, would
he far better than a legal tribunal. If people have
their minds set on honest dealing and co-operation
between nation and nation, it will be easy to find a
way. Of course the whole weight of the co-operat-
ing States would have to loyally support every
decision made. The experts when making their
decision should never have to think for a moment


of what support they should receive for this or that
decision, but only what would be the best in the
long run for the nations concerned. If they have to
study what power will support them, it will be only
another form of power politics, and that will bring
about a condition in which war will be inevitable.
Honesty and justice alone can give that groundwork
for co-operation which will secure peace among men
of goodwill.
But what about those who believe in war as
the best way to secure their ends? After the exhi-
bition or lesson the Axis countries have given us,
we will not be able—or if we do we will be mad—
to ignore the possibility of nations turning them-
selves into bandit gangs, with the world as a field
for plunder. We do not like to think so ill of
neighbouring nations as to consider it possible for
them to do such a thing. But the fact is, that it has
been done, and that with loud protestations of their
national “aspirations,” their “New Order,” their pacts
of friendship and mutual help, etc., etc., all with a
view to disarming or confusing their victims. How
are we to treat such so that they shall not again
destroy the peace of the world and shed innocent
blood?
After the first World War we made it easy for
such nations to go wrong and hard to do right.
Unless we want to get the same result again we must
reverse that.
Let us look at a few of the things that were done
after the 11th of the 11th month, 1918.
The blockade preventing foodstuffs from enter-
ing the enemy countries was continued for some
time. This probably aroused more bitterness and
hatred in those countries than all they had suffered
during the war. The highest Authority, the Prince
of Peace, has laid it down: “If thine enemy hunger,
feed him.” Of course this does not mean that we
are to send butter to the enemy while he would


use it to make high explosives and use them to
blow us to pieces. But it does mean that if we are
to lay a foundation for a lasting peace we must
treat the enemy who has laid down his arms with
justice and some consideration. If we do that it
should convince him that we have not been fighting
either to obtain or maintain an injustice. Great
Britain has done this in many parts of the world with
great success, converting enemies into friends and
loyal citizens of the Empire.
Then the Rhine lands were occupied, and when
the time came for withdrawal under the Treaty, the
occupation was continued another cause for
resentment.
An indemnity was imposed, to be paid in cash,
which all the cash in the world would not have paid!
We would not accept the indemnity in goods because
that would have meant unemployment for our own
people. More cause of ill-feeling.
Later, when the farmers of Australia were re-
ceiving 1/6J per bushel for their wheat, the people
in Germany were paying over 11/- per bushel and
the people of Italy about 7/6 —an injustice to both
the producer and the consumer. This came about
through the policy of national self-sufficiency—and
Australia was a ring-leader in establishing that
policy. And, of course, that policy extended to many
other things besides wheat, and was one of the
causes of the world depression.
Is it any wonder that in such a hot-bed of
frustration and discontent, with a sense of defeat
and loss of faith in God and man, the Germans
listened to the voice of Hitler and submitted them-
selves to the yoke of Nazism, with its promise of
national liberty for Germans everywhere and world
domination as the crown of their efforts? Surely
one does not need to point out that the results as
we now know them are the natural working out of
cause and effect. Do we want the same effects


again? If not, we must see to it that we remove
the causes. If we win, as we hope and expect to
do, it will lie in our hands chiefly what we shall
work to produce in the future, war or peace. One
thing is certain, if we are so mad—or bad—as to
work for war, then we had better prepare for it
with the same method and self-sacrifie as the
Germans did!
If our leaders, Mr. Churchill and President
Roosevelt, at their meeting in the Atlantic, really
expressed our mind and objectives in the eight
points they declared to be our war aims, then we
are for peace. It will be well for us to keep these
eight points well in mind not only to inspire us dur-
ing the war, but to put into effect when the war is
over. Briefly, they are:
1. We seek no aggrandisement.
2. No territorial changes except by the will of
those concerned.
3. The right of all peoples to choose their own
form of Government, with sovereign rights. (This
is all right provided we keep the other fellow’s nose
well in view and respect his “sovereign right” to it!)
4. The right of all States, little or big, victor
or vanquished, of access on equal terms to trade in
the raw materials of the world. (To implement this,
a world order of money and exchange will be neces-
sary, and to get that the strong nations will have
to help the weak.)
5. The fullest co-operation between all nations
for improved labour conditions, economic advance-
ment and social security. (This will mean inter-
national planning of wbat should be produced and
where, for the good of all nations and all classes of
men.)
6. Hope to establish a peace which will afford
to all nations the means of dwelling with safety


within their own boundaries ... in freedom from fear
and want.
7. That such a peace should enable all men to
traverse the high seas and the oceans without
hindrance.
8. The abandonment of the use of force, the
disarmament of nations that threaten aggression,
and the lightening of the burden of armaments.
These last three objectives are not only good,
but necessary if we are not to have a self-destroying
world, but a world worth living in. But they will
only remain an aspiration unless, as nations, we deal
honestly with one another and co-operate to attain
them.
As it is neither practicable nor desirable that a
sufficient body of nations would federate to be able
to attain these objectives, it will be necessary for
all those nations who believe in them, while retain-
ing their national independence, to co-operate loyally
to attain them.
As quick and decisive action in an emergency
is necessary, a small body representative of the co-
operating nations would make the decision, to stop
all trade with the offending nation or to use military
force.
In the same way the international military force
or forces would need to have a unified head and co-
ordinated supply. An overwhelming air force would
be the mainstay of such a force because it could
strike at any point on the earth’s surface within a
few hours, or, at most, days, of deciding upon action.
Once more this may seem very drastic to the
pacifist, but surely it is better than that the world
should be killing off all the best of its young man-
hood every 25 years or so. If all reasonable means
will not prevent a man from demanding “your
money or your life,” the law of self-preservation
demands that you be a split second quicker on the


draw than he is. To allow him to shoot you will
not bring peace to the world, whatever it might
do for you! And if the portion of the world which
desires peace has not learned the lesson of never
allowing a strong and warlike nation to build up
military power and equipment till it has got “the
drop” on them, not taking adequate measures to
meet such a situation, then this war will have been
fought in vain, and will be but the prelude to the
war which will put the world at the mercy of the
gangster nations. Their study is not how to bring
in the rule of right, but how to overcome any defects
which prevented their success previously.


CHAPTER XII.
Personal.
Let the writer close with a short heart-to-heart
talk with the reader.
The great issue which is being decided in the
world to-day, not only in the military but in every
other sphere, is this: Shall we have freedom under
democratic rule or shall we have compulsion under
some form of totalitarian government? That is the
issue, and until it is decided, there is little hope for
peace in the world. Let me ask you, my reader,
very earnestly, on which side are you. lam not
going to ask you to tell me in words, rather I am
going to ask you to choose liberty and work it out
in deeds of social honesty and co-operation with
all who wish and work for a fuller life under
better circumstances. I have tried to put the facts
before you, so far as I could, in limited space. These
facts touch you at some point, and that is just
where you count for something. When your time
comes to leave this world, as come it will, you will
leave it either better or worse because you have
lived in it. My hope is that this book will have
shown you a little more clearly how you can make
your life tell in the direction making for peace and
prosperity—your own peace and prosperity, and.
bound up with it, the peace and prosperity of your
fellowmen.
Perhaps at first you will think that there is
little more that you can do than what you have been
doing.
Possibly you have almost, or altogether, uncon-
sciously been doing in your own sphere what this
book advocates. My hope is that for the future you


will do it of set purpose and with fixed determination,
seeing the end in view.
It may be that some of those who read this
book are laid aside from the active work of life.
Even so, you can lend this book to others or give it
to a library or School of Arts. “Cast thy bread upon
the waters” —social honesty and co-operation is the
bread the world needs. If this be taken and assimi-
lated the world will have life and peace; without
them, war, dissension and destruction is, and will be,
our lot.
The writer has not written this book for per-
sonal gain, but to give the world the results of more
than twelve years of intensive study, induced by
the problem of the man on the land—how to live on
almost nothing, and sometimes less than nothing (in
money), while others lived and made money on what
he produced! The glaring wrong and wicked injus-
tice of this is plain for all to see, yet no one seems
to have thought of the remedy, while very many
regard it as the normal thing, closing their eyes to
the fact that it cannot last. Social honesty and co-
operation will put this right; and would be equally
effective to cure the wrongs which caused dissension,
strife and war. These things cannot be cured by
Acts of Parliament. The best that even a success-
ful war can do is to give us an opportunity to cure
them. Each war makes it harder to apply the
remedy. The only remedy that can meet the whole
situation is social honesty and co-operation. And
the only people who can apply that remedy are
ordinary folk engaged in the world’s work, such as
you and I. It will cost us something, but not nearly
so much as war, class dissension, industrial unrest,
and Church disunity are costing us now. Will you
be true to the best that is in you and tackle your
part of the job and never let up till there is peace
on earth and goodwill amongst men? I know this
remedy acts because I have tried it.
