

1847.
No. 11.
ORDINANCE enacted by the Governor of South Australia , with the advice
and consent of the Legislative Council thereof.
For the Encouragement of Public Education.
[yith August, 1847.]
BE IT ENACTED by the Governor of South Australia,
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
thereof—
That it shall be lawful for the Governor, from time to time,
by notice published in the South Australian Government Gazette ,
to appoint any number of Persons, not less than Three nor exceeding
Five, to constitute a Board of Education, which Board, or any Three
members thereof shall have power, subject to and with the approval
of the Governor, by publication in the South Australian Government
Gazette , to make such regulations as shall be proper for giving effect
to this Ordinance, and the same from time to time in like manner to
vary, alter, and revoke.
11. And
Board of Education.


Governor may autho-
rxZhei 6alaueB
Proviso.
Premium forprofessed
Teachers.
Proviso.
Lists and returns to
be made of the at-
tendance.
Proviso,
11. And be it Enacted, that whenever it shall be certified to the
Governor by the Parents or Guardians of not less than Twenty
Children between the respective ages of Six and Sixteen, that they are
desirous to place such Children under the tuition of a Teacher to be
named by them, with their residences and a description of the
place where the School is proposed to be kept, and it shall also
be certified by at least One Justice of the Peace, that he knows the
residences of such Persons to be as stated by them, that such
Teacher is known to him as a person of moral habits, and every way
fit to undertake the care and instruction of Children, and that
proper accommodation has been provided for the said School, it shall
be lawful for the Governor, subject to such regulations for the
due application thereof as may be made by the Governor, to authorise
the payment to any such Teacher of a Salary at a rate not exceeding
Twenty pounds per annum for the first Twenty Scholars, and not
exceeding One pound per annum in addition for every additional
Scholar above Twenty attending the School: Provided that no
amount shall, to any One person, be paid in virtue of this provision,
exceeding Forty pounds in any One year.
111. And be it Enacted, that whenever it shall be made to appear
by testimonials or otherwise to the satisfaction of the said Board, that
any Teacher is by character, attainments, and in all other respects
qualified for the profession of instructing in the higher Branches, it
shall be lawful for the Governor, on the report of any Three
Members of the said Board, to authorise the issue to such Teacher,
of a premium at the rate of One pound per annum for and in respect
of every Scholar actually instructed by such Teacher in the higher
Branches, over and above a Salary at the rate of One pound per
annum for every Scholar attending his instructions, of any age above
Six years, and in any Branches of Education: Provided there be not
less than Twenty Scholars in all so attending ; and that no such pay-
ment shall exceed in the whole One hundred pounds per annum,
which shall be the maximum amount payable to any Teacher under
this Ordinance.
IV. And be it Enacted, that every Teacher shall keep a Book
showing the names and daily attendance of the Scholars at each such
School; and on the last day ot every month shall prepare a nominal
return or list, showing the actual attendance of such Scholars during
the month and the branches in which they have been respectively
taught which return or list shall be verified by the declaration of such
Teacher before some Justice of the Peace to be true and correct and for-
warded to the Colonial Secretary, before payment shall be made of
any Salary under this Ordinance: Provided always, that no Scholar
shall be deemed to be in regular attendance at such School, or taken
into account for the purposes of reckoning the amount of Salary,
unless


unless such Scholar shall have attended at least Twenty days in
every month for which salary is claimed: Provided also, that a
Day’s attendance shall be not less than Five hours at the School:
Provided also that all Holidays and Play-hours approved by regu-
lation of the Board, shall be reckoned as attendance.
V. Provided always, and be it Enacted, that such proof shall
be produced to the Governor as he from time to time shall require of
the sufficient and regular performance of the duties in respect of which
such Salaries shall be respectively issued; and if it shall appear to
the Governor that the said duties have been culpably or wilfully
neglected, or that there has been any Misconduct on the part of
the Teacher it shall be lawful for the Governor to withdraw the
Salary entirely, or for such time as to him shall seem proper.
VI. And be it Enacted, that it shall be lawful for all Her
Majesty’s’s Justices of the Peace, and for any other Persons, being
appointed by Her Majesty, or by the Governor in the name and on
behalf of Her Majesty, as Visitors or Inspectors of any such School,
to enter any such School at all reasonable hours in the day, for the
purpose of inspecting and examining the State and Condition of the
School and the Scholars thereat, and of making such Report thereon
to Government as they or any of them may deem fit; and every such
Teacher shall, on being desired, exhibit to any such Justice, Visitor,
or Inspector, the Books and Returns required to be kept by this
Ordinance, and shall afford all necessary information respecting
the same.
VII. And be it Enacted, that all Reports made by the Board,
and by any Visitors or Inspectors under this Ordinance, together with
full and true Statements and Accounts of all sums of Money paid
under the authority of the same, shall be, by the Governor, laid before
the Legislative Council, as soon as may be, after the then next as-
sembling thereof.
VIII. And be it Enacted, that in all Schools kept by any Teacher
deriving benefit under this Ordinance, there shall be held at least
Once in every year an Oral examination of the Scholars as to their
progress and proficiency, which examination the Public shall be in-
vited to attend by notice of at least Seven days, published by the
Teacher in at least One of the Newspapers circulating in the Province.
IX. And be it Enacted, that the word “ Guardian” shall be con-
strued to include any Friend having the charge of Children ;
“ Teacher” shall be construed to include Schoolmaster and School-
mistress; and the term “Higherßranches” to include the Mathematics,
Classics, and such other Sciences, Languages, and Branches of
Education, as shall from time to time be declared by Regulation of
the Board.
X. And
Proviso,
Proviso.
Proof to be required
of due performance
of duty by the
Teachers.
Yisitation of School*.
Regulations, reports,
and accounts to be
laid before the Legis-
lature.
Examination of
Scholars.
Construction;


Commencement.
X. And be it Enacted, that this Ordinance shall commence and
take effect from and after the passing hereof, except as to the issue
of Public Moneys, which shall commence from and after the First
day of April next.
FREDK. H. ROBE,
Lieutenant Governor.
Passed the Legislative Council this Seventeenth
day of August , One thousand eight hundred
and forty-seven.
W. L. O’Halloran,
Clerk of Council.
SCHEDULE


No.
Names of Children.
Age.
No. of Days each
attended daring the
Month.
Branches taught.
No. of Scholars.
Elementary.
Higher Branches.
•
•
►
*
I
. /
•
MEMORANDUM OF VISITS.
■
Date.
Name of Magistrate, Visitor, or Inspector.
'
SCHEDULE.
FORM OF SCHOOL RETURN.
Name of Teacher. —District or Place.
Date —From to
NOMINAL RETURN OF SCHOLARS.
I hereby declare that the Children whose names are stated in
the above Return actually attended my School during the period
above specified, on the number of days set opposite their names
respectively ; that the above Magistrates (Visitors or Inspectors, as
the case may he) visited the School on the respective dates set
opposite their names ; and that the foregoing is a true extract from
my Book, kept in terms of Ordinance No. 11, 1847.
Signature of Teacher.
Declared before me at
this day of IB
•Signature of Magistrate.
Adelaide : Printed by authority by John Stephens, Hindley-street.


