

FORBIDDEN
FILMS . . .
"MILLIONS OF US."


TRADE UNION FILM BANNED
The film, “MILLIONS OF US,” has been banned by the Commonwealth Film
Censor.
“MILLIONS OF US” is listed by the authoritative American publication,
“Educational Film Guide” as an educational film, suitable for use in senior high
schools, colleges, adult education groups, and film forums, as a film which tells
“the story of millions of unemployed exemplified by a young man who is driven by
hunger to take employment as a scab, and the experiences that lead him to
recognise his common interests with the strikers and the working people
generally.”
“MILLIONS OP US” was made in 1936 during the depression in U.S.A. by
American Labor Films, Inc., a group of sincere Hollywood technicians, directors,
and actors, working in early mornings and week-ends.
This film, which is nothing more than an elementary introduction to the
principle of trade unionism, has been banned for Australians, who once led
the world in the struggle for trade union organisation.
If it is now forbidden to propagate trade union principles through the
medium of films, the question arises: How soon will it be “verboten” to do so
in speech and writing?
We cannot remain indifferent to this new attack on our freedom.
Every effort must be made, not only by members of trade unions, but by every
ordinary citizen, to secure a reversal of this decision of the Commonwealth
Film Censor.
Protests should be sent to the Commonwealth Film Censor in Sydney, to
the Minister for Trade and Customs in Canberra, to other Federal Ministers
and Members of Parliament, and letters should be written to the daily press
and the trade union papers.
ATOM BOMB FILM WITHDRAWN
Another educational film, entitled “WHERE WILL YOU HIDE?”, was
imported from the U.S.A. by the State Film Centre this year.
Produced by the Audiographic Institute, U.S.A., and distributed widely in
the U.S.A. by the reputablef firm of Encyclopedia Britannica, Ltd., this film
shows the incalculable devastation which would inevitably follow if a third
world war were allowed to start, and atom bombs, radio-active dust, and bac-
teriological poisons were unleashed against civilian populations.
“WHERE WILL YOU HIDE?” makes a personal appeal to every member of
the audience to make himself familiar with world issues of the day and to
play an active part'in the campaign for peace through support of the United
Nations Charter.
Passed by the Commonwealth Film Censor for general exhibition, “WHERE
WILL YOU HIDE?” was screened by the State Film Centre in a number of
country towns in Victoria before being released for use in Melbourne and the
metropolitan area.
On the very day after its Melbourne preview in the presence of representa-
tives of the press and various film-using bodies, the Victorian Documentary
Films Council—the State Government Committee which controls the policy
of the State Film Centre—met and decided to withdraw the film.
No official statement has been made on the reasons for the withdrawal of
the film, and citizens’ protests have been met with the insolent claim that no
organisation which borrows films from the State Film Centre has a right to
protest, since it has signed an agreement recognising the legal right of the
State Film Centre to withdraw a film at any time.
One might as well say that once a government is elected, voters have no
right to criticise its actions!
Protests about this case of political censorship of films should be forwarded
to the Documentary Film Council, 110 Victoria St., Carlton, N. 3, Melbourne, to
the Chief Secretary, Parliament House, Melbourne, and also to individual mem-
bers of Parliament and to the daily and trade union papers.


IRON CURTAIN DESCENDS ON THE SCREEN
The cases of “MILLIONS OF US" and "WHERE WILL YOU HIDE?” are but
two examples of many that could be given to show that the increasing assaults
on working-class organisations, and on those who are working for peace, are
now taking the form of stifling freedom of expression—in the film, even more
viciously than in any other medium.
Of 400 feature films imported into Australia last year, 90 were slashed by
the Commonwealth Censor, and one (the British production, “NO ROOM AT
THE INN”) was banned outright.
How many of the Censor’s cuts were intended to protect our morals, and how
many were designed to prevent us from thinking “dangerous thoughts,” the
public is not permitted to know.
Commercial films which. do get into the country are even then subject to
censorship by the film trade. Prints of such Hollywood films as “MISSION TO
MOSCOW” and “GRAPES OP WRATH” have been destroyed by the Australian
distributing agencies. An interesting example of trade censorship is that of
the British film, “FAME IS THE SPUR,” which was withdrawn from Hoyts’
circuits during the miners’ strike of 1949.
Documentary films which might remind us of the anti-fascist aims of world
war 2, or of the debt we owe our Soviet ally, are being withdrawn from circula-
tion by the governments responsible for their distribution. Canada has with-
drawn “INSIDE FIGHTING RUSSIA,” which tells of the faith which inspires
the Soviet people, and “GUILTY MEN,” which reminds us of the crimes of
the Nazi and Japanese war leaders. The U.S.A.. has withdrawn “BATTLE OP
RUSSIA,” an official U.S. Government tribute to Soviet military achievements
during world war 2, and “REUNION,” which shows some of the atrocities com-
mitted by the Nazis in their concentration camps. The British Government
has withdrawn a number of films which recall war-time solidarity with the
U.S.S.R.
And what of the films which never reach Australia, because the commercial
exhibitors are not interested in screening them—films from U.S.A., France,
Italy, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, China, and U.S.S.R., films whose themes
are reconstruction after the devastation of war, and the work of these peoples
in the struggle for peace?
It is clear that big business, which is well aware of the tremendous propa-
ganda value of the cinema, and uses it without hindrance for anti-union, anti-
Soviet, and pro-war propaganda on an enormous scale, is determined to prevent
even the smallest use of this powerful weapon in the interests of peace and
freedom.
WHAT CAN WE DO?
Is there nothing we can do about this, apart from voicing our protests?
Yes. We can do something to break the monopoly of big business. We can
import our own films.
Already we have acted to break the local bureaucratic ban on the atom bomb
film, “WHERE WILL YOU HIDE?” by ordering our own print from U.S.A. We
are also negotiating for feature films from various European countries.
Just how much success we can achieve in the direction of importing our own
films depends on your financial support. Even so small a sum as £5OO will
enable us to build a valuable nucleus of worthwhile films, and make an impor-
tant challenge to big business, with all its millions.
You may ask how we can hope to get our films past the Censor.
We would point out that the Realist Film Association, unlike commercial
importers, or weak-kneed public servants, is determined to drag into the spot-
light of publicity any political censorship of its importations, and to mobilise
public protest against any such action.
Accustomed to working behind the scenes, the censors have capitulated when
faced with public opposition. In 1937 the ban on “TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK
THE WORLD” was beaten; in 1948 public protest defeated the films bill in
Victoria. It can be done.


Above is a still from "THE LAST STAGE/' the Polish feature film
for which Realist Film Association has already placed an order.
Writing in "Masses and Mainstream," Warren Miller describes this
as "the most compelling and powerful film since OPEN CITY; as a
documentation of the meaning of fascism, it is unsurpassed.
"THE LAST STAGE" was filmed on location at Auschwitz, the con-
centration camp where four and a half million human beings were
put to death by the Nazis; most of the women who play in the film
had been prisoners at the camp, as were the director and scenarist.
The story centres on a group of women, nurses and attendants at
the prison infirmary; here, where the suffering come for release,
the heart of resistance locates itself and begins to grow. For the
film's tremendous power lies not alone in its picture of horror, but
also in its evocation of hope. "THE LAST STAGE" won the prize
for the best film of any nationality at the third Czech international
film festival.
We hope also to import another Polish film, "BORDER STREET,"
which tells the story of the unforgettable heroism of the Jews of the
Warsaw Ghetto. From the U.S.A. we want to import "STRANGE
VICTORY," which shows how fascism, thought to be destroyed in
World War 11, threatens to gain a victory in the "democracies," and
"THE QUIET ONE." the story of a negro child—victim of racial
prejudice. From France we want to get the resistance film, "BATTLE
OF THE RAILROAD," from China a film of a great people's revolu-
tion, "DAUGHTERS OF CHINA."
AND SO ON. IT ALL DEPENDS ON YOU.
