

FORBEARANCE,
THE DIVJNEL Y - ORDAINED MODE OF PRESERV-
ING UNITY IN THE CHURCH.
SUBSTANCE OF SPEECH
IN THE
PRESBYTERIAN ASSEMBLY
ON THE
MAEEIAGE QUESTION.
WITH APPENDIX.
REV. ANDREW ROBERTSON,
WEST MELBOURNE.
ROBERT MACKAY, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1873.
Price Threepence.




/ pC4^7O
OEBEAEAN CE,
THE DIVINELY-ORDAINED MODE OF PRESERVING UNITY IN
THE CHURCH.
SUBSTANCE OF SPEECH
IN THE
PRESBYTERIAN ASSEMBLY ON THE MARRIAGE QUESTION.
REV. ANDREW ROBERTSON.
<*»
<r*
1
Moderator,
I think it may be of advantage to the debate that I rise
thus early to address you. A great deal of the discussion might
have been spared, had the question at issue been only rightly
understood. There is no wish whatever on our part to alter the
standards of the Church. We are satisfied with the Confession as it
stands; but as differences of opinion exist as to the Scripturalness
of marriage with a deceased wife’s sister, what is pled for is simply
forbearance amongst brethren. But supposing we did really desire
to alter or modify the standards, what offence, I ask, could there
be in this 1 Is there anything so sacred about the Westminster
Confession of Faith that it cannot be touched, disparaged, or
interfered with in the smallest degree 1 Mark what has been said
of this same Confession by those who profess to be so much attached
to it. Let us begin with the Convener of the Committee, whose
report has just been laid upon the table. In a speech delivered
in the Free Chui’ch Assembly in Edinburgh, the Rev. Dr. Cameron
spoke thus:—“l make bold to say that if Dr. Begg, and Dr,
Gibson, and Dr. Miller, had lived in the days of our fathers, they
would not have been allowed to sign the Confession of Faith, on
their understanding of it. (Loud applause.) Faithful men though
they reckon themselves, they would not have been allowed to
enter the Church of Scotland as ministers. (Continued applause.)
I venture to say further that if Alexander Henderson, and George
Gillespie, and Samuel Rutherford, and Robert Baillie, were living
in these days, Dr. Gibson, Dr. Begg, and Dr. Miller, with their
views, would not allow them to come, as ministers, into this Free
Church of ours. (Loud applause.) And I say, yet further, that
if, in 1846, when the Act prefixed to the formula was passed,
declaring the understanding of the Church as to the teaching of
the Confession on the subject of liberty of conscience, if at that
time any single minister or member of Assembly had held the


good old persecuting doctrine, he would have been as much entitled
as Dr. Gibson was yesterday to come and lay a protest on the
table of the house —(loud applause)—against their even proceed-
ing to consider that Act—(continued applause)—and would have
quite as good a right, in virtue of that protest, to lay claim to the
whole property of the Free Church. (Enthusiastic and prolonged
applause.) While I say all this, I have no desire—none in the
slightest—to insist on our friends understanding that twentieth
chapter as I understand it. I have no doubt, for the reasons
stated, that our fathers meant it to teach intolerance, and per-
sonally my belief is that they succeeded in carrying out that
intention—that intolerance is in the chapter, not only as histori-
cally interpreted, but even as grammatically construed. But lam
far from insisting that our friends should admit that. If they
leave me free to hold my view, I leave them entirely free to hold
theirs. (Hear, hear.) There have been men of name and note
among us, who, refusing to look at the historical associations of
the chapter, have held that, apart from these, it cannot be proved
to be, in its own terms, incapable of a tolerant construction. By
all means let our friends hold that, if they see their way to it.
But don’t let them seek to abridge the liberty, and even to impugn
the good faith, of those who take the opposite view, and that the
view of our fathers, of the very men by whom the Confession was
drawn. Don’t let them forget that it is their own interpretation
of that twentieth chapter that is the novel interpretation, requir-
ing to have allowance made for it. (Hear, hear.) And if
allowance is made for them as to that, don’t let us find them
refusing to make similar allowance for others in like connections.
(Hear, hear.)”
Here, in the above quotations, the Convener of your Com-
mittee uses no mincing terms in describing the character of the
Confession, which we forsooth are not to touch, while he pleads
for forbearance for himself in language which might even move
this court, were I to use it for myself and my brethren who agree
with me.*
Turn, now, for refreshment to the great leader of the Free
Church of Scotland, over whose recent death all Christendom
mourns, and hear what fell from his noble lips:—“lf this matter,”
says Dr. Candlish, “ is pressed so far as to make men feel that we
insist upon the recognition of the lawfulness of civil establish-
ments of religion, in the ordinary sense of the term, as being essen-
tial to office in this Church—if that shall come to be the mind of
this Church, or a majority of the Church, and if union is arrested
upon that ground, why, then, I agree with Dr. Buchanan—and I
speak from pretty extensive personal knowledge of the younger
ministers and office-bearers of our Church —that they will not
consent to be members of a church that takes up that position.
* Appendix (A).


(Load applause.) More than that, sir ; I myself, strongly as I
hold still the principle of the lawfulness, and in some cases the
propriety of civil establishments of religion, I would have very
great hesitation indeed in continuing to belong to a church which
at this time of day made that a term of communion, (Prolonged
applause.)”
But still more to the point is the passage which occurs in his address
—alas! for the last time—to the Assembly he so much adorned : —“ I
am not desirous of excluding (he said) from the Church those who
believe that the doctrine of a national establishment of religion is
within the four corners of the Confession; but I will not consent
to exclude from this Church, as a branch of the living Church of
Christ, those who are conscientiously of opinion that that doctrine
is not within the four corners of the Confession. (Loud cheers.)
Here would be my difficulty—a difficulty not pressing upon my
own conscience, for I hold the principle of a national establishment
of religion, and the perfect lawfulness, and in certain circumstances
the duty, of the State to acknowledge and endow the Church of
Christ as an Established Church ; but if it were declared, either
directly or by inevitable implication, that all office-bearers, whether
now in the Church or henceforth to enter it, were bound to
acknowledge, or to hold and avow, that that doctrine of the civil
establishment of religion is in the standards, and that doubt or
even denial of the proposition that that doctrine is in the standards
were to exclude these office-bearers from the Church —that might
not drive me out directly, for I hold the doctrine of establishments,
and Ido think our standards give some countenance to it; but I
am by no means clear that I could continue to be a minister or
member of a church constituted upon the footing of declaring that
the Westminster Standards embrace the principle of a national
establishment of religion, and that none who doubt or deny that
could hold office within her pale. (Applause.) That cuts pretty
deep. It is not a matter of feeling, or of sentiment, or of brother-
hood, but it cuts deep, because I hold it to be a matter of Christian
principle—l shall not say of Christian charity even —but I hold it
to be unlawful for any Church to insert as a term of office what is
not absolutely essential as declared in the Word of God. (Hear,
hear.)” Such were the latest, ripest utterances of this truly great
and distinguished man, and which utterances, I am sure, will do
more than almost anything else that ever came from him to embalm
his memory in the heart of “ the Church of the Future.”
Take another man of mark, the Rev. Dr. Buchanan, the author
of the Ten Years' Conflict, and who may be regarded as the
ecclesiastical statesman of the Free Church of Scotland, whose
history he so ably narrates. Was he afraid to meddle with the
Confession, or to qualify its statements'? Pi’evious to the Dis-
ruption in 1843, the Westminster Confession was taken by the
ministei’s of the Establishment without any qualification what-
ever, but in 1846 the Free Church deemed it imperative to pass a


Declaratory Act, but for which Act Dr. Cameron could never have
become a Free Church minister.
As Dr. Buchanan explained to the Assembly of 1870, that Act
became suitable and necessary in view of those proceedings of the
courts of law sanctioned by the Legislature and by the Crown,
which produced the disruption. “In the Act in question,” Dr.
Buchanan continues, “ our Church declared, and continues to
declare, that she disclaims intolerant or persecuting principles,
and does not regard her Confession of Faith, or any portion of it,
when fairly interpreted, as favouring intolerance or persecution.
But the very fact (continues Dr. Buchanan) of having found it
necessary to frame a Declaratory Act on the subject is the best
and strongest of all proof that a good deal could be said on the
other side. If any of them should happen to think that the inter-
pretation which rids the Confession of the charge of favouring
intolerance and persecution is not the natural one—is an inter-
pretation in the correctness of which they themselves could hardly
concur—they can now, at least, take refuge in the fact that the
Church does not consider them, in subscribing the Confession, as
giving in their adhesion to any -principle of a persecuting or
intolerant kind. If any one (I am still quoting Dr. Buchanan ;
and here this master in Israel lets out his own opinion on the
matter) if any one will calmly and candidly read over the
fourth section of the 20th chapter of the Confession of Faith,
whei-e is laid down, ‘ That for publishing opinions contrary
to the power of godliness, or destructive to the external peace and
order of the Church, any one may be lawfully called to account
and proceeded against, not merely by the censure of the Church
but by the power of the civil magistrate,’ he will, I am sure, if he
be an office-bearer of the Free Church, be very thankful for the
Declaratoxy Act of 1846.”
It is true, as has been stated, this Act declares that the Con-
fession, fairly interpreted, does not favour intolerance or persecu-
tion ; but this is not the interpretation put upon the Confession
by Dr. Cameron and those who go along with him. But this
Declaratory Act enables them to subscribe the Confession, in
consequence of the Free Church having undertaken to declare that
the meaning Dr. Cameron and others attach to it is not the
meaning in which they are called to sign it. Another cele-
brated name has been mentioned in this debate—Dr. Hodge, of
America. He has been spoken of as facile princeps among divines,
and certainly no more sober-minded theologian ever adorned
America, or any other country. And how does this eminent, this
J'acile princeps divine treat the Confession 1 Without ceremony or
scruple, he and his brethren have excluded an entire chapter of
the Confession, the 23rd, which now forms no part of the West-
minster Confession as received by the American Church to which
Dr. Hodge belongs. What offence therefore, I repeat, would we
be guilty of, supposing we moved an altex-ation iix the standards, or


such a Declaratory Act as the Free Church of Scotland has so
wisely adopted 1 *
But, as I have said, we have no such intentions. We are per-
fectly prepared to allow the standards to remain as they are, and
even to allow the Assembly to interpret them in a sense to which
even we cannot accede. All that we contend for is freedom to
hold the belief that marriage with a deceased wife’s sister is not
contrary to the Word of God, and that, holding this belief, we
shall be at liberty to act in accordance with the same ; in other
words, we seek that the question may be left an open one in the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
We have already given the opinions of Dr.'Candlish, as to the
making the establishment principle a matter of forbearance in the
Free Church at home. Let us now listen to what came from the
venerable Dr. Duff, who, from the Moderator’s chair at the last
memorable meeting of the Assembly, spoke to his brethren in the
following pregnant, weighty words: —“l have come to the conclusion
that the divine and divinely-ordained Scriptural way of dealing with
all differences of judgment on all disputed points whatsoever,
excepting the grand fundamental doctrines essential to salvation,
or such as necessarily include or involve these doctrines, is to be
found in the exercise of mutual, friendly, brotherly forbear-
ance under the influence of God-like charity”—a conclusion very
much akin to that of Dr. Candlish, who holds it to be unlawful
for any church to insert as a term of office what is not absolutely
essential as declared in the Word of God.f
Such is the conclusion to which these veterans in the Free
Church have been led in divine providence to come, and such
we believe to be the grand lesson which God is now teaching the
Church, both in Victoria and Scotland, and throughout the world
at large. Forbearance is not a human device, but a broad Chris-
tian principle laid down in the New Testament Scriptures for the
guidance of the Church in all times ; and never was its exercise
more needed than in the infant Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
There is little or no hope whatever for its future progress and
success but in adopting the Bible principle of forbearance.
Look at its position, surrounded by churches, in which not only
forbearance is practised, but in which such views as those which
are held by Drs. Cairns and Cameron can hardly be said to receive
a shadow of recognition or support. Take the Church of England;
its Bishop has pronounced for forbearance in terms which do him
honour. Take the Wesleyan body; its laity are not opposed to
such marriages as those which Dr. Cairns condemns, while its
clergy are, with almost a single exception, in favour of them.
So with the Baptists; their board in London see nothing in such
marriages opposed to the Word of God. The Rev. Mr. Martin, of
* Appendix (F).
f Appendix (E).


this city, a scholar and divine, informs me that the most active
member in his congregation in England had formed a union of
this description. The Rev. Mr. Henderson, probably the best-
read man in philosophy and theology amongst us, is, in his senti-
ments, a fair representative of the Nonconformists of England;
and what was their reply to the Rev. Dr. Charles Brown’s address,
sent specially to them from Scotland, to warn them on this subject.
A deputation, headed by the Rev. T. Binney, representing 4000
Nonconformist ministers, requesting the Archbishop of Canter-
bury to advocate the legalisation of these marriages in the House
of Lords. Look, moreover, to your own Presbyterian Churches in
the colonies. In South Australia forbearance is already exercised.
The Rev. Mr. Davidson, from the Free Church of Scotland,
honourably allied to the late Hugh Miller, has, at this moment, an
elder officiating in his church, who is married to his deceased
wife’s sister. In New South Wales, where I have lately been, I
found the leading minds in the Presbyterian Church startled at
the very idea of the Victorian Church not making this question a
matter of forbearance.* Indeed, it is impossible for me to con-
ceive how the Presbyterian Church'of Victoria can preserve not
merely its unity, but its existence, without having recourse-to for-
bearance, not on the ground of expediency, but of high Christian
principle.
But it may be said I have not yet entered on the real merits of
the question; but it was never, and is not now, any part of my
argument to contend for marriage with a deceased wife’s sister.
My own belief is that the scholarship and the theology of Christen-
dom, with our foremost legislators and lawyers,! are clearly on
the side of the lawfulness of such marriages ; but no matter
what side may be taken now, what I maintain is, you cannot
preserve the unity of the Church, nor secure its progress and
success, but by making this an open question. Presbyterian
minds are surely not so constituted as to run for ever into one
groove. The church that has no ministers nor members but
those who cling to one view of this question, is not a church
in which independence or freedom of thought is cherished, and no
church which would attempt to crush out this independence and
freedom can possibly survive.
Without, however, going into what is called the merits of this
question as a question of interpretation, which does not affect my
plea for toleration, I have now, in the presence of this Assembly,
to protest against the monstrous exaggerations which have been
put forth with regard to the views on this marriage question
which I, in common with many of my brethren, entertain. These
exaggerations may arise from passion or prejudice, or it may be
from ignorance; but in what respect, I ask, do I differ in my
* Appendix (B).
f Appendix (C).


views of the marriage question from my revered father, Dr.
Cairns ? There is not a prohibited degree in Leviticus, growing
out either of consanguinity or affinity, which I do not abide by as
closely and conscientiously as Dr. Cairns; and if I do not class
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister as one of these, it is from
the same regard to the Word of God as that which leads Dr.
Cairns to hold the reverse. As to the Confession of Faith, I have
no fault to find with it. It leaves this question, in my humble
opinion, an open one. The law or principle laid down, that “ the
man may not marry any of his wife’s kindred nearer in blood than
he may of his own,” I do not object to. It is not this law which
determines the classes of marriage forbidden in Scripture; it is
the classes specified that have led to the rule laid down in the
Confession. But I contend that as every general rule may
have exceptions, so this one has. The Confession does not give
any decision upon exceptional cases. The Westminster divines
weighed their quotations from Scripture, as well as the propositions
they were intended to support, but there is no reference to mar-
riage with a deceased wife’s sister. There is, however, reference in
the Confession to a brother’s wife; but, singular to note, there is
no allusion to the fact that, in this case, there was an exception
sanctioned by Scripture itself. And if there was, although no
notice whatever is taken of this exception in the Confession, may
there not be another exception to the general rule as laid down in
the Confession in the case of marriage with a deceased wife’s
sister ? I hold that there is, and it is with this interpretation of
Scripture and the Confession that I subscribe the standards. I
may be wrong, I am not infallible, but I have no alternative but
to follow my own conscientious judgment, which I have not found
to be so very inferior to that of my brethren, especially to that
of those who are the most positive and intolerant upon this
subject.
And now as to the marriages in dispute being incestuous. Not all
the divines in Melbourne, not all the divines in Edinburgh, nor
even all the divines in Rome, with the Pope at their head, will
ever make me believe that the God of Holiness would ever have
so associated His name with that of Jacob, as to allow Himself to
be called the God of Jacob, while all the time that God was
manifesting Himself so graciously to him the patriarch was living
in “ an intrinsically vile, abominable, and incestuous connection.”
In conclusion, I may say that appeals in this debate have been
made to our feelings, but what have these to do with principle?
No one has a more sincere regard for Dr. Cairns than myself, but
surely a little reflection must convince him that, however uninten-
tional on his part, such appeals to our sympathies are really
insults to our understandings. I have passed through many a
stormy controversy in Scotland, compared with which this in
Victoria is but a breeze to a hurricane; but come what may, I
shall never devote my energies on behalf of any ecclesiastical


organisation which can only accept of the services of its ministers
at the sacrifice of liberty of thought and action, and that too in
regard to a question on which the ablest scholars and divines so
widely differ. Probably, when passion spends its force, Christian
forbearance will prevail, but no earthly consideration could tempt
me to submit to the meanness of that ecclesiastical servitude
which would require me to lay my conscience and my intellect at
the feet of those who seem to imagine that their word in this not
yet enslaved Presbyterian Church of Victoria must be law.
APPENDIX.
As might have been expected, in giving utterance to unwelcome truths, Dr,
Cameron did not escape animadversion from some of his brethren. The
Eev. Thomas Main, who was offered the Moderatorship of the last Free
Church Assembly, but who declined it, observed “ that he was amazed at
the course pursued by Mr. Cameron. As a minister of this Church, he has
signed the formula, with the declaration that, when rightly interpreted, it
does not favour persecuting and intolerant principles; and yet, on the floor
of this house, he has entered into an elaborate argument to show the very
opposite, and has insisted upon it as his right that he should be at liberty
to believe and publish that it does teach persecuting and intolerant
principles; and to add to his glaring inconsistency, as a member of the
Union Committee, he has joined in the declaration that, ‘ in the act on
the formula, the Free Church disclaims intolerance and persecuting
principles, and repudiates as ungrounded any exposition of the Confession
according to which it should be understood to favour intolerance or perse-
cution and this forms part of the report he proposes to send down for the
consideration of presbyteries. The man who does so, writes his own libel,
and pronounces his own condemnation.”
One of the prominent members of the Presbyterian Assembly of Victoria
remarked, but not at last meeting, that he had watched this question for
about 80 years, and was glad to find all the great lawyers against marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister. We should like this divine to publish, but as
he is not likely to do so, we would recommend him to read Lord Denman’s
pamphlet, dedicated to Lord Brougham, in which he says : —“ No other set
of men knows so much of the domestic relations of social life in England as


solicitors, and nearly the whole of that influential body residing in London
have joined in a petition to both Houses of Parliament, for the repeal of the
law against’ such marriages,”
The Church of Scotland. The Rev. James Cochrane, of that Church, says
“ I have no hesitation in saying that opinion in Scotland is coming round to
views in favour of legalising marriage with a deceased wife’s sister to a
very remarkable extent. I have been speaking to many ministcis and
others, and the conviction is as I have described it.” _
The United Presbyterian Church. The Rev. Dr. Eadie, Professor o± Biblical
Literature, expresses himself thus“ Is the marriage of a widower with
his late wife’s sister within the ‘ prohibited degrees ? ’ In all frankness and
honesty I am obliged to answer—No. It is interdicted neither by express
veto, nor yet by implication. Canonical austerity is not to be identified
with moral purity or matrimonial fidelity,”
The Rev. H. Renton, of Kelso, one of the well-known leaders of the United
Presbyterian Church, says “ The prohibition of such marriages is, in my
judgment, sanctioned neither by Scripture, nor by physiology, nor by
expediency.’ ’
" The late Dr. Chalmers, of the Free Church, says:—“ In verse 18 of Lev.
xviii., the prohibition is only against marrying the wife’s sister during the
lifetime of the first wife, which of itself implies the liberty to marry the
sister after her death, besides implying a connivance at polygamy.”
‘‘ It was a great mistake (said Dr. Begg in the last Assembly of the I ree
Church) into which Dr. Candlish inadvertently fell when he said we would
appeal to the ignorant Highlanders. Dr. Candlish : I never used that ex-
pression (cries of “ yes ” and “no ”); all I said was that they were not well
informed as to the principles at issue. Dr. Begg : The Highlanders were
said to be ill informed. Dr. Candlish: I said on the present question (that is
of union with the United Presbyterian Church).” —Edinburgh Daily Review.
Unfortunately Dr. Begg and his party have succeeded in putting a stop in
the meantime to the further prosecution of this union, by bringing to bear
upon it all the Highland clans they could muster to the battle, leaving the
Free Church not in bonds to the Erastianism of the St ate, but to the more
grievous bondage of being overborne by the least informed portion of the


Scottish community. From such influences we in Victoria are happily free,
and no appeal to any portion of the laity of our church could ever evoke
any sentiments but those which an enlightened public would approve of.
(E.)
It is gratifying to note the gradual development of Dr. Candlish’s
catholic sentiments. The same remark applies to the late Dr. Cunningham,
who contend* 1 for “ allowing some latitude to honest and intelligent men
in construing :he precise bearing and import of minor points in the
Standards,”
(F.)
Instead of the 23rd chapter of the Confession, the American Church
gives its own views of the magistrate’s power in religion. DjK Hodge in
commenting on these says—“ Christian magistrates should also seek in
their influential positions to promote piety as well as or&jff. they are
to do, not by assuming the functions of the church, nor oy attempting by
endowments to patronise or control the church, but personally by their
example, and officially by giving impartal protection and all due facility
for the church in its work.”
MASON, FIRTH, AND M'CUTCHEON, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.
