

a io
cS'3~*W #/ ~U r/ L*-/(rty /<s^f
//} ’ „ / V 7? V/ .^sTtfyU'lrtUfvM,
{The home of our family at the end of the
18th century).
Fordwich lies about two miles from Canterbury, on the
bank of a swirling rivulet called the Stour, within view of
the road which leads from Margate and Ramsgate to the
Cathedral City. It lies amid level meadows, a mere score
or so of red-roofed cottages grouped nearthe modest Church
and Court Hall. It contains but 228 inhabitants, and prob-
ably never had many gipre. Yet for a thousand years until
1885 was an independent borough, possessed of municipal
rights, and rejoicing in a Mayor and Corporation. It was
called in Domesday Book (1085) the “Little Borough.”
Its importance originally was due to its position ; for,
where the Stour now floy*s peacefully through fields and
marshes, was once an arm of the sea. Thus it obtained
importance as one of the Custom-houses of the Kings of
Kent. It possessed a Quay, and a Crane on the Quay,
and a Boat. And both Boat and Crane, and especially the
Quay, figure as objects of great concern in the town records,
for by these Fordwich played its profitable part of land-
ing and passing on to the interior the sea-borne commerce
of those times. Envious neighbours watched with greedy
eyes for opportunity to snatch from Fordwich its coveted
advantages. But Fordwich was defended by the valiant
resolution of its freemen, and moreover being attached as a
“member” to the neighbouring town of Sandwich, it
enjoyed not only the privileges and responsibilities, but
also the support of its brethren the great Cinque Ports.
Thus Fordwich held itself high in the eyes of the world.
Small as it was, its rights were confirmed by grants of


Kings, and its privileges assured by Royal charters. Its
municipal records have been kept with unusual care.
Like the other Cinque Ports it possessed a Custumal book
in which were enrolled its Charters and its by-laws;
and that of Fordwich is still preserved, having been
written apparently in the fifteenth Century, and bound in
is sheep-skin binding about 1572. There are two public
buildings, the Church and the Court Halh We will speak
of the latter first.
The Court Hall is a small square building, the lower
part of rough stone, the upper part plastered and white-
washed, which stands on the bank of the river near the
site of the Quay, On opening the humble door you
almost stumble up a very steep flight of steps which leac
to the upper storey—the Council Chamber. Here there are
panelled seats for the authorities along one side ; in front
is a solid table, and in front of that a very solid bar, set to
keep the eager public in their place, and not allow them
to press unceremoniously upon Fordwich dignitaries.
Above the Mayor’s seat are the Royal and other Arms,
with the impressive motto : “ Love and honour the truth,
1660.” Rather a diminutive theatre for the public proceed-
ings of a rather diminutive world. But, after all, the
passions and policies of men are very much the same
whether on a large scale, or a small. And we need not
suppose that the conduct of public affairs was less worthy
of respect at Fordwich than in larger assemblies.
The Corporation consisted .of a Mayor with Jurats- —
annually elected in the Church. The Mayors were
Justices of the Peace within the liberty, and possessed once
a practically unlimited jurisdiction in criminal as well, as in
civil cases. This office was held by our forefather Mr.
John Blaxland (No. 5) from 1767 to 1775. Of their
judicial functions memorials remain in a huge truncheon
and pair of formidable handcuffs lying on the table.
Another instrument of justice is still in evidence in the
form of a very substantial chair. For wßat purpose used


do you think ? I grieve to record that it was designed for
the purpose of ducking scolding wives 1 A little loft near
the roof is shown as the place where the ducked were put
to dry when they came out. Let us hope for the honour
of Fordwich’s women and their husbands that the excellent
preservation of the chair is an indication of its having been
but seldom used J But male defaulters were not to get off.
No ! Fordwich has its gaol. There is but one cell it is
true, in the basement of the Court Hall. But then how
many criminals could you expect, out of so small a popula-
tion ? What was lacking in quantity was made up in
quality, for a more grim and forbidding house of detention
could hardly be imagined. And it had its deterrent effect.
It was seldom used. Of the customary alternatives, a year
and a day in gaol, or a fine of sixty shillings, the criminal
seems usually to have chosen the latter. Seventy years
ago there was ah old gaoler whose memory could recal one
and only one instance of incarceration. The culprit had
been committed for three or four days “ for washing to
come on the Parish! Of this grievous depravity let us
hope he was effectually cured!
Among the other functions of the Magistracy of Pord-
wich was the supervision of the town fishery. Por
Fordwich was noted for its trout, and a turn at the fishing
was, in later years the sole emolument of its public officers.
There was also the duty of maintaining the liberties of the
township, resisting the encroachment of neighbours,
regulating the tolls paid on the landing of goods, and
keeping up the above-mentioned material of the community,
the Quay, the Crane and the Boat. Most interesting are
the side-lights thrown bn the life of the times by the list of
articles of import on which duties were levied, by the
muster roll of 37 armed men with their equipment, whom
Fordwich was prepared to send out for the service of their
country, at various times of need, such as that of the
Spanish Armada, and by the recital of local grievances and
the measures taken in quarrels with neighbours. The


'Mayor’s accounts too, kept with the most scrupulous
■minuteness are full of quaint and expressive details, e.g.,
“ item payed to the Schipwryte in pty payment for making
of ye comon bote 20/-, item for drynk to ye same wreyte
2d., item for nayle id.” The Mayor and some of the other
officials who went to represent Fordwich at the meeting of
the Cinque Ports were entitled to charge their expenses to
the town. That this permission was interpreted liberally
may be inferred from the following hotel bill, one of
many:—
ffor Wednesday dinner and breakfast, (a.d. 1685).
a great pye 8/6
a joyent of veale 2/4
cheese 6d.
a shoulder of mutton 2/6
three ffowles 6/8.
bread, beer, tobacco and fire 5/8
horses hay and 12 gallons of oats 15/10
for three bottles of wine 3/6.
Not bad for some half-dozen people! The ‘ great pye ’ —
great indeed to judge by the cost —fascinates me, and I
.am lost in amazement at our forefathers’ appetites! Let
us hope that their capacity for work was equally in excess
of these degenerate days !
But the judicial functions of the Mayor and Jurats were
a serious reality in the days when the above-mentioned
Custumal Book was written. The Mayor was not
allowed to decline election. If on the third summons he
still refused to serve, then the whole community was to
‘go with hooks’ and tear down his principal house, and if
he had no house he lost his rights as a freeman of the
Borough.
To him and his colleagues were entrusted many func-
tions. They discharged the duties of a Town Council,
providing for the purity of victuals, bread and beer, etc.,
the clearing of the King’s Highway from obstructions,
and the enforcement of a curious measure of precaution,


that 5 every man or woman should have in the time of
drought a bucket of water standing at his doorway,
because of the danger of fire.’ They were also a Court of
Probate for proving the wills of Freemen. They kept the
peace between man and man and that with strictness. The
penalty for drawing a weapon was a fine of 10/-, a large
sum then, and for wounding the offender had to choose
either a fine of 60/- or imprisonment for a year and a day,
or the perforation of his hand by the weapon used. Law
suits of all kinds came before them, concerning land and
property, concerning the guardianship of orphans, concern-
ing the rights of freemen as against ‘foreigners.’ A
singular trial by battle seems to have been in use in early
times. When a stranger accused a freeman of felony,
the accuser was placed in the river Stour fully equipped
but up to the middle in water. The accused came in a boat,
clad in a garment called a storrie, and armed with an instru-
ment called an ‘ore’ three yards long, and so they fought
it out. Even capital punishment was within the Mayor’s
jurisdiction. A man charged with a capital crime had to
produce ‘thirty and six good and lawful men and true who
shall swear with him that he is not guilty.’ Of these 24
were dismissed; but of the remaining twelve, if one shrank
from taking the oath, the accused was condemned. And
the condemned in such cases were ‘taken unto a certain
place called Thief’s well, and there their hands must be
tied under their legs, to wit knee-bent, and they shall be
instantly thrust down alive and drowned. And this shall
be done by him who prosecutes.’ Such wars the measure
of self-government entrusted to bur little municipality
some five centuries ago. But it should be added that in
many of these cases the jurisdiction of the Mayor and
Jurats was shared by the Bailiff of the Abbott of St.
Augustine’s Monastery in Canterbury which possessed
rights over the township.
This brings us to the Church, a modest and homely
building, more in accordance with Fordwich in its decline


and humility, than with the by-gone days of its dignity.
It stands in the little Church yard, its grey walls
harmonising well with the weather-worn grave-stones
which surround it. It has a Chancel, a low Nave and
North Aisle, and a Tower of modest dimensions
surmounted by a Spire. Within, its appearance seems to
be but little changed since the days of my childhood, when
our uncle, Colonel Mark Blaxland occupied the house now
called the ‘Firs,’ and welcomed his nephews and nieces to
the inexhaustible delights of his large garden, its rose
trees, its fruit trees, its oast, and its pond. Indeed its
condition would seem to be much the same as it was in
the days of his grandfather, Mr. John Blaxland (No. 5),
who about the year 1766 removed from Wandsworth to
occupy the Manor House, or as it was called ‘Hemphall,’
(now converted into the Vicarage), and brought his
children* to be baptised in the ancient font. There are
still the square deal pews which may well have done duty
for 150 years, and the singers’ pew near the tower from
which the village singers used to give out ‘Awake my
Soul ’ to the note of the pitch pipe, after the manner of
their forefathers, as they doubtless do still. There are still
the* same Royal Arms and Commandments over the
Chancel Arch, dated 1688, and the same ancient font and
ancient tomb in the body of the Church. A spirit of
somewhat forlorn antiquity seems to dwell within the
age-stained walls. But in old times the Church held an
important place in the civic life of Fordwdch. Parts of it
are said to be of Saxon workmanship. There are traces of
an original Norman structure, of an enlargement by addition
of the N. Aisle about 1200, and of later renovation and
adornment a few generations afterwards. In its more
prosperous days there were lights kept burning in honour
of St. Christopher, St. John the Baptist, and other saints
for which endowments were bequeathed by the wills of
Note.— * They were (i) Elizabeth born at Wandsworth; (2) John;
(3) Christopher ; (4) Samuel ; (5) Mary Ann ; (6) Gregory; all born at
bordwich. Christopher is the parent of the English branch of the family.
J ohn and Gregory left their name and fame to their numerous descendants
in Australia.


parishioners. There was a weekly distribution of loaves
from the quaint little shelves on the West walk The
Mayor’s splendid Mace adorned the supports which still
remain in front of the Mayoral pew. And hither on the
Monday after St. Andrew’s Day the Freemen of the
Borough used to assemble for the important business of
electing the Mayor, who swore ‘ to do justice, as well to
foreigners as to home born, as well to the poor as to the
rich, regarding neither reward, hatred or love—so help
me God.’
There are 54 rectors of Fordwich enumerated since 1282,
good and devout men doubtless for the most part, but not
much known to fame. Of one, William Smith, lam sorry
to say the complaint was made in 1577; ‘We say our
Parson cometh to the ale-house, then he goeth home and
falleth out with his wife unhonestly.’ Another Rector
John Nichols (1714-1741) has left the record of his private
grudges by entries in the Parish Register : “Buried Samuel
Short Esquier and Informer “ Dorothy, daughter of
Thomas and Susan Jennings, baptd., to whom I pray God
grant more grace than He has given to the parents." Not a
very edifying example of the priestly character, though he
was popular, and was twice elected Mayor, a position to
which no other Rector attained. But it is not by the
faults and foibles of the few that the Rectors of Fordwich
must be judged. Fame takes account of eccentricities.
Of faithful and patient labour, that looks for no earthly
reward, she too often makes no record.
The Parish Register contains other curious entries of
which the following may be quoted :
“1740, Alexander Hart, aged 84 years, burd. Aug. 27.
N.B. He left liveing at his death 2 children of his
own, 21 grandchildren, 213 grandchildren’s children
in all 36 Branches from that one old Root.”
Fordwich had its diversions; amongthem was a Pageant
of some kind in which a ‘King and Queen of Fordwich’
in some way figured. In 1566 an inventory of their


apparel is found enumerating ‘clokes, jackets, cappes, and
a pare of bryches embradered with silver lace.’ But it
had but a short day, for, eight years after, the ‘things of the
late supposed King and Queen’ were ordered to be sold.
Another custom, more hilarious perhaps than edifying,
Fordwich shared with other places in the kingdom, that of
holding a kind of parish entertainment called a ‘give-ale.’
This was often held in a booth in the Churchyard, and
even in the Church. It is to the credit of the people of
Fordwich that the}' removed these festivities to a house
set apart for the purpose, the rebuilding of which in 1556
is minutely accounted for down to the cost of one ‘m tile,
and carryage of the same tile Bd.’
But we must bid farewell to our old town, and leave it
in the repose into which out of it past splendours it has
now sunk. Not many rich, no great names are recorded
on its mouldering gravestones. No heroic, no celebrated
part has it played in our Country’s history. Yet out of
the dusty records of the past some glimmerings may be
discerned of the busy life of our forefathers which may be
remembered with interest. That sturdy love of indepen-
dence and capacity for self-government, that care for
justice, even though sometimes rough, that sense of public
duty, that association of religion with the concerns of life,
and fellowship of rich with poor, which, with some homely
English humour, characterised the civic life of our ‘ Little
Borough,’ have now flowed out of its quiet backwater into
wider channels, and have entered into the making of an
Imperial race both at home and beyond the seas.
G.C,B.
Reprinted with some additions relating to the Family, from
the St. Andrew's, Haverstock Hill, Parish Magazine. Com-
piled with the help of Woodruff's History of the Town and Port
of Fordwich.
GOD ART & CO.. PRINTERS. HAVERSTOCK ROAD N.W.
