

EDUCATION DEPARTMENT, VICTORIA
CIRCULAR OF INFORMATION No. 17.
FORESTRY.
CONTENTS.
1. Arbor Day
J. A. Leach, D.Sc. 2
2. Australian Forest League, The .
3, Forestry in Australia
H. Mackay 4
4. Forest Conservation a National Duty
5. Eucalypts
Elwood Mead 5
W. R. Grimwade, BSc., F.C.S. 6
6. How the Schools Can Help
J. P. McLennan 7
7. Raising Trees from Seed at State Schools
8. Observation Plantations for Schools
9. On the Formation of Forestry Museums
C. E. Isaac 9
C. S. Sutton, M. 8., Ch.B. 11
H. B. Williamson 12
10. Identification of Trees..
Plant Names Committee 14
See.. Professor of Botany, Melbourne University, Chairman)
(A. J. Ewart, D. Sc.,
11. Pith and Point from Arbor-day Publications (U.S.A.)


FOEESTET.
ARBOR DAY.
By ]. A. I.each, D.Sc., Organizing Inspector of
Nature-study.
Arbor Day was first celebrated on the 10th of April,
1872, in Nebraska, U.S.A. It has been a Victorian
school fixture for twelve years, and many other countries
and States have an annual Arbor Day. In a few States,
two Arbor Days annually are advocated.
Teachers, school committees, parents, and children have
done good work in former years, and the Minister and
Director confidently expect that this year’s program will
be carried through even more enthusiastically than
previously. Teachers will find much to assist them in
the articles contained in this supplement.
Being a .young, country, Victoria has not suffered, to
the same degree as older countries, by the destruction of
her timber resources, though, in parts of the State, almost
complete denudation has occurred. Fortunately, it is
not too late to preserve considerable areas, and thus
prevent further destruction of timber, land, and streams.
In January last, at the biennial meeting of the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
was inaugurated the Australian Forest League, the chief
aims of which are the maintenance of forests, especially
on watersheds and along streams, and the encouragement
of the use of our native timbers, now admitted to be
amongst the finest timbers procurable for furniture.
The Victorian Branch of the League (Dr. C. S, Sutton.
Hon. Sec.) has offered a series of prizes for essays in
connexion with Arbor Day topics; details are given
under the heading “ Arbor Day ” in the body of this
Education Gazette.
Victoria, the “ Garden State,” a country with one of
the finest climates in the world, needs only the application
of water to its rich soils to be one of the wealthiest of
countries. The Government, therefore, has obtained the
services of an eminent irrigationist, Mr. El wood Mead,
and is proceeding vigorously with the important work of
closely settling rich areas where water can be readily
applied. Water is the one essential. To ensure the
constant steady supply of water, forests on the watersheds
are absolutely necessary. Mr. Mead says, in his thought-
compelling article printed elsewhere in this number,
“ Every thousand acres of forest land retained on the
head waters of the Goulburn and Campaspe means the
preservation of a water supply for an equal area of the
most fertile and productive plains below.” Think of
it; one acre of forest ensures water for one acre of
irrigated land.
Observations made during recent journeys in the
forests about the head of two of our chief irrigation
treams —the Goulburn and the Murray—show damage due
to wilfully lighted, devastating fires. Some of the land,
unfortunately, is leased for the grazing of a few hundred
sheep over a large area. To get a return for rent paid,
A VICTORIAN FOREST.
it is reckoned by some people that each part of the forest
should be burnt about once in three years. Incalculable
damage is done to the forest, river, and State by such
penny wise and pound foolish action.
Twenty thousand acres of our National Park, Wilson’s
Promontory, were destroyed this year, for grazing of
cattle was permitted there because of the fees paid.
This, however, has been stopped, and, within a few
weeks, all cattle must finally leave the National Park.
Sad to say, however, irretrievable damage has been
done. Possibly, some of Australia’s unique plants and
animals have become extinct in this last fire.
2
[27TH May, 1913-
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


In addition to the very serious and often extensive
damage brought about by fires, cattle, sheep, and goats
cause injury to forests by loosening stones and rocks, and
making paths, which, when rain comes, form channels
THE FOREST DESOLATED.
[Photograph by Dr, T, Hall,
for water to run along and cut through the soil. A
gutter becomes a gulch, a ravine, a gorge, and the whole
country face is altered ; no soil is left, streams are sand
beds, and the country becomes a desert. Geological
changes and periods are necessary before such an area
can again be of use to man.
Further, grazing animals nip off young trees, and
eventually kill forests. St. Helena was heavily forested.
It is now treeless. The kurrajong, one of the prettiest,
most valuable, and interesting trees of the Upper Murray,
KURRAJONG, ON THE UPPER MURRAY
is being exterminated there in one generation. Though
I kept a close watch, I did not see one young kurrajong
(Wing two long trips down the Upper Murray. A few in
one reserve from which cattle are excluded were heard of.
The tops are cut from these trees for fodder for cattle,
but the grazier is exterminating a stand-by in time of
drought, for no young ones are permitted to establish
themselves.
Fortunately, many denuded areas may need no expense
for planting. Keep grazing animals out, and Nature
will do the rest. Seedlings come up abundantly. These
can then be thinned and transplanted as required.
Darwin’s famous instance (in his Origin of 'Species)
of a bare British moor that was simply fenced and became
thickly covered with trees, and his case of another area
planted with Scotch firs, are worth citing.
“ In Staffordshire, on the estate of a, relation, where I had
ample means of investigation, there was a large and extremely
barren heath, which had never been touched by the hand of
man; but several hundred acres of exactly the same nature had
been enclosed twenty-five years previously and planted with
Scotch fir. The change in the native vegetation of the planted
part of the heath was most remarkable, more than is generally
seen in passing from one quite different soil to another : not
only the proportional numbers of the heath-plants were wholly
changed, but twelve species of plants (not counting grasses and
carices*) flourished in the plantations, which could not be found
on the heath. The effect on the insects must have been still
greater, for six insectivorous birds were very common in the
plantations, which were not to be seen on the heath; and the
heath was frequented by two or three distinct insectivorous
birds. Here we see how potent has been the effect of the
introduction of a single tree, nothing whatever else having been
done, with the exception that the land had been enclosed, so
that cattle could not enter. But how important, an element
enclosure is I plainly saw near Farnham in Surrey, Here
there are extensive heaths, with a few clumps of old Scotch firs
on the distant hilltops : within the last ten years, large spaces
have been enclosed, and self-sown firs are now springing up in
multitudes, so close together that all cannot live. When I
ascertained that these young trees had not been sown or planted,
I was so much surprised at their numbers that I went to several
points of view, whence I could examine hundreds of acres of the
unenclosed heath, and literally I could not see a single Scotch
fir, except the old planted clumps. But, on looking closely
between the stems of the heath, I found a multitude of seedlings
and little trees, which had been perpetually browsed down by
the cattle. In one square yard, at a point some hundred yards
distant from one of the old clumps, I counted thirty-two little
trees; and one of them, with twenty-six rings of growth, had,
during many years, tried to raise its head above the stems of
the heath, and had failed. No wonder that, as soon as the
land was enclosed, it became thickly clothed with vigorously
growing young firs. Yet the heath was so extremely barren
and so extensive that no one would ever have imagined that
cattle would have so closely and effectually searched it for food.”
It is doubtful if there is any other subject which
can approach forest preservation in importance to Victoria
at the present time. If we lose our forests, our water
supply must decrease; our hillsides will be bare rocks;
our alluvial valleys gravel and sand beds littered with
rock waste from neighboring hills, each rain producing
a disastrous flood ; our streams will be empty after that
one destroying rush, and there will be severe drought
until the next rain falls; and much of the country will be
a veritable desert just as other once fertile countries are
now uninhabitable wastes, f
The Forest Department is working vigorously to
save our forests and our State from the threatened danger.
The Forest School at Creswick will give us a body of
trained men to ensure that the work is properly done.
♦ Usually called sedges.
tteachers will find, under “ Nature-study,” in the body of this Gazette, suggestions
for a course of study on the influence of vegetation on the rate of flow of water, and
the importance of vegetation in preventing the destruction of the land.
3
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27th May, 1913.]


Abridged fro
m an Address Delivered by
Mr. H. Mackay,
Conservator of Forests, Victoria, at the Last Annual Conference
of the Australian Natives' Association.
Of all the
great divisions of the globe,
Australia has the
smallest area
of timber-forest in proportion
to the total land
surface. .
. The irregular course of settlement, with the
the regularly recurring
summer fires, materially reduces the
total acreage every year.
After an examination of all avail-
able authorities, I have
come to the conclusion that the true
forest area is less than
4 per cent, or under one-twenty-fifth
of the total land area.. .
. . The great Otway and Strzelecki
Meanwhile, each can do his part by helping to save what
is left from damage by fire and by planting a tree on
Arbor Day.
DESTRUCTION OF A STREET OWING TO UNCONTROLLED WATER-FLOW.
THE AUSTRALIAN FOREST LEAGUE.
Aims and Objects (Provisional).
1. The maintenance intact of our present forest
reserves.
2. The setting apart of further areas as forest reserves
—more particularly on the main watersheds and along
the banks of rivers.
3. The re-afforestation of denuded areas.
4. The tree planting of waste spaces and sand dunes.
5. The protection of our forests against fire, and the
taking of such action as shall lead to the prosecution of
persons responsible for their destruction in this way.
6. The promotion of legislation for the attainment of
the foregoing.
7. The fostering of tree planting generally—as shelter
for stock, crops, homesteads, and for ornamental pur-
poses.
8. The advertisement of the value and encouragement
of the use of our timbers and their products.
9. The discussion at its meetings of subjects having
relation to trees and forests, the collection of facts and
statistics concerning these, and their publication and
diffusion for the benefit of the public.
10. The education of the public by all possible means
to a realization of the value of forests and of the evils
resulting from their destruction, so that, eventually, a
“forest consciousness” shall be created in the public
mind.
('The subscription is 2s. 6d. a year. The Honorary
Secretary is Dr. C. S. Sutton, Rath down-street, Carlton.)
FORESTRY IN AUSTRALIA.
widespread damage which occurs in all Australian forests from
forests of Victoria were virtually destroyed in the course of
thirty years, scarcely any timber growth of value being left
even on the highest ridges and pinnacles, while, on the broader
plateaus, where the eucalypts grew to giant size, and the black-
wood equalled in height and girth the common hardwoods of
the lowlands, the same wide destruction prevailed.
With the exception of the Grampians, Mt. Cole, the Wombat
Ranges, and the Upper Yarra Ranges, with part of Baw Baw,
Mt. Buller Range, and a portion of the Omeo Ranges, but little
of the mountain chain of Victoria, which forms the Main
Divide, is reserved under any form of tenure, and thus pro-
tected from alienation, or from the dangerous and insidious
form of occupation which arises from grazing licences, with in-
discriminate firing during the hottest season of the year.
Virtually, the whole of these unreserved mountain ranges, em-
bracing within their limits several hundred thousand acres, bear
forests of great value considered merely as a source of future
timber supply. But, considered in their climatic aspect as the
storehouses of our heaviest snowfall and rainfall, as the sources
of springs, and the regulators of our stream flow, their value to
the people of this country is priceless. Viewed as timber forests
alone, they bear enormous quantities of ash, woollybutt, blue
gum, spotted gum, stringybark, messmate, silvertop, and pepper-
mint, ranging in value from ,£5O to over £lOO an acre; but, above
a certain line of elevation, they must always be strictly pro-
tected from the axe of the timber-getter, as well as from the
ravages of fire. Therefore, if they are not to be allowed
to disappear during this generation, they must be put under
the strictest form of reservation we possess, that is, under
forest laws, and, further, be patrolled and guarded during the
dangerous season of hot winds by an active body of guards,
who will check and prevent the incendiary fires which now
threaten their very existence every summer. At present, the
Forests Department is able to spend about £soo a year only in
forest fire protection, but fully six times this sum is essential
to safeguard the principal mountain forests from deliberate
fire-raising. It must be remembered that not only are our
young forests of evergreens very inflammable in summer, owing
to the essential oil in their foliage, but that many of them
bear a dry, fibrous coating of bark which carries fife to the
summit of the loftiest stems, while the underwood and scrub,
after a few hours of hot winds, are in a condition to carry for-
ward volumes of flame of a fierceness and intensity which cannot
MACEDON STATE NURSERY I BLOCK OF THIRTY THOUSAND PEPPER TREES AND
SUGAR GUMS,
be successfully coped with by even a large body of fireguards.
An army of beaters is helpless in thick forest with heavy under-
growth, when such fires have made headway with a raging wind
4
[27TH May, 1913.
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


on a wild January day, for not only cannot the main fire be
approached, but strips of flaming bark are carried ahead long
distances, lighting up new walls of fire, perhaps nearly half-a-
mile from the break or track where the beaters are at work.
Therefore, the first essential for the safety of such forests is
to prevent, as far as possible, the outbreak of any dangerous
fires.
A short time ago, I had occasion to examine the high country
which forms the Divide between the head waters of the Goulburn
and Mitchell on the south, and the King, Buffalo, Buckland,
and Ovens Rivers on the north. For several davs, we travelled
along high, narrow ridges which had originally been clothed
with thick belts of woollybutt and ash. Now, the timber on
whole ridges and spurs was completely destroyed. Gaunt,
bleached skeletons of dead trees stretched as far as the eye
could reach, falling southward towards Gippsland, and northward
towards the Murray. Where patches of deep granite soil existed
in folds of the tableland, and belts of young seedlings had given
promise of a new forest, a second fire had swept over portions
of the range and had destroyed them. In many places, useless
scrub acacias, and patches of high bracken in the upper valleys,
had taken the place of young tree-growth. On the bare slopes,
where, in spring, soakqges existed, the shallow, peaty soil had
been burnt away, exposing many acres of naked rock, while, in
the steeper valleys, erosion from the winter rains and the snow
water of spring had set in, the narrow watercourses gradually
widening into a gulch or ravine whose course could be traced
into the lower valleys far below. What I witnessed in these
fire-swept areas, I have seen in many other parts of the Aus-
tralian Alps, and again in central and southern Gippsland, as
well as in the soft grey-sandstone of Otway, and the Strzelecki
Range. Probably, there are few places in Australia where the
neglect and utter disregard of the protective influence of moun-
tain forests is so marked as in Eastern Victoria. Everything
appears to be sacrificed to indiscriminate selection, or private
grazing rights; and, where the occupier cannot hope to ringbark
a grazing block in mountain country, he attains his aim in a
speedier way by the use of match and fire-stick. How long,
we may well ask, is this callous indifference to the safety of
our timber supply, our water supply, and the soil of our moun-
tain slopes and valleys to last? For the sake of a few hundred
pounds, paid yearly for the right to„ enjoy unrestricted summer
grazing, we are imperilling the existence of many of our best
forests, impoverishing the soil of extensive areas of hill and
valley, and, gradually, bringing about the silting up of perennial
streams and river beds.
Worst of all, in a land subject to periodical droughts, we are
endangering, in many instances, the regularity and volume of
our stream flow. The State has spent several millions sterling
on storage works and irrigation basins on the plains. On the
continued storage capacity of these basins and reservoirs gene-
rally, the prosperity of our richest orchard and farm-lands
depends. Are we prepared knowingly to sacrifice the prosperity
of great stretches of our northern plains to the temporary
interests of a few score stock-owners, who should be excluded
altogether from country which apparently they cannot occupy
without bringing about its gradual ruin?
FOREST CONSERVATION; A NATIONAL DUTY.
An Address Delivered by Mr. Elwood Mead, Chairman of tht
State Rivers and Water Suffly Commission, to the Biology
Section of the Australian Association for the Advancement of
Science, Melbourne Meeting , 10th January, /9/j.
One reason for my interest in forest conservation is that I
was born in the largest, and perhaps the most valuable, area
of hardwood timber on this planet, and saw it disappear like a
morning’s mist within the lifetime of one generation. From
the Alleghany mountains to beyond the Mississippi River, a dis-
tance of nearly 1,000 miles, and from the Canadian border
on the north to the Gulf of Mexico on the south, a distance of
more than 500 miles, there was originally an almost unbroken
forest. It was the home of the oak, hickory, ash, walnut,
cherry, maple, beech, and poplar, which grew to a size and
perfection not found elsewhere. This forest stretched in an
unbroken circle around our home, and one of my earliest
memories is the long line of bullock teams hauling hickory,
beech, and ash firewood to the Ohio river steamers. The value
of that timber standing to-day can scarcely be estimated, because
it was of a strength and toughness not found in any timber
obtainable by the motor-car and other vehicle builders of to-day.
Immediately surrounding our home were poplar trees from
4 to 6 feet in diameter, and from 50 to 100 feet to the first
limb. On my grandfather’s farm was one walnut tree 7 feet
in diameter, and many others from 4to 6 feet through. This
timber then had no commercial value; on the contrary, it was
regarded as an unmitigated evil. The land had to be cleared
before it could be cultivated, and that involved heavy expense
and arduous toil. From the first settlement of the continent
300 years before, up to near the close of the last century, settle-
ment was a continuous contest with forests. Every- pioneer
was an expert with the axe, and he looked on the tree as an
enemy of his prosperity. To get rid of timber, settlers had
logging bees, at which they piled together and burned the great
trunks of the ash, the beech, the oak, and the walnut as the
readiest means of removal.
If forest destruction had been followed by soil conservation,
the national loss would not have been so serious; but, after
the splendid wealth of forests had been slashed away, there
came a system of agriculture equally crude and equally wasteful.
A soil of unparalleled fertility was swept down the slopes by
winter rains, and hillsides were soon scarred with gullies and
the beds of streams filled with the rich surface soil. The
change in the character of streams which this caused can be
adequately realized only by those who witnessed it.
CHANNEL FROM THE GOULBURN WEIR, TO THE WARANGA RESERVOIR, VICTORIA.
In my boyhood, every neighborhood had its local mill, where
grain was ground into flour by means of water power. The
forests along the streams held the winter rains like a sponge,
and their flow had little diminution in the whole summer months.
But, when the forests were swept away, the streams became
torrents in the winter and dry channels in summer, and the mills
and water-power disappeared. The Ohio river, once a great
waterway, is now almost unnavigable in summer, and the
National Government is spending nearly $100,000,000 in the
building of locks and weirs to mitigate, in a measure, the change
which unrestricted destruction of forests has caused.
The benefits which would have come, not only to the United
States but to the world, by the preservation of belts of timber
along the head-waters of streams in the area referred to cannot
be adequately stated. Restricting the area cultivated would
have hastened the adoption of better farming methods. It
would have saved both the timber and the streams. The
beautiful cherry, walnut, and ash that were either burned or
made into fencing would now be a source of enjoyment to the
makers and users of furniture.
A few years ago, I made, for the United States Government,
an investigation to determine the cause of the decline in rice-
growing along the Atlantic sea-board. This rice-field had once
been the most prosperous and profitable in the United States.
The rice sold for higher prices than any other, and the lands
were of good value Now, rice-growing has almost ceased,
the rice-mills are abandoned, and an ; adustry that was a great
5
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27Th May, 1913.]


factor in the prosperity of cities and an element of national
wealth has disappeared. Its cause was the destruction of the
forests on the head-waters of the tidal rivers which irrigated
the rice belt. So long as the forests remained, the summer
flow of these rivers was well maintained; but, after their de-
struction, the winter flow became greater, and the summer flow
was so reduced that the levee banks were washed away in the
winter, and created a scarcity of water for irrigation in the
summer. The same results are following the destruction of
forests on the mountains which supply water for the irrigated
areas of the arid west. While State Engineer of Wyoming,
I knew of two streams heading in the same mountain region
having substantially the same snow-fall, and originally practically
the same water supply in summer ; to-day, in the valley of one
stream, the irrigation area is extending; in the other, it is
receding. The change is due to the unfortunate fact that a
saw-mill found lodgment on the head-waters of the stream where
irrigation is declining before forest reservations were estab-
tablished or the value of this protection understood. With the
saw-mill came fires; the head-waters of the stream were swept
bare; snow water, which formerly sank into the beds of pine
needles and came away slowly, now falls on a surface hardened
by the sun of summer and the feet of pasturing animals, and,
as a result, it runs off the mountain side as it would off tlie roof
of a house. It is the old story : floods in winter when water
is not needed, and an absence of water in summer when it is.
OUTLET FROM THE WARANQA RESERVOIR.
To-day, America, although a new nation, is confronted with a
timber famine, which threatens the success of many of its im-
portant manufacturing industries, and which will add to the
cost of homes and affect the prosperity of dwellers in cities and
towns. And the experience of America is the experience of
every nation that has been careless in the protection of its
forests. It is a lesson which the young continent of Australia
ought to heed while it is still time. If Australian forests are
to be preserved for future generations, it can be adequately
done only in one way, and that is, by the retention of the forest
lands as permanent Government reserves, and the placing of the
cutting of timber on those reserves under regulations similar to
those now enforced in Germany and other European countries.
It is useless to expect forests to be preserved after the land
passes into private ownership, because private owners cannot
hold these lands except at a loss. The benefits of forest pre-
servation are not restricted to the individual land owner; the
general public shares, in an equal measure, in the cheapening
of timber, in the conservation of soil fertility, and the protection
of water supplies. These benefits are so widely distributed
that their preservation is a matter of national concern, and to be
effective must be a matter of early national legislation. No
economic question is of more importance to this continent, and,
so far as the State of Victoria is concerned, the preservation of
the splendid forests of East Gippsland will mean as much a
half-century from now as would the preservation of a part of
the forests of oak, walnut, and ash to the States of America
to-day. Furthermore, if we are to have irrigation at a reason-
able cost, then our most effective and cheapest stream regulator
is the forest on the head-waters of our rivers. If these forests
are swept away, they cannot be adequately replaced by artificial
storages, because the soil will be washed down the slopes, and
will fill the reservoirs as it has filled those of the Pyrenees.
It is not too much to say that every thousand acres of forest
land retained on the head-waters of the Goulburn and Campaspe
means the preservation of a water supply for an equal area of
the most fertile and productive plains below. Hut, if these
lands pass into private ownership, the forests will not be pre-
served, because the owner of the uplands will consider his own
interests and not the national welfare.
Forest preservation on the head-waters of streams is, therefore,
a matter which needs public interest and support, and nothing
will contribute more to the ultimate prosperity of this Common-
wealth than comprehensive and effective legislation to this end.
EUCALYPTS.
By W. Russell Grimivade , B.Sc., F.C.S.
It seems strange that, of all the legacies the people of
this country have inherited from our pioneers, the least
appreciation is paid to the very noblest. Other rich
and productive countries equal or excel us in their mineral
resources, their soil fertility, their river systems, or some
other asset of national wealth, but no country other
than Australia has an endemic vegetation to compare with
our eucalvpts. The comparison can be made in many
aspects. For industrial, horticultural, scenic, utili-
tarian, or hygienic purposes, the main representative of
our native flora can account well of itself. Over two
hundred individuals, ranging in native habitat from sub-
temperate to tropical climates, and from the sea level to
6.000 feet altitude, present an adaptability to environ-
ment that is marvellous. The saddest feature of it all is
that they do not arouse enthusiasm in the people of our
countrv. The economic value of our eucalypts is so patent
that every thinking man is ready to acknowledge it when
he is asked to think about it, yet sufficient enthusiasm
does not prevail to achieve any practical results. Our
virgin forests are already badly damaged—in some cases
quite destroyed—as though the prodigality of this fecund
country were inexhaustible ; and, in a foolish sense; we
take no heed of the morrow.
A verv unwise humorist once justified his selfish actions
by asking, “ What has posterity done for me?” Being
satisfied that he was not in the debt of future
generations, he felt at liberty to dissipate his possessions
at his own pleasure. Quite apart from the morality of
this reasoning lies the fact that the present abuse of our
eucalypts will probably not concern the unborn people
of this country so much as the generations alive to-day.
The extraordinary utility and commercial value of our
gum-trees is better appreciated in other parts of the world
than in their own home. When an Australian visits the
Western States of America, and sees many varieties of
eucalypts in plantations of acres, and windbreaks miles
long, he becomes Conscious of his own shortcomings. All
these beautiful trees —many of them 100 feet high and
more —have been grown from seed, and therein lies the
reason for the American’s appreciation of our trees. They
grow so quickly on indifferent soils, and produce such
splendid timber in so short a time, that their commercial
value has stimulated their planting as much as their
hygienic and scenic qualities. There are, in the State of
6
[27TH May, 1913.
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


Oregon, plantations containing as many as 100,000 young
trees each, and the owners of the plantations consider
them a safe and profitable investment. An officer of th«
U.S. Forestry Department told the writer last year that
they liked our trees “ because, in twenty-five years, you
MOUNTAIN ASH, WARBURTON, UPPER YARRA.
f Photograph by Mr. A. W. Crooke, Department of State Forests, Victoria.
have a tree yielding timber as large as that of an oak
350 years old.” The end of the natural oak in the
United States is within sight, and these highly commercial
and practical people are planting our trees to replace
them. It is, indeed, quite a possibility that, within the
next two decades, the United States will be in a position
to export eucalyptus hardwood to this country. The
plantations are so numerous, and have been so well
founded, that the trees seem to be indigenous and self-
sown.
Ten years ago, the writer was a few miles from San
Francisco, and surrounded by hundreds of blue gums.
He ventured to suggest to some American children that
Australia also had eucalypts. In reply, he was told in
perfect good faith, and with typical assurance, that
'* Australia must have got them from America !”
Apart from the quality of the wood that the various
species of eucalypts produce, consider how these trees
compare with other species in regard to other points.
They are evergreens, and they thrive on any class of soil
from the richest to the poorest. Their growth from the
seed is marvellously rapid, and their persistence of life
in dry and unfavorable circumstances is sometimes
incredible, and, with all these virtues, they produce a
timber that rivals, for any industrial purpose, the well
known and established hardwoods. Not only is the lack
of appreciation of these beautiful trees to be deplored,
but sadder still is the fact that the enterprising man who
uses them for cabinet-making has to conceal his actions
as a thief. Or else why is the term “ Tasmanian oak ”
growing in use? It is not oak, and should not be classed
as such, although a great deal of it finds its way into the
furniture trade as oak. In Melbourne and Sydney shops
to-day are pieces of furniture offered as oak, which, if
not wholly, are in part, none other than gum-tree. .Is it
not sad that the public has to be hoodwinked into buying
furniture made from home-grown timbers?
Let me emphasize here the necessity for all those
interested in our eucalypts to dispense as much as possible
with the merelv local names of the trees. Confusion
arises, as the same tree has different names in different
districts, and the same local name is given to different
trees in different localities. The “ Plant-names Sub-
committee ” of the Field Naturalists’ Club-of Victoria
has supplied an authentic name (in addition to the strictlv
scientific name) for each of our 143 native trees and tall
shrubs; It would be well for teachers, when they are
sure of the identity of the trees, to insist on the use of
these- names.
HOW THE SCHOOLS CAN HELP.
Bv ]. P. McLennan , Warragul Agricultural High School.
The care of shade trees and ornamental trees is an
entirely different matter from the care of forests. The
forester grows the tree to be harvested for timber, bark,
oil, or leaves; the landscape gardener grows it for shade,
general effect, and beautv of form. The choice of trees
before planting and their subsequent treatment depend
largely on these considerations.
The great need of the planting of trees for timber,
firewood, shade, and shelter is gradually being realized.
The timber supply of the world is being exhausted, and
many countries are now taking steps to reasonably con-
serve existing forests and to replace the trees which are
felled for timber and firewood. Foremost of the nations
of the earth in this great work stands Germany.
Italy, Denmark, Austria, Germany, France, and Russia
maintain schools of forestry, with experimental stations
attached, where young men may learn the science of forest
culture. Attention has recently been given to this branch
of the work in Britain, United States, Canada, and Aus-
tralia.
Why Forests have been Destroyed
During the early stages of settlement in new countries, •
trees must be felled to make way for farm crops and to
improve the grass pastures; but, as a rule,-little or no r .
7
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27th May, 1913.]


thought is given to the future, and it is soon found that
many districts are so denuded of trees that the timber,
firewood, shade, and shelter supplies are exhausted. In
this respect, Victoria has been a severe sufferer, as may-
be attested by any one acquainted with the Goulburn
Valley and the Western Plains.
Evils of Wholesale Forest Destruction.
The wholesale destruction of trees in the hilly districts
of Gippsland and Beech Forest has removed the chief
source of the leaf mould and humus which enriches the
soil, and causes it to act much in the same way as a
sponge, by facilitating the soakage of the rain into the
soil and its being retained there for a considerable time.
This supply of water replenishes the springs and streams
and regulates their flow during the year. When the
forests are cleared away, the streams flow intermittently ;
the rain sweeps over the surface, carrying away much of
the rich topsoil to the lower levels. As Mr. El wood
Mead well expresses it, “The streams are flooded in
winter when water is little required, and low in summer
when it is needed.” The absence of trees enables the
wind to sweep uninterruptedly over the surface of the
soil, thus vastly increasing the amount of soil moisture
lost by evaporation.
A Public Sentiment Must Be Created.
The creation of a public sentiment towards the plant-
ing and preservation of trees is needed. This sentiment
is being fostered by the writings of experts and enthusi-
asts in the public press, and by the work of officials in
the Forestry Department and the Education Department.
But much more is required ; the matter is of such national
concern that it behoves all who realize its seriousness to
lose no opportunity of educating the people. Laws will
not be enacted in advance of the general sentiment of the
people; if they are, they will not be carried out in the
proper spirit. “ The wealth, beauty, and healthfulness
of the country,” Whittier says, “ largely depend upon
the conservation of our forests and the planting of trees.”
It would be a fine thing to have forestry associations in
every city, town, and township.
Arbor Day.
Valuable work has been done, during the last seven or
eight years, by teachers and pupils at many Victorian
schools, and it it would be a pity if the enthusiasm of the
Arbor-day celebrations were allowed to diminish. This
festival makes a lasting impression on the minds of both
adults and children, and we wish to help the children to
acquire a love for trees and tree-planting that will remain
with them all their lives. To make Arbor-day a reallv
successful function, the co-operation of leading citizens is
required ; the time given to the work is well spent. It
has been very pleasing to read, in the accounts of Arbor-
day forwarded to the Education Department during the
last few years, that the leading people in the various
school districts have taken a prominent part in the celebra-
tions.
A German proverb says, “ What you would have
appear in the nation’s life, -you must first introduce
into the public schools.” The school is one of the centers
of life in the community, and time and money are well
spent in making it attractive and beautiful.
Most of the school grounds in Victoria are now almost,
or fully, planted, and the planting operations might be
extended to the streets and roads, and the parks and
farms.
ARBOR DAY AT A MELBOURNE STATE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
Planting and Care of the Trees.
At many schools, the teacher and his pupils raise the
trees from seed in the school nursery. This is a practice
which might be extended with excellent results. Seeds
of trees and shrubs can be obtained from the Forestry
Department and the Education Department, and from
the State Schools’ Horticultural Society. The collecting
of seeds by the children is a commendable practice, which
is already being carried out in some schools.
With a little experience and reasonable care, trees can
be raised successfully in this way at schools. The seeds
should be sown thinly and not too deeply, in a box, or
bed, of light sandy loam. When the plants are a few
inches high, they can be pricked out, and replanted in
pots or tins which are well-drained. There is a great
advantage in thus having them ready for planting out in
their permanent positions, when the weather is suitable, in
the planting season. The plants are acclimatized, and
there is the pleasure of having raised them. Some teach-
ers have raised thousands of trees, and have distributed
the surplus ones among the people of the locality.
Although the holes which are to receive the trees may
be deeply dug, the trees should not be planted too deeply,
especially in stiff clay soils.
Subsequent Treatment.
Care should be taken to see that the holes do not hold
free water during the winter; good drainage is as neces-
sary for the successful growth of trees as for that of farm
and garden crops. During the first year or two of the
life of the tree, the soil surrounding it should be kept
loose by shallow digging, or hoeing ; this will facilitate
the entrance of air and water, and will lessen the amount
of evaporation of soil moisture during the dry weather.
8
[27TH May, 1913.
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


The trees should be firmly staked to prevent swaying
with the wind, care being taken that the cord is not tied
too tightly around the trunk. Crystals of sulphate of
iron scattered around the tree will destroy fungus
growths on the roots, and will tend to brighten the foliage.
In dry districts, when water is available, the water
should not be applied too close to the trunk of the tree.
The feeding roots are gradually extending over a larger
area, and this extension of the root system is encouraged
if the water is applied some feet away from the tree. A
thorough watering occasionally is much better than fre-
quent light applications; in fact, very light waterings do
more harm than good by making the capillary connexion
between the subsoil water and the surface of the soil.
After every watering, as soon as the soil is dry enough,
stir it well with the hoe, and cover it with a grass or
straw mulch.
Some Trees Suitable For Planting
Southern Districts.
Australian: Eucalyptus cladocalyx (Sugar Gum);
E. botrvoides (Mahogany Gum) ; Eugenia Smithii (Lilly
Pilly); Casuarina quadrivalvis (Drooping Sheoak) ; Acacia
melanoxylon (Blackwood); A. prominens (Grey Wattle,
or Sally); Olearia argophylla (Australian Musk Tree);
Pittosporum undulatum (Sweet Pittosporum); Acacia
dealbata (Silver Wattle).
Exotic: Cytisus problems (Tagosaste); Cupressus
horizontalis (Spreading Cyprus); Madura aurantiaca
(Osage-orange); Schinus molle (Pepper Tree).
Hill Districts.
Australian: Eucalyptus leucoxylon (Yellow Gum); E.
polyanthemos (Red Box); E. obliqua (Messmate); E.
calophylla (Red Gum of West Australia); Acacia pyc-
nantha (Golden Wattle); A. pravissima (Ovens Wattle) ;
Pittosporum undulatum (Sweet Pittosporum).
Exotic: Cupressus torulosa (Nepaul Cypress); Melia
azedarach (White “Cedar”); Robinia pseudacacia
(False Acacia, Locust Tree of North America); Pinus
Halepensis (Aleppo Pine).
Mallee and Dry Northern Districts.
Australian: Eucalyptus cladocalyx (Sugar Gum); E.
leucoxylon (Yellow Gum); E. ficifolia (Crimson-flowered
Gum of West Australia); E. calophylla (Red Gum of
West Australia); Brachychiton populneum (Kurrajong);
Eucalyptus citriodora (Lemon-scented Gum); Casuarina
glauca (Buloke); C. Luehmannii (Belar) ; Callitris ro-
busta (Murray “ Pine ” or “ Cypress ”).
Exotic: Robinia pseudacacia (False Acacia); Schinus
molle (Pepper Tree); Cytisus proliferus (Tagosaste) ;
Cedrus deodara (Deodar).
The educational value of a school collection is
increased if the trees are provided with labels giving the
botanical and popular names, and the country of which
they are natives. Experience will teach which are the
most suitable trees for particular soils, situations, and
climates, a knowledge of the nature of trees, and the ills
which may befall them.
RAISING TREES FROM SEED AT STATE
SCHOOLS.
By C. E. Isaac, Officer Supervising the Supply of Seed
to State Schools, Education Department , Victoria.
Advantages.
Since the introduction of experimental agriculture, with
forestry as one of its branches, into the State-school curri-
culum, there has been a great increase in the number of
teachers who raise from seed the. trees and shrubs which
they require for planting their school grounds and gardens.
The chief advantages of raising trees from seed at
State schools over obtaining them as small plants from
a distant nursery may be summarized as follows :
(a) The cost is less.
{b) Varieties especially suited to the district may
more easily be obtained.
( c) The trees, when ready for planting out, are
acclimatized.
( d) The time which must elapse between removing
a tree from the pot or bed where it has
been growing to planting it in its permanent
place is very much reduced, and the tree,
consequently, suffers less check.
(e) It is possible to sow some seeds in the places
where the trees are to remain, and so to
avoid the necessity for transplanting.
(f) The most suitable time for planting may be
chosen.
(g) Greater interest is taken by the children in
trees which they have raised from seed.
(h) The educational value of the work is far
greater, and the practice of tree-raising
and tree-planting is more likely to spread
from the school to the children’s homes.
These advantages are so great that any teacher desir-
ing to improve his school surroundings by tree-planting
will be amply repaid if he adopts this method.
Help Offered to Teachers.
With the view of assisting teachers, the following tree
and shrub seeds are supplied free, on application, to
schools :
Eucalyptus botryoides, E. calophylla, E. corynocalyx. E.
diversicolor, E. globulus, E. hemiphloia, E. leucoxylon, E.
longifolia, E. marginata, E. rostrata; Acacia cultriformis, A.
dealbata, A. decurrens, A. longifolia, A, elata, A.
pycnantha; Pinus strobus; Abies Douglasii; Cedrus Atlantica,
C. deodora; Cupressus macrocarpa; Pittosporum undulatum;
P. eugenioides.
The Victorian State Schools Horticultural Society is
also devoting special attention to encouraging the cultiva-
tion of our native trees, and has some thousands of packets
of various kinds of acacias, eucalypts, and other native
trees available for free distribution amongst State
schools.
9
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27TH May, 1913-]


Seedbeds and Seed-boxes.
Many teachers are deterred from starting this work
by the impression that such special skill is required in
raising trees from seed that it would be quite useless
for them to attempt it. Fortunately, this impression is
a mistaken one.
depth of about an inch with charcoal or small pieces of
brick or stone, and this, again, with a very thin layer of
dead leaves, after which soil may be filled in to a depth of
2 to 3 inches and pressed firmly. This soil should be of a
moderately sandy nature, and would be benefited by the
SEEDBEDS AT THE COBURG SCHOOL, NEAR MELBOURNE.
Another mistaken belief is that elaborate and expensive
appliances are necessary. As a matter of fact, a teacher
may raise sufficient trees to plant his ground many times
over with no appliances beyond a few boxes, some pieces
of cloth or hessian, and a supply of jam tins. The tins
should be placed in a fire until the bottoms melt out
and the sides open. Each tin may then be made to
overlap until an inner diameter of about two and a half
inches is obtained, and tied round with string to prevent
it from opening. The depth of the tin may also be
lessened by cutting off an inch or two. Young plants
grow better in small pots than in large ones.
The preparation of a seed-box, although simple, is a
very important operation, and could be made the subject
of a very useful lesson to the senior pupils.
Almost any box about 4 or 5 inches deep will be
found suitable. An ordinary kerosene case makes two
excellent seed-boxes if cut down the middle of the shal-
lower sides.
In the bottom of the box, about half a dozen holes an
inch in diameter should be bored, and each covered with a
curved piece of broken china or pptteryware, hollow side
down. The bottom of the box should then be covered to a
addition of a little leaf mould or well-rotted stable 01
cowvard manure.
The box should be kept off the ground by resting it on
two or three blocks of equal height, or by having cleats
nailed underneath the bottom before the box is filled.
If the seeds are to be sown in a bed, it will be advis-
able to make the bed over the hardest piece of ground
available, provided it is in a sunny position and has suffi-
cient slope to allow of proper drainage. Asphalt,
cement, or brickwork will be found the best bottom for
such a bed, but, failing these, a mixture of gravel and
clay, beaten hard, will be fairly effective. The object
of this hard bottom is to prevent the roots from penetrat-
ing to such a depth that they will be broken when the
young seedlings are dug up for transplanting. Above
this hard bottom, the bed may be built up in a similar
way to that described in the preparation of a seed-box.
Before sowing the seed, the boxes or beds should be
watered thoroughly, in order that a light watering-, which
will not displace the seed, may suffice afterwards.
The boxes or beds being now ready, the seed may be
sown either broadcast or in rows—the latter is preferable
—over the surface, and covered with very light soil, qi
10
[27TH May, 1913.
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


clean sand, to a depth proportionate to the size of the
seed. Small seed, such as that of the sugar gum, should
be barelv hidden from sight, while larger seed, such as
that of most of the acacias (which should be soaked in
hot water for some hours before sowing), may be buried
a quarter of an inch or more deep.
After sowing, the surface of the bed or box should be
pressed lightly, watered gently, and covered with a sheet
of thin cloth, propped up in the middle, so that any rain
falling upon it may run off. This covering should be
removed temporarily to water the beds when they begin to
have a dry appearance —which will not take place for
several days in autumn or spring weather—and removed
entirely when the first seedVngs appear above the ground.
The above suggestions apply more particularly to the
seed of such trees as the acacias and eucalypts which must
be transplanted to their permanent places with a ball of
earth around the roots. The pines and other conifers —
which may be transplanted, “open root,” r.e., without
a ball of earth surrounding the roots —may be sown in
rows about a foot apart in an open bed and allowed to
grow in these rows until thev are ready for transplanting
to their permanent places.
Teachers will find it a good plan to try smying some
seeds in the places where they wish the trees to remain,
and so to do away with the necessity for potting and
transplanting. A little more care will be needed while
the seed is germinating, and until the plant attains a
height of 3 dr 4 inches ; but the small amount of attention
required later, and the more rapid growth once the plant
has become established will, in many cases, more than
repay the extra care heeded at the beginning.
It will also be worth while lo try sowing some seeds
straight into the tins or pots, so saving the work and loss
involved in pricking out from the seed bed.
In each case, several seeds should be sown together and,
if more than one plant grows, those not required should
be pulled up, leaving the strongest.
Transplanting.
(a) Acacias and Eucalypts. —As soon as seedling
acacias and eucalypts begin to get their second pair of
leaves, they should be removed from the seed bed, care
being taken not to break the roots, and transplanted
singly into the tins or pots which have been prepared for
them. The tins or pots should be placed side by side
over a piece of very hard ground or asphalt (see section
on the preparation of a seed bed) over which a thin layer
of gravel or coarse sand has been spread, and filled with
a mixture of light soil and leaf mould, if the latter is
obtainable. A hole should be made with the finger or
a pointed stick in the center of each tin, and the seedling
held by one of its leaves with the roots hanging down
this hole. Light, slightly damp soil should then be
sifted around and between the roots until the hole is full,
and the soil pressed very firmly down. A space of half
an inch or more should be left above the soil for watering.
The newly potted plants should be watered as soon as
possible and kept shaded from the sun for a few days.
Subsequent waterings should be given only when the
surface of the soil in the tins begins to get dry, but
every watering should be a thorough one, the tins being
filled to the top two or three times, if necessary. Pro-
tection from frosts will be needed during the first winter,
but the plants should get as much sunshine as possible,
once they have recovered from the transplanting.
As soon as the plants have reached a height of three or
four inches, they may be planted out in their permanent
places if the season is suitable. This may be by
untying the string surrounding the tin, removing the tin,
taking care not to break the ball of earth containing
the roots, and planting the little tree in the place prepared
for it. A thorough watering should follow.
(h) Pines and Other Trees which will hear Open-root
Transplanting. —These may be dug up from the bed where
they have been growing, care being taken to avoid break-
ing the roots. The roots should be dipped at once into
thin mud prepared beforehand, which will form a coating
and exclude the air. The plants should then be placed
in their permanent positions with as little delnv as pos-
sible. If some delay is unavoidable, a shallow trench
should be dug in a shady place and the roots laid, in this,
covered with soil, and watered.
The best times for sowing and transplanting will
denend chiefly upon the amount of water available and
the liability to frosts. Where there is a plentiful water
supply, spring sowing and late autumn or spring trans-
planting will probably be found the best. Where the
water supply is very limited, autumn sowing and spring
transplanting will probably be better. In either case,
the plants must be protected from frosts, and it must be
borne in mind that plants are especially susceptible to
frost immediately after transplanting.
The chief care required by trees, in addition to the
protection from occasional heavy frosts, during the first
year or two after their final planting out, is the frequent
shallow cultivation of the soil around the trees, to prevent
evaporation, and an occasional thorough watering. A
mulch of dead leaves, or similar material, during the first
summer, will be an additional help.
Frequent light surface waterings should be avoided,
as they do far more harm than good. A thorough watering
which will soak the soil for two or three feet down, three
or four times during the hot dry weather of the first
summer, with the shallow cultivation of the soil around
the plant after each rain or artificial watering, will be
all that is necessary to bring any comparatively hardy
tree through what is usually the most trying period of its
existence—-the first summer in its permanent place.
OBSERVATION PLANTATIONS FOR SCHOOLS.
By C. S. Sutton , M. 8., Ch.B., Honorary Secretary,
pro tem., Australian Forest League.
The most important of the “ aims and objects ” of the
newly created Australian Forest League is undoubtedly
the last, which runs, “ The education of the public by
all possible means to a realization of the value of forests
and of the evils resulting from their destruction, so that,
eventually, a ‘ forest consciousness ’ shall be created in
the public mind.”
Obviously, the most effectual and certain way of
creating a public opinion is to educate the younger
generation first of all. An interest in trees leads
to an appreciation of the value of forests, and
11
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27TH May, 1913-]


if this is not fostered in us when young, it is
difficult in later life to realize how essential forests are
to our own well-being and the welfare and prosperity of
the State.
It is freely recognized that good work is already be ng
done in our schools in this direction, but something more
might well be attempted—something that would lead to
a real knowledge of our gums and other trees by the
pupils, and, at the same time, provide data tending to
the elucidation of some of the problems connected with
them.
The gums are a notoriously difficult group of trees t
know. Practically, they may be said to “ compose
our forests. They vary greatly, according to situation,
altitude, and soil, and the species often run one into
another in the most perplexing manner. That confusion
as to their identity exists in the country is, therefore,
not to be wondered at, even botanists not being in agree-
ment as to the number of species existing; and them
distribution and range is yet a matter to be determined
exactly.
The something more which is proposed is that small
plantations for purposes of observation and record be
established as close as may be to each school—like the
agricultural plots at Orbost and elsewhere. In these
“ observation plantations ” could be grown, first of all,
and preferably from seed, all the trees naturally occur-
ring in the vicinity of the school; that is, within an area
roughly determined by points midway between the school
and its neighbors. Complete botanical specimens in
duplicate (with buds, flowers, fruits, ordinary, and sucker
leaves), as well as sections of the timber and bark, and
notes as to the nature of the latter on stem and branches,
should be taken when the seed is gathered.
One of the duplicate specimens would be kept in the
school herbarium for reference; the other, bearing a
similar number, could be forwarded later for determina-
tion as opportunity arose.
Very little difficulty should be experienced in obtaining
the necessary sites for the plantations. Probably,
neighboring landowners would allow corners of their
holdings to be devoted to the purpose; if not, the public
park, the cemetery, or even the railway or other public
reserve might be used.
The records suggested to be kept would have relation
to the time of sowing or planting, yearly growth, season
of greatest growth, flowering times, insect pests, visits of
bees and birds, and also to the factors concerned in
growth, such as slope, aspect, altitude, nature of soil, its
water content, rainfall, rainy days, and temperature.
In addition to the trees native to the locality, a selec-
tion of gums and other forest trees of known timber or
other value might, at a later date, also be raised as well
as another selection of softwood trees.
Supposing, then, it is possible to carry out the scheme
outlined above, what advantages might with some con-
fidence be expected to result?
In the first place, the children would learn to know the
trees surrounding them and composing the forests in the
vicinity. They would learn their rate of growth and
appreciate the influence on growth of the seasons and
of the factors in the habitat; would learn, amongst other
things, the nature and value of the timbers, the values of
the trees for shelter and for bee-farming, and their
liability to pests.
Other and more important results would be obtained
from the collation of the accumulated data. A com-
parison of the records of growth with the factors concerned
would enable it to be determined what trees are worth
cultivation, and the places where they are likely to be
grown to the best advantage. By the information thus
gained, the planting in unsuitable places could be avoided,
and much time saved in the future.
Determining botanical specimens and comparing lists
would go very far towards showing the range and distri-
bution of the species, and .render it possible for a
commencement to be made in the matter of charting the
State and giving a graphic representation of the area
covered by each species.
Such work is now being done by the United States of
America for their own trees. Without the co-operation
of our schools, it is unlikely to be done here perhaps for
a very long time. Much denudation of tree growth has
already occurred in the State, and even now, the occur-
rence of species can be only approximately ascertained ;
the trees are still being cleared away, and, the longer
the work is left undone, the less approximate will be the
final result of an investigation which is of the highest
scientific importance.
To stimulate an interest in trees and forests, the League
intends to offer prizes for essays on the subject by the
pupils in our schools. The children, if brought to an
appreciation of the value of the work suggested, could
not fail to have their interest aroused, and a hearty spirit
of emulation would surely follow amongst them and
amongst the schools. The pupil in each school showing
most interest and intelligence in the matter might be put
in charge of the plantation, as chief ranger or keeper of
the records, and the best report from each of the prin-
cipal districts as to the progress of the plantation would
be the subject for another prize, while the best school
forestry exhibit should be worthy of a third.
In making the above suggestion, and while expressing
my thanks for the privilege of being allowed to do so
here, I am fully conscious of the full curricula already
in existence in the schools. Still the carrying out of the
scheme should not add much to it. Many of the records
required in the work are already kept, tree planting is
already carried on ; only the sites and some further records
are necessary, and the getting the site and keeping the
records does not seem to present insuperable difficulties.
The only apparent difficulty is in making a commence-
ment. The sites having been provided and the start made,
the rest should be easy.
ON THE FORMATION OF FORESTRY MUSEUMS.
By H. B. Williamson . School No. 880, Linton.
One aim of the Australian Forest League will be to popularize
the study of Australian forest trees, and I think one means of
helping to accomplish this aim would be the establishment of
forestry museums in country centers, at which collections of
named specimens would be on view at schools, Mechanics’
Institutes, or Shire Halls.
The name “ museum ” means to most persons a collection of
curiosities, and, when one is established in a town, scores of
articles such as aboriginal weapons and remains, Chinese
12
[27TH May, 1913.
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID,


carvings, stuffed freaks, and relics of Pompeii and other historic
places are donated. Economic botany and entomology would
have no place among those exhibits. A forestry museum in a
country town need not be a very elaborate affair. It would not
be instituted for the purpose of gathering in one room specimens
of all Australian, or even of all Victorian trees, timbers, fruits,
etc.
This is the aim of such institutions as the technological
museums of Melbourne and Sydney. A district forestry museum
should have on view specimens of the trees growing native within
a few miles of the center.
In addition, specimens of trees acclimatized in the locality
from other districts might be admitted. 'I hen, for comparison,
closely allied species could be exchanged between districts, for
instance, in the case of the “ white gums.” Every locality has
its “ white gums.” Eucalyptus viminalis, E. rubida , E. haemas-
toma, E. coriacea, E. leucoxylon, and others are known by that
vernacular in various districts, and, if, for comparison, specimens,
if only of leaves, fruit, buds, bark, and seedlings were shown
of “white gums” not recorded in the district, bushmen and
woodcutters might see the necessity of adopting the vernacular
names decided on by the Plant Names Committee. We want
uniformity in the use of popular names for our trees, and
forestry museums will be one of the means to this end.
It may be asked, “Who is going to form these collections?
and where are we to place them ?”
These questions are not easily answered, but I may be allowed
perhaps to put forward an ideal. It may seem to some to be
unattainable, but many apparently unattainable ideals have been
realized, so I shall outline this one.
First, let us presume that the hopes of the A.F.L. have been
realized so far as having a branch established in each country
district. These branches would consist of farmers, tradesmen,
bush workers, and professional men, including, of course,
teachers. Regarding the last-named, many of them are
enthusiastic gardeners and nature-students, and, while not sug-
gesting that more honorary positions should be forced upon
them, it is certain that their support and assistance could be
counted on. Some would lecture to the public under the
auspices of the district branch; others would endst the services
of pupils and their brothers and fathers in obtaining specimens
of timber. Others, who were amateur photographers, would
obtain photographs of trees, and of the various processes which
the tree-products undergo in the locality. Then there would be
a Government officer at the service of the A.F.L., called perhaps
“ Director of Forestry Museums and Plantations,” whose duty
it would be to visit all the districts, and advise the branches
as to the management of plantations, and the establishment of
museums. Among other qualifications, the Director would be an
expert in identifying the trees, would show the members
what species they had in their various localities, and would
supply certain specimens and give practical advice as to the
treatment of these in forming museums of district trees.
I shall now outline a method of displaying, in a compact way,
the specimens to represent the trees of a district. Of course,
the first thing is to have the trees examined and the species deter-
mined. To this end, specimens of leaves, flowers, fruit, and
buds should be submitted to the Government Botanist of the
State. By leaves and fruit —woody seed vessels or capsules —
many of the eucalypts can be identified. In the case of acacias
and other genera, flowers and sometimes fruit are necessary
as well as leaves. Seeing that, in any district of 5 miles radius
from a given center, there are seldom more than 20 species of
trees, the work of getting these determined would not be very
great for each district. Any one could do it in a few months
by giving a few minutes now and again to bush rambles and to
the dispatching of parcels of specimens to Melbourne.
Let us say one of the species determined is Eucalyptus
macrorrhyncha , red stringy-bark, and it is required to make an
exhibit of this species. A board about 2 feet by 3 feet is pre-
pared. This may be of some light wood, say, white pine, two
12 inch boards cleated together; cost, about two shillings. It
should be planed up and varnished. Four pieces of half-inch
T. and G. lining, three feet long, put together with cleats, would
serve; but I think would not look so well. A neat narrow
moulding round it would set it off nicely. Now, on this board
is to be displayed a specimen of everything that red stringy-bark
Can afford us, arranged round a photograph of the tree. A good
pressed specimen of a small branch showing leaves, buds,
flowers, and fruit should be tacked on firmly by means of
many fine tacks with small heads. Little staples might be
used here and there. These specimens should have been under
a thirty-pound pressure between newspapers which had been
changed now and again till the branches were quite dry.
With these should be shown a pressed and dried seedling, or
some epicormic shoots that show juvenile foliage. This helps
in some cases to determine the species, for example, in the case
of E. rubida (candle-bark) and E. viminalis (manna gum).
EXHIBIT SHOWING! CHIEF PARTS OF A TREE.
1. Photo of tree (height and locality) ; 2. Seedling ; 3. Buds ; 4. Flowers (and
time of flowering); 5. and 6. Fruit; 7. Seeds; 8. Transverse section of wood
green and unpolished; 9. Transverse section of wood, dry and polished;
10 Longitudinal section, radial, polished ; 11. Longitudinal section, tangential,
polished; 12. Longitudinal section, tangential, unpolished ; 13. Bark, showing
inside surface; 14. Bark, showing outer fibre ; 15. Long strip of inner bark ;
16 Rope made from bark ; 17. Photo showing use of bark in building.
These trees are much alike, but the seedling leaves of the
former are orbicular, while those of the latter are cordate
lanceolate. If ripe capsules are placed in a warm place, the
vaives will open and let out the seeds, which should then
be placed in a little bottle, and wired to the board. Specimens
of the bark, each about eight inches long and a few inches wide,
should be tacked on, sufficient being used to show outer and
inner bark and the lower surface.
A photograph of a sheet of the bark or a bark roof and a
sample of rope made from the bark fibres would add information
regarding the uses to which the tree is put.
Regarding the timber specimens, these must necessarily be
small. A limb about six inches through should be sawn off, and
two transverse slices an inch thick, one polished, and the other
unpolished, should be fastened on by screws through the back.
Other pieces should show longitudinal sections, both radial and
tangential, some being polished, and others being in the rough
state. If a transverse section be cut green and fastened up, it will
split when seasoning. This, however, will show the bark, and
another section from a solid dry limb will be needed. The
latter only should be polished. After planing and sand-paper-
ing, the surface should be treated with several coats of French
polish, unless filling is used, and then less polish is required.
Then, with a pad and a little raw oil, the surface should be
rubbed down to a fine polish.
13
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
27TH May, 1913-]


If any part of a tree is put to any special use in a locality,
some of the manufactured product, for instance, a bottle of tan,
honey, or mucilage, or a manufactured article, should be shown
EXHIBIT OF SEEDLINGS.
To show importance of observing seedling to identify eucalypts.
Seedling of E. rubida. Seedling of E. virninalis.
Two trees very similar as to leaves, fruit, and bark.
as well as photographs of such scenes as an oil-factory, an
apiary, a saw-mill, shingle-splitting, bark-grinding, or bark-
stripping operations.
TYPES OF BARK OF EUCALYPTS.
1. E. rubina, candlebark (outer bark flaking' off, leaving
smooth, white surface).
Type of bark called /2. E. dives, broad-leaved peppermint,
box bark \3. E. melUodora, yellow box.
f 4. E. amygdalina, narrow-leaved peppermint, with short,
Fibrous bark -f dense fibres.
(5. E. macrorrhyncha, red stringy-bark, with fibres very
long and loose.
The display might include a piece of the kino, resin, gum,
or other secretion, such as manna in the case of manna gum.
In the last case, a specimen of the cicada, the insect causing the
flow of manna would add to the value of the display, as would
also diseased parts of the tree, along with specimens of insects
or grubs causing the trouble, or the galls that are formed by the
pests. In fact, the board should have displayed on it a sample
uf everything that the tree possesses, partly for the purpose of
determining the species, in doubtful cases, and partly to enlist
interest on behalf of the tree. This may seem a big order, but
I think it no bigger than the importance of the subject demands.
I certainly think that every high school and sloyd center
should have such a record of every tree within a radius of three
miles of the center.
Some of the advanced sloyd students could be given the work
of preparing the exhibits, and, under this scheme, all bovs
learning to work up timber would be learning to identify the
timber trees of their district.
IDENTIFICATION OF TREES.
A sub-committee of the Field Naturalists’ Club (Pro-
fessor Ewart, Chairman j and Dr. C. S. Sutton, Hon.
Sec.) has been working steadily for some years past to
get an appropriate common name for each of the 2,000
Victorian flowering plants. Its labors are so far advanced
that provisional names for three-quarters of them have
been supplied to the Journal of Agriculture for publica-
tion. Names of about 150 trees and taller shrubs are
printed below.
To assist teachers in learning local trees, arrangements
are being made to identify some, at least, for country
schools. If a numbered duplicate set of five, not more,
tree specimens—leafy twig, flower, fruit”, and bark, if
possible—is sent to the Training College, names will be
supplied as soon as possible. Next year, this work may
be extended. In time, it is hoped to have a colored tree
chart, and a workable scheme for identifying eucalypts.
At present, all is confusion with the identifying of these
valuable trees, except to two or three expert botanists.
List of Native Trees Suitable for Planting in the
Neighborhood of Schools.
As there is hardly a native tree which is not suitable for
planting in some district or other in Victoria, the present list is
practically a list of our native The common names
adopted for each tree by the Plant Names Committee are given,
and these will render the recognition of the plant easier in cases
where it is not generally known by its scientific name.
A number of plants are included in this list which vary from
shrubs to small trees, and, in fact, generally the height a tree
may attain depends largely upon the conditions under which
it is grown. The plants have been grouped into three classes,
namely, (1) tall trees; (2) medium-sized trees; and (3) shrubs or
small trees, so that, by reference to the numbers on the lists,
some idea may be gained of the size a particular tree may attain
under favorable circumstances.
The locality or kind of situation for which a tree is specially
suited or where it will do best is given. It should be clearly
understood, however, that trees will grow and often do well
outside these localities or situations, particularly if grown in
the neighbourhood of houses, where they can be given some
attention while young. In some cases in fact, particularly with
certain of our eucalyptSj thev appear to grow even better in
certain foreign countries, where they are now grown widely, than
in their native homes. With the majority of the plants on the
present list, however, the most satisfactory results will be
obtained by planting the trees in the districts or situations
mentioned.
1. Drimys aromatica, F. v. M. “Mountain Pepper.” Gool
uplands. - f!
2. Atherosperma moschatum, Labill. “ Southern Sassafras.;”
Mountain valleys.
14
[27TH May, 1.913
SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.


3. Hedycarya Cunninghamii, Tulasne. “ Austral Mulberry.
Gippsland.
4. Cappans Mitchellii, Lindl. “ Desert Caper.” Mailee
districts. . )(
5 . undulatum, Andr. “Sweet Pittosporum.
Needs fair rainfall and moderate temperature.
'6. Pittosporum revolutum, Aiton. “ Curled Pittosporum.
Needs fair rainfall and moderate temperature.
7. Pittosporum philLyrceoici.es, D. C. Weeping Pittosporum. 1
Mailee district.
8. Pittosporum bicolor, Hook. “ Banyalla Pittosporum.
South coast and Gippsland.
9. Bursaria spinosa, Cav. “ Sweet Bursaria.'’ Mailee to
Gippsland.
10. Zieria Smithii, Andrews. “ Sandfly Zieria.” Coastal
districts to Gippsland.
11. Brachychiton populneus, R. Br. “ Kurrajong. 1 Valleys
in N. and N.E.
12. Elaeocarpus holopetalus, F. v. M. “Black Olive Berry.”
Moist E. districts.
13. Elaeocarpus cyaneus, Ait. ( reticulatus, Sm.). “Blue Olive
Berry.” Moist E. districts
14. Beyeria viscosa, Miq. “ Sticky Wallaby Bush.” Coastal
districts to Gippsland.
15. Beyeria lasiocarpa, F. v. M. “ Large Wallaby Bush.
Moist E. districts.
16. Claoxylon australe, Baill. “ Brittle Wood.” Moist E.
districts.
17. Homalanthus Leschenaulhanus, A. de Juss. “ Poplar
Spurge.” Moist E. districts
18. Ficus scabra, G. Forst. “ Sandpaper Fig.” Moist E.
districts.
19. Fagus Cunninghamii, Hook. “ Myrtle Beech.” Wilson’s
Promontory to Gippsland.
20. Casuarina quadrivalvis, Lab. “ Drooping Sheoak.
General.
21. Casuarina lepidophloia, F. v. M. “ Belar.” Mailee dis-
tricts.
22. Casuarina Luehmanni, R. T. Baker. “ Buloak.” Mailee
districts.
23. Casuarina glauca, Siebef. “ Grey Buloak.” Mailee
districts.
24. Casuarina suberosa, Otto & Dietr. “Black Sheoak.”
Coastal districts to Gippsland.
25. Nephelium leiocarpum, F. v. M. “Smooth Ramboutan.”
Moist E. districts.
26. Acacia leprosa, Sieber. “ Leper Acacia.” S. districts to
Gippsland and N.E.
27. Acacia penninervis, Sieb. “ Hickory Wattle.” N.E.
and E. districts.
28. Acacia retinodes, Schlech. “ Wirilda Acacia.” Mailee dis-
tricts to Gippsland.
29. Acacia pycnantha, Benth. “ Golden Wattle.” Mailee to
S.W. and S. districts.
30. Acacia salicina, Lindl. “ Willow Acacia.” Mailee dis-
tricts.
31. Acacia pravissima, F. v. M. “ Ovens Acacia.” Gippsland
and N.E. districts.
32. Acacia subporosa, F. v. •M. “ River Acacia.” Moist E
districts.
33. Acacia homalophylla, Gunn. “ Yarram Acacia.” Mailee
districts.
34. Acacia stenophylla, Cunn. “ Eumong Acacia.” Mailee
districts.
35. Acacia melanoxylon, R. Br. “ Blackwood Acacia.”
General.
36. Acacia implexa, Benth. “ Lightwood Acacia.” General.
37. Acacia Dallachiana, F. v. M. “ Catkin Acacia. N.E.
districts.
38. Acacia doratoxylon, Cunn. “ Currawang Acacia.” N.Fi
districts.
39. Acacia glaucescens, Willd. “ Rosewood Acacia.” Moist
E. districts.
40. Acacia discolor, W’illd. “ Sunshine Wattle.” Moist E.
districts.
41. Acacia decurrens . Willd. “Early Black Wattle.” S.W.
districts to GippsLmd.
42. Acacia mollissima, Willd. “ Late Black W’attle.” S.W T .
1 districts to Giopsland.
43. Acacia dealbata. Link. “ Silver Wattle.” S.W. districts
to Gippsland.
44. Lepiospermum laevigatum, F. v. M. “ Coast Tea Tree.”
Mailee districts to Gippsland.
Kunzea peduncularis, F. v. M. “ Burgan.” S. districts
to Gippsland and N.E.
46. Callistemon lanceolatus, DC. “ Crimson Bottle Brush.”
Moist E. districts.
47. Callistemon coccineus, F, v. M. “ Scarlet Bottle Brush.”
Mailee districts.
48. Callistemon salignus, DC . .“.Willow Bottle Brush.”
General.
49. Callistemon brachyandrus, Lindl, “ Prickly Bottle Brush.”
Mailee districts.
50. Melaleuca parviflora, Lindl; “ Moonah.” Mailee to S.W.
. and S. districts.
51. Melaleuca armillaris, Sm. “ Bracelet Honey Myrtle.”
Moist E. districts.
52. Melaleuca-squamea, Lab. “Mealy Honey Myrtle.” S.W.
districts.
53. Melaleuca ericifolia, Sm. “Swamp Paper Bark.” S.W.
and coastal districts to Gippsland. .
54. Angophora intermedia, DC. “Gum Myrtle.” Moist E.
districts. , .
55. Eucalyptus stellulata, Sieb. “Black Sallee.” N.E. dis-
tricts.
56. Eucalyptus pauciflora, Sieb. “Snow Gum - .”' S. districts
to Gippsland and N.E.
57. Eucalyptus regnans, F. v. M. “White Mountain Ash.”
S. districts to Gippsland and N.E.
58. Eucalyptus amygdalina. Lab. “ Narrow-leaved Pepper-
mint.” S. districts to Gippsland and N.E.
59. Eucalyptus dives, Schauer. “ Blue' Peppermint”’ S.W.
districts.
60. Eucalyptus obliqua, L’Herit. “ Messmate.” S.W. and S.
districts to Gippsland. ‘ ' L
61. Eucalyptus vilrea, R. T. Baker. “ White Top Gum.” S.
districts.
62. Eucalyptus santalifolia, F. v. M. “ Sandal Giltn.” S.W.
coastal districts.
63. Eucalyptus macrorrhyncha, F. v. M. “ Stfing-ybark.” S.
districts to Gippsland and N.E.
64. Eucalyptus capitellata, Sm. “ Brown Stringybark.”
General.
65 . Ettcdiyptus Muelleriana, Howitt. “Yellow Stringybark.”
Moist E. districts.
66. Eucalyptus ' eugenioides, Sieber. “White Stringybark.”
Moist E. districts.
67. Eucalyptus piperita, Sm. “ Peppermint Gum.” Moist E.
districts.
68. Eucalyptus pilularis, Sm. “ Blackbutt.” N.E. and moist
E. districts.
69. Eucalyptus hcemastoma, Sm. “ Brown Messmate.” N.E.
and moist E. districts.
70. Eucalyptus Sieberiana, F. y. M. “ Silver Top.” N.E.
and moist E. districts."
71. Eucalyptus delegatensis. Baker. “Red Mountain Ash.”
E. and N.E. mountain districts.
72. Eucalyptus paniculata, Sm. “ Grey Ironbark.” Mailee
districts.
Is. Eucalyptus fasciculosa, F. v. M. “Pink Gum.” Mailee
districts.
74. Eucalyptus leucoxylon , F. v. M. “Yellow Gnni.”
General.
75. Eucalyptus sideroxylon, Woolls. “ Red Ironbark.”
General.
76. Eucalyptus melhodora, Cunn. “ Yellow Box.” General.
77. Eucalyptus polyanthemos, Sch. “ Red Box.” General.
78. Eucalyptus calycogona, Turcz. [gracilis, F. v. M.). “ Slender
Mailee.” Mailee districts.
79. Eucalyptus viridis, Baker. “ Green Mailee.” Mailee
districts.
80. Eucalyptus fruticetorum, F. v. M. “Blue Mailee.” Mailee
districts.
81. Eucalyptus Baueriana, Schauer. “Fuzzy Box.” Moist E.
districts.
82. Eucalyptus unciriata, Turcz. “ Hooked Mailee.” Mailee
districts.
83. Eucalyptus odorata , Behr. “ Scented Peppermint.” Mailee
districts.
84. Eucalyptus Bosistoana, F. v. M. “ Gippsland Box,”
Gippsland districts.
15
CATION GAZETTE AND TEACHERS’ AID.
SUPPLEMENT TCT^U
27tH May, 1913-]


SUPPLEMENT TO EDUCATION GAZETTE A x - TEACHERS’ AID.
; AM * L
85. Eucalyptus bicolor, A. Cunn. ( largifiorens, F. v. M.).
“ Black Box.” Mallee districts.
86. Eucalyptus Behriana , F. v. M. “ Bull Mallee.” Mallee
and S. districts.
87. Eucalyptus hemiphloia , I’. v. M. “Grey Box.’ Mallee
districts.
88. Eucalyptus alpina, Lindl. “ Grampians Gum.” S.W.
districts.
89. Eucalyptus globulus. Lab. “ Blue Gum.” S. districts to
Gippsland and N.E.
90. Eucalyptus Maidtm, I. v. M. “ Spotted Blue Gum.
Moist E. districts.
91. Eucalyptus longifolia. Link. “ Woolly Butt. Moist L.
districts.
92. Eucalyptus botryoides, Sm. “ Mahogany Gum.” Moist L.
districts. „
93. Eucalyptus goniocalyx, F. v. M. “Grey Gum. S.W.
and coastal districts to Gippsland and N.E.
94. Eucalyptus elceophora, F. v. M. “ Long-leaf Box. S.W.
and coastal districts to Gippsland and N.E.
qc. Eucalyptus Considineana , Maiden. “ Yertchuk.” Moist E.
districts.
96. Eucalyptus incrassata. Lab. “ Giant Mallee. Mallee
districts. . w ~
97. Eucalyptus oleosa, P. v. M. “Oil Mallee. Mallee
districts.
98. Eucalyptus cladocalyx. F. v. M. ( corynocalyx , P. v. M.).
“ Sugar Gum.” Mallee districts.
99. Eucalyptus neglecta, Maiden. “ Neglected Gum.” Gipps-
land districts.
100. Eucalyptus Gunnii, Hook. “Cider Gum. ‘ S.W. districts
to Gippsland.
101. Eucalyptus camphora. Baker. “ Sallow. General.
102. Eucalyptus paludosa. Baker. “ Swamp Gum.” General.
103. Eucalyptus Kitsoni, J. G. Lueh. “ Dwarf Gum. Moist
E. districts.
104. Eucalyptus cinerea , F. v. M. “Mealy Stringybark.” N.E.
districts.
105. Eucalyptus Smithii, Baker. “ Gully Gum.” Gippsland.
106. Eucalyptus Stuartiana, F. v, M. “Apple Gum.” S.W.
and coastal districts to Gippsland and N.E.
107. Eucalyptus Bridgesiana, R. T. Baker, “ But But.” Gipps-
land.
108. Eucalyptus viminalis, Lab. “ Manna Gum.” General.
109. Eucalyptus rubida. Dean &M. “ Candle Bark.” General,
no. Eucalyptus rostrata, Schl. “River Red Gum.” General,
in. Eucalyptus tereticornis, Sm. “Forest Red Gum.” N.E.
districts and Gippsland.
112. Eucalyptus corymbosa, Sm. “ Bloodwood.” Moist E.
districts.
113. Eucalyptus maculata , Hook. “Spotted Gum.” Moist E.
districts.
114. Tristania laurina, R. Br. “ Kanooka.” Moist E. dis-
tricts.
115. Eugenia Smithii, Poir. “Lilly Pilly.” Moist E. districts.
116. Panax Murrayi, F. v. M. “Large-leaved Panax.” Moist
E. districts.
117. Panax sambucifolius, Sieb. “Elderberry Panax.” S.
districts to Gippsland and N.E.
118. Panax dendroides, F. v. M. “Tall Panax.” S. districts
to Gippsland and N.E.
iiQ, Fusanus acuminatus, R. Br. “Sweet Quandong.” Mallee
districts.
120. Fusanus persicarius, F. v. M. “ Ming Quandong.” Mallee
districts.
121. Persoonia arborea, P'. v. M. “ Tree Geebung.” N.E. dis-
tricts and Gippsland.
122. Persoonia linearis, Andr. “ Narrow-leaved Geebung.”
Moist E. districts.
123. Hakea eriantha, R. Br. “Tree Hakea.” N.E. districts
to Gippsland.
124. Hakea acicularis, R. Br. (sericea, Schrad). “ Silky
Hakea.” S. districts to Gippsland and N.E.
125. Lomatia Fraseri, R. Br “Tree Lomatia.” S. districts to
Gippsland and N.E.
126. Banksia marginata, Cav. “Silver Banksia.” General.
127. Banksia integrifolia, L. “Coast Banksia.” S. and moist
E. districts.
128. Banksia serrata, L. “ Saw Banksia.” Moist E. districts.
129. Olearia argophylla, DC. “ Musk Aster.” S. districts to
Gippsland and N.E.
130. Myrsine variabilis , R. Br. “ Mutton Wood.” S. districts
to Gippsland and N.E.
131. Notelcea Longifolia, Vent. “Mock Olive.” Moist E. dis-
tricts.
132, Notelcea ligustrina, Vent. “ Privet Mock Olive.” S. dis-
tricts to Gippsland and N.E.
133. Eremophila oppositifolia, R. Br. “ Twin-leaved Emubush.”
Mallee districts.
134. Eremophila bignonifiora, F. v. M. “ Bignonia Emubush.”
Mallee districts.
135. Myoporum Dampieri, Cunn. Mallee districts.
136. Myoporum insulare, R. Br. “ Boobialla,” S.W. and S.
districts to Gippsland.
137. Myoporum viscosum, R. Br. S.W. and S. districts.
138. Myoporum platycarpum, R. Br. Mallee districts.
139. Styphelia lanceolata, Sm. S.W. and N.E. districts and
Gippsland.
140. Styphelia Richei, Lab. S.W. and coastal districts and
Gippsland.
141. Callitris robusta, R. Br. (var. verrucosa ). “ Murray Pine
or Marong.” General.
142. Callitris cupressiformis , Vent. “ Cypress Pine.” “ Mallee
and S.W. districts.
143. Callitris calcarata, R. Br. “ Red Pine.” Gippsland and
N.E. districts.
In the foregoing list, the trees are divided into the following
classes :
Tall Trees.
Nos. 2, 12, 19, 22, 23, 25, 34, 35, 36, 39, 41, 42, 43, 54, 56,
57> 5 8 > 60, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 74, 75, 85, 87, 89,
91, 92, 93, 98, 100, 101, 102, 108, 109, no, in, 112, 113, 116,
12 7 j *4i-
Medium-sized Trees.
Nos. 5,8, 16, 18, 24, 76, 77, 81, 84, 90, 94, 95, 106, 107, 115,
130, 142, 143.
Tall Shrub or Small Tree.
Nos. 1,3, 4,6, 7,9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 26, 27, 28,
2 9> 30, 3 1 , 3 2 , 33, 37, 3 8 , 40, 44, 45, 46, 47, 4 8 , 49, s°, 5 1 , S 2,
53, 55, 59, 6i, 62, 72, 73, 78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 86, 88, 96, 97, 99,
102, 104, 105, 114, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125,
126, 128, 129, 1 3 1, 1 3 2, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140.
Note.— ln some cases, it has been difficult to determine whether a particular
plant should be included in the list as a tall shrub or not. This applies, for
instance, to such plants as Leptospermum lanigerurn, Sm. (the “Woolly Tea-
tree”); L. scoparium, R. and G. Forst (“Manuka”); and Melaleuca deeuxsata,
R.Br. (“Cross Honey Myrtle”); but shrubs which are usually small and only
occasionally tall have been excluded from the list.
PITH AND POINT FROM ARBOR-DAY PUBLICATIONS
(U.S.A.).
What can schools do towards reforestation? Beautify their
grounds, distribute information, and spread sentiment and
opinion.
Who plants a tree loves his neighbor, the birds, and growing
things.
We don’t own the soil ;we borrow it. We ought to band it
over to our successors in a condition at least as good as when
we obtained it.
An Arbor-day celebration that does not rouse the whole district
is too tame.
'Lie j are so many places to plant trees —along the roads, the
fences; in the houseyards, the farmyards; and last, but not
least, along the banks of all streams, creeks, and ravines.
Forestry is practised by nearly every civilized country. France
is paying £j an acre to reforest her watersheds. Italy is paying
£4 an acre. X.
Through the teachings of intelligent forestry, it has been made
plain that ruinous flooo, and exhausting droughts can be largely
prevented. California has found, by actual measurement, that
stream flow has increased 25 per cent, since the establishment of
efficient protection for forest cover. On the other hand, it has
been calculated that, owing to deforestation, the Mississippi
carries to the ocean 25 per cent, more silt and soil than it did
forty years ago.
By Authority : Albert J. Mullitt, Government Printer, Melbourne.
[27TH May, 1913.
