



( *
FORESTRY
AND
THE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE
In Australian Reconstruction.
INDEX.
V —4? »V(fVrv
tiOM. 9
Witness. ' 1
Government for Employment. 2
Agrarianism - or Industrialism. 2
Our Resource - Capacity for Industrialism. 2
Conquest by Wood - a German objective. 3
Forestry in the Rural Economy of Germany. 5
Australia. 6
On Our Selection. 7
Ponsanoe or Inlsfroe. 8
Residual Lands the Key Lands. 10
Design for Development. 11
The Economic Base. 12
Timber Industrial Economics. 16
Prioe-to-get-supply* 17
ioionoy. IS
Recons tract ion Blueprint. 20
Industrialism in Wood. 21
The Woolgoolga Plan. 22
The Forest Plan. 22
Overhead, 23
APPENDIX — AND APPENDECTOMY.
The Australian Forestry Scene - • 1
2Cth Century.
Wild West Development. 3
Improvisation. ' 4
East - and West. 6
Forest Academy. 7
Post-Mortems
Academic. 9
Personnel Policies. 11
Timber Industrial. 12
Finis - et exordium. IS
APPENDIX 11.
-Programme of Post-war Works for Initial
Five Yeat Period,
APPENDIX 111.
N.S.W. Forest Areas not accessible to oper-
ations at present fixed prices.
E.H.F. SWAIN,
N.S.W. Commissioner for Forests.
/!% //


CORRIGENDA.
On page 6s Chapter "Australia” Fourth Line;
Read "prinked” for "printed l^*
On page IBs "Economic Base 11 - Second Line s
Hoad "integrate” for ”integral”.
On page 14;Second paragraph;
Read ”economics” for ”economies”.
Fourth last paragraph:
Road "Kahikitea” for "Eahogltea".
On page 21s "Industrialism in Wood"? Fourth paragraph;
Read ”Bogalusa” for ”Bogalusa”.
On page 23 : "The Forest Plan” - Fourth line;
Road ”sake” for "wake".
Eleventh lines
Road ”£3,500,000” for' ”X 4,000,000".
Twelfth line;
Read "8-9,000” for £11,000”.
Fourteenth line:
Read ”75,000” (people) for ”350,000”.
APPENDIX & APPENDECTOMY.
On page Z% Twelfth lines
Read "whence” for "when”.
On page 4s Chapter "Wild West development l ” -
twentyf irst lineV 11
Road "manoouvrings” for ”manoeufrings"«
On page 7: Chapter "Forest Academy” - twontyfourth
lino:
££ScT "60" (miles) for "100".
On page 11;Fifth paragraph*
Head" "practitioners hip ” for "pract loner ship”.
FORESTRY
AMD
THE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE
in Australian Reconstruction.


RURAL RECONSTRUCTON COMMISSION.
N. S.W. FORESTRY COTTISSICK.
FORESTRY :
and
THE CONSERVATION IMPERATIVE IN AUSTRALIAN
RECONSTRUCTION.
WITNESS: E.H« F. Swa in, N. S. W. G omm is slon or for For e s Is.
As a matter of duty, at a potential turning point In the
Australian evolution, the N.S.W. Forestry Commission presents, throu
Its v/itnoacoa, authoritative historical testimony to the Conservatio
Imperative in Australian Reconstruction, and to the high Political
Essentiality of Forestry in the Modern State.
These witnesses cros-
1. E.H.F.Swains The Conservation Approach to Recon-
struction*
2 v . W,A.5/7.d oßonz o vllie * The Climatological Bases of Develop-
ment.
3. D.E.Murray; Forest Alienation and Bpoliation.
State Laws for Ringharking.
Forest Redemption Policy.
Forest Areas.
4. I.P.McNally: Forest Glassification Surveys.
5. W.D.Muir; The Multiple Service of Forests.
Future Forest Fire Control.
Staffing Forestry.
6. B.U.Byles ; Training for Forestry: Professional;
Technical; Returned Soldier.
7. W.D.Muir: Financing the Forestry Programme.
8. R.J,W.Ritchio. Timber and Forest Industries.
9. H.I .Cooks The Market for Polos, Piles and Hewn
Timber.
10. G-.H. Mao leans The Mining Timber Industry.
Masonite.
Rattle Bark.
Essential Oil Industry.
11. E.L.Westbrook; Stabilisation of the Timber Industry
Rationalisation for Survival.
Firewood Supply Industry.
IS. H.Mo Lane: Forest Reading.
13. M.J.Youhotskys Forest Construction and Housing.
Water Supply and Irrigation.
14 0 E.B.Huddleston s Y/ood Technology and the Timber In-
dustries of the Future.
15. C.P.Sorenson; Forestry and Post-war Housing.
16. F.M.Bailey; Silviculture in N.S.W.


17. B-*U.Bylos: Exotic Pine Plantation Management.
18. P.U.Bylos and.
v; -A. W.doßeuze- Pam and Communal Woodlots.
vlllo.
19. W.A.W.doßeuze- Ro force ting the, N.S.W. Bust Bowls.
villo. Twin Forest Belts for Inland N.S.W.
GOVERNMENT FOR EMPLOYMENT:
As has happened throughout the ages* the courses of policies,
and the fates of Governments, for a given country, are determined,
inevitably, by the fundamental need of the people for employment j
at the standard of work and of living Instinct within theml
In the Australian chapter, now closed, employment was provided
by turning the people loose upon the lands of the country, to ex-
ploit the virgin resources! by building railways and roads, cities
and towns, with promissory notes upon the future, by precipitated
unemployment relief schemes; and so on.
Notwithstanding which, the dole became an Australian institution,
along with the Australian standard of living, and the national prayei
to 11 Advance Australia”.
The courses of lalssez falro colonisation are now finished!
Governments have little left to them to give away, and few of
the expedients of the Planless TJneconomy upon which they subsisted
in the past.
But they have, imminent upon them, the world obligation to be-
come keepers of the post-World War II immigrations!
The future responsibilities of Governments and Public Services
in Australia cannot bo faced with any last complacencies.
AGRARIANISM - OR INDUSTRIALISM;
The prospect for Australia holds only the alternative policies
of:
(i) Agrarianism.
(ii) Industrialism.
Agrarianism means subsistence farming, as in China or in pre-
revoTu tibnary Hussla, with some 85$ of the people engaged in agric-
ulture and in home manufactures which dispense with the factory.
Industrlalism connotes mechanised agriculture, employing about
10$'bf~’tHe~ pebpTo % plus an industrialisation to bo founded upon the
raw material resources of the country.
For the Australian proper - who is no peasant - abandonment of
the Australian standard of living, in a trek backwards to the Agrar-
ian state. Is unthinkable.
Therefore, there is no choice for future Government but to accept
its more modern function of planning the much more complex Industrial
State, whose beginnings are upon us.
OUR RES PURGE - CAPACITY FOR INDUSTRIALISATION;
Four thousand odd miners at Broken Hill make a city of 27,000
people.
Three thousand forest workers on 100,000 acres of managed forest
would furnish a timber industrial city of 55,000 population.


.Those are indices of employment in the industrial State.
Our potential industrial State, however, is conditioned by our
natural resources.
Natural res out cos fall into the throe categories:-
1. doe Indestructible.
2. The Exhaust:lble and Non-Renewable.
, 3. The Exhaustible but Renewable.
Our climates are indestructible. They predetermine our agriculture,
our silviculture, our industries, our architecture, our way of life.
Their diversity and their limitations have been compared with those
of other lands in deßeuzevillo 1 s "Climatic Bases of Development "(£).
Our water resources can be impaired b\it not irrecoverably.
Our mineral and coal stores are exhaustible and non-renewable*
There will come a time, not far distant, when the city of Broken
Hill will be a deserted village. We shall have to find other employ-
ment for its 27,000 people.
There will come a time, far distant, when our coal seams will be at
an end.
We have a present abundance of coal; but the future rate, and kind
of use, may be conditioned by developments not yet obvious. For in-
stance, the world's oil wells are falling, post-war supplies may be
awarded military and civil aviation priorities, and wo may have to make
additional requisition upon our coal and shale resources for more ex-
pensive petrol substitutos. Wo may be pox'suaded also to use coal for
the production of textiles (nylon), and for many other and unexpected
industrial products. Those things, by increasing the rate of consumpt-
ion, will reduce tho life of our coal seams, and eventually drive the
nation to other recourses.
Our soils are exhaustible; but renewable by erosion control, fer-
tilisers, and modern agricultural technique, or by forestry.
Our forests have been massacred and forgotten.
They can be restored.
Tho job is much more complex and much more onerous than the people
conceive.
The forests must be restored.
Because, of all our renewable natural resources, viz. those that
can he reproduced frem the soil, forests produce "the universal raw
stuff", the Primary Product from which Almost Anything can be made,
and without which, nothing can be donoi
CONQUEST BY WOOD: A Berman objective;
The long-range future of the world belongs to the forest-producing
countries I
In this future, Australia has no moan place, oven with its low
percentage of forest climates, if it fully uses its high cellulose-
production capacity.
Today the Australian timber industry is devoted to the provision of
wood for war. Whatever the resultant condition of our forests after
the war, our remnant timber resources made possible American partic-
ipation and the oanbined operation*
Without forests, Australia can have no policy of'defence. Without
Goaohwood and Maple, Australia can play small part In post-war civil


aircraft production.
Ytflthout forests, Australia can have no modern nationhood.
World War II was pPlanned on woods its continuance has depended
very cons id eras .1.7 on wood I
It was the aus 'mod-yield structure of German forestry, inaug-
urated at the beginning. of the 19th Century, which Increased acre-
yields from 25 cubic foot; to 66 cubic feet per annum within 75 years*
At the same time, enormous forest capital was built-up, of which the
annual cut was merely the annual increment, or orthodox dividend upon
the capital - the increasing capital being kept intact. Germany
elected to import one-third of her timber requirements rather than
to depart from the cardinal principle established, viz of forest in-
tegrity, in preparation for the future, come peace, come war.
Knowing Germany's lack of basic materials generally, pre-war pro-
phets considered that she would run out of critical materials in .six
months of World War 11.
But four years have o lapsed!
It was the forest resources of Germany, plus those of the coun-
tries she occupied, which were made to furnish, in addition to wood:
j 6/ Motor fuels. $/ Protein fodder*
pj Pats. p/ Fibres.
p/ Lubricating Oils. p/ Textiles.
p/ Munitions. p/ Acetic* acid.
Aeroplanes. v p/ Tannic acid.
p/ ■ Equ :Ipm cnt. p/ Charcoal.
p/ Metal Substitutes. p/ Plastics.
pf Synthetic Rubber.
/. / Rosins.
// Sugar.
. This forest capital, coupled with an intensive timber industrial-
isation, has made it possible for Germany to challenge the world - ar
to fight a long war I
The Nazis "made wood to fit into their warplans at almost every
point where there was a shortage of a major war material 11 .
The great Idea of "beating the world with wood” v/as sold to Hit lei
by Marshall Goering as early as 1928. And thereby Goerlng won his
first Party promotion - to the post of Chief Forester of Germany,
and Master Hunter (RaichfoVst - und Jaeger meister).
Goering was prompted In this matter by Professor Heske, who was
rewarded with the office of leader of Germany's propaganda campaign
among the world's foresters « the supervision of political infiltrat-
ion.
Von Monroy, a forester and a Prussian Junker, "was put In charge
of the great programme of developing wood conversion plants for
Germany ! s war economy"•
One Parohmann, formerly assistant clerk in a lumberyard was added
to provide "strong arm and organisation short-cuts u .
The Nazis planned, not only the continuous expansion of their
own wood utilisation industries, but also control of the world's woot
output, as a commodity essential In peace or war.
The story is told in full by Dr.* Egon Glosinger, Secretary of
the Comite Internationale du Bols. This Cornite was formed In 1952
in order to ensure bona fide co-operation among the nations of the
world, in bringing some order into the timber trade. The Nazis
sought to dominate, to capture or to sabotage the Oomite, and event


ually to supplant it by establishing f! a sort of synthetic internatione
centre of s in 1937 at Berlin” - after failing to gain the
blessing of the Second International Forestry Congress which was held
at Budapest in I°3o.
"The Nazis s 1 hope that, oven if they be defeated in world war,
the legal inn*, by which they have obtained the timber in
other. no untried, w i’i 1 leave them in control of key posit ions, from
which they can prepare the next German assault on oivillsat ion” •
Through Por estryl
FORESTRY IN THE RURAL ECONOMY OF GERMANY:
Quite apart from the startling revelations of World War II resort
to the managed timberlands for the munitions and service of combat,
both on the Allied and the Axis fronts, the German advances, expressei
from their dire resource-limitations, portend the future of the rural
economy of the technic ally-comp lex export-industrial State at peace*
Han-directed forests will bo marshalled, in that rural economy,
to contribute oven more significantly to the means of livelihood of
modern man than primeval sylva did when the word "savage”, derived
from "silvager”, implied ”tho man who lived, In and on, the forests”!
Three million Germans were gainfully employed in 1925 in growing,
utilising, and marketing wood - 2,000,000 of them part time, 50$ of
them independent farmers, or a nett 1,500,000 people in full employ-
ment*
This figure of 1,500,000 people represents-5$ of all parsons gain-
fully employed, 8$ of all persons employed in industry and trades,
15*5$ of all persons employed in primary production*
Forestry, agriculture, and forest products constituted ”a socially
and economically invaluable synthesis of local industry”, in a coun-
tryside apportioned as follows
£/ Fields. 46$
pf Forests. 27$
p/ Cultivated
meadows. 12$
$/ Grazing. 7$
6/ Waste land. 2$
p/ Amenities and
utilities. 6$
Total*. 100$
The products of the forests wore divided among industry as follows
$/ Fuel* 40$
p/ Building. 32$
pf Pu Ix 3 wood. 14$
p/ Mining. 8$
p/ Railway sleep-
ers . 2$
// Miscellaneous. 4$
Total. 100$
The "operating co-efficients”, i*e. the ratios of expenditures to
gross incomes of the various State Enterprises were;
$/ State Forests. 48,1$ Mines 95*0$
p/ Domains. 51*7$ p/ Steam-
pf Railroads* 76*1$ ship
p/ Post & tele- 76.3$ linos.9s*Bs
graph*
// Miscellaneous 84*9$
Industries. Average 76*0$


The State Forests showed the best co-efficient of all - because
oven highly-developed sustained-yiold silviculture depends far less
upon human labor than on natural forces; an advantage "which makes
it especially suitable for a State Enterprise, and which gives it
greater importance from the standpoint of the State budget than might
be supposed in view of it's minor share in the gross income from State
undertakings 11 .
At the same time, requiring as it does, loss mechanisation than
most other industries, it has a relatively high employment capacity
per £.
Finally, quoting Hesko himself;
"Industry and agriculture must store their products in order to
n awalt more favorable prices, xxx Forestry has the advantage of
,l belng able to store its products on the stump, without requiring
"special storage space, without storage bEargos, and without any
■"diminution in value, or loss of the products. Timber left standing,
"as a speculation, during a time of slight demand, produces, through
"its increment, still more wood substance; and thereby compounds
"the invested capital even during the crises. - Instead of using
"up Interest, it produces interest, xxx
"Those peculiarities of sustained-yield forestry endow it with a
"special position in contrast with other forms of Industry, xxx
"A State Forest may become a valuable reserve for the State’s bud-
get, if reserves of growing timber ere accumulated during depress-
ion years, 'when timber prices are low and demand small. The timber
"left growing xxxx is then ready for disposal in times of increased
"demand. Hi that event, 'increased cutting in the State's forests
"may prevent otherwise inevitable and always unpopular increases
"in taxation, and thereby exercise a very valuable function of
"equalisation".
AUSTRAIIA;
* 1 ‘""T 1 ,
AUSTRALIA - climatically - is North Africa northornlng, to India,
southornlng to California, westering to South Africa, south-easting
to Palestine, Spain, Italy and Prance, easting to Arizona, Texas,
Mexico, and the Argentine: printed by the Southern Alps with Insets of
Oregon, Colorado, Alaska and Norway: a fob of Tasmanian Chile and Eng-
land; eastern-edged with Portugal, northornlng coastally through
Coastal Argentine, Brazil,. Florida and China, to Mozambique, Madagascar,
and Central America (2).
Because of its climates and its landscapes, Australia is a critical
land, a land of erosion-hazards.
It has no eternal snows to feed its too few rivers; and it must rely
Instead upon its too few forested ranges.
In a century of colonial exploitation, wo have prostituted these re-
servoirs of agricultural waterings, superseded their timber production
by timber Importation, and used them to dispose of our unemployment
nuisance in hill-billy settlements, subsisting on the bones of des-
troyed forests to raise a poor-white posterity, or a now unemployment
problem.
Yet we have sought also to cradle a new race, of Quality, which re-
jects the Oriental-Mediterranean degree of agrarianism affording sub-
sistence, in similar climates, to many times our millions.
We are held in Question by the nations.
To v/ln our standards for our race is our high Governmental respon-
sibility; but wo lose them if reconstruction bo merely extension of
past unpolioles and not a purposedlan reacting from our own tribul-
ations, from the similar tribulations of older lands; in intelligent
and understanding sublimation of mass urges, and escapo-romantioisms, .


precipitated by unemployment or demobilisation crises.
Australia is sixteen times the size of Germany, with forests of
less extent than Now Guinea; although of more varied and valuable
constituency. It is six times the area of South Africa, but with less
agricultural opportunity than Argentine's, further from the world's
markets, and with world-demand diminishing for us. It is as wide as
the HAS.A., but its water power, coal, steel and natural resources are
relatively retail. It is withal a land of indigenous qualities, and
riches, peculiarly its own; and to be trusteed as the significant
contribution of Australia to the world pool.
It needs an indigenous policy I The debt of that policy is to the
people of the world who make it a place to live ini
It is for Government to marshal employment opportunities for' this
people | and to orient these, employment opportunities to the standards
and purposes that we racially, nationally, seek.
Government - and Public Services - can have no other reason for
existence, and should have no less objective.
ON OUR SELECTION:
Pre-V/orld War I, the Queensland Department of Lands settled on the
land, among others, one Macintosh*
It provided him with three hundred acres of Hoop Pine in the Kill-
arney district as a non-rosldontial G.P., at 20/- per acre. It gave
him twenty years to pay, by annual installments. Before the twenty
years wore up, and before the selector had made any "improvements", the
Queensland Forest Service resumed the selection to consolidate its ad-
joining State Forest. It was confronted with a compensation claim
for £40,0001 Estimating the value of the timber stand, the Queensland.
Forest Service realised the hopelessness of contesting the claim and
the resumption was allowed to lapse. The selector proceeded to log the
area. Careful records were kept. Three years later ho had netted
£47,000 from the sale of timber which the Grown had given away, with
£3OO worth of land, to Induce settlement.
This is an authenticated, documented case.
Around 1920, the Commonwealth Government through its newly-estab-
lished, enthusiastic. War Service Homes Department, decided to operate
its own sawmills, on its own forests, to saw its own timber for its
own housing schemes.
To this end, it purchased, in Queensland, for approximately £500,000,
from timber agents, timberlands which had boon alienated by the Crown -
"for settlement"!
A few years later, the Commonwealth Government resold these timber-
lands back to the same timber agents - at a reduced figure!
In N.S.W., Homestead Farm tenures 5-8, Parish of Alder, County of
Gresham, Cloud T s Greek, Dorrigo, are held by G.W.Sabine; who made a
sale agreement with Messrs. T.Pldoook and Sons, Sawmillers, to remove
the standing timber, at the rate of 225,000 sup.ft. per quarter, at
specified royalty rates payable to him regularly. There had been oper-
ations previously from this area by Hammond’s sawmill, but the Pidcock
operations began in May, 1939, In 1943, manpower and transport short-
ages made it difficult for Pidcock’s to adhere to the quarterly removals
specified by the agreement. Pldoocks applied to the Court at Grafton
on 24/7/4 3 for a variation of the agreement#
.C.W.Snblno objected to any variation. The ground of objection was
that the royalty derived by him from the sale of the Crown timber vested
in him by the Homestead Farm tenure, was "his only means of support"!


At a public mooting at Yarraman (Q,ld.) at which the Queensland
Director of Forests defended to a hostile crowd of electors, the
remnant Hoop Pine forest .reservation which was Yarraman* s mainstay,
a whito-beaided sole:tor inter3oo tod that he himself had early taken
up a selection virh. plenty of pine on It, sufficient to keep him
going ever since; fax! ho did not see why his sons should bo denied
the same rights, since the Premier of the day had declared that
selectors wore the backbone of the country I
The retort from the platform, whilst admitting the Indlsp©usab-
ility of a backbone, suggested that, possibly, a body consisting
only of backbone might be said to bo inadequate.
These are just a few instances of the normality of the selection
scramble, during which the small Forest Services joined in the rough-
and-tumble, and emerged with the remnants of the forest resource and
the rudiments of a forest policy.
The selectors who survived, and succeeded, and who became the
backbone of agriculture, were those who made no fortunes from forest*
but who, on good land in economic locations, added economics to hus-
bandry.
For the rest, either the Grown gift of timber is their *’only
means of support”, or they subsist in forest or timber industry or
hill-billy oocupatloni or they reappear in the Old Ago or Invalid
Pension lists, or in Unemployment Relief Camps, or at the labor
Exchanges| whilst on the Crown maps of the State, their names, as
original selectors, are being replaced by the portentous titles of
trading banks and financial corporations.
The failures in soldier Settlement may bo the more obvious to us,
yet be the least part of the selection failures.
But these same soldier settlements cost Australia, original capit
original natural resources, broken lives and family anguish - plug
a nett twenty million pounds of extra loan and taxation monies, wnlo
had to be abstracted from our Australian standard of living.
We had also to repatriate English settlors from Victoria.
Probably,a thousand million pounds would not measure the aggregat
loss and cost, to the Australian community, of the natural resources
human energies, and private and Governmental capital, which were
wasted during our history up to the year of review and reconstructic
1943.
It is obvious, in the retrospect, that one thousand million pounc
governmentally applied to a purposed evolution, could have advanced
Australia more directly towards the Utopia which is its aspiration.
Neither a person, nor a country, however, learns from the lesson*
of others | but only. If at all, from its own.
There is much to bo learned by us - if wo have the courage - froi
ours J
PENZANCE OR INISPREEs
The root of the matter is the very human pursuit of happiness, r
Is this pursuit, by the individual, which, collectively, becomes th
responsibility and concern of good Government.
Further, It becomes at once an affair of human employment. And
not merely a dumping of discarded humans into unemployed relief
‘works, but a sorting out of overheads and entities, good, bad or
indifferent! and placing each at the station in the national plan
whereat each can best serve both himself and the nation in self-
realisation in a common aim - or be served himself if he bo incap-
able of service.


This is tho policy of Pull Employment; which has boon promised,
post-war, hy all political parties I
Providence has so arranged that no onehnman integrates, in himself,
all truth, and all values. But, it has arranged that each human has
one or more vain os to contribute to the Commonwealth. Those unit
values, collectively, constitute the man-power potential of tho nation
which, applied to tho natural resources, yields the indigenous pattern
of our development.
Ideal Government promulgating Full Employment would concern Itself
with the correct placing of each individual at his inborn task within
the community. It would do so by delegating the responsibility for
Implementing this principle, to all the overheads of organisations
within tho Commonwealth.
Australians are more diverse in vocational talent than the gonerail
of races. It is this diversity, demanding fulfilment, which will shap
our policies, even if Atlantic Charters should otherwise declare.
It is humanly inevitable that, with our human material, our evolut-
ion will bo multiform Ih its modernism: that oven the man on tho land
w ill be a mechanic in an agricultural factory; that mechanised agric-
ulture will concentrate on arablo-oconomio fields; that tho then
abandoned hills are destined to servo tho State in newer and bettor wa
But, in reaction from this modernism, there is a residual of tho
race, seeking escape to Ponzanoo or to Inisfreo.
Incarnate in that proportion of our people who dislike the confines
of industry, or even the strait-jackets of tho Public Services, there
is a desire for flight to the supposedly free individualism of tho
countryside.
That proportion has been increased by the years of war.
The N.S.W. Lands Department has In hand, already, a thousand applio
ations from soldiers of World War IX who want to go on tho land; as
did their fathers!
The Lands Department stands ready, in Its historical r6lo, to cater
for this human demand.
Not all tho applicants are motivated by a vocational impulse to add
economics to mechanised husbandry.
Implicit in many is a resurgence of tho primitive; not so much,
perhaps, in this generation, directed to tho buccaneering exploitation
which characterised our colonisation, as towards the'concept of sub-
sistence farming, romanticised; reactionary against the intonsifioatic
of our economics, of our machinery, of our urbanisation - and of war.
n I will arise and go now, and go to Inisfreo
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made,
Nino bean rows will 1 have there, a hive for tho honey bee
And live alone in the bee-loud glade. 11
This is a human urge, a human demand, which must bo catered for by
Government, since it is human - and Australian.
It is confirmed in its existence by tho intense desire, also, of
tho city dweller to sook his own momentary escapes back to Nature.
Modern Government can neither deny this urge, nor yield hopelessly
to its urgency.
It is idle to let young soldiers of this war bury themselves in
uneconomic baokblooks, to raise a generation of poor whites. It is
idle to put on the land men who, with their families, will fail on
tho land: either because their production Is not needed there; or


because tho men themselves are of a type or experience needing the
discipline of a purposeful organisation to give useful direction to
their lives 5 and" opportunity for the contributory expression of their
values*
The urge must bo catered for In an economic way: not an individual-
economic ■ way, but a community-economic way*
Tho‘community-economic way has boon illuminated for Governments by
the land utilisation studies and experiences of eider and bigger
democracies; notably by the democracy of the United States of America*
That way lies towards the forests and towards the hills, which
supply tho fundamental resources of industrial nationhood, and with-
out 'which private enterprise runs out of basic material, and agric-
ulture goes to seed*
It lies in tho realisation of the Conservation-Imperative, as a
first principle of Government;, and in tho dedication of residual labor
to the residual lards, which, though previously rejected, now become
the headstone of tho corner*
RESIDUAL Ik HDS TUB KET JAHD3:
The residual lands of Australia are those left over, to the Crown,
from the processes of exploitative colonisation: plus alienated
lands which, agriculturally, pastorally, industrially, or adminis-
tratively, have failed to servo the country: and cannot succeed In
service to the country, if left in individual hands*
These are largely the hill lands, the forest lands, and the so-
called waste lands.
The residual lands are unimportant from the standpoint of individ-
ual profit-and-loss economics*
From the national angle of conmunity-economics, the residual lands
of Australia constitute the backbone of Australia. Without this back-
bone the corporate State would collapse in degeneracy*
The residual lands exercise vital functions of State;
£/ They provide Timber - without which, mining railways, shipp-
ing, aviation, defence, housing, publication, education, ad-
ministration, secondary industries, could not exist.
// They provide Water - without which, or with which, if uncon-
served, agriculture would fail, and the land become an eroded
dust-bowl.
j 6/ They provide Ro-oreation - without which the promised modern
complex industrial State would break down of its human weight.
/S/ They provide tho Australian Character - without which Australia
has no world contribution to make, In fauna, flora, art, archlt-
■ ecturo and literature.
ji/ They provide Grazing Refuges - without which drought would dec-
imate the pastoral industry.
/{/They provide community-economic Employment - without which.
Pull Employment Is an impractical political dream.
This is the concept of Multiple Service, described by W.D.Muir (s)*
The all-important residual lands of Australia have not been man-
aged for'their Multiple Service. They have not been managed at all.
There has been no thought of management worth mentioning, other than
a degree of management of their Incorporated State Forests. They have
been disembowelled and disintegrated in search of the last dregs of
selection - fox* Crown Leases, Homestead Farms, timber-traffic king


selections and so on; or reserved "for class Ification” or as tent-
ative "National Parks"; or as pocket handkerchief Scenic Reserves,
under trustees with neither finance nor managerial powers or con-
cepts: or left as "vacant Grown Lands".
In the scheme of things, they have been deemed to b© Ko Man's
Land - and Nobody's Baby*- abandoned to periodic bush fires.
It is no tribute to our collective intelligence, to our collect-
ive public-spirit, and to our genius for good Government, that, in
our zest for the individual good, we have dissolved the common good
on the too easy assumption that Providence will continue to exercise
vital functions of State that the State Itself neglects to exercise.
DESIGN FOR DEVELOPMENT;
The hills, the forests, and the waste lands - integrated by nec-
essary redemptions - must be developed by the State, for the State:
as an enterprise of continental-economics: as a pivotal of Full
Employment - for the useful absorption of labor surpluses created,
and to be created, by the labor-saving mechanisations and rational-
isations of our post-war industrialism: as a counter-poise against
new stampedes to the land - by directing human urges and urgencies
to the considered shaping of a stable and balanced and watered coun-
tryside, essentially Australian on a westernising globe: as an amen-
ity and rest-cure and a higher standard of living for our own in-
dustrialised populations: as a theatre of the world's newest, great-
est secondary Indiastry of tourism.
And,paromountly, as an increasing source of increasing raw mater-
ial for our Increasing urbanisation!
These hills and forests and waste lands - residuals of our agric-
ultural intensifications - furnish a fine and overbrimming category
of rare and beautiful and useful Australian resources;
// The Kauri Pine, the Walnut Bean, the Sllkwood and Silky
Oak and myriad cabinotwoods of North Queensland jungles.
The Ebony, Sandalwood and Buddha wastes of north western
spaces.
t>/ The Araucarian pineries of Southern Queensland.
// The Eucalyptlan coastal hill-lands, with their wealth
of world-wanted hardwoods.
// The Coaohwood stands for airplanes and rifle stocks.
// The scented Cypress Pino forests of inlands the Brig-
alow, the Yarran, the Myall, the Eurrajong, the Loop-
ardwood•
// The blossom and the tanbarks of the wattles.
/>/ The Eucalyptus oils.
/£/ The Alpine Ash of N.3.W. highlands*
// The Murray River Red Gum forests.
■j6/ The Royal Ash of Victorian and Tasmanian Mountains*
// The Jarrah broad belts of Western Australia.
The Karri Giants.
// The wildflowers of the West.


And these - gemmed with waterfalls and forest industries -
constitute only the high points of the pattern of species and
scenes which Nature has been good enough to make especially Aus-
tralian! and, therefore, especially to ho treasured and develop-
ed hy Australians for Australian industries, arts, crafts, archit-
ecture interior decoration, gardens, literature - and agricultur-
al conservation i
The hills, the forests, and the wastelands, are indivisible
in management: for multiple service.
They have all to he organised for that modern-state service,
by*.
// Survey and Planning - in a pattern of industry and
amenity (3)(4)•
// Heading and tracking (12).
// Fire Protection (5).
Forest Construction and Water Supply (13).
. £/ Industrial Development (8)(9)(10)(11)(16)(17)(19),
' ji/ Scenic Development, Playgrounds and Camping Places.
// Housing, Sanatorla, Hostels, Kiosks, Cablns (15)(15).
// Village - Planning (15),
// Car Parks and Aerodromes.
// Staffing and Employment.
fi/ Management Planning and Conservation Policy.
These are the functions of Modern Forestry - which Is Forest
Estate Management.
ECONOMIC BASE!
Policies which cannot make themselves self-supporting, have
limited chances of integral . survival in an Economic-Political
world.
Residual Lands under Management have in them the content of
self-finance. Thoy could be made to pay their own ways
j 6/ By Forest Industry.
// By Tourism.
// By Water Supply.
In community-economics, there can bo no question of economic
survival by the cannibalistic competition for bankruptcy advant-
age, which manifests itself, as between individuals; hut^ human
administration, official or otherwise, needs the discipline of
profit arid loss principles, as compass and chart of economic
efficiency, in the avoidance of need for subsidy from taxation to
cover bureaucratic irresponsibility.
Many of the regulations and rules of officialism Forestry
is no exception - would not have even their present pious and
time-serving existence, if economic sense had boon in direction
in the framing.
Man’s world is shaped and mis-shapod, by his economic thinking


There is an appalling difference between individual economic
thinking, and community economic thinking*
Around 1905 there existed, on the Dorrigo Plateau in N.S.W., a
oathedralled forest of Araucarian pines, lI altering lesser Rose-
woods, Goachwoods, and a hundred other precious timber trees spec-
ial to Australia*
In its stead today, thirtyeight years later, there are 45,000
acres of weedy, frost-bitten, wildernesses, harboring precariously
the survivors of the original selectors who earnestly put this
forest to axe and fire to turn it into smiling farms, ringing with
happy childhood, surrounding Brooklana, the new city of their dream*
The less unsuccessful of these selectors were the unsuccessful
ones who did not "Improve” their holdings? and lived to find them-
selves rewarded for their farming failures - by aoorueing timber
values I
Today, wo are short of matches, and butter boxes and rifle stock*
and aeroplanes, and landing barges and so on, because we destroyed
the Eastern Dorrigo forest.
Post-war wo shall have to reclaim these degenerated lands, at
cost, by reforestation - without seed supply of the indigenous
frost-resistant Hoop Pines which once grow there I
Australia paid the cost of Individual economic thinking, in
this case, in timber wealth in soil fertility, in human labor and
living, and in land and tax delinquencies*
And the debt is not yet met.
The Dorrigo Hoop Pine-Goachwood forest wqs one of the natural
resources which were to bo the foundations of national prosperity.
By Individual economic thinking wo proved, in 1905, beyond any
shadow of arithmetical doubt, that it paid us to destroy the
foundations of national prosperity*
Which is absurd *• from the angle of community-economic thinklngl
In the sovereignty of price, the natural resources had been
under-priced*
The railway had not arrived: there were no roads to speak of;
timber from settlers* clearings glutted the market, and artific-
ially depressed the market value; Hoop Pine on the Dorrigo, In
consequence, had a current minus value: it did not pay to cut
and sell it if there wore no sawmills within throe miles: it was
destroyed as va3uoless; H*D*Hay, to bo the first N.S*W. Forestry
■Commissioner, had no economic base from which to contend with the
Department of Lands.
Community-economic thinking was non-existent.
Fifteen years later, Queensland faced a similar situation; its
great Araucarian pineries of the Mary Valley and the Brisbane
Valley swung In the alienation balance; the price of Hoop Pine was
so low that only the butt logs were marketed; half the tree was
wasted as valueless and the Hoop Pine industries had only a ten or
fifteen year life; forestry had no individual economic case for
retention of its State Forests against tho less inferior economic
case for dairying.
Meanwhile sawn Hoop Pine, because of its lighter weight, arrived
in Brisbane at less price than hardwood; it was used as a cheap
flooring timber « whilst tho great hardwood forests along the
railway line between Brisbane and Gympio were being put to the axs
as of no market worth.


Queensland was busily engaged in undermining the foundations
of its prosperity*
The Queensland Forest Service fought economics with economies -
and wonl
All the timbers of the world mat in Melbourne in open, duty-
free competition. In that market, Queensland Hoop Pino had found
Its true price level. That natural economic finding of the world
was accepted by the Queensland Forest Service as the economic base
for Hoop Pino. Melbourne parity for Hoop Pino was adopted for
Brisbane - and the local price of Hoop Pine consequentially was
almost doubled | what time the Government of the day had established
State Sawmills to defeat the "timber barons” and to keep down the
price of timber. The Forest Service acquired the State Sawmills
from the State Enterprises Commission, and used them to establish
the true community-economics of native silviculture, and, incid-
entally, the profitability of that particular State Enterprise in
honest, open* competition with private enterprise at identical
prices for raw material.
Converting Melbourne parity, Brisbane, for sawn Hoop Pina, to
log value; and do-freighting back to sending stat Ton s, the prices
of Hoop Pine logs wore correctly established for the rail points
of delivery fran the State Forests.
But Hoop Pine existed in Nature if not in commerce in several
girth-classes, and in several quality-classes. In sawmilling, the
sawn recovery, and its apportionment into sawn grades and sizes,
varied for each of these girth and quality log classes. These
were accordingly defined and described by spSoifioatlon; and price-
differentiated, so that each class, best or worst, yielded equiv-
alent profit in manufacture, and were, therefore, equally accept-
able to industry.
The best grade of log was oyllndrically faultless, with a small
core, yielding clear and select timber.
The next two grades were sawlogs of two different degrees of
knot-occurrence.
The lowest grade was the knotty top suitable for case timber-
The Forest Service undertook the logging, classification, and
delivery of logs to "on truck” for industry.
The effects of those economic dispositions were electrifying:
// The great plywood industry of Queensland was born -
fed by the best grade logs previously monopolised by
tho sawmilling Industry for baser purposes.
Tho great case-milling industry of Queensland was born -
fed by tho upper half of the Hoop Pine tree previously wasted
In the bush. It developed in time to save the Australian
dairying industry when, a few years later, New Zealand
inrposod an embargo on the export of its Kahogitoa (White)
Pi,ne, then considered the only possible butter box timber
for Australia.
£/ The life of the Queensland Hoop Pine industry was doubled -
giving thirty years time to forestry to organise its
northern and western timber resources for industry.
// Queensland's great Araucarian pineries were saved to the
•nation - a silvlc-agric-economic survey established Hoop
Pino silviculture as more economic than dairying*
// Indigenous silviculture was bprn: the most noble conifer-
ous plantations in Australia developed, and, inter alia,
Australian dairying was of its future butter boxes.


// The settlors in the hardwood country ceased ring-
barking and turned to the more profitable occupat-
ion of supplying to the Brisbane market, the now
wanted hardwood logs#
// Architects and builders ceased to specify the
nail-dinted soft Hoop Pino floors for Queensland
.houses- Hardwood flooring came into its own*
Timber importation into Queensland was averted -
after wharves had boon established on the Brisbane
Hiver to accommodate it.
// Sawmilling and plym filing operations were equated %
their manufacturing margins defined to deny specul-
ative profiteering, and their efficiency compelled;
the timber industry organised its collective struct-
ure to present-day national usefulness*
fi/ And, incidentally, the Forest Service reduced five
measurements of the same log to one - its own: pre-
viously the cutter measured, the hauler measured,
tho forest officer measured, the railway station
master measured, the receiving sawmillor measured - .
and the latter docked all the preceding measurements I
// These savings and tho improving forest revenues put
Queensland forestry in a sound financial position,
no longer tho poor relation, but able to got funds
for organising its forests to ensure the permanence
and prosperity of its forest and timber industries.
When Governments and public fool a' thrill of horror,in terms
of individual economics, at tho thought of price rises, it is well
to count tho horrors which have boon perpetrated on tho community
by tho negloct to adjust prices to get tho host results for tho
community in terms of community economics.
Price cutting hero was proven to have been a groat national
evil, occasioning appalling waste, and undermining prosperity and
sound development. Price fixation to get supply to establish and
maintain Industry, to pay award wagos, and to ensure frugal util-
isation of valuable resources, has been demonstrated by the 1920
at seq. events in tho Queensland forest and timber evolution, as
tho only realistic instrument of realistic forest policy*
In North Queensland, a low-priced wood was dumped experimental!;
on tho Sydney market - as Hod Beech. It was the best and biggest
of a hundred known and unknown oabinetwoods of the Northern jungle!
It was rejected by Sydney as of no account. That single rejection
of Maple Silkwood, as it was later to bo called, encompassed tho
involved rejection of the North Queensland cabinetwood resource.
Walnut Bean, later to become the world T s fashion, was being ring-
barked and felled with all the others.
Takixag these two most precious woods to the price ceiling of
world parity, the Queensland Forest Service arranged the hundred
lesser cabinet woods of the North thereunder in relative price
order; and, using wood technology, collaborated with the native
timber Industry in market extension work. As Walnut Bean was
hard to saw, it had it rotary-plied. The product went to the
Chicago Exhibition, and swept the world.
By dint of high-pricing for its best woods, the Queensland For-
est Service not only sold these for their best uses, but it was
able also to satisfy the demand for cheap timber from lesser
§peciee which previously had been settlers’ clearing liabilities.
Although tho Q\ieensiand Forest Service was almost howled out
of court on repeated indictments of high royalty. charging and so-
called profiteering, it saved by its strong-arm, policy the forest


values of that State - and created the great industries which now
servo the nation-at-war.
Such la the Economic Base.
Before the economists it was described domestically as u Waste
not - Want not"I
TIMBER INDUSTRIAL ECONOMICS* (8)(9)(10)(11).
The economic principles of successful forestry, which had been
learned and proven in Queensland practice over years of trial and
trials, came later to N.S.W., there to be re-worked out, in greater
refinement, for application to the less remunerative hardwood trades.
These had had a speculative existence in a history of timber
traffickings and liquidations; surviving on advantages, fluked or
won in competition for location, and for under-parity ’’royalties' 1 .
Half their raw material came from private lands. The State
Forests had to compote for sales at bargain prices. Although con-
ditions of license areas, hopefully and legalistically, proscribed
’’cutting in a face”, the sawmlller’.s alibi of ? ’no orders' 1 except
for the pick of the stands, was sufficient to abort the condit-
ions, and to leave the forests in a state in which silvical oper-
ations were either Impossible or uneconomical.
Forestry in N.S.W. was baulked by individual economics. The
South Coast Spotted Gum industry was practically cut-out. The
North Coast industry was subsisting on immature trees. The re-
maining virgin hardwood areas were out of economic hounds. The
Cypress Pine stands were decimated. It was a problem of finding
economic grist for the sawmills - and gaining time to organise
for later permanence and prosperity.
But reform and reorganisation wore clamorously opposed, by the
industry itself, each unit fearful of disturbance of its precarious
status quo.
As the first step, the formula of sturnpage equation was admin-
istered over five years of trade expostulation, often politically
expressed.
This formula consists In awarding to each sawmill, the same
margin for manufacture I
As this margin is computed to yield a J. 0% dividend over award
costs for a sawmill of moan efficiency, the more efficient saw-
mills can attain a higher dividend, and the less efficient sawmills
have to increase their efficiency or bo satisfied with less than IQ%
The nward costs of felling, snigging, log hauling and sawn
timber transport are similarly awarded.
The balance loft over from the market price, after deducting ■
those awarded costs, is the sturnpage value or royalty; this balance,
diminishing to beyond vanishing point at the outer radius of
current price operation, provides the finance for forest organis-
ation towards industry permanence.
The effect is that sawmllllng is no longer a speculative In-,
dustry depending for its financial life upon cheating its workers
out of award wages, upon price-cutting, or upon log-stealing. It
becomes a legitimised industry, non-profiteering but gilt edged,
with a collective status and responsibility.
But - the market price, or the fixed price, pegs the radius


and intensity of its operation. If this price be too low, it
crowds the sawmills. In devastation of forest policy, for a limited
lifo 'upon a limited zone of overworked forests; forbidding resort
to virgin forests and also the ■utilisation Of sub-standard logs
which should bo used to extend the life of industry and make sil-
viculture economically possible.
This actually is the present position in N.S.W. and Tasmania,
and in degree in Vlctox*ia.
Before N.S.W. could organise its timber industrial economics
as Queensland had done, World V/ar II befell, and an anomalous
price structure was anomalously pegged for N.S.W,, at a juncture
when, not timber control, but timber production was the essential
of national war policy.
The contest of forestry in N.S.W. * since then, has been with
Commonwealth Price Fixation which has not yet reached comprehension
of the economic surround of timber production, and of the categor-
ical- Imperative of price-t O-ge t-supply.
As a matter of plain national need, and community economics.
Price-to-got-supply will, indubitably extend, from Queensland,
to the rest of Australia*
The timber industries and Forest Services of Eastern Australia
in two successive conferences at Sydney and Melbourne in 1942-4 S,
have established themselves in permanent conference to forward
this national economic Ideal.
PR IGE-TO-GET-SUPPLY;
It is reasonable to assume that a Commonwealth which subscribes
to the principle of assuring to its workers the wages-awarded by
its Arbitration Courts, will agree,to pay the costs of supply, at
those wages, for the material It requires.
It is reasonable to assumo also that the Commonwealth will not
knowingly price-cut for Individual or departmental economy so as
to imperil the forest policies of the nation, and the life of its
native timber industries.
The price-to-got-supply policy necessary to forestry has an
august precedent in tho Sugar Agreement, in which awards and mar-
gins and prices are similarly determined to procure Australia's
sugar production.
Timber has a more domestic claim upon'tho nation, in that bal-
ances from a similar agreement for timber fall into the money-
pool of States and Commonwealth in relief of taxation, and become
available to produce, by reading and silviculture, more timber
for the nation's need - and post-war, more productive employment
.instead" of an unfavorable trade balance.
Profiteering is eliminated, and orderly marketing inaugurated.
But, above all, no Forest Service can determine the economic
order of merit of its investment propositions unless Prlce-to-get-
supply is first accurately determined; and therefrom the stumpage-
potential of its various forests.
Upon these depend decision as to silvicultural intensities,
and the direction of post-war forest operations involving millions’
of pounds.
The Forest Services and forest industries of Eastern Australia
propose that an economic base be nationally-provided for a per-
petual officiency-industrialisation in wood, stabilised and rat-
ionalised for consumer-service; by demarcating all commercial
forests, exploited and exploitable, virgin and unroaded, tha*


Australia has - as the forest extent of the Australian timber in-
dustry: by price-to-gat-supply, representing the determined Aus-
tralian award posts and fixed manufacturing margins for the cost-
distance to the defined boundary of required supply; and by import
quotas*
Broken Hill provides a miniature of these concepts in operat-
ion* When the price of firewood was 54/-, and the supply at that
price became inadequate, the people of Broken Hill, as workers,
computed the award costs-to-get-supply at 71/-; and as consumers,
gallantly accepted the bill*
In 1942, at 54/- they froze; and cooked their breakfasts with
the morning newspaper*
In 1943, at 71/- they wore able to procure the nation 1 s ore in
comfort*
It remains for us to apply those lesson# in community-economics
to the national timber industry: to fix'the lab or-consumer prloe-
to-get-supply: to stabilise and rationalise industry: to put a
natural resource to work instead of to the axe: to strike a blow
for Pu 11 Emp loym ent *
If the price of timber be raised in Melbourne by the necessary
few shillings per 100 sup*ft# to meet the award costs of supply
from the green virgin Mountain Ash forests beyond the black, the
burned-out hardwood milling industry of Victoria.will live again,
and bo swung into post-war action, whilst- Its employment and in-
dustrial potential will be maintained until new forests on the
Groat Burn of 1938 ripen to a wider industrialism*
At the same time the restricted Tasmanian zone of sawmilling
operation would widen to the possibility of industrial permanence
on present forbidden forests; and, from its plenty. Western Australia
could then come economically with Jarrah to the greater reinforce-
ment of the depleted East; and take over from N*3*W* the sleeper
export trade with New Zealand, which N*S.W. may not much longer be
able to maintain,
Simultaneously, the N.S*W* industry, in danger of post-recon-
struction collapse, would get a now lease of life on out-of-bounds
forests, and this may tide it over until sapling stands ripen on
the cut-out areas*
The Queensland forest industries are already assured of per-
petuation - by a years-old proven price-reach policy, for all
forests, all species, all grades*
Queensland should never have to import timber*
South Australian pine plantations - and those of other States -
full of industrial promise, have to bo saved from post-war dumped
Hemlock* The price-reach policy affords them this opportunity*
Without this policy, the future of coir forest industries is as
black as the Gippsland hills.
Safeguarded by timber import quotas, we make the forests of
Australia - and their long chain of timber-working and wood-using
industries - safe for our democracy, and for its employment
potential*
As a matter of long-range community-economics - and of Pull
Employment policy - Australia should never again accept the in-
dividual-economic stratagem of writing-off the forest foundations
of our national prosperity, in order to bolster up the importat-
ion of cheaper foreign woods - to create an alien architecture and
Interior, in which even the Forest Offices of Australian forests
were furnished with Oregon shelves. Redwood cabinets, Baltic floors
and Austrian dhairsi


ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY:
Every sawmill, over:/ plymili, ©very available timber worker,
every available forest officer l in Australia, have had to be en-
listed into the war effort of timber supply - whether their effic-
iency be high or low!
The moan efficiency of the forest Industries, by consequence,
has fallen to below pre-war organisation-efficiency: and pre-war
it was not 100$*
Again by consequence, and otherwise,.. the cost of production has
increased, and prices have risen.
Forestry advocates a still further price increase - to cover
the forest-potential of Australia; so that it can make all its re-
maining sources of raw material accessible to industry, not only
for war purposes, but for reconstruction purposes, and also for
post-reconstruction Pull Employment purposes#
The nett cost to the nation of this plan, paradoxically, is nil#
The contrary policy of price-repression, to mask those universal
war phenomena, would react in anti-social disorganisation of over-
worked forests, the cutting-out of sawmills, and the falling of
supplies - In justification of negative timber control as against
positive timber production.
The coats of wartime tjjabor supply wore best squarely faced*
They are award costs on warvtlmo efficiency standards. They permit
no profiteering. They must be paid to get supply.
l
But there is Implicit obligation to increase our eoonomio-
efflolonoy; so that, whilst wo cover with our operations all our
necessary resources - without thieving the plums for economic
appearances - wo can, at all events post-war give'the consumer
service "which is due in return.
No man can realise himself until he is extended. That extension
is essential to humanity. If evolution is not to cease - and the
iHw Order of Social Security will not provide relief from the nec-
essity, for overheads at all events.
But economic-efficiency has to bo compelled by economic necess-
ity.
The manufacturing margins awarded to the sawmilling industry of
'N.S.W., under war dispensations, permits the continuance inevit-
ably of inefficient plants.
As scon as may be, these manufacturing margins must be narrowed,
to compel eoonoraic-offiolonoy; and to eliminate the inefficient-
unfit •
The Forest Services must further this efficiency development by
sawmill studies and sawmill engineering. Since the money balance
available for forest organisation depends upon prior timber Indus-'
trial organisation, and upon both depends consumer-service, it Is
obvious that industrial efficiency is fundamental to d-overnmental
forest policy and finance#
But the major component in the price of timber is the-cost of
timber transport; and the major component in the cost of timber
transport is the cost of logging in the forest.
The cost of logging can be reduced; and must be reduced - by
Forestry action.
Mechanical transport, to be abundantly available post-war -
with drivers - will make this possible#


But before mechanical transport oan operate to full effect,
the forests must be effectively roaded (12)*
Bullock-age roads will not suffice#
But again, before forests can be roaded, there must be economic
warrant.
No Forest Service with any sense of managerial responsibility
would put up to its bankers - the Treasury - a recommendation to
expend £IOO,OOO in the Industrial organisation and reading of the
Upper Hastings virgin Blaokbutt forest in N#S#W#, without inform-
ing them that it would then become necessary to pay sawmillers
2/- per 100 aup.ft. to induce them to take the 266,000,000 super#
feet of timber awaiting utilisation there*
And no self-respecting Treasury would put this proposition high
among political priorities, when it involves increasing income
tax to meet a deficiency which belongs appropriately to the trad-
ing structure#
So, we got back to the principle of prioe-to-get-supply, as
the Economic Base*
But, with this proviso now, that, from this economic base, we
shall not only be put into a position to meet our wartime timber
supply obligations, but, proceeding therefrom, to meet the post-
Y/ar challenge towards economic-offioloncy and cost-reduction, by
more honest means than by stealing the plums from the nation’s
assets, and by cheating the worker of his dues.
RECONSTRUCTION BLUE PRINTS
Rural Reconstruction moans to Forestry, inter alia, the promotion
of a new era, in which the forest industries, proper, are vlllaged
in or near forests which, through management and silviculture,
guarantee them permanence, and an awarded degree of prosperity:
with security and amenity for their workers#
The first measures towards this end aro to;
(i) Increase the mean efficiency of the industries 1 by the
elimination of the unfit and unworthy, and by the technolog-
ical-economic stimulation to efficiency, of the remainder.
(ii) Reduce the number of industries on overcrowded forests, to
that number of efficient plants and managements which the
forests oan sustain by their growth*
Clii) Placo the displaced efficient plants on new, last forests,
to be brought within economic bounds by a Timber Prices
Agreement resembling in principle the Sugar Agreement#
(iv) Fire-protect and stimulate the forest production, so that the
periodic rav/ material yields equal the Australian consumer
demand; and keeps pace with our increasing population, and
with oar inareasing industrialisation.
There is na nqy/ principle Involved# Basically, these four meas-
ures merely express the traditional forest policy of sustained
yield « the traditional business policy of paying dividends out of
earnings, and not fraudulently out of capital#
But there Is integrated into the measures, as corollary, the latt-
er day concepts of rationalisation and stabilisation (id.
Those, however, flow by consequence from the essential acceptance


of the principle* of .tho sustained yield, and with it, acceptance
of responsibility for national consumer-service.
Forestry text-books culminate in exposition of Forest Working
Plans for unit forests. Those text-books, however, were written
prior to the era of modern transportation, when each isolated
town or village had to be assured of its own local timber supply
continuity. Today, the State is tho working plan area; and the
purpose of tho State Working Plan must bo to assure the State of
its own local timber supply continuity, free from tho necessity
to import from oversoas.
There can be no good international reason to Import any rural
product, whilst there aro Australians looking for work.
Tho forestry blue print for reconstruction provides primarily,
for the primary production of the entire Australian timber re-
quirement, in Australia, by Australians;and, incidentally and in-
tegrally, the conservation of water relations, and tho provision
of forest recreation. To that end It proposes the incorporation
of the entire forest estate in its allotted sphere of rural use-
fulness, and the organisation of that estate for multiple forest
s orvlo o.
IHDITSTHIALXSM XM WOOD;
In tho Sydney Morning Herald one day in 1908 appeared an illus-
trated two-column article describing Woolgoclga, H.S.W., as a
hive of timber industrial activity, evolving to a Promised land
of agriculture.
Today, thlrtyfive years later, the village of Woolgoolga is of
the same dimensions - the timber industry has petered out, dairy-
ing has not redeemed its promise, and the village survives as a
seaside resort for Grafton,
Within another thlrtyfive years, it could bo converted to a
city of 55,000 people.
It has in it all tho elements of a timber industrial city like
that of Begalusa, TI.S.A., in the same climatic zone.
It has a port - though its jetty is broken down. It produces
hardwood naturally* It has a climate natural to the production
of Southern Hollow Pinos which yield building timber and case
timber, veneers, wood-pulp and turpentine. It has vacant soils
waiting for such a crop - and this crop we need* There are wait-
ing- timber markets in the capital cities north and south, within
economic reach, and local markets as well*
An economic pulp mill site is hard to find in Australia. It
demands three to six; million gallons of water per day - but, more
difficult again, requires moans of disposing of an equivalent
volume of noxious effluent without taint to tho neighbourhood.
Woolgoolga provides all those requirements but the raw material.
And no other Australian site.is better situated*
This raw material can bo readily produced - pilot plots have
Established this* Tho first raw material supplies could be de-
livered fifteen years after the Inception of planting operations.
Before thlrtyfive years are past the .world will be calling for
more wood cellulose, and not merely for paper, but for textiles
and plastics.
Three thousand forest workers on 100,000 acres of managed for-
est in the Woolgoolga district, would furnish a timber industrial
city of. 55,000 poptilation, in the same way as 4,400 actual minors
at Broken Hill build into a city of £2V,000 people#


THE WOOIGOOI&A PIAN:
The Woolgoolga Forest Project Is cited as the text of expos-
ition of the content and intent of modern industrial forestry;
whose purpose Is to furnish never-ending raw material for a com-
puted industrialism, at lowest coat by highest economic-effic-
iency, for ultimate consumer-service, as the forest contribution
to increasing employment, at increasing standards of living - and
scour it; •
From the beginning to end it is planned and costed, knowledge-
ably to pay its own way, without subsidy from general taxation*
Woolgoolga f s economic past was in tfibers its economic pres-
ent is, obviously, not in agricultures its economic destiny lies,
Incontestably, in forestry.
The Woolgoolga Plan contemplates tho management of a forest
region by a Regional Forest Authority for forest industrial dev-
elopment; on much the same principles as those which function,
agriculturally, in the case of tho Tennessee Valley Authority,
U.S.A., and which should function similarly in the agricultural
management of the eroded Hunter River Valley of N.S.W.
The proposition Is made because n ßeconstruction” implies that
we are now ready to take hold of lalssea-faire failures, and con-
struct them to pro-determined structures of human achievement In
constructive living.
A planned development for Australia is an ideal too colossally
complex to be implemented by any one overhead.
But wo' can essay the purposed planning of a geographical part.
Tho Woolgoolga region is a self-contained region of forest
climate and forest soils. It integrates timber industrialism with
water relations and tourism. The native hardwood forests, which
formerly sustained an.active timber industry, are rising again on
Its background of hills. The projected plantations of Southern
Yellow Pinos will fill the f orog^ ov - ' 1 •. Seascapes and beaches
fringe tho scone.
A million people visit Miami Beach in Florida every season, to
bask in a region of plnowoods.
The pinewoods of Miami are composed of these same Southern
Yellow Pines.
THE FOREST PLAN;
Intensive management belongs, in economies, to propositions of
high economic location and of high productivity - such as that of
Woolgoolga.
As cost-distances from markets increase, and returns diminish.
Intensity recedes into extensity.
•Stumpage value, truly computed from true market values for sawn
timber, is the index to economic investment in forestry.
Exterior forests may, thus, bo subject only for reading and fire
protection - since their stumpage return ray not Justify direct
investment in new production; and repreduction may have to be
left to Nature to do, uneconomically, a 3 beet it can.
But, Integrated in the forest foreground, and extending back-
wards therefrom through the exterior commercial forests to the
final hills, arc areas of scenic content, which, in the scheme of
things, will be patterned and managed as such; leaving primitive
things primitive, for the enjoyment of those many who seek relief


from occupational stress## by "walking in halted woods of naked
glory, in the green and gold of forest sunshine" - to pause "like
one with all the life transfigured",
- Or catchment areas whereon, for the wake of water relations,
the forest canopy is maintained perpetually intact, under a sel-
ection system which merely anticipates Nature by the utilisation
of overmature destined otherwise to less useful deaths#
Against this background of Forest Planning, have been projected,
as a First Draft in Reconstruction, the Budget of Forest Works
scheduled in Appendix II of these notes.
This budget, accounting for £4,000,000 per annum, for the em-
ployment of 11,000 actual forest workers, is a mere foretaste of
economic forest Investment possibilities in N.S.W.
But it would give living to probably 350,000 people I
The pyramiding effect of forest works on secondary and tertiary
employment is something to be reckoned with in reconstruction
planning*
In Roman law, the State is guardian of its future.
Australia does not exist for today but for all time* It is
with its future that we must bo concerned, if "Advance Australia" 1
means anything at all.
In that future, the unique cellulose-production capacity of
Australian forests, popularly unknown because of the isolation
of forestry from public knowledge, is an Australian opportunity*
- "Forests produce the Universal raw stuff 1 , the Primary Pro-
duct from which Almost Anything can be Made - and, without which.
Nothing can he done" -
Although forestry-ln-Australia thus far has been regarded,
both by public, public services and Governments, as mostly a minor
conceit of a minor officialism, the long-range Industrial Future
of Australia depends in largo degree upon the contemporary forest
policies of Australian Governments,
The forest works which have been drafted in Appendix II here-
to, derive from the economic base, as parts of a Plan of Forest
Industrial Development in which Australians of World War II can
engage | in the confidence that, collectively, they will be creat-
ing now wealth for the Commonwealth, and adding to the stature
of the nation.
OVERHEAD!
Human beings are routineers, well drilled in the past.
Acts, regulations, precedents, procedures and fixed attitudes
build the past securely into the future.
Change in direction can come only from a changed direction.
The burden of Reconstruction must be carried by the Overhead.
The Overhead is supplied by the rank and file.
The principles of promotion to the Overhead must be:
(1) The first purpose of staff organisation is to assure the
service of the State and not necessarily, only the beno-
■*>■?.!. --a J-1- - ■» —-s■» Jt „ n


(il) Every man Is entitled to opportunity for the expression
of his values, in the field in which those values can
best bo expressed.
(iil) If the organisation owes something to the individual,
the individual has an equal debt to the organisation.
(iv) Increment must bo earned, and not unearned: promotion
must be won by effort and not by the effluxion of time.
(v) Men are entitled to effective developmental leadership.
In making any appointment, the obligation is to the men
to be led and to the purpose to be served - not to the
appointee!
(vi) Acceptance of promotion to the Overhead is a responsib-
ility to do and not to be. No man should remain in the
Overhead beyond hla capacity for responsibility for re-
sults.
The Future must necessarily be ah intensification of the Past.
The weight to be carried by Overheads will be increasingly
heavy.
If the Overhead cannot carry the modern burden, the Future will
collapse.
The organisation of Overheads is the most critical step in Re-
construction,


APPENDIX: AND APPENDECTOMY:
THE AUSTRALIAN FORESTRY SCENE - 20TH CENTURY:
In its Q.lO, the Rural Reconstruct ion Commission asks, speciflc-
ally;
n Has the attitude of Governments towardt JTorost exploitation,
been one which has enabled a progressive forest policy to bo
built up 5 or has it been influenced unduly by;
” (i) To obtain money fran the sale of timber?
tt (ii) To enable timber interests to exploit timber, without
due regard to the future Of the timber supplies, or
the correct development of the forests as a biological
entity?
"(ill) To increase the areas available for agriculture, or
othor forms of farming, at all costs? 11
The Commission adds that, if necessary, it will hear this evidence
in camera.
It seems, therefore, that it requires an answer.
The answer to the question must be substantially the same for
all States - certainly for the Eastern States*
X X X X
Against the formidable background of century-architected, techno-
Solitical forestry in Europe, and more precisely in Germany, the
aninant Australian forestry scene, as a whole, presents a trivial
inoonoluslvoneasJ stark rlngbarked trees, massacred forests* wasted
wood, timber trafficking, failed selections, slum-dwelling timber-
workers, bullock team transport, and coffee-pot sawmills, on the one
side, are offset toy royalty wrangles, departmental vondettas, academic
controversies, psoudo-soientiflo silviculture and toy working plans,
pressure propaganda as for Ittjports, popular clamor as for new front-
iers; political bye-passing*
- And the gradual painful accretion of forest service and forest
plan.
X X X X
Australian Governments have never developed authentic forest pol-
lol os!
There was no public will to such.
The petty sawraillor, and timber workers, were preoccupied in piec-
ing together livings from tho pick of selectors 1 clearings, obtain-
able at a ringbarking song; for ealo, through speculative timber
agents, to a glut-depressed city market; in competition with Oregon
and Baltic dumped duty-free ex sailing ships, and only for which were
building speoifioatlons provided - by imported text books for Im-
ported architects!
We were then only exploiting the country.
Neither sawmillor nor forest worker wore advocates for an indig-
enous forest policy which might react against their inodes of liveli-
hood.
The only advocates of a forest policy were occasional forest
officers; who contended unrealistically for the reservation of those
refuges of noxious vermin, weeds and valueless timber, the subject
of popular objurgation, which came to be known as State Forests.


To tho local Member, forestry was a dlsfranchis ocl nuisance., an
irritating, If temporary, obstruction to u •
Tho political slogan was: 11 Children before trees: what has pos-
terity done for us?* 1
lacking positive Government policy, however, the State Forest
Services, as they emerged, promulgated unobtrusive forest policies
of their own; and at their peril I
Sometimes they persuaded tolerant Ministers to tolerate their
hopes, so long and so far as the constituencies wore kept appeased.
On,occasions, an exceptionally publie-spirited Minister took his
courage and his political life in his hands, and cajoled an instal-
ment of forestry legislation through tho Houses, when it emerged
safely emasculated to conform to the departmental and popular stand-
ards of the day.
Governments have not been Influenced, by desire to obtain money
from tho sale of timber*
If they had been so influenced, they would not have permitted the
departmental alienation of timber lands capable of trebling and sus-
taining the forest revenues.
The lands Departments, In any case provided more revenue, and
more constituent-satisfaction, than tholr Forestry Branches.
Forest revenues, instead, were kept down by popular Government
nolicies of “low royalties I *, so that neither finance nor economic
justification existed either for forest management or for forest re-
tention.
Governments were elected to implement the democratic will of the
people; and the people wanted to exploit the native timberlands by
timber-trafficking and selection.
And did I
Tho Ministers who came and went, in all States, were, ordinarily,
decent Australians, differentiated only by their idiosyncrasies and
prejudices. They were generally honest, their main concern the human
interest. They wore made Ministers for lands or Agriculture or Minos
usually because they were men of the land, serving men on tho land,
who wanted more land thrown open, logically and humanly enough, to
gain neighbors, schools, roads and amenities. They wore stimulated
by tho shopkeepers and commission agents of tho main street of tho
hopoful villages, knitted together in Progress Associations to get
railways and public works and “developmentand more business from
public expenditures, and more unearned increment for the constituency
Tho local member of Parliament was tho political agent of the Pro-
gress Associations; and tho guide, philosopher and friend of indiv-
idualism. If ho did not gain tho village ends, ho was in political
hazard of his occupation.
Every country town of pretensions had its own more or loss pre-
tentious Crown Lands Office. Tho Chairman and Members of the Local
Land Board wore visiting potentates? the District Surveyor an import-
ant regional dignitary. Even tho C.P.lnspectors were allotted higher
salary and status than tho forest officer; whilst the Staff Surveyors
of the Lands Departments were authoritarian, decreeing that the only
possible place for State Forests in tho scheme of things - if such
rural decorations were requisite to a balanced countryside - was in
the inaccessible ranges; beyond the needs of survey, or roads; whence
the costs of logging made timber industrial operations both uneconomi
and unnecessary, particularly in competition with tho struggling sel-
ector in the ringside timber zones, who provided the struggling sawml
with more of the best logs than they could cut, at only tho lowest
costs, to meet a market depressed by “cut-out-and-get-out“ gluts.


Ministors had an average currency Of only two or throe years, and
though political color changed with changing Governments, the con-
stituencies remained the same, and so did the deportments. So also
did the Australian way of life - "-each man for his out of the natural
resovirces".
Each succeeding Minister had to be able to announce, against the
next ©lection, that he had bettered the settlement record of his
predecessor. Lands officers strove to satisfy him.
When selection lagged, and unemployment reared its head, while
Grown Lands became less and loss, lands Departments sustained their
activities, establishment strengths and statuses, by combing and
"r©classifying 11 the forest reservations which had been provisionally
won by Forest Branches of the same Departments. Remunerative timber
stands were given away to induce and subsidise selection. Lands
Officers justified this technique in the name of "development”.
When case after case of timber trafficking wore adduced against
them, they devised the disguise of new tenures which gave the select-
or the right to sell the timber if he paid rent on a nominal timber
valuationi It was or. all fours with the philosophy of renting a
.furnished house and giving the tenant an incidental right to sell the
landlord T s furnituroi Too often he sold the furniture statlm and
vacatedi
In other cases, he cleared and grassed thirty acres for a bullock
team and settled, down to a tiiiborgotting life, subsidised by the
Grown timber royalties which had boen transferred to him.
- Or retired to urban amenities? and conducted a small Forestry
Department of his own, living on his forest revenues I
wild west Development";
It was our Age of "development" - of our "Vast Potentialities" -
a Planless Void of Uncontrolled Individualism.
It was probably the colonial extension to Australia, of a historic-
al period of exploration, discovery, conquest, "buccaneering, South
Sea bubbles, and the looting of new countries for their treasure.
W© had really not decided to stay In Australia - for England was
"home"! Arid \ihen we did take up land, it was to seek a fortune
rather than to remain. Our bark and tin huts, our later frame house
even the few pretentious manors, and, finally, evon our great city
aggregations in a dopopulatod countryside, still testify to this
original nostalgla.
The ordinary man himself was caught In the coils of a Wild West
economy, which compelled individualistic existence by competitive
cheapness at tender, auction, or contract; at the cost of untold
extravagance with the community f s assets, the natural resources
which alone could provide -the foundation of the national prosperity
implicit in th<s new nation f s crest "Advance Australia".
The country a Ido was subjected to an appalling prostitution. The
gospel of cheapness by exploitation was universally accepted as
"developmental™ and had official sanction. King Demos, with royal
gosturo, flung fortunes underfoot, and kept a starveling court.
"Efficiency ancl Economy" were self-imposed by the Public Services
with such excessive r>x*opriety that they cast away the substance of
the Indigenous riches for the portentous shadows of an arithmetical
progression of an almost childish check and inter-chock, suporvisioj
and counter supervision, inhibiting any constructive functions of
the Departments, and denying the tools of workmanship to the worker,
as an economy, tc accumulate funds for popular politics.
It was the Alge of "Development"of our "Vast Potentialities" "but
it was also an Ago of Shoddy and Retrenchment in the Public Service*
during a per loci when they also lost popular respect, not yet regain*


Conservation concepts had -not appeared on the horizons of civil-
isation ? and Governments were not so const runted,, or so served by
their Public Services as t£ bo able to direct the ordered evolution
of the perfect Stats f
The war for forestry was largely an IntoriHiCino strife within the
Public Services.
Ministers wore usually bewildered observe*? of this internecine
strife, who finally sided with the tines and turned their thumbs
down upon the equally bewildered "Chiefs" of the embryonic Commiss-
ions of Forestry.
A Premier sent for one such State Forestry Officer and quoted
warningly to him the story of “The Armenian arid the Turk"; "The
Armenian was always good at logic, and the Turk was always convinced
by it. But against his v/illi This annoyed the Turk, who finally
slaughtered the Armenian, to end the argument".
The sequel to the warning was the eventual official slaughter
of that Director of Forests.
It was a low adventure to bo the Chief of an Australian Forest
Service in those colonial days - a period of personal drama, of
private triumphs, and tragedies of the public interest, of heresy
huntings and counter-vigilances, of manoeufrings and out-wittings
and unpublished intrigues, of stipsrs ess ions and Committees and Royal
Commissions •
In four States, five forestry chiefs lost their official lives.
Forestry Acts of sorts were indeed passed in Western Australia,
Victoria and IJew South Wales, but their authors in the first two
States were quickly superseded or dismissed.
The Queensland Forestry Act of a dozen or so clauses passed through
unnoticed in 1906, but the continuous energies of the Forest Service,
over since, have failed to secure passage of modern legislation in
face of the opposition of Treasury, Lands and Public Service Comm-
issioners. Instead, reactionary Lands legislation was enacted to
return the momentarily freed Provisional Forestry Board to the lands
Department, as a Sub-Department; and to dismiss the then Director
of Forests who had by his evidence confounded a Royal Commission
of Lands officers entrusted with the political task of winning an
election, by alienating the valuable cabinet wood forests of North
Queensland to the timber trafficker in the name of "DEVELOPMENT".
IMPROVISATION :
From the beginning: the Forest Services had to bo, in very faith,
their own Schools of Forestry: and forest administrators, driven
teachers of a rag-tagglo class.
The administrations wore ribs of thoir early colonial lands De-
partments - In various degrees of detained detachment: inheriting
nuclear staffs, with tendencies to build Forest Lands Departments
rather than Forest Services: and to furnish them. In the stylo of
the period, with penal forms, processes, phraseologies and para-
phernalia.
The first District Foresters were lesser men than the District
Surveyors with whom they had to contest the stage: their first
assistants were the more or less literate bushman procurable at the
20% above the basic wage v/hich was appraised, by Public Service
Boards and Commissioners, as a proper remuneration for forest officer
The struggle for forestry was, intrinsically* an appeal to the
older-officlalism which rocked the political cradle, and ruled thq
Public Service world. It was, first and last* a struggle for the
status, staff and finanee with which to bu;JPW - th© tools of thf
worker!


Because forestry was unpopular and unpolitical, all wero grudged;
and what was actually galnedT/to he fought fop, inch by inch.
Only depression, unemployment and demobilisation really saved
forestry in Australia.
The forest administrations had to make shift; to turn water into
wine, to make the bricks without the straw. Butchers, bakers,
candlestick makers *• were laboriously hammered into forest assessors,
surveyors, botanists, lawyers, architects, civil engineers, climat-
ologists, ecologists, publicists, wood technologists, economists,
silviculturists, timber industrialists, conservationists, conservators
And this improvised type of organisation was then largely stotted
by Public Service processes as representing appropriate establishment
strength”l
The first forest assessment surveys in Australia, complete with con
tour and forest type maps, however, were made by such men; the word
"assessment”, now claimed for the scientific forestry glossaries, was
coined by theml
This was in N.S.W. - circum 1915.
But the most amazing achievements of improvisation in forestry-
building, were those of Queensland,
In 1915, Sir David Hutchins catalogued, the staff of "the small
English Forest Branch” of the Her thorn State as ”six men and a girl -
a man for each day in the week, and the girl for Sundays”.
The Queensland Forest Service no we know it today, was improvised
out of returnee!' soldlor s' -Tn tlie years' l9l£-I9SCT
Taking advantage of Commonwealth repatriation funds offered to the
States to tide over demobilisation after World War I, the ”small
English Forestry Branch” bye-passed the Public Service system, and
improvised a complete Forestry Department out of returned soldiers;
selecting and sorting them out into the assorted jobs of forestry,
according to their upbringings and vocational bents. Then, by daily
uso of the mimeograph,happily available, conducted a correspondence
course by circular, giving "directions for using”, std£ by step, the
processes necessary to survey, organise, road, log, market, reforest,
cost and account.
Two years later, the Commonwealth concluded that its repatriation
job was dene. It out off its finance, and-the State Government dis-
covered that it had a Forestry Department which did not exist on the
State salary list', or in the estimates submitted to Parliament*
The Queensland Treasurer ordered the discharge of the unprovided-
for returned soldiers, who wore really the Queensland Forest Service:
discovered the consequences of dissolving an essential going concern!
censured the Director of Forests for committing the Treasury to un-
authorised expenditures.
And recanted I
By fortuitous chances such as these was Australian Poros-try built.
The first Intensive forest mapping ever done in Australia was the
work of those Australian returned soldiers: it became the sure basis
of the ordered logging operations and forest management which follow©
The glorious Hoop Pino plantations, which distinguish Queensland
from the exotic-coniferous south, were initiated by returned soldiers
The truly/Australian spirit, and silviculture, implicit in the proson
structure and outlook of the Forest Service of Queensland, wore de-
rived largely from the spirit of the original A.1.P., made manifest
in peace.


It whs to "be ten or fifteen yea-3?a later that these same returned
soldiers gave the glad hand of welcome to the graduates of the Queens-
land Forest Cadet shin system, who bad boon brought up with them as
part of the forestry family; and now arrived back to help add the
coping stones*
EAST - AND WEST I
The high drama of Australian Forestry was played in the Eastern
States: where valuably forests* cramped with fare timbers unknown
to the world, were to be turned into "smiling farms”: to the early
colonial tune of subsistence farming for the Australian millions,
sorviceing industrialised Europe from a Hew pood Front,
The Westralian Scene:
Prom the Eastern View it seemed that Western Australia escaped
the full glare of the footlights, primarily because its broad Jarrah
bolts were neither climatically nor edaphically favorable for closer
settlemento And because the Jarrah broad acres came under the pro-
tection of a pew erful timber export trade, established early on the
Westralian scene*
Nor did the Jarrah industry's demand exceed the wide forest cap-
acity, Its utilisation of the stands was rendered naturally more
complete because it. was not confronted with a mountainous terrain,
a dispersal of forest areas, and a multiplied confusion of timber
species of all sorts and usesj conditions abich, in the Eastern
States, conspired to make industrial operation, as well as forest
management, silviculture, and fire protection by the Forest Services
infinitely complex, aM also economically unstable.
Wfith utilisation restricted largely to expert grades, the sustained
yield ideal in Western Australia was not so desperate to realise*
Western Australia retained its forest adequacy, and the Westralian
forester his happy, if loss eventful life,
The South Australian foene:
South Australian forestry found an even more sheltered life: for
the still better reason that it had no native forests at all!
It presented, instead, a mild landscape of mallee undergoing trans-
formation to wheat and wine; in which the worship of the wanted tree
climaxed in arboricultural ambitions*
Among the packets of seed which came the way of John Ednlo Brown,
late arboriculturist to N.S*W. removed to South Australia, was one
from Southern California - unconsciously bringing an American-despised
pine tree to its South Australian hornoclime, where it sprang into
forests : as did similarly, and at much the same time, the Mexican
prickly pear when Introduced to its homoclimes in North-western N*S-W*
and Southwestern Queensland.
Thus oa*ne silviculture to South Australia*
First-tended by -falter dill., it Was magnified courageously by
Edward Julius into the extensive commercial plantations of Pinus
radiata, \siich are now gallantly serving tholr adopted country-at-war
in the year 1943.
X X X X
By the grace, or ungraoe, of Nature, the F'orost Services of the
Western States of Australia were saved from the maelstrom of realism
which invested and informed Australian forestry in the Eastern States
from the white-hot, unequal, contests in the official-political fur-
naces of exploitation In which the forestry protagonists of the East
tested their mottle, learned their vigilances, and taught their raw
recruits how to neko Australian forestry safe -from democracy 1


There was leisure in the Western States for learning.
A lectureship -in forestry was established at the University of
Adelaide.
The Southern State devetod itself to the rescue of the forestry
profession in the H gw Commonwealth.
FOREST. ACADEMY;
Wise in his day and generation, H.K.Maokay, founder of the Victoria:
Forestry Commission, had foreseen that the two main cornerstones of
forest policy wore:
(i) Staff-organisation.
(ii) Staff-training.
He provided - in .the forest legislation which ended in his super-
session - for staff-organ! sat ion by the Forests Commission free from
external Public Service oontroli and fop his 'own Forestry School as
the recruitment and training centre of his future administration.
These original dispositions eventually gave to the Victorian Forest
Commission the strongest staff organisation of any Forest Service in
Australia; enabling the Victorian Government to use it later, inter
alia, as its Rural Fire Protection agency for the State, to pioneer
the concept of timber kilns, and to assume the huge wartime respon-
sibilities of charcoal and firewood supply.
But the typo and location of the Victorian Forest Academy were
shaped from political chance* The gold mines of Creswick were worked
out, population dwindled, the hospital buildings were vacated, the
electorate was that of Sir Alexander Peacock.
The Creswick Hospital in the early 1900*3 became the Victorian
Forestry School (and forthwith languishod from the current philosophy
of Economy).
In H.S.W. in 1917, the now Forestry Commission copied the Victor-
ian idea and established its duplicate of Creswick at Harara, 100
miles from Sydney.
Harara died fran Inanition and an unshapod, uncared for concept.
, In 1920, the Queensland Forest Cadetship Scheme was initiated, in
a co-partnership between the Forest Service and the University, with
the native forests and timber industries as the workshops of apprent-
iceship.
The South Australian Forest Academy quickly filled the staff needs
of the South Australian Woods and Forests Departments - the overflow
went West - and East; to fill the vacua.
The early Forestry Schools in Australia made a prime contribution
to Australian forestry in that they brought into forestry, fine Aus-
tralian educated youth with ideals and hopes of service above the
ordinary.
The Australian time and place, hew over, called for a higher forosti
oduca t ion; c omp x* oh end ing:
(i) A community-economic philosophy.
(ii) A land-use concept and plan based upon the Australian climat-
ology.
(ill) Wood technology - and a technique of utilisation for the new
Australian timbers - with new ap ooif loations for the architect,
to displace the coniferous specifications of imported building
text-books.


(iv) Timber industrial economics: qualitative pricing towards
complete .utilisation as a first step in applied silvicul-
ture; stumpage appraisal and timber sales policy and ad-
ministration; a planned timber industrialisation; tariff
pr ot ec ti on aga ins t 11mb or dump ing £r an ali enat ed forests
abroad which condemned our Hoop Pine forests to destruct-
ion and our Eucalypts to ringhiarking.
(v) forest reading and loggias forest constructions.
(vi) Principles of forest classification; forest survey and
assessment.
(vll) The multiple-service of forests.
(vlii) Fire protection.
(ix) The forest botany, ecology, and silvics of the undis-
covered Australian forests.
(x) Forest management: and forest management surveys.
(xi) Administration - departmental and political; and the
principles of economic-officienoy.
Lessons in these fundamental subjects of Australian forest
management and administration were given to the Eastern State
Forest Services: hardly, bitterly, with their backsrto the wall of
falling forests and chaos of unordered selection and exploitation:
when forestry briefs were learned, originally, newly, in dire daily
administration: when forestry's only chance lay in superior knowled
and vigilant purpose to out-manoeuvre Impossible odds; when old
text-books failed like broken toys: when the Australian forester
was abandoned by his age and generation to his forlorn hopes, and
to his besetting faiths.
The lessons wore not new: they wore as old as the ages. More
recently they had boon sorely memorised on the vaster canvas of the
elder American democracy - whence they.were being increasingly pub-
licised in the forestry text hooks of the New. World.
Forestry in Australia desperately needed this higher education.
The South Australian Forest Academy taught little of these lessc
Secluded from native reality, divorced from economics, it pur-
veyed for the most part instead, the dogma of an English estate
amenity forestry, in which the odors of Druidism and of the med-
iaeval chase, survived the centuries, and prescribed, in the 20th,
an uneconomic and an unhygienic coniferous silviculture as all-
forestry for Australia.
Young Australian foresters, needing, above all others, an Aus-
tralian outlook, were graduated into Australian forestry realism,
naively equipped with fixations such as those :-
(i) It was the forester's function to grow timber: not to sell
it* Forestry was a profession - not a business.
(ii) Only waste lands should be devoted to forestry: all waste
lands should be planted with trees what other use had
waste lands?
(ill) Whether forests paid or not was no concern of the scientific
forester* whatever the cost of timber production, the timbea
Indus try would have to pay.
(iv) The indigenous forests of Eastern Australia should be aband-
oned, or converted to coniferous plantation.


(v) The indigenous forests and their Industries should he
put into cold storage while timber could he inserted;
there should he no tariff protection for the native timber
industry under Australian protection policy.
(vi) It was unnecessary to thin forests, planted or otherwisej
all growth went Into the dominant trees with which supp-
ressor trees did not compete.
In 1924, the Australian Forest Academy lapsed: what time
there we re two spare foresters, displaced from the hurly-burly of
State forestry; a Constitution Commission in search of unification:
State Universities dividing spare specialisations; and vacant build-
ing lots on Burley Griffin’s Canberra Plan.
The South Australian Forestry Academy was transferred to the new
national capital. Its currency wont with it, was elaborated, given
gold backing under the aegis of the Commonwealth, declared exclusive
by the combined Universities of Australia - and issued to the State
Forest Services as the only legal tender. All others were pronounced
counterfeit by the now Principal of the new Commonwealth School of
Forestry, under hand and seal of an Inspectorship General of Forests
for the Commonwealth of Australia.
Naturally enough, the chief supporters of the now School were the
graduates of the University of Adelaide, devoted to their Alma Mater.
Compassionately,however, the Queensland Forest Service came to the
rescue of the new School with its first five Cadets, guaranteed to
be put through, complete with degrees, in one year!
N.S.W. also contributed whatever it could rake up.
But there wore clashes and schisms.
The State of Victoria countered by developing Its own School of
Forestry; the University of Melbourne broke with the combined Univer-
sities and gave academic recognition to this modernised State School
of Forestry.
Tasmania drew on the graduates of the Victorian higher education
in forestry.
Queensland took the precaution of thoroughly grounding its For-
estry Cadets at the University of Brisbane, and in field and office
practice in Its own Forest Service, before trusting them to possible
uneconomic indoctrinations. It sent same of them subsequently to
the U.S.A. Two returned with the degree of Master of Forestry, Yale
'University, magna cum laudo.
N.S.W., which had, too early, let lapse Its School of Forestry at
Narara, sought the collaboration of its' - University of Sydney in settir
up a Forest Cadetship basic degree course similar to that of Queens-
land, majoring in Botany and Geography, which could be availed of
basically also by Soil Conservation, agricultural and/or Lands student
This collaboration was not forthcoming - lest it violate the Univ-
ersity’s bonded subscription to the exclusive school of forestry
thought now enthroned in the national capital, remote fron the world
of the forest Industries.
POST MORTEMS:
(i) Academic;
Diplomas and degrees, like china eggs, brightly shining, wore
meant to induce the sitter, neither to crow nor to cuckoo, but to
hatch chickens that count and do not come home to roost!
Bring a youth up in the way he should not go, and ho will not de-
part from it when ho is a practising forester - unless after years
of bewildered defeat and personal anguish.


r ';v? ana non-thinning theorems may have done small mate
ial harm In South Australia; save that nearly 50$ of the resultant
pine plantations materialised, on the too-poor waste lands. In die-
back and spindled sub-normality | whilst the remaining 50$ wore so
depressed in diameter growth by non*thinning, that the first logging
of the new Mt. Burr Sawmill were a frantic search for siseablo logs
on break-edges and in accidentally thinned pockets - and only World
War II saved the economics of an otherwise gallantly-conceived pro-
ject!
Pinus pinaster might remain healthy on waste land,, but it was toe
slow growing and too crooked to pay its way, even on otherwise econ-
omic locations*
Because the Forestry Schools had inculcated in sound Australian
youth, that was non-professional, the same im-
planted mistakes marred coniferous silvio-economic success in Wes-
tralia, Victoria and N.S.W.; and helped to depose a Commissioner
in the Mother State.
Travelling eastward, the academic teachings invaded the native
forests and brought confusion to the Forest Services instead of to
their embattled enemies.
They were quoted against the Forest Services, by departments,
politicians and Royal Commissions, as so lent ifioally authoritative,
In devastation of their endeavors, They nearly lost to Australian
silviculture the economically important Hoop Pine forests of south-
ern Queensland, and the rich and rare cabxnotwood jungles of Native
Queensland; they disintegrated the nearer hardwood forests of the
eastern coast: they decimated the Cypress Pino forests of inland.
But they reacted also to produce from Eastern Australia the first
authoritative indigenous thesis on silvicultural v. agricultural
economics, favoring the former; by which the Queensland Forest Servl
finally won title to the Hoop Pino lands which arc now the sites of
man-made forests of noble indigenous trees, and thereby saved the
dairying Industry of Australia, and later came to the rescue of the
nation in World War 11.
By similar reaction, they also won tariff protection for Austral-
ian forestry and Australian forest industries, when timber-importing
interests played thotr trump card in producing in the witness box
at a Tariff Board enquiry, a Commonwealth and a South Australian
forestry protagonist of ”cold-storago t? for the native forests to
justify wholesale importation.
They als*o contributed by contraries to the concept of native
timber utilisation by wood technology, leading fran Queensland to
(the foundation of the division of Forest Products of the Council for
Scientific & Industrial Research; and to the evolution of the stump-
age- equation formula w ithin the philosophy of economic efficiency
which now motivates the Eastern Forest Services, to a higher and mor<
natlonally-usoful forest policy*
It was too much to hope that forestry in Australia would escape
the conflict of Ideations and Ideologies which make the whole world
a modern Tower of Babel to be reduced only by World Wars. But it wa;
pathetic to see fine young Australians, who had boon attracted to
the new Australian profession of forestry, being sent out to teach
the indigenous forests truth according to Druidic-feudal gospel; and
counselled that the writing of pedantic papers numerally annotated
with bibliographic testimony to their unoriginality, was more im-
portant than the unobtrusive disintegration and re-integration of
the truth-content of the native timberlands and their industries.
In economic service to our employment capacity.
Our beginnings in higher education in Australian forestry lacked
complete validity and vitality, because they lacked, on occasion
repudiated, and wore remote from, indigenous experience! and because
they fell back on protective pretentiousnesses and text-book author-
itarianism, alien to the Australian scene and psychology.


Our Universities did not cater for forestry: it was not a convent-
ional course narrowing to a specialisation in one or two sciencesj
but one widening to an integration of the sciences in a liberal educ-
ation towards applied conservation and economic management. The
N.S.W, Chair of Geography got nearest to it, and could have been basic-
ally used.
The most important function of Higher Education in Forestry was to
provide a new generation of administrators, leaders, captains of forest
industries, executives and technicians, for extending and widening
policies; and to concentrate into a brief teaching period, the truths
which had been more realistically learned over a ten-fold period by
administrations and technicians in painful practice.
Staff Improvisations had held the fort and had achieved wonders -
but for caning functions, factors and futures, now recourse had to
be made to University youth; who in taking forestry, however, had to
accept the penalty of isolation from their age and gonoratlon at the
Universities; and detachment also from tho laboratories and workshops
of tho Forest Services.
On the other hand, medical science had evolved to a complete accept-
ance of tho obvious principles of training for which forestry must yet
wait.
Just as the medical student can now find his careful way to praot-
lonershlp only through a hospital cadetship within tho Universities,
and a journoymanshlp under guidance of an actually practising honor-
ary, so also should the forestry student have been trained in tho
professional realities within the University, using B'orost Service
facilities and experience.
{ii) Personnel Folicios:
The Queensland 1919-20 experiences in forestry staff improvisations
were repeated in miniature in 1933-54 in South Australia, when forty
depressed out-of-works led and taught by half-a-dozen technicians,
forestry and other, completed tho most abstruse forest management
survey work in Plnus radlata ever done in Australia; and, again, in
1936-38 in N.S.W. whon, with a raw crew of ordinary
youths, led and taught similarly by an overloaded technical few, tho
Plnus radlata plantations and the Alplno Ash forests of N.S.W. were
subjected to a critical sllvlc-GOonomio survey, to establish tho
basos of scientific management.
Nowhere else in the world has forestry ever boon reduced to such
straits and devices.
The experience, however, can woll enrich tho richor future; with
Australianism - when hundreds of thousands of Australian youths aro
released from years of u 90% borodom and 10$ of intense foar 11 - to
fond for themselves.
Forestry staff-improvisations offor significant lessons for post-war
personnel policy.
Thoy discovered that a small, dovotod, overhead could achieve more,
by delegating much, and teaching alii -
- That knowledge was not to bo held, but givonl
Th*oy brought to light, and lifo, tho inborn hope of the plain man, of
finding his interest and his valuo in croativo work - and his inborn
rlghlp to share in that work to the extent of his effort and character.
They demonstrated that a human organisation could function without
schisms, or or discontents or Public Service promotion
appfeals, because its discipline was that of tho unit aim in tho common
aim.


They disclosed the human and economic possibilities of a division
of labor, and of a dilution of overhead resulting from promotions
on the basis of effort, character and skill, rather than on the basis
of dull and effortless seniorities.
They threw a revealing light upon the chronic and anachronic isol-
ationism of the conventional forestry organisation -
- And of conventional Public Service personnel machine policies.
Their success derived entirely fran the fact of promotion by merit 1
by tryingl
By 1935, on the other hand, the N.S.W. forestry salaried staff-
organisation had so gone to seed, from years of seniority promotion,
to the satisfaction of Public Service processes, that it was incap-
able of implementing a forest policy.
The Public Service Act provided that promotions were subject of
reference to a Promotions Committee. A printer from the Government
Printing Office, and a Weights and Measures officer could outvote
the forestry representative on the Committee, on the accepted Public
Service Thesis that if the senior candidate could appear to do the
work of the vacancy, ho must be promoted thereto.
It was for the Commissioner for Forests, from this disadvantage
point, to plead with the Public Service Act to give him a chance to
carry out his Commission, upon the success or failure of which de-
pended his renewal of office every seven years I
Forestry ia not a subject for the Public Service Actj which applies
t o the stat ic adriTnistrat ions •
It belongs to the category of the developmental commissions, which
arrange their own staff organisations under Arbitration Court Awards.
It is an army of officers whose rank and file are the workers in
the forest and timber industries. It cannot function by static
routine, but only by the know ledge able individualism of its dispersed
personnel, left largely to their own initiative, and, certainly, to
their own resources in the search for the forest data upon which
forestry administration rests.
Its future depends upon its power to assign men of all qualities
and qualifications to typos of work of multifarious character and ex-
tent .
It has never boon, and can never be, understood, by external auth-
orities having in mind the ordinary Department of State, and deter-
mining whether the head of such shall bo given the mimeograph or the
dictionary he asks for
Public Service, processes must boar their share of the responsib-
ility for the failure of forest policy in N.S.W. - a failure measured
by the extent of timber importation which had to bo resorted to, by
the state of the forests, and by the condition of the sawmilling in-
dustry.
(Hi) Timber Industrial:
Western Australia has forest adequacy and timber industrial securit
South Australia has built now man-made forests of Pinus radiata
which' in the South' East will deliver 400,000,000 sup .ft* of logs to
the great sawrnilling and plywood industry, annually after 1972.
The Adelaide Hills will make a proportionate contribution.
Queens land in the last war brought practically all its native
timherTanda within price-reach, by economic price-fixation to get


supply rated to cover full utilisation. It has directed its plant-
ing policy to the restoration of Its Hoop Pino industries, and has
organised and thinned its 1902 Cypress Pine thickets to swing into
the gap between the cutting out of the original Hoop Pino stands by
1948, and the reopening of the man-made Hoop Pine forests by 1980.
It can draw also upon the N.S.W, forests just across its south-
eastern border, which by reason of cost distance from Sydney has not
been operated on to capacity.
There is no real reason why the Queensland timber industry can-
not be made safe from timber importation.
Victoria, in the Great Fire of 1938, lost its industrial forests
of Mountain Ash. Its Red Gum forests on the Murray are completely
exhausted. It will be thirty years before industry is restored to
either the original Mountain Ash or the Red Gum forests. It now
draws upon Tasmania for much of Its timber and must do so increas-
ingly.
Tasmania has dedicated its Valley of Giants in the Florentine,
the noblost forest in Australia, its Royal Ash, 250 feet high,
250,000 sup.ft. per acre, to newsprint pulp* It has divested itself
of forest management thereon for 99 years.
The Burnle forests of Alpine Ash have been dedicated to the pro-
duction of writing paper.
The main timber industry of Tasmania is now confined by Melbourne
price-cutting to a narrow zone between the waterside and/ the foot-
hills. Within these price confines it has a precarious mendicancy
of ton to fifteen years.
New South Wales, prior to World War II already imported a third
of its sawn timber requirements* Another third was derived from
private timber lands in process of clearing. There are 800 sawmills
crowded within the forests accessible at fixed prices, dinging to
existence. The Hoop Pine resources are practically exhausted: €yprosg
Pino Is nearly cut-out. Immense demands have been made on the for-
ests for war supplies, and these will bo intensified by post-war re-
construction. Sawmills will die like flies and timber importing in-
terests will reap a harvest.
On the Coast, sturdy reproduction has ensued, and there will bo
survival of a proportion of the industry subsisting on immature logs#
The only hopo of the industry, hewevor, is the remaining virgin
resource, from which prlce-f ixatlon now fences it off.
FINIS - ET EXORDIUM:
The Past is already too securely built into the Future.
Our first duty in Reconstruction is not to teach - but to UnteaohJ
And Unlearn!
Which are harder!
Thinking is hard work. That Is why it is seldom done; and why we
leave it to the crises of Events to determine now courses.
Wo entered the Battle for Singapore, amiod with drill-books written
by Events which established the British Raj.
The Japanese untaught us.
And that was Progress.
By the Battle of Singapore, more than by any other, we wore
driven, lh n toll and blood and sweat and tears" to accept that success


was not static, and could not be maintained by the’prestige of
seniorities, or by the glories of the past; that old codes however
honorable would not suffice; that the search for now truths and
now services must be .unrelenting and unappetising; that easily offend-
ed dignities are traitors to progress; that those who cannot load
should not bo in the lead; that fine .men are entitled to finer
leadership; that trusted leaders arc above rubies; that the many
are dependent on the few; that our future, whether in War or in
Peace, is measurable by the overhead we get; that the job of the
overhead is to do and not to bo, its remuneration, if necessary, a
martyrdom and not an Indemnity.
If wo could import into the Battle for Reconstruction, the bitter
lessons of the Battle for Singapore, there would be hope that wo
might soon roach the Post-War' World that has been promised to us*
As, however, the Events of Peace will be less compelling than
the Events of War, the Millennium will not bo soon reached*


Summarised statement
of man-power
and
expenditure required to develop and maintain
industrial and
amenity forests in N.S.w,
—4
PROJECT
Name
T
A
K N U A
L PR
0 G R A M M E
£
"Wo.
|
Ho* of
Expendi- 1|
No* ofl
Expendi-
-(No* of| Expendi— |No* ofl Expendi- 1No. of (Expendi-
if
• £
1
men
ture
J;
men 1
ture
j men 1 ture
jmen | ure
jmen
i ture
|
|
£1000
£1000
| | £1000
{ ] £1000
(£1000
£
1
General Administration
S
3
loo
30
|j
F;
200 j
70
s I
1 300 i 120
* s
I \
| i
I 350 j 140
H ;
J 350
£
a
I
j 140
2
Forest Training Camps
|
2,500
1,250
i
1,500 |
1 600
( 500 j 150
1 200 t 60
5 I
1 200
a
| 60
|
3
Forest Assessment & Survey
|
|
254
85
Vl
508 J
170
| 400 i 130
i- i
j- :
1 300 1 100
a '
H ;
1 200
f
| 70
u
4
Forest Reading
f
s
1,500
600
2,500 |
1,000
1 3,000 | 1,200
\ *
|3,000 ) 1,200
1 3,000
| 1,200
5
Forest Construction & Housing
j
300
180
450 |
270
! 550 1 330
| |
1 SCO f 240
1 400 j 240
1 1
| 250
|
I 150
ii
6
Fire protection
|
I
1
S
500 j
150
|
700 |
210
1 700 I 210
| 600
| 180
§
7
Silviculture -Indigenous Forests
750
177
950 |
224
1 1,050 | 247
i 120 | 30
J 1,200 1 283
11,350
319
J
8
Hoop Pine (& other native species)
|
72
18
(
96 |
24
1 144 1 36
:
144
| 36
n
■i
£
Plantations
|
i
j
l
I? i
11 1
\
I
9
Exotic pine plantations
t
3
623
174
643 J
178
1 661 1 146
S i
J 678 | 150
| 678
j 150
5
10
Logging
1
s
400
250
1
600 |
375
! 700 | 430
1 f
j 800 1 480
j: |
| 900
| 550
|
11
Research in Wood Utilization
i
54
38
1
i
104 |
52
1 124 I 50
| ;
[ 150 | 60
1 150
I
60
|
12
Forest Redemptions
|
J.
5
|
.
100
j
|
- j
100
1 - | 150
| 1
I - 1 200
S 1
1 -
i
11,000
200
§
t
13
Shelter belt planting in inland
100
40
|
400 |
140
i 600 1 180
|
150 1 60
| |
1 800] 250
is »
! 300
§
areas
|
|
1
i \
1 150
| 60
li
14
Amenity Forest Development
I
5
50
27
100 1
60
| 150 | 60
i 1
3
|
TOTALS
iS
1
s
1
7,203
£3,119
:
|
8,751 j
£3,473
8,955 k3,463
1 j
J 8, 872 {£3,479
a . 1 - i • ■
j 8,972
1£3,475
I
n
js
5;
§
FORESTRY CO MM ISS IO N, N.S.W.
Programme of post-war Works for Initial Five year period.


APPENDIX II:
Item No . 1: General A dministratio n:
Proposed expenditure under this heading is for the staff
recruitment necessary to Increase the Commission 1 s existing staff
of field and clerical officers*
Only a gradual expansion is possible in post-war staffs, hav-
ing in mind the initial training period necessary to qualify both
field and clerical staffs in forest administration.
Initial expansion of post-war staff must rely on the absorption
of field staff direct from the officers of Army or Air Force tech-
nical units plus the acquisition of competent clerical officers
from various defence administrations.
It is also probable that a selection of suitable and exper-
ienced forest officers **7 for certain key positions can be
made from the Forestry Services of other States to meet the greater
needs of the N.S.W. forest administration*
Item No»2: Forest Training Camps:
Reference? Training for Forestry - Professional, Technical,
Returned Soldier - by B.U.Bylos - Paper No*6,
pages 6-8.
This most vital rehabilitation task alms at the early estab-
lishment of post-war occupational training grounds In the form of
forest camps for ex-servicemen who give some Indication of interest
in forest employment and who appear to be responsive to training.
The actual training will endeavour to lead a variety of human
beings back to peace-time conditions, classifying each according
to his merit and his qualification for permanent forest employment
in a wide range of tasks - from positions of administrative res-
ponsibility to those of forest artisan. It is thought that trainees
will be readily forthcoming from the N.G*o* class of defence per-
sonnel.
To sort out a largely uninitiated class of labour, field train-
ing will be chiefly concentrated on investigation surveys embracing:
1. Topographical contour, typo and site quality forest surveys.
2# Marketing surveys, sawmill and logging studies*
3. Botanical and ecological studios, stand analyses, growth
studies.
4, Forest management surveys.
In addition, all trainees will bo given practical lessons and
lectures in the basic and specialist elements of forest administrat-
ion, plus opportunity for reading elementary forestry text books and
manuals•
Trained showing promise of developing into field officers will
be given class room special tuition of a practical nature in math-
ematics, field surveying, timber marketing and economics, plus
short courses in various aspects of practical forestry.
While directed primarily at training field personnel, the
scheme will’of necessity embrace the training of clerical officers
in the office technique and procedures associated with modern forest
management and development*
It will be noted that after early o one deration of forces in
training camps, the number of trainees will show a steady diminution
towards the close of the five year period, but will retain a res-
tricted programme of Camp training which is considered to be a per-
manent necessity for continued forest development.


Item No* 3s Forest Assessment and Surveys.
Reference; Forest Classification Surveys - by J.P#
McNally, paper No*4, page 6.
Survey Is basic to forest management and in N.S.W. forests
survey must commence virtually ”from scratch”#
The immediate task involves:-
Manag ©ment Surveys of some 2,063,400 acres of good quality
‘SfiTLoToresx: areas in reasonably good economic locations.
Ut 11 Is at lon Survey of some 4,000,000 acres of State Forest
hot" at pr^esentf"within economic range.
Forest Classification Survey by cruising and complete reconn-
aissance of some 6,600,000a0r0s of Crown Lands to determine
their suitability for forest management#
By emergency augmentation of existing staffs by the return
from war service of experienced employees and the engagement of
N.C.O. or other officer types from defence personnel, experienced
in general land survey, a substantial start could be achieved in
the first of the post-war years.
Survey camp strength would then bo augmented by onrolleos from
forest training camps who show early adaptability for survey om-
ploynent, but the strength would then diminish towards the end of
the five year period as survey personnel drifted to more settled
forest employment and as the task ahead was reduced.
Item No#4; Forest Roading:
Reference; Forest Roading in N.S.W. -by H.M.lane,
■ Paper N 0.12,
pp.2l, 22.
Foreat roading offers the greatest opportunity to labour from
among the rank and file of defence forces, which while seeking
rural employment is not qualified or needed in agricultural pursuits
and is not sufficiently well versed in other forest work.
This class of work, while offering unlimited opportunity to
"Diggers” with pick and shovels, must of necessity develop somewhat
slowly In the post-war period until administrative personnel is
adequately trained,and until new road construction machinery is
available to replace thatwoifasd so relentlessly in the war period.
Once these latter facilities are available a substantial labour
fbroo can be permanently employed in an effort to cope with the con-
struct ion of thousands of miles of forest roads now required to
serve the needs ofs-
(a) Forest Industries.
(b) Fire protection and other management con-
siderations.
(c) Recreation and other amenity considerat-
ions .
The mileage of roads awaiting construction throughout the var-
ious forestry districts of the State is enumerated horeundor;-
Distriot. Mileage for construction.
Gaslno-TJrbenvillOd 1,178.
Goffs Harbour-Dorrigo# 703.
Glen Innos-Armidale. 247.
Kemps oy-Wauohop a. 1,224 *
Carried forward. 3,352 .


District * Mileage for construction*
Brought f *wd. 5,352.
Taroo-Hewoastlo-Gossnock. 978.
South Coast. 650,
l,lOO.
Forbos-Dubbo.,' 580,
Elverim-Southern Table-
lands. - 315.
Exotic Plantations (gen-
eral) . 515
7,990
Item Ko»5: Forest Construction and Housing;
References Forest Construction and Housing by
M. J.Youhotsky)
and ( Paper No* 13(B), pp.l-5*
S.Edwards. )
In respect of permanent improvements such as housing, store
space, office quarters, camps, fire protection structures etc.
the Commission is faced with an accumulation of necessary works
that must bo expanded still further with additional forest dev-
elopment in post-war years.
The cessation of hostilities will not permit an immediate
commencement of many construction works, as the supply of building
materials must cause some concern in initial post-war period.
The programme of forest construction must therefore show a
steady expansion during the first three post-war years, as mater-
ials, tradesmen and artisans become available for overdue tasks,
followed by a gradual reduction as the major construction jobs
are disposed of.
The work offers opportunity for tho absorption of tradesmen
and artisans with a rural background who have been engaged with
the defence forces, or in tho Civilian Construction Corps.
Item No*6s Fire Protection.
References Future Forest Fire Control in H.S*W. -
by W*D*Muir - Paper No.5(B),
pp# 10-14.
The majority of H*S*W. forests at present under some form
of fire protection require augmented and, to some extent, spec-
ialist staffs and equipment to bring protection facilities to a
reasonable standard of modernity and to implement future fire
control planning. It is hoped in the initial post-war period to
engage manpower in the form of reliable typos of rural workers
largely from the rank and file of defence units, but also including
such trained staff as meteorologists from the H.A.A.P.
Certain equipment, together with a specialist cadre of ex-
perienced fire control officers will not be immediately available
in tho post-war years, so that the necessary expansion of forest
fire protection in this State must take several years.
In this respect it must bo remembered that post-war treat-
ment of indigenous forests, tho extension of plantation projects,
and the development of fire protection on watershed and recreat-
ion areas not included within existing State Forests, must be
co ns id oread in outlining the general post-war expansion of forest
fire projection.
On the other hand, construction of lookout towers, water
supply, bouslng-htc* required for fire protection purposes is


dealt with elsewhere under ”Forest Construction", whilo the pro-
vision of access roads so essential to fire protection is included
in the general reading programme considered elsewhere*
Item No* 7: Silviculture - Indigenous Forests.
Reference: Silvicultural Methods and Systems in N.S*W.
by F*M.Bailey, paper No*l6, pp*27-31.
1* Post -war si Ivlcu Itur.e aims at the "salvaging” of the State’s
out-over and fir e-damagod forest stands, and bringing those to
a condition where some standardised system can he applied.
2. The silvicultural process will ho undertaken in conformity with
the" economics' of the timber markets, giving maximum utilisation
to the existing stands and renewing the exploited forest with
a timber crop to fulfil future timber requirements.
3. Silvicultural systems will provide, inter alia, the following
main timber' classes:
Ply logs and Sawlogs • for reconstruction works and post-war
building.
Poles and Piles - for the State’s power and telephone re-
ticulation systems*
Sleepers - for the State’s railways.
Girders - for railways and road works.
Mining Timber - for the maintenance of coal production*
Fencing Timber - for the agriculturist and pastoralist.
Wattle Barks - for tanning.
Essential Oils - for medicinal and perfumery purposes.
4. Timber Stand Improvement and Planting Methods will be used to
obtain the new post-war forests.
5. Timber Stand 3toprovament alms to rehabilitate a minimum area of
2,0b5,400 acre's of indigenous production forest within the first
20 years of the post-war ora.
This will require the following annual expenditure and labour
staff
Flrst 5 years : £250,260 - 1,069 men.
Second 5 years : £421,530 - 1,801 ”
Third 5 years : £531,850 - 2,273 ”
Fourth 5 years : £472,560 - 2,019 ”
6. Forest nurseries will bo extended to provide plants for the
C ominTs s ibr' r 3~rofor ost a t ion and research requirements and for dls
tribution for amenity planting - arboreta, parks, streets, wind-
breaks, farm lots.
7. Research will bo extended under the control of a Silvicultural
Research Officer, who will direct the establishment of pilot
plots and sllvical studios throughout the State’s forest types.
The general development of post-war silviculture must await
the training of both workmen and supervisory staff in the detailed
treatment necessary for a wide variety of forest stands. Attempts
will bo made to employ tho N.C.O. class or the better typos of men
fran tho ranks of the defence forces who have a definite rural


background, and who are capable of acquiring an intelligent
appreciation of the basic silvicultural needs which dictate all
timber stand improvement work*
As a result, annual works programmes will show a steady
increase throughout the initial five year post-war period, annual
Increases in expenditure being also accentuated by the cost of
re-treatment of hardwood areas (brushing, cleaning etc*) follow-
ing their silvicultural improvement*
Item. No* 8; Hoop Pino (and other Native Species) Plantations *
Reference: Silvicultural Methods and Systems in
N.S*W* - by p*M*Bailey, Paper Ho*l6, pp*l7-
80*
The post-war programme for Hoop Pine establishment alms at
the planting of 2,000 acres per annum of this valuable species in
each year of the initial five-year period. Although the annual
planting programme is constant throughout the period increasing
expenditure is incurred from year to year because of the hogivy
cleaning costs associated with the first three years of Hoop
Pino establishment*
The estimated expenditure also includes plantations of other
native speoies, particularly Eunya Pino and certain Buoalypt spec-
ies such as Flooded Gum which are capable of remarkable growth
under plantation conditions.
Item No*9; Exotic Pine Plantations*
Reference: The Story of Exotic Pine Planting in N.S.W*
1919-1935 - by B.U.Byles - paper No*l7,
pp*lo-14*
1* The established plantations of the State cover an area of 39,000
aorosVllesults of pla'nVlng are closely recorded over a period
of 16 years. From these data, the post-war programme can be
determined with a high success probability.
2. Post-war plantations will Include:-
(a) Production areas to supply the metropolitan market.
(b) Production areas to supply local market sufficiently large
to absorb the output of an economic forest unit managed
on a sustained yield basis.
(o) Areas favourably situated to markets, power and transport
facilities to provide raw material for secondary industries.
(d) Pilot plot areas.
5. The Metropolitan softwood market will bo in part,
from 'Jonolan-Harnpton and Vulcan-Gurnang Forest groups; where
some 18,000 acres ban bo obtained for Pinus radiata planting.
4* Local market production areas will include
(a) Supply areas for the Murrumbidgeo Irrigation Area* An
additional 3,000 acres of Pinus radiata plantation is
required and can be obtained in the Tumut, Tumbarumba,
Batlow and Wagga localities.
(b) Supply areas for the Orange case market.
5* Potential industrialisation areas can be developed ln:-
(a) Woolgoolga district with plantations of Pinus caribaea,
Pinus taeda and Pinus palustris for the establishment of a
future cellulose and paper production industry. An area
of 40,000 acres of suitable plantation country is available*


P* radiata
- Jonolan
1,000
acres
year*
tt
P* taoda* (
caribaoa)
- Gurnans-Vulcan -
1,000
it
- Woolgoolga.
3,000
H
w
«
P*radiata.
- Rod Hill-Bllla-
1,000
n
it
n
« n
paloola.
- Groan Hilla-Bago ,
- 2,000
1!
it
ti
tt n
- Carabost
600
it
ti
n
(b) Tumut-Batlow district where 25,000 acres of country
suitable for conversion to plantations of Pinus radlata,
Pinus ponderosa, Pinus larloio and Douglas Fir, can be
found *
This with bho intensive management of nearly 50,000
acres of Alpine Ash, will give a forest industrial centre
of groat economic value to the State.
6* Pilot plantlags with a view to their future incorporation in
larger roToresTTatlon programmes are desirable for tho convert
sion of uneconomic hardwood production areas on the North Ooast
and Southern Tableland.
7* The Post-war Programme for the first 5 years aims at the estab-
lishment 1 . of 4T5, r OOO acros of production plantation at the annual
rate of 8,600 acres, This includes planting ats
In addition, pilot plantings will cover 450 acres per annum*
8. The total expenditure projected for the five-year period is
£796,000, employing from 000 to 700 men on actual establishment•
The expenditure projected for the five-year period is based
on a constant planting programme of 8,600 acres in each year,
heavier expenditure shown for the initial two years being due to
the acquisition of plant and material at the outset of operations*
Item Nq.XO; Logging*
Post-war conditions will make heavy demands on available
native timber supplies - import of timber from the Pacific Coast
of North America not being considered feasible until shipping
space is freed from supply to the devastated old world*
The Forest Service must carry out its own logging as well as
directing that dpne by private enterprise. The silvicultural
treatment of forests out over during war-time, coupled with an
intensification of orderly marketing procedures during peace-time*
will bo nullified at least partially by laiasoz fairo logging
by private enterprise*
In the caso of virgin forest areas at present outside economic
ambits it will be imperative for tho Commission to determine the
economic mill sites for private enterprise and to initiate logg-
ing operations by tho Forestry administration as a moans of
Instituting control of logging from the outset of operations.
Tho restoration of heavily cut-over forests will demand
prior utilisation, wherovor practicable, of the trees previously
rejected by private enterprise logging and hero departmental oper-
ations offer tho only means of of foe ring such utilisation.
In planning tho development of tho Commission’s own logging
operations in tho post-war period it will bo necessary to graduate
the operation as suitable plant becomes available and as sawmillors
realise tho desirability of transferring their logging operations
to the Commission’s control.


Item No. 11: Research in Wood. Utilisation.
Utilisation Extension.
In the post-war period, the present establishment strength
and organisation of the Division of Wood Technology will have to
be expanded to handle problems associated with the utilisation
of forest products, involving extension of timber utilisation,
preparation of specifications, development of grading rules,
development of markets for forest products and forest by-products,
oollootion of data on timber uses and users*
To handle market extension, a retail trading yard for special
woods not stocked ordinarily by the trade, will need to bo estab-
lished, At the present time the normal trade channels are not in-
terested In selective utilisation, and loft to the trade, the most
will not be made of forest products. Tho small semi-commercial
yard now controlled by tho Bivision is not a trading concern. Its
activities are designed to further the extension of correct util-
isation, but it is unable to follow up the work by making supplies
available to tho market created.
.to.
To carry on general research, to increase tho efficiency of
timber conversion and to provide a technical service to the trade,
a complete organisation will have to bo developed from tho nucleus
already existing within the Division. It will bo tho function of
this organisation to investigate sawmill efficiency, utilisation
designed to reduce tho loss in recovery of sawn timber, to develop
tho recovery of forest by-products and to render technical assist-
ance to manufacturers and users of forest products.
As post-war forest development in Australia will need to
keep abreast of such development overseas, it is desirable that
selected applicants should be sent abroad to study processes in
other countries. To achieve the most satisfactory results, staff
so selected should bo thoroughly conversant with Australian con-
ditions and tho problems facing tho utilisation of forest products
before being sent away.
Tho cost of sending officers away would bo approximately
£2,000 p.a. for throo years.
Tho expenditure proposed in the initial five-year post-war
period aims at a steady increase in the present staffing of tho
Division of Wood Technology.
Also provided for is tho oar3y acquisition and equipment of
tho auxiliary timber trading yard described above.
Item No# l2s Forest, Redemptions.
References Forpst Redemption - Bas.qs and-Povolppmont
-r-T7V v.- hy d.e,Murray - No .S TOT,
Tho Commission has boon handicapped in past years by not
having sufficient facilities at its disposal to redeem for pos-
terity, areas of private land which are bordering State Forests,
or are suitable for tho establishment of now Crown forest areas.
Too often tho Commission has received offers for tho disposal
of very suitable aapoas of privately owned timber lands, which by
reason of their site quality and economic location may bo of higher
value for forestry purposes than adjoining or nearby areas of State
Forest located on more difficult topography.
Certain areas of private property also require resumption in
ordor that tho only practicable routes of access to sections of
State Forest may bo constructed without hindrance.
As forest management intensifies, tho necessity for resuming


areas of private land will increase. For example, certain
plantation projects demand the resumption of isolated areas
of private land within proposed planting areas.
For this reason expenditure on land resumption and redemption
is estimated to show a steady increase throughout the five-year}
period of post-war development.
Item No. 13: Shelter Bolt Planting in Inland Areas.
Reference; Reforesting the N.S*V/. Dust Bowls - by
W.A.W.dcßouzovlllo - paper W 0.19, pp*s-7.
Among the concrete proposals considered for inland reforest-
ation are:
1* The South-North mllo-wido afforested belt across the State
from Tooumwal to Goondiwindi, intended not only for tourist
amenity and windbreak purposes, but as a permanent source of
supply of firewood, fencing and utility timber to the treeless
plains.
2* The, intons if ioat ion, of communal and farmer 1 s woodlpt plantings
including widespread planting of shade and fodder trees such
as the native Kurrajong.
The expenditure proposed for the five year period is an
estimate based on the gradual extension of inland shelter bolt
plantings following the initial establishment of nurseries,
raising of suitable plants, and the organisation of suitable
plenting areas.
Item No. 14; Amenity Forest Development*
Reference; The Multiple Service of Forests - by
W.D.Muir, paper N 0.5 - pages 4-8
The estimates prepared for a five-year period aim at the
gradual establishment of recreational facilities on forest areas.
Principal effort will bo directed at the development of over-
night tourist camps, youth camps, recreation improvements (shelter
huts, playgrounds, swimming pools etc.) etc. - the work expanding
to meet an anticipated growing need for public tourist facilities
on public forest lands.
Aiming at initial development in the vicinity of public
highways the scheme will eventually aim at the creation of more
distant recreation grounds at somewhat higher expenditure.


District
Sub-district
Area
County
parish
Area
Acres
Remarks
Casino
1. W&shpool S.P, Ho* 355
Drake
(Plevna
66,115
)
(Albert
)
2. Dandahra Creek S.P.
»
Richmond
4,200
)
Ho. 353
) These areas will be opened up witi.
3. pt. Cangx S.P. 354
it
(Dandahra
) the completion of the new Glen *'
(Puhoo
) Inn© s-Graf ton Road.
(Cangi
)
4. pt. Grange S .P. 771
Gresham
Grange
)
5. Wollumbin S.P* 357
Rous
Burrell
4,000
) Areas are available to mills but
6. Mt. Belmor© S*F. 361
Richmond
Wyon
12,299
) need more or less extensive lorry
road construction before the avail
able timber could be extracted at
the present market prices.
7. pt. Acacia Creek &
Bull or
Koreelah ■
)
Koreelah S.P* 1
} Areas generally distant from
' (The White Swamp)
) established mills and difficult
8. Roseberry Greek Sec.
Rous
Roseberry
) of access. The timber could be
of Toonumbar S.F. 343
) extracted only if access were
9. Terrace creek Section
Rous
(Unumgar
4,870 ,
) improved and timber nrices were
of Ros©berry S.P.608
(Pindon
) increased.
Coff*s Harbour
South
10. Boundary Creek S.P.
Gresham
(Marara
9,280
) These areas are outside the limits
Grafton
627
(Alder
) of economic exploitation. Hoad
Coramba
11. pt. Crara West S.P,
Pitzroy
(Comlaroi
) construction will be necessary in
535
(Ueombe
) order to place the timber within
(Wongawanga
) economic distance of market*
Dorrigo
12. Marengo S .P. 318
Clarke
Fever Fever
15,166
)
13. Hever Fever S.P. 613
Raleigh
(Timboon
)
(part)
(Hover Hover
)
FOREST AREAS NOT-ACCES SIBLE TO OPERATIONS AT PRESENT
FIXED PRICES


District
Sub-district Area
County parish Area Remarks
Acres
West Kemps ey
Urunga 14* watershed of
Bellingen River
Raleigh Area at present uneconomic owing
to high logging costs. Heavy
reading construction will be
necessary. In the past this
area only exploited for high
grade species as Red Cedar,
White Beech, Hoop pine.
NOTE:
•
A large area of timbered land at the head of the Bellingen River is included in a National Park
and.carries an immense crop of matured trees, many of which are deteriorating and in the coining
years will become a total loss to the State. The timbers comprise Hardwoods, Brushwoods, Cedar,
White Beech and Hoop pine. The area is distant about 24 miles and upwards from the nearest
Railway Station with fair haulage thereto. A largo quantity of timber could ‘ e obtained from
the area if some arrangements could be made for the marketable timber thereon to be exploited.
West Kempsey
Macksville 15. Areas within
the watershed
of Nambucca
River
>
Raleigh Area distant about 40 miles
from rail by winding road for
most part. Operations under
present conditions would be
uneconomic. Areas have been
worked over for Red Cedar
and White Beech. Railway is
the only market and the con-
struction cf main artery roads
up Taylor f s Arm, North Arm and
Buckrabendinni Creeks with
various feeder roads is required.


District
Sub-District
Area
County
parish
Area
ACge.a
Remarks
West Kemps oy
West
Kemps ey
16* Watershed of Macleay
River for a distance
of approx* SO miles
from Coast In a
wos ter ly direction
«
Dudley
Clarke
Vernon
In the past this watershed has
only been exploited for Red
Cedar, White Beech and (Judge ry*
Working of area for ordinary
Hardwoods and Brushwoods is
uneconomic owing to logging
costs and distance from market
40 to 60 miles, and to the
absence of roading. in parts
the construction of necessary
roads would constitute work of
a heavy nature* Roads so
constructed would make the
greater part of the area avail-
able for operations* Sufficient
timber is available to maintain
at least 3 mills*
17* Nulla Five Day S.F.
and crown Lands at
head of Hickey *s
Creek, Nulla Nulla
Creek and Five Day
Creek* SO miles
north-west of
Kempsey
Dudley
Cliffs
Co mar a
Wolseley
Loftus
Bellbrook
Gordon
Ibis area is mostly steep and
has been Isolated from markets*
!Ehe Shire Council has now built
a road for 10 miles up Five
Day Creek and by the construction
of further roads in extension of
the Shire Road millions cf feet
of hardwoods and brushwoods,
together with a small quantity
of the remaining Red Cedar and a
fair quantity of Whitq Beech and
Hoop Pine will be made available*
Other reading will be necessary
to tap the eastern portion of
the area*


District
Sub-Di strict
Area
County
parish
Area
Acres
Remarks
IB*
Areas at heads of
Willi Willi, McCoy »s,
Pinnacle and Toorumba
Creeks a. rd Carrai
and Fitsroy plateaus
Dudley
Vernon
Warn©
Vernon
Clarke
Dudley
Kunderang
Fitzroy
Dock
This area is now being roaded by
private enterprise (w* Haydon)
and large quantities of Red Cedar
Coachwood and all species of
brushwoods will be available at
an early date. By the extension
of the road now being constructed
through Kangaroo Flat to join up
with the Oxley Highway vast
quantities of Brushwoods include
ing Coachwood could be made
available.
West
Kemps ey
19.
20*
21*
Bakers Soction of
Ingalba S.F. 527
pt. Allgomera Section
of ingalba S.F. 527
Scotchman S.F. 486
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Ingalba
Allgomera
Bolmore
7,527
7,103
)
)
)
)
)
Failure to exploit these areas
is due to the lack of access.
Road construction will have to
be carried out before the areas
can be economically exploited.
West
Kempsey .
Wauchope
22.
Hastings River
Watershed
Macquarie
Area In parts worked for Cedar.
Areas are rough and isolated
being from 25 miles upwards from
market and without any roading
facilities. To make these areas
available main artery roads will
have to be constructed up Bril
Bril, Geary f s and pappinbarra
Creeks and the Wilson, Hastings
and Forbes Rivers. In addition
feeder roads will be required.
In addition to providing future
cutting areas for existing
mills in the district a number
of new mills could be placed on
the area when roading has been
completed. Assessment reveals
stands of


District
Sub-district
Area
County
parish
Area
Acres
Remarks
approximately 250 million
feet of Hardwoods and BrushvAU^g
on a total of about 55,000 acre&*
paree-New castle
23• Pt* Mt. Royal S.F.297
Durham
(Mt* Royal
3
Areas at present outside the range d
(Rosamond
)
of ocohomic working owing to
24* Pt* Chichester S.P#292
(Durham
Various
)
lack of access etc* Road construct-
(Gloucest-
\
J
ion will have to be undertaken to
or
)
make the areas accessible
25. Pt. Bttlga S.P. 285
Macquarie
n
J
26. pt. Dingo S.P. 779
Macquarie
n
)
27. Crown lands
Horthum-
(Cosgrove
3
berland
(Finchley
*
(Blaxland
)
( etc.
)
28* Crown lands
Hunter
Bulga and
)
adjoining
)
parishes
)
Metropolitan
Eden
29. A large area long main
Auckland
Area is distant from port and
& South Coast
streams intersecting the
does not carry the higher grade
area north of the Victor-
species of hardwoods# Construct-
ian Border, east of Moun-
ion of access roads would be
tain Range, west of
necessary before area could be
Tinbillica S J?. 768 and
exploited*
south of yanbulla S.P*
126.
Eden and
30* Area at head of Bega and
(Dampier
)
Areas have not been exploited
Bermagui
Tuross Rivers
(Auckland
)
owing to the somewhat difficult
Bateman* s
31* Area lying along and to
(Dampier
Burrill
3
nature of the access and their
Bay
the eastward of the
(St*Vincenfc Currock
3
distance from market* Before
Coast Range between
Currowan
3
exploitation could begin it
Moruya River and
3
would be necessary for roads of
Clyde River
3
access to be constructed*
32* Area to westward of the
Wes tmore-
>
Warragamba Catchment
•
)


District
Sub-district
Area
County
parish
Area
Acres
Remarks
Area in Cox River
Watershed carrying
Brushwoods and Hard-
woods
Windsor
53*
A large tract lying
west of the new strat-
egic road between Colo
River and Putty embrac-
ing much of the Colo
Watershed
Hunter
Area has not been exploited owing
to the difficult nature of access
And the fact that the timber is
confined generally to the valleys
of rivers and creeks and not in
sufficient quantities to induce
exploitation under present price
conditions. The construction of'-,,
roads of access will be necessary,
before exploitation could begin.
Metropolitan
& South Coast
Blackheath
Queanbegnn
Bateman *s-
Bay
C’ .
35,
36.
37*
Areas on Main Dividing
Range between Oberon
and Taralga including
Banshea S.F* 683*
(Hardwoods - mountain
species}
Areas adjacent to Snowy
River and between that
River and the Victorian
Border and the Main
Dividing Range *
(Hardwoods - mountain
species)
Quart Pot creek Area
west of Mogo S.F. 549
Western and north-
western corner of Clyde
S.F .83 5 with Crown Lands
adjoining to Bimher ana la
Creek
Westmore-
land and
Georgiana
Wallace
St*Vincent
St.Vincent
Bucken- 1 # 000
bowra &
Mogendoura
Yadboro &
Mogood
) Owing to their distances from
) markets and the fact that they
) do not carry the better class of
) Hardwoods no operations have
) taken place. An increased demand
) for timber of these species and
) the construction of some roads of
) access will be necessary before
) operations can proceed.
)
)
)
)
) These areas have only been partly
) exploited in the past as they
) were not economically situated*
) Road construction is necessary
} to make the areas more access-
) ible and to facilitate log
} extraction.


District
Sub-district
Area
County
Parish
Area
Remarks
Acres
38*
tt Spotted Gum M Gully ;
St.Vincent Albert
600
)
39.
Crown Lands
Currock
)
River ina East
40.
Yellow Bog S.P.702
Selv/yn
(Welumba
6,710
)
These areas have only partly
exploited in the past as they
n
(Jagumba
11,810
)
41*
Khancoban S.P.504
(Lea
)
were not economically situated-.
u
(Khancoban
17,300
)
Road construction is necessary to-
42.
Bogong Creek S*P* 842
Murray
)
make the areas more accessible a-nrt
43*
Ash belts on Crown Lands,
w
(Hume
)
to facilitate leg extraction.
Upper Murray
(Geehi
)
(Victoria
( etc.
)
)
Dubbo
44.
TTarung S.P* 457, Bundulla Bligh
’7arung
)
Lack of operations largely due to
S.P. 511 and crown lands
Cunna
12,430
)
absence of adequate access roads.
in the vicinity (Goolah
pottinger Bundulla
10,000
)
Before large scale operations
District)
Brennan
)
could be proceeded with the con-
structlon of an all-weather road
from Coolah to the forests, a
distance of 25-30 miles, will hav*
to be completed.
45.
State Frrest and large
extent of Crown Lands
in the vicinity of Mt.
Coricudgy (Rylstone
Hunter
Roxburgh
Phillip
)
)
1
The construction of some 25 to
28 miles of aL1-weather road
from Rylstone to Mr. Coricudgy
will he necessary to tap large
District).
supplies of hardwood and a limited
)
supply of Coachwood and Sassafras.
Baradine
46
• Mt.Kaputar S.P. 20
Murchis-
(paler oo
11,932
)
Areas require a roading system
on
(Rusden
)
established in order to overcome
47
. plagyan S.P. 409
Handewar
(Beriove
10,800
}
)
the difficulty of haulage over
(Byar
grades not traffi cable under
48
. Warialda S.P. 417
Burnett
Wyndham
8,845
)
present day conditions.
Murchison Adams
49
. Mehi SJ. 4V8
Mur chi son Eva ns
3,000
