

FORGERY
and its Detection
BY
LOUIS C. S. MANSFIELD
Forgeries and Handwriting Expert


Copyright and all other
rights reserved.
Reproduction in whole
or part of blocks or
letterpress is forbidden
unless with express
permission.


FORGERY
and its Detection
LOUIS C. S. MANSFIELD
Forgeries and Handwriting Expert


Forgery, and its Detection
MOST Banks at some time dur-
ing their career have the
misfortune to discover, after
the money has been paid, that the
paper they hold is a rank forgery and
it is poor consolation to tell them
afterwards that over ninety per cent,
of the average forgeries bear plain
witness in themselves to the fact that
they are not genuine and that the
banker could have saved his money
had he but known what constitutes
the finger-prints of forgery.
It is extremely seldom that the
person called upon to pay cheques is
armed with sufficient knowledge to
justify either acceptance or rejection,
and where an important account is
concerned, he must take a chance
rather than risk alienating his client’s
custom.
The average person who decides the
genuineness or falsity of a signature,
or cheque, relies on one thing only—its
form (outline or general appearance).
Such things as movement of writing,
line quality, position of maximum
pressure, position of shading, the man-
ner in which the pen is held by the
writer, speed of writing, etc., convey
nothing to him because he is not
aware of their existence or their
significance.
It is a strange fact, however, that
the form or outline is extremely easily
forged, whilst the other points are very
difficult, and some of them well-nigh
impossible, of simulation.
In the following course of articles
all the important points that have a
bearing on forgery will be outlined.
Page Two
They will, however, convey but
little to you if you do not study each
point as it appears. It is necessary
to consider many fundamentals before
a consideration and examination of
forgeries can be undertaken. When
you have made yourself familiar with
these articles you will be in a posi-
tion to recognize at sight all those
forgeries that are Immediately detect-
able. This class includes the vast
majority of cases, but not all.
There are some extremely skilful
forgeries that require an expert for
their detection, pud, as the average
ledger-keeper has not the time to
become a forgeries expert, a few false
documents will continue to be paid as
genuine.
The Act of Writing.
The act of writing, like any other
habit, is almost wholly unconscious.
In childhood one learns to write only
slowly and painfully, and it is only
after long years of practice that a
child reaches that stage of graphic
maturity when he can write easily
and fluently without paying any con-
scious attention to the formation of
the individual letters.
In the beginning he draws his
letters one stroke, or a portion of a
stroke, at a time. This is because he
is quite unfamiliar with the writing
process and with the forms of the
letters whose outlines he is trying to
reproduce. Little by little he learns to
draw the letters in their entirety. Next
he learns to link them together into
words. Finally, when he reaches tha 1


stage at which he can write easily and
fluently without having to pay any
conscious attention to the formation
of the individual letters, he is said to
have reached graphic maturity.
From then on, he will write spon-
taneously with a speed that is gov-
erned mainly by the speed of his
mental reactions. No person can write
as fast as he can think. The pen is
always trying to keep pace with the
writer’s thoughts. As a general rule,
if he is mentally slow, he will write
slowly. If mentally quick, he will
write rapidly.
When, however, conscious attention
is paid to the' letter formation, the
speed of writing will slacken and the
resultant copy will approximate the
“flying starts and finishes,” or the thin,
fine stroke with which the words com-
mence and finish. (See illustration 11,
h and c.)
The writing impulse, or mental
stimulus, that causes one to write may
conveniently be classified into sentence-
impulse, word-impulse, letter-impulse,
or stroke-impulse. By sentence-impulse
is meant that a writer unconsciously
conceives the sentence as a whole, and
then writes it before pausing for
another thought. With many people
sentences are written only one word
at a time. Less facile writers, or those
who for any reason wish to pay par-
ticular attention to letter formation,
write with only a letter-impulse or a
single stroke-impulse.
The upper line (a) is ■written quickly. The lower (b) fairly slowly. The
observant reader will notice that, although the writer attempted, to write all
four words slowly, he was ac.wa.ted by such a strong sentence- and rightward-
tending impulse, that after he had -written the first two words he unconsciously
commenced to lapse into his normally rapid hand, with the result that he
did not take the time necessary to move his hand hack to form the loop of
the “h” properly. The result is that the down stroke coincided with the up
stroke contrary to school copy. The same thing happened with the letter “e.”
In the word “wetit" the “n” is formed with a strong rightward-tending impulse
and the connecting links are longer than in two first words.
Attention to details like this will teach you to recognise which parts of
a specimen of writing were written quickly and which slowly ; also, at what
point the writer passed from a slow movemerit to a quick movement, or from
a quick movement to a slow one.
ordinary school hand more than usual.
(See illus. I, a and b.)
With a fluent writer, the writing
impulse commences in the air before
the pen is applied to the paper. It
also terminates in the air in front of
the last letter, the pen being lifted
clear of the paper before the motion
of the hand is halted. This causes the
These things are important. It is
manifest that when wishing to trace
or to simulate another person’s writing
one cannot write a whole sentence or
a signature without paying attention
to the outline of the letters. In this
case the impulse generally degenerates
into a letter or into a mere stroke-
impulse.
Page Three


"a,” “b,” “c,” and “d" are all specimens of smooth, flowing, rhythmical writings. Note
carefully the "flying starts and finishes,” also the tendency to the right, fen fositions, shading,
etc., disflayed by the z.arious sfecimens.
The more rapidly a word is written,
the wider it spreads and the more de-
generate becomes its outline, until,
with many people, we find that com-
mon endings such as “ing” are rep-
resented by a sinuous line terminating
in a figure 8 or 9.
The increase in width is caused by
the impulse sending the pen forward
at such a rate that there is not suf-
ficient time to form the individual
letters properly, with the result that
letters such as “a” and “o” are not
closed at the top; “m” and “n” become
“w” or "u”; the up strokes do not
coincide with the down strokes of the
body of the letter as they should do;
the connecting links between letters
are made longer than school copy
lays down, and the tendency of every
stroke is towards the right. (See
illus. 111. In the left-hand column the
letters are written slowly and care-
fully; in the right-hand column, rapidly
and carelessly.)
Much knowledge of the effects of
speed on writing can be gained by
scribbling out a passage quickly, then
re-writing it slowly and carefully, and
finally comparing the two.
You would be well advised to make
a few experiments and comparisons
along this line, because the majority
of forgeries are written by the tracing
process which can never be done
rapidly.
' ' y '
In the left column the letters are written slowly. In the right, quickly. Note how, under a
strong sentence-impulse, the letters degenerate from the fcrm prescribed by school copy, and the tendency
of each letter is towards the right of the Page which is the point that the writer is unconsciously
hurrying towards.
Page Fom


Pen-Position, Pressure and Shading.
Each person holds a pen in a man-
ner that is highly individual. It is a
fixed habit that is seldom, if ever,
altered throughout life, though, with
a certain type of clumsy writer, it
varies within certain limits.
Pen positions vary in three principal
ways, (a) in the angle of the pen to
the paper, (b) in the angle of the pen
to the line of writing, and (c) in the
distribution of the pressure on the two
nibs of the pen.
The position of the pen during the
writing of a signature may be easily
seen by tracing the signature over with
a dry pen when the shading will show
the method in which it was held. (See
ill us. IV.)
Note how the ink tracks show how the fen
has been held to frocluce it. Comfare illustration
V, which shows various shading and pressure
positions. Maximum shading and pressure do not
always coincide. In IV a. a maximum pressure
coincides with maximum shading. In IV l> maxi-
mum pressure occurs on the down stroke, whilst
maximum shading occurs on the lateral strokes.
Note the jagged line which results from maxi-
mum pressure with the side of the nib.
When a forger attempts to simu-
late a signature, he naturally holds the
pen m the manner to which he
is accustomed and which, probably,
varies greatly from the genuine. This
difference in pen position is frequently
sufficient to stamp a writing as a for-
gery though the outline itself be a
perfect copy of the genuine. On a
number of occasions, by way of a test,
I have submitted specimens of writing
to bank officials for their opinion, and
have had forged writing passed as
genuine, though the difference in pen
positions fairly screamed.
It is wise to familiarise yourself
with the pen positions of your custom-
ers as this is a point that will never
let you down.
Pen pressure, or pressure of the nib
on the paper must never be confused
with shading.
Pen pressure is the pressure with
which the pen is applied to the paper.
Shading is the increase in width of
the ink film caused by the spread of
the nibs of the pen, and the conse-
quent deposition of more ink on the
paper.
Shading is controlled primarily by the
resilience or flexibility of the nib. With
an extremely hard nib very little shad-
ing occurs and then only when maxi-
mum pressure is applied to the pen.
With an extremely soft nib all strokes,
except those made in an exactly oppo-
site direction to the pen position, will
show a degree of shading.
When the pen is held in the normal
position (see illus. IVa), maximum
shading will occur on the down strokes
if maximum pressure is applied at
this point, which is usually the case.
But if, as in fig. IVb the writing is
done with a lateral hold of the pen,
whilst the pressure may be applied
on the down stroke, shading will oc-
cur only on the lateral strokes. The
effect of downward pressure on a
lateral hold results in a somewhat
ragged line at the point where pressure
occurs, due to the fact that the nib
points cannot expand and, therefore,
dig into the paper.
In illus. Va, maximum pressure
coincides with maximum shading. In
illus. IV b, they occur in opposite
directions.
f age Five


Illustrating writings produced with different -pen positions and different shadings.
Note also the individual pen lifts shown in “a.
Positions of maximum pressure and
maximum shading are highly indi-
vidual and should, therefore, be care-
fully noted. Any alteration in these
points requires explanation.
Watch, however, the effect of stub
pen shading. Stub pens are so de-
signed that they can be held only in
a lateral position, and being rather
broad (approximately 40-thousandths
of an inch), show shading at the top
as well as the bottom of letters, even
though these top loops are made with
the pen travelling backwards.
Ink Tracks, Writing Movements and
Line Quality.
For the purpose of this series an ink
track is defined as any mark made by
pen and ink on paper, etc.
When observed closely, an ink track
tells us, amongst other things, how the
pen was held, where the pressure and
shading were applied, whether the pen
was so inclined as to throw the maxi-
mum pressure on to the left or the
right point of the divided nibs, whether
the outline was written quickly or
slowly, and whether it was written
surely or uncertainly.
Page Six
Writing movement, or the methods
by which writing is produced, may be
divided into four classes. 1. Finger
movement, in which the writing is
done by the fingers alone without the
use of the hand or arm. 2. Hand
movement is that produced by the
action of the hand as a whole with the
wrist as the centre of action and em-
ploying some movement of the fingers.
3. Forearm movement is that produced
by the hand and arm, supported on
the muscular portion of the forearm
and with the elbow as the centre of
action. 4. Whole-arm movement is
written by the unsupported arm as in
black-board writing, ornamental pen-
manship, etc.
Finger movement is that employed
by children and others with whom
writing is an unfamiliar process. It
is generally not so much writing as
painful, slow drawing, and is the re-
sult of a letter- or a stroke-impulse.
This is the movement employed in
99% of traced forgeries.
Hand movement is more facile than
finger movement and the writing is
generally produced in a succession of
waves, stops, and starts where the
hand has had to be shifted further


along the line of writing to allow the
characters to be formed.
Forearm movement is that employed
by the majority of skilful writers. It
is smooth, even, flowing, rapid, and its
outlines are clear cut and well defined.
This is by far the hardest type of writ-
ing to forge by the tracing process.
Finger movement is the easiest.
Whole-arm movement we may dis-
regard in these columns.
Line quality may be distinguished as
good or bad, according to whether the
line is fluently, easily and firmly
made or whether it is slowly, painfully,
and erratically drawn. (See Ulus VI.)
The small block shows
two capital “S’s” in
normal size. “a’ is a
t genuine writing', “b” is
a forgery -produced by
the tracing process.
Note the line quality
t displayed by the two
different letters. It will
be easily seen that the
forgery was produced
slowly and painfully by
a mere stroke-impulse.
This shows a cap. “S” magnified; “a”
has a good line quality, “b” is poor. Note
this carefully. You will see that the
latter is not so much written, as
slowly and carefully drawn. Poorness
of line quality and a slow, hesitating
drawn movement is characteristic of
all forgeries produced by tracing, which
is by far the commonest system of
forgery.
It is evident that writing movement
and line quality are bound up in each
other.
A quick writing movement will
always produce a good line quality if
the pen, ink and paper are in the
average good condition. A customer
does not usually draw a cheque with
a rusty pen and thick, cloggy ink, and
a cheque so drawn usually requires
some explanation.
A very slow writing movement usu-
ally produces a bad line quality because
the slowly moving nib hesitates a
longer time at any given point and
thus deposits more ink, which is ab-
sorbed by the fibres of the paper with
a ragged edge effect. This is well
illustrated in the enlarged forgeries.
The great majority of writers em-
ploy a good line quality. The outline
of their signatures is clear-cut and
well-defined with a minimum of saw-
edge effect on the strokes.
When a signature, which is usually
clearly and decisively drawn, suddenly
exhibits hesitating movements and an
uncertain line quality, the cheque
should be thoroughly examined and
investigated before any decision as to
payment is made.
A hesitating line quality may, how-
ever, be caused by sickness or by
some other unusual condition of the
writer, and this must be taken into
consideration.
Sequence of Writing, Interlineation
and Corrections.
When there is a suspicion that a
cheque may have been raised or
Illustrating sequence of writing,
“ The “y” of the upper line was
yQ -written after the “h” of the lower
line. Note ho7v the loop of the “y”
crosses OVER the "h.”
altered, etc., the question of whether
the signature or the body of the
cheque was written first is of great
importance.
In raising a cheque the procedure fre-
quently followed is to erase (either
chemically or mechanically, usually the
Page Seven


former) the words and figures and then
to insert the new amount. This erasing
and subsequent re-writing frequently re-
sults in the down strokes in the body
of the cheque crossing the upper parts
of the signature, and, being done
some time after the signature has
been written and dried, leaves a dis-
tinct ink track where the lines cross.
In the enlarged illustration (VII) it
can be distinctly seen by the upper ink
film that the loop from the top line
was written after the signature.
Where any two ink tracks meet, if
one has dried before the other is
written, a distinct ink film will always
be left by the stroke last written, over
the top of the first stroke, and thus
can the sequence of writing be deter-
mined.
However, should both the lines be
wet, the ink will mingle at the point
of crossing, and it will not then be
possible to determine, even with a
microscope, which stroke was written
last.
Where any downstrokes from the
Page Eight
top line mingle with the ink of
the signature it is one of the
signs that that whole document
was written at the one time, since
it would be extremely unusual
for a person to sign a cheque and
then, after having allowed his
signature to dry, insert the addi-
tional matter. The whole docu-
ment may, of course, be spurious.
With some persons who write
only occasionally, it is a habit to
over-write, correct, or re-touch a
signature after it has been
written.
This correction or re-touching
may be suspicious, or it may be a
sign of genuineness according to
the reason for which it was done.
All of us have had the experience of
having written something and then
re-touching or correcting it to make
it more legible or to restore the out-
lines of a letter improperly written.
In illus. VIII a number of genuine
restorations are shown. In these it
will be seen that the restorations were
purposely done to make the writing
more legible. It is quite plain that the
correction was intended to be seen.
When, however, a forger is dissatisfied
with his original attempt and tries to
touch up the form to make it more
like the copy, the re-touching is slowly
and carefully drawn, not with the idea
of allowing the correction to be seen
and read, but with the idea of making
it merge so closely with the original
stroke that it will not be seen and
detected. For this reason re-touching
on forgeries are frequently made up
of many minute strokes and not with
one bold movement such as is used to
restore the outline in a genuine writing.
Accordingly as whether the correct-
ing or re-touching is done boldly,
openly and quickly to restore a
familiar outline or to enable a wrongly


Illustrating various types of natural additions, corrections
and over-writings. It will be easily apparent that these
corrections were made to be seen plainly by the reader and
to enable wrongly-made letters to be read as was originally
intended by the writer. Thus, they differ from fraudulent
additions and corrections, which are made solely with the
idea of restoring letter forms in such a manner that the
fraudulent re-touchings will pass unnoticed by the person
examining the signature. The forged signatures of S. G. Holt
{Ulus. X), Bosworth {Ulus. XI) and Burrows {Ulus. XII)
and others in Ulus. XIII show various fraudulent additions.
made letter-formation to be read as
another, or whether it is slowly and
carefully added, so that it will be hid-
den and, therefore, hard to detect, so
may the genuineness or spuriousness
of the writing be determined.
Suspicious re-touchings occur, almost
without exception, at points where
they are not necessary to restore either
legibility or a slip of the pen. They are
done solely with the idea of making
the forgery conform more nearly to
the signature copied and generally co-
incide almost exactly, but not per-
fectly, with the outline as already
written.
It usually has the effect of a heavier
line at the point where it occurs, and
is often made in a direction entirely
opposite to that in which the pen
would ordinarily travel. This point is
well illustrated in the forged signatures
of S. G. Holt in illus. X.
Ink Flow-Backs.
The flowing back of ink from
one point of a stroke to another
Is frequently confused by the
unitiated with re-touching or
re-tracing.
Look at Ulus. IX. It will be
seen quite plainly that the ink
has flowed back from one part
of the outline to another. The
writing presents the appearance
of having been first written with
a weak ink and then retraced
with a heavier one. This is not
the case.
These flow-backs are caused by
a failure in the ink to flow, due
to (1) a bad pen, (2) poor quality
ink, (3) inks of different consis-
tencies and densities having been
mixed or (4) a combination of
any or all of these features.
Note how the natural flowing hack
from one -portion of a stroke to another
differs from additions and re-touchings.
Ink flow-backs are ordinarily caused
by a bad fen or poor quality ink, and
the Portion so flowing back always
coincides exactly with the stroke
already written.
When any writing is done with a
bad pen or bad ink the flow of ink
from the nib to the paper will not be
regular, with the result that when a
failure in the flow occurs a faint ink
Page Nine


track is made. When the ink starts
to flow once more from the pen a
heavier track is made. So the move-
ment proceeds with a succession of
stops and starts in the flow of ink.
One feature is always outstanding.
When a flow-back occurs the film of
ink which has so flowed back will,
without exception, always coincide with
the ink track just made. It will be
bounded by the sides of the track al-
ready written, and will never overflow
them. Re-touchings, on the contrary,
will never coincide exactly with the
tracks already written, and no matter
how carefully done will always over-
lap the original stroke to some extent.
Where a forgery has been first per-
petrated with a pencil or a very weak
ink and then over-written with a heavier
ink, the stops and starts of ink fail-
ure and flow-backs will not be seen,
as the whole outline will be over-
written. Should the outline of the
second writing diverge from the out-
line of the first, the result will be two
lines almost side by side. When pencil
is used, these divergences are erased,
and in the process, parts of the second
or final writing are frequently destroy-
ed and have to be re-touched to restore
the form. When a weak ink has been
used first any divergences must be
made good by re-touchings, blottings,
etc., in order to make the divergent
lines merge with the finished outlines
Fen lifts.
Most writers have a habit of rais-
ing the pen clear of the paper before
certain letters. The letters "a,” “e,” “d,”
“g" frequently show this raising of the
pen, and the fresh Impulse necessary
to form the letters. Pen lifts before
certain letters or combination of letters
are highly individual and should be
carefully noted. The habit of pen-
lifting varies only very occasionally
Page Ten
with any but an extremely awkward
writer.
With forgeries, the pen is lifted from
the paper whenever it is necessary for
the forger to take a further look at
the copy he is following, and, there-
fore, may occur at any point in the
entire outline. When, as in a certain
type of traced forgery, the outline, as
seen through the paper, is rather ob-
scure, the pen lifts in the original are
frequently not seen, with the result
that certain letters are joined together
in the forgery though they are habitu-
ally disconnected in the genuine writ-
ing. A knowledge of the habitual pen
lifts of your customers may save your
bank many pounds. Ulus. Va shows
a number of individual pen lifts.
Variations in Genuine Writing.
As every bank official is aware, no
two signatures are ever written exactly
alike. The variations, where no ex-
traneous circumstances occur such as
illness, writing done at an unsteady
table, in a train, etc., are slight, but
nevertheless plainly discernable to
the practised eye. Even a writer who
signs his name hundreds of times a
day never produces two signatures that
exactly coincide, and should a number
of signatures be produced that coin-
cide exactly down to the smallest de-
tail, this is one of the surest indica-
tions that they have been produced by
tracing.
The determination of what is varia-
tion in a genuine signature and what
is variation caused by forgery is a
comparatively simple matter.
Divergence in slant, size of capitals,
absolute size of small letters and
alignment of writing to the base line
are the most common variations, The
more frequently a writer signs his
name the more stereotyped becomes
his signature until, with a person who


writes his name dozens of times a day,
these variations are extremely slight.
With the average fluent writer, the
slant does not usually vary more than
5% to 10% in its angle to the base line.
With uncertain writers it may vary
20% or even more. The size of the
capital letters, as well as the small
letters, may vary slightly as also may
any individual small letters in the
body of the signature. These varia-
tions, however, are written with the
usual pen positions, pen pressure,
shading, line quality, pen lifts, etc.,
that are normally employed. Uneven-
ness in the surface of the paper may
cause the alignment of the writing to
the real base line to diverge quite a
lot.
These variations, of course, may oc-
cur with a suspected or forged signa-
ture, but there is this to watch. A
forger does not desire any variation
whatsoever ffom the genuine and
should it occur during the forgery he
immediately attempts to correct it.
This gives rise to the re-touching and
re-tracing that nearly all forgeries
exhibit.
When any divergence in direction,
caused by unevenness in the surface
of the paper, occurs in a genuine writ-
ing, the outline flows on smoothly in
the new direction. In a forgery, after
surmounting the obstacle, the outline
immediately returns to the original
path. This is particularly so in the
case where a forgery is produced by
placing a sheet of paper over a genu-
ine signature and thus copying the
outline on the top sheet. The outline
of the genuine signature appears only
faintly through the paper, with the
result that the traced strokes are apt
to diverge quite a lot from the original,
but immediately after the divergence
it returns to the path being traced,
like a traveller stumbling along k
narrow path on a dark night, and,
when erring, returning to the dimly
lit path. These forgeries thus show
that they have been traced from a
copy.
Forgeries.
Now that we have considered the
most important of the individual fea-
tures employed in the production of
a writing we are in a position to con-
sider forgeries themselves: —
Forgeries may be made in either of
two ways: (1) Simulation; (2) Tracing.
In the first case, which is very rare,
the forger first practises the outline
of the signature many many times
until he is satisfied that he can produce
it freely without any other aid than
his visual memory. He then sits down
and produces his forgery.
In the tracing process the spurious
document is either placed over the
genuine signature and the outline, as
thus seen, is traced on the top paper
(this is the most common), or the
genuine signature is placed over the
document to be forged and the out-
line is traced fairly heavily on to the
paper beneath. This results in an in-
dentation in the surface of the lower
paper which is then filled in. Some-
times a piece of carbon paper is in-
serted between the two sheets to make
the outline. When this is done it is
necessary to use an eraser of some
kind to remove the superfluous carbon
marks after the forgery is complete.
Erasure is also necessary when the out-
line has first been traced in pencil and
then retraced in ink.
If carbon paper is not used it is
necessary to trace the outline heavily
with some blunt instrument. The use
of the blunt instrument is to obviate
the possibility of tearing the top sheet
and thus destroying the genuine sig-
Page Eleven


nature. ’The pressure which it is neces-
sary to apply always results in a
distinct indentation being made on the
bottom sheet, which is apparent on
the reverse side of the document if
it is looked for. The hardness of the
supporting surface underneath the
sheet will always determine the depth
of the indentation.
Tracing by the indentation method
does not show such things as pen posi-
tion, pen pressure, etc., and when the
forger comes to fill in the indented out-
line it is necessary for him to keep the
model in front of him to see where to
apply the shadings, etc., to the stroke.
This results in a slowly drawn line
similar to the other types of tracing.
No matter by what process the
tracing is made, it is necessary for the
forger to keep in front of him the
document that is being forged in
order that he may see the outline
more clearly. This results in the pen
being held with a slant towards the
right. In any other position it would
obscure the outline. This gives rise
to divergence in the pen position and
in the coincidence of pen pressure and
shading. The slow, drawing movement
of the pen during the process leads
to bad line quality, due to the depo-
sition of more ink, and to the general
uncertainty and unfamiliarity with the
outline being reproduced. This slow
rate of travel of the pen, with its con-
sequent deposition of more ink than
ordinarily, usually results in making
the thin upward strokes fatter or
heavier than they should be because
the fibres of the paper have more
time to absorb ink than they have
when the nib is travelling at a fairly
rapid rate of speed.
Of all types of forgery, that pro-
duced by simulation is the hardest to
detect if it is done by a really skil-
ful, practised forger, because it is
Page Tivelve
smooth, fluent and flowing, has a good
line quality and exhibits very little ot
the uncertainty of the tracing process.
The forger is, however, always the
most severe critic of his work and the
desire to make it more perfect gener-
ally leads him to make those little
extra additions and re-touches that
give him away.
Even were he aware of the signifi-
cance of it, the forger could not write
fluently with a pen hold and pen posi-
tion that is foreign to him, and it is,
therefore, necessary for him to make
good the deficiencies in the forgery by
means of additions.
Apart from such highly individual
characteristics as pen position, pen
lifts, maximum pressure and the other
points already dealt with, the average
forgery generally breaks down on the
insignificant features such as the con-
necting links between letters and the
small letters themselves. This is caus-
ed by the fact that the broad outline,
appearance or form of the signature
is the only point to which the forger
usually pays any attention. The out-
line of a writing is dominated by the
slope of the letters and the shape of
the capitals or looped letters. The
absolute shape of the small letters is
not always exactly followed, and the
angle of the connecting links between
one letter and another is frequently
overlooked. Study the reproductions.
You will see that the angle of these
links is highly individual, and though
a thief may succeed in making a fair
job of the forgery of the general out-
line, he generally inserts his own type
of connecting link instead of the
genuine.
Turn now to illus. X. This shows one
genuine signature (a) and three traced
forgeries (b, c, d). When placed close
together merely a rapid glance suf-


fj *
A genuine signature ( a ) a grasp of three forgeries {b, c and d) . Note the difference
in position of maximum pressure and, maximum shading. Note also the pen positions, the
re-touchings, re-tracings, tremulous line quality, etc. Even the paraphs, under the signatures
are hesitatingly drawn, though, as a general rule, these are made hastily and carelessly by
all 'writers. Test these known forgeries by all the points outlined in the letterpress.
flees to show that they are forgeries,
though it will be difficult for a tyro
immediately to recognize the last one
(d) as a forgery.
In "b” and "c” the thinness of the up
strokes shows us that a fine nib was
used. Why then do certain down strokes
exhibit heavy shading? Is it caused
by the resilience of the nib? No. If
this were the case all down strokes in
the direction of the shaded strokes
would show somewhat similar shading.
If the specimens are examined it will
be seen that only a few of the down
strokes exhibit this shading, others
have very little.
Closer examination shows that these
heavier strokes are caused by re-touch-
ing and re-tracing, and are the result
not of a single stroke, but of two, three
and even more strokes. Look closely
and you will see clearly where the pen
was applied and where it was lifted for
the purpose of making these additional
strokes. This is soon perceived to be
arbitrary. In illus. “c” the first up stroke
of the capital “S” and the up stroke of
the small letter “o” will be seen by
the shading to have been made in a
direction exactly opposite to the direc-
tion in which they are usually made.
The heavy shading on the up stroke
of the final “t” in this illustration is
seen to be made up of a number of
strokes instead of one stroke. The
thinness of the nib used shows clearly
that this shading cannot be the result
of the running together of two wet
ink lines. The paraph or stroke under
this signature has been deliberately
and carefully touched up.
This fact in itself is sufficient to
stamp the signature as spurious since
nothing is written so carelessly as the
stroke under a signature and there is
no earthly reason why it should be
tampered with when once done.
The form or general appearance of
these three forgeries is very similar
to the genuine, and it is only when all
three are brought close to the original
that the inexperienced man can see the
difference. If they were presented
separately they would have a good
chance of being paid, especially so the
last one (d).
The line quality of these forgeries
is very poor. The whole were written
with the careful, slow motion that ere-
Pngf TJtir'.cen


A genuine signature ( a ) and, tiro forgeries (/' and c). Note the tremulous line quality i which
is 'particularly apparent on the “t” bars, though these should be done carelessly. In “c” the “t”
bar was written with nearly twenty different applications of the pen. This alone stamps the
whole thing as a forgery. Note the many re-touchings in both “b” and “c.” In “b” the
upper loop of the last stroke of the capital “W” was made in the wrong direction. The
same thing applies to the last stroke of the capital “Gln “b” and “c,” note the thick
dot-like ending of the last upstroke of the ftnal letter “h.” This proves conclusively that
the pen came to a halt before the nib was lifted clear of the paper. Apply also the other
tests indicated in the letterpress.
ates a tremulous, uncertain line quality
in the finished product.
The very unsteadiness of the paraph
in “d” gives rise to suspicion. A careful
scrutiny will show the careful retouch-
ing of the upper loop of the capital
“G.” The beginning stroke of the letter
has been made towards the left instead
A genuine signature (a) and two for-
geries (b and c). Apply the tests indicated
in the letterpress and see how many signs
of forgery you can detect.
Page Fourteen
of towards the right. The belly loop
of the capital “H” has been made with
a pen position different from the posi-
tion employed in the rest of the sig-
nature. Some of the letters have been
made with a number of stroke im-
pulses rather than by one sweeping
movement.
The pen position, pen pressure and
shading are all entirely different from
the original and there are many other
irregularities that, with the help of
this series, you will be able to detect
for yourself.
Turn next to Ulus. XI and XII. These
show genuine signatures “a,” and for-
geries “b” and “c.” Comparison of these
groups by means of the various
characteristics already enumerated
immediately brings to light dozens of
differences in the signatures. In the
Bosworth signature you wiy note that
the commencing and final strokes
commence and finish with vigour and


ht.
tf &
d jfy 7?}
■■? : xll
A group of forged signatures. Note the line quality, the changes in pen position in the
same word, the re-touchings and additions, strokes made in a direction different from that
in which the pen would ordinarily travel, the dot-like endings of the final strokes and the
general uncertainty of the uhole writing movement. These bear many other indications of
forgery. How many more can you detectf These signatures do not even need the Presence
-•
£?/ genuine ones to -prove forgery.
speed. In the forgeries the pen has
first been placed on the paper before
the movement commenced, and after
the forgery was finished the nib was
left some little time on the paper before
it was lifted clear. Examine these
groups carefully and tabulate all the
variations in INDIVIDUAL CHARAC-
TERISTICS that you can find.
Of course, during rush hours in a
bank you have not the time to make
a close comparison of all signatures
with the originals on file. This does
not matter because the majority of
forgeries bear many little tell-tales in
themselves that show they are not
genuine. As a final test turn to illus.
XIII where is shown a group of sig-
natures that have all been forged. If
you have familiarized yourself with
these articles you will be able, at a
glance, to pick out many features that
point to spuriousness. Such features
are; Different pen positions employed
at different places in the signatures,
re-touching and re-tracing, tremulous-
ness and poor line quality, strokes
made in the wrong direction, absence
of “flying” starts and finishes and
their replacement by rest points where
the pen has rested before commencing
a stroke or has remained before being
lifted clear.
Go over each one carefully and see
how many points you can pick out
that point to spuriousness. Apply each
point that you have learned, and you
will soon see that each specimen fairly
bristles with reasons why you should
not pay it. They do not even need the
presence of a genuine signature to
prove their spuriousness.
If you happen to be one of the un-
fortunate ones who originally mistook
these for genuine, you will not make
the same mistake in future if you have
assimulated these articles.
By now you will have gathered that
tremulous line quality, with uncertainty
and dissatisfaction of form, are found
in almost every forgery.
There is another type of writing
that contains tremulousness. The
script executed by very sick, feeble
people, or those who are aged or ex-
tremely nervous, is generally accom-
panied by this feature. Tremor of
illness, nervousness or age can be
generally distinguished from tremor of
fraud, though they cannot be dis-
tinguished from each other in the
majority of cases.
Writing made by aged people is
usually made with great pressure and
the strokes are roughened. It does
not usually show any fine, continuous
hair-lines such as are frequent in for-
geries, and to think that a person with
Fage Fifteen


poor eyesight and improper control of
the muscles could apply the very fine,
almost indistinguishable re-touchings
is, on the face of it, absurd.
Tremor of age or weakness fre-
quently results in a very uneven base
line and, being natural, the tremor is
apt to be comparatively regular at
the same part of the same letter,
whilst the forger is apt to place the
tremor in the wrong spot.
In illus. XIV are a number of writ-
ings showing natural tremor. It will
be seen that despite the uncertainty
of the movement, they are all done
with a carelessness and freedom that
is easily distinguishable from the
tremor caused by painful anxiety to
make the forgery conform more ex-
actly to the genuine. They also ex-
hibit a desire to get the whole job over
as soon as possible, whilst forgeries
are almost invariably carefully drawn
from the beginning to the very end.
Carelessness in writing is one of the
indications of genuineness, whilst care-
ful attention to even the minutest
detail generally points to spuriousness,
and when this extreme care is extended
to such things as “t” crosses, paraphs,
“i” dots and the final strokes, you may
be certain that everything is not as
it should be.
In conclusion, let me state one thing.
These articles have been written for
your guidance in the detection of for-
geries. The simple reading of them is
not going to do you any good what-
ever. You must study them, and the
knowledge so gained must be applied
with common sense and discretion.
Even though you apply your know-
ledge to every specimen of writing
that you handle it will still be some
time before you are able to do so
automatically, and it is only this auto-
matism that will enable you to pick
out the majority of forgeries without
any reference to the standard genuine
writing.
Illustrating natural tremor in genuine old-age writings. Though incorrect co-ordination
of the musculature causes bad line quality and some uncertainty , it differs from the
hesitating , drawing movement of most forgeries. See letter-press.


Published in New South Wales by the United
Bank Officers' Association, and printed by
Aladdin Industries Limited (Printing Division),
61-63 William Street, Sydney.
3 1508 00566534 9
