

FORM OF PRAYER
TO BE USED
©ii 28tf)
APPOINTED AS
A DAY OF SOLEMN FAST, HUMILIATION,
AND PRAYER
BEFORE ALMIGHTY GOD.
In order to obtain Pardon of our Sins, and in the most
solemn and devout Manner send up our Prayers and
Supplications to the Divine Majesty, imploring His
Blessing and Assistance on our Arms, for the Resto-
ration of Peace to Her Majesty and Her Dominions.
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BV HUSSEY AND SHAWYER, KING WILLIAM STREET.
1854.


Lieutenan
11 appointed by Proclai
instant, be observed as a 1
Humiliation, and Prayer—
England in this portion of
requested to use the
was appointed by A
and Chapels in the 1


s rr
€\]t (Drkr far Earning
The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holi-
days, except where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.
Let him that ministereth read with a loud voice these sentences
of Scripture; and after them the Exhortation (Dearly beloved
Brethren, &c.)
I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son.
St. Luke xv. 18, 19.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us ; but if we confess our sins, He
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness. 1 St. John i. 8, 9.
Instead of the Yenite Exultemus :
Hear our prayer, 0 God; and hide not Thyself from
our petition. Psalm Iv. 1.
Take heed unto us and hear us; how we mourn in
our prayer and are vexed. Psalm Iv. 2.
Nevertheless, though I am sometimes afraid, yet put
Imy trust in God. Psalm Ivi. 3.
He, verily, is our strength and our salvation : He is
our defence, so that we shall not greatly fall. Ps. Ixii. 2.
The Lord is King, be the earth never so unquiet.
The Lord is great in Sion, and high above all people.
Psalm xcix. 1.
The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly ;
but the Lord who dwelleth on high is mightier.
Psalm xciii. 5.
O put your trust in him always, ye people ? pour out
your hearts before him, for God is our hope. Ps. Ixii. 8.
As for the children of men they are but vanity ; the
children of men are deceitful upon the weights, they are
altogether lighter than vanity itself. Psalm Ixii. 9.
0 trust not in wrong or robbery ; give not yourselves
unto vanity ; if riches increase, set not your heart upon
them. Psalm Ixii. 19.
Be Thou, 0 God, our help in trouble ; for vain is the
help of men. Psalm lx. 11.


Help us, 0 God of our salvation, for the glory of Thy
name: 0 deliver us, and be merciful to our sins, for
Thy name’s sake. Psalm Ixxix. 9.
The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord
shall give his people the blessing of peace. Ps. xxix. 10.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.
Proper Psalms—l. and li.
First Lesson, Daniel ix, to end of verse 19.
After the First Lesson shall follow—Te Deum Laudamus,
Second Lesson, St, Matthew iii, I—l 2.1 —12.
Then Benedictus, the Creed, &c., to the end of the Lord’s
Prayer.
Then the Priest, standing up, shall say,
Priest. 0 Lord, shew Thy mercy upon us ;
Ans. And grant us Thy salvation.
Priest. 0 Lord, save the Queen;
Ans. Who putteth her trust in Thee.
Priest. Send her help from Thy holy place;
Ans. And evermore mightily defend her.
Priest. Let her enemies have no advantage against
her;
Ans. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her.
Priest. G\ve peace in our time, 0 Lord;
Ans. Because there is none other that fighteth for
us, but only Thou* 0 God.
Priest. Lord, hear our Prayer;
Ans. And let our cry come unto Thee.
This Collect to be used instead of the First Collect for Morning
Prayer.
0 Lord God Almighty, who orderest all things both in
heaven and earth ; look down we beseech Thee upon us
Thine unworthy servants, who turn unto Thee in our
time of trouble, and humbly seek Thy favour and
protection. We confess, 0 Lord, that in many things
we have deserved Thine anger, and have failed to make
that return which Thou mightest justly require at our
hands for the national blessings which we have long
enjoyed. We have offended Thee by disobedience to


Thy commandments, and by neglect of Thy word and
means of grace; and if Thou wert to deal with us
according to our deserts, we might iustly fear Thy
chastenings.
But, 0 Thou, who hast revealed Thyself as a God
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, we pray Thee,
enter not into judgment with Thy servants who now
humble ourselves before Thee. 0 remember that we
are but dust and ashes ! Yet, Gracious Lord, let us fall
into Thy hands, for Thy mercies are great, and not into
the hands of men ! So teach and try us, that we may
learn from Thy godly chastisements to examine our
ways, and to turn to Thee by a lively repentance. Grant
us to acknowledge Thine almighty power, and Thy will
in the events of that warfare in which we are now
engaged. Bless us, we pray Thee, with victory, and
give us grace to use it with humility, justice, and charity.
Enable us by Thy Holy Spirit to walk as becometh
the disciples of Thy dear Son, and to discharge each in
his station, our duties to our Queen, and our country.
And above all, in every dispensation of Thy hand,
whether it be of prosperity or adversity, make us ever to
lift up our hearts above this lower world to Thine
heavenly kingdom, where pain and sorrow and war and
hatred shall be no more, and where alone true joys are
to be found. These and all other mercies, we humbly
beg, not for our own worthiness, but from Thy love, and
through the merits and mediation of Thy blessed Son
our Lord, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be
all honour and glory, now and for ever. Amen.
Then shall follow the Second and Third Collects at Morning
Prayer and the Litany.
After the Prayer (We humbly beseech Thee) shall the following
be added : the People repeating the same after the Minister.
Turn Thou us, 0 good Lord, and so shall we be turned.
Be favourable, 0 Lord, be favourable to Thy people,
who turn to Thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For
Thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long
suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest, when we
deserve punishment ■ and in Thy wrath, Thou thinkest
upon mercy. Spare Thy people, good Lord, spare them,
and let not Thine heritage be brought to confusion,


Hear us, 0 Lord, for Thy mercy is great, and after the
multitude of Thy mercies look upon us, through the
merits and mediation of Thy blessed Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
Instead of the Prayer in Time of War and Tumults, the following
shall be used.
O Almighty Hod, Maker of the Universe, and
Sovereign Disposer of the aifairs of men, at whose
command nations and empires rise and fall, flourish and
decay; we Thine unworthy servants most humbly implore
Thy gracious aid and protection. We flee unto Thee
for succour, in this time of peril and perplexity, when,
in defence of the rights and independence of nations,
now endangered through unprovoked aggression, we
are exposed to the calamities of War. Vouchsafe, we
beseech Thee, Thine especial protection to our most
gracious Sovereign. Direct her counsels, prosper all
her measures for the welfare of this kingdom, and the
preservation of our Church and civil constitution. And
let no internal divisions, nor any other sins and provoca-
tions of this nation, obstruct her designs for the public
good, nor bring down Thy judgments upon us. Bless
her councillors with wisdom. Inspire her commanders,
both by sea and land, with valour and patience; teach
them, amidst all their perils and hardships, to shew
forth in their lives and actions the united duties and
graces of Christian soldiers. 0 prosper them in all their
doings with Thy gracious favour and protection.
And whilst we pray Thee, 0 merciful Father, to
defend us from them that rise up against us, inspire our
hearts, and the hearts of our enemies, with the love of
peace. Let us do nothing through strife, or pride, or
vain glory ; but teach us to be meek and merciful,
tender-hearted, and full of compassion. And in Thy
good time vouchsafe us, we pray Thee, such a secure
and prosperous peace as may tend to the glory of Thy
name, to the honour and safety of our Sovereign and
her dominions, and to the common welfare of mankind.
Hear us, 0 merciful Father, and help us in this our
time of need, for the sake of Jesus Christ, Thy Son
our Lord. Amen.


A Prayer fcr the Safety of our Fleets.
0 Eternal Lord God, whose voice, mighty in operation,
the raging seas and the stormy winds obey; who, in Thy
mercy guidest the mariner safely through the trackless
deep; receive, we beseech Thee, into Thy gracious and
Almighty protection, the fleets of Thy servant our
Sovereign, the vessels of our merchants, and the persons
of all those who serve in them. Preserve them from
the perils of the seas, from the efforts of the enemy,
and from the danger of disease in distant climates;
that they may return in safety, and crowned, if it be
Thy good pleasure, with success in their enterprises, to
enjoy the blessings of their native land, and with
thankful remembrance of Thy mercies, to unite with us
in rendering praise and glory to Thy holy name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
We humbly beseech Thee, most merciful God, that by
Thy grace Thou wouldst keep alive in us, who have this
day presumed to implore such great blessings at Thy
hands, a constant sense of Thy presence, and of our
dependence upon Thee. Suffer us not to call down Thine
anger by sinfulness and disobedience, nor to yield to
those evil passions and desires which might justly incur
Thy wrath and indignation ; But save us, 0 God, save
us, not only from our worldly, but also from our spiritual
enemies ; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Then the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament—General
Thanksgiving—to the end of Morning Prayer, as usual.
sjre Cnmratnmra Ihto.
After the Prayer for the Queen [Almighty God, whose Kingdom
is everlasting] shall be read the Collect for the Day, as in the
Morning Prayer [0 Lord God Almighty] and then shall follow
For the Epistle. Jeremiah vii, I—7.
The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord,
saying, Stand in the gate of the Lord’s house, and pro-
claim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the
Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to
worship the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I
will cause you to dwell in this place. Trust ye not in


lying words, saying The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these. For,
if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if
ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his
neighbour; if ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless,
and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this
place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt; then
will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that
I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.
The Gospel. St. Luke, xviii, 9—14.
And He spake this parable unto certain which trusted
in themselves that they were righteous, and despised
others: Two men went up into the temple to pray; the
one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee
stood and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank Thee,
that I am not as other men are —extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the pub-
lican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying,
God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man
went down to his house justified rather than the other;
for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
Then shall follow the Nicene Creed, and after that the Sermon.
After the Prayer [for the whole state of Christ’s Church] the
following shall be used.
A Prayer for this Church and Kingdom.
Blessed Lord, who hast manifested Thy goodness to
this kingdom by an unusual period of prosperity and
peace, now unhappily disturbed, we beseech Thee to
preserve in our minds a grateful sense of Thy past
mercies. Take away from us, 0 Lord, all pride and
hardness of heart, all neglect of Thy ordinances, and
contempt of Thy word; endue us with a spirit of piety
and devotion, of justice and temperance, of humility
and charity, and of all the graces which adorn the
Christian profession; that Thou mayest delight to dwell
amongst us, and to do us good; and that the blessings
which we have so long enjoyed, both spiritual and tem-
poral, may through thy Providence be continued to us
and our posterity. And whilst we seek Thy protection


agaiiist our enemies abroad, so we entreat Thee to ward
off from our land that fearful pestilence which has
threatened our welfare at home. As once thou didst give
command to the destroying angel, Stay now thine hand! so
let Thy mercy prevail against judgment, and preserve
us in health and safety, for Jesu’s Christ sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.
A Prayer for our Enemies.
0 Lord, and heavenly Father, who wouldest not that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
who hast commanded us to love our enemies, and to pray
for them which despitefully use us; have mercy, we be-
seech Thee, upon our adversaries in the present war.
Deliver them from the guilt of ambition and blood, and
dispose their hearts to clemency and justice.
Visit them, we pray Thee, with Thy spiritual bless-
ings; with reverence for Thy holy name, Thy word and
ordinances, and grant them to grow in graco, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and
in all charity and godliness of living.
Let all mutual offences and hatred be removed from
our hearts; and grant that, being reconciled one towards
another, we may unite in striving together to exalt and
magnify Thy glorious name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
Almighty God, who hast promised to hear the petitions
of them that ask in Thy Son’s name, We beseech Thee
mercifully to incline Thine ears to us that have made now
our prayers and supplications unto Thee, and grant that
those things which we have faithfully asked, according
to Thy will, may effectually be obtained, to the relief of
our necessity, and to the setting forth of Thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) shall let them
depart with this Blessing.
The peace of God, which passeth all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love
of God, and of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you
always. Amen.


€ji t (Diittr fnr feeing
Let him that ministereth read with a loud voice these sentences
of Scripture ; and after them the Exhortation (Dearly beloved
Brethren, &c.)
I will arise and go to my Father; and will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son.
St. Luke xv. 18, 19.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us; but if we confess our sins, He
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness. 1 St. John i. 8, 9.
The Hymn appointed to be used at Morning Prayer, instead of
the Venite, &c., shall here also be used before the Psalms.
Proper Psalms—lxxvii. and Ixxxvi.
First Lesson, 1 Kings, ix, to end of verse 9.
My soul doth magnify the Lord, &c. St. Luke i. 46.
Second Lesson, Romans, ii.
God be merciful unto us, &c. Psalm Ixvii.
Then the Creed, &c. to the end of the Lord’s Prayer.
Then the Priest, standing up, shall say,
Priest. 0 Lord, shew Thy mercy upon us ;
Ans. And grant us Thy salvation.
Priest. 0 Lord, save the Queen;
Ans. Who putteth her trust in Thee.
Priest. Send her help from Thy holy place;
Ans. And evermore mightily defend her.
Priest. Let her enemies have no advantage against
her;
Ans. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her.
Priest. Give peace in our time, 0 Lord;
Ans. Because there is none other that fighteth for
us, but only Thou, 0 God.
Priest. Lord, hear our Prayer ;
Ans. And let our cry come unto Thee.
Instead of the First Collect for Evening Prayer, the First Collect
at Morning Prayer shall be read.
Then the Second and Third Collects at Evening Prayer,
0 God from whom all holy desires, &c.
Lighten our darkness, &c.


Then the people shall say, after the Minister .
Turn Thou us, 0 good Lord, and so shall we be turned.
Be favourable, 0 Lord, be favourable to Thy people, who
turn to Thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For
Thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long
suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when we
deserve punishment; and in Thy wrath Thou thinkest
upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them,
and let not Thine heritage be brought to confusion.
Hear us, 0 Lord, for Thy mercy is great, and after the
multitude of Thy mercies look upon us, through the
merits and mediation of Thy blessed Son, Jesus Christ,
our Lord. Amen.
Head the usual Prayers, to the End of that for the Clergy and
People.
Instead of the Prayer in time of War and Tumults, the same as
used at Morning Prayer shall be read.
Then the Prayer for the Safety of our Fleets, as at Morning Prayer.
Then the Prayer for this Church and Kingdom, and the Prayer
for our Enemies, as in the Communion Service.
Then the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, and the
Prayer for all Conditions of Men.
Then the prayer (We humbly beseech Thee, most merciful God
&c.) as at Morning prayer.
A prayer of St. Chrysostom.
Almighty God, who hast given us grace at this time,
with one accord, to make our common supplications unto
Thee; and dost promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in Thy Name Thou wilt grant their
requests ; fulfil now, 0 Lord, the desires and petitions
of Thy servants, as may be most expedient for them ;
granting us in this world knowledge of Thy truth, and
in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us
all evermore. Amen.
Hussey and Shawyer, Printers,


