

FORM OF PRAYER
TO BE USED IN ALL
nnS» C&aptls
THE UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND
AND IRELAND.
PRINTED EY READING AND




3 iss7r i
s-s-rr
€\)t fur Hunting
The Service shall he the same with the usual Office
for Holy days, except tohere it is in this Office , otherwise
appointed.
Let him that minis ter eth read with a loud Voice these
Sentences of Scripture ; and after them the Exhor-
tation, Dearly beloved Brethren, &c.
I will arise and go to nay Father ; and will say
unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and
before Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy
son. St. Luke xv. 18, 19.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us : But if we confess our sins,
He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 St. John i, 8, 9.
Instead of the Venite exultemus ;
Hear our Prayer, O God : and hide not Thyselffrora
our Petition. Psalm Iv. 1.
Take heed unto us and hear us: how we mourn in our
Prayer and are vexed. Psalm iv. 2.
Nevertheless though I am sometimes afraid: yet put
I my trust in God. Psalm Ivi. 3.


He verily is our strength and our salvation : He is
our defence, so that ice shall not greatly fall. Psalm Ixii. 2.
The Lord is King, be the earth never so unquiet.
The Lord is great in Sion, and high above all people.
Psalm xcix. 1.
The waves of the sea are mighty and rage horribly:
hut the Lord who dwelleth on high is mightier. Psalm
xciii. 5.
O put your trust in him alway, ye people : pour out
your hearts before him, for God is our hope. Psalm
Ixii. 8.
As for the children of men they are but vanity : the
children of men are deceitful upon the weights, they are
altogether lighter than vanity itself. Psalm Ixii. 9.
O trust not in wrong and robbery ; give not yourselves
unto vanity : if riches increase, set not your hearts upon
them. Psalm Ixii. 19.
Be thou, 0 God, our help in trouble : for vain is the
help of man. Psalm lx. 11.
Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Thy
name : O deliver us, and be merciful to our sins, for Thy
name’s sake. Psalm Ixxix. 9.
The Lord shall give strength unto his people : the Lord
shall give his people the blessing of peace. Psalm
xxix. 10.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Lloly Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is noiv, and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.


*[[ Proper Psalms L. and LI.
First Lesson, Daniel IX. to the End of Verse 19.
After the First Lesson shall follow, Te Deum Laudamus.
Second Lessort, St. Matt., Chap. 111. Verse I—l 2.1 —12.
Then Benedictus, the Creed, Sfc., to the end of the
Lord's Prayer.
Then the Priest standing up, shall say,
Priest. O Lord, shew Thy mercy upon us ;
Answ. And grant us Thy salvation.
Priest. O Lord, save the Queen ;
Answ. Who putteth her trust in Thee.
Priest. Send her help from Thy holy place ;
Answ. And evermore mightily defend her.
Priest. Let her enemies have no advantage against her.
Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her.
Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord ;
Answ. Because there is none other that fighteth for us,
but only Thou, O God.
Priest. Lord, hear our Prayer ;
Answ. And let our cry come unto Thee.
This Collect to be used instead of the First Collect
for Morning Prayer.
OLORD God Almighty, who orderest all things
both in heaven and earth; look down, we
beseech Thee, upon us Thine unworthy Servants, who
turn unto Thee in our time of trouble, and humbly
seek Thy favour and protection. We confess, O Lord,
that in many things we have deserved Thine anger, and
have failed to make that return which thou mightest
justly require at our hands for the national blessings
which we have long enjoyed. We have offended Thee


by disobedience to thy commandments, and by neglect of
Thy Word and means of grace; and if Thou wert to
deal with us according to our deserts, we might justly
fear Thy chastenings.
But, O Thou who hast revealed Thyself as a God for-
giving iniquity, transgression, and sin, we pray Thee,
enter not into judgment with Thy servants, who now
humble onrselves before Thee. O remember that we
are but dust and ashes ! Yet, Gracious Lord, let us fall
into Thy hands, for Thy mercies are great, and not into
the hands of men ! So teach and try us, that we may
learn from Thy godly chastisements to examine our ways,
and to turn to Thee by a lively repentance. Grant us to
acknowledge Thine almighty power, and Thy will in the
events of that warfare in which we are now engaged.
Bless us, w'e pray Thee, with victory, and give us grace
to use it with humility, justice, and charity.
Enable us by Thy Holy Spirit to walk as becometh
the disciples of Thy dear Son, and to discharge, each in
his station, our duties to our Queen and our country.
And above all, in every dispensation of Thy hand,
whether it be of prosperity or adversity, make us ever
to lift up our hearts above this lower world to thine
heavenly kingdom, where pain and sorrow and war and
hatred shall be no more, and wdrere alone true joys are
to be found. These and all other mercies, we humbly
beg, not for our ow r n worthiness, but from Thy love, and
through the merits and mediation of Thy blessed Son
our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all
honour and glory, now r and for ever. Amen.
Then shall follow the Second and Third Collects at
Morning Prayer, and the Litany.


After the Prayer (We humbly beseech Thee) shall the
following he added; the People repeating the same after
the Minister.
TURN Thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be
turned. Be favourable, O Lord, be favourable
to Thy people, who turn to Thee in weeping, fasting, and
praying. For Thou art a merciful God, full of compas-
sion, long-suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest,
when we deserve punishment; and in Thy wrath, Thou
thinkest upon mercy. Spare Thy people, good Lord,
spare them, and let not Thine heritage be brought to
confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for Thy mercy is great,
and after the multitude of Thy mercies look upon us,
through the merits and mediation of Thy blessed Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Instead of the Prayer in Time of War and Tumults,
the following shall he used.
O ALMIGHTY God, Maker of the Universe, and
Sovereign Disposer of the Affairs of Men, at
whose command Nations and Empires rise and fall,
flourish and decay, we thine unworthy servants most
humbly implore Thy gracious aid and protection. We
flee unto Thee for succour, in this time of peril and per-
plexity, when, in defence of the rights and independence
of nations, now endangered through unprovoked aggres-
sion, we are exposed to the calamities of War. Vouch-
safe, we beseech Thee, Thine especial protection to our
most gracious Sovereign. Direct her counsels, prosper
all her measures for the welfare of this kingdom, and
the preservation of our Church and civil constitution.
And let no internal divisions, nor any other sins and


provocations of this nation, obstruct her designs for the
public good, nor bring down Thy judgments upon us.
Bless her councillors with wisdom. Inspire her com-
manders, both by sea and land, with valour and patience;
and teach them, amidst all their perils and hardships,
to show forth in their lives and actions the united duties
and graces of Christian soldiers. O prosper them in
all their doings with Thy gracious favour and protection.
And whilst we pray Thee, O merciful Father, to defend
us from them that rise up against us, inspire our hearts,
and the hearts of our enemies, with the love of peace.
Let us do nothing through strife, or pride, or vain-glory;
but teach us to be meek and merciful, tender-hearted
and full of compassion. And in thy good time vouch-
safe us, we pray Thee, such a secure and prosperous
peace as may tend to the glory of Thy Name, to the
honour and safety of our Sovereign and her Dominions,
and to the common welfare of mankind.
Hear us, O merciful Father, and help us in this our
time of need, for the sake of Jesus Christ Thy Son our
Lord. Ameti.
A Prayer for the Safety of our Fleets .
O ETERNAL Lord God, whose voice, mighty in
Operation, the raging seas and the stormy winds
obey ; who, in Thy mercy guidest the Mariner in safety
through the trackless deep; receive, we beseech Thee,
into Thy gracious and Almighty Protection, the Fleets
of Thy Servant our Sovereign, the Vessels of our Mer-
chants, and the Persons of all those who serve in them.
Preserve them from the perils of the Seas, from the
Efforts of the Enemy, and from the danger of disease in


distant climates; that they may return in Safety, and
crowned, if it be Thy good Pleasure, with success in
their Enterprises, to enjoy the blessings of their native
Land ; and, with thankful remembrance of Thy Mercies,
to unite with us in rendering praise and glory to Thy
holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
We humbly beseech Thee, most merciful God, that
by Thy Grace Thou wouldst keep alive in us, who
have this day presumed to implore such great Blessings
at Thy hands, a constant sense of Thy presence, and of
our dependence upon Thee. Suffer us not to call down
Thine anger by sinfulness and disobedience, nor to yield
to those evil passions and desires which might justly
incur Thy wrath and indignation : But save us, O God ;
save us, not only from our worldly, but also from our
spiritual enemies; for the sake of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
Then the Prayer for the Legislative Council. — General
Thanksgiving .—To the End of Morning Prayer as
usual.


€Jje Crnnimraintt permit.
*f[ After the Prayer for the Queen [Almighty God,
whose Kingdom is everlasting] shall he read the Collect
for the Day as in the Morning Prayer [O Lord God
Almighty], and then shallJolloiv
For the Epistle. Jeremiah vii. verse I—7.
The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord,
saying, Stand in the gate of the Lord’s house and pro-
claim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the
Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these Gates to
worship the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and
I will cause you to dwell in this place. Trust ye not
in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these.
For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings ;
if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and
his neighbour ; if ye oppress not the stranger, the father-
less, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this
place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt; then
will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I
gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.
The Gospel. St. Luke, ch. xviii. 9—14.
And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted
in themselves that they were righteous, and despised


others : Two men went up into the temple to pray ; the
one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee
stood and prayed thus, with himself; God I thank Thee,
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the
publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes unto heaven, butsmote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you,
this man went down to his house justified rather than the
other ; for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased ;
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
T[ Then shall follow the Nicene Creed, and after that
the Sermon.
After the Prayer [for the whole state of Christ’s
Church] the following shall be used.
A Prayer for this Church and Kingdom.
BLESSED Lord, who hast manifested Thy goodness
to this Kingdom by an unusual period of pros-
perity and peace, now unhappily disturbed ; we beseech
Thee to preserve in our minds a grateful sense of Thy
past mercies. Take away from us, O Lord, all pride
and hardness of heart, all neglect of Thy ordinances,
and contempt of Thy word ; endue us with a spirit of
piety and devotion, of justice and temperance, of humility
and charity, and of all the graces which adorn the Christian
profession; that Thou mayest delight to dwell amongst
us, and to do us good; and that the blessings which
we have so long enjoyed, both spiritual and temporal, may
through Thy Providence be continued to us and our
posterity. And whilst we seek Thy protection against


our enemies abroad, so we entreat Thee to ward off from
our land that fearful pestilence which has threatened
our welfare at home. As once thou didst give com-
mand to the destroying angel, Stay now thine hand ; so
let Thy mercy prevail against judgment, and preserve
us in health and safety, for Jesus Christ’s sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.
A Prayer for our Enemies.
OLORD, and heavenly Father, who wouldest not
that any should perish, but that all should come
to repentance, who hast commanded us to love our ene-
mies, and to pray for them which despitefully use us ;
have mercy, we beseech Thee, upon our adversaries
in the present War. Deliver them from the guilt of
ambition and blood, and dispose their hearts to clemency
and justice.
Visit them, we pray Thee, with thy spiritual blessings ;
with reverence for Thy holy name, Thy Word and or-
dinances, and grant them to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and
in all charity and godliness of living.
Let all mutual offences and hatred be removed from
our hearts ; and grant that, being reconciled one towards
another, we may unite in striving together to exalt and
magnify Thy glorious Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
Almighty God, who hast promised to hear the
petitions of them that ask in Thy Son’s Name; We
beseech Thee mercifully to incline Thine ears to us that
have made now our prayers and supplications unto Thee ;
and grant, that those things which we have faithfully


asked, according to Thy Will, may effectually be obtain-
ed, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth
of Thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he he present) shall let
them depart with this Blessing.
The peace of God, which passeth all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love
of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord ; and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always.
Amen.


€jj t (Drkr for Cunning ffinapt.
f Let him that ministereth read with a loud Voice these
Sentences of Scripture; and after them the Exhorta-
tion, Dearly beloved Brethren, &c.
I will arise and go to my Father ; and will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son.
St. Luke xv. 18, 19.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us : but if we confess our sins,
He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 St. John , i. 8, 9.
The Hymn appointed to be used at Morning Prayer,
instead of the Venite, &c., shall here also he used before
the proper Psalms.
% Proper Psalms , LXXVII and LXXXVI.
First Lesson, 1 Kings IX. to the end of verse 9.
My soul doth magnify the Lord, &c. St. Luke 1. 46.
Second Lesson, Rom. 11.
God be merciful unto us, &c. Psalm LXVII.
If Then the Creed, Sfc., to the End of the Lord's Prayer.
5[ Then the Priest, standing up, shall say,
Priest. O Lord, shew Thy mercy upon us,
Answ. And grant us Thy salvation.


Priest. O Lord, save the Queen;
Answ. Who putteth her trust in Thee.
Priest. Send her help from Thy holy place,
Answ. And evermore mightily defend her.
Priest. Let her enemies have no advantage against her ;
Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her;
Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord ;
Answ. Because there is none other that fighteth for us,
but only Thou, O God.
Priest. Lord, hear our prayer ;
Answ. And let our cry come unto Thee.
Instead of the First Collect for Evening Prayer the
First Collect at Morning Prayer shall be read.
Then the Second and Third Collects at Evening Prayer.
O God, from whom all holy desires, &c.
Lighten our darkness, &c.
Then the People shall say, after the Minister;
TURN Thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be
turned. Be favourable, O Lord, Be favourable to
Thy people, who turn to Thee in weeping, fasting, and
praying. For Thou art a merciful God, full of com-
passion, long suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest,
when we deserve punishment; and, in Thy wrath, Thou
thinkest upon Mercy. Spare thy People, good Lord,
spare them, and let not Thine heritage be brought to
confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for Thy Mercy is great,
and after the Multitude of Thy Mercies look upon
us, through the merits and mediation of Thy blessed
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
*j[ Read the usual Prayers to the End of that “ For the
Clergy and People .”


6 i 6ul o
% f n c | 10
Instead of the Prayer in time of War and Tumults,
the same as used at Morning Prayer shall he read.
Then the Prayer for the Safety of our Fleets, as at
Morning Prayer.
Then the Prayer for this Church and Kingdom , and
the Prayer for our Enemies, as in the Communion
Service.
Then the Prayer for the legislative Council, and
the Prayer for all Conditions of Men.
Then the Prayer, We humbly beseech Thee, most
Merciful God, Sfc., as at Morning Prayer.
A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.
ALMIGHTY GOD, who hast given us Grace at
this time, with one accord, to make our common
supplications unto Thee; and dost promise, that when
two or three are gathered together in Thy Name Thou
wilt grant the'ir requests ; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires
and petitions of Thy servants, as may be most expedient
for them; granting us in this world knowledge of Thy
truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, he with us
all evermore. Amen.
Beading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-sti’eet, Sydney.
