

Form ok Service
FOB THE CELEBRATION OF THE
uf 1 [|o Selling
AND OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND THEREIN,
To be used on S UNDA Y, January 22nd , 1888, and , so
far as shall be deemed expedient , on THURSDA Y, January
26th, »S UNDA Y, January 29th , or such other S UNDA Y
as may be found advisable.
By Authority of the Bishops of the Province




FORM OF SERVICE
TO BE USED AT
Morning and Evening Service, and at the Service of
Holy Communion
Instead of the Venite Exultemus at Morning Prayer, or
either Canticle at Evening Prayer , shall he used the
following :
OLORD our Governor : how excellent is Thy Name
in all the world !
2. Lord, what is man, that Thou hast such respect unto
him : or the son of man, that Thou so regardest him ?
3. The merciful and gracious Lord hath so done His mar-
vellous works : that they ought to be had in remembrance.
4. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for His
goodness : and declare the wonders that He doeth for the
children of men ?
5. God is our hope and strength : a very present help in
trouble.
6. The Lord of Hosts is with us : the God of Jacob is
our refuge.
7. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O
Sion.
8. For He hath made fast the bars of thy gates : and
hath blessed thy children within thee.
9. He maketh peace in thy borders : lie feedeth thee
with the flour of wheat.
10. He sheweth His ways unto Jacob : His statutes and
ordinances unto Israel.
11. Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel :
which only doeth wondrous things.
to SX


12. And blessed be the name of His Majesty for ever:
and all the earth shall be filled with His Majesty. Amen,
Amen.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the
Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be :
world without end. Amen.
For Proper Psalms, any of the following: Ps. xx., xlvi.,
xlvii., Ixv., xcviii., cxxii., cxliv., cxlvii., cl.
For Proper Lessons, any of the following ;
First Lesson —Deut. iv. 1-11, xxviii, 1-15, xxx. 9 to
end ; 1 Kings viii. 54 - 62 ; Is xxv. 1-10.
Second Lesson —Matt. vi. 24 to end, xxii. 15 -23 ; Rom.
xiii. 1 -11; 1 Pet. ii. 11 -18 ; Rev. xix. 6-17.
After the Collect for the Queen in the Morning and Evening
Services, or in the Service of Holy Communion, if used
alone, shall he said the following Collects :
For the Colony.
OLORD, our heavenly Father, who ordainest to all
the nations of the earth the time of their increase,
and the bounds of their habitation, we heartily thank Thee,
that, in the past century, Thou hast granted to this Colony
an abundant growth, and hast made us to enter upon a
noble heritage. We confess that, through our many follies
and sins, we have too much neglected and misused Thy
gracious gifts. But, Thy mercy triumphing over our sin,
Thou hast still continued to us Thy manifold blessings :
Thou still openest to us the gates of prosperity and greatness,
and callest us to enter in, and to let our light so shine before
men, that they may glorify Thee, our Father, which art in
heaven. For this Thy great goodness, O God, we laud and
magnify Thy glorious name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
evermore praising Thee and saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hosts ; heaven and earth are full of Thy
glory. Glory be to Thee, 0 Lord most high. Amen.


O ALMIGHTY GOD, who guides! all nations
accomplish Thy gracious will; send down, we beseech
Thee, Thy blessing in the future, as on the Empire in
general, so especially on this Colony. Grant to us, if it
please Thee, the continual increase of plen. ousness and
peace ; spread abroad amongst us more and more the en-
lightenment of understanding and the knowledge of truth;
teach us to grow continually in the righteousn ss, which
exalteth a nation, and the love, which is the bond of
perfectness ; and, above all, give us that knowledge of Thee
in Thy dear Son Jesus Christ, which is the light of this
world and the life eternal; that so we may serve Thee for
the blessing of all families of the earth, and that to us the
kingdom of this world may become the kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with Thee and the Holy
Ghost be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen.
For the Church.
OLORD, let Thy continual pity cleanse and defend Thy
Church, and, because it cannot continue in safety
without Thy succour, preserve it evermore by Thy help and
goodness ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ai ion.
OLORD JESUS CHRIST, who hast promised to be
with Thy Church always, even to the end of the
world, we, Thy humble servants, thank Thee, that from a little
seed, sown in tears, Thou hast granted to our Church in this
land to reap in joy an abundant harvest. We glorify Thy
holy Name for all Thy faithful servants, whose labours
and prayers Thou hast blessed in the past, and who are
now at rest in Thee. And we beseech Thee, O Lord, in the
years that are to come, to pour upon us a continual increase
of Thy Holy Spirit, that we may more and more enter into
Thy truth, seek Thy righteousness, and be kindled with the
fire of Thy love; and that so, under all trials and duties
which Thou mayst lay upon us, we may find in Thee the
victory that overcometh the world; who lives! and reignest
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God, world with-
out end. Amen.
The Service shall conclude with the General Thanksgiving ,
the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, and the Blessing.


At the Service of the Holy Communion , the following Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel shall he used :
The Collect.
RANT, O Lord, we beseech Thee, that the course of
X this world may be so peaceably ordered by Thy
governance, that Thy Church may joyfully serve Thee in all
godly quietness ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For the Epistle. Isaiah xxvi, 1.
IN that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah ;
We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for
walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates, that the righteous
nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. Thou wilt
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on Thee;
because He trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the Lord for
ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The
way of the just is uprightness: Thou, most upright, dost
weigh the path of the just. Yea, in the way of Thy judg-
ments, 0 Lord, have we waited for Thee ; the desire of our
soul is to Thy name, and to the remembrance of Thee.
With my soul have I desired Thee in the night; yea, with
my spirit within me will I seek Thee early; for when Thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
will learn righteousness.
The Gospel. Matt, xxviii. 18.
AND Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All
power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth. Go
ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have com-
manded you; and 10, lam with you alway, even unto the
end of the world. Amen.


A fter the Prayer for the Church Militant , the following
Collect shall be used :
OGOD the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only
Saviour, the Prince of Peace ; give us grace seriously
to lay to heart the great dangers we are in hy our unhappy
divisions. Take away all hatred and prejudice, and what-
soever else may hinder us from godly union and concord :
that, as there is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one
Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
Cod and Father of us all, so we may henceforth be all of
one heart, and one soul, united in one holy bond of Truth
and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and may with one mind
and one mouth glorify Thee; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
J, L. HOLMES &. CO., PRINTERS, 315 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


% Ri .. »
1 r
& \
o~j '* ■
m - '
4 #
, «
**
■
■
, j, '»
*
*
*
V .
*
V
-.-
. *;
