

FORM OF SERVICE
Laying the Corner Stone
OF THE
CHAPTER HOUSE
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL, SYDNEY,
ST. ANDREW’S DAY,
NOVEMBER 30th, 1885.
«[ When all are assembled , at the place chosen, and all things disposed in
order, the Bishop shall say —
UR HELP is in the Name of the Lord.
Answer. Who hath made heaven and earth,
fciSSR-. - f'/S- Qkfrff
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.
Answer. From this time forth for evermore.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son ; and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall he ; world witli-
out end. Amen.
«{ Then sha 7 be said or sung by all —
T BELIEYE in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and
I earth:
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius
Pilate, Was crucified, dead, and buried, He descended into hell; Ihe
third clay He rose again from the dead, He ascended into heaven,
And sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; From
thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.


I believe in the Holy Ghost; The holy Catholick Church; The
Communion of Saints; The Forgiveness of Resurrection of
the body, And the life everlasting. Amen.
The Lord be with you.
Answer And with thy spirit.
Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Answer. Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUR FATHER, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres-
passes, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation : But deliver us from evil. Amen.
Praise ye the Lord,
Answer. The Lord's name he praised.
Then shall he sung —
Psalm cxxvii.
EXCEPT THE LORD build the house : their labour is but lost that
build it.
Except the Lord keep the city : the watchman waketh but in vain.
It is but lost labour that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carefulness: for so he giveth his beloved sleep.
Lo, children and the fruit of the womb : are an heritage and gift
which cometh from the Lord.
Like as the arrows in the hand of a giant: even so are the young
children.
Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not
be ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Then shall follow the Lesson —
1 Cor. iii. 9-14.
Then shall he sung
the following Hymn
Christ is made the sure Foundation,
Christ the Head and Corner-stone,
Chosen of the Lord, and precious,
Binding all the Church in one,
Holy Sion’s help for ever,
And her confidence alone.
To this temple, where we call Thee
Come, O Lord of hosts, to-day : ’
With Thy wonted loving-kindness
Hear Thy servants, as they pray :
And Thy fullest benediction
Shed within its walls alwav.
All that dedicated city,
Dearly loved of God on high,
In exultant jubilation
Pours perpetual melody,
God the One in Three adoring
In glad hymns eternally.
Laud and honour to the Father.
Laud and honour to the Son
Laud and honour to the Spirit
Ever Three, and ever one,
Consubstantial, Co-eternal,
While unending ages run.
Amen.
Let us pray.


rpHE Church’s one foundation
Yet Saints their watch are keeping
1 Is Jesus Christ her Lord ;
Their cry goes up, “ How long ? ’
She is His new creation
And soon the night of weeping
By water and the Word ;
From heaven he came and sought her
To be His holy Bride ;
With His own Blood He bought her,
And for her life He died.
Shall be the morn of song.
Mid toil, and tribulation,
And tumult of her war,
She waits the consummation
Of peace for evermore ;
Till with'the vision glorious
Her loaging eyes are blest,
And the great Church victorious
Shall be the Church at rest.
Elect from every nation,
Yet one o’er all the earth,
Her charter of salvation
One Lord, one Faith, one Birth.
One Holy Name she blesses,
Yet she on earth hath union
Partakes one Holy Food,
With God, the Three in One,
And to one hope she presses
And mystic sweet communion
With every grace endued.
With those whose rest is won :
0 happy ones and holy !
Though with a scornful wonder
Lord give us grace that we,
Like them the meek and lowly,
Men see her sore opprest,
By schisms rent asunder,
On high may dwell with Thee.
By heresies distrest,
Am
PREVENT US, 0 LORD, in all our doings with Thy most gracious
favour, and further us with thy continual help; that in all our
works begun, continued and ended in Thee, we may glorify Thy Holy
Name, and finally by Thy mercy obtain everlasting life ; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Show Thy Servants Thy work :
And their children Thy glory.
And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us, prosper
Thou the work of our hands upon us :
0 prosper Thou our handy-work.
*' Then the Stone shall he laid with these words —
T N THE FAITH OP THE LORD JESUS CHRIST and in loving
I memory of Frederic Barker, late Bishop of this Diocese, I lay
this Corner Stone, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen.
*' Then shall he sung the following Ilymn
O ALMIGHTY GOD, who hast built
ation of the Apostles and Prophets
the head corner stone; grant us so to
spirit by their doctrine, that we may be
able unto Thee, through Jesus Christ or
OMOST GLORIOUS LORD GOD. whose throne is the heaven of
heavens and the earth Thy footstool, look down we beseech
Thee from Thy dwelling place on high, and bless the undertaking of
Thy humble servants. We know 0 Lord that without Thee our works
are vain, and that, unless Thou build the house, their labour is but
lost that build it. Bless, therefore, we beseech Thee, the work which
we desire this day to begin in the name of Thy blessed Son. Bring it,


if it be Thy good pleasure, to a happy completion, and send down Thy
grace and benediction upon all who sh ill engage in and promote it,
for the advancement of Thy glory, and the good of Thy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with Thee and the Holy
Ghost be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen.
ALMIGHTY and most merciful God, who by Thy Son Jesus
Christ hast promised to be with Thy Church even to the end of
the world, and, in answer to the prayers of Thy servants, hast ever
been present in the Councils of Thy Church, bless, we beseech Thee,
those who shall hereafter assemble within these walls as the Synod of
this Province or Diocese, in Thy holy Name. Endue them with Thy
heavenly wisdom, sanctify them, and guide them in all their work,
that the Gospel of Christ may be faithfully preached, and obeyed, and
the order and discipline of Thy Church maintained amongst us,
through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our Lord.
Amen.
rp HE Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
JL Ghost, he upon you and remain with you for ever. Amen.
I! 4
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 490, Kent-street, Sydney.
