

Fortitude Valley
Centenary
1849-1949
As in the Past
So in the Future
•FAITH
•VISION
•COURAGE




STATE
PARLIAMENT
HOUSE,
BRISBANE
\
«r *** •** vo - tit '• ‘ - *
'»•""“ v**** go*^ 1
on® •-. a t.n® ,-4
«•*>* ~W»- .„<*•* "‘ ;• t .
*v^ d ® ( , r ri'' ed *, r ft ofl> „ te^ 9
»<** «..!>*• * -g. .ree®' 1 ' so *** , t V.* 1 *
V l.* *“ „, W e 9 ® tt ,W CS>V 4 40 »» l * »,«>«
jJ .of s ° .*°rt „r 4« r 6 „,, .O'" ~4
„ ..*» „„ *« r ' *»* Te^'“'
V» W ° ,„f . „<=^ 4 1 . „*. «** .„of «*
<* e W> \„« W 1 ”® i * ° 5 to» lri ‘ tr* 4 ' '! o» 4 ' , " eV
«»~' *» ; el «*• °V«- 1 **• -* *° 4 '
*"° COl0a „ *■»*" *"\ n 18 °°.f' 4 ‘’”° I ' iS W V
- 4 “ 0 «o 49V **» Vo
4,0 -* ie4 of «** . tt 0 «-"
f i- ' e a. roof 9 ~ v«®° .!»»'■ .ef 1 n
4. 9 V. fO^°" 8 «** * e ”“ 9 »
*«*'?«** **?*” <" 3 -"O* ** " r
z» -*;:. *- r:i* - :>- 088
1 6 r/)n 7Sn^
1 vf vc 2^’
10 «..f 4eS -t^o^
** Vo
in


FORTITUDE VALLEY
ITS southern boundary situate just half a mile from
the General Post Office in Brisbane, the capital city of
tPe State of Queensland, Fortitude Valley during the first
one hundred years of its existence has become one of the
most flourishing commercial, industrial and cultural centres
in the State.
Within its borders are some of the biggest emporiums
in Queensland. In latter years it has become one of the
chief manufacturing centres in the City of Brisbane. Along
the foreshores of the river-front the major portion of
Queensland wool, valued at millions of pounds, is shipped
for export overseas.
Culturally, the Valley occupies a high place for
many things culture and learning stand for. The Medical
School at Herston is a dignified example of Renaissance
Architecture. In the Valley are the Museum and the Art
Gallery and the Headquarters of the Maternal and Child
Welfare Centre and the Queensland Health Education
Council. There, too, is the Brisbane General Hospital,
claimed to be the largest institution of its kind in the
Southern Hemisphere; and the Exhibition Building and
Grounds which are the show place for the Royal National
Agricultural and Industrial Association of Queensland,
where every year is to be seen a display of the great primary
industries of the outback and exhibits of the latest in the
art of manufacture.
All these institutions are in the immediate precincts
of the site occupied by the first settlers of the “Fortitude”
just a century ago. The Hospital, the Dental School, the
Museum and the Art Gallery look down upon York
Hollow, where the aborigines fought out their tribal
battles during the days when the “Fortitude” first dropped
anchor in Moreton May.
It has all been a marvel of courage and development.


Fortitude
Valley
Post Office
Valley
Police
Headquarters


Valley Pioneers Who Have Helped to Build a Nation
EARLY STRUGGLES OF THE "FORTITUDE" IMMIGRANTS IN THE GREAT PLAN TO
ESTABLISH "FREEDOM AND INDEPENDENCE FOR THE
GOLDEN LANDS OF AUSTRALIA"
In setting out an introduction to this brief history of Fortitude Valley, a thought
comes from the pen of that keen observant mind, Professor W. K. Hancock of
Adelaide University, expressed in his penetrating work on Australia under the head-
ing “Transplanted British.”
He writes: “The tendency of a folk to idealise its origins is universal among
mankind, and may be observed even in Australia, where the popular imagination has
created the legend of a typical convict ‘sent out for snaring a rabbit.’
“This legend neatly reverses the positions of the convict and of the judge who
sentenced him, for in Australia it is considered not only legitimate, but even virtuous
to snare rabbits.
“Thus the champion of the convicts invariably opens his case with an indictment
of the vices of England’s aristocratic social system and brutal penal laws.
‘The law locks up the man or woman
Who steals the goose from off the common,
But leaves the greater villian loose
Who steals the common from the goose.’ ”
The truth of this quotation must have been recognised by Dr. John Dunmore
Lang more than one hundred years ago, when he set out to fight the convict system
with all his rugged determination, and to establish his scheme of free immigration
into the then penal settlement of Moreton Bay.
During the thirties and early forties of last century the demand for labour in
the then colony of New South Wales was at its height.
In 1840 transportation, except to Van Dieman’s Land was abolished, and in the
Australian colonies first thoughts of ultimate political freedom began to take shape.
But, as Professor Hancock comments, “Self-government is not easily reconcilable
with a society that is split into two well-defined opposing interests, and the feverish
immigration of the thirties and the forties, directed as it had been to supplement and
supplant the labour of assigned convicts, had done little to provide a class of settlers
capable of filling the gap between the capitalists and the wage earners.”
Dr. John Dunmore Lang took upon himself the responsibility of providing Aus-
tralia with a middle class.
He first came to Australia in 1823, and for years was a most powerful and
healthy influence upon Australian life. He had achieved a good education and the
ministry, and in Australia he was an indefatigable founder of churches and schools.
Later in the century he became Senior Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and
one of the Representatives of the City of Sydney in the Parliament of New South
Wales.
He happened to visit Moreton Bay, then part of the colony of New South Wales,
for the first time, in November 1845, and was particularly struck with the “general
capabilities of the country,” and with the idea that the “great inlet of Moreton Bay”
was as well fitted to become the headquarters of a separate and independent colony
as either Port Phillip or Port Jackson.


The stately spread and glorious colouring of the Poinciana in Bowen Park.
He had already made many voyages to Great Britain in search of independent
self-respecting mechanics, and still more, or sturdy farmers, and since the exploita-
tion of land in Australia tended to follow large-scale methods, he undertook enquiries
into crops likely to attract and reward his family-settlers. It was Dr. Lang who first
demonstrated the possibility of occupying coastal Queensland by means of a small-
scale cultivation of cotton and sugar. All these ideas crowded into his mind simul-
taneously on seeing the cotton-plants in Dr. Ballow’s garden in Brisbane.
His rooted objection to the retention of Moreton Bay as a penal settlement, the
difficulties pastoralists were experiencing in securing suitable labour, the golden
future he foresaw for free settlers in, around, and beyond the confines of Brisbane,
stirred the imagination of this rugged Scot and provided him with an outlet for his
tireless aggressive energy. Originally it had been the question of labour which led
Dr. Lang to Moreton Bay in 1845. In his mind it boiled down to one of “free
labour, as opposed to the employment of ex-convicts.”


Looking west over what was one time Duncan’s Hill.
Many of the squatters of those days, despairing of finding a supply of labour of
any kind, sought a revival of a modified form of “convictism.” The Home Govern-
ment had been concerned for some time with the problem of finding some suitable
place to which to transfer the surplus of the criminal community then confined in
gaols and reformatories.
“Even if such a class did not form desirable immigrants from the Colonial
standpoint, it was evidently thought in London that a partially reformed criminal
settler was better than no settler at all,” writes Mr. W. W. Craig, M.A., in his book
“Moreton Bay Settlement.”
Many squatters, starved of labour as they were at that time, figured that convict
labour promised to be plentiful and cheap. Hence their support of the idea. In
1846, Governor Gipps’ rule of the Colony came to an end. He was succeeded by Sir
Charles Fitzroy, then regarded as a mouthpiece of the autocratic Earl Grey, who was


then Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies. Governor Fitzroy and Dr. Lang
were destined to more than just know each other in the affairs of Moreton Bay,
wrapped up as they then were with the two controversial subjects of “free labour”
or “immigration.” In 1846 Dr. Lang went to England to further his plans for the
despatch of selected immigrants in a defiant vindication of his belief in “Freedom
and Independence for the Golden Lands of Australia.”
“In the two years which elapsed between his arrival in Britain in 1846 and the
despatch of the first shipload of intending settlers to Australia, Dr. Lang succeeded
not only in arousing interest in Colonial settlement, but also in exciting against him-
self the animosity of both Home and Colonial State officials,” writes Mr. Craig. “His
efforts, however, had indirectly one good effect. They roused the governing powers,
with Earl Gray at their head, to push on the work of sending out emigrants on their
own account with all speed possible.”
Two views of Fortitude Valley to-day showing the extent of its growth during a century of
unrelenting struggle and enterprise.


Above:
The Northern End
of Centenary Place.
Below:
Newstead Park
showing the his-
torical Newstead
House hidden in
amongst the trees.


Bowen Park —the lower portion of old York’s Hollow in the vicinity of which the Fortitude
settlers first erected their bark huts.
It thus happened that the Government ship “Artemesia” arrived in Brisbane
with a load of passengers for the Colony in 1848 just about two months before Dr.
Lang’s first ship the “Fortitude” dropped anchor in Moreton Bay. There may be
something in what Mr. Craig says that the despatch of the “Artemesia” had been in-
tended to “deflate” the sturdy and no doubt troublesome enterprise of Dr. Lang.
“Like most men Dr. Lang had his failings and one of these was his belief in the
capabilities of —himself,” records J. J. Knight in his contribution to early Queens-
land history, “In the Early Days.” “As far as possible he would carry out his ideas
without requisitioning the assistance of others, and possibly this accounted as much
as anything else for the many failures which followed him. This desire to do all was
never better exemplified than in the case of the ‘Fortitude’,” writes Mr. Knight.
To again quote Knight, “This desire to do all, was never better exemplified than
in the case of the ‘Fortitude.’ There had, it is true, been a rumour that Dr. Lang
would send out immigrants to Moreton Bay, but not one word did he communicate
to the residents here of his intention; and indeed they were in total ignorance of the
‘new chums’ having been shipped until the ‘Artemesia’ brought the news that the
‘Fortitude’ was about to leave when she left. Consequently when on the 20th
January 1849, the ‘Fortitude’ did arrive in Moreton Bay, after a tedious voyage of
128 days, she was not altogether unexpected. The immigrants to the number of 256 in
all were, it was discovered by the letter from the doctor which came by the vessel,
consigned to the care of a Mr. Richardson, who naturally refused to undertake the
responsibility, since he had never been communicated with.
“The residents, however, took in the situation immediately. It was feared that
such an exhibition of unaccountable neglect of any business-like precautions might
bring discredit upon the colony and deprive the promoter of the confidence of his
proteges. Two cases of typhus having occurred on the passage, Captain Wickham,
then Government representative in Moreton Bay, acting on the advice of Dr. Ballow,
ordered the immigrants into quarantine, where they remained for a fortnight. This
gave the residents breathing time.” During this period the old barracks and a portion


of the hospital were got ready for their reception, and Captain Wickham had oppor-
tunity to formulate a scheme by which to temporarily settle them. A statement of
Dr. Lang’s claims upon the Government arrived with the immigrants, and this was
sent to Sydney by Captain Wickham. Meantime the “Fortitude” had been released
from quarantine and on February 2 her passengers were brought up to Brisbane on
the “Susan.”
The problem that now faced the authorities was that of their accommodation.
Pending a reply to Captain Wickham’s letter to Sydney, which in those days could
not be expected for weeks or more, they were permitted to form a temporary village
“on some of the slopes running parallel to the chain of hills in the neighbourhood
of York’s hollow,” in the vicinity of what is now Gregory Terrace. Here they were
apparently given permission to erect temporary dwellings for immediate purposes,
but were forgidden to cultivate the land as the authorities held that this would be
unfair to purchasers of ground around the settlement.
To say the least, the vicinity of York’s hollow was not altogether a delectable
spot in those days. It was a rendezvous for the more unsavoury types of aboriginals
who inhabited the outskirts of Brisbane and the country northwards and was a fre-
quent battleground for the Brisbane and Bribie natives for settling their tribal dis-
putes. Even as late as 1852, three years after the “Fortitude” settlers had made their
temporary homes there, it was recorded that an affray in York’s hollow in the settle-
ment of a fued between the two tribes one night, resulted in one aborigine having
“his head cut clean off, his body being afterwards cut to pieces.” So it will be
readily understood that there was some cause for apprehension regarding the natives
even in the “town.”
Meanwhile everybody eagerly awaited the decision as to the future destination or
settlement of the “Fortitude” immigrants.
Whilst in England Dr. Lang had floated or attempted to float the “Cooksland
Colonisation Company.” With this idea in mind he made application to the Imperial
authorities for free passages for 100 immigrants who, he said, he would himself select
in Glasgow, and who, he announced would be employed in cotton culture in Moreton
Bay. The Imperial Government would not listen to the proposal. But apparently
relying principally on the statement of their Under Secretary for the Colonies, Mr.
Hawes, in a personal interview in 1846, that the Local Government would allow all
immigrants sent out by him an area of land equal in proportion to that granted in
the case of those sent out by purchasers under the Land and Emigration Act, Dr.
Lang persevered and dispatched his immigrants, the first of whom were the “Forti-
tude” folk.
The doctor chartered two other vessels, the “Chasely” and the “Lima,” and gave
the people who came out on these ships land orders at the rate of £l6 for every £2O
received from them. It was on the rock of these land orders that the ship of good will
on the part of the local Colony authorities crashed. After a considerable wait, Cap-
tain Wickham was instructed that the immigrants should not be allowed to even
temporarily occupy Crown lands, nor yet be supplied with Government rations.
“Thus,” writes Knight, “the new arrivals were made to feel the bitter spirit which
Dr. Lang had evidently excited in the minds of Earl Grey and Sir Charles Fitzroy.
The second immigrant ship of the same line, the “Chasely” quickly followed the
“Fortitude,” bringing a second supply of 225 passengers, and the “Lima” put into
Moreton Bay later on in the year still. As an immigration agent Dr. Lang had been
decidedly successful, to say the least. His three vessels had brought about 600 new
settlers to Moreton Bay.


One of New Farm’s great show places. An avenue of Jacaranda in full flower and a corner
of the famous rose garden of more than 20,000 trees —the largest in Australia.
During the height of the controversy which raged after the peremptory instruc-
tion had come from Sydney that the ‘'Fortitude” passengers were not to be allowed
to occupy Crown lands, a number of the passengers, sensing their insecurity on the
hillside by York’s hollow shifted their belongings to a spot somewhere near the old
warehouse of Foy and Gibson, where the Rex theatre now stands in Wickham Street.
Fortitude Valley could be reached only by climbing over Duncan’s Hill, called
after William Augustus Duncan, then Collector of Customs. Mr. Duncan lived in
“Dara” on this elevated prominence. The house was afterwards purchased from him
by Dr. O’Quinn in 1864. On the opposite side of what is now Ann Street was the resi-
dence of Dr. Fullerton, one of Brisbane’s first doctors. It occupied the prominent site
on which All Hallows’ Convent School now stands. It is interesting to note that the
original Fullerton Building was never destroyed. It is embodied in All Hallows’
Convent and the actual doorways and stairways are there to this day. The climb
over Duncan’s Hill to reach Fortitude Valley was very steep until it was first cut
down in the ’seventies. It was brought to its present level by further cutting in the
1920’5. Actually at the time when the Fortitude settlers came down in to the Valley


The spread of the
Thristian Faith
Top: Fortitude Valley Presbyterian.
Right: Jireh Baptist.
Below: The Salvation Army.


Top: “Holy Trinity” Church of England.
Left: Methodist.
Below: “St. Patrick’s” Roman Catholic.


A “Coat of Many Colours,” or “St. Joseph’s Coat”—the name sometimes given to the
multi-coloured foliage of the Amaranthus.
Duncan’s Hill was a formidable barrier to any penetration northwards from Brisbane
proper. On the other side, between Dr. Fullerton’s house and the river, there was
nothing but a steep declivity and a maze of bush, until Ivory Street was formed. On
the western side of Duncan’s house at the bottom of the steep hill was Wickham
Street which could scarcely have been formed in 1849. It was therefore natural that
people making their way to Fortitude Valley should keep to the low-lying ground at
the foot of Spring Hill.
This move into the then practically uninhabited area of the slopes leading down
from the hills above York’s hollow, was destined to give the name Fortitude Valley
to the whole of the surrounding district. Here, the settlers, again erected shelter sheds
with boughs, and those who had money paid the blacks—who at that time carried
more weapons than wearing apparel—to strip from the neighbouring trees, sheets of
stringy-bark with which to roof the structures.
The Valley in those days was something of a “No-man’s-land.” In a paper read
by Mr. Charles Melton to the Historical Society of Queensland in 1919, Mr. Melton
described the Valley in the early fifties as outside the zone of the industrial and com-
mercial activities of the “Settlement,” as Brisbane was then called.
We are indebted to the Historical Society of Queensland for making available
Mr. Melton’s address which gives a vivid picture of what the Valley was like in the
early days of its settlement.
Brisbane was then but a widely scattered village. In the first census taken a year
or two before the arrival of the “Fortitude” North Brisbane had a population of 483
and South Brisbane 346. The passengers of the “Fortitude” had settled some distance
from the residential portion of North Brisbane and there they were surrounded by
bush, and seemed to be quite a long way from everywhere and from everybody.


The nearest house on the town side of Father Hanley’s cottage, now the present
site of the Roman Catholic School in Boundary Street, was that of the late Andrew
Petrie, opposite the present Customs House, while the only building between Mr.
Petrie’s house and Edward Street was the old gaol on the southern side of Queen
Street.
On the northern side of the street, from the intersection with Wharf Street down
to Creek Street was then vacant ground. Nearly opposite to the old gaol was a small
wooden cottage which served as Brisbane’s first School of Arts. From there to the
old “Courier” Corner, the Queen Street frontages were not built on. It will be seen
therefore that when the “Fortitude” immigrants settled in 1849 near the site of Foy
and Gibson’s old store, there were only a few houses between what is now the Valley
Corner and Edward Street. The streets and footpaths of the “Settlement” proper
were then undefined and were well grassed playgrounds for both white and black
children.
The slopes were timbered with box, ironbark and gum trees, while the lower
levels held swamp-oak and tea-tree. Steers grazed on the hillsides, and dairy cows
pastured on the flats, while here and there was a cow yard with a milking shed. There
was of course, no Wickham Street in the fifties, much of the land bounded by Ann,
Brunswick, Leichhardt and Boundary Streets was still in blocks, as originally sur-
veyed by the New South Wales Government, and the nearest street to and parallel
with Ann Street, was Leichhardt Street.
A Romance in
VENETIAN BLIND
Manufacture
At Left: The original factory established in 1937.
It is on record that the Venetian
Blind originated in the East,
where the leaves of Palm trees
were used to shade verandahs and
give the desired coolness with
necessary ventilation.
Many improvements followed the
original idea, and the modern
Venetian blind is the result. Asso-
ciated with the progress in manu-
facturing all classes of blinds for
Queensland’s tropical conditions
has been the well known firm of
Pauls Blinds.
Commencing in a small way about twelve years ago,
Mr. A. Paul had two boys and a girl working in a
little factory situated next door to the Waterloo Hotel,
Valley.
This business was in 1944 purchased by Mr. George
Pickers, trading as Pauls Blinds Pty. Ltd., and to-day
employs from 30 to 35 hands.
Below: The factory to-day, at Breakfast Creek.
Since this date, the manufacture of the original
Pauls Venetian Blind has been greatly stepped up and
to-day the output from the new Factory is increasing
weekly.
In march with progress, Pauls Blinds created a new
non-rattle safety glass louvre which has revolutionised
the modernisation of verandahs, office and factory
buildings.
Pauls Blinds also manufacture the ordinary wooden
louvre for verandahs, interior Venetian Blinds, Budds
Roller Blinds and Canvas Awnings of all kinds.


The block of land at the corner of Ann and Boundary Streets containing an
area of one acre and three roods was owned by James Gibbon. The Union Hotel
stands on a portion of this land which is now divided by Wickham Street. The
Reverend Father Hanley had about three acres fronting Boundary Street and adjoin-
ing Mr. Gibbon’s land. Next was an area of five acres owned by J. Massey, front-
ing Ann Street and running towards Leichhardt Street. This takes us down to the
present Gotha Street. Land which now fronts this latter street, Ann Street, Gipps
Street and Leichhardt Street, was, at the period referred to owned by Mr. W. A. Dun-
can, and contained an area of a little over thirteen acres.
The next block contained eight acres and was owned by Mr. Gibbon. This land
extended from Gipps Street down to the Royal George Hotel at the corner of Ann and
Brunswick Streets thence past T. C. Beirne’s, on past the now busy Valley Corner,
down to about the spot where the railway line intersects Brunswick Street, thence
across to Gipps Street. Mr. Robert Cribb owned a block of five acres in Brunswick
Street, commencing at Mr. Gibbon’s peg, and running up to Leichhardt Street, fol-
lowing that street to its junction with Gipps Street.
From a point just below Father Hanley’s House in Boundary Street a small
watercourse ran right down to Bridge Street, intersecting the whole of the blocks
between the two points. It followed the low-lying land on the northern side of what
is now Wickham Street, and crossed Brunswick Street near the present Valley Rail-
way Station. Above the railway station and along the line of the watercourse were
some excavations made by the early brickmakers, whose bricks were still to be seen
in some of the old cottages in Wickham Street near Gipps Street in the early twenties
of the present century.
Between Wickham and Ann Streets, the land which borders Constance, East and
Bridge Streets, was low and swampy, and was then often covered with storm waters
from York’s hollow (the gully in Victoria Park running from the Grammar School
to Bowen Bridge Road), Spring Hollow, and from the gully just mentioned lying
between Leichhardt and Ann Streets. The waters crossed Ann Street near James
Street, and many years ago the Brisbane Municipal Council erected a bridge over
Ann Street to accommodate vehicular traffic—hence Bridge Street.
By-and-by the “Fortitude” passengers were joined by immigrants from other
ships or by persons from other portions of the town, and the boundaries of the little
village began to expand. Some of the larger blocks of land were afterwards cut up
into smaller areas, and those who had the pleasure of a banking account bought
allotments of land, and built houses upon them. These little drab coloured cottages
were mostly of the two rooms and a skillion order of architecture and were scattered
about the frontages in somewhat irregular order. Attached to nearly all these cot-
tages were small gardens, which rewarded the industry of their owners with a
generous yield of vegetables and flowers. Below Constance Street in the Valley,
Charles Windmell, after whom Windmell Street is known, had ten acres of low-lying
land extending from Ann Street to Leichhardt Street. Most of this land was under
cultivation in early days. ,
The isolation of the Valley had attraction for some people, and a few families
went there to live because the neighbourhood seemed to them to agree with their idea
of what country life should be. As a business proposition, the Valley of those days
was a failure. Here and there a cottager’s wife, in addition to her household duties,
found time to dispense small quantities of tea and sugar, a tin of jam, a few sweets,
pins and needles, coloured ribbons, cottons and odds and ends of stationery. Now
and again, someone whose hope had almost become a faith, ventured to embark on
a larger scale of business, but in the end, the asset side of the ledger was blank,
while the liability side had what sailors call a “list to port.”
Men in North and South Brisbane of recognised business ability, with all the
qualifications necessary to ensure success, said “Not good enough,” when it was sug-
gested that they should open in the Valley. Even the residents themselves shared
this pessimism when discussing business possibilities.


A corner of the great Exhibition ring where Queensland’s primary and industrial
wealth is yearly displayed.
But later the “Cinderella” of the City came into her own. In 1891 the fairy-
god-mother waived her magic wand over the streets and thoroughfares of the slighted
suburb, and she was linked to the City by strong bands of shining steel. In 1897,
the line was extended to the Bulimba reach of the river. The fertile wand was at a
later period raised over the roofs of the unpretentious little cottages, and there arose
in their places storied warehouses filled with costly fabrics of the manufacturer’s art.
A further wave of the fruitful wand caused the erection of stores and wharves at the
foot of Teneriffe second to none in the twin cities of North and South Brisbane.
“Where in the fifties the lowing of cattle was heard on wattle scented slopes is
now heard the ceaseless whirr of machinery, and where the black fellow’s gunyah
sheltered a few ill-fed and poorly clad members of his tribe in the early days are
now to be seen scores of up-to-date villa residences.”
With the coming of the Trading Banks to the Valley in the ’eighties began an
era of trade in the new settlement which has made it one of the biggest commercial
and industrial areas in the City of Brisbane.
The Trading Banks, by a sound policy of finance, unfettered by political con-
trol, have been the backbone in the development of Australia and have placed this
country in a sound economic position. Foremost always in their advocacy and
development of private enterprise they brought stability and progress to the new
Valley settlement and gave it also a sense of sound financial independence.
To-day the total clearings of the Valley Trading Banks runs into millions of
pounds, which represents the earnings of all types of commercial, industrial and
trading enterprises as from the large companies down to the small individual trader,
who is so important and necessary in any community.


AS IN ALL THINGS
FORTITUDE VALLEY
HOLDS A HIGH PLACE IN
THE WORLD OF SPORT.
Above:
Booroodabin
Bowling Club.
Right: New Farm’s well-
known Bowling Green.
Below: White wings on the river
during a Saturday blow.


T.C.Beirne's
THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE
for VALjUE
AND SERVICE...
narfli
0
m
I I
11
11
11
11
A
□r-r
THE STORE, BRUNSWICK STREET FRONTAGE, 1949.
A man of vision laid the Corner Stone of this Emporium 51 years ago.
He had Vision and faith in an ideal. He saw in the mists of the future
a memorial in steel and concrete to his principles of serving the people
of his community. He wanted to bring to his fellows a pleasanter way
of living, and he desired to exact only a fair sum for this enrichment
of their lives. He could envision a towering store, teeming with people
. . . people who came because they could get the things they wanted,
at prices they could afford to pay. "Give them better values," he said,
"and they'll come again and again." And come they did, because his
values were not only sound, but his rigid adherence to standards of
quality was unswerving. They liked his store 1 . They liked the greater
values and they came again and again. Suddenly there were 1,000
customers. The number grew to 10,000 . . . and then to tens of
thousands, until to-day the T. C. BEIRNE EMPORIUM is Queensland's! leading departmental Store.
T. C. BEIRNE (PTY.) LTD., The Valley, Brisbane


Bulimba Brewery
Founded 1887
Administrative Block erected 1941.
I
Original Brewery on the bank of the Brisbane
River. Site now occupied by Dalgety's Wharf.
il
i.
■
h
mm
4
Hi
m
■
P
Hi
It
Hi
■
Existing Brewery as it now stands. Well known
landmark at corner of Martin and Brunswick Sts.
Queensland Brewery Limited
Registered Office and Wine and Spirit Store:
Cnr. ANN and BOUNDARY STREETS,
CENTENARY PLACE
Brewery Premises:
Cnr. MARTIN and BRUNSWICK STS.


Valley District
Cricket Club was established
50 years ago.
Above: Cricketers in action.
During the years Valley Cricket
Club has provided many players
of International repute.
Above: Valley footballers whose ranks have produced some of
the finest exponents of the game Australia has known.


Bruce Pie & Sons Pty. Ltd.
8 McLachlan St., The Valley, Brisbane
Distributors for Bruce Pie Industries Ltd.
Bruce Pie’s Horizon has widened....
Since he commenced business in 1927
and subsequently began in the Valley
in 1935.
Each year from 1935 to 1949 has
been a year of steady growth and
expansion for Bruce Pie and Sons
Pty. Ltd. . . each year a milestone
of achievement culminating during
1948 in the establishment of the first
section of Bruce Pie Industries Ltd.
at Kedron. Bruce Pie Industries Ltd.
represent not only a monument of
advancement for Bruce Pie, but also
for the State of Queensland. A new
industry has been born and already
nurtured to the stage where it can
be regarded as the most modern and
highly developed textile mill of its
kind in Australia. While all manu-
facturing will be carried out at
Kedron, Bruce Pie & Sons Pty. Ltd.
will do the distribution from their
Valley premises.
An aerial view of the first section
of Bruce Pie Industries modern new
textile mill at Kedron, Queensland.


The home of. . .
SINGER GARS
HUDSON
CARS
DIAMOND T i.
TRUCKS
SEAGUL
OUTBOARD
MOTORS
'Morrison" & "Clifford''
Tillage Equipment
OVE^
OVERLAND LIMITED
(Inc. in N.S.W.) 295-321 Wickham St., Valley
Flowering Laburnum in
New Farm Park


A corner in the
Art Gallery
A show piece in
the Museum


100 YEARS AGO
the Aborigines used Smoke Signals and Message
Sticks as a means of Communication
But, to-day, in the same locality, 1 he Read Press
combine Ihe skill of their Craftsmen with modern
type faces and machinery to create and produce
Printing which is not only symbolical of Progress
hut also achieves an undoubted distinction in the
ART PRESERVATIVE OF ALL ARTS.
The substantial commercial progress of Fortitude
Valley in such a relatively short space of time
is proof of the Confidence which inspired the
early pioneers of trade to establish their varied
businesses here and so lay the foundations for
this great manufacturing and trading district.
The READ PRESS Pty. Ltd.
Craftsmen in Printing
6 10-616 ANN STREET, FORTITUDE VALLEY


J)URING the past century, immense
tracts of country have been cleared;
vast distances have been conquered; mil-
lions of acres placed under cultivation;
industries, both rural and manufacturing
have been established, and an efficient
comprehensive commercial structure has
evolved to distribute to consumers the
production achieved.
A notable contribution to all phases of this
development has been made by the Aus-
tralian Banking system, and The Union
Bank of Australia Limited, established in
1837, can be justly proud of the pari it has
played as a pioneer banking institution.
Its first Brisbane Office was opened in
1853, and during the intervening years,
opening of additional branches has pro-
ceeded side by side with the development
of the Capital City and the State as a
whole.
The Union Bank has pleasure in being
associated with the Valley's Centenary
and looks forward with confidence to the
future.


Busy Brunswick Street near the Valley Corner


THE
COMMERCIAL BANK
OF
AUSTRALIA LIMITED
(REGISTERED AND HEAD OFFICE')
335 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
★
For over 80 years the Bank's business has developed
and 571 Branches and Agencies serve the community
throughout Australia and New Zealand; also at
London, with Assets exceeding £100,000,000.
A comprehensive efficient service based on wide
experience and knowledge of financial problems is
readily available to every member of the community.
Personal attention and strict privacy in all trans-
actions is the privilege of every customer.
★
For friendly service and advice
Call on the Manager of the Local (Branch
COMMERCIAL BANK OF AUSTRALIA
LIMITED


OVERELLS
D€ol mOD€RI) SIOR€
V
W
10L
m
O
%
r 5
Overells (Pty.) Ltd. was established in the year 1883 in premises situated in Ann
Street, Fortitude Valley by the late Mr. W. J. Overell. Later, in the early nineties
the business was transferred to its present site in Brunswick Street, the frontage in
Wickham Street being acquired some years later.
On the 10th of February 1910 a disastrous fire destroyed the entire premises and
stock. The loss resulting from this fire was in the vicinity of £25,000 and was a
severe setback to the Company at this stage of its career. A fresh start was made
and like the "Phoenix", which became the Company's Trade Mark, the business rose
triumphantly from the ashes.
Today, the confidence and goodwill of the shopping public is reflected in the progress
made by the company, which is recognised as one of the leading Departmental
Stores in Brisbane.
OVERELLS (PTY.) LTD., THE VALLEY, BRISBANE


BEGINNINGS OF CHURCH HISTORY IN
FORTITUDE VALLEY...
By far not the least of the influences
which have contributed to the progress
and development of Fortitude Valley
throughout the years are the Churches.
All denominations have reflected the
principles of the sturdy Christianity which
characterised the work of the early mis-
sionaries when Moreton Bay was first
opened up as a settlement.
The greater part of the 235 passengers
who arrived on the ''Fortitude" were ar-
tisans from England and Scotland, and
all were members of the evangelical
churches, specially chosen by Dr. Lang.
Among them were the Rev. Charles
Stewart, a Baptist minister from Birming-
ham.
When the "Fortitude" passengers were
released from quarantine and were al-
lowed to land in the settlement, one of
the first things Mr. Stewart did was to
hold a thanksgiving service for the safe
arrival of the newcomers. That was on
February 19th, 1849. The previous day
he conducted his first service after land-
ing, in the old convict barracks in Queen
Street.
The new arrivals immediately set about
forming a congregation, the adherents of
each denomination being too few to justify
the founding of separate Churches. So
the Presbyterians, Congregationalists and
Baptists formed a "United Evangelical
Church", Mr. Stewart being the first pastor.
It was not until the middle 'fifties that
a move was made to set up the first church
in the Valley.
In 1856 the Rev. E. K. Yeatman, rector
of St. John's Church of England, establish-
ed in the settlement proper in 1849, found
that the church was not large enough for
the growing congregation, and recognising
the difficulties that his Valley parishioners
were experiencing in attending the ser-
vices at the mother Church, he set about
looking for q church site nearer to their
homes. So a cottage at the corner of Ann
and Ballow Streets opposite where the
Valley Post Office now stands was
rented from Mr. C. Windmell. Mrs. John
Hodge was engaged to conduct a day
school there, and on Sundays, Mr. Yeat-
man held divine service.
A few years later the Methodists made
a move into the Valley. The old Bruns-
wick Street Church was originally the
centre of Primitive Methodism in Brisbane.
Work in the Valley was commenced in an
atmosphere of revival in 1861 when a
small building was erected in Windmell
Street. In 1876, through the enterprise
and labours of the Rev. William Powell,
the present Church was opened.
In 1861 also was set up the "Jireh" Bap-
tist Church in Gipps St. Mr. John Kings-
ford, who had just arrived in the Colony
to-join his brother, was invited to become
pastor. Inciden-tly, the family name of
Kingsford has been perpetuated in the
person of the late Sir Charles Kingsford-
Smith of aviation fame.
It should be mentioned also that the
Reverend Thomas Kingsford conducted
the first Presbyterian service at Ipswich on
May 13th, 1849, after the arrival of another
of Dr. Lang's ships, the "Chaseley" on
which he was a passenger.
The first Roman Catholic Church in the
Valley was built by Father Hanly and
stood in Wickham Street just above the
present Prince Consort Hotel. A school
was later built. The land occupied by
the buildings ran down to the present
Valley railway line.
The church remained in use until the
building of the new St. Patrick's which was
opened in 1882. The school remained in
use until about 1890 when it was trans-
ferred to the present building in Ivory St.
Both church and school in Wickham St.
were wooden buildings and very good
for their time.
Present day churches in the Valley can
claim as a result of their eighty or more
years of Christian fervour some of the
most handsome structures in Queensland.


A little patience can
save you a lot of money
Vauxhall. Australia's proved favourite British car. costs fSO
to f 800 less than many competing cars Thats big money
-too big to spend lightly. If you must have immediate
delivery, there's no more to be said. But if you can wait
a little see us for all the facts - and for all the details
about Vauxhalls engineering and value leadership
AS ENGLISH AS ENGLAND
1
VAUXHALL
e
9
ct
Moto
Ge
ro
ne
9^
m
3 m
■V
■;*
t .
m
4
o>
m
*****
o*o9ll
dn
Metropolitan Distributors: MOTORS PTY. LIMITED 303 ADELAIDE ST., BRISBANE
Distributors for Q’land and Nth. Rivers: E. G. EAGER $ SON PTY. LTD., Newstead, Brisbane


Valley Baths, where State and Olympic
Champions have thrilled
thousands.
Below: Valley Hockey fame is likewise
known all over Australia.


m
9
FIN A N C E
MA Y BE ARRANGED BY-
m BANK
OVERDRAFT
HIRE
# PURCHASE
FIXED
# LOANS
UNDER-
f WRITING
At p.a. interest.
For Motor Vehicles, Industrial
Plant and Equipment of all
kinds.
Equal instalments repayable
over a period.
An issue of shares or subscrib-
ing to the capital of a company.
INDUSTRIAL FINANCE
In
every case our
Branch Manager
has practical help
and advice to
offer. Bring your
problem to him.
DEPARTMENT
Commonwealth lank
of Hustralla


A Century ...
m
$
... and still batting!
CONGRATULATIONS/ The Bank of New South Wales, now in
its 131st year, sends greetings to the people of Fortitude Valley on
the occasion of their centenary celebrations,
As you enter on your second century, we would like you to know that
the "Wales” is as keen as you are to promote the further economic
expansion of your district.
The Manager of your local branch of the "Wales” will welcome your
enquiries about the facilities which the Bank can afford you.
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
FIRST BANK IN AUSTRALIA
Incorporated in New South Wales with limited liability
A.4D04


R
APSON ENGINEERING CO. PTY. LTD.
SOLE MEMBER OF THE REGISTERED FIRM OF RAPSON & DUTTON
We have carried on the traditions of this old firm
established in 1920.
We have helped considerably in the Industrial Development
of the Valley.
5P
I
i
628 Wickham Street, VALLEY
Phone: L 1948
Victoria Park Golf House in the vicinity of old York’s Hollow.


Brisbane was young indeed when weary bullock
teams plodded through the Valley, hauling their precious
loads to the infant North Coast
settlements and selections.
Wood blocks paved the Valley when high-stepping
buggy horses flashed by with dainty, crinolined
passengers giving Brisbane its first glimpse
of the “New Look.”
Bowler-hatted cabbies, drowsing on their hansoms,
little thought that they would one day be displaced by sleek,
streamlined taxis. Indeed, the “horseless carriage”
was not invented when the Valley was young.
When horse buses plied to the City, it was no unusual
sight for the Valley to see a horse down, with a
dignified business man, dickie and all complete, sitting on the
animal’s head while a blasphemous Jehu
released the traces.
It was 1890 before the smoke of a steam train drifted
across the Valley, as “Puffin’ Billy” huffed and
puffed his way northward to the delighted and slightly
scornful cheers of the younger members of the community.
The original ancestor of Brisbane 400-type trams
was not notable fofl its streamlining. The Valley has seen both
these and many other types of trams bearing
homewards weary crowds of shoppers after a hard
day’s bargain-hunting.
The turn of the century saw Brisbane’s first motor car
chugging merrily through the Valley in a
cloud of smoke, and causing no little consternation amongst t'he
bystanders. Despite the scoffers, the motor vehicle
had come to stay and to develop into the mainstay
of modern transportation.
To-day the Valley houses the premises of the
distributors of the Rover car—the epitome of engineering skill
and master craftsman construction. In all its
hundred years of progress, the Valley has witnessed
no finer form of transport than the Rover “75”
one of England's fine cars, now made finer.
Breakfast Creek Road,
Newstead, Brisbane
Phone: L 1031


m
%
*
: €
d
7
9
fil
♦
IN
1913
. . . when the firm of Besley
& Pike Pty. Ltd. was founded,
plans were made for an all
time policy of a higher stand-
ard of manufactured station-
ery, printing and service.
TO-DAY
. . . we can look back with
pride in the wisdom of the
founder who forsaw the day
when such a policy would
bear fruit in lasting business
friendships.
TO-MORROW
. . . we know that our busi-
ness associates throughout
Australia who have become
friends through this policy
will be happy to keep meet-
ing us on the common
ground on which we have
always met them sincere
service and a higher stand-
ard of printing and manufac-
tured stationery.
Besley & Pike Pty. Ltd.
93 ALFRED STREET - - VALLEY, N.l
BRISBANE


The stately building in which the Queensland National
Art Gallery and the Queensland Museum are housed.


Two views showing the great
span and stately structure of
the Story Bridge.


* m-mm
There’s Timber
iit Fortitude Valley
100 years ago tall timbers GREW in
Fortitude Valley. Progress felled the
trees and industrial factories took their
place. Strange to say, that same pro-
gress BROUGHT timber to Fortitude
Valley, for, as the years passed, Brown
U Broad sawmills grew and grew, un-
til to-day, with new production
methods and careful organisation, they
are geared to produce more cut timber
than ever.
&
W,
A
m
wm
m
II 1
7
u
I
wr
mm.
■
Brown &
Broad Ltd,
Breakfast Creek Road,
NEWSTEAD, BRISBANE
Phone: L 1041


ELECTRICITY DEVELOPMENT
IN the very early “Eighties” a
dynamo machine of the
Crompton-Burgin or Brush Vic-
toria type was dumped off a ship
at Pinkenba. Some time later the machine was acquired at a nominal figure by one
of the early pioneers of electricity supply in Queensland and installed at a skating
rink on the grounds now utilised by the Royal National Association, where it pro-
vided brilliant electric lighting. This machine, situated in the Valley, was one of
the first, if not THE first, electric generating plants ever installed in Brisbane.
Over a period, various firms and individuals were granted the opportunity to make
electricity supply available in the Valley, but it was not until the year 1908, when
City Electric Light Co. Ltd. was authorised to provide supply, that the task was
tackled in earnest. During the interim, a number of firms installed their own private
plants, which were of many and varied types —even the dentist used a small water
wheel. These, of course, have long since disappeared.
After receiving the order to proceed, City Electric Light Company commenced to
lay down mains and provide services which ultimately covered every inch of the
Valley area. To-day, the Valley can boast of one of the most up-to-date alternat-
ing current systems procurable, in which City Electric Light Company has invested
hundreds of thousands of pounds.
What is the Valley’s future? Whatever it is, City Electric Light Company’s
organisation will continue to keep in step with every progress.
CITY ELECTRIC LIGHT CO. LTD.
(INCORPORATED IN QUEENSLAND)
Head Office: BOUNDARY STREET, BRISBANE


Two views of the Brisbane
General Hospital the
largest of its kind in the
Southern Hemisphere.


Night view of the Kangaroo Point entrance to Story Bridge.


Queensland canned products, bound
for overseas’ markets, set off on
their travels smartly-dressed in
labels printed by Simpson, Halligan.
To high-grade products is added
the final touch of excellence; the
subtle, silent salesmanship of the
craftsman-printed label. Work well-
done in our century-old Valley is
helping to sell Queensland products
all over the world.
0
6
RIN*
ALU
A
o
m
PLANNING A
SPARE ROOM
No home ever seems large
enough to the growing
family. So it is with pro-
gressive business. In the be-
ginning, 1906, in Queen
Street, Petrie Bight, 800
sq.ft, seemed ample; but
steady growth filled the spare
room, and to-day we find
30,000 sq. ft. insufficient to
provide for the constant ex-
pansion of plant and staff.
It seems we’ll never reach the
stage' of saying with cer-
tainty—“We have a spare
room.”
IDEAS, SYMBOLS, PAPER, INK-
For close on fifty years, Simpson Halligan
have been using these basic printers’ tools
with a craftsmanship that at once
honours, and is the printer’s Art; crafts-
manship which embraces genuine interest;
which does not stop at to-day, but—
restlessly progressive—seeks always the
machines and methods of to-morrow.
It is this attitude of progressiveness that
has built a business operating the largest
and most modern printing machinery in
the State; which, with a highly-skilled
staff, is the material force behind the
words— “Printers by all Processes 99
TT
SIMPSON, HALLIGAN
& Co. Ply. Ltd.
129 WICKIIAM STREET, VALLEY


E. SACHS & CO. PTY. LTD.
Cnr. Brookes and Wickham Streets,
VALLEY
MANUFACTURERS OF THE
Famous ‘'SAXON” STOVE.
Aerial view of the Valley premises
of E. Sachs & Co. Pty. Ltd. The
works and administration block
occupy an area of acres.
We “grew up” with
the Valley!
FORTITUDE Valley in 1 896, with its
dusty gravel streets, small wooden
buildings, and open bushland, has changed
a great deal since the late Mr. E. F. Sachs
travelled down from Bundaberg in that year
to establish our business.
The story of his enterprise is the story of the
Valley, for it is in the last 52 years that the
Valley has grown from a pioneer settlement
to a commercial centre, second only to Bris-
bane City itself. In the same period the
original one-man business of our founder
has grown to a great organisation occupying
premises covering over 21 acres and giving
employment to hundreds of Queenslanders.
The brand name “Saxon” is linked with the
manufacture of such diverse lines as fuel and
gas stoves, dairy utensils and equipment,
nails, nuts and bolts, wrought iron gates,
irrigation equipment, sheet metal goods in
all kinds. In addition to manufacturing, the
Company has a large merchandising organ-
isation handling paint products and builders’
supplies of all kinds. Our founder had faith
in the future of the Valley; we have equal
faith in its progress in the years that arc
ahead.


VALLEY HAS LARGEST HOSPITAL
In the Valley, Brisbane, is an outstanding example of “stories in stone.” Stories
that are statistically staggering and incredibly rich in drama lie behind the walls of
the largest hospital of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere—the Brisbane General
Hospital.
In dusty tomes and faded ink in the basement of one of its earliest buildings, can
be traced the amazing development from a tiny beginning. Selecting one of the books
at random, the reader will come across something like this: “6 sheets of blotting
paper; 6 penholders; 100 wafers”; being permission from the Board of Trustees for
the Secretary to purchase these articles!
It was in 1866 that the Brisbane Hospital was moved to the “Quarries,” Bowen
Bridge Road. One of the first buildings was that still standing on the corner of
Bowen Bridge Road and Herston Road. Up till 1872 the hospital was controlled by
a committee comprising the most generous and trusted citizens. A donation of £lO
made a man a life member of the committee. In that year a change was made by the
Government, and the committee comprised a chairman, three members appointed by
the Government and three by subscribers. At that time the Brisbane Hospital had a
house surgeon with two assistants!
To skip the intervening years and return to the present day is to see in figures,
an amazing contrast. To-day the Brisbane Hospital, including the Women’s and Chil-
dren’s sections, stands in 28 acres of ground, and has a floor area of no less than 15
acres- —15 acres of round-the-clock activity in the care of the sick! This area is taken
up by 43 wards and a number of pavilions.
To continue the remarkable story in figures of the size and activity of the Bris-
bane Hospital is to find that in the year 1947-48, 43,375 patients were admitted as
inpatients, whilst 100,083 were admitted as new outpatients. The daily average of
occupied beds was 1800. The care of these huge numbers of sick is in the hands of
63 full-time doctors, and an even greater number of part-time experts in all branches
of medicine. As to the nurses, 876 busy examples of the Nightingale tradition carry
on their work of mercy at this huge hospital. The task of provisioning alone is a
staggering one. Milk, meat, vegetables, and bread, measured in tons, go to feed
this amazing city within a city.
Completely self-contained, the Brisbane Hospital has on the spot, the most
modernly equipped departments in all technical fields of healing. Outstanding
amongst these is the Queensland Radium Institute, which is doing everything possible
to defeat cancer.
Next time you pass the Brisbane Hospital, give a thought to the organisation,
planning and ceaseless activity in modern treatment of the sick, that make it indeed
a great institution of healing!
EAST MEETS WEST IN THE VALLEY
Boulia! Winton! Cloncurry! Julia Creek! It’s a far call from Queensland’s
scattered outback to the Valley. Yet, situated in the Valley ward, is an institution
which provides a most important link between the two.
It is the Wilson Ophthalmic School Hostel, at Tenth Avenue, Windsor. To this
home come children from all parts of Queensland’s far interior, the hot, dry regions
where Trachoma inflicts so much damage to the eyes. The splendid brick building,
carefully designed for efficiency, caters for sixty children, a floor each being devoted
to the boys and the girls.


19 2 1
9 4 9
e are Valley Folk
... and Proud of it !
The Valley, to us, is filled with tender memories. It was there we opened our
first retail unit.
There were three of us at that humble beginning two men and a boy. But
we dreamed grand dreams in those far off Valley days and knew that by
effort, we would extend far beyond cur tiny "Signal" Store in Ann Street, and
eventually bring our service to tens of thousands of homes in Southern Queens-
land. With all due modesty we think we have succeeded.
We now control large modern food stores at twelve picked locations and
still young, look forward to even greater expansion and an ever increasing
number of good friends.
STORES
PTY. LTD.
Head Office and Bulk Store Margaret St., Brisbane
Branches at Valley, Adelaide Street, George Street, Woolloongabba, Stones
Corner, Wynnum, Warwick, Toowoomba, Southport, Bundaberg and Gympie


Another view of Brunswick Street taken at the Ann Street Corner


THE COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY
OF SYDNEY LIMITED
ESTABLISHED 1834
with which is amalgamated
THE BANK OF VICTORIA LTD.
Serving the Valley since 1887
The Valley Branch
was first opened
in 1 887
The present premises
were opened
in 1940
pOR 62 years this Bank has
served the merchants and
carriers, the manufacturers
and shopkeepers, th e
builders and plumbers, the
doctors and solicitors of the
Valley each, in his own
way making the Nation
richer by his labours and his
enterprise; each finding the
Bank a friend; each a friend
to the Bank.
In all these years the Bank
has found its greatest satis-
faction in helping the
"small" customer to become
a big one.


W E the licensed victuallers of Fortitude Valley salute—
The sturdy Britishers who came to explore the Australian wilderness in
the ship "Fortitude" just 100 years ago.
To these early settlers this great land of ours was an unfriendly
wilderness.
It did not accept them as it did the aborigine. They were required to
master it, and mastery—until the middle of last century—came so painfully
and so slow.
Most of these men and women began their labours with the barest neces-
sities and tools, and they wrought out homes for themselves in this then
strange and distant land in a manner that helped to spread British fame as
pioneers the world over.
With the taming of nature and the breaking-in of the wilderness they
watched throughout the years the fords becoming bridged, the trails becoming
roads, the advent of the railroad and the tramway, the advent of the telephone
and the little post office becoming a township.
Since then, instability has become stability; it has become security; it
has become independence.
We lift our hats to these sturdy people, to their children and to their
children's children, for they have helped create a nation whose fame has en-
circled the globe.
No matter to what great heights of material prosperity this country may
rise in the future, always in the background will be the legend of the great
spirit and enterprise of the early settlers and those who came here in the
"Fortitude."
We, the licensed victuallers of Fortitude Valley salute you and all and
the generations that have followed in your wake.
Mrs. J. YOUNG Empire Hotel
JIM CONROY —Exhibition Hotel
PAT. KEATING —Jubilee Hotel
BERT. GARDINER Osborne Hotel
TOM GORMAN Prince Consort Hotel
ARTHUR JOHNSON Royal George Hotel
TOM BENNETTS Shamrock Hotel
LEO DUNLEA Waterloo Hotel
JOE CARROLL Wickham Hotel
FRANK FULLERTON Valley Hotel


Brisbane City Council
Power House at New
Farm Park
Below: Wool and
Passenger Ships at
at New Farm


BRISBANE TRUCK & TRACTOR CO. Pty. Ltd.
Metropolitan Dealers lor International Harvester Company ol Australia—with headquarters in THE VALLEY
International Trucks
AND GENUINE INTERNATIONAL
Spare Parts
• McCormick-Deering
Tractors & Spare Parts
• Blue Ribbon Truck and
Tractor Service
• Milking Machines
• Farm Implements
• Jaguar Cars
BRISBANE TRUCK
& TRACTOR CO
PTYL
LTD.
302 WICKHAM STREET, VALLEY, BRISBANE
Telephone: L 4160 Telegrams: "TRUKTRAC", Brisbane
The Brisbane Truck & Tractor Co.
is proud to conduct its business
from this prosperous and ever-
growing centre—The Valley !
They look lo the future with con-
fidence in The Valley as a long
established, convenient and wide-
ly recognised business centre.
PROGRESS.
over 12 years
MM*
mm
\ ***** | m { :. T: ' ': f
iTp. i i i i 'r-|j
?«
m
in
IQ
HP
Manufacturing & Automotive Engineers, Foundrymen, Electroplaters
Progress over the last 12 years have allowed us to take our place among
the leaders in the Industrial Development of the Valley.
METAL PRODUCTS PTY. LTD.
43-59 Sandgate Road, Albion, Brisbane. M 4147


ill
i i i«IM
r* £lTf TiT> V 'S/£frJ£l
MM
KIZIIJL
YJ Ml
DM
W
mm
50
50
1898-1948
YEARS OF PROGRESS
YEARS OF SERVICE
M
m\
S»»Sl*
»»
aSS6^
IVVWJ
i
rc
ma
ti i
»^x
■?*=>*
THE VALLEY,
BRISBANE Phone 81234


Top: Loading Wool at
one of the VALLEY'S ever
busy wharves
Centre:
River Vehicular Ferry
Below: Colonial Sugar
Refinery at New Farm


THE
Bank
of
Australasia
(Established by Royal Charter 1835, the liability of the members is) limited)
provides a personal service for the smallest individual customer as well
as World wide facilities for Trade and Travel.
BRANCHES AT FORTITUDE VALLEY ARE SITUATED AT
Duncan Street 834 Ann Street
(Manager, Mr. R. H. O'Regan) (Manager, Mr. J. W. Cox)
The Duncan Street Branch has been open for many years to provide for
the needs of the community and as a further convenience to the public
the Bank recently opened a Branch at 834 Lower Ann Street.
At each of these Branches you will receive up-to-date information and
advice regarding your financial problems.
★
THE BANK OF AUSTRALASIA
has been established for well over 100 years and has branches throughout
Australia and New Zealand, as well as in London.


Because the treatment of Trachoma must extend over a long period (up to two
years or more) a properly equipped school is incorporated in the Hostel. In this
way, any interruption to the children’s schooling is overcome.
At the Wilson Ophthalmic Hostel, every effort is made to get away from the
institutional atmosphere. It is a home, and a remarkably happy one, for the small
visitors from the West. While perfect discipline is maintained, every child knows
that the members of the staff are friends. This helps greatly, both in health and
educational progress. The extent to which the homely atmosphere has succeeded is
evident in the wistfulness which many of the children show on leaving to return to
the West.
The bright, fresh surroundings, with lawns and gardens, provide a captivating
environment for kiddies acustomed to parched plains. The Matron reports a great
interest by many in the gardens, and a positive delight in the green grass of the
lawns. There are extension radio speakers throughout the building, and every
facility to help in children’s natural enjoyment of life.
The story of this efficient and successfully-functioning home goes back to 1927,
when the idea was first mooted by the Government of the day. In 1929, the Wilson
Ophthalmic School Hostel was officially opened, and named after the then Minister
for Public Instruction. In 1936 alterations were begun to provide great accommoda-
tion, and in 1938, the present brick building was opened.
Children between the ages of five and fourteen years are eligible for admission
to the home, on being certified by a doctor as suffering from Trachoma. The service
is free to all, as is the rail travel to and from the Hostel. Thanks to the work done
by the Hostel and the local medical officers in the Western towns (who examine and
treat the children’s eyes at the school as part of the Government’s scheme in the fight
against Trachoma) the disease is decreasing in both severity and incidence.
Apart from being cured of Trachoma, children attending the Wilson Ophthalmic
Home invariably make rapid weight gains, and give every other indication of a
general improvement in health. As to their schooling, inspections have proved flatter-
ing to both children and teachers. These facts give happy testimony to the great
job being done for Queensland’s outback children by the Wilson Ophthalmic School
Hostel.
QUEENSLAND PRODUCES OWN DOCTORS
To see the Medical School at Herston is to admire it as a dignified example of
Renaissance architecture. A little thought on the matter will replace this superficial
approval with a very real appreciation of the significance of this building to Queens-
land.
Let us imagine, for instance, a young Queensland schoolboy or schoolgirl, fired
with the ambition to become a doctor. The first thought of his parents is—what
facilities does the State provide to enable him (or her) to achieve this aim? A few
years ago, the answer would have revealed the need for the boy or girl to go to
another State to complete his studies. To-day, the Medical School at Herston stands
as the final achievement in the campaign for the provision of facilities for medical
education in Queensland. Queensland produces its own doctors within the State.
Fourth, fifth and sixth year students receive the whole of their training in the
science and art of Surgery, Medicine and Obstetrics in the Medical School, and in
the hospitals of the Brisbane and South Coast Hospitals Board. They also receive
instruction in Social and Tropical Medicine. First, second and some of third year
work is carried out in the several departments of the University at George Street and
Victoria Park.


OTHER VIEWS OF BRISBANE
GENERAL HOSPITAL


cn
f—
cn
cn
o_
o_
*
n
cn
os mi
£Z
C_D
m
SB
D
a
L
U
FOR KITCHEN. BATHROOMiLAIiNIWY
%
! L
r
'T'
n
— a»
r
i
F
mmm
M
to-
-1
K-
IN MO RE POTTERY PTY. LTD manu-
facturers of the famous Dinmore
Glazed Fire-clay Ware, is an associate
company of D.P. Hardware Pty. Ltd.
Retail Distributors for
D.P. Hardware is the Valley's most modern hardware
store —in fact, it has no equal in Brisbane. Goods are
displayed in a well appointed showroom and there's
ample storage space for bulk stocks, on the premises.
Whatever you need in hardware be sure to call into
D.P. Hardware or 'phone L 2461.
D.P. Hardware Pty. Ltd. and Dinmore Pottery Pty. Ltd.
are situated at the
Cnr. WICKHAM and GIPPS STS., VALLEY.
'Phone L 2461


*£j..
w
27 YEARS OF PROGRESS
Following the purchase of the long-established business of Messrs.
Bellamy & Co. in 1921, Sharpes Hardware carried out extensive altera-
tions to the premises, including the addition of two extra stories,
and opened in November, 1922, trading as retail Hardware, Paint
and Builders' Suppliers and Tool Merchants.
The wholesale section of the-business developed to such an extent
that in February. 1948, a new Company, Sharpes Hardware Pty. Ltd.
was formed to cater exclusively for the wholesale trade and store-
keepers generally. Sharpes Hardware remained the separate retail
establishment.
4^*
m?\
Rsr
mm
s
JigjUrjur
Hi
‘ *£ *
Stockists:
Hardware . . Ironmongery
Tools . . Electrical Goods
Household Hardware . . .
Kitchenware . . Paints . .
Colours . Oil . Lead Zinc
Varnishes . . Painters' and
Household Brushware . . .
All Painters' Materials . . .
Dulux Finishes . . . Plants .
Seeds . . Bulbs . . Fertilizers
Wire Netting . . Barb Wire
Fencing Wire . . Galv. Iron
Ropes . Cordage . Lawn-
mowers . Carbide . Garden
Tools . . Hose.
Distributors:
Cast Iron Porcelain Enamel
Ware . . . Linseed Oil
Hardie’s and Wunderlich
Asbestos Cement Sheets.
Agents for:
Taubman's Paints and
Painters' Requisites.
Meccano and Hornby Trains
and Spare Parts.
Ezybilt Sets and Spare Parts
. . Dinky Toys.
SHARPES
HARDWARE
RETAIL HARDWARE MERCHANTS
314-316 Brunswick Street, Valley, Brisbane
SHARPES HARDWARE
PTY. LTD.
Wholesale only:
HARDWARE AND GENERAL MERCHANTS
AND IMPORTERS
314-316 Brunswick Street, Valley, Brisbane
J
I
II I
X>
%
■HI


The first step towards this end was in the form of proposals by the late Dr. E.
Sandford Jackson, in 1913. These were interrupted by World War I. In 1922,
arrangements were made for anatomical demonstrations to be given to Dental
Students. The Medical Act of 1925 legalised and regulated the practice of Anatomy.
Two years later a School of Anatomy for the teaching of Dental Students was
established by converting an old disused bedding factory in William Street into a
dissecting room. This was made possible by a grant from the Brisbane and South
Coast Hospitals Board, and by the activities of the late Dr. E. Sandford Jackson, the
late Professor E. J. Goddard, Dr. E. S. Meyers and Dr. J. V. Duhig.
The next important year was 1934, when the activities of the Anatomy School
were transferred to a building in Alice Street kindly given to the University by the
Freemasons of Queensland. In the following year, the Hon. W. Forgan Smith, then
Premier of Queensland, appointed a Committee to report on the practicability of
establishing a Faculty of Medicine within the University of Queensland.
In the report of this Committee it was suggested that the inauguration of the
Faculty was of such importance that even makeshift buildings would be better than
delay. However, the Government decided to provide buildings worthy of the new
venture, and the Medical School at Herston Road, the foundation stone which was
laid in 1937 by the Hon. E. M. Hanlon (then Minister for Health), opened in 1939,
is a magnificent tribute to their recognition of its scope and importance.
The first graduates were registered as legally qualified medical practitioners in
1940. The number of graduates is now approaching three hundred, and they have
been of great value to the State, not only during the recent War, but also in meeting
the needs of peace time conditions.
A GOOD START FOR YOUNG QUEENSLANDERS
An address in the Valley that means much to the present and future welfare of
young Queenslanders and their mothers, is located in St. Paul’s Terrace. Here are
the headquarters of the Maternal and Child Welfare Service.
Established in 1917, with the first clinic being opend in the Valley, this Service
has grown to be a splendid assurance of healthier generations ahead. Spreading out
from the main centre in St. Paul’s Terrace, Maternal and Child Welfare Centres and
sub-centres have been established throughout Queensland, the number now exceeding
170.
The personal guidance and assistance of these centres is given completely free,
and embraces the three main aspects of maternal and child care. First there is the ser-
vice to expectant mothers. After consulting their doctors and making accommoda-
tion arrangements, they can commence regular visits to their nearest centre. Here,
trained sisters, skilled in ante-natal care, are waiting to assist in the problems of diet,
exercise, baby clothing. They also watch the progress of the mother-to-be so that
remedial action can be taken before any possible complications become serious.
Next there is the care of the new baby, and advice to the mother on every aspect
of giving the little one a good start in life. Trained sisters do all they can to help
the mothers to establish natural feeding, and also give sound advice on artificial feed-
ing. Charting baby’s weight, and test feeding are only part of the individual health
service which the mother can use as often as she wishes.
The third service provided by Queensland’s Maternal and Child Welfare Centres
is the care of the toddler. It is especially during the years from one to five that the
child’s mother is confronted with problems concerning food, rest and habits. Here
again free assistance is readily available, at the Toddlers’ Health Centres. Quarterly
check-ups by the medical officer are just one part of a really interested service.
Still further free services provided by the Maternal and Child Welfare Centre,
include a correspondence service for the advice of mothers and expectant mothers
living outside of the metropolitan area. When mothers, due to illness, are unable
to attend their centre, a trained sister will make regular visits to assist in the welfare
of both the mother and the child.


A fine example
of Renaissance
architecture.
The
Medical School
at Herston.
A Children’s Home at Sandgate cares for children under five while mothers are
in hospital. Further, three other baby homes, two in Brisbane and one in Toowoomba,
have been established to care for difficult, premature or weakling babies. Another
important function of the Maternal and Child Welfare Service is the training of
trained nurses and untrained girls in the principles and practices of Maternal and
Child Welfare work.
Here is a service which can be proud of all it is doing to assure a bright outlook
for a healthier, happier Queensland in the future.
HEALTH COMES TO THE VALLEY!
A highlight of the recent history of the Valley is the establishment of a per-
manent health centre at the Exhibition Grounds.
Housed in a new building, which was opened at the 1948 Exhibition, is the
Queensland Health Education Council, whose ever-growing activity augurs well for
healthier horizons for Queensland.
With a modern theatrette and well-situated display space, the Q.H.E.C. is well-
equipped to present the message of health most effectively to the many thousands who
visit each Royal National Show.
However, this health centre is the scene of activity right throughout the year. It
is the source of a constant stream of health literature, newspaper articles and radio
broadcasts designed to spread health through knowledge over the entire State.
Epidemics and holiday seasons receive special attention from the Queensland Health
Education Council, which uses every effective means to improve hygiene and teach
the most effective means of disease prevention.
The major acheivement to date of the Q.H.E.C. has been the production of a
unique health handbook for schools. This attractive and authoritative book, which
has been received with high praise, will be in use in every primary school in Queens-
land. It crystallises one of the main aims of the Queensland Health Education Council
—to ensure for to-day’s children, a healthier, happier to-morrow!


95 YEARS OF BANKING SERVICE
r
H
mm
£
Valley Branch at
190 Wickham Street
SERVICE IS OUR BUSINESS
('“'WER 100 years ago, the first Settlement took place at
Fortitude Valley.
Since then much progress has been made, and to-day this
important and busy centre stands as a monument to the
courage and enterprise of the early pioneers, serving the
needs of the business community in many different ways.
Service is our Motto and in order to cater for an increas-
ing number of Valley clients, a branch of this bank was opened
at 190 Wickham Street, and from this centre a daily Agency
is now being conducted at 803 Ann Street.
Discuss your financial affairs business and private
with the Branch Manager.
Daily Agency conducted at 803 Ann Street.
The English Scottish & Australian Bank Ltd.
(Incorporated in England)
A Bank where Service is a tradition.


INDUSTRIAL
and
MEDICAL GASES
C.I.G.
(QUEENSLAND)
PTY. LTD.
G.I.C. (QUEENSLAND) PTY. LTD. is the
W Queensland unit of a Commonwealth Organ-
f isation, THE COMMONWEALTH INDUS-
TRIAL GASES LTD., Sydney. That Organisation
has Dioneered and promoted the Compressed
Gas Industry in Australia. The most important
of the Industrial Gases is Compressed Oxygen and
it was first manufactured in Australia in 1912.
Prior to that time, suoolies were imported in small
quantities. Other Industrial Gases marketed are —Acetylene, Compressed Coal Gas, Hydrogen, and Nitrogen. The
Medical Gases comprise—Medical Oxygen, Carbon Dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, and Cyclopropane.
Equipment enabling the use of these Gases, both Industrially and Medically, is also manufactured by the
Organisation whose Policy is to be ever on the look out for improvements and refinements by means of develop-
ment and research.
The Oxy-Acetylene Welding and Cutting process is universal as it is an essential to practically every Indus-
try including Steel Works, Shipyards, Railways, Foundries, Engineering Shops, etc. The various processes em-
ployed in the use of these gases besides Welding and Cutting include Profile Cutting, by Cutting Machines,
Deseaming, Descaling, Flame Hardening, the Application of Hard Facing Materials to parts which are subject
to Abrasive wear, Under Water Cutting of Steel, Pole Charring or the treatment of that portion of Telegraph
Poles and other timbers which show decay, Lead Welding, Brazing, Glass Cutting, and many other applications of
the Oxy-Acetylene Flame.
The Medical Field embraces Hospitals, Doctors, and Dentists who use the Anaesthetic and Oxy-Adminis-
tration Equipment in Analgesia and Anaesthesia. In the Medical Section a 24-hour Medical Delivery Service is
maintained.
It is the Policy of the Organisation to engage in continuous research so that new Developments and Tech-
niques might be passed on to the Operators for the benefit of Industry generally.


FISH STEAM LAUNDRY PTY. LTD.
This laundry was established in 1902 by the late George
Fish. He erected two 2-storey brick buildings and carried on
until 1921 when he sold out his interests to Mr. J. C. Penny
and his associates. Improvements were made from time to
time and several smaller laundries were bought out, including
Standard, Globe, Glencoe, Mirror and Brisbane Laundry Ltd.
The laundry during the war was impressed by the Com-
monwealth Hirings Department and let to the U.S. Army who
operated it entirely for their own army work.
During their occupation the factory was duplicated by the
addition of another two-storey brick building and additional
machinery. It is now the second largest laundry in Australia
and as regards lay-out is the most modern.
Its capacity is now 26,000 pieces per eight hour day, and it
can cope with all work required by ships coming to Brisbane,
as well as doing its regular work for Hotels, Cafes, Hospitals
and the general public.
It also has a modern dry-cleaning plant to do dry-cleaning
required by its laundry customers.


PIONEERS IN QUEENSLAND OF AN
IMPORTANT BUILDING MATERIALS INDUSTRY..
JAMES HARDIE & COY. PTY. LIMITED
(INC. IN N.S.W.)
Office and Factory: Breakfast Creek Road, Newstead, Brisbane
another milestone was passed in the march of
progress of Queensland's greatest secondary in-
dustries when in 1936 James Hardie & Coy. Pty. Ltd.
opened their large, modern factory at Newstead, for
the manufacture of "FIBROLITE" Building Products.
There is little doubt that the establishment of this
important industry in Queensland has played its part
in the growing prosperity of the State. Constant em-
ployment has been provided for a large number of
Queenslanders, directly in the Company's own factory
and indirectly through numerous other channels. For
instance, huge quantities of Queensland cement are
used annually in the manufacture of "Fibrolite" pro-
ducts, thus creating additional employment in this
industry.
In the building field, "FIBROLITE" is playing an
important and expanding role. It has assisted the
State's industrial development by enabling numbers
of new factories and industrial buildings to be erected
quickly and economically. Its use for walls, ceilings,
etc., has enabled thousands of modern, attractive and
durable homes to be erected at moderate cost. In the
country districts, it assists the man on the land to
erect his homestead and farm and station buildings
with a minimum of labour and money.
HARDIE'S "FIBROLITE" Factory at Newstead has
proved a valuable asset to Queensland and to the
Brisbane Valley.
Another activity of James Hardie Cr Coy.
Pty. Limited in Brisbane is the manufac-
ture of terra-cotta roofing tiles at Bulimba.
Well situated in relation to good clay de-
posits and fitted with modern kilns and
equipment, this factory manufactures roof-
ing tiles that are unsurpassed in colour,
texture, shape and strength. Many of
Queensland's most beautiful homes are
roofed with HARDIE terra-cotta TILES.


DR
RS
y y
$\
L__J
n
L J
U
-CD
LEADING EDUCATIONAL BOOK PUBLISHERS
CARDBOARD BOX and CARTON MAKERS
ENVELOPE MANUFACTURERS
STATIONERS
Backed by 60 Years’ Experience in the Trade
STATIONERY SERVICE
299 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE
WILLIAM BROOKS & CO.
(Q.) PTY. LTD.
299 Queen Street - - Brisbane
Telephones: B 0374, B 0258
542-356 Wickham Street - Valley
Telephone: L 1551


Cnr. of Gipps and Wickham Streets,
Fortitude Valley.
Established 4/8/14.
Q.N. Branch
Brunswick Street, Fortitude Valley.
Established 13/3/77.
On 13th March 1877, 28 years after arrival of the vessel "Fortitude," the first link between
The National Bank and Fortitude Valley was forged by the opening of a branch of The
Queensland National Bank Ltd. The Bank's second point of representation there was born
on 4th August 1914 when a branch of The Royal Bank of Queensland Ltd., was established
in Wickham Street, on the site at present occupied by the Union Bank of Australia Ltd.
Now, as units of The National Bank of Australasia Ltd., proud of their share in the develop-
ment of The Valley, these two branches in common with all other offices of the Bank are
eager to do their part in rendering expert banking service to the community.
THE NATIONAL BANK
OF AUSTRALASIA LIMITED
(Incorporated in Victoria)
WITH WHICH IS UNITED
THE QUEENSLAND NATIONAL BANK LIMITED


Northern approach to Story Bridge
W. R. SMITH & PATERSON PTY. LTD.
KEMP PLACE VALLEY BRISBANE
PRINTERS - PUBLISHERS - STATIONERS - BOOKBINDERS


Right:
Valley State School.
Left:
New State School in
course of erection.
Right:
St. Patrick’s School.


MStk*
pri \l\ /r> 3pBW
Q/i V *i^*
MMK
sHst?
',m^ 2
•m-
OSS
SJBL-
a
7
«
ITTl!
«
n
Sisnuiosds 3>iyo Hoiy
1 I “| il>: *** 1 1 1 Vjj
111 % 1 if /IB m '
*0
s» *v I*


Leading Canvas Manufacturers
Ships Chandlers & Sail-makers
GEO. PICKERS & Co. Z
Marquees, designed in the most
popular style to give complete
camping comfort, are strongly sewn
in materials chosen for durability
and are double strengthened with
solid webbing. GEO. PICKERS'
splendid Marquees have Berkmyre
Tops and 12oz. Duck Walls.
Write for full price list and
particulars.
CYC
8
If it's made of canvas, make sure it's a GEO.
PICKERS product, for Queenslanders know the
name of GEO. PICKERS & CO. as makers of superior
canvas goods—Caravan Lean-tos, Tarpaulins and
Camping and Holiday needs of every description.
Gay, distinctive canvas
Awning Blinds are a
speciality with GEO.
PICKERS who fit all types
of special Awning. Expert
advice is freely given by
GEO. PICKERS on all
your Blind problems.
y
Follow the choice of
champions and fit your
craft no matter what
type —with chandlery from GEO. PICKERS' complete stocks.
GEO. PICKERS have an unexcelled range of finest Japara for
sails and also carry Torpedo Brand Paint and Alpha Metallic
Anti-fouling Copper Paint in Red or Green.
Superbly styled for winter
warmth are GEO. PICKERS'
Horse and Cow Rugs, cut
and sewn by master crafts-
men in sft. to 7ft. 20oz.
jute and green or khaki-
dyed waterproof duck with
white or check felt lining.
Write for complete price list.
{
■,.r r
GEO. PICKERS & CO. PTY. LTD.
Cr. GIPPS and ANN STREETS, VALLEY
and next to Breakfast Creek Bridge
Brisbane. Telephone L 2218-9


Fortitude
Valiev
Methodist
Day
Kinder-
garten
Fortitude
Valley
State
School
All Hallows
Convent,
Fortitude
Valley


Our Privilege . .
It has been our privilege to be
associated with the development
of "The Valley" and to con-
tribute something towards the
smartness of its appearance as
well as its prosperity, by dis-
playing to full advantage the
cars, trucks and tractors that
have attracted so much wealth
to this centre.
9l
Hi
IlfS?
1
sffiiffifi
, v
ES
mm i
■ j
Distributors for Queensland and N.S.W. for
HUMBER, HILLMAN MINX & SUNBEAM TALBOT CARS
COMMER TRUCKS & BRITISH MARSHALL DIESEL TRACTORS
John McGrath Motors Pty. Ltd. 324 WICKHAM ST., VALLEY
I
Makers of the
finest Aerated
Waters <§• Cordials
since 1850.
OWEN
GARDNER
and SONS
McLachlan St.,
P *
0 i
3 *
Valley, Brisbane
CORDIALS
m
111
HOT WATER
Bringing customers to the Valley for
over 12 years for Electrical Hot Water
Equipment.
THERMAX
ELECTRIC WATER HEATERS
PTY. LTD.
32 McLachlan Street, Valley
’Phone L 2081-2


» •
S A 5”
Jk
BE
mm Mm
M mi
■ I
111
I
v? ■'!
I
*
sas -
HEAD OFFICE: GIPPS STREET, VALLEY, BRISBANE
Phone L1221 - 1222


Acknowledginents...
The preparation of this brochure has naturally involved a considerable
amount of research, which, in turn, called for the active co-operation of
many institutions and individuals. It is desired to acknowledge the great
assistance that has been given by the following, without whose help the
story of the “Fortitude” and subsequent events could have not been told:—
The Queensland State Government.
. , „ . , „
The Historical Society of Queens-
land -
Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia.
The Oxley Library.
The State Parliamentary Librarian
(Mr. D. V. Ryan).
Hjs Grac{ , Mos( . Rey James
Duhig, D.D.
Rev. Canon S. Watkin.
Thc Rev j N Bagnall.
The Rev. S. Summers.
The actual production of the brochure was only made possible by the
help of the following companies, firms and individuals, for which the Valley
Centenary Committee takes the opportunity of expressing its grateful thanks:
Adams, G. E., Pty. Ltd.
Annand & Thompson.
Bank of Australasia.
Bank of New South Wales.
Beirne, T. C., (Pty.) Ltd.
Bennetts, Tom, Shamrock Hotel.
Bcsley & Pike Pty. Ltd.
Best, S. A., Pty. Ltd.
Brisbane Cash U Carry.
Brisbane Truck U Tractor Co. Pty.
Ltd.
Brooks, William, & Co. (Q.)
Pty. Ltd.
Brown U Broad Ltd.
Bruce Pie Industries Ltd.
Carroll, Joe, Wickham Hotel.
City Electric Light Co. Ltd.
Commercial Bank of Australia.
Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney Ltd.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
Commonwealth Industrial Gases
Ltd.
Conroy, Jim, Exhibition Hotel.
Dinmore Pottery Pty. Ltd.
Dunlea, Leo, Waterloo Hotel.
Eager, E. G., & Son Pty. Ltd.
English. Scottish & Australian
Bank Ltd.
Fish Steam Laundry Pty. Ltd.
Fullerton, Frank, Valley Hotel.
Gardiner, Bert, Osborne Hotel.
Gardner, Owen, U Sons.
Gorman, Tom, Prince Consort
Hotel.
Hardie, James, & Co. Pty. Ltd.
Johnson, Arthur, Royal George
Hotel.
Keating, Pat, Jubilee Hotel.
McGrath, John, Motors (Pty.)
Ltd.
McWhirters Ltd.
Metal Products Pty. Ltd.
National Bank of Australasia Ltd.
Overells’ (Pty.) Ltd.
Overland Ltd.
Pauls' Blinds Pty. Ltd.
Pickers, Geo., & Co. Pty Ltd.
Queensland Brewery Ltd.
Rapson Engineering Co. Pty. Ltd.
Read Press Ltd., The
Sachs, E., & Co. Pty. Ltd.
Sharpe’s Hardware.
Simpson, Halligan & Co. Pty. Ltd.
Smith & Patterson, W. R., Pty. Ltd.
Thermax Electric Water Heaters
Pty. Ltd.
Union Bank of Australia Ltd.
Young, Mrs. J., Empire Hotel.


Valley Centenary Organisation:
Patron: Hon. T. C. Beirne.
Vice-Patrons:
His Grace, Most Rev. James Duhig, D.D.
Rev. Canon S. Watkin.
Hon. S. J. Brassington, M.L.A.
(Speaker of the Legislative Assembly).
Mr. Duncan McWhirter.
Mr. C. C. Overell.
Central Committee:
President: Mr. Clem Scully.
Vice-President:
Mr. E. S. Hancock.
Hon. Secretary:
Mr. J. G. Earwaker.
Organising Secretary:
'Mr. Paul Goldenstedt.
/•/on,. T reasurer :
Mr. J. F. Overell.
The Hon. S. J. Brassington, M.L.A.; and Messrs. S. Burrows, J. N. Castley,
P. J. Conway, H. J. Daniels, F. L’Estrange, T. Gorman, R. C. Hancock,
J. B. Hooper, D. McNaughton. D. J. McWhirter, M. Hadgraft, V. Lucas,
I. Marsh, G. Pickers, J. Richter, F. V. Sharpe, B. Sweeney, E. A. Stumbles;
Alderman T. Rasey; Mrs. H. Robertson, and Rev. Canon S. Watkin.
Sporting Committee:
Messrs. M. Caldwell (Rugby League), E. S. Collin (Swimming),
H. Cormie (Hockey), F. Flynn (Cricket), T. Gorman (Rugby League),
D. Hill (Rugby Union), V. Lucas (Sailing), R. B. Lyons (Swimming),
G. Nuss (Australian Rules), P. Scott (Rugby League), E. Stumbles
(Tennis), S. Sully (Swimming), H. Witham (Golf).
Appreciation
The Committee particularly desires to express its thanks t'' ”
City Mission for having made office space available for the < 111UH111 11111
various activities associated with the Celebrations. 1111111111 11111


Sailing Ship “Fortitude” —608 tons. Master: John Christmas. Surgeon Supt.: Dr. Challinor. Sailed from Gravesend, England, 14th September 1848 Arrived Moreton Bay, 20th January 1849. Carried 256
sailing snip immigrants, many of whom settled on the present site of Fortitude Valley, which they so named in honor of the ship that bore them.


