

FORTUM I US
<xi !\ ROMANCE >>
Y ■ OF
JSTRAL-!AN - AUTHORS




I




FORTUNATUS


. H '-a
t 9 J


C' i -X -vi-V’
A J


THE TWIN CAPTAINS.
Frontispiece .]


FORTUNATUS
M ‘ROMANCE
WITH SEVEN ORIGINAL ILLUSTRATIONS BY
PHIL EBBUTT
Like to the Pontic Sea, whose icy current and compulsive
course ne'er feels retiring ebb but keeps due on.”— Othello
MELVILLE & MULLEN
LONDON AND MELBOURNE


PRINTED BY
HAZELL, WATSON AND VINEY, LD.,
LONDON AND AYLESBURY.


PAGE
I
8
14
20
27
• 37
• 45
54
. 66
74
. 80
• 9i
CONTENTS
PART I
CHAP.
I. TWIN CAPTAINS j
11. “per mare per terram” .... 8
111. TO A GREAT SCHOOL
IV. OLD BAILEY .20
V. “GOOD-BYE—FARE YOU WELL” . . ..
VI. OUTWARD BOUND . . . . . 37
VII. MAD AS A HATTER . . . -
VIII. GOLD AND A GRAVEYARD
IX. THE TURN OF THE TIDE 66
X. STERLING GOLD . - .
XI. ALGIERS AT LAST g Q
XII. CRUISING AND CONSEQUENCES . . . • QI
XIII. A DROWSY LOVER 9 g


. 149
• 155
i6i
■ 165
. 171
176
180
189
• i97
. . . 202
. 216
CONTENTS
XIV. LIKE TO THE PONTIC SEA . . . , 106
XV. “RACHEL WEEPING FOR HER CHILDREN” . 114
XVI. HONOURS FOR FORTUNE . . .123
XVII. THE FIRST CLOUD 130
XVIII. NO BALM IN GILEAD 137
XIX, THE LONG WASH OF AUSTRALASIAN SEAS . 14X
PART II
XX. FRIENDS IN COUNCIL 149
XXI. FORTUNATUS 155
XXII. JOHN STEELE 16l
XXIII. RUIN AND REAL PROPERTY . . . .165
XXIV. A FIGHT TO A FINISH 171
XXV. THE FIGHT 1 76
XXVI. THE FINISH 180
XXVII. PROPONTIC I . . . . . .189
XXVIII. PROPONTIC II 197
XXIX. FRENCHMAN AND TEUTON .... 202
XXX. FILTHY LUCRE 216
XXXI. READY, AYE, READY . . . . .221


PAGE
229
• 236
• • . . 246
• 251
• 2 57
. 263
• . . . 269
• 275
. . . 284
XXXII. AT THE FRONT 2 2g
XXXIII. THE BATTLE 2 56
XXXIV. IS IT DEATH? 246
XXXV. AS YOU WERE 251
XXXVI. IN TERROR 2K y
XXXVII. WARNING ....... 263
XXXVIII. ARABY THE BLEST 269
XXXIX. TRIBES ON HIS FRONTIER . , . *275
XL. DEATH IN THE POT 284
XLI. FINIS




FORTUNATUS
PART I
CHAPTER I
TWIN CAPTAINS
“ /''OME along, Uncle,” said a singularly fine boy
of tender years, “ the wind has changed, and
you say yourself that when the white horses begin
to run into the bay your work for the day is over.”
The scene was an historical old castle in the little
island of Jersey, within sight of the coast of France,
to which it and its neighbouring isles in ancient
times belonged, and the time somewhere beyond the
middle of the ’forties.
The Channel Islands, of which there are four or
five, are situated in what Shakespeare’s countrymen,
with unconscious audacity, call the English Channel,
and breed a race of sturdy islanders noted for their
fierce loyalty and devotion to the British Crown.


At least, such was their character when this story
commences.
The old castle referred to is small and insignificant
compared with the great stronghold across the bay,
lying close alongside the island’s chief town and
citadel. Both were so cunningly built for their
first tenants, into and upon great reefs of beetling
rocks, that it is not easy to perceive where Art
begins and Nature ends.
The beautiful sandy bay is crescent-shaped, each
horn being occupied by one of the two castles,
which ever seem to be gazing at one another across
the blue water with unceasing curiosity. The greater
of the two castles has in our time become, in every
respect, a real, living stronghold, bristling with
cannon and filled with soldiers.
Compared with the size of the little island, the
bay is of great depth and width—as a fact it is about
three miles across at the most—sending a glistening
yellow beach a mile or so into the land, “ over some
wide watered shore, swinging slow with sullen
roar.” At high tide both castles are surrounded by
water.
At night time, in calm clear weather, there
is something in the view across the bay from the
smaller castle that appeals strongly to an imagina-
tive mind. The scene is quite out of the common
—one not easily forgotten. The silent innumerable
lights across the glassy star-streaked water seem
to belong to some far-away unreal country, whereas,
in fact, they are the bright and varied lights of castle
and citadel, town and suburbs, rising tier above


PI p
■%
M
»
L
p: :|jii
i
Y/*'
r. *
.. - V^*—
< • ; ' '
1 |
A
UN
Ji '■• - " ■'■■■ '•■'■/
7 • •
'
j r
< /
/
4, dpf* ; ■
1 '
"V
a.*'-**
.4
# / ■
.
j
- ' "Cft
/
Wr^'
V
/ ft '
■ i'
ii "
\
y/
# i
T 'W
/W
3
\ wr
k-
"
..y*?
■ - M*.
..
jsjjS
pp*
1
kij- yiS/” / 1
IP
_ ' *<
- s*VX*
—
if
A ■ -
i
•*v.^c
~
('nil . £.110 WTT.
gflp< --4
THE TWO CASTLES AND THE RAY.
[To face p. 2.




tier in irregular groups until they seem to be arrayed
with the stars themselves—“one faint eternal even-
tide of gems.”
At least, such was the impression left upon the
brain of the elderly gentleman—called uncle by the
boy—who had then marched stiffly away, the little
fellow proudly keeping step for step with the tall
old soldier. To him the lights of town, citadel, and
castle were real stars, and the glittering sea a light-
streaked surface mapped with the courses needed
to guide departing spirits from mother earth to the
skies above. Such was the simple but serious belief
of the war-worn veteran.
It was a peculiar kind of madness that possessed
this fine old soldier ; but to say that he suffered from
it, would be quite a mistake. On the contrary, his
madness, so far from bringing suffering, brought
real happiness to his simple child-like mind. His
might be described as an inverted condition of the
brain ; but all the same it was perfectly harmless
and offended no one.
He sought to make no converts to his belief: such
a proposal would have startled him. He would certainly
have felt seriously incommoded by any person offer-
ing him or herself as a disciple, and fortunately no
one ever made such a proposal. Had it been otherwise
the old man’s tottering brain might have lost its
balance entirely.
His creed was one entirely for his own mental
comfort and deliverance, possessing the precious
merit of being absolutely free from dogma. Being
himself the sole worshipper there was no room for


division in his church. His belief was simplicity
itself, offering a sharp contrast to the complicated
creeds of the many churches abounding in the island.
He thought much, but spoke little, about his mystical
beliefs —never to strangers. His sister-in-law Mary
and his little nephew were his only confidants, and
to them it was more like thinking aloud, than talking.
He had, it is true, invented a new religion, but it
was not endowed by any sort of jargon or abracadabra
so far.
“ There,” he murmured softly, “ were the blessed
azure skies, visible to all, the future home of the
entire human race, it mattered not of what colour —
saint or sinner. No divisions or differences would be
found there; for all would be white and shining.
Those skies reflected the blue sea. Beneath it, and
however rough, there lay the still, crystal waters
through which the disembodied spirits moved star-
lighted to their welcome in the heavens above.
Being there, all trouble was over and happiness
reigned ; you were then to be in the keeping of God
Almighty your Creator, and your care and safety were
for Him only—that surely should be enough for you.
My scheme is a merciful one and admits of no Hell
or darkness. All is to be light after the passage
below the sea is performed.
“ I am not yet decided about the place that man’s
domestic animals are to occupy in the system ; but
incline to the belief that horses and dogs may
follow the human spirits after death, and perhaps
make the passage over the strand under the deep
waters. This question, however,” he would continue


softly, “ remains in my mind unsettled, and in that
condition is likely to be for long, as it is too deep for
hasty decision.”
Most people in the island knew of his beliefs, and
indulged in exaggerated stories of its ramifications ;
but all treated him with respect and tender sympathy.
There was really nothing to pity in his condition of
mind ; he was perfectly happy, and troubled with no
doubts, which perhaps was more than could be said
of his critics.
The fine old soldier was a retired captain of Royal
Marines: lord over the petty castle and half a
dozen bombardiers who formed its sleepy garrison.
By sea and land—obeying the motto of his corps —
he had served his country in every part of the world ;
getting plenty of honour, not a few hard knocks, and
finally the rank of captain.
The last of his hard knocks —a terrible sabre
wound on the head and cheek —nearly finished him ;
and after a long period in Haslar, he was discharged
“ cured,” never again to fight men.
Accompanied by Mike, a faithful old soldier-
servant with, if possible, even more hard knocks to
show than his captain, the two battered old warriors
found a pleasant haven of rest in the little castle
nestling in a corner of the bay, where each forth-
with marked out a pacing track in their respective
quarters, after the habit and custom of seafaring
men.
The sabre stroke which cut open Captain Pomeroy’s
head, and finished his active career, let in, among
other novelties, many stars. Was it any wonder


then that the stars remained as permanent tenants
never again to vacate the astonished brain ?
To him there arrived, one day, his twin brother
(another retired Captain Pomeroy), the twin brother’s
wife, and little son ; and forthwith, in an incredibly
short time, real comfort reigned supreme. The castle
quarters were transformed into an elegant home,
just such as a kindly, affectionate gentlewoman
would not rest until she had planned and built up
around her dear ones. It at once became her
kingdom, over which she lovingly and graciously held
the sceptre to the last.
Outside, on the frontiers, as it were, of “ this king-
dom by the sea,” a sheltered little plot was filled in
with the rich soil of the island, and here the eyes of
the entire garrison soon beheld a garden bright with
flowers —mother and son being the chief gardeners.
Very soon a cow was to be seen marching over the
causeway at ebb tide to the common, and back before
flood. A pony carriage followed shortly after ; and
when Lovell, the great Newfoundland, added himself
to the census of the little community, the delight of
both boy and dog knew no bounds. Last, but not
least by a long way, a faithful, loving old Irish
woman—widow of a sergeant killed in fight at the
side of his captain in India—was at once nurse,
servant, and friend ; and the household tale is
complete.
The newly arrived captain had served the greater
part of his military career as a cavalry officer in
India, seeing much service in the field, yet singu-
larly fortunate in escaping anything more serious


than mere flesh wounds. He had married the sister
of a dear brother officer, killed in “ wild Mahratta
battle ” ; and after seeing two of his children taken
from them by the deadly climate, retired from the
army, and with his wife and little son removed, at
his brother’s earnest solicitation, to the Channel
Island that was to give shelter to both until the
fulness of years quenched their lives in death.


CHAPTER II
“ PER MARE PER TERRAM ”
A lil HEN this story opened Uncle William the
V V soldier-sailor had been sitting in one of the
embrasures of the ramparts looking intently across
the bay to the great castle and town. Out of that
embrasure he gazed into the water below, for hours
at a stretch, when they were calm, and on certain
special occasions at night. The boy, who had roused
up his uncle, knew well by experience from the look
of the sea that he would not refuse to give up his
watch. The sea could render no account to him
such as he looked for, while the white horses were
racing into the shining beach.
The brothers never missed their daily march
together over the island, rain or fine ; and there was
not an inhabitant to whom the captains were not
known far and near. Frequently mother and son,
in the pony carriage, were companions in the march,
and soon the country people learned to distinguish
between the brothers, though exactly alike in
features, stature, and erect soldierly bearing ; naming
one in their island patois “ Captain Uncle,” and the
other “Captain Father.”


In course of time a bond of sympathy grew up
between the old soldiers and their humble friends ;
and every case of sickness or bereavement, whether
among the rich or poor, found the captains ready
with inquiries and assistance.
On the occasions of epidemic, when the very
old, or tender children, were taken, Uncle William
devoted much time to religious watch over the waters.
But one terrible summer when Asiatic cholera was
carrying off numbers of the inhabitants, the united
efforts of the family found it difficult to draw him
away from the embrasure to meals or bed. At such
busy times, or indeed at any time, it was useless for
his brother to remonstrate, and it was in fact never
attempted ; but Mary, his sister-in-law, could at times
coax him indoors. When she failed, the boy, who
frequently slept out a watch with his uncle, never
failed in leading him home from the contemplation
of the passing star-spirits, and the mysterious exercises
of his fantastic religion.
Mary Pomeroy was a singularly beautiful woman,
and as good in nature as she looked. Divinely tall,
of regular, even classical, features, she influenced for
good all who came into contact with her. Talking
well and sensibly on most subjects, the outcome of
a good home training and a well-stored mind, it
needed no effort on her part to convince her hearers
when she chose to make the effort.
The boy was her image in little ; and while she
was outwardly careful to avoid coddling her only
surviving child, she suffered many a secret pang of
anxiety lest something vague or uncertain should


arise to deprive her of her little son. Both husband
and wife had accepted with resignation Heaven’s
stern demand for their two babes, but with the
mother it was really only outward stoicism. She
sorrowed in private over their memory, and shed
many a secret tear of grief over little garments and
toys religiously preserved.
The twin captains were the sons of an old Cornish
family of more than good estate, but not many
years after obtaining their commissions, troubles
from various causes arose which seriously im-
poverished the properties; and when their father
died suddenly in the hunting-field, it was at once
resolved by Uncle William—who, being half a minute
older than his brother, found himself the heir—that
he would live on his pay for the sake of the little
nephew, until the family estates were free from
debt.
With Mary’s small dower and clever management,
the cheap prices then prevailing in the island, and
the two brothers clubbing together, they contrived
to live in comfort, even luxury ; but the family
ambition to have the boy educated for Oxford was
with deep regret abandoned as beyond their united
means, and the importance of laying aside a nest-egg
for Fortune’s future career came uppermost.
It was then decided that father, mother, and uncle
should give him a home education between them,
until he was ten years of age, when family interest
would obtain for him a nomination to the great
public school for officers’ sons near London.
About the time Mary lost her two jewels, her


husband received news of his father’s death, and
of the bankrupt condition the estate was found to
be in. When her little son was sent to console the
bereaved parents, Mary cast about for a name for
her boy. She was resolved it should be one out of
the common, and by way of finding an antidote to
all their troubles she not only decided to call him
Fortune, but induced both husband and brother-in-
law to approve. And so it came to pass that by
that name he was known, until men in the great
southern continent, where he lived and flourished
for some years, were led by circumstances to rename
him Fortunatus.
The years in the little castle on the bay passed
in calm contentment. The twin captains continued
their daily march together about the island—they had
become quite an institution —and it had long been
well understood by the people, that in any and every
case of serious illness or death, Captain Uncle had
prolonged consultations from the embrasure with
the sea-stars.
“ I don’t think I can permit the daily march on
Sunday, brother Edward. On that day ‘church
parade ’ should be the strict rule of the castle, and we
must set a good example to the little garrison. It is
true that my own religious beliefs clash mildly with the
Church ; but I am a Queen’s officer, and private beliefs
such as mine must give way to the regulations. All
my career, on shore or afloat, I and my men have
joined in the Church services ; the custom must on
no account be broken here.”
In this way it came to pass that the embrasure


knew him not on Sundays. On that day of the week
he was sane—and unhappy.
On Sundays it was the custom for the twin captains
to pace their “ sentry go ” for hours, discussing the
affairs of the nation, the island, and the family. To
them, Mary and Fortune came at times ; but latterly
Mary had instinctively kept away. She knew as well
as though she heard the words, that her boy’s time
for leaving his mother had at length become the
subject of discussion, and she trembled. Fortune
would reach the age-limit in a few months —“ How
few they were! ” she sighed. Soon the long blue
envelope, so familiar to her as a soldier’s wife, would
arrive, and then its mandate must be obeyed.
There came a Sunday when her husband, well
knowing the suppressed state of terror she was in,
and puzzled to know how to lessen it, said in a
careless, everyday voice, but guilty-looking face;
“Oh !—ah ! Yes, dear, I, we, that is you—what did
you say? I mean, would you join our ‘sentry go’
this afternoon, Mary ? The fact is we want to
consult you about Fortune.”
“ I will be there, dear,” replied Mary faintly. It had
come at last. Holding out the dreaded official enve-
lope Uncle William signed to her to read it. Notwith-
standing his cracked skull and star-troubled brain,
Uncle William, in all questions of family, or business
of importance, but especially any matter referring to
Fortune, gave shrewd common-sense advice, such
as both parents felt the wisdom of, and moreover
never failed to follow.
“ Sister dear, you know I must not vacate my


position in the castle without leave of absence.
Brother declares he won’t go away and leave me to
march the island alone, and so there’s nothing for it;
you must take Fortune to London yourself.”
“ Very well, dear,” said Mary softly, with brave
glistening eyes, “we shall be ready when the ‘ route ’
comes.” And of the three, it was difficult to say which
of them felt the most. Mary hurried indoors knowing
well that any one tender word spoken by her would
have set all three a-weeping ; for the bonny lad had
grown very dear to them, and filled their hearts with
affection.


CHAPTER 111
TO A GREAT SCHOOL
THE tidal steamer to Southampton was timed to
leave the little Jersey harbour at an early hour
in the morning. The “ route ” had duly come to
hand ; Fortune’s little chest had been packed and
re-packed, a dozen times or more, by his tearful
mother. At first the contents prepared were, at least,
three times the capacity of the box ; but with father
and uncle judiciously weeding out, the quantity was
at length sufficiently reduced, and by sitting down
on the lid it was at last under lock and key.
“Take comfort, Mary,” said Uncle William with a
grim smile. “I predict that Fortune will soon have it
in the condition of the midshipman’s chest: every-
thing uppermost, nothing wanted.”
“Now, Brother, we inspected Fortune’s ‘kit’
yesterday and pronounced it all well. We will retire
for an hour’s ‘ sentry go,’ and there decide whether
anything remains to be done.”
“ Brother, I think,” observed Edward, when they
had taken a few turns, “ a few words of advice to
Fortune might be of benefit to him ; he is going
into the world for the first time, you know. Who


can say how much a little exhortation might avail to
save him from temptation, when he goes away from
us?”
“ No, Edward, I don’t think so ; and besides, depend
upon it, all that has been done by his good mother
every day for the last fortnight, and in a way, Brother,
that he will never forget, nor we improve upon,
however we might try. More’—and here the old
soldier-sailor put on his gruffest manner—“the boy
is a gentleman’s son of good breed and training, and
is the last of a long line of gentlemen, so we may
take it for granted he won’t forget who he is. The
boy won’t go wrong, I’ll engage ; so better have no
moralising.”
The farewell by father and uncle was characteristic
of the quiet, reserved old soldiers. Putting on a
transparent appearance of affected cheerfulness, they
looked around the steamer with a display of satis-
faction, confidently predicting a fine passage, in
Fortune’s hearing. Contriving to keep up a look
of indifference to the preparations for immediate
departure, both men chattered incessantly about
commonplace matters, until the time had come for
them to get back to the shore. The moment came
for Fortune to throw his arms around his father and
uncle’s neck ; but when this had been done, and the
vessel was moving off, the boy was doubtful whether
the tears he wiped away were his own or fell from
the twin captains, for both of them turning sharply
away made it quite impossible to settle the question
of ownership.
Mary with her little son arrived at the great school


before the date appointed for the reception of new
boys, not sorry to have an opportunity of letting
Fortune see the Painted Hall and marine picture
gallery, where relics of the nation’s dead and gone “ sea
kings ” were jealously preserved. Taking her boy to
a large oil painting hung amongst many others, she
explained that it depicted a desperate fight by British
ships with the forts of Algiers, and that Uncle
William was there when only a young subaltern of
seventeen.
“ Uncle William never told me of that fight, dear
Mother. He often made up little stories for me of
other battles he was engaged in, but never of that
one at Algiers. I wonder why was that ? ”
“ For some reason your uncle never could be in-
duced to talk of the battle of Algiers. I think your
father knows why ; but whenever I ask him, he
always puts me off with a laugh. When you come
home for your holidays, you will be able to ask uncle
yourself about it. He may tell you—but I have my
doubts. Whenever I have found him in a talkative
humour, and tried to lead him on to the subject, his
invariable reply is that it was a bloody battle, and
better not to talk about it.”
Next day Mary, with a heavy heart, handed her
precious boy over to the officials of the naval school,
where a grateful country was to give him care and
education for the next five years of his life. It was
midsummer, and daylight until late into the evening ;
but the loving mother kept her post, gazing with
aching eyes through the iron railings which enclosed
the playground for four hundred youthful inmates,


until long after the last boy had disappeared within
the walls of the dormitories.
With a heavy heart, in which she suddenly found
there was a great void, Mary at length crept away
to her hotel, and wept herself to sleep. Next day,
behind her veil, she silently wept herself by rail to
Southampton, and thence by steamer to the island at
last. Once there, her tears had vanished, and she
presented a brave face to her twin captains ; but she
had returned to the little castle alone with a sore
heart, and the three of them, avoiding any reference
to Fortune, wondered whether their little man could
realise what a void he had left in their hearts.
A few days after, Uncle William led the march
into town ; and there to a lawyer’s office. Asking
if the will ordered by him was ready, he was
promptly invited into a private room, the document
read over, witnessed, and signed.
“ There, Edward, that’s done ; the Cornish pro-
perties go to Fortune. The will really makes no
difference, as he would inherit as next-of-kin after
you—should I go first; but it is now off my mind.”
The old dreamy look returned to his eyes as he
remarked, “ I shall be able to give more attention to
certain doubts I have been much exercised about,
with regard to the exact position of horses and
dogs in my system, which it is really high time was
finally settled.”
It was the following midsummer before Mary
folded her boy in her arms again, and filled the
vacancy in her heart during the six happy weeks
of his holiday at home.


“ W r e will ‘ parade ’ the lad for inspection in the
Stone Yard to-morrow morning,” said Uncle William,
as king of the castle, “and examine the condition
of that chest that once gave Mary so much cause
for anxiety, and gymnastics with the lid. I warrant
it will keep down now without sitting on.”
Before leaving for home Fortune had taken
another look at the battle picture in the Painted
Hall shown him by his mother twelve months
before ; and soon an opportunity of speaking to his
uncle offered. Making his way to the embrasure,
he found him sitting there looking absorbed and
lost in thought. It was a good day for his study
of the sea, no white horses being visible. Creeping
into the embrasure beside his uncle, as he had done
many a time before, Fortune patiently waited for
him to look up.
“ Well, my boy, well! so you’ve found your uncle
at his old post, have you ? ”
“ If you’ve finished with the sea, Uncle William,
I want you to tell me about the battle of Algiers.
You have told me about the other fights you were
in, but never about Algiers. You know there is a
big picture of the battle in the Painted Hall at
Greenwich, and I have often looked at it. One of
the biggest of the ships—she is about third in the
line—looks awfully knocked about. Do you know
which it is, sir ? ”
“ Yes, boy, yes. That one you mention is a line-
of-battle ship called the Impregnable. They said she
was badly stationed and got raked by the Mole
Batteries in that fight; but I was only a lad of


seventeen in those days, and knew very little
about it.’'
“ Were you in the Impregnable that day, Uncle ? ”
“ I was, Fortune, stationed on the lower deck.
The carnage was awful —nearly two hundred killed
and wounded, and we had to be towed out of the
line ; but I hadn’t a scratch in that fight. The old
ship is still afloat, lying at Portsmouth. Lord ! what
a terrible time our ship had while it lasted ; a little
more of it and she would have foundered. Don’t
let us talk of it, boy. It was a bloody battle ; besides,
there is a memory about the event I don’t like to
revive, and, what’s more, I won’t, not even for you,
my nephew, so we’ll go into your mother’s and get
a cup of her tea.”
“Mother dear, when I asked Uncle William
yesterday about that battle he got quite fierce-
looking, and muttered some dreadful words. I was
so sorry I spoke to him about it,” said the boy,
looking shocked.
“ It is evidently a dubious subject with your uncle,”
Mary replied ; “ best let it alone, I think, my son.”


CHAPTER IV
OLD BAILEY
■pORTUNE’S five years at the great school were
i rapidly drawing to an end, and not without
credit both to the masters set over him and to his
school-fellows. W hen asked by his uncle, after leaving
the institution and returning home, whose suffrages
he \ alued most, the masters or the boys, he answered
unhesitatingly, “The boys’”; and Uncle William
approved of the answer. He had fought his school
fights from time to time, as became a plucky lad ;
he had formed his boyish friendships, and on the
whole his career, both as a student and schoolboy,
was more than satisfactory. The high officials, in
accordance with usage, had offered him an opening
in the Army or Navy, but already the lad’s mind
was set on adventure and travel. He disliked the
idea of being tied to barracks or ship. He had made
up his mind to see the world and conquer it ; not
that he thought this in so many w r ords, but the
tendency of his mind ran in that direction.
He was encouraged in his dim romantic notions
about his future life by one of the schoolmasters
the second highest—who had taken a sudden liking


to Fortune, and let no opening pass for pushing the
boy on in his studies.
The first indication Mr. Bailey, the master referred
to, gave of his kindly disposition towards Fortune,
took place one day in the playground, where it was
his custom to take his class and give them practical
lessons in certain scientific studies. The great school
consisted of a number of palace buildings, once the
ancient and stately home of kings and queens.
Outside the walls lay the spacious park, made
familiar to readers of “The Fortunes of Nigel.”
The beautiful park was dotted with handsome old
trees, which sheltered colonies of many rooks. These
birds frequently flew cawing over the school grounds ;
and on one occasion when master and students were
outside, intent on the lesson in hand, a sudden outcry
by the boys nearest Fortune caused Mr. Bailey to
look up hastily from his occupation. The man
was struck with astonishment at what he saw, at
what had fallen from the sky above upon Fortune ;
and from that day the event —to him most im-
pressive—was destined to influence Mr. Bailey’s
fortunes to the end of his life.
He found it difficult to restrain himself before
the class, which he abruptly dismissed. Fortune he
detained, looking at him with his unsmiling, glassy
eyes, muttering to himself that the boy was a favourite
of Heaven ; the gods had marked him out for a great
future ; no matter what he engaged in he would
succeed in it, for so the fates had pronounced. The
Romans, he went on, knew it, and believing implicitly,
never failed to follow the fortunes of any one so


distinguished as this schoolboy had been that
day.
“ What happened, boy ? ” he exclaimed excitedly.
“Where were you standing? Why did you stand there ?
Tell me everything precisely ” —all in a breath and
giving no time for replies to his hurried questions.
“ What is your name, sir ? No, I mean your name
in full. What? Fortune did you say ? How strange!
What a coincidence ! No, no, by Heaven ! more than
a mere coincidence—a design.” His hands went
instinctively to his neck-cloth and loosed it ; his
head lifted high with a rapt expression ; he appeared
almost gasping, and at length turned staggering
away to his room, leaving Fortune wondering what
he had done to excite his master so greatly.
Boys invariably have nicknames for their masters,
and, indeed, generally for each other. No one in
the school knew why the second master was called
Old Bailey. He was neither old nor looked old,
but from the first day of his appearance in that
school he had been dubbed “ Old Bailey,” and Old
Bailey he continued to the end of his life.
For the many additional years of existence Heaven
allotted to him, he attached himself to Fortune
with limpet-like tenacity. In sorrow, sickness, or
despair, in good or evil report, fortunate or unfortu-
nate, for better or worse, his trust and belief in
Fortune’s lucky star remained with him an accepted
article of faith, never wavering but once in a far
distant land and under trying circumstances.
Strangely enough it never appeared that this feeling
was the outcome of any real affection for the youth.


THE SCENE IN THE SCHOOL GROUNDS.
[To face p. 22.


, . . .
. • . . ■. ■


Nor. indeed, was it ever at any time certain that
Fortune regarded it in that light. Without doubt
the feeling in Old Bailey’s mind grew out of a
superstitious distrust in his own luck. He had put
it to the test at the card-table often enough with
monotonous failure. He possessed the gambler s
anxiety to keep in touch with fortunate men or
circumstances, and this he firmly believed he had
found for certain in young Fortune; never once
in all his subsequent career refusing, in his own
words, “to back Heaven’s choicest favourite.” But
the foundation for it all was one of pure selfishness,
and nothing else : the worship of luck and the anxious
determination to keep in touch with it.
In course of years it became a second nature with
him to rest and rely upon Fortune. By himself he
had no more power to stand self-supporting than
an empty sack, nor did he even make any sustained
effort to do so.
When Fortune turned his back on the great
public school that had done so much both for his
mental and physical development for the past five
years of his life, he made a parting visit to the
Painted Hall, and its pictures of sea-fights ; and
this done, he lost no time in making his way to
the steamer that was to take him home to the little
island. He had not been a minute on deck before
he noticed Old Bailey looking expectantly around ;
who, presently discovering his late pupil, explained
hesitatingly that he had decided to take his mid-
summer holiday in Jersey, instead of France, where
he had always spent it. On parting after arrival


at the island, he promised Fortune an early call
upon the inmates of the little castle.
With what quiet, serene delight Mary Pomeroy
folded her tall boy in her arms, when he crossed
over the causeway and entered the little castle!
With what pretended unconcern the twin captains
received son and nephew, “as a matter of course,
dear boy, of course,” and what fun all four had
next morning when the old soldiers “paraded”
the youth, and after “ kit ” inspection, dismissed him
“all well”!
Then came “ sentry go ” and endless discussion as
to the future of Fortune’s plans for study, and pro-
fession to be decided on—whether naval or military,
one or the other “as a matter of course, dear boy
of course.”
I am not drawn,” declared the youth, “ to either
or indeed any profession; I should like to wait
a little before deciding. I prefer, if you will give
me a good tutor, to grind a couple of years at
classics and general literature—neglected hitherto
owing to the undue prominence given to mathe-
matics and science during my period at the great
school I have just left.”
Father and uncle’s faces fell.
Besides, added Fortune with boyish unconcern
for the disappointment his words were causing, “ my
thoughts run much on travel and adventure. Why
shouldn t I find wealth and position, as so many
others have done in our great British territories of
the south ? ”
Mar) s face fell ; with maternal instinct she saw


plainly that the time for keeping her son at home
with her was not to be long, and bravely she
resolved to prepare for the change. Men’s minds,
she well remembered, had been deeply moved by
California, and now she saw with a mother’s instinct
that the glorious future before Australia would deeply
influence the boyish soul of her dear one, and part
them again before long. “ Was it not the fate that
awaited all mothers ? ” she moaned to herself again
and again.
Looking up, Fortune gave a start of surprise;
there, standing almost before them, was Old Bailey
bowing low to his mother. A few words sufficed for
introduction, and, rather to Fortune’s wonder, his late
schoolmaster, who had never appeared to him in any
other character, entered easily and gracefully into
conversation. He talked well, careful to do so with-
out display, and by the time the rising tide warned
the visitor to depart, the impression made was
favourable. Without the slightest effort he contrived
to make it evident that he was a well-read man, as in
fact he really was ; and if he talked with an object in
view, it was not only well concealed, but successful
in its object, as the look of satisfaction that came
into his eyes indicated when Mary gave him an
invitation to call again and consult with them about
Fortune’s studies.
The call was duly made, but not until after a
decent interval ; and before it ended Old Bailey
himself had been engaged as Fortune’s tutor.
Excitement kept the man awake for long hours
that night. “ How well my affairs are turning out !


Already I see proof of the good luck coming to me
from my connection with the fortunate youth. I feel
sure I am backing a certainty, and may gloat over
the success that, in consequence, will be mine. The
cards arc in my hands to play the winning game all
through, and I can hug the thought that my luck
has turned at last. Mine had been a career, so far,
of monotonous failure ; a patrimony sacrificed to ill
luck. That the bad luck of a gambler’s career might
arise from bad play, I can never bring myself to
believe. My skill with the cards is equal to that of
my opponents ; there is but one element lacking—
good luck —and soon that will be in my grasp.”
It was far into the morning when next he awoke,
and saw in the bright sun confirmation of his sordid
night-thoughts.


CHAPTER V
“GOOD-BYE —FARE YOU WELL”
“ 'T"''HE two years,” Fortune cried one day, “ I
i decided should be given up to reading, are
drawing to an end. I feel that I have been wise
in my decision, and am conscious of the expansion
of mind my course of study with Old Bailey has
brought me, and what a necessity it really was. The
desire for adventure and travel, which I spoke of
so thoughtlessly to my dear ones after leaving
school, though kept out of sight for a period, lives
latent in my brain, and now begins to rise again
to the surface. My thoughts keep running on
Britain’s vast possessions in the spacious southern
seas, and I must soon decide to give an early hint
of my design to Uncle William, first of all.”
His preoccupied manner had not escaped the
affectionate eyes of his mother, who knew instinc-
tively what the portent meant for her ; while Portune,
on his side, realised with emotion what a vacancy his
departure would create in the little castle-home, for
mother, father, and uncle.
He found his uncle seated as usual in the embrasure,
and so intent on the salt sea flowing between the


two castles, that he saw little prospect of attracting
the old man’s attention. Waiting patiently for an
hour or more without success, he decided to make
a second attempt next day. Late that evening his
uncle passed softly into the dwelling, and, contrary
to custom, went direct to his bedroom.
“ Your uncle has been seriously exercised of late,
Fortune, about that unsolved problem of the position
of horses and dogs in his scheme of the future life.
He has scarcely touched food at all, and even omitted
his daily march with your father to-day. I never
knew him so moved before.”
“ What is the special difficulty to-day, Mother ? Is
it connected with the death of our old dog Lovell
last night ? ”
I think so, from the few words he mutters about
it. The difficulty as I understand it is this : two
stars of light have made their appearance to him in
the sea. One, fainter than the other, is, he thinks,
Lovell s a sort of dog star, I imagine, if such there
be in the cult ; the other, he says, is the star of
Maistre Boissy, who died rather suddenly yesterday
in the village. Old Boissy was such a discreditable
old reprobate—has buried three wives you know—
that I should give the brighter of the stars to the
dog myself,” said Mary seriously, “for I cannot
possibly take a favourable view of a man who has
had three wives in succession. Your uncle hoped
that the position of domestic animals in his belief
would for certain have been finally cleared up to-
day.”
“Fancy surviving three wives,” replied Fortune,


who found it hard to suppress a laugh. “ What has
interfered to prevent my uncle coming to so important
a decision ? ”
“ Something, I fear, very serious. You know Mike,
his old soldier-servant, has been ailing for some weeks,
and last night took such a bad turn that we all
fear he cannot last. It appears that in your uncle’s
belief a faint star-light is always visible in the sea
for some time before death actually takes place,
and if Mike dies to-night as expected, and no other
star-light makes its appearance, then Lovell, the
faithful old dog, is out of the running, and, what
is worse, the article of faith relating to the lower
animals remains hung up and in a state of confusion.
Now do you see?”
“ I do indeed, Mother, and must try and console
my uncle to-morrow, if he is at all approachable.
Meantime, if I were high priest in uncle’s place, I
think I should give the star to a good dog, rather
than to an old Bluebeard like Maistre Boissy.”
“It seems doubtful wisdom on my part,” reflected
Fortune, “to consult first with a man who is but
little removed from a crank, chock-full of absurd
hallucinations. But as a fact it is not so ; for after
all, Uncle William is but ‘ mad north-north-west,’
and well I understand that no one in the family, when
it pleases him, can take such good common-sense
views of affairs. lam quite confident in this belief,
and will again seek the embrasure. Now, here we
are, and it is occupied as usual by the dear old watch-
man. During the night Mike, his ancient comrade,
has died ; I wonder much how my uncle’s mind will


be affected by the loss of his faithful servant—with
him so many years.”
Coming close up he was struck by the scene before
him. The day was calm and favourable for the old
man’s usual occupation ; but reclining there with
eyes closed he appeared to have finished with the
sea, in so far as keeping his usual intent gaze upon
it, and was listening to the murmur of the water
lapping and gurgling musically against the foot-
rocks of the castle wall. Were the sweet sounds,
Fortune thought, that reached up to his ears, merely
gentle messengers from the star-spirits that had for
so long passed before his uncle’s patient eyes in a
continuous procession ; or were they simply to him
an unmeaning lullaby ?
Standing and waiting close by, within hearing
of the tiny waves, Fortune gradually felt stealing
over him a drowsy sensation. Surrendering to the
pleasant feeling, he stretched himself full length upon
the grass, under a warm sun ; and with the eternal
soliloquy of the waters below in his ears, he sank into
a gentle slumber.
“What! asleep? and so early in the day! Jump
up, lazy Nephew of mine, and help me down out of
this hole in the wall. I miss old Mike already: he
was generally about to give me his arm. He’s gone,
Fortune,” spoke the captain quite cheerfully. “ His
light passed finally out of sight not an hour ago
while you were asleep—gone away through the
crystal waters to his home in the skies. Lord! how
I shall miss my good old comrade. How many
desperate fights we’ve been in together, side by side,


when our lives weren’t worth a pin’s purchase ; and
yet here he dies in green old age, after a score of
peaceful years with his old officer. But there’s
one important matter settled, my boy,” said Uncle
William thoughtfully, as the old well-known dreamy
look came into his eyes, “ and a relief it is to my
mind, dear lad. The question of the position of
the lower animals in my religious scheme has been
settled this very morning, and no place can now
be found for them there ; so Lovell, poor dog, is
out of it, and will never bear me company to the
skies when my bugle call is sounded.”
“I regret to hear that, Uncle, but of course in all
such matters you must undoubtedly know best.”
Then Fortune gently broke it to the old man that
he was set on going forth into the great world. His
mind was full of the design he urged with many
words. Uncle William must pave the way for him
with his dearest mother and father, whom he had
so far shrunk from telling.
“ You’ve given me a difficult task, lad, but I suppose
I can’t refuse. I fancy though that Mary will not be
unprepared for the news. When do you think of
leaving the little castle ? ”
“In a few months, sir, I shall be eighteen ; surely
that’s late enough in life for any one to seek his
fortune. You and my father must have left the
parental nest much before that.”
“ That’s true,” said the old soldier thoughtfully. “ I
left home at sixteen—at seventeen I was in my first
fight. Yes, Nephew, you are right to leave early.
What is it Shakespeare says about home-keeping


youth? He is never wrong in anything he says on
any subject. Now, dear lad, one word more before
we all discuss your plans ‘on parade ’ to-morrow.
The Cornish estates have not been idle all these
years, but you must know that I have been riding a
4 dead horse,’ as sailors call it. I have a matter of
a thousand or so at my bankers’, which will do nicely
to start you in life when you touch bottom where
you go ; and the income besides will be regularly
remitted to you, so we shall know you won’t starve.
Now, Fortune, not a word of thanks, for I can’t stand
it, dear lad, after what you’ve just told me ; but God !
how we shall miss you,” said the dear old fellow to
himself. “By the way, what does your tutor say to
all this ; I suppose you’ve told him ? ”
“ He thinks well of it, sir, and, indeed, declares he’ll
migrate with me.”
“Ah, Uncle William dear,” said Mary next day,
when her kindly brother-in-law hinted that she
would be needed to assist at 44 sentry go.” 44 I think
I know what you mean ; the 4 route ’ has come again,
hasn’t it ? ” and her eyes glistened with unshed
tears. 44 I wish I could weep, dear, as I used to
when my babes were taken from me, and as I did
when I left my boy at the great school gates. My
tears will flow again, dear, but not down my cheeks
now ; there are none so bitter, you know, as those
that fall within, unseen.”
The day came, at length, when Fortune was to
join in the last family discussion for a longer time
than any there present cared to think of. Uncle
William’s approval went far to soften father and


mother’s objection. Secretly all of them applauded
the youth’s manly resolution to seek, like Ulysses,
a newer world. The twin captains remembered
their own adolescent down when war had called
them from a loving home. The callow youth was
now fledgy ; what more natural event to look for
than his flight from the parental nest?
“ No, dear Mother,” said Fortune, rousing himself,
after all four had been lost in cogitation, “ I think I
can read your thoughts. I feel sure you wouldn’t have
me give myself up to lotus-eating in this little island.
The taste is sweet, too sweet, and before it cloys
I had better set my sail for the great Austral conti-
nent —plenty of room there.”
“ What does the boy want taking that glassy-eyed
tutor of his with him, I wonder?” thought Uncle
William ; “some kind-hearted nonsense of Fortune’s,
no doubt, I don’t imagine there’s any harm in the
pedantic ass, but I doubt whether there’s any good
in him.” And the wise old fellow was not far
wrong.
Mary seldom missed a night, singing to her
limited audience. She possessed a rich voice, highly
cultivated, deep and languorous in tone ; and it
had the rare quality of intense sympathy seldom
found in the vox Humana. Hers was a voice that
reached the heart. She usually sang old ballads
that never failed to soothe the war-worn old cam-
paigners. The only times they ever manifested the
slightest sign of mutiny against Mary’s household
government were on the rare occasions she omitted
the usual evening songs. Her husband played well,


and at times accompanied her singing ; but both men
preferred to hear her voice unassisted.
Happiest when she was making her dear ones
happy, Mary, at such times, would lift her magnificent
voice in giving forth one old ballad after another.
There was a song she never missed, fresh and
welcome wherever, near or far, English men and
women were found at that day. This special old
favourite was named “ Strew, strew with roses.” On
great occasions the three would join together in the
singing, never omitting “Tom Bowling” for Uncle
William, the soldier-sailor’s special comfort.
On these evenings it was amusing to observe the
effect of the singing upon the little garrison. One
after another the bombardiers and their families were
drawn from their quarters by the delightful sound
of the cultured voices, and once out they never rested
until all had silently slipped into the officers’ great,
comfortable, warm stone kitchen, from which point
of vantage they listened entranced to the music.
When all was finished, the welcome though
uninvited audience gave no sign of retiring home-
ward, for experience taught them that the best
was yet to come. Uncle William never missed
a pleasant little farce the simple old soldier loved
to indulge in. It was with well-feigned surprise
he invariably made the discovery that the castle
inhabitants had mustered in his old kitchen. “ Why,
Sister dear,” he called out, “ I declare we’ve quite a
lot of listeners—cold night too it is for them ; a fine
compliment to your music, Mary. I really think you
might let us all have a slice of your currant cake, and


a good jorum of hot negus ’’—for which Mary had
thoughtfully been most of the day making preparation.
“Strew, strew with roses,” hummed Uncle William
at the last, lighting the bedroom candles, “for time
is on the wing.”
When the voices ceased and Fortune’s young eyes
were closing in sleep, his last waking thought—half
of it a dream—was the fancy that his mother’s song
had the sound of an invocation to Heaven. Never
in after-life did he forget that dear voice, or that
old ballad. How many a time a chance word, a
thought, a familiar scent even, recalled the memory
of his dear home that night and his mother’s
melodious prayer! How smooth his path in life
had been made for him, and what dangers in all
his travels and adventures had been fended off!
The road of life was strewn for him with roses,
while time was on the wing. It was true they had
faded, but their sweet scent had grown up with
him, and would ever remain blended with the sacred
memory of home and mother.
He awoke at dawn with the refrain of the old
ballad in his thoughts, and its music in his throat.
Mary heard her son’s voice rising, and joined softly
in the melody. “It was their morning hymn,” she
thought; and that it might go with him by sea and
land formed the chief burden of her orisons that
day, and for many days after.
Strew, strew with roses
Life’s rough path, and let’s be gay;
Thoughtless youth proposes,
And trifles time away.


But youth, a fleeting April morn,
This lesson seems to bring :
Every rose will bear a thorn,
And time is on the wing.
Trip, trip to measure,
Dulcet as the voice of love;
Warble, sons of pleasure,
Adown the flowery grove.
But love’s sweet voice will oft betray,
And pleasure cloy’d will sing—
Every flow'r must fade away,
And time is on the wing.


CHAPTER VI
OUTWARD BOUND
NO parade or kit inspection this time. Mary
and the twin captains were in too serious a
mood for any trifling, and intent on seeing the last
of their dear lad, while he, keeping them cheered
by a confident bearing, passed away out of their
sight, closely followed by Old Bailey. A couple
of days found them at Plymouth, where they duly
embarked in one of the finest of the splendid clipper
ships then doing duty between the old country and
the new. All their movements of the past few days
had been made with celerity, Fortune, with a tender
feeling of self-distrust, being anxious to place the
deep sea between himself and the dear ones he had
left behind in the little castle.
It is difficult to realise to-day the fact that, up
to the end of the ’sixties, the enormous traffic in
passengers and cargo was carried on almost entirely,
between Britain and her great southern colonies,
by sailing ships ; and admirably they did their work.
With the exception of a monthly mail-steamer and
an occasional auxiliary steamship (a cross between
sail and steam), passengers had but to select the


best amongst ;the sailing clipper-ships, and resign
themselves to a sea life for from seventy to a
bundled days. It was from the deck of one of
the finest of these fine clippers that Fortune and
Old Bailey found themselves looking their last, for
years to come, upon the sacred shores of the dear
mother-land.
To Fortune the voyage was one of intense en-
joyment and amusement, it being made in one of
Green s well-found ships, built for speed, and carrying
a light cargo and a couple of hundred passengers ;
he thought it one long enjoyable holiday—and not
too long either. With a vast cloud of white gleaming
sail, alow and aloft, the clipper glided through the
waters like a wraith ; never once, on what proved to
be an unequalled performance, taking in an upper
sail, and finally anchoring at her destination in the
shortest time recorded, even in those days of rapid
sailing, then or afterwards. It was a delightful
experience for Fortune to observe the excited press
reporters come clambering on board, eager to
secure several weeks’ later news from “ home as
the dear old country then was, and still is, affec-
tionately named. The passage out, he hoped, was
a good omen, and confidently he looked ahead as
he left his floating home and set a firm foot upon
a kindly land.
When, in the early stages of the passage, Old
Bailey understood that the ship was making quite
remarkable progress, an expectant look grew up in
his glassy eyes. He became watchful of the sails,
and learnt from a loquacious young officer how


to judge of their work in pushing the ship along.
Each day the ship’s run was announced, and on
the only two occasions she met with a slight check
in her progress he felt it like a personal injury. He
regarded the strong fair winds and rapid sailing as
a part of Fortune’s good luck.
“ All looks well for us both,” exclaimed Old
Bailey. “ I am not disposed to give the good ship
all the credit ; any ship my Fortune sailed in would
have done the same.” And when at length, to the
wonderment of all on board —captain, crew, and
passengers—the astonishing voyage came to a
triumphant finish, Old Bailey found it hard to
contain himself. “ Here,” thought the superstitious
man, “is the first clear proof of the good luck I fore-
saw ; and it will continue. I will never cease from
following after the fortunate youth, happen what
may.”
“ During the two years of my tutorship in the
little island,” he reflected, “ I did not reap the harvest
at the gambling tables I so confidently anticipated,
and at times I felt somewhat shaken in my belief
in the chosen youth. But at the precise moment
it was most needed by me, a stroke of good fortune,
which arrives at times even to the worst players,
put enough money into my pocket to pay my
passage money and outfit, besides a good sum in
hand on arrival. The effect upon me is magical,
and the lucky passage out has restored all my
old faith, and with interest.”
“ What is to be our next move, Fortune ? ” inquired
Old Bailey ; “ we’ve waited in the city long enough,


it seems to me. lam eager for an active life, and
like Mr. Tupman, anxious to begin.”
“ We have delayed, but no time has been wasted.
There has been, as you know, much information to
collect and preparations to make ; but all is ready
now for our visit to a far-away gold-field. We shall
start to-morrow, and may be years absent on our
quest.”
Old Bailey’s eyes shone like glass with suppressed
excitement as he replied, “ I am ready to follow you ;
lead on, and you will never find me wanting.”
“Oh, brave!” cried Fortune gaily. “Depend on
me to lead, and I will depend on you to follow.”
After many months of roaming from one gold-field
to another —a new rush here, a worked-out district
there—the two arrived by coach one evening upon
what had once been a vast field of auriferous shallow
alluvium, in the north-east of Victoria, but still of
sufficient importance to keep a few thousand gold-
diggers employed on its widespread area. But the
“ eyes ” had long since been picked out of the wash ;
for the marvellous early years of the alluvial stage
had passed, and those who remained were princi-
pally employed as wages-men for the great sluicing
companies dealing with large areas of poor ground.
It was strikingly beautiful hill country, so bracing
and healthy that both Fortune and Old Bailey pitched
their tent and sat down to a prolonged stay.
“I am not sorry,” said Fortune to his “mate” —
for all were mates in those digging days —“that I’ve
given time to geological studies. I must express my
wonder that no clear traces of any importance have


been found, or indeed systematically looked for, of
the matrix from which the great auriferous deposits
must in past ages have been washed away, and dis-
tributed around. I find that men take surprisingly
little interest in the question : they are alluvial
diggers, don’t understand quartz, nor want to, think
it risky work as compared with shallow deposits,
and need capital. Such mining, they say, might
come in time, but at the present it was not in
fashion ; so much is made clear to me. The more
I allow my thoughts to range over the position,
the more I feel convinced the diggers are mistaken.”
Old Bailey, attired in the orthodox jumper and
cabbage-tree hat, looked up at Fortune and remarked,
though with fainter enthusiasm than when first they
arrived on the field, that “their luck was rather
long in coming.”
“You harp too much on luck, man,” rejoined Fortune
impatiently. “ Better drop the superstition and let
me continue what I was about to point out. The vast
extent of worked-out ground—miles and miles of
it—though ugly and repulsive in appearance, has a
strange attraction for me. What busy hives of men,”
he went on thoughtfully, “ have laboured industriously
here; and how rapidly they are disappearing. The
colour of the alluvial workings in the north-east is
between light brown and red ; they seem to one to
carry an eternal blush on their face for the faithless
men who have deserted them, leaving behind a scene
of something very like red ruin. Their abandoned
appearance somehow suggests a feeling of discontent.
The vast deposits of gold were gone —millions of


ounces. No share in it remains for us, apparently.
The diggers had ripped open the unoffending earth,
and torn away its hidden treasures, nor could they
be brought back to render account. The only harvest
permitted by Dame Fortune had been reaped, yellow,
unto the sickle, and never again would she yield
another, they are all agreed; but I don’t accept that
conclusion at all. * Will she never yield another ? ’ I
keep thinking and questioning ; the speculation has
taken strong possession of my mind. We have been
rambling the country close on twelve months, but I
find you have no practical suggestion to offer, Bailey!
You are like a leaning tower, in danger of falling
helpless to the ground. You kept up the appearance
of affection for your mate,” he continued with good-
natured railery, “ but I begin to question whether it
is really for the mate, or his supposed luck, after all.”
“ hatever you do, or decide on doing, will turn
out for the best, I still think. I am patient and
can wait. The gods had said so, and plainly made
it known to me that day at the school. I am selfish
enough to anticipate the time when I shall hope to
enjoy the fruits of my belief in it.”
“ Are you sure you are not weakening in your
faith, Bailey ? I doubt whether you can stand the
test of time. I also have my day-dreams ; but what
you call luck has no part in this will o’ the wisp of
mine, but only my good right arm and brain.”
A long silence followed which neither seemed
inclined to break. Both men filled up the interval
with tobacco, and brandy and water in nobblers—


as drinks were named in those early days of the
colony—whiskey and soda being at that period
an undiscovered tipple.
Fortune at length rose from his chair, and declared
with a portentous yawn for bed.
“ Never felt in such splendid health in my life,
Bailey. We are in great form, the both of us, and
fit for any sort of work. I haven’t an ounce of spare
flesh, thanks to my exploration of all the likely
ground about the country. I know you are getting
impatient, but I don’t feel it so and can abide
events. I have somehow, I can’t tell why, a feeling
of confidence in the future, and it amounts to much
more than hope merely. To-morrow we’ll discuss
the campaign and perhaps decide on a new move.
You know I received a fat draft from my uncle
to-day, so we have the ‘ sinews of war.’ Clear your
mind of doubt and you’ll sleep all the better for it.”
Old Bailey’s eyes followed Fortune, as he left the
room, with strangely mixed glances. At length he,
too, got up and walked off dreamily to bed, muttering
to himself as was his habit.
“ He has confidence in himself, he says ; and thinks
it amounts to more than mere hope ” —repeating the
words over and over again as though questioning
the position so simply put before him. “Yes, yes,
and so have I, also ; but with good and sufficient
reason for the faith that is within me, which is more
than Fortune can say. He neither will nor can
understand that he is a child of destiny. His
inward trust in his future is nothing but inborn
luck, and it’s good enough for me.”


He at length fell asleep, but woke again and again,
always dreaming the same twisted, distorted fancies
until merciful sleep came wrapping him around like
a cloak. Deep slumber fell upon Fortune almost as
soon as his head touched the pillow, and if he had
dreams at all they must have passed lightly over
him, for he awoke with the early birds, happy and
confident; and by the time he returned rosy from
his dip in the creek, Old Bailey was knuckling the
sleep out of his still tired “ eyeliads.”


CHAPTER VII
“MAD AS A HATTER”
FORTUNE had not lived years with Old Bailey
without learning to understand the selfish
creature that had glued himself so tightly to the
younger but stronger intelligence, and to which the
sordid motives were made quite transparent. Fortune
looked at his “ mate ” with tolerant eyes, having no
wish to see him break away in despair, especially
as it was pretty certain he would, in such event,
make back to Jersey and fill the dear ones there
with panic. To prevent such a risk he rallied Bailey
out of his gloom, and even strove hard to keep him
occupied and amused. The man had not yet reached
the ebb tide of despair: belief in Fortune’s luck,
though fading, was not yet gone. It was a fine
inland mining town they were living in at the time,
the centre of a great shallow alluvial district rapidly
getting worked out. The place, beautifully named
Beechworth after an English town, still maintained
a great influence in that vast mining corner of
Victoria ; but its real power had departed with the
gold that for years had been lavishly poured into
its lap, and like many another great mining town


was dwindling away and would finally become less
than half its size, and wholly forgotten.
That Bailey was a sham, Fortune had long since
realised ; but he was a necessity, or made himself
appear to be. There was much about the man that
was mere imitation, perhaps all of him. Outwardly
he lived a life of pretence, looking appreciative of
the good things that fell to his share, but all the
time consumed with the gambler’s inordinate greed
and selfishness, and thirst for more.
View Old Bailey in a room full of company, and
you saw all the motions of enjoyment: a face of smiles
that somehow never broke into laughter ; lips that
curled and moved, but not in chat with either side-
neighbour ; eye-brows arched with an appearance
of fun that had no existence. There was a silent
merriment that possessed no reality of festivity
even, that was nothing but hollow pinchbeck. It
was an astonishing appearance of enjoyment you
looked upon, but it crumbled away at the touch and
neither gave nor received. All through it was the
same, whether he sat at a feast or followed in a
funeral.
To keep the “wooden machine” going Fortune
managed by talking, or inducing it to talk ; but the
task was a hard one, and many a time afterwards,
when the gloom that threatened to settle down upon
both men had been chased away by success, he
thought of Old Bailey’s false face and pretence of
what, in reality, he had not in his entire composition.
“ I took a long ride out of town yesterday, Bailey,
miles beyond that pathetic little village of Stanley,


up in the hills. What a silent, introspective place
it appears now, and what a busy diggings once, they
tell me! I came across two ‘ hatters ’ and found
besides much food for reflection.”
“As a rule hatters are not communicative,” re-
marked Old Bailey, in a depressed voice.
“'No doubt; but I found an exception. As a rule
they won’t talk, but this old fellow had seen better
days. He described what roaring times there were
up here once, in the shallow alluvial period, the
bearded bronzed diggers that swarmed over the vast
network of gold leads, and how they had departed to
new rushes— ‘ in the Elysian fields,’ he said. There
were, in those days, thousands of ant-like men whose
huts and tents made the scene hum with life. Now
the human kaleidoscope is at a stand-still, the land
desolate, and only a ‘ hatter,’ here and there, to act
sentry after the treasure has taken wings.”
“ I suppose,” rejoined Bailey, “ once a digger always
a digger; he is ever as restless as Ulysses. Then
there’s the excitement of the hunt, the dreams of
wealth both sleeping and waking, the rich patch to-
day—a streak of fat; the poor ground to-morrow—a
streak of lean ; just like bacon, and not fat bacon
either ; for ever saving up to get back ‘ home ’ again
to old England, and but few getting there.”
“ There is much of gambling in a gold-digger’s life,
no doubt. I have had the feeling myself since
coming here to this new land of Havilah. Men
give up all to the hunt—nothing kept back, not
even his body and bones. Everything he possesses
is staked upon the ‘ cloth of gold.’ ”


Fortune spoke without meaning ; but Bailey looked
up sharply, shooting a keen glance at him.
“ Come to your ‘ hatters,’ ” he said abruptly, “ and
tell us what you know about them. Are they as
eccentric as rumour says they are ? ”
“ Quite! as you’ll see when I’ve finished my ac-
count of the two I came across yesterday—one white,
the other yellow, for they are of both colours. It is
difficult to take a ramble in any of the silent worked-
out diggings without coming upon a‘hatter’ potter-
ing about, alone, of course, shy as the lyre bird,
barely visible for the undergrowth, but his presence
made plain by the tell-tale tin dish. When discovered,
he looks askance at you as an interloper, while you
find a picturesque old fellow in long white beard
hanging in ragged festoons over a scanty waistcoat
that barely conceals the browned hairy bosom be-
neath, however cold the day. Like his clay-stained
garments, his beard is also yellowed, but with tobacco
juice ; observing which, it is as well to transfer the
contents of your well-filled pouch, if you wish to un-
lock his usually tongue-tied mouth—for the hatter
is a taciturn man given to long fits of silence, like
any monk of La Trappe. Monk-like too, you find
he is a single man, never married and never wants to
be. The woman who could wean a hatter from his
solitude has not yet been born ; he has the making
within him of a dozen St. Anthonys.”
“ What! so far gone as that ? ”
“ Oh yes, and makes no secret of it if you find him
in the humour for a chat. But the subject is a
ticklish one; you have to be careful, for he is quick


to take umbrage, and once offended shuts up like an
oyster. Solitude and much introspection have given
his face a long, drawn look. Serious and unsmiling
it is, but honest, and not unkindly. You feel that by
no possibility could it break into laughter ; that
died, with him, long ago. Not that there is no
incentive in the Australian bush, for presently peal
after peal of side-splitting laughter is heard coming
from a dead tree near by ; but they are birds that
laugh, not men. He is quiet and gentle in manner—
the hatter I mean,” said Fortune with a smile, “ not
the laughing-jackass —and most likely has a history,
all his own now, with no one to share in it, for he is
of the age that leaves little behind but memory.
Probably none of his contemporaries remain above
ground. The old hatter—there are no young of the
species—has worked many years of his life, gleaning
over and over again the abandoned tailings heaps.
He is a * hatter/ not a miner, and stubbornly refuses
to admit that any good luck ever fell to him.
‘ What! ’ you exclaim. ‘ Dame Fortune never once sat
herself down on your doorstep?’ ‘Never,’ comes the
emphatic reply. ‘ She sent her daughter instead—
Miss Fortune.’
“Shall I go on, or are you tired of my
hatters ? ”
“On the contrary, I feel quite interested. There’s
more in hatters than I thought.”
“ My hatter —the one in particular I have in my
mind —is a bookish man, probably educated at one
of the universities, but fights shy of the subject,
fearing that speech bewrayeth. Nature’s book is all


around him, and for long years past has formed
his only study. He is usually too poor to buy a
newspaper, and during all the time you hold him
in talk he keeps the tin dish going, leaving you to
wonder how his old fingers can stand constant
contact with ice-cold winter water, while you glance
at your own warm gloves. Solitude is his goddess,
and while admitting the word ‘ hatter ’ as applied to
himself, knows nothing of the origin of the appellative,
and does not care. You turn at last to leave the
old fellow, with a promise to look round that way
again with another pouch full, and he brightens up ;
but it is with relief that you are going, for you are
not wanted there. As you leave he volunteers the
assurance that he will remain faithful to the old
diggings, and will live and die a ‘ hatter ’ to the
last.”
“ I thought you mentioned a yellow hatter,
“ I did, and am coming to him in my little history.
Half a mile away—for they hate like poison any one
of their kind working within sight or speech—is a
ragged old Chinaman, also a hatter, a yellow one this
time. He is old, so old as to look forgotten of God,
and when he attempts to stand up you perceive that
he is bent nearly two double. He has more than
likely stooped over the vegetable garden and the tin
dish all his life, and like his white neighbour will go
on a hatter to the last—until his countrymen in the
camp ‘box’ him. He can speak ‘pidgin’ English
quite well, but won’t to you, a stranger, fearing you
wish to know too much about the wretched scraps of
‘colour’ his old eyes can barely see at the bottom


of the tin dish. Poor harmless old John, he lags too
long on Charon’s wharf, and will soon take passage
with the ferryman, to be seen no more.
“ If you make them a study, as I have,” continued
Fortune thoughtfully, “ you will soon find there are
hatters and hatters. They all love to work and
live in solitude, but things are not so solitary as
people think. One of them told me that birds,
especially the small ones, and animals inhabiting the
wood, get quite friendly and trusting as time passes.
No doubt men leading lonely lives acquire the
hatter’s mind. The shepherd does so, out back with
no other companions but his sheep, and learns to
look with distaste upon human-kind. The same man
assured me that there were ‘ hatters ’ to be found
in cities full of noise and people, friendless and
lonely by preference, and absolutely silent them-
selves, getting a living no one knows how or
cares.”
“ They seem to me, from what you describe, to be
in Hamlet’s condition —taking no pleasure in man or
woman either.”
“ True,” replied Fortune, “ and are all mad north-
north-west. Their form of madness is one natural to an
unloving and unloved existence : ‘ the world forgetting,
by the world forgot.’ He is a forked animal like
other men, but probably has more of the vegetable
in him —a sort of human carrot.”
“ And to follow out your vegetable image,” laughed
Old Bailey, “we may liken his brain to mashed
turnips.”
“ We mustn’t speak unkindly of the harmless old


creatures,” rejoined Fortune, “ for they appear to
have but little use for the brains they possess; still,
I found it unsafe to touch, accidentally of course,
upon distasteful topics, as, for instance, water for
panning—a very important question for the hatter.
The mining laws in Australia permit of the con-
struction of vast networks of water-races for puddling
and sluicing purposes—very profitable, and jealously
guarded. Hatters, like many others, have their
tempers sorely tried in droughty times by seeing the
‘ tribute wave ’ run away in plenty to the users of
it miles and miles distant. It is a burning question
with them, and a remark I innocently made in
reference to it led me into a perfect quagmire. The
hatter of that day’s experience I am speaking of
instantly turned upon me with glittering eyes and
a smash on his tin dish. Almost breathless with
anger, he declared that persons competent to make
the country’s mining laws could only be obtained
out of a cross between Quakers and Jews ! Some-
thing had jarred on the old fellow’s ‘ mashed
turnips ’ ; he was at once ‘ mad as a hatter,’ and
turning sulkily to trudge off homewards, took good
care that his track through the trees was not
mine.
“You remember that young sailor-man Bill we
have often stopped and yarned with in the bush
hereabouts, Bailey? I saw him the first thing this
morning and commissioned him to purchase horses
and a dray, with all the necessary stores for a
prolonged prospecting tour in this district. He is
to have everything ready for a start in two days,


so offer up your prayers for good luck to the gods
and get all ready,” said Fortune gaily to his as-
tonished friend.
“You’ve relieved my mind,” replied Old Bailey,
jumping to his feet. “ xAnything is better than this
long waiting on the gods you laugh at. I began
to think the luck was against us, but now that you
have decided to act at last, I can see the turn of
the tide, and what’s more, it will bring with it the
long-hoped-for luck. I feel it in my very bones.”
“ Lord save us ! Bailey. Do keep fortune’s wheel out
of it if you can. Spare me, it is getting wearisome.
You are eternally calling up spirits from the vasty
deep.”
“ I have, I confess, from the day I saw you marked
for Heaven’s favours in the old palace grounds.”
“Yes, yes, I know, and tired enough of it I feel.
Remember, Bailey, those spirits you keep calling
up may not come ; far better let them be. We
can get along very well without them.”


CHAPTER VIII
GOLD AND A GRAVEYARD
THE active moves of Fortune’s new campaign
were afoot after much anxious thought. He
had weighed over the pros and cons with the slow
caution characteristic of him, and at length decided
to put his prospects to the test. Old Bailey’s sug-
gestions were more numerous than practical, some
were actually absurd ; but with his kindly, patient
consideration, Fortune had contrived to dispose of
them without hurting his friend’s self-love. Always
in one extreme or the other, it excited amusement
bordering on ridicule to observe his clumsy attempts
to offer assistance. The hired diggers (Bill and
his mate) sniggered uncomplimentary asides, and
grinned out the opinion that he was ready to take
the command of the whole “ caboose,” The party
started early ; but it was late in the evening of a
warm spring day before they reached a dip in the
hills Fortune had decided upon for their first camping
place.
Before the camp had been long astir next morning,
one of the two diggers—a youthful runaway sailor
who had from the first attached himself to Fortune


with dog-like fidelity—took an opportunity of getting
in his way, evidently full of some proposal. Like
many another digger on the gold-fields in those
days, and filling employments all over the country,
sailors were to be found —mostly deserters from
their ships—who by reason of their handy qualities
and geniality were popular and sought after. Sailor
Bill’s offence was, however, of a more serious class,
being desertion from a warship, and the man
perfectly understood his danger, but wisely kept
it to himself. Nothing suited him so well as to
keep away from the towns and police camps, where
he had often seen his own name and description in
print. At such times poor Bill, conscience stricken,
gnawed by the rat anxiety, fled as far away into the
bush as he could get in safety, a prey to panic.
Fortune, who had often observed the man in his
rides about the country, knew something of Bill’s
history, and guessed more. When the prospecting
tour was proposed, Bill jumped at the offer to
join the party and hide himself away for an in-
definite period. For some reason, impossible of
explanation even to himself, the quick, ready little
fellow silently worshipped the handsome young
man who never missed a chance of stopping for
a talk about mining whenever they met. Bill had
become quite proud of his swell acquaintance, and
would at a word have thrown down pick and shovel
and followed him to the ends of the earth. He had
heard him called Fortune by Old Bailey, and to
the last day of the long service that followed, never
failed to address his master as “ Mr, Fortune, sir.”


“Well, Bill, what is it you have to say to-day?
Out with it.”
“ It’s this way, sir. I know you have more than
gold-finding at heart —not that I don’t hold with
getting heaps of it if we can ; but every inch of these
hills is well beknown to me, and I can take you
to the spot, about fifteen miles further, where the
first pick and shovel went into the ground, in this
district, for gold. It was a shallow working, the gold
visible in parts on the surface after rain ; but being
that rich and easy the leads were worked out pretty
quick and have never been looked at since. It’s a
wonder how the first prospectors came across that
bit of country—there wasn’t much of it—for it would
puzzle any one not in the know to find it again.
I’d like well to pilot you there, Mr. Fortune, sir ;
you’d look and look at that queer ugly old diggings,
I know.”
“ You’ve excited my curiosity, Bill, by your descrip-
tion, and if you can find the place we’ll go together
under your pilotage. We can combine business with
pleasure. These worked-out leads never tire me
looking at them. I don’t know why they appeal
to me so much ; it is certainly not their beauty.”
“ I know, sir, I’ve felt it often, but not been able
to put it into words. It’s the life, the roaring life
that went on, the lashins of grog. Gold in buckets-
full there was—l’ve seen it myself, sir, in that very
ground we are going to. A pound for a bottle of
brandy like fire, a fight to get it, another fight
afterwards. No police in those early days,” said Bill,
with great relish. “ I’ve been told by a man who had


a little bit of a claim on that creek, that for some
months gold came out in such quantities they thought
they’d come upon solid rocks of it. What a wild
hell some of them made of life there! They shoed
their horses with gold for devilment; the flash ones
would eat big bank notes between bread and butter,
or have a mad shout of champagne to run into a
hundred pounds.”
“ I think I understand what you mean, Bill. You
think perhaps, as I do at times, that the echoes and
ghosts of the once populous workings still hang
about. I catch myself letting imagination run riot
looking at the old alluvial ruins, and find it difficult
to shake off the fancies and return again to prosy
thoughts. Saddle up both horses, we’ll start now.”
“So long,” cried Fortune to Old Bailey, as he
turned his horse’s head. “We shall be back in a
couple of days or so. I intend to work all through
that forgotten country Bill has filled my head with.
Let’s see which of us has the luck you believe in
so hard, you or I.”
As he cantered off he caught a glimpse of Bailey’s
glassy stare and the sound of words called after
him. “ Luck, luck, what an interminable litany he
makes of it,” smiled Fortune to himself as he passed
out of sight. “ There’s no luck save what we make
for ourselves.”
Bill intimated, after an hour’s jog trot, that the
country they were making for lay some ten miles
beyond Stanley and that there was a fairish inn to
put up at in the faded little town where they’d
get “ bub and grub,”


On reaching Stanley, Bill looked up an old mate
settled in the little place and freshened his memory
for the “ bearings ” of the deserted old diggings they
were bound for. By the time this was done and
they had piped to lunch, as the sailor put it, they
pushed on again, but lost much precious time in
taking what he called “ new departures.”
“ Now, Mr. Fortune, sir, we are on the right course,
we’ve got the landmarks right at last ; we’ll soon
make out those old ‘ jeweller’s shops,’ as they were
called.”
The grey, velvet sky and quiet day were dis-
appearing together, but before ending the sun had
resolved to light up the scene for a parting display.
The flecked blue of the dome overhead became
beautiful as any seen above the Mediterranean’s “glad
waters,” with an added turquoise colouring impossible
to find anywhere out of Stanley’s lovely hills. The
famous old diggings they had come forth to see
were by this time close at hand—all the familiar
signs visible of a once populous community, such
as heaps of empty tins and bottles, latter-day
potsherds, and occasional brick chimneys standing
alone, the huts they once warmed gone for ever.
Sailor Bill’s eyes brighten up as he points out
to his companion the brands on beer and spirit
bottles popular in the early rushes. Trees on either
side of the track get thinner and let in more day-
light ; old stumps abound. Suddenly the opening
ahead broadens out, and the two young men find
themselves gazing down from the hill-side upon a
hungry-looking lifeless flat, suggestive of a once


living body bled white to the bone, withered and
bleaching—a weird scene.
The pale yellowish ground that Fortune regards
with intent eyes is barely warmed by the sun’s
slanting rays ; and though the surface was once red
and rich with precious gold, even to the roots of the
grass, the gold of the sun, setting in apparent hurry,
seemed to laugh in disdain at the petty competition
once attempted there beneath him. What had been
a busy prosperous field of man’s industry wore now
a chill, deprived, brooding look, suggesting the
thoughts of disappointment that most worked-out
gold country offers the beholder—doubly so in the
scene that lay stripped and naked at their feet. The
note struck was one of distinct gloom and depression ;
and both men felt it even more lowering when two
laughing-jackasses near by, in derision of the ruin
that man the destroyer had made and abandoned,
broke the awful silence with screams of laughter,
startling and untimely.
The sailor looked up uneasily in Fortune’s face,
shifting his glance to the lengthening shadows of the
trees, but failed to divert his companion’s absorbed
watch. He appeared unable to withdraw his eyes
from the dumb, mournful scene.
What he viewed, gazing down intently from his
espial, was a wreck and raffle of worked-out flats of
limited area, far too limited for the original diggers
who had so suddenly found the golden cup dashed
from their lips. The area was threaded through by
an oozy creek, choked by slime and mud ; once a
glancing crystal stream rising, as was supposed, in


Mount Stanley at their backs. The fancy took hold
and held possession of Fortune that he was in reality
looking down upon a sea beach at dead low water ;
and the feeling grew upon him with the dusk, that
the tide would presently come stealing back once
more to flood and cover that sad, lonely shore there
with gleaming water, to glitter again under the
silvering moon when she rose. Across what presented
the appearance of a wan, monotonous beach to a
“ salt sea foreland,” a mile or two distant, the whole
scene was exposed in ghastly, unwholesome naked-
ness, where once a feverish, greedy community had
grasped with both hands at the golden substance and
found it but shadow after all. Pallid and solitary it
looked now, too dejected even for a “ hatter ” to pick
and glean over ; the heaps of ominous spoil once
full of wealth, now squalid and poverty-stricken, dead
and ownerless.
Again the sailor turned shivering to Fortune
without attracting his still rapt attention. To Bill’s
mind the once bounteous old diggings were now but
a bare cupboard, and gave him nothing but disgust
to think that no share of its gold had gone through
his hands. Waiting patiently, his thoughts kept
turning back gloomily to the cruiser and the
shipmates he had deserted ; and he shivered again
with vague superstition and dread.
To Fortune’s fascinated eyes the gloomy cadaverous
flat suggested recent storms and shipwreck : blackened
logs and beams of timber where some tall ship had
perished. Something like the same thought was
slowly dawning upon Sailor Bill’s mind, whose


imagination pictured iron-bound reefs of deadly
rocks, and long, hairy seaweed that seemed to be
taking the shape and outline of drowned men. He
was by this time restless and repentant at bringing
Fortune near the accursed place, and full of a sailor’s
child-like fear of something haunted and ghostly.
With an effort rousing himself at length, and
putting away the fancies that had clung around him
so tightly, Fortune began muttering softly to himself,
while Bill listened in a mild sort of panic at the
new development.
“ It’s not a sea beach there, looking so wave-
whipped, nothing half so good. Call it a carcase
lying prone and stripped by robbers of what was
once a golden raiment. Uncouth it all looks to me,
and bereft of beauty—the golden bowl broken. How
impossible it is to think of it at all and leave out
gold ! I’ve seen many another derelict diggings in
these parts and moralised over them often, but never
one that looked so unlovely and ransacked ; peopled
perhaps by mute forms and phantoms—a populous
solitude. The very soil seems to feel the shame of
its ill-usage and deprivation. How persistently the
thought arises that surely some to-morrow will find
the men, that once peopled the place in hundreds
and bled it to death, upon the old familiar ground
again to toil and moil and grub once more for the
gold that was —that is—‘so easy to get, so hard to
hold.’ ”
With a shudder at the creepy chill that he felt
striking in at his very marrow, Fortune jumped to
his feet, passing a hand over his eyes to break the


spell of the weird, desolated old workings. Still
thinking aloud, he murmured softly to himself in
Bill’s hearing : “ No, no ! it is not a sea beach there ;
that is a fancy for daylight; let it pass. What did
the seer of Patmos say ; what were those terrible
words? The haunted scene belo\w recalls them.
God ! though few and simple, how awful they are !
* I looked, and behold there was no more sea.’ No
imagination, however wild, can picture this earth
without sea.”
“ Sea beach, did you say, Mr. Fortune, sir,” whis-
pered Sailor Bill, shaking with nameless fear, and
siding up to his “ officer.” “ More like a graveyard
as I think.”
“ A graveyard it is, Bill. You’ve given me the
missing word ; it fits the scene all over. Plow miser-
able and cold the place looks ! What an abode of
misery and hallucinations ! ”
“ Let us away, sir. I don’t like to be near the old
ground after dark ; it might be unlucky if we saw
a ghost. Cart-ropes will never pull me here again.
There was a bloody fight here once with a party of
Chinese who tried to shove into the field. By the
time it was all over —and no time was lost—half
a dozen Chinkies lay dead on the ground.”
“ But surely, Bill, you don’t think there’s any
chance of seeing a yellow ghost. They must be
white ; that’s the orthodox colour, you know, for a
ghost, so cheer up mate, lead on and away.”
“By thunder, Mr. Fortune, sir! ” exclaimed Bill
greatly relieved, “ I never did hear tell of a yellow
ghost,” and Bill slapped his thigh with delight.


“We shan’t see a white one, there was none killed
in the fight. I’ll tell you, sir,” said the young sailor,
rapidly resuming his cheerful manner, “ while we
are riding along back to Stanley, how it was I came
to the place the first time; this makes my third
visit, and it grows more like a graveyard every time.
“ After deserting my ship, me and my mate, likewise
a deserter, made off to the diggings, like half the
ships’ crews in the port, and got bushed in the Black
Forest. We was just having a last pipe before
turning in under a bush, and very hungry, when up
came a party of three diggers bound for Melbourne.
They was bushed too, but had a pack-horsp with
lots of prog and grog besides heavy metal, judging
by the weight of the load. The party was from
this very place we’ve just left behind us, and were
in mortal fear of two men who had stalked them
most of the day. They gave us as much as we
could eat and drink, besides a promise of a few
ounces of gold in the morning if we kept guard with
them all night. They had Colt revolvers and we
soon had everything man-of-war fashion. Before
we separated they gave us the sailing directions
and told us of the wonderful gold, and as fast as
we could leg it we reached here a few days later.”
“ Go on, Bill, this interests me.”
“It didn’t take us long to find that the place was
rapidly getting worked out. I never somehow could
like the look of it, but the stories of the gold were
all quite true. As you saw this afternoon, it was
like a great flat dish, surrounded by a rim of low
hills running back ever so far. The creek passed


out through a narrow opening like a bottle neck ;
when it got outside the water spread itself over
another and far larger flat dish, but without a rim.
The gold was spread out veiy thin and poor all
about, but it wasn’t ‘ pay dirt,’ and we found the
men trooping off as fast as they came.
“ And you with them, I suppose, Bill ? ’’
“ No, not for a bit. There was a queer snuffy old
German, the usual kind, all eyes, pipe and goggles,
pottering about the diggings. He said he knew all
worth knowing about gold, or made people believe
so. It made no difference, for all hands finally gave
up the field as a bad job. My old Dutch took a
fancy to me, called me a ‘ tarn fine sailor-man ’
and hired me to cook and prospect the country
with him. Well, Mr. Fortune, sir, listen to this: he
never ceased yarning about gold, how it was formed,
and what made it. One night 1 answered, ‘ God
Almighty made the gold,’ but I never said so twice
to him ; he got that mad, not with me, but apparently
with ‘ Goramighty,’ as he pronounced it. He was
full of talk about the gold having a ‘ modder.’ Mother,
I found he meant. The great point, he kept saying,
was to find the ‘ madrix,’ and into the low rim of
that flat dish we used to potter week after week for
months, looking for his precious ‘ madrix,’ that we
never found. One day, very miserable, he told me
he couldn’t afford to keep his ‘ tarn fine sailor-man ’
any longer and we parted ; but for all I know he’s
still in the hills ‘ madrix ’ hunting.”
“ I’m more than ever interested, Bill; you shall take
me over those low hills you speak of to-morrow.


But be wise, and whenever you talk of your old ship
don’t say man-of-war. You’ve let out your secret,
which I fancy is valued at ten pounds to an informer,
Bill. There are the lights of Stanley ahead. What
a long day it has been ; seems like many rolled into
one. Your story about the old German clings to me
strangely, and then that haunted scene we looked at
so long, and its unreality. I shall dream of it to-night,
tired as 1 am, ‘ a dream within a dream.’ Here’s the
dear little pub—hotels they call them all now-a-days,
no matter how humble. They were called by a
better name when Shenstone lived and sang the
praises of his inn. Cheer up, countryman ; never
fear. There are no informers here, but a warm
welcome at our inn for a certainty.”


CHAPTER IX
THE TURN OF THE TIDE
THE chortling magpies had scarcely opened their
hymns to sunrise next morning when Fortune
and his man turned out. Bill, being a prince of foragers,
soon provided hot coffee as a preliminary preparation
for the journey ahead of them. These complete, and
in the sailor’s cheery expression “ dunnaged with an
ample breakfast,” they were early afield. Bill showed
signs, when they approached what he had named the
“graveyard diggings,” of shying off the track, but
this Fortune would not permit. “ I have reasons,” he
explained, “ geological ones, for wishing to cross over
the old ground from the bottle neck to the top end
of the flat, where the creek enters that once golden
receptacle, held in reserve for how many thousands
of years, I wonder ! ”
“ That old German said he knew, sir ; had it all
chalked out to a day.”
“ Now observe, Bill, the creek head is nothing but a
series of springs and is the main supply of the stream.
Water may have brought all that fabulous gold into
this sepulchral-looking flat, but the creek certainly
did not —first check for us. We must go further on ;


the hills are easy travelling; I like their looks and
can distinguish no signs of granite or diorite here to
cut off the quartz formation, which your old Dutch
named the ‘ madrix,’ that yielded the gold in the
year one. We ll make for that cone-like hill beyond
there; it marks a distinct change of country and
looks like an old volcano—just what I want to see.”
« Why, Mr. Fortune, sir,” exclaimed Bill with sur-
prise, “ that’s the very place the old German always
made for. I could never get him away from it, but
he never struck anything, poor old hunks. It’s a
good ten miles.”
“Never mind distance, Bill, that hill must be our
first call. I daresay we shall find a shanty or wood-
man’s camp somewhere about good enough for us ;
a couple of days’ short commons won’t hurt. Let’s
talk, Bill; it’s a capital way of shortening the road.
I must say those weird old workings we have left
behind us didn’t improve on acquaintance this
morning. How fancies chase one another while the
depressing place is before you ! There was still the
same look of misery and deprivation. It waited long
years enough surely for the diggers. It’s still waiting,
but what for? Imagination can never picture that
scene, bright and smiling under its green mantle, as
it must have appeared once, barely hiding the gold
that was doomed to be ripped off its unoffending
surface by man the destroyer —by the men you once
saw there, Bill, drunk with the heaps of gold they
found and squandered ; who puddled away all the
good in it and themselves too, at the end. Over
many of the deserted old leads that I’ve wasted time


pondering over, Nature, labouring day and night,
has set to work again covering over the scarred and
wounded surface with trees and shrubs; but not so
with this one left behind us. Though many years
have passed it continues disconsolate and bare, and
where it once attracted, now repels. It possessed a
fatal beauty, though, that has proved its ruin—the
beauty of enormous riches.”
“ Well, Mr. Fortune, sir, I like the way you put it,
but I call the place a beastly hole. I can tell you
this much about this country hereabouts : that Stanley
we left this morning, a little bit of a village, was once
the centre of a diggings containing more than ten
thousand people, mostly miners. Good times we had
while it lasted, my word ! ”
“ I don’t doubt you, Bill, but it is hard to believe.
That’s the worst of these shallow auriferous deposits ;
the surface for scores of miles gets wrecked and
destroyed, and remains unfitted by fortune’s largesse
for practical uses. The whole of this enormous
mining district is the same, and the millions of
ounces of gold it has yielded are gone. The few
buildings in that little hamlet Stanley you mention
are all that remain of the countless dwellings that
once sheltered the miners in thousands. Even the
tribes of black fellows are gone—swept out of
existence. What a blight seems to grow out of
this gold-hunting! In what doth it profit a man ?
It’s very fine and very easy to moralise over it all,
and yet we are most of us agreed to join in the hunt.
Tents, huts, shanties, buildings of every sort, gone
away. Those snail-like diggers must have moved off


with their houses on their backs, Bill. They folded
their tents like the Arabs, and silently stole away.”
“Shenstone, sir,” cried Sailor Bill, on the alert to
lend a hand, cheerfully unconscious of misdirected
homage.
The monotonous jog trot had gone on all day, and
now, at length, Fortune felt “ full of the evening and
sad.” He was not in the slightest degree depressed,
but the day’s task, with its frequent excursions into
the timbered slopes, resulted in a deep feeling of
weariness. He had found much in the prospects
that pleased him. The geological indications were all
favourable, and an exultant feeling had grown up in
his mind all through the day.
“ Bill, you are a wonder. How can you keep
going without showing a sign of fatigue? Your
happy disposition I daresay accounts for it. A far
greater man than your favourite Shenstone says ;
‘ A merry heart goes all the day ; your sad tires in a
mile—aye.’ That merry heart of yours, mate, has
kept both of us going, I think.”
“ I like to hear you call me mate ; Mr. Fortune, sir,
you do me proud. But we’re not mates. I’m your
mate, but you’re not mine, sir; there’s a vast differ-
ence. Since I took to the diggings and lived this
sort of open-air life, I never felt fatigue ; no more
will you when you get used to it. Why, I’ve often
ridden the whole day long, and at the end it was the
horse, not me, that was knocked up—and on foot
myself half the time. But see over beyond, sir, above
those trees, there’s smoke rising. I don’t own to be
tired out, but I like that smoke.”


The welcome blue spiral when reached proved to
be from a splitter’s camp, where the jaded travellers
were soon regaled with tea and damper in hearty bush
fashion. They yarned round a big camp-fire until
slumber came, bringing with it a hush that enveloped
the little community with a calm and dreamless
rest.
Fortune and his mate made the splitter s camp
their headquarters for the few days they prospected
the district, and though no actual discovery was made,
the auriferous signs were too promising to neglect,
and with a light heart Fortune set off in Bill’s
company to rejoin Old Bailey, fully resolved to
return and establish their camp.
“ Now, Bill, we will head away back to Mr. Bailey’s
camp by a shorter cut ; your knowledge of bush
craft will be of value, and this time you can steer
clear of that noxious old negation that you call
a graveyard. I do believe, Bill,” cried Fortune
laughing, “ if I had given a sign you’d have bolted
for Stanley, and left me to square the ghosts in the
uncanny sepulchre that evening. Thank God we
know a country better worth attention. I have a
feeling of elation, Bill, that nothing can keep down,
and firmly believe the sap of success is rising for me
even now. Your old Dutch will prove to be right
in his opinion of that volcanic cone and its
foot-slopes ; my wheel will come full circle there.”
“Do you find this sort of life as lonely as you
did at first, Mr. Fortune, sir? I like it, but then
it suits me for good reasons of my own,” said the
simple-minded sailor,


Fortune was too much occupied with his thoughts
to answer his companion’s question. True, he had
felt the solitude of his life of late, and its contrasts
with town existence. It had made for much that
was introspective, but he had guarded himself from
the habit of taciturnity so frequently seen in the
bush. Bill’s unanswered question stirred in his mind,
and to himself he admitted the mental weariness of
bush life, the craving for a change from his own com-
pany—at times almost painful. Was Solitude, that
romantic maid, at her best in the lonely bush of
Australia ? Fortune had found her at times a dull
companion. But then he had the main chance to
consider : the quest that lay before him, sordid though
it might be. The thought absorbed him entirely
that he had taken a Pisgah view from the summit
of that cone-like hill, and seen his promised land
below. The intent expression in his large serious
eyes and handsome profile ; the unmistakable look of
breeding, shown at its best on horseback, struck Bill’s
attention more strongly than ever. He recognised
the superior intelligence riding by his side, and
found a master to love and serve perhaps for life.
The allegiance that by right should have gone to
his officer was henceforth Fortune’s, and there would
be no more desertion.
In another moment Bill felt himself quaking under
a look from Fortune’s eyes that seemed to pierce
him through and through. The ugly word that had
pushed itself into his thoughts, shook the man with
terror as he heard Fortune asking him a question.
“ Why did you desert the warship, Bill? ”


Poor Sailor Bill! why did he? It was a long
story and took long in the telling—the usual
commonplace narrative of temptation and youthful
folly, for he had no complaint against ship or
officers.
“ I was a mere lad and led away by an older
shipmate, sir,” replied Bill, with a dog-like look of
devotion in his eyes, “to serve a selfish purpose
of his own, and I’ve never been able to shake him
off, he’s too foxy for me. He’s the man at the
camp with Mr. Bailey, called Tommy. But all the
men hereabouts call him ‘Tommy the Nut,’ and
he’s by no manner of ways to be trusted, Mr. Fortune,
sir,”
It was late in the evening when Fortune and his
man reached Old Bailey’s camp, and evidently not
a day too soon. His account of proceedings was
ludicrously woeful. Bill found it necessary to turn
away and hide his amusement, easily excited in the
merry little fellow. The horse had strayed off and
had never been recovered by Tommy, who was
suspected of selling it. “So like the Nut,” thought
Bill with dancing eyes.
“ Prospecting ? Lord bless you, Fortune ; how could
I without a horse ? besides, it took all my time to
watch the camp. Thieves were about, and as it is
we’ve been shamefully robbed. I rather fancy
Tommy has been pretty free with the grog; at any
rate he’s been drunk half the time, and the other
half mutinous.” It was only too apparent that Old
Bailey’s gipsying days were not a success.
Around the camp-fire that night there was an


exchange of experiences. Fortune, at the best of
times, was very far from being loquacious, but told
Bailey his story without restraint. He recounted
their life and doings admirably, without effort,
describing all that had passed, quite unconscious
of the evident pleasure his narrative gave his hearers,
and the rise in Old Bailey’s mercury that it effected.
Three days later the whole party and possessions
arrived on the ground he had decided to return to
and prospect. The weather had become sultry, with
occasional rain, and their arrival had been delayed.
Selecting a slope permitting of good drainage, the
tents were soon pitched and, delight of all bushmen,
a roaring fire started. To boil the billy for tea, and
make the damper, smoke a couple of pipes or so,
and drink night-caps to success for the camp, came
in due sequence. Too tired and sleepy for yarning,
Fortune and Sailor Bill turned in between their
blankets, while Old Bailey sat for hours sucking his
pipe before the fire and seeing in the glowing embers
pictures of good luck in every conceivable shape
and form.


CHAPTER X
STERLING GOLD
DAY broke next morning with a sultry spring
sun, and all hands were soon afoot and about
their several duties. Returning to camp with the
dray and horses an hour later, Fortune was struck
by the glittering appearance of one of the muddy
dray wheels. Looking closer he detached several
flakes of quartz richly studded with gold. They
were no water-worn pieces of gravel from a shallow
auriferous wash, but clearly fresh broken by the
heavy cart wheel from a solid mass of stone —but
where? Beckoning Old Bailey away from some
trivial task he was blundering over, Fortune put
the stones into his hands, telling him how he had
found them. Slowly turning them stupidly over and
over, he seemed unable to realise the importance of
the discovery. After a time the truth slowly dawned
upon him, and at length he presented the same
painfully excited appearance that was so noticeable
on the day, years ago, when the rooks passed over
the students in the playground of the great school.
“ What are you going to do about it ? ” he
whispered eagerly.
“ Don’t whisper, it always excites notice. I shall


send the men away in an opposite direction, while
we work back on our wheel tracks until we come
to the quartz reef.” And after breakfast this plan
was tried, unsuccessfully as it turned out, but
materially lengthening Old Bailey’s face.
The good luck Bailey now believed was actually
in his hands when he patted the specimens was, as
yet, afar off. The rut was carefully examined for
more than a mile on the return tracks, and then
heavy rain stopped further examination. The
weather had changed with semi-tropical violence,
and all hands were needed at the camp to trench
off the flood waters from the tent and site. The
weather continued bad for several days, winding up
with a hurricane of wind and rain. There was
nothing for it but listen to the crashing branches
and roaring creeks, and watch the rain falling in
long, white slate-pencils of water. At length the
leaden pall lifted, disclosing a long-absent but
welcome sun, and the two friends sallied forth again
on their quest, hock deep in slush and mud;
Fortune smiling at the picture of mingled despair
and impatience which for four days Old Bailey’s
face presented to him. Not a mile from the camp,
on a rise in the ground, Fortune stopped suddenly
to examine the roots of a fallen tree.
“Well, what is it? Where is it? Can you see
anything?” said his companion hoarsely, looking
ludicrously anxious and trembling violently. “Do
speak, it’s cruel to keep me in suspense. My God !
what have you found ? ” he asked excitedly in a
voice that fell to a hissing whisper.


“ The storm, for us at least,” said Fortune calmly,
“ has proved to be a blessing in disguise. Without it
vve might never have made this discovery. Look !
there, beneath that newly uprooted tree, lies the
cap of the golden quartz lode from which came the
flakes I removed from the dray wheel! Hallo ! who
comes here? Sailor Bill, I declare! We must
have been watched, Bailey. I can’t believe that
Bill is a spy as well as a deserter. I wonder
what’s gone wrong at the camp, and why he’s
leading my saddle horse ! ”
“Jump up, Mr. Fortune, sir,” cried Sailor Bill when
he reached the two men, looking pale through his
bronzed skin, and breathless with haste. “Take the
horse and away. I’ve dished Tommy the Nut this
time, foxy as he is, the dog. Don’t delay a moment,
sir, but ride for your life into Beechworth and put
in your mining claims for the ground, while I stay
here with Mr. Bailey and get the pegs in. Don’t fear
we shall make any mistake, sir ; I know the bearings
pretty well, being a sailor-man, and the sun that’s
been so scarce for days past will help us out with the
lines correct enough until the surveyors come along.”
Fortune took in at a word the crisis so abruptly
declared by Sailor Bill, and with prompt decision
rode off as quickly as the heavy ground would permit.
Once on the hard road he increased his pace to a
gallop, and the good horse landed him in ample
time at the mining offices before closing, to put in
his claim for the leases his discovery gave him the
right to demand. The whole affair had reached its
climax so sharply that Fortune had scarcely pulled


nj»n
Pk 81 4j£, .~mt/ ' i jfK
JSf/t f -
* * , i
? Sg I *^^ | B5fe \ <»
Pt* \^!
UBB v w rf,-v JMM */ Ir 'n
‘_ : fif v'|£|8pln
/l i# ** %** ; *'-' 1 " «T '
THE DISCOVERY OF THE GOLDEN LODE.
[To face p. 76.


.iicai . .Hi. - ' \o v, .1 ;.i ,
.OV ii\ li";
J


himself together when he had reached a mile out
of Beech worth on his return to the camp. It was a
puzzle-headed sort of thing after all for him to have
acted so vigorously, but Bill was true as steel and
knew what he was about. Anyhow, prevention was
better than cure, he thought, whatever the danger had
been. How many stories he had heard of disputed
ownership of claims ! Who could tell what blackmail
from the man Tommy and his precious friends Bill’s
quick-witted precaution had saved him from !
Several hours after Bill had started him away to
the mining offices, he drew rein and dismounted
where he had left Old Bailey. He found both men
awaiting him anxiously. Bill had kept Bailey hard
at work pegging out the claims; both were muddy
to their waistbelts.
“ Never mind, sir,” exclaimed Bill merrily, “ you did
good work this time, I swear, working out the angles.
Why, Mr. Fortune, sir, he can take the sun, like my
officers used to on board ship,” and ever after the
sailor regarded Old Bailey with greatly increased
respect, though his patience was sorely tried at times.
“ Now, Bill, I shall be glad to learn why you bundled
me off this morning so unceremoniously.”
“Yes, Mr. Fortune, sir, I can do that easy. The
day you found that bit of quartz sticking on to the
mud on the dray wheel, and thought it was a secret,
that Tommy smelt a rat. He’d been grumpy and
silent all day, and I felt sure some rascality was in
his head-piece, so I watched him closely. You gave
out extra liberal grog that day it rained so heavily,
and I pretended sick, giving him my tots of rum.


With both allowances in him his head opened, and
out came his secret. I knew as well as if I saw him
at work what he’d be up to, so when the weather
cleared and you went off with Mr. Bailey, he sneaked
after you among the trees, until at last you stopped
and found the outcrop. In less than an hour he was
back to camp expecting to saddle up the horse and
off to the mining offices. But Lord ! ” cried Bill with
a look of pride, “ I was too much for him this board.
He couldn’t find your horse because I had him and
both saddles planted half a mile away, and the other
horse had disappeared down the gully after getting
a cut or two from my whip on his flanks. I watched
from where I had hid myself, and when I saw him
bridling the old dray horse I thought it time to come
to you sir.”
“So it was Tommy I saw dodging among the
trees on the draught horse, shortly after I got
away from Beechworth! ” Fortune looked his
gratitude to the faithful sailor, but said nothing.
He was not sorry to lose Tommy the Nut and
most likely the horse with him ; but in Bill, the
deserter, he had found a friend who served him
faithfully all the rest of his days.
Some little time after the discovery of the reef,
Old Bailey became so agitated that he tottered to
the fallen gum-tree and with difficulty saved himself
from slipping down. From that hour through to
the term of his natural life he never willingly
separated himself from Fortune for a day. What-
ever he did or said was of necessity right —from
the first he had recognised him as a favourite of


Heaven. He never again faltered in his belief, nor
wavered in his allegiance ; but sincere affection for
his old pupil, or indeed for any one of human-kind,
he was incapable of feeling.
In course of time the true inwardness of Old
Bailey’s nature became revealed to Fortune, and
unconsciously displaced the mistaken feeling of
regard he had for long entertained towards him.
There could of necessity be no reciprocity ; but by
the time the man’s true character was understood
aright, it was too late to break with him, and besides,
Fortune’s generous heart was large enough to accept
as a follower a man whom he no longer regarded as
a friend.
After securing his leases Fortune lost no time
in removing to Melbourne, taking with him a
wonderful box full of specimens from his newly
found quartz reef. The fine town was rapidly
growing into an important city, giving promise of
becoming the great capital which years afterwards
began to excite the world’s -admiration. A sight
of the box of specimens very soon changed the
fashionable indifference for quartz to a feeling of
enthusiasm, and in a few weeks Fortune had sold
half his claim for a very large sum. Then it was
that one of the first quartz mines seen in the country
was opened up ; and long years after its youthful
disoverer sold out and returned to Europe, it yielded
its stores of hidden gold. The mine became famous
in the land, being named the “ Fortunatus” in honour
of its discoverer, and by that name he was kno.wn
himself, so long as he remained in the country.


CHAPTER XI
ALGIERS AT LAST
THE question Fortune had so often asked when
looking at the rapidly waning glory of the
great alluvial leads in the hill country he had so
closely studied, was soon answered. The fame of
the discovery he had made spread far and near,
and the whole district for many miles around, nay,
the entire country, was assiduously prospected for
new quartz reefs ; and many were the discoveries
made —good, bad, and indifferent. Failure, in time,
came to many of these ventures, success to few;
but for many years a revival of prosperity took
place in the once potential gold-field, bringing back
a few thousand of the fickle diggers who had once
loved and ridden away. Quartz mining became a de-
servedly fashionable industry, and remains so.
In a very few years the enormous profits yielded
by the mine made Fortune a very wealthy man,
with command of capital ; and everything he touched
by way of speculation turned to gold. At first
his effusive but envious friends declared it was
nothing but good luck, all chance work. Old Bailey
from sheer conviction encouraged this view, and


to the last refused to regard the success in any other
light Fortunatus was a man of destiny, he declared ;
call his luck by any other name that was best,
all the same it was nothing but luck, good luck,
and of a kind that never failed. What more could
any man desire? He would back it with his life.
Fortune was generous and unstinting to a fault;
but almost as fast as supplies fell to Old Bailey they
were secretly dissipated at the gambling table, while
he encouraged the fiction that safe investment was
his policy. As time passed, and success followed
success, his belief in Fortune’s luck grew into a deep
and abiding superstition—he ardently worshipped the
rising sun. Heaven’s favourite became his God and
benefactor, and of the two the old pagan thought the
latter far the most reliable.
But there were shrewd men in the city who watched
Fortune’s career with the closest interest, and who
saw in the young man’s management of affairs clear-
cut rules of life that permitted no element of luck to
enter in. They noticed that while the whole com-
munity rushed into the quartz mining speculation,
which followed on the new fashion his discovery had
started, Fortune would go no further in that direction.
He had succeeded and was content to await events.
It was understood that he would not have more than
one iron in the fire at one time; that he kept a
large sum in ready money at the bank, awaiting the
opening that was to absorb it, and was certain to
offer ; that until that operation was reaped and
harvested, nothing put before him, however glitter-
ing, would tempt him to make renewed use of cash


or credit. He followed the advice of Polonius—
neither to borrow or lend. A worthy merchant, the
greatest of the city magnates and Fortune’s stead-
fast friend and admirer, pointed out, long years
afterwards, when the community had fallen upon the
evil days which followed on a mad land boom fever,
that had the rules of commercial life laid down by
his friend Fortunatus been observed and followed,
there would have been no smash-up for all of them
that day. And John Steele was right. Old Bailey
was right also, but the luck he so constantly wor-
shipped was the growth of Fortune’s splendid qualities
and nothing more.
For the few years Fortune sojourned in the great
southern city of Australia, his career was marked by
almost invariable success. Modestly and without dis-
play he had lived there, and without fuss of any
kind he wound up his affairs as soon as he had re-
solved to return home. He took with him what he
and others regarded as an enormous fortune at that
time, but it proved to be insignificant compared with
the vast wealth he was destined to amass in other
lands. He smiled when Old Bailey referred to his
good luck and declared it was no compliment, but
never gave a thought to what became of the fat
cheque which fell to his follower’s greedy hands after
each successful coup. It was not until years after-
wards that he discovered the wretched man’s secret.
Sailor Bill had been removed from the mine that
he had assisted to its marvellous development, and
had been promoted to the important post of body-
servant to his master. He was little more than a


youth, and had been kept in a state of terror by
Tommy the Nut, who would not be denied, though
regularly bundled-off the claim whenever his presence
there was known to Fortune.
“ Bodily threats I don’t so much mind, Mr. Fortune,
sir,” said Bill one day, after a visit from the vicious
rascal. “ I can put up my fists with him any day, but
when it comes to knifing I give him best. That’s a
trick I never learned, nor won’t either. I wonder
Tommy hasn’t informed on me for a deserter—he
has threatened to of late ; but now that I’ve tipped
him the last pound he’ll ever get from me I sup-
pose the beggar will put the Navy men on to me,”
groaned the merry little fellow, striving unsuccessfully
to look unhappy. Bill was a Cockney born, quick
and chirpy as a grasshopper, and a constant delight
to his master as a never-failing spring of humour
and cheeriness. “ You see, sir,” said the artful little
man turning on an irresistible grin, his mind made
up to get to the city, “Tommy never forgave me
for liming that twig for him on the day of your
discovery,”
When Fortune returned to the little island-castle,
closely followed by Old Bailey and Sailor Bill,
thanking Heaven that he found the dear inmates
alive and well to receive him, Mary Pomeroy noted
with something akin to awe the splendid physique
of her handsome son ; his face, “ bearded like the
pard,” far above reach of her loving kisses. Travel
and adventure had developed the slim youth, lovingly
pictured and unchanged in her mind all the years
of his absence. He was now about twenty-four,


standing over six feet, with bright wavy brown hair,
and beard trimmed to a point; he looked what he
was, every inch a patrician Englishman. Singularly
blessed with intellectual gifts and specially sober
judgment, Fortune seemed cut out for all that goes
to make success of life’s opportunities. Possessed
of caution almost to a fault, he found the quality
frequently a restraining influence to a naturally
enterprising, even venturesome, disposition. It was
a rare combination, and had not only served him
admirably in his youthful undertakings, but was not
unlikely to prove invaluable in after-life.
There was no mistaking the never-absent look of
breeding, whether he was clay-stained by labour at
the “ Fortunatus,” or en grande tenue for Pall Mall.
He would not set up as a curled darling, and was
retiring and reserved almost to a fault. His serious,
steadfast eyes looked out pleasantly from a noble
face, and except when his dearly loved mother in-
dulged in some gentle raillery, they were slow to light
up. Certainly no other woman had yet succeeded
in making them brighter; he was entirely fancy free.
When Mary learnt from her son the magnitude
of the wealth he had brought home with him, she
expressed the utmost astonishment.
“ Well, dear, when you were born we were in
sad case, full of trouble and sorrow, and I was
possessed of the whimsical idea that you should
be named Fortune. By that name you were
christened, but never in my wildest dreams did I
picture my son as likely to wear the cap of
P'ortunatus.”


“ Mother of mine, now that you understand my
position, we’ll join father and uncle in ‘ sentry go,’
to-morrow, and discuss my plans for the future.
You must back me up, dear, for I’m going to propose
a yachting cruise in the spring, as soon as I get
the yacht fitted out I chartered in London, before
starting home to the little island that looks so
small after my travels in spacious Australia.”
Like his mother, father and uncle were as-
tounded at Fortune’s success while absent from the
old castle, in the far-off south.
“ Why, sir,” said Uncle William in a voice growing
querulous with age and infirmity, “ it’s downright
sinful to have so much money. When I was your
age such wealth was never thought of; we were all
poor as church mice, sir. How on earth are you
going to spend it ? It’s true you’re young enough
to look ahead to many years of life and opportunities
of lavishing your wealth, but Lord ! how time flies.
Why, you must be twenty-four by this time, boy! ”
“ Not on earth, Uncle, mostly at sea. I shall have
a steam yacht ready for a crew as soon as spring
arrives ; and I want you all to leave this and live
with me on board the yacht during the season’s
cruising, and afterwards, when you tire of it, on
shore in a house near London I am in treaty for.
It will do you all good, give you new life; you’ve
rusted here on this rock quite long enough. What
do you say to this proposal of mine, Father ? Come,
sir, better back me up and help me to capture
Uncle William, before he has time to say no.”
As he had anticipated, father, mother, and uncle


fell under Fortune’s influence, as most people did
who came into contact with him. It was agreed
that they were to leave the old castle where life
had waned almost imperceptibly, and Mary’s heart
was stirred at the thought of a return to the
world.
Before leaving the island, Fortune, seeking his
uncle in the familiar old embrasure, found him
looking very disconsolate. “What, Uncle William!
downcast, after promising to come with us in the
yacht ? Why, I thought you’d be delighted to
change the ‘sentry go’ in this dull place for the
quarter-deck again.”
“Fortune, I find it hard to leave the shabby old
castle. Consider how many star-lights I have seen
go through below there to the skies beyond. What
will people do while I am away with you? Who
is to manage their stars’ passages for them after
all these years if I neglect my duty ? ”
The old dreamy look had come into the old man’s
eyes that Fortune remembered so well. Still mad
as ever on the one topic, he thought j but knowing
of old the importance of avoiding any appearance
of raillery at Uncle William’s innocent beliefs, he
suggested, with a serious face, the necessity for
getting leave of absence, and appointing one of
the bombardiers to keep watch from the embrasure ;
adding that the man should keep a record of the
passing star-lights for report to the absentee on
his return, or even periodically by letter.
“ Capital, my dear Fortune,” replied the simple
old man. “ \ ou’ve removed a load from my mind


and cheered me up. I shall see about it at once,
and get my kit ready for a start with you.”
Finding his uncle in such a genial humour, it
struck Fortune that now was the time to get from
him the story of Algiers, so long delayed.
« Uncle, I had another look at that picture of the
fight at Algiers as I passed through London this
time. Tell me what it was that happened to you
there —I mean what you alluded to when I asked
you for the story long ago.”
“ You’ve taken me by surprise, Nephew ; I must
think it over. You’re a man now and so I suppose
I can’t refuse you ; but give me time. This evening
after dinner I’ll tell the story —there’s not much
in it after all.”
Patient and expectant, Fortune and his father
and mother sat that evening waiting for Uncle
William to tell his story of Algiers. His twin
brother, looking up with a smile, said: “ I think,
William, you had better get done with it; I’ve shared
the secret with you too long. Mary has tried all
she knows to get me to split, and now here comes
Fortune, who has been prying into the secret—man
and boy—for years. It’s too much for me,” said
Edward laughing, “ and if you don’t out with the
story, I shall have to divulge it myself or explode.”
“ Very well, dears, I suppose I must submit to
superior numbers. You know I was only a youth
of seventeen at that awful bombardment. Raw and
inexperienced, I really knew very little of the
horror of our position in the line. I took all that
happened as a matter of course, supposing that the


carnage on board the Impregnable —my ship, you
know—was the usual thing in sea fights, and shared
by the other ships in the battle, only hearing it
mentioned afterwards that our ship had got into
the wrong station. God ! what a scene of bloodshed
it was ! I think I can see it all now. The few minutes
we were in the hurly-burly, before the frigates came
and towed us out of the action, seemed like hours,
I know that the thought uppermost in my mind, and
probably of the others present with me between two
of the lower decks, was that not one of us would
come out of it alive.”
“ Yes, yes ! ” cried his brother laughing, “ any one
can read the story of the fight in the books. Come
to the sandwiches, William ! ”
Unwillingly the worn old soldier-sailor resumed.
With a hard look in his rugged, battle-torn face,
made ghastly by the white streak of the deep sabre-
stroke across head and face, he spoke in halting
sentences. Before the battle, he said, an old marine
of his company—later killed in the fight—brought
the officer boy a packet of coarse sandwiches, telling
him to hide them carefully away ; he would be glad
of them when all was over; the cooking galleys
would all be smashed up and no chance of a feed
for hours.
Fortune watched his uncle closely during his
narrative, and felt that it was forced out of him.
He nudged his mother, who was looking pained
like himself, and she with a piteous glance motioned
to her husband to stop it. But suddenly Uncle
William, ending the difficulty, stood erect, and with


a look of indescribable fierceness in his weary eyes,
he told in sharp crisp language —like abrupt words
of command—what happened to him that day, and
it proved to be very little when told.
“ I put the packet of sandwiches away overhead
between one of the rough beams and the decking
above, marking the place with my sword and thinking
no one saw my act. When the fight was over, the
single epaulette subalterns wore in those days had
been shot off my shoulder, the ship was in safety,
the dead and wounded attended to, and the decks ”
here he visibly shuddered—“ washed down. After a
time I began to feel hungry. I looked in my hiding
place for the sandwiches—they were gone! Some
low scoundrel had stolen them. Yes, by Heaven,
they were gone ! ”
And that was all the story of Algiers that Uncle
William had to tell his breathless audience.
It was too much, and too unexpected, for Mary
and her son to take seriously. Uncle William stood
there silent, glaring aL his twin brother, who was
shaking like a jelly with suppressed merriment, for
he knew what was coming. There was nothing for
it but relief by laughter, and all three at length
indulged in peals of it, for restraint was quite
impossible. Suddenly the good old soldier jumped
to his feet, and throwing up his sword-arm gave
three cheers for the Queen and subsided, remaining
silent and grim for the rest of the evening. He saw
no reason for merriment.
Many a time in later days Fortune thought of
that scene, absurd and yet pathetic. Here was a


good soldier who had fought and bled, the world
over, in a score of fights, putting up with every
sort of suffering, hardship, and ill-usage ; and though
half a century had passed over his loyal old head
since the fight in which he himself narrowly escaped
destruction, a ridiculous and unimportant incident
had been magnified into a desperate and deadly
injury, rankling ever fresh and unforgiven in his
mind all the time, to the exclusion of every other
event in his fighting career, all else being pretty
well forgotten.
Was there ever such a bathos? thought Fortune,
smiling to himself, whenever the figure of his kind
old uncle arose to fill remembrance with emotion
and renew the memory, in after-life, of that evening
in the little castle, with the best friends of his
childhood and youth.


CHAPTER XII
CRUISING AND CONSEQUENCES
IT was a treat to Fortune to watch the enjoyment
father, mother, and uncle found in a yachting
life. As to Uncle William, every day brought him
some new delight or surprise. The yacht was taken
into Portsmouth to let him see the old Impregnable ,
and contrast her with the stupendous battleships
lying close at hand. During the twenty years’
vegetating in the little island, his country’s warships
had undergone magical changes. Both he and his
nephew lifted their hats in salute to them and the
proud flag that flew overhead. He trod the yacht’s
deck as of old, when soldier-sailoring ; and soon the
twin captains had marked out the planks upon which
they were to do “ sentry go ” for hours each day.
It took the place of the daily march on shore in
the island. Often Uncle William was noticed gazing
into the sea, evidently trying to make his new
surroundings fit into the “ star ” religion, but the
speed of the yacht, white horses, and general dis-
traction of steamboat life, were too confusing for
the sacred rites, and with a sigh of regret he put
aside his old craze for the time.


Fortune’s programme for his first yachting cruise
was simple but venturesome : it comprised the entire
course around Africa, west to east about. Taking
the yacht past the coast of Portugal and Spain, he
boldly pushed on for the extreme western point of
Africa, thence steering for Capetown, where the
vessel arrived in safety after making several calls
for coal and repairs. At the time of Fortune’s
arrival Cape Colony had reached the period of its
greatest depression—politically and commercially—
the only activity of any sort noticeable being rather
louder snarling than usual on the part of the Boer
leaders, met by the usual British surrenders, char-
acteristic of the national wobbling then, and long
after, the rule in South Africa. None of the great
Transvaal gold discoveries were dreamed of at the
time, but the world was not to wait many years for
their development.
A languid rumour was heard in the clubs of some
diamond discovery in a far-away district in the
north-west;—a sort of Tom Tiddler’s ground, neither
Boer nor British, but claimed by both. The yacht,
after her long passage, wanted more repairs, and it
was while waiting that Fortune resolved to accept
the invitation of a club friend, who, with a party, was
about starting for the new field. Old Bailey—for
whom no seat could be found—was left behind,
much to his chagrin. The word “diamonds” was
quite sufficient to set his glassy eyes shining; and
when, after several weeks’ absence, Fortune and the
party returned, he was eager to learn the result.
“ How lucky you decided to bring that gold coin


in the yacht, Fortune. Whoever would have thought
of doing so but you ! With ready cash you’ll buy in
on the best footing, of course.”
He took it for granted that shares would be
bought, and was equally confident that the purchase
made would prove lucky.
It was not until the yacht had been at sea some
days that Old Bailey had his restless curiosity satisfied.
Fortune confessed, shamefaced at purchasing such
wild-cat stuff, that he had bought an interest in
the diamond mine.
“ I liked the blue colour of the ground,” he ex-
plained. “ But for that I wouldn’t have touched it ;
besides, I wanted a change from the gold ventures
of Australia, where no temptations offered of touching
such risky stuff as diamonds. I acted rather pre-
cipitately, I fancy, carried away by the enthusiasm
of my companions.”
“You have done right,” Old Bailey replied im-
pressively. “You can’t do wrong with your marvel-
lous luck.”
“ How you harp upon that word ‘ luck ’! All Ido
is the result of carefully-laid plans, though I cannot,
perhaps, claim to have acted so in this case. In
putting the coin in the yacht I acted on the principle
of having ready money at hand for unexpected
openings. I have ever done the same since I
possessed wealth ; and now that I have begun with
the yacht, it is my fixed intention to have ready
cash on board every season’s cruise, and you call it
luck ! I must say you are not complimentary to my
business acumen.”


The calls at Mauritius, Zanzibar, and the Seychelles
were interesting events to the travellers, now
homeward bound; but on arrival at Aden more
repairs were found necessary. During this delay
Fortune was presented to a youthful but dignified
chief or sultan of an important Arab state in the
neighbourhood. The two men found so much
mutual liking that Fortune agreed to go off with
his new friend on a sporting visit to his country,
resulting not only in a pleasant trip, but in the birth
of an abiding friendship between the two, renewed
on each of Fortune’s subsequent visits and lasting,
without a break, all the years of his yachting career.
The passage up the Red Sea was so frequently
delayed by engine-room troubles that it was found
necessary to leave the yacht at Suez, thence to drag
her way along through the canal to Alexandria,
while Fortune and his party found their way by
train to Cairo.
Mary, her son, and the twin captains were en-
chanted with their visit to hoary Egypt’s old city ;
which, before the modern days of Arabi Pasha and
the British occupation, had far more of the romantic
East about it than can now be seen. It presented
to their eyes an untiring kaleidoscope of change and
amusement, made additionally pleasant by an old
Army friend of Edward’s, whom he had discovered,
high in military command.
Colonel Landor was getting too old for work,
and intended retiring to England with his family as
soon as his successor appeared to take his place.
Mrs. Landor was a delightful motherly woman—with


remains of great beauty and grace—of superior
education and accomplishments, and she had made
her only daughter quite her equal in both. An
invalid sister of Mrs. Landor’s had lived with them
for many years. Both were natives, born of English
parents who had lived and died in Cairo. The invalid
sister possessed literary ability much above the
mediocre, making eastern history her chief work.
Hers was a life of one long lingering pain, borne with
quiet resignation and patience.
When her sister’s daughter was born, she pleaded
hard for the privilege of naming the child, both
parents finding it impossible to refuse the petition ;
but when it appeared that the good old family names
were to be passed over for the Pagan name of
Palmyra’s queen, consent was obtained only after
much pressure, and so it arose that the baby girl
was christened Zenobia. But by that grand name
she was never called ; the simpler pet word Zena
being invariably used in its place.
The study of eastern literature had no doubt led
the invalid sister to select the unusual name for her
niece ; but considered as a prophetic selection, the
choice was beyond a doubt justified by the handsome
queen-like beauty of the young girl at the time of
Fortune’s visit to Egypt.
Mary Pomeroy from the first fell under the
influence of the beautiful girl and her mother, being
drawn more by her culture and reading than her
beauty. Every day Mary discovered some new
charm in manner and conversation, and at length,
woman-like, she began to regard her favourite as


possessed of every charm to qualify for Fortune’s
wife. Like a sensible mother she believed she kept
this opinion to herself, while pondering secretly and
fondly over the pleasant reflection ; but Uncle William
knew better.
“ Mary, you match-making mother, you’re as trans-
parent as the blue Mediterranean. I’ve not made deep
waters my study for nothing, dear Sister, during a
long career on its surface. I’m just as much in love
with the girl you’re thinking of at this moment, as
you are, dear, but beware how you show your hand,
or by George they’ll fly as far asunder as the poles,”
exclaimed the shrewd old campaigner.
“ I didn’t know my thoughts and wishes were so
near the surface as to be visible, William,” Mary
replied with a crest-fallen look. “ I see I must be
more careful in future. I will take your advice, dear —
I invariably do, you must admit —and not show my
partiality too plainly.”
“ If you are on your guard, all may turn out right.
I don’t think any one save myself has noticed any-
thing in your demeanour so far, you dear designing
woman. Let the two of them alone and see what
God will send you. I’ve a little plot in hand myself,
but prudence demands of me to keep the secret to
myself, Mary—especially as I am dealing with your
son,” he muttered softly below his breath.
In a few days, when Fortune announced that the
Landors were to make a short cruise in the yacht,
and return with them to Alexandria, Uncle William
caught a meaning glance from Mary’s eyes that
brought a grin to his rugged old face, and compelled


him to turn aside and hide it from view. When
the old cicatrix across his head and face came
into play, the grin became a caricature not pleasant
to behold—certainly quite impossible to mistake for
a smile.


CHAPTER XIII
A DROWSY LOVER
THE short cruise of the yacht, though occupying
only a few days, gave Fortune’s guests much
delight ; but as though divining the innocent scheme
of mother and uncle, he applied himself diligently
to the practice and study of navigation, the theory
of which he had mastered at the great school with
Old Bailey. These duties occupied most of his time,
leaving but little leisure for his guests, whom he
left much to themselves. Both Mrs. Landor and
Zenobia indulged in gentle raillery at his serious
occupations on board a pleasure yacht ; and to them
with mock gravity he explained that their presence
had increased his responsibilities, adding archly that
he found sufficient compensation and pleasure in
watching over their safety. “Be pleased to see the
dolphin’s play,” he quoted with his rare smile and
courtly manner, “ I mind my compass and my way.”
After re-landing his guests at Alexandria the yacht’s
head was turned west, and to the surprise and delight
of Uncle William it was announced by Fortune, after
a few days’ steaming, that Algiers was in sight.
Entering the port, his uncle pointed out how the


British and Dutch ships had stood in and anchored
off the town, with wonderful memory showing where
his old ship had been raked by the Mole Battery.
“ I was a mere youth then, Fortune,” he remarked,
with a glow on his weather-worn face, “ and you
know how deeply early impressions are engraved
upon the mind.”
“The season is getting late—l’ve been thinking,
Uncle of mine, too late to risk my dear folk across
the Bay of Biscay. We will land at Marseilles and
send the yacht home to her owner. What do you
think, sir?”
“ You are right in your decision, and, besides, the
yacht is not in the best order ; the chief engineer
hinted as much.”
“ Hint, you call it! He told me in very plain English
and settled my doubts effectively, besides supplying
a very convenient excuse for a delightful holiday in
Paris on our way through France.”
The racket and gaiety of a fortnight in Paris fairly
exhausted his parents and uncle, who at the end
were thankful to get the “ route ” for London.
After arrival, Old Bailey lost no time in going
into the City, and presently returned with a batch
of letters accumulated during the long period taken
over the passage to England. On the road back
in his hansom, he opened and read two from
correspondents in Capetown addressed to himself.
Agitated at their contents he dismissed the cab and
ran upstairs looking for Fortune, who was not to be
found. Ordering a supply of brandy and soda in
his own room, he drank off two in rapid succession,


looking the while so white and excited that the
waiter hung about outside for some minutes in
expectation of a call. Reading and re-reading his
letters he at length rang the bell violently, and gave
urgent orders to direct Fortune to his room the
moment he entered the hotel.
Muttering to himself, wild-looking and excited, his
glassy eyes seemed to roll in his head, and at length
to his merciful relief a dulled feeling came over his
over-wrought brain, and lying back exhausted he
shortly fell into a broken slumber. Awaking in
what seemed to be but a few seconds, he saw Fortune
seated at the table, calmly reading his letters.
Anxiously Old Bailey gazed at his face. Was it
possible that the news which had moved him so
deeply should have no corresponding effect on
Fortune? There he sat reading on until he came
to the last of the letters in the batch, his mobile
face unchanged, his eyes looking rather more than
usually serious.
“ I see you’re awake, Bailey ; I feared you were
ill. I’ve been quite an hour sitting here reading my
rather bulky budget. If you are well enough, better
get up and look through them. I fancy you’ll rather
like my news from the Cape.”
“ Good God, Fortune ! can you receive the news
these letters bring and show no emotion ? Are you
made of flesh and blood, I wonder, like the rest of
us ? Don’t you see that you have again the trump
cards in your hands ? Man, man, it means millions !
The more that blue-looking ground you liked the
look of so much is opened up, the finer are the


diamonds given out. Do you note the precautions
the managers are taking to prevent stealing by the
Kaffir labourers, and the other thieves gathering
around like vultures to filch away the precious
stones ? But the most noticeable fact of all is the
advice pressed upon us by our friends not to part
with a share, whatever may be the inducements
offered.”
“ I see you’ve had letters yourself, and they pretty
well agree with what I have received. But you are
wrong to jump so quickly to conclusions ; it is much
too soon to talk of millions. Why raise hopes that
may never be fulfilled ? Wait a few months until
the result of the drilling is known to us. I admit
the prospect is attractive, but I shall not allow
the news to affect my sleep o’ nights. I advise
you to get into the same frame of mind, otherwise
the thirst I notice you have been so industriously
striving to quench will grow upon you,” said Fortune
with a laugh. “ Besides, I don’t look so much to
good luck as you do. If I did I should lose myself
entirely.”
“ It’s your wonderful luck, I tell you again and
again. You can’t prevent it coming to you with
sheaves full. Heaven’s favourite,” he muttered to
himself; “ I saw it from the first day, and I am
right. It will be the same all through the story,”
he went on to himself with excitement, kept down
by the safety valve of Fortune’s aggravating coolness.
“ VVhat luck he has—and never touches a card !
If I could get him to take my place at the accursed
green tables, he’d break the bank. It would be


sweet revenge for all the money they’ve made out
of me. He’s not likely to follow me to the tables,
I fancy, with all his marvellous luck. He stops
short at cards and play. What a fool he must be,
after all ! ”
“ It’s luck, luck, nothing but the word ‘luck ’ with
you, Bailey; I wish you’d desist. What you call
my luck may turn some day and then I shall hear
of nothing but my bad luck, if, when that day comes,
you remain near enough to denounce me. Now
listen to something more. Before we left Cape-
town I placed a sum of money, not a large amount,
with a friend there in whose judgment I had much
confidence —if judgment enters at all into mining
ventures, which I doubt. He writes to say he has
invested the money in some new venture far inland.
That money I consider gone to the wild cats, and
the diamond venture that has so excited you may
perhaps help to make up my loss on the other.
Now it’s time to dress for dinner.”
“ All the same, Fortune, at the risk of offending I
shall continue to talk luck —your good luck. The day
when the turn comes will never arrive to you ; and
as to my going or staying, I shall never cease from
following after you, and that’s where my good luck
will come in,” he called to Fortune as he hurriedly
left the room.
When seated at dinner shortly after, Fortune
calmly remarked : “ Mother dear, who do you think
I met in the hall of the hotel when I came in this
afternoon ? You’ll never guess, so I had better tell
you at once —Colonel Landor. He and his ladies


have arrived from Egypt within the hour, quite
knocked up with their journey across from Brindisi.
I wish you’d call upon them to-morrow and show
what civility you can. And, by the way, I’m sorry
I can’t stay here to assist you, for I have to start
for Scotland by the early train. I am half-decided
to build a yacht for myself—hiring I found so
very unsatisfactory; and I am wholly resolved to
indulge my taste for yachting regularly each year,
as I have formed important plans for combining duty
with pleasure.”
“ How long will you be away, Fortune ? Pity you
are going out of London just as the Landors have
arrived.”
A warning glance from Uncle William put a stop
to any further moan from Mary. She felt puzzled
by her son’s apparent indifference, and still more
puzzled to understand the look of happy confidence
on his face. Her anxiety to bring Zenobia and
Fortune together was indiscreet, she knew, and then
there was Uncle William flashing terrible glances at
her. Perhaps after all it might turn out best for her
motherly hopes if Fortune went away for a few
weeks, and with this thought uppermost, she returned
the old soldier’s warning signals with a bright re-
assuring nod.
Fortune’s half-formed decision to have a steam-
yacht built for himself settled into a fixture before
he left the north to return to London; and the
builders had contracted to deliver her at Cowes in
the spring. She was to be named the Propontic , and
to be an armed yacht steaming fifteen knots at least.


“ I have given much thought,” he observed to
father and uncle, “ to the wasted yachting power of
the country, and which in my opinion should ever be
kept capable and ready for the service of the state,
if necessity arose. I confess to being an intensely
loyal subject, and buried deep down in my heart lies
a fierce love of country. What valuable assistance
fast steam-yachts might be made to render the
country, if they were placed under some sort of
judicious naval organisation ! Say twenty swift
steamers added to the country’s naval force, and
ready for offensive action, would strike heavy blows
against the enemy’s commerce at the very start of
the war. I go even further and insist that, even if
the Admiralty is supine, it is, for all that, the duty of
steam-yacht owners to act for themselves. If an
owner can afford to keep a fast, sea-going steam-
yacht, he can afford to keep her armed and his
crew drilled in readiness to assist his country.
Objections, I admit, may be made to having
armaments on board peaceful yachts devoted to
pleasure. This difficulty might be overcome by
having quaker guns on board, at which drill could be
carried on —the real weapons being kept in readiness
on shore or in the yacht’s hold. As to yachts being
solely devoted to pleasure, I cannot hear that remark
made—often as it is dinned into me—with patience.
Duty to the state should never be lost sight of, and
it is surely not incompatible with the pleasure of
yachting.”
“Your father thinks as you do, lad; we shall be
found a chorus of approval. It will be consistent too,


I may tell you, youngster, if with your opinions you
set a good example as a fast steam-yacht owner.”
“ I am pleased you both approve ; it strengthens
my hands greatly. When the Propontic is delivered
over and pronounced, after undergoing unofficial
inspection, entirely adapted for the design I have in
view, I shall at least think I have begun well, how-
ever the idea may turn out.”
He was frequently absent in the north watching
the progress made by the builders, and even Uncle
William expressed his fears to Mary that their
favourite might be lost to them, unless Fortune’s
thoughts could be turned into the right channel.
Zenobia’s great beauty had already attracted general
attention : people constantly turned round to look
at her with involuntary admiration as she passed.
Mary’s heart ached to think her son might yet lose
the bright, beautiful girl ; see her carried off from
under his eyes. How vexed the gentle soul was to
admit to Uncle William, when discussing the endless
theme, that at best her son Fortune was but a drowsy
lover ! And how little either of them knew what they
were talking about!


CHAPTER XIV
“LIKE TO THE PONTIC SEA.”
UNCLE WILLIAM never approved of Old Bailey
and took no pains to conceal his opinion. “He
is nothing better than an impostor and humbug,” he
said. But with all the old campaigner’s shrewd
judgment both he and Mary utterly failed to perceive
the signs that were quite apparent to Fortune’s old
tutor. Where Heaven’s favourite was concerned he
was ever watchful and suspicious. It would never
suit his plans to allow any one, man or woman, to
divide with him or cry halves in the good things
coming, and to come, out of Fortune’s boundless good
luck. He dreaded most of all the danger that might
arise from Zenobia; and he alone discovered, of all
the interested lookers-on, what that danger was.
While Old Bailey was constantly watching the
young people, Uncle William was as patiently
watching him ’blundering clumsily about with his
surprised, glassy eyes whenever Fortune and Zenobia
were by chance together, fussy and nervous. The
watchful old uncle cursed him softly for a marplot,
and would cheerfully have sent his “ star ” through
the sea to a home in the skies.


“ But for the outrageous absurdity of it,” he growled
one day to his dear crony, “ I should suspect the
creature of designs on the girl himself, Mary.”
“ Impossible, William. This time I think I can see
further than you. He is afraid of losing his hold on
Fortune if a wife came between them. We can’t
blame the man for thinking of himself; but it says
little for our old eyes, that while you and I have
seen no signs of awakening love, Old Bailey has, and
that plainly enough. Well, we owe him some thanks
for teaching us a lesson, and I think we may rest
easier in our minds now that we have been taught.
Fortune is shortly going north again about the yacht ;
if I can’t induce him to send Old Bailey in his place
this time, you may call me more names, William,
you bad man,” said Mary laughing. “ Leave it to me,
dear, but not a word to Edward. I am bound to
confess that he is almost as great a marplot as
the other.”
As soon as Mary’s plan had succeeded, Old Bailey’s
departure north left the coast clear, and it was
surprising how well the hitherto slow love-making
progressed. That Zenobia had long since given her
loving heart to Fortune, she had acknowledged to
herself with many a mantling blush—and small
wonder. Fortune was at this period of his story
one of the handsomest men to be found in any land.
His quiet reserve and retiring disposition left him
much in the background it is true, but whenever
he emerged and came to the front, he was seen to
be a splendid specimen of manhood. The crisis
in the fate of both arrived rather unexpectedly one


Sunday afternoon in the great park. The whole
party were enjoying the scene ; the twin captains
and Colonel Landor, all of them tall, soldierly, and
ancient, escorting the sweet gentle-looking ladies
of both families, Fortune and Zenobia side by side.
The queen-like figure and striking beauty of
Zenobia, more than ever set off that sunny day by
Fortune’s manly strength and stature, drew general
attention from the groups of handsome men and
women assembled there for the usual church
parade.
On Fortune’s part it would have been affectation
if he had not both seen and heard the admiration
expressed for his beautiful companion. His modesty
prevented him from noticing that on the part of one
sex, certainly, a large share of the admiration was
reserved for him.
When at length a royal personage signified to
those surrounding him his critical approval of the
newest luminary of beauty, the anxiety to catch a
glimpse of Zenobia became both acute and incon-
venient, and soon Fortune was glad to lead the way
to the park gates, thankful to escape from the incon-
venient admiration of the crowd that followed them.
That evening Mary bustled the twin captains away
to their smoking-room, with a hint to stay there
until called. It was an anxious time for Mary ; her
motherly instincts had led her by some mysterious
feminine intuition to the conclusion that the drowsy
lover was at length awake. Seated, with Mrs. Landor,
who had caught the infection, they were not long
kept in suspense. Presently the door opened admit-


ting Zenobia and Fortune hand in hand. Gliding
shyly across the room direct to Mary, Zenobia knelt
down by her side and buried her beautiful head in
her lap. Fortune found himself seated near Mrs.
Landor. Kissing her hand, he spoke for both.
“ Is it presumption in me to ask for your daughter,
dear lady ? Can you part with your treasure, and can
you trust her with me ? Zena has consented to take
another yachting cruise with me, dear—a cruise that
is to last out our lives.”
The reply that came from the sobbing, inarticulate
woman to Fortune’s simple unaffected words, must
have been understood, for it was followed by a fond
embrace, more than eloquent of success.
Zenobia at Mary’s knees, with crimson cheeks and
glistening eyes, was making her confession.
“ Though Fortune actually said nothing until to-
night, dearest—in words, I mean—l knew he loved me
from the very first, and I am afraid, dear, I was so un-
maidenly as to let him see that I was not fancy free
either. Oh, I feel so happy—it frightens me. He is my
God-given man, my treasure trove. We are no longer
to be twain —but one. He will be to me my oak-
tree—my talking oak ; and I, his chosen mate for all
my days, will cling and twine around him, and hold
him prisoner of my heart for ever. Oh, my dear
Fortune’s mother, I am too happy to know what I
am saying.”
“ Now you two old dears,” exclaimed Mary with
delighted eyes to the twin captains when they had
been graciously summoned and admitted to the
room, accompanied by Zena’s father, “here they


are, both of them, caught like fire-flies in a silver
braid. Is that correctly quoted, Zena ? Oh, you poor
men, what a pair of blind moles you are! Here
you’ve been in an agony of fear lest the two inno-
cent babes should miss their chance, and all the time
they were sweethearting ! ”
“ Mary, I’m quite shocked at your duplicity, and
for two pins I’d tell all I know about you. But you
know, dear Sister, my fighting days are long since
over, and I must even make sacrifices for peace.
Here, Edward, and you Landor, ‘ call up my horses
and call up my men,’ for I feel quite in a festive
humour to-night, in other words we’ll ring the bell
for the waiter and hang the expense; for this night
we will drink to them both and add the silent prayer
that God may have them in His keeping always.
Ah!” said the battered old soldier as the familiar
dreamy look came into his eyes, and speaking more
to himself than the room, “ this old, old story of love
is the oldest of all, and will ever remain the newest, I
do believe. Love is a native of the rocks: Virgil’s
shepherd who made the little god’s acquaintance has
said so. I’ve taken part in a love story even myself.”
Poor bereaved Uncle William, was the thought his
remark brought to Mary and her husband, who heard
the words faintly spoken. Well they remembered
the tragedy which had cast a black shadow on his
whole life : when Death laid his abhorred and un-
expected hand on both wife and child.
When Old Bailey at length returned from the
north it was in the new yacht built for Fortune.
By the time this happened his old pupil was married


and returned from a brief honeymoon. Fortune had
correctly guessed at the cause of Old Bailey’s mental
commotion at the time Uncle William was softly
indulging in anathema. Taking him aside he
pointed out in kindly words the position he would
in future occupy in his service. The yacht’s business
and the treasure which would be carried in her on
each yearly cruise would be his special care. It
came like balm to the poor misguided creature, to
find that there was still to be a place for him near
Fortune. So long as that was assured he would
be a faithful follower. But as to affection, that was
not in him to give ; he was incapable of the feeling
for any human being, and by this time Fortune, who
had correctly gauged his true character, knew it well.
Fortune was, in addition, influenced by the weighty
reason that Old Bailey’s predictions about the South
African diamond and gold ventures looked greatly
like coming true, though he persistently denied the
luck. The six months that had passed since the
first news arrived had been followed by marvellous
developments ; and there could now be little doubt
of the millions that were to come. Apart from the
cruelty involved in sending away the helpless
creature, Fortune felt that to do so would be
shocking bad form, and smack of ingratitude. He
was incapable of either, and so it was settled that
Old Bailey was to continue basking in the rays of
his golden sun. As to the mines, the fame of
Fortune’s investments had reached men’s ears, as
usual greatly exaggerated by the lying jade, Rumour.
Courted everywhere and treated with adulation as


the coming millionaire, he was at length thankful
to escape from London, and with his Zenobia busy
himself with preparations for the approaching cruise.
“ It is a delight to me,” Fortune said to her one
happy day of the many shining on them now, “to
note the pleasure the beautiful new craft gives you,
dear. You never weary admiring the exquisite taste
displayed by the upholsterers in the design for your
sumptuous suite of cabins and the various handsome
apartments.”
“ How can I help liking it all ? ” cried Zenobia.
“ It is a dream of lavish beauty, worked out in the
most perfect taste. I wonder how they found out
my love for pure white as a ground for ornamen-
tation. What a noble effect it lends even in
a flower garden blazing with colour! Masses of
it somehow make the best show there, and white
lights at night completely carry the day. There
now, you can’t think how I’ve laboured to work off
that humble little joke of mine.”
“Joke of yours! When? I didn’t hear it. You
must be joking, indeed ; but is that all the praise you
bestow on us, Zenobia ? ”
“ No, indeed ! I can see by the direction of your
eyes what you mean : it is the motto round the walls
of the dining-room. How exquisitely done! The
lettering is in old English, inlaid with silver on a
waving ribbon of rich Algerian marble. How deeply
the words appeal to my love of reading! ”
“ Read them out to me dear, slowly.”
“ ‘ Like to the Pontic Sea whose icy current and
compulsive course ne'er feels retiring ebb , but keeps


due on' It’s all too lovely,” exclaimed Zenobia, “and
far too good for me ; but I’ll try my best to be worthy
of my good fortune.”
“It will ever make me happy to see you happy,
wife : that you may regard as fixed and unalterable. It
will always remain so for me, of that I’m as certain
as of the rising sun to-morrow. When you spoke,
I thought of the familiar quotation that we may not
be able to command success, but ”
“ But we’ll deserve it, dear,” gaily cried Zenobia,
putting her hand over Fortune’s lips and finishing the
quotation for him.
Hand in hand the babes in the wood, as Mary
had once called them, left the ship that happy day ;
but whether success in their subsequent career came
to them, or whether they deserved it when it came,
and what followed from it, will be unrolled in these
pages as the narrative progresses. Their frail craft
is launched on life’s uncertain flood, where it may
float in sunshine and calm and be buffeted by storm
and stress, and in the fulness of time their dim
light quenched for ever. They are but mortal
after all, and it is best not to expect too much
from them on their road through life and marriage


CHAPTER XV
“RACHEL WEEPING FOR PIER CHILDREN”
F'ORTUNE started the Propontic on what
was to be the forerunner of many happy and
lengthy cruises : both families accompanied the young
couple. To the three old soldiers it was a source
of endless amusement to watch the gun drill and
discipline of the ship. Fortune began as he intended
to continue, and at the end of the cruise he had the
satisfaction of knowing he possessed a well-trained
crew, fit for any emergency, and a smart yacht—an
example for wealthy steam-yacht owners he hoped
would be followed. When the cruise terminated,
Zenobia looked the picture of health and happiness
and declared she was intended for a yachtsman’s wife.
Taking counsel with his wife, Fortune resolved
from the first to have accommodation on board and
suitable attendance for a certain number of sick poor
wanting a sea trip to effect the cure that would never
come to them on shore. It was Zenobia’s task, in
each port the yacht entered, to go the round of
the hospitals, and arrange to take away and return
again any cases needing the necessary change. It
was a duty never forgotten, and sweet was the feeling


of satisfaction, both to herself and husband, that
they were enabled in that manner to show their
gratitude to the Giver of all their prosperity.
It was some years after marriage before her first
baby-girl came to gladden her heart, and when this
important family event happened, she remained
with her little goddess on shore; and the old people
declaring themselves tired of the sea, were delighted
to find an excuse for remaining on shore with her.
Fortune with a select party, and of course Old
Bailey, took the yacht on one of his many cruises
through the Red Sea to Aden, where his friend the
sultan, duly notified, awaited his arrival, and it
was on that occasion that Fortune engaged to take
with him, on some future cruise, for training, the
sultan’s lately-born son and heir, though, as it turned
out, not the son destined to fill the place on board
arranged by the two friends. By the time the
Propontic passed across the Indian Ocean and south
about, around Australia —where Fortune not only
renewed old friendships but made new ventures —his
thoughts had fondly turned homewards to wife and
bairn, and the cruise was shortened. Old Bailey was
delighted for two reasons. He would so much earlier
be able to indulge his secret gambling propensity ;
and Fortune’s new speculation in North Queensland
promised to be a success, like all the others.
“ The luck would never change. How could it for
one who was a child of fortune and Heaven’s
favourite?” exclaimed Old Bailey again and again
to himself. He had given up repeating the word
to Fortune, who had tired of the eternal theme.


Zenobia met her husband with brave eyes but
a sinking heart. Her account of the child was not
satisfactory,. and her lovely face was clouded by
anxiety and watching. For the sake of the child’s
health it was taken in the yacht on the next cruise,
but to the sorrow of both parents it visibly faded ;
and when at length all hope departed, a hurried
return to England was made, where their little
daughter's sufferings ended.
For the first time in his happy life Fortune was
made acquainted with grief, increased by the know-
ledge that the loss of her baby-girl had deeply—too
deeply—affected his wife’s health and spirits. But
time softened the blow, and when after a few years
another little treasure was born, her heart rejoiced
again over Heaven’s gracious gift. Zenobia had
formed the opinion that had her first child been
taken to sea early, it would have grown strong ; and
in this belief she pressed her husband to make a
prolonged cruise as soon as spring opened.
The cruise was made and lengthened out until the
yacht had been the best part of two years moving
over the waters from port to port. Every clime was
tried, but all in vain, and Fortune at length saw plainly
that the dear little baby-girl would soon follow the
first. Not so Zenobia ; she neither could nor would
see the approaching event that to all on board was
inevitable, and Fortune dreaded, with good reason,
the effect that her bereavement when it arrived would
have upon her. She clung to her child, following
it hungrily with her eyes, when the nurse was
unwillingly permitted to take it for a while.


One day, when the yacht was nearing England,
sitting in her easy chair on deck, she fell asleep with
the child in her lap, then little more than a shadow.
The nurse, in grief herself at the coming event, gently
turned aside the lace from the child’s face and went
white with horror —the poor little mite was dead.
Zenobia fairly staggered under this her second
blow, and refused to be comforted. Husband and
the united efforts of the dear old folk, when she
returned to them, utterly failed to soften the hard
tearless condition she sank into. For a time Fortune
was face to face with the hideous thought that even
his Zenobia’s brain was in danger, but to the surprise
of all she at length roused up, and became at
intervals her own bright lovely self again.
From that time a peculiar habit grew upon her
which, in later years, become painfully noticeable.
She would stop talking in the middle of a sentence
and let her gaze rest vacantly for minutes upon the
face of whoever might be at the time in conversation
with her, seeming to look right through it into space
beyond.
The first cruise that followed after their sad
bereavement had been specially enjoyable ; every
possible amusement to lessen the tedium of sea life
had been thoughtfully provided by Fortune, while a
delightful party of friends were, for most of the
cruise, with them. Zenobia entirely regained her
health and in some measure her spirits, and when
the time approached for the birth of her third —her
last child as it proved to be—no sort of anxiety was
felt for the result. The baby-boy that she brought


into the world was a specially fine, healthy infant ;
but Zenobia heard unmoved the assurances of the
medical men that her boy would live to be a comfort
to her.
It was soon apparent that the mother was changed.
The nurse from the first noticed an unusual chilly
indifference to her little son, and at length husband
and all about her perceived it only too plainly,
and worse still, that the feeling was steadily giving
place to dislike. It was too evident that Zenobia
had turned from her child with something akin to
repugnance.
“ I am inexpressibly shocked,” declared Fortune to
his mother, “ at the discovery that her boy is distaste-
ful to her. What does it portend ? I can scarcely
trust myself to talk about this with you, dear, or
even think of it. Zenobia is dearer to me than any
object on earth, and will continue so to the end. She
will ever be my non-pareil. She appears to me to
be no longer the same loving woman she was to any
of the dear ones about her. It is a terrible blow,
Mother dear ; but all may yet go well, though, at
times, I have strange misgivings,” said Fortune with
a choking voice.
“You must bear up, my son, manfully. Zenobia is
certainly entirely changed and, stranger still, appears
absolutely unconscious of what has happened. The
sweet, gentle disposition that was her chief charm
seems gone for the time. She seldom smiles, and
only then at her own fancies. Her very soul appears
to be dead, and no longer looks out soft and loving
through its windows.”


Mary knew too well the truth of her sons words,
and shrank with horror at what she dared not admit
even to herself. Softly putting her loving arms
round Fortune’s neck as of old, she whispered ;
“ There is nothing left for us but hope, and prayer.”
The medical men knew well the significance of
the change, but kept it to themselves. The case
to them was not so uncommon. To Fortune it was
plainly indicated that his wife, for a time at least,
would need great care. Her moods were to be
watched, and it was impressed upon him that it
would be well to humour any fancies she might
develop, and above all things she must not be
thwarted in anything. There was no need for the
warning to a husband too fond to deny his wife
anything in his power.
The boy, who had been christened Edward, was
quietly moved away from Zenobia’s sight to Jersey,
where the twin captains and Mary mournfully
settled down again, but not in the shabby little
castle this time. The military authorities had at
last given over any pretence of keeping up the
antique stronghold. The old guns were left to
honeycomb, and the bombardiers removed.
At low water Uncle William frequently resorted
to the deserted old embrasures, and it became Mary s
care to see that the dear old soldier was not im-
prisoned by the rising tide, and left to do sentry
go” alone all night. It had happened once, but
not again.
In a few years the bonny boy, little Edward, was
big enough to be taken to the embrasure and sit


in the old man’s lap, as his father had so often done
at the same age ; while the simple old soldier, with
dreamy gaze, traced the star-lights of departing
islanders through the sea to the skies. Zenobia did
not see her son again until he was a ten-year-old
schoolboy. Time had not altered her ; she was
almost as a stranger to the lad, and to Fortune’s
deep distress, he had to look on helplessly and watch
the son’s growing unconcern for his own mother.
A year or two after, Edward joined his father on
board the yacht with his tutors, and was at once
put into training as an officer-boy, taking his share
in the strict duties of the vessel. Father and son
were dearly fond of each other, but Fortune permitted
no relaxation of discipline on that account.
After a couple of years’ cruising, the sultan at
Aden was notified that the next season would find
the Propontic at his little red seaport, where his'young
son Prince Ali would be received on board, in terms
of the old promise, to join with Edward in his
training and education. The sultan had informed
the friend of his heart, with oriental imagery, that
he also had been bereaved—the harem desolated
more than once. The son that was about to join
the yacht was the only one left to him.
In due time the yacht appeared off the port,
and the young prince, in charge of certain of his
royal father’s court officials, was brought on board.
The sultan, his father, sent courteous messages to
Fortune, explaining that one of the most trouble-
some of the tribes on his frontier needed watching
not an uncommon thing to happen, as he well


knew. It was unwise for him, he explained by letter,
to absent himself from his capital at such a critical
time. The dignified messengers, in choice Arabic,
were specially charged to add that the words of
wisdom that had fallen from the lips of his heart’s
dearest friend and counsellor (meaning Fortune)
would not be forgotten in his dealings with the tribe.
Lastly, he was to take his son, and heir to his throne,
and, if Allah had in reserve such happiness for the
boy’s father, then might his son be returned to
him as good a man as his future chief and protector
on the black water. He could ask no more, it was
enough; and he prayed that Allah would have
Fortune and all in the yacht in His keeping evermore.
To Edward the arrival of Prince Ali was hailed
as an event of great satisfaction. He had now
with him a lad of little more than his own age
as companion, and both soon became inseparable
friends and favourites, though sadly addicted to
mischief, and in endless scrapes. Both lads were
attached to the same battery, and soon the hand-
some young Arab became known to all on board
as the Black Prince, and both, by the time the
next cruise was completed, had been drilled into
promising young sailors, held in check by Fortune,
who was a kind but firm and determined master
over them. It turned out, from an unforeseen event,
that the next year’s cruise was not to be so long
as intended, and indeed terminated in a manner
never dreamed of by Fortune when planning the
yacht’s itinerary. When the yacht arrived, after
a delightful ramble, amongst the Japanese Islands,


the sullen mutterings of the little people against
Chinese aggression in Corea were both loud and
deep. All the omens pointed to the war that actually
broke out the following year.
Pressure of so influential a character was brought
to bear on Fortune to sell his yacht to the Japanese
Government, that he very reluctantly agreed to do
so, after long hesitation ; and she was accordingly
added to a fleet gravely in need of additions, as
will be made clear in a later chapter.
A new Propontic was ordered by cable, and
by the time the yachting party arrived in England
she was well advanced in construction, and within
twelve months of the sale, ready for sea.


CHAPTER XVI
HONOURS FOR FORTUNE
7DROPONTIC the second was a far finer craft
*■ than her predecessor —greater speed by several
knots, and in her turrets guns of the latest models
To Fortune and his new yacht credit, and even fame
in a small measure, arrived. A sudden difficulty, in
the Arabian Sea, with a coast-potentate long depen-
dent on British supremacy and protection, led to a
growl of anger from the commander of the nearest
gun-boat watching the port. The Propontic happening
to be near at hand on her summer cruise, was placed
at the orders of the Navy commander, who was
enabled thereby to secure prompt and peaceful
submission, in spite of the intrigues of a friendly
maritime power.
On the return home of the Propontic , some months
later, a knighthood was offered to Fortune, and,
rather to the surprise of his friends, it was accepted.
“I consider,” Fortune argued simply, “that what
petty service I have rendered was, with me, a matter
of simple duty, and a very small return for the protec-
tion my country’s glorious flag had given to me and
mine all my life. My sovereign considers the reward


of knighthood sufficient, and it is not for me to reject
any honour, however insignificant, bestowed upon me
by my revered Queen. If it were possible that such
an occasion arose, I would be prepared to give up
all I possess for my country’s safety, without reward,
and those who know my ardent patriotism are well
aware that I am not exaggerating in the least.”
The story went the round of the clubs, and was
even embellished by a more or less truthful account
of what took place when Fortune was presented at
Windsor Castle for the Queen’s honour. Ushered
into the presence, after several more or less clumsy,
nervous-looking worthies had received the accolade,
her Majesty was struck by the noble-looking face and
figure of Fortune when he entered and sank upon one
knee before her. A coronet, the Queen afterwards
remarked, so it was said, would better fit such a man,
and would surely come to him some day and that
soon, unless the speaker was much mistaken in faces.
Lady Pomeroy received her new title without
showing interest or notice taken of the change in
addressing her, but to Old Bailey it gave the keenest
delight ; not that he valued the new honour for itself,
but saw in it another manifestation of the good luck
the fates had in store for Fortune and indirectly for
himself.
It was in keeping with all that happened from the
day he saw the schoolboy marked out for Heaven’s
favour. The measure of it had not yet reached the
full meridian ; of that he was more than ever assured.
“ See, Sir Fortune, see,” said the old follower, airing
the new title, “ your North Queensland mining venture


has turned up another trump, as I foretold. It makes
me giddy to count up your millions. What will you
do with them all ? I often wonder. The wheel turns
merrily, the propitious star is not on the wane, the
flood not yet at the full.”
“ I don’t suppose you care very much, Bailey, so
long as you get a share ; you invariably obtain a
liberal one from me whenever I make a successful
venture. You should have a pretty warm nest egg
yourself after all these years. As to my millions,
I have it in my mind to endow the Church and
charitable institutions of the British possessions I
have made them in with a fair share. There is plenty
to spare, as you know, but I have no plans yet
detailed. When I have I must talk them over with
my wife.”
The following summer found Fortune and his wife
at Cowes, amongst a host of every sort of pleasure-
craft and pleasure-loving people, awaiting the arrival
of certain royal and imperial personages.
The pretty town was crowded with rank and
fashion, and admiration for the beautiful Propontic
was lavished upon her. The yacht was present in
deference to a hint received by her owner from a
very great royal prince, that her presence would
be welcome at the meeting.
Acting on his invariable rule Fortune offered his
yacht for official inspection whenever she entered
an admiral’s station. At Cowes the Propontic was
inspected unofficially more than once while awaiting
the arrival of the royal and imperial party.
The day after this important event, royalty


intimated to Fortune, on presentation, that after the
programme of sailing races—in which the prince
himself took part —was completed, he proposed, with
his imperial visitor, to make an inspection of the yacht
the admirals had mentioned to him so favourably.
Some hint had previously reached Fortune of the
honour in store for him, and on the day the royal
and imperial party, followed by a fashionable crowd,
made their visit, the Propontic presented an
appearance never before seen at Cowes.
During the many voyages made and lands visited,
Fortune had accumulated a large store of the richest
fabrics and tapestries —bought to please the now
listless eyes of his Zenobia. These, with an array
of costly and magnificent works of art from eastern
climes, collected regardless of outlay, were brought
from their hiding places and modestly set forth
without any effort to extort admiration for the price-
less treasures.
No display was permitted, but with exquisite
taste flowers, palms, and rare exotics were so skilfully
arranged that the treasures brought out in honour
of the important occasion were more suggested than
put forward. Both Sir Fortune and Zenobia were
rewarded by the exclamations of delighted surprise
that came from the great visitors when looking
through the yacht.
Care had been taken that the legend running round
the dining-room wall should not be hid from sight
by the enrichment.
Stopping short in his walk the imperial personage,
in perfect English, read out the noble words.


“Ah, Sir Fortune, I observe you have a just
appreciation for your great countryman. What do I
say ?—no, I mean every man’s countryman ; he thinks
for all men. The words come from—from —let me
have a moment to tax my memory, and if I can’t
remember you may remind me. Yes, I now recall
it ; they are in Othello —or do I mistake ? When I
saw that you spelt the yacht’s name in the fashion
that prevailed in Shakespeare’s time it set me think-
ing, and thus you see I was not unprepared for the
text.”
“ Your Majesty’s memory is perfect. The quotation
is a great favourite with me ; it is the ship’s motto.
I suspect Shakespeare had his country’s great future
in his thoughts when he put those fine words into
Othello’s mouth.”
“You are patriotic, that is easily seen, Sir Fortune.
Love of country appeals to me as the greatest of
sentiments. Without it I fancy a nation’s founda-
tions are not too secure. What a tremendous moral
force it is, and what strength it gives a man’s right
arm when he strikes a blow for his native land ! ”
The royal prince on his part had startled Zenobia,
who had made an effort for once to please, by a dis-
play of his wonderful memory for names and faces.
“ But that your appearance belies the flight of time,
I should remark that it was many years since I saw
both you and your husband at church parade one
Sunday in the great park,” said the prince with courtly
grace to his hostess. “It has been my loss that we
have never met since that day, my lady, but I see
my imperial guest in earnest talk with your husband,


there by that lovely clump of palms. Let us join and
hear what it is all about.”
Surrounded by a perfect galaxy of fair women and
handsome men, Fortune led the way to the main
turret, explaining to his imperial and royal visitors
the ingenious machinery by which the turret and
guns were hoisted to the upper deck for action.
“ I’m very much pleased with all you show me,
the guns especially. The yacht is fit for a king ! And
so you let the Japanese persuade you to part with
your last yacht—you see we’ve heard of you before,
Sir Fortune. Are there any more of such yachts
as the Propontic , belonging to private Englishmen ? ”
“ Not armed, or of such speed, your Majesty; but
from what I hear I think my example will shortly be
followed, and in more than one instance.”
“ And why do you look for this, Sir Fortune ? ”
“ My country has enemies, Sire, one in particular,
that we can no longer look upon as our ‘ sweet
enemy.’ She would willingly smash us in the
unlikely event of an opportunity arising, and perhaps
not she alone,” said Fortune with an immovable face.
“ Is it your opinion that a few armed yachts would
have an appreciable effect on a maritime war?”
“ A maritime war, Sire, at the first jump would be
purely commerce-destruction. Twenty of such craft
as this would work incredible harm in a very short
time before they were driven off or destroyed.”
“ you English can’t keep from racing terms.
‘First jump.’ Yes, yes, I see—you mean the first
fence. Well it might be so’’—turning to the prince.
“ But one word more, Sir Fortune. Would the owners


of such costly yachts as this—craft you called her
give them freely' for the—the —ah, what shall I call it
—for the enemy to smash at the first jump ? in-
quired the great man smiling.
Bowing profoundly to majesty, and with the
prince’s approving smile, Fortune replied with a
proud look upon his handsome face : Sire, I can-
not answer for my countrymen, though I feel quite
sure of them. But this I know, that my yacht and
all I possess, even to my life, I would give up at my
country’s call.”
The words were uttered with so much modesty
and deference that a polite murmur of approval went
round the circle.
Majesty became thoughtful. His fine intelligent
eyes looked absently aside for a moment or two.
As he moved away, he suddenly exclaimed to the
prince : “ Another great Englishman—by George !
That’s how I should swear in merrie England. It’s
beginning to dawn upon me that the greatness of
your country, my Prince, lies with her great civilians,
not in her admirals or generals, but in her private
citizens such as this Sir Fortune here. These are
the men who conquer for her—it’s splendid ! ”
“ All thinking men amongst us have been aware
of the truth of your conclusions for many years,
your Majesty—since Clive, in fact; and the people
of this country are beginning to understand the posi-
tion. We have much to be proud of and still more
to be thankful for in our private enterprise.”
And it was in this wise the ever-memorable visit to
the Propontic terminated.


CHAPTER XVII
THE FIRST CLOUD
WHAT a falling off was seen in Zenobia ! and
how noticeable it was to all about them
that her husband appeared to see no change in her,
as his once loving wife! That she was altered to
all others no one knew better than himself; but
he failed to realise that her heart and affections
were dead to him, her husband, as the world of
her life.
She received from him the same attentions as of
old ; his preference never wavered ; true hearted and
constant he ever remained. Zenobia to him was
unchanged ; he would have been a bold man indeed
who hinted otherwise.
The news of her aunt’s death, preceded by that
of her once dear father, had given her no concern.
The Propontic had been taken to Jersey more than
once, to visit the old people there; but Zenobia’s
strange, cold manner gave no sort of pleasure while
she remained with them. Even Mary and Uncle
William, who had lavished such a depth of affection
upon their lovely favourite, were treated by her with
the same languid unconcern. Where her loving


kisses once fell upon their soft old faces, her cheek
was coldly held up for their caress, nothing more ;
nothing from her that was loving; she could not
give what she no longer possessed, for it was not
there to give.
Mary trembled before her. She saw at times a
dangerous gleam in Zenobia’s eyes that terrified the
gentle lady, now greatly aged and nearing life’s end.
The twin captains had long since departed to the
“ land of the leal.”
While she had never at any time shown ungovern-
able temper, those nearest to her knew well, and
more than expected, that a spark might set the
smouldering brain aflame any day. Nothing but
Fortune’s anxious care that her slightest wish should
be gratified kept her from outbreaks of anger, but
if he saw dangerous tendencies in her mental condition
he managed to conceal it under a brave show of
confidence in his wife.
He little thought that it would be from him that
the innocent cause might proceed —some day, not
far off—to turn all this calm into fire and tempest.
Zenobia through all her later smooth and eventless
life kept her superb figure and marvellous beauty
barely touched by time. There was little left in her,
since the death of her children, but mere animal
existence. Her once soft lovely eyes had grown
hard and restless, seeming to be constantly looking
round for something missing. In all, save her
good looks, she was a mere wreck.
Bravely and cheerfully Fortune kept his wife
amused and employed, and nowhere did she appear


to feel so contented as when cruising in the Propontic.
But for the sick and convalescent, still carried in
the yacht as of old, nothing would induce her to
take any further interest or care; no sort of recogni-
tion would she ever give them, ill or well.
From Cape Colony, where Fortune still possessed
large interests, anxious news frequently reached him.
The Boer leaders seemed desirous to discover
how far they could go in pulling the lion’s tail with
impunity. Fortunately the tail stood a deal of
pulling. But thoughtful people in South Africa were
asking each other whether the sleepy old lion would
awaken at last to his danger, or turn over for another
prolonged sleep. It was a haunting thought that
they might be left to the horrors of Boer tyranny
and plunder; that the Empire might awake too late
and find South Africa lost for ever.
To all those who understood the extreme danger
of the situation, the ill-concealed preparations for
fighting the paramount power (visible to all save
the British Government), it was a time of terrible
anxiety. The pious Boer leader waved before the
world a Bible in one hand, a murderous rifle in the
other ; glib texts of scripture falling from his canting
lips the while, the cloak of religion worn successfully,
but carelessly enough to expose the contempt the
great humbug had for his deluded followers.
After much hesitation, Fortune resolved to revisit
South Africa in the Propontic , thinking, and rightly,
that he could ascertain on the spot the true inwardness
of public affairs, and the prospects for peace or war.
With characteristic decision he, very shortly after


arrival there with the yacht, came to two conclusions.
First, that the Boer presidents meant war, and were
ready for it, only waiting for their own season to
begin the bloody game. Second, that the British
forces were disgracefully inadequate and unready.
This to the loyal mind of Fortune was infinitely
more important than his own personal interests, which
were great. He felt sure the stupendous old hypocrite
at Pretoria would seek to carry on the war by
plundering both the gold-mines of the Transvaal and
the diamond-mines also if get-at-able ; and as regarded
the gold-mines, his forecast turned out remarkably
correct.
The guns of the Propontic were freely offered for
service in the field when war finally broke out. The
Propontic was soon made useful for sick and wounded
officers and men, who came to the yacht hoping
to recover life and strength, burning to strike again
at the treacherous foemen who, though preter-
naturally active belligerents, were seldom actually seen
save when running away, but stinging as they fled
and always dangerous.
At this time Fortune, anxious to be of service
to his country’s cause, was frequently absent from
the yacht. Zenobia, owing to the crowded state
of the hotels, and general confusion into which Cape-
town was thrown, was seldom on shore, preferring
to give her uncheering company to her husband’s
numerous friends on board.
Fortune was lavish with the yacht’s hospitality,
and gratefully it came to be appreciated by military
convalescents, who could not buy for money on the


shore the comforts ever ready for them on board
the Propontic,
“It is seldom the yacht is free from visitors,”
abruptly remarked Zenobia to her husband one quiet
day on board ; “ and now, Fortune, that there is an
opening, I wish you would explain to me clearly
what it is Old Bailey has told me about some scheme
you entertain for disposing of your wealth.”
“ You surprise me, Zena dear,” replied her husband.
“ My time and thoughts have been so busily employed
of late, I have completely lost sight of the half-
formed plan I had of making certain gifts and
endowments. I did not intend to consult you for
the present, dear, while affairs here absorb so much
of my attention ; but you may be sure I shall do
nothing without first doing so.”
“ Old Bailey ” —who was as usual hovering about
when Fortune was present —“ said you had decided
to give away large sums of money. I hope, Fortune,
you will consider your wife and son, and not beggar
us.”
“You make me laugh, dear Zena. I should have
to give away fabulous sums before it came to that.
The whole subject is premature —pity Old Bailey
mentioned my remark to you. If it gives you concern,
Zena, dismiss it from your mind ; nothing shall be
done, not a step taken, without your knowledge and,
I hope, your approval.”
“ Approval, Fortune ? ” flushing with anger. “Do
you imagine you could ever obtain that from me ? You
must think me mad to suppose such a thing—to
give away our money ! To leave me and Edward


penniless! I won’t hear of such a thing. I am not
mad, sir, whatever you may think, but such foolery
would soon make me so, or any other woman for
that matter. I can’t stand it, and what’s more, I
won’t.”
She rose from her seat looking, to her husband’s
astonished eyes, like a mad woman indeed, and
turned away with hurried steps to her own apartments.
The first outbreak —a sudden gust —and not to
be the last! It was the first cloud, and a sign to
all save Fortune.
He found a thousand excuses for his Zenobia.
The weather, the guests, himself, Old Bailey —each
and all were to blame. Whoever was in the wrong
it could not be Zenobia. In his faithful eyes it was
impossible that she could do wrong in anything.
“ It would have been better, Bailey, had you not
mentioned my words about the millions to Lady
Pomeroy,” said Fortune mildly. “ You see yourself
her mind is not attuned to sordid subjects like this
filthy lucre of mine. Better that I had none, than
let it become a cause of irritation for my wife.”
“ But my lady is right, Sir Fortune. It is wrong
to give away the money, at least in your lifetime.
How do you know you may never want it, and
leave us all to starve? No, no, my lady is right in
this. Don’t, I implore you, give away the money
to strangers ; if you do, good luck will depart, and
where are you then ? It has been nothing but
good luck—don’t, Fortune, don’t turn it off your
doorstep. You don’t know what mischief may
come of it ; be warned, or the luck will change,


depart from you and never return, taking with
it our palmy halcyon days and leave us all stranded
by the ebb tide.”
“ I’ve no patience with you, Bailey ; you mustn’t
disturb Lady Pomeroy with any more of your
trash, if this is the sort of talk you have been
regaling her with. You see you’ve quite upset us
both with your chatter about luck. Luck ! I call it
nothing but superstition, and the word sickens me
now more than ever before. Do let me hear no
more of it. I don’t suppose for one moment you’d
think the luck, as you persist in calling it, would
change for the worse, if I gave you the spare money,
do you, Bailey ? ” demanded Fortune, with a keen,
sharp look at the shaking man.
It was a question that penetrated deeply into
the old follower. He felt for a moment as if Fortune
was looking through him—had shot an arrow in
the dark and hit the white.
Old Bailey trembled at the storm he had raised,
and had no reply ready. Fortune’s question had
startled him, and, with “ supple, sliding knee,” he
took himself off for the night, “ all his conscience
and one eye askew.”


CHAPTER XVIII
NO BALM IN GILEAD
FORTUNE’S time and attention were almost
wholly occupied with matters pertaining to
military and naval interests on the coast of South
Africa. Eager to be of use to his countrymen, he
spared no exertion or expense in rendering assistance.
With him, in all that concerned his country, duty was
his chief pleasure, and ever the uppermost thought.
It was well for him that it was so, as it occupied
his mind, and saved him from dwelling on the
peculiar and startling attitude taken up by Zenobia
regarding his money matters. Still at times the
unpleasant doubt intruded itself, that all was not
well with his wife.
It was so unexpected to find her, not only showing
a strong interest in his affairs, but actually offering
to interfere. He felt bewildered ; there was some-
thing in her behaviour he failed to understand,
and again horrid doubts, long since laid to rest,
crept in. Surely, he thought with terror, there
could be no serious mental disturbance. He recalled
the doctor’s warning that she was not to be thwarted.
“ Well,” he said, “ she has not been and shall not be


thwarted. Better anything than do her injury” ; and
for the time, at least, he resolved to do nothing
definite about the surplus millions.
As time passed and the safety of Cape Colony
and Natal was, or appeared to be, secure, the
feeling grew upon Fortune, as indeed it did upon
most of the loyal colonists, that the war was being
conducted upon entirely mistaken views of the Boers
and their character. He felt, with many others, a
desire to deal tenderly, even mercifully ; but when
the chief features in the war, as conducted by the
British generals, were more and more seen to be
humanity and civilisation, there remained the mourn-
ful conclusions that the war would be prolonged
indefinitely ; that a continued destruction of British
soldiers would follow, here, there, and everywhere,
small parties; and finally- that the drafts on the
British treasury would mount up in time to ruinous
totals.
“ The war was over,” declared the general, sitting
down in the enemy’s capitals and occupying their
country to the remotest frontiers, following on a
series of brilliant and masterly operations. “Now let
the Boers surrender like beaten men, and all shall
be well for them—all forgiven.”
But those who knew the Boers were amused at
the kindly innocence of the grand old warrior and
the Government behind him, who believed that
Christian sentiment was to be the balm in Gilead.
Well these people understood, and impressed it upon
Fortune and all who would listen, that no physician
was there to heal the wounds.


So long as they were treated with the same con-
sideration and respect that would be given to an
European army, organised and in uniform, the Boers
would receive offers of peace and forgiveness with
derision, as so many bribes to give up a war that
was designed and confidently expected to be ruinous
to the British. They recognised no conquerors, and
wanted no forgiveness.
And soon it became apparent that, instead of the
war being over, a new war on new lines was opening,
a war of organised marauding, leading to the de-
struction of friends and foes alike, at the merciless
bidding of a modern Mokanna, living in comfort
and security himself. Peace! what was peace to
him ? Let the country become as a desert ; not till
then would he cry peace.
Fortune, watching events, noted something very
like despair coming over the better class of British,
and of the loyal Dutch. They were painfully
realising that the sentimental placability of the
Governments —both British and Cape—would lead
to serious results and more or less of costly failure.
John Bull, the most patient and generous of relieving
officers, would be put to a very severe test before
all was over.
To remain and view what would surely prove to
be a breakdown, or something like it, did not
commend itself to his mind ;he felt sick at heart,
and he unwillingly turned his eyes to the eastern
seas, where his frequent letters from Japan told him
a storm was brewing in China that would astonish
the worlds


At the farewell conversations Fortune held with
heads of the British colonials, much stress was laid
upon the hazardous character of the whole position.
The truth of the adage that “ delays are danger-
ous” was more deeply marked in war than any other
position, and none but the wealthiest of countries
could afford such delay. Complications in Europe,
they urged, may yet arise to compel Britain to let
go her grip of the Boer country. In such an event
God pity the loyal colonists, for it is quite certain
that the Boers would show none.
Nothing would remain to us in South Africa but
a seaport town or two, and those not for long. Is
it any wonder the Australian people were showing
a keen desire to fight on the side of the motherland ?
These intelligent folk, it was pointed out, fortunately
saw plainly that the struggle really involved the
safety of the deep sea road from Europe to their
great continent.
Like the friends he was about to leave behind at
the Cape, Fortune felt much depressed but unwaver-
ing in his confidence as to the result of the struggle.
He felt he could no longer serve any useful purpose
by remaining in the country, and, once decided on
departure, permitted no delay in preparation for the
coming voyage to Australia and the Far East.


CHAPTER XIX
THE LONG WASH OF AUSTRALASIAN SEAS
FORTUNE decided to lose no time in turning
the taffrail of his yacht on South Africa, with a
feeling bordering on disgust at the milk and water
state of things he was leaving behind him. Several
months had been spent in the country, some of them
made unhappy by military blundering and defeat,
and he found relief in the busy occupation of getting
his vessel ready for sea.
Several officers, suffering from desperate wounds
received in fight, accompanied the yacht on her
voyage east to the great Austral continent, where
she would coal and refit, while her owner renewed
r
old friendships and made preparations for the voyage
to China.
The letters received by Fortune from Japanese
friends had latterly made it quite clear that affairs in
China were rapidly drifting into war. His corres-
pondents in Japan were officials of high rank, who
retained a lively recollection of the service he had
once rendered their country. Their information was
invaluable, and he determined to take the Propontic
to China and there offer her services to the British
admiral if war took place.


Basking all day in the cold spring days of the
rolling southern seas, eager for sunshine as grass-
hoppers in Attica, the officers in most cases made
rapid recovery, and each day formed a symposium of
guarded criticism on the war they had taken part in.
“ While I don’t care to enter into military criticisms
of my superiors,” remarked a war-worn soldier of rank,
“ I think I may even without impropriety aver that
the game of futile rear-guard actions has gone on
too long, and is bringing the army into disrepute.
Delays are dangerous, and especially so is it true in
war, and then just consider the open hostility of the
continental peoples for Great Britain. It seems
dangerous to be safe in the face of such deadly hatred
as we see everywhere shown for us. Fortunately we
can afford to disregard it, though it can never be
forgotten.”
“ The game as I look at it,” rejoined Fortune, “ is
altogether a one-sided one, but the latter-day troubles
of our dear old country have their growth in our
national habit of turning the other cheek. It may be
Christian, but appears to be shockingly bad policy.
Who are we afraid of, that our foot is not to be put
down firmly when we see good reason for doing so ?
What people or peoples on earth need we to fear ; or
is it that we fear ourselves, our own kin ? God help
the nation if ever the day dawns that we can’t be
true to ourselves ! ”
“It seems to me,” replied one of the seniors, “ that
Britain’s danger does not come from any nation or
combination of nations (she has had all that to
contend with before), but in displaying fear or dread


of foreign opinion. We are a free and independent
nation, thank God ; and when we think we are right,
it is the safest and easiest plan to go on our own way
rejoicing. Then and not till then will the nation be
respected. If you can’t secure people’s love and
respect, or they won’t give it under any circumstances,
the next best thing is to make them fear you.”
“I’m reminded,” said Fortune, “of what was
urged a year or two ago by more than one London
newspaper, when some fiscal change was proposed
detrimental to foreign interests. It was actually
urged, as an argument against a purely domestic
proposal, that it might offend our continental
neighbours ! What is to become of the manhood
of our country if such sentimental poltroonery is
to find a place in our conduct of our own affairs ?
I often call to mind the warning words of one
of England’s greatest admirals : ‘We mustn’t allow
ourselves to be fooled by the foreigners.’ But
softly; this sort of talk is little short of treason
in the eyes of those peculiar people, the Little
Englanders, who are, it is true, not without love
of country exactly—but it’s generally the enemy’s
country ! Well! ‘ something too much of this.’ We
can find pleasanter topics to fill up our spare time
at sea, and may rest assured that all will yet come
right between Britons and Boers at the Cape.”
“ Aha, gentlemen ! ’’cried Fortune gaily one bracing
sunny day, made all the more enjoyable by the
improvement in his sick guests, “ I’ve just paid a
visit to the bridge deck, and bring you the news
that you will very soon get a view of the Australian


coast : Cape Northumberland will be the first point
to show up ahead of us. The yacht is steaming
remarkably well, though she is badly in want of
the docking she is to receive at Melbourne. Well,
I can take comfort in the improvement in looks
all of you show since we turned our taffrail
upon Capetown. I should like one or two I
won’t name to look up a bit, and play a better
knife and fork ; but all that will come in time,
Colonel, eh ? Lord ! what a wreck you looked when
first you came on board to us ; the Boer bullets
left little life in you ; it was touch and go I thought,
sir. I really don’t think my wife ever had a case
on her hands on board the Propontic that gave
her half the work and anxiety that you caused, to
say nothing of all her other pasty-faced guests, and
the sleepless nights you contrived to give her
amongst you.”
The distinguished colonel, spoken to by Fortune,
had come on board on his invitation to take the
run for health’s sake. He was too much broken up
to see or hear much of what was passing before
his languid eyes —eyes that more than once showed
a strong tendency to remain closed permanently
when shut in sleep or faint. But he knew enough
to understand what a world of pathos there was
in the words addressed to him, and wondered
whether it was self-deception on the part of Fortune,
or a simulated belief in what his demented wife
certainly never showed any desire to give to her
sick guests. The true facts were too open and pal-
pable to deceive any one there, unless her husband ;


and in that lay the pathos of it all, he hinted when
chatting over the position with a crony. Loyal to
his kind host, though quite alive to the active
position, he managed, when replying, to put an
extra note of cheeriness into his quavering voice.
“ Her ladyship has been a ministering angel, and
you, Sir Fortune, a friend in need to all of us here
—God bless you for it, I say. When I’m strong
enough it’s not three cheers I’ll join in for the
Propontic and her owner, but a score of them. In
the meantime I am ready to quarrel with Shakespeare
for saying ‘ throw physic to the dogs ’ without in-
cluding slops and spoon food of all kinds.”
“ Cheer up, Colonel, never say die. We shall soon
see you promoted to a knife and fork.”
Many hours later, when Fortune and some of the
convalescents were on deck watching the land rapidly
drawing in ahead, a quartermaster came up and
saluted with the report that Cape Otway was in sight.
“Then we shall be in harbour pretty early to-
morrow, I trust,” he remarked to the officers. “We’ll
go below now and enjoy the red herring and hot
potato we have for supper whenever we make the
land inward bound late at night. How I wish all
our sick friends could join us. That pleasure will be
ours later —what do you say, mon capitaine ? ”
“ The doctor thinks even our worst cases will pull
through ; I find myself enjoying herrings and potatoes
even after taking a look into that awful valley of
shadows, Sir Fortune. By the way, I’ve never been
in either Melbourne or Sydney, but the fame of
Sydney harbour for its beauty has reached most


folk, I rather think. I never heard though what Port
Phillip is like.”
“ You will see to-morrow morning, I trust,” replied
his host. “We shan’t enter the bay until daylight
and you will have a good sight of the entrance and
bay, if you can leave your warm blankets early
enough. Both are well worth seeing and have a
special interest for me. The great city I knew, and
lived in, when it was a moderate-sized town com-
pared with what it has grown to since. When you
spoke of the fame of Sydney's beauty it would be
absurd to disagree —certainly I wouldn’t be so rash
myself, but for all that Port Phillip Bay possesses
beauty of a kind Sydney harbour never can attain
to. There is a spacious roominess about that vast
sheet of inland sea that more than makes up for the
absence of soft, peaceful beauty such as you will see
at Sydney if we call in there. You will perceive in
Port Phillip Bay grandeur of the large, masculine
type that claims admiration.
“ Stretching many miles across in all directions,
the shores on three sides of the great bay have
a background of handsome hills and ranges, that
go to make up a very fine picture, I do assure
you. Sydney harbour, or Port Jackson, on the
other hand, is in a semi-tropical latitude possess-
ing what, for want of a better word, I would
describe as a feminine cast of beauty—beyond
compare, it must be admitted. Summed up I find
it is hard to say to which the apple should be
presented. Port Phillip may be regarded as the loaf
of bread ; Sydney harbour the wedding-cake—both


good in their way. But if, after seeing each of them,
you decide in favour of the port we are to enter
in the morning, it will be politic,” said Fortune,
smiling, “ not to say so, when you pay your call on
Sydney, which, of course, you must not fail to do
while we are in Australia ; and be sure you don t
forget that admiration for the harbour is expected
from the visitor.”
As Fortune watched the curling smoke from a
last cigar that night, he mused over his life in the
great colony, where he had found his first success in
the world, and of the friends he had made in it.
To one man in particular his thoughts constantly
returned. Would he find him, on landing next day,
still in the flesh ? He had lost sight of his esteemed
old friend for the last few years, and now felt nervous
as to what he was to learn about him next day.
All through Fortune’s sojourn in the land, the friend-
ship that had grown up between them was no
uncertain quantity. Fate had willed that the younger
of the two should depart to other scenes wealth-laden,
while the other, John Steele, remained in the country
of his adoption to fight the battle of “ that slow
suicide called life ” single-handed, and in the end sore
wounded. With what a merry heart in those days
of old, Fortune recalled, his genial friend took the
stiles that lay in his road! How tired and sad that
glowing heart must have since grown under the years
of trouble and despair that had arisen to afflict him !
Or might it happily prove next day when he sought
out his friend, that his feet had “trod the way of
deliverance ? ”


As the Propontic sped along past familiar head-
lands towards the “ wild tide race that whips their
harbour mouth,” the hopeful thought faded quickly.
John Steele’s storm-tormented life could hardly have
grown smooth and prosperous without being made
known to him. Certainly his first task on landing
would be to seek out his old friend, and, if still
alive and fit, carry him off to China in the yacht.
“ Friends in plenty I have,” Fortune said softly,
below his breath, “but not one I can open my
heart to like the tried friend of my early days in
Australia. I look forward to having him with me :
it would be a comfort for many reasons—many,
many,” he added thoughtfully, as he turned into
bed that night.


PART II
CHAPTER XX
FRIENDS IN COUNCIL
WHEN David Lynnt made the usual afternoon
call on his chief, who was slowly recovering
from a desperate illness, he found the invalid in close
conversation with a distinguished-looking stranger,
to whom he appeared to be well-known.
“Sir Fortune,” said John Steele, “let me make
known to you a young man who has proved himself
to be a true and faithful friend to me. I would prefer
to say ‘ servant,’ but we have to be careful how we
use that good old English word in these shabby-
genteel days.
“ You remember, David, what I predicted a fort-
night ago, when first the news reached here of the
outbreak in China, and the burst-up of the Boer
armies at the Cape ? Sure enough my words have
come true this time. I foresaw, Sir Fortune, that
you would be here with your yacht on the way to
China to give your usual helping hand. It’s not


often I’ve proved to be right of late—mostly wrong
I fear, sir—quite contracted the bad habit, in fact, of
going wrong ; but right well pleased am I to have
made such a good shot this time ; it’s a good omen,
besides, that brings to my door the man, above all
others on this planet, I have most longed to see.”
John Steele was still desperately weak from his
late serious illness, and let out what sounded very
like a sob. “ Yes,” he added in a broken voice, his
honest face kindling with pleasure, “ the man my
soul most longed for is back again amongst us, and
with his noble steam-yacht I mentioned to you,
David, the Propontic. But there, no doubt you will
have ample opportunity of seeing the splendid craft
now she is in our waters ; and hark you, sir ” —this in
an impressive whisper —“ she is an armed yacht,
ready at all times like her owner to serve her country.”
“You take me by surprise,” said David Lynnt.
“ Her arrival was not mentioned in the city when
I left. All the same, let me offer you a hearty
welcome, Sir Fortune, the more so that I feel sure
your visit will do more good for the patient than all
the doctor’s stuff, and he can now ‘ throw physic to
the dogs,’ it is to be hoped.”
“ Many thanks to you both ; but John, old friend,
when we lived years together in this same city, small
in comparison with whatit is now, you were often more
right than wrong, I well remember; and we must
now get you out of your bad habit of going wrong.
We will try to right the ship for you. In those days
I speak of, I was Fortunatus to you, and most other
people I think, and Fortunatus let me remain, for


I love the name and the kindly memories it invariably
brings to me, so no more Sir Fortune from you, old
friend.
“ Mr. Lynnt, when you entered the room, I was
pressing my friend here to take a trip with me to
China in the Propontic , and I want you to add
your influence to mine in persuading him to join
the yacht. In fact, I was mainly influenced in
touching here, instead of calling in further north
for coal, by the hope that I should once again grip
my old friend’s hand and carry him off on a cruise.
Now that I am here I see, in the weak state of his
health, an additional reason for taking him away
with me, cotton-wool and all.”
Lynnt spoke out plainly, giving very strong
reasons why his chief should accept the invitation.
“ The fact is, Sir Fortune, Mr. Steele has never
recovered his strength since the serious illness he
suffered two months ago. All his friends have
urged him to go away out of the country for a trip
and get stored with health again ; fearing he’ll never
come right moping here. I’m sure the banks and
other creditors would be delighted to see him take a
holiday ; they’re deeply interested in his health, and
selfishly anxious he should be enabled to go on
striving and straining to work out his quixotic scheme
for paying them all in full. They know he’ll never
work out his redemption unless he recovers health
and strength.”
“ I’m much pleased you’ve given me the cue, Mr.
Lynnt ; though I felt sure something of the kind
was holding you back, old friend. It’s just like you,


John, with your big heart, undertaking a task no
one else would face ; and it’s like your pride too,
for well I know both. I’ve heard something of this
noble work you have been devoted to for years ; the
story reached me long ago. I assure you it is well
known and deeply admired, though not applauded
exactly, and I fancy moreover has but few imitators.”
John Steele, to whom the subject was ever dis-
tasteful, gruffly rejoined with the remark that it was
all a question of temperament.
“ And honesty, John Steele ; do yourself bare
justice,” remarked his visitor. “ I doubt whether
there are many in this great southern city that would
have undertaken your heavy task, and no blame to
them either. The law shows people a road out of
their financial troubles and difficulties, their house of
bondage ; small wonder that so many find relief to
mind and body by following it.
“When I was last here, nearly ten years since,
the mad land boom speculation, which had intoxicated
the entire community, was in its waning stage ;
people seemed them to be pallid with apprehension.
What surprised me most was the fact, so far as I
could learn in a short and not very pleasant visit,
that no one in the whole country seemed to have
preserved their poise : prudence, caution, judgment,
all had gone by the board, cast to the winds. No
one, whether banker, merchant, politician, statesman —
and between the two last there exists a mighty
difference—had foreseen the inevitable ruin that
must, in the ordinary nature of things, follow a mad
belief that real property could by any possibility be


made available for the instant payment of enormous
debts and liabilities, or for the cash demands presently
made by a distrustful community, when the day of
reckoning came.”
With a groan John Steele replied : “ Real property,
at that time, was of no more use to stem the tide
than six feet of freehold in a graveyard.”
“ The day of reckoning came upon you all not
long after I had left the country for the Far East
in my yacht—you remember her, John? What a
smart craft she was, and her guns ! I followed with
interest in the newspapers which reached me from
time to time the tale of misery and failure that
had overtaken a brave but unfortunate community.
I knew before I left that you were in trouble up
to your chin, John Steele. My resources were large
at that time, but quite insufficient to help you and
one or two other esteemed friends, all in the same
boat. It would have made no difference, for you
were too proud to accept monetary assistance.”
“ I knew well at the time that you were ready
with your money-bags, Fortunatus. The boat you
speak of capsized with us, as was inevitable, and
I’ve been floundering about ever since. Some of
us reached the shore, and though naked and penniless,
have since flourished again in the world ; but I
must confess to having a doubt whether it will ever
be my fortune to reach dry land—and finish my
task,” he said softly to himself.
Looking over to his old friend, he hastened to add :
“ I don’t regret the decision I came to at the capsize,
to pay the uttermost farthing owing. They all tell


me it is a quixotic task and impossible—a task be-
yond my strength. King David here never seems to
tire of saying so, but I will never give in even if I
die in the effort ; and God giving me health and
life I will yet succeed ; the slave shall yet receive
his freedom.”
The frail-looking, prematurely aged man, worn
with sickness, breaking to pieces under his self-
imposed task, still looked bravely out from beneath
his bushy eyebrows, dismasted but undaunted and
unbeaten ;no surrender there. It was pathetic, and
the two men sitting with him found it hard to
refrain from emotion. Fortune felt and looked his
admiration ; he had never seen so brave a man, nor
ever expected to ; it was sublime courage. He knew
then that he was in the presence of a true hero, whom
all might envy, but few could imitate.
King David, as his employer affectionately called
him, found it necessary to hide his feelings by a
show of bluster.
“ You know well enough, sir, that the fight has
nearly killed you, is killing you ; surely it’s time to
call a truce and make ‘ peace with honour.’ No
one knows as I do, how you have laboured and
striven day and night for years to clear the sheet,
and the steady reduction you have made in the
terrible schedule of debt. You alone know what you
have suffered in the unceasing struggle that is now
pulling you down to the very ground.” Lowering his
voice and with moist eyes, he added, “ and the sacri-
fice of all you hold dearest. The chains, dear Chief,
that you mentioned may fall off the slave too late.”


CHAPTER XXI
FORTUNATUS
KIND, faithful David Lynnt, the bluster failed ;
his emotions .were not under control ; a sob
arose in his throat Well John Steele understood
what was meant by the allusion to sacrifices. In
his stubborn and unceasing efforts to get clear of
debt, all he held dearest and best had been laid
under contribution : the home and household gods,
even to the cherished possessions of dear wife and
daughter. All had gone ;he had stripped himself
willingly without a regret. If the wolf gnawed at
his vitals his cheerful face showed no sign ; none
could see marks of anguish there as he went on
his way rejoicing at the thought that he was per-
mitted by Heaven to continue the good work. All
who watched the man were touched by his splendid
devotion, but they also saw in the struggle a useless
out-of-date sacrifice, a self-inflicted cruelty which
they unwillingly condemned while giving it unbounded
admiration.
His wife, tired and worn with loyal assistance,
faded slowly and sank into the grave, to the last
upholding her husband in his noble determination
to pay what he owed.


“John,” she whispered, when the farewell came,
“our children will learn to understand their father’s
noble conduct, and honour him for it all the days
of their life.”
His daughter fell nothing short of her loving
parents, going out cheerfully as a hospital nurse.
Two stalwart sons, seeking their fortune far away
beyond the seas, left him, content with a father’s
blessing ; he had nothing else to give them ; while
another, the mother’s youngest and dearest, filled a
soldier’s grave in South Africa —a quite recent
affliction for the broken old man. Left almost alone
in the world, John Steele was in reality a beaten man,
but without knowing it —the spirit willing to continue
the unequal struggle, but the flesh weak and weary
beyond expression.
It was now time for Fortune to take up the
parable, and he smiled as he thought of Job’s
comforters. Lynnt was certainly cut out for young
Bildad. He knew well the temper of his old friend
John Steele. He came of a race that would certainly
leave its deeply-graven marks on the world to the
end of time ; a stubborn people of strangely-mixed
qualities, good and bad, but the good uppermost and
very near the surface. It was a glorious thing to
see the great-hearted, honest old Briton still in-
fluenced by the one sole, simple-minded thought,
that he would strive onwards, while he lived, to pay
the uttermost farthing, whatever happened.
It was not so rare a thing in the world, reflected
Fortune, that longing to pay in full what was owing.
He had in his career through life met with many


instances ; indeed, he firmly believed the desire to
pay was firmly planted in most men’s minds. It was
the rule, he was sure, not the exception. But never
had he come across an instance of a man hopelessly
indebted, setting himself with such dogged, such
painful, determination to free himself from debt, and
that by the simple process of paying ; his great soul
calmly disregarding the human laws by which he
might free himself had he so willed.
To Fortune it was quite apparent that unless the
fine old fellow could be induced to go away out of
the land and leave the cares of life behind him,
nature would be more than likely to adopt a rapid
and thorough-going way of paying off his debts once
and for ever. He returned to the proposal that John
Steele should join the Proponiic on her coming
journey to China, and before he left the room, knew
he had overcome his old friend’s scruples and
difficulties. His charm of manner had prevailed
with John, as it did with most men.
“Now, John Steele, consider what an ‘in-keeper’
you’ve been for ten years past, and how pleasant it
will be for me to have you to talk to on the voyage
the Propontic is about to take. I’m afraid we shall
become a pair of gossips on board, having so much to
tell each other. The yacht is a noble craft, you will
admit, and will surprise you when you step on board.
lam very proud of her, I assure you. She steams
twenty knots easily and should be in Hong-Kong
within eighteen days of our leaving this. When we
arrive, the admiral, who has been apprised of our
coming—and believe me will be very glad of our


company—will have entire control of the yacht, her
officers and crew.
“We are pretty sure to be ordered to join the
light draught squadron assisting at Taku in the
north, for you must know we possess a couple of
splendid Long Toms, besides other very useful guns,
and in the strong-room an ample supply of gold and
silver coin for any emergency. It has always been
my rule to carry in the yacht plenty of ready money
in coin ; I have found this answer well as a speculation,
and much of my wealth has really grown up out of
the practice. It’s surprising what power the possession
of ready money gives a man whether ashore or
afloat; I have found it so, and if our admiral in
China finds it useful to draw upon my floating bank
—not unlikely—he will be welcome, you may be
sure ; and it will not be the first time the owner of
the Propontic has been so honoured.
“ I feel quite certain we are on the eve of a
break-up in China ; yes, and serious trouble in store
there for our country, for which, as usual with the
dear old land, John, she will be found unprepared.
England the unready, you know. I have the best
and most reliable information from my Japanese
friends, who are fully alive to the signs of upheaval
in China, and are preparing—my letters say are
actually prepared—to move to the front.
“You wonder how I obtain such information, I
daresay, and from highly-placed Japanese in power;
but I do, and place the most implicit confidence
in it, as you may judge when I tell you that I
decided at Capetown to take the PropontiQ to


China, on the strength of advices received by me
there from Japan two months ago. There is no time
to tell you now how my influence with the Japanese
Government arose, and why I am a white-headed boy
in that quarter —even to the Emperor. You shall
learn from me all about this on the voyage, when we
have nothing to do but talk.
“ The yacht will be out of dock, coaled, and ready
for sea this day week ; your cabin will be ready for
you, and your welcome on board may be taken for
granted. Bring a good supply of warm clothing,
you are sure to want it in the north ; and by the
way, John, while I think of it, remember this : If a
single one of your creditors whimpers because you
are leaving the country, there is plenty to pay him
with in the ship’s coffers. You can borrow from
me what you require for that purpose, if it arises,
and hand me over the security.
“ Now, John, not a word of thanks, for I won’t
listen. It’s a pure matter of business ; I’m not so
foolish as to think you’d take money from me on
any other terms. I’ve not been landed in the city
for more than a few hours, but I can see and hear
enough to convince me that the country is rapidly
recovering itself. Lookers-on, you know, see most of
the game, they say. I confidently predict you will
not only pay off all your indebtedness, but emerge
from your trials and sacrifices a wealthy man. ‘ Your
horn shall yet be exalted.’ ”
“ God be thanked for sending you to me this
day, Fortunatus ; your gracious presence and words
act like a charm. You have given my blood a


new circulation ; I'm yours for the voyage to
China.”
“Spoken like a man, John, but not merely for
the voyage to China, I hope. I shall keep you with
me until we reach England after finishing with the
purple East. Now I must leave you ; I have im-
portant visits to make and instructions to give Mr.
Lynnt here about the yacht’s coaling, etc. You
are looking better already at the prospect of the
trip you are to take with Fortunatus. You will
leave this abode of woe in cotton-wool, John, and
return to it in buckram, or I’m no prophet.
“ You have gained a victory over my stubborn
but valued old friend, Sir Fortune. I will keep him
up to his promise and ship him off in the Propontic.
It will save his life to get away out of the community
and leave his troubles behind for others to contend
with. Everything needful will be completed for
the yacht to the day and hour ; about that you
may rest assured.”


CHAPTER XXII
JOHN STEELE
IT is necessary for the reader to be made better
acquainted with John Steele, and his career in
the great Austral land, brightest of all the jewels in
England’s Crown. He had been a sailor in his youth,
reaching to the dignity of carpenter of a fine London
passenger ship. With but little education he sought,
in a modest way, to improve that little by judicious
reading. His books were few but carefully selected,
confined mainly to his country’s best classics, prose
and verse, besides the Bible, Shakespeare and Milton
—this trinity being reverently worshipped apart.
Charles Dickens attracted him most as a novelist,
and in this author’s and Thackeray’s books he could
have passed an examination creditably. He read Sir
Walter Scott carefully, instinctively feeling that his
works were fine models of English composition for a
humble, self-taught student like himself. John was too
modest and too cautious to express any loud-mouthed
opinions of either of his favourites, but when pressed,
admitted his preference for “Vanity Fair” and
“ Dombey and Son.” His reading was limited, he
explained, and though he was doubtful about his
161 11


own judgment, he could not imagine that any novel
in the language could possibly excel “ Vanity Fair.”
His seafaring life explained his love for “ Dombey
and Son.” The little midshipman, Captain Cuttle,
and Jack Bunsby appealed to him deeply, and were
an ever fresh and constant love. On every return to
London City, he never failed to visit and lift his hat
to the little wooden middy who never ceases to take
observations.
About the Bible he would not talk, fearing to get
out of his depth, and besides, his reverence for the
book was too great to permit of discussion ; but in
his inner mind he worshipped the great volume,
thinking it the grandest of all man’s written work,
of which the book of Job, in his diffident opinion,
reached to the top.
The Bible otherwise had no influence on his
Christianity, the grandeur and magnitude of the
“ multitudinous seas ” upon which he had lived and
moved so many years being too awful in their effect on
his imagination to leave much room in his thoughts
for inspired religion.
The Lord’s Prayer was his whole duty of man,
and faithfully he strove to live up to its standard.
More he would not aim for ; less he would not practise
in his dealings between man and man.
Shakespeare was to him a never-ending source of
wonder and admiration. He could not and did not
attempt to analyse his thoughts about the works of
the “ immortal bard,” before whom his head went un-
covered in something akin to awe. Many were the
hours he devoted to Shakespeare’s exalted diction,


and it was surprising how well he mastered the
glorious language used by the bard and its meaning.
Unconsciously his reading influenced and raised
his character. He was never once heard to quote
from any one of his favourites ; his thoughts were
full of their teaching and expression, but did not
overflow into quotation.
He was an admirable example of a self-educated
man ; a contrast to those terrible people who are for
ever setting up as extra-superior, because of their
acquisition of self-culture under difficulties, confident
and ready at all times to pronounce an opinion on
any subject, often gathered painfully from ency-
clopaedic reading, or study of Radical and Socialistic
literature, never properly understood and digested.
Nothing of this describes John Steele, whose modesty
and reserve kept him quite safe from any sort of
display. Well he understood that a little learning
was a dangerous thing.
On one of his many voyages, for like Ulysses he
could never rest from travel, a cabin passenger, who
frequently observed the young carpenter and dis-
covered his worth, made an unexpected but none the
less welcome offer to John Steele ; it was that he
should leave the ship and the sea on arrival at New
Zealand, and enter the passenger’s employment.
He agreed, and never once did he regret doing so.
A mutual regard and respect very soon sprang up
between them which lasted all the days of their con-
nection, and became a sweet memory in after-life.
For many years he served his respected employer,
bringing a shrewd and upright mind to bear on his


duty, and adding much to the success and prosperity
of the important interests which, at length, came under
his sole management. On the rather sudden death
of his chief, John found he had not been overlooked.
What with his own considerable savings, and the
handsome legacy which fell to him, together with a
share of the business, he was now on the road to
fortune, and in a very few years considered he had
one within his possession.
With keen though—as it proved—mistaken fore-
sight, he very soon thought he perceived a change
for the worse in the prospects of the business—not
through want of management or care, but through
some change of fashion in the demand for its produc-
tions. This, with a real or fancied change for the
worse in his health, decided him to sell out and move
to a more genial climate. No doubt he had over-
worked himself for years, and had suffered deeply at
the loss of his guide and friend. As a fact there was
nothing wrong, either with his health or the business :
the latter flourished long after it lost him as manager.
His share of the business was at length sold for
a fine price, and the move he had contemplated
and desired duly made. With ample means for all
his wants to the end of his days, John believed
himself to be a perfectly contented man, and free
from ambition ; but in reality he was neither. He
became restless in his new home, and chafed at his
inactive, idle existence. Before long he found himself
again an active money-making man, immersed in a
flourishing business established in the great Australian
city to which he had moved himself and family.


CHAPTER XXIII
RUIN AND REAL PROPERTY
HERE in the great Austral city, John Steele
worked hard, and harder still as the business
grew ; cautiously enough at first, but as operations
became enlarged, prudence was not so prominent
a feature in his management. He found the com-
parison between the new sphere and that from which
he had removed all in favour of the former, which
permitted of larger scope and greater mercantile
flights. There were times when he and his ad-
mirable wife, in a spirit of caution, regretted the
change of arena; the old life had certainly been
slow but safe, and accumulations sure. Then one day
came a venture skilfully piloted to a large profit.
At intervals another and again another followed,
yielding still larger profits ; prudence departed and
was seen no more ; all regrets vanished in their
success.
The land boom, fatal and disastrous in its effect,
was spreading all over the southern continent, and
every day saw a once staid, contented community
getting drawn more and more towards speculative
movements, slow at first, but growing imperceptibly


faster and faster, until, in time, barely a man or
woman in the great land of the southern seas but
became involved one way or another, directly or
indirectly. Many without knowing or suspecting
their danger, cautious well-to-do folk to whom the
word “speculation” spelt madness, were innocently
drawn into the torrent, and though absolutely blame-
less were found among the army of the ruined at
the day of reckoning.
But at this stage, and for long after, all was
smiling ; never a day but profitable transactions in
real property, as it is the fashion to call freehold
land, were credited to rich and poor citizens alike.
Frequently poor men with but slender means were
suddenly enriched by some fortunate connection
with a purchase or sale of city or suburban land.
From near suburban, speculation spread to distant
suburban lands ; the demand became insatiable, but
in the long run fell short of supply. When the
smash-up came it was ruefully perceived that vast
areas of suburban land existed around the chief
cities, whose natural boundaries were many miles
distant on all sides. The supply was boundless.
Still, for a long time buyers predominated. The
fever took years to run its course, and often after-
wards it was talked of how this or that property
owner had refused exaggerated valuations for outside
surburban freeholds, which at the end of the boom,
when a frozen reaction had set in, could not find
buyers at prairie value. Few industrial enterprises
escaped the vortex ; most of them were swallowed
up in the gaping maw of syndicates and company


promoters. It became a vast community of share-
holders —alas ! with much liability.
The tale of indebtedness increased from day to
day and grew by what it fed on. No thought
was given to the vast liabilities: the community had
neither fear nor doubt. Balance-sheets came out at
the appointed time exhibiting great apparent pros-
perity, but to those few lookers-on who could read
between the lines and see beneath the treacherous
surface, the breakers were visible ahead, and ship-
wreck imminent. There was no warning voice or
pointing finger, nor were there people to heed if
there had been. The water at Niagara is smoothest
just before it reaches the Falls.
At this blind and reckless stage of the history
the ground was sown full with the seeds of sorrow,
sickness, and death, which were to spring up in due
season, leading to a harvest of misery, and even to
something akin to disgrace. A whole generation
would pass away before the deadly results of this
south sea madness were forgotten. The theme was
not a pleasant one to dwell upon ; useful only to
mark where a prosperous and deserving community
suffered shipwreck.
Young communities, like young folk, recover
quickly, and in a few years’ time the shadows which
had fallen in long slants across the land grew shorter
and shorter, and oblivion began to cast her black
mantle over the sorrowful memory, covering over
the desperate sufferings of the thousands who rich
became poor, and poor became poorer. The residue
was a distressing jumble of ruined families, men.


women, and dear, dear children. All these suffered
exactly in proportion to the conditions of affluence
or comfort in which they had lived before the smash.
They suffered in silence. Many gave up the
druggie, and died in silence.
The community who found themselves compelled
to bear the brunt of this terrible commercial break-
up that at length fell upon them like the walls of
Jericho, behaved, on the whole, with wonderful
fortitude and discrimination, setting to work again
repairing damages, and righting the position with
patience and even good humour. Half-hearted
attempts were made to prosecute a few of the more
prominent land boomers, but on the whole men were
soon able to reflect coolly on the mad time passed
through, and accept their own just share of blame.
In a word, the behaviour of the entire country was
precisely such as the world has a right to expect
from a law-abiding British community. Misfortune
brought out the highest and best qualities of the
race ; and nobly they proved their loyalty to the
dear land from which they sprang when, ten years
later, thousands of brave men gave devoted service
in South Africa to the mother country, for which
John Steele’s youngest son was among the first
to volunteer.
A prominent and wealthy man like Steele, full
of life and enterprise, was not likely to hide his light
while great events passed like a procession before
him. He saw, full early in the day, signs of a great
movement, and was one of the first in the field. His
imagination was fired by its potentiality. Outwardly


and habitually calm and self-possessed, he was really
full of ardour for the chase after wealth, and the
power that wealth brings.
In a great community, where scarcely one man
held aloof, he followed the stream willingly, soon
to become one of its chief leaders. As the mania
for share and land speculation grew, his name grew
with it and became a household word for gigantic
operations and huge profits. Afterwards, when from
admirers men became severe judges, it was remem-
bered to his credit that his charities during the few
short years of his prosperity were generous beyond
count. He gave freely with both hands, privately.
No deserving case of distress was ever laid before
him in vain, and it was not forgotten when the
verdict came.
Towards the waning stage of the boom, he found
himself “rich beyond the dreams of avarice.”
Fortune had poured wealth into his lap, or what was
mistaken for wealth. In the end it proved to be
illusive, and slipped out of his hands. His money
being made round, it rolled away ; but at that time
he firmly believed in his great riches ; there was not
a man in the community that disputed it. His credit
was undoubted, and no face was more welcome than
John Steele’s in the great financial institutions of
the city. The day was to arrive, and that soon,
when the welcome no longer came ; his power and
credit had departed from him ; the doors once so
wide open were closed to him.
Afterwards, when fighting his battles over again,
he pointed out that at no time during the campaign


could he have laid down the cards and said, “ I will
take up my stakes and play no more.” Transactions
were too much interlaced ; the ball had to be kept
rolling until, at the last, it stopped from sheer want
of “ powder.”
At such times John pointed out what a mistake he
made, in common with the rest of the world, in the
belief that freehold land was real property. To meet
a sudden call for cash payments, little use in a
gorged market to turn to title-deeds for help.
Parchments failed when called upon to save the
position, and down went the house of cards in every
direction. No, no, he argued, the only real property
he knew in a time of stress was gold, and there was
no substitute for it that he knew. Had he fortified
his position as he went along during the boom time
with reserves of gold, it would have been unassailable.
The neglect to do so was fatal, not to him only, but
to every one alike.
What a bitter cry of distress it was that went up
from men in that great community of vast possessions
in shares and real property when the crash came!
“ What shall we do to be saved ? Is there no help
for us?” There could be but one answer to that
cry : “ Get gold ; it only can save you, poor fools !
Put money in thy purse.” To bankers and com-
mercial men the bitter lesson was taught: real
property was a snare and delusion where the position
demanded gold, and no more to be trusted than
princes.


CHAPTER XXIV
A FIGHT TO A FINISH
IT was no sentimental decision John Steele came
to, when he resolved to devote his life to the
payment of all his just debts, to be dropped when
the heat and burden of the day became intolerable.
Nobly his wife and daughter held up his arms in the
combat he had deliberately entered upon ; there was
to be no drawing back.
When the man’s resolve became known, he was
beset by all sorts of people ruined like himself, who,
fired by his noble example, were anxious to follow
the lead he gave. Many were the vows made to
do so, and were made in all sincerity ; but, alas for
human weakness! scarcely one of those vows was
kept ; not from want of faith and good intent, but
lack of mental and bodily strength. Few men were
of John Steele’s moral fibre, or possessed his physical
ability to sustain a prolonged and hopeless contest.
Those few who did begin the fight failed almost to
a man, fainting by the road-side. The task, worse
than Egyptian, was too much for ordinary human
strength and will ; while there was a merciful law
ever ready to remove the dreadful burden—nay,


offering rest to the weary and debt-laden—surely it
was best for broken man to seek the sanctuary!
Was it any wonder that John Steele’s companions
in misfortune fell away and left him to fight alone ?
Surely not. He was ever ready to admit this, but
the effect upon him was to strengthen the noble
fellow in his fixed determination. Like his friend
Fortunatus, he regarded all men as honestly anxious
to pay what they owed ; nay, possessed of a resolve
to do so, and be free before Death came with the
abhorred shears. The exception was the small
percentage —the mere vulgar rogues ; and this, he
held, proved his contention.
When first he declared to his creditors his fixed
resolve to work out all the debts he owed, many
smiled with incredulity—good intentions were so
common in those days—some laughed in his face ;
all doubted his power to sustain the struggle, but
none the honesty of the man’s purpose. Some few
representatives, not personal creditors, advised him
against his idea, giving many sound reasons against
it. One or two chiefs of finance spoke strongly,
warning him that he was putting into the scales his
very life, the comfort and future of wife and family.
To all this John Steele made no answer in words,
his high resolve was written plainly on his handsome
face; and men at length ceased from further
remonstrance, while watching the steady, dogged
perseverance he brought to bear in working out
his redemption. He had a fine mercantile con-
nection, making large annual profits, all available
for his purpose. A small settlement on his wife,


made in the days of his prosperity, paid the house-
hold expenses. Even this the worthy pair offered to
surrender, and would have done so, but hard-hearted
trustees curtly refused.
The hero, quiet and unaffected, was left to his self-
imposed task ; men ceased to make remarks, no
longer muttering “ Fool,” “ Idiot,” “ Insane,” whenever
his name was mentioned. As customary in the world,
friends fell away from him. He was poor and of no
account; worse still, he had by his own deliberate
act cut himself away from a future of possibilities.
He was left and abandoned by his velvet friends.
Shakespeare, he said, had drawn the picture for him.
He walked the town as of old, squaring his honest
shoulders ; his fresh, kindly face grew more serious-
looking as the years went by, but the pleasant glance
from his eye in no way diminished. He never
mixed among men without wearing a confident,
even happy look. He had no doubt about himself,
and, above all things, wished men to observe that
with him all was well and at peace.
At night, after a long study of his beloved
Shakespeare, a slight gloom frequently descended
upon him, followed by wakeful hours. He was not
conscious of actual misery as he walked the petty
den set apart for him in the little house facing the
sea, but one thought, the thought, was ever present.
Could he ever succeed in working off his debts ?
Would his strength hold out ? When, oh God ! when
would the slave be free ? Should he give up the
task and admit his defeat, and surrender ?
Long after wife and family had retired to bed


the pacing continued. If the night was windy, he
would stand for hours at his bedroom window watch-
ing his old friend, the sea, run brawling up the
sandy beach below them, and retreat again for
another noisy rush.
Silent, he stood gazing out seaward, without a
word to the dear unsleeping wife waiting watchful
in her bed. This nocturnal occupation must have
been soothing to the man’s over-driven brain, for
it was invariably followed by deep slumbers far
into the next morning. Between his heavy-laden
mind and the sea’s troubled waves he surely found
something in common.
The struggle was an unequal one, and he was
fain to admit it to his self-questioning mind ; but
all the greater would be his victory, it said in reply,
and his face kindled with renewed resolution. At
this stage of the story of John Steele’s struggle
with adversity, he might fairly be considered “ a
sight for the gods,” though all unconscious him-
self of any such qualification.
After some ten years’ ploughing his endless furrow
the man visibly drooped beneath the yoke. He
was grown old in years, his shoulders became bent.
The kindly face still remained, but his eyes looked
tired ; the whole man was tired, and for the first time
days came when he remained desolate at home ; for
the gentle companion of his life had been taken from
him ; the children had grown up and drifted away from
his hearth. “Oh for the touch of a vanished hand ! ”
were words that frequently arose in his thoughts.
His grief for the terrible affliction that fell upon


him was deep and abiding, but not made visible even
to his few intimate friends. He admitted to himself
that the self-imposed task of his life took, with him,
the first place ; no bereavement could displace that.
His courage was strong to the last; no quailing with
him now, or ever. The lesson had been set before
his eyes and he would both learn and complete it.
He had no fear of failing; all would yet come
right. To this poor, afflicted Job there would yet
come a redeemer; but at times he caught himself
wishing for a respite, and then he wearied of his
life. When this feeling prevailed and depression
had taken possession, he longed for the return of
the dove, upon whose wings the dear departed wife
had flown away, to remove him likewise and lay
him to rest; but not until the uttermost farthing
had been paid, no, a thousand times no.
Much of the burden of debt had been removed,
but much of it still remained. It was characteristic
of the man that, had his creditors presented him
with a quittance in full, it would have been declined,
and knowing this, no one approached him. His
ruling passion was to pay in full, and it would be
strong, even unto death.
Gradually and imperceptibly sickness grew over
him : first neuralgia, frequent colds, influenza, then
a touch of bronchitis, and from this time forward
he failed visibly. At the end of the winter, more
bronchitis ; then suddenly he was struck down by a
desperate attack on the lungs, and soon his struggle
with debt was lost sight of in a struggle with the
King of Terrors.


CHAPTER XXV
THE FIGHT
SOON after John Steele entered upon the self-
imposed task of paying off his staggering load
of debt, the principal creditors decided upon ap-
pointing a gentleman of sound experience to take
charge of his land boom affairs. It was a prudential
step on their part, and well understood by both
parties. John Steele’s amiable temper enabled him
to give the young accountant a proper welcome to
his offices; while the new arrival himself, feeling
deeply the delicacy of the position, and its re-
sponsibility, mentally vowed that, so far as was
compatible with his duty, nothing should be said
or done by him to hurt the feelings of his new
employer.
It very soon became evident to the office staff
that, in Mr. Lynnt, a valuable man had been placed
over them as manager, and as time went on John
Steele saw reason to bless the change. King David,
he called him, when the two men learnt to appreciate
each other’s worth ; for now he had a new master,
he said, with a smile, who was king over him.
As the years went by, and the two men worked


together to one noble end, David Lynnt became so
full of admiration for his chief’s simple honesty of
purpose, that he would himself have cheerfully
undertaken to carry on the romantic labour in the
remote event of his being called upon to do so. For
all that, he still refused to approve of the self-sacri-
ficing work, and referred to it openly as quixotic,
romantic, mad ; but he had learnt to love the
madman.
When after sitting at the same table year after
year working out the same design, David Lynnt at
length saw the signs of breaking health referred to
in the last chapter, he, for the first time, ventured on
a spirited remonstrance, and implored John Steele
to give up the struggle. The reply came in one
word, “Never.” The faithful man had put his hand
to the plough and it must abide to the end ; there
must be no turning back now. The iron, David
knew well, had entered into his soul, slaying not
him but his wife, the mother of his children. He
could have wept salt tears for the dear chief, who
had no mercy for himself, no tears.
David Lynnt never allowed two days’ absence
by his chief to pass without a visit to his rooms.
He had, at this time, a small suite on a flat in
one of the many lofty buildings of the city, children
of the land boom. With one faithful old servant to
attend his wants, and a visit from his loving daughter
when free from her hospital duties, he got along
contented and thankful. Old friends dropped in of
an evening and sat an hour or two with the man
whom all honoured, though none could imitate. The


subject of his devoted task never came up. His
friends had long since learned to understand their
friend’s beautiful but obstinate character, and were
silent; but, none the less, all shook their heads over
his stubborn resolution, predicting among themselves
a disastrous ending to a sublime cause.
A regular visitor was the friend above all others
John delighted in : one of the busiest and most
popular medical men in the city. It was but seldom
his friend troubled the doctor professionally, but of
late the signs of failing health were too plain to be
ignored.
“Well, Pills,” when the doctor entered the sick-
room and examined his patient, “you look serious
enough. What do you make of me to-day ? ”
“ 1 think, Chips, you had better get to bed at once
and let me tell the servant to light the fire.”
In the London passenger-ship of which, in his
youth, John Steele had been carpenter, the doctor
was the “ experienced surgeon.” After roaming the
world over, gathering invaluable medical knowledge,
the ship’s doctor at length found his way to the great
Austral city, at about the time his once humble
friend had reached the top of the ladder, and there
he settled down for life to practise the healing art ;
owing much of the success that came to him to the
wide-spread influence of the man of wealth, but more
to his own admirable qualities. Hence their use of
familiar nautical nick-names, known to them in old
times on board ship. Later on, when the doctor’s
stethoscope, and his tapping over the region of the
lungs, became a frequent and anxious duty, “ Pills ”


was at times changed to “ Woodpecker,” and many
were the smiling allusions to the more expressive
word.
The two men understood each other ; their mutual
regard was beyond question, unaffected and sincere,
and the death of either would have left a void in the
other’s life. The doctor had, unsuspected, watched
his friend’s health narrowly ; in his ripe judgment
it was but a question of a short time when the break-
up would come. He was satisfied to find the attack
was purely physical —that his medical art might cure ,
but if otherwise, anything was better than that he
should witness the mental upset of a noble mind,
for to that disease he knew well he could not minister.
A few days, nay hours, developed pneumonia;
and the patient, worn with pain but ever cheerful,
whispered, “ It’s all hands to the pumps now, Pills! ”
Two experienced nurses were in attendance night
and day, and the sick-room became a busy scene of
nursing. Contrary to his usual custom, the doctor
kept nothing from the patient, whose dangerous
condition he admitted openly. Every stage in the
attack was explained and commented on, until there
arrived a night when both patient and doctor knew
well the fight was to be to a finish, and would be
settled that night. The doctor knew his man and
his splendid courage so well that he calculated on
his resolution to resist attack to excite the native
“ fight ”in him, in short. It was an element of im-
portance in the case, he considered ; and he was not
mistaken when he took the unusual risk of speaking
openly to his patient of his danger.


CHAPTER XXVI
THE FINISH
THE two devoted friends, David Lynnt and the
doctor, prepared to stay the night in the sick-
room. The patient looked up smiling, and whispered
hoarsely :
“ What, Pills, all hands on deck already? Then it’s
time to man the lifeboat! Come closer, both of you,
or you won’t hear me properly. King David, if I
do go down you must carry on the good work ; it’s
a horrid legacy to leave you, but I know you well,
my good and faithful servant; your heart is in the
task, and you need no urging from me.”
John Steele did not see the doctor’s emphatic
shake of the head—surely one victim was enough ;
but it would have had no effect on David Lynnt,
whose mind was quite made up to accept the trust
if the necessity arose.
“ I wish you both to understand that I don’t want
to die this bout, and I don’t think I shall. lam
stronger than you think, Doctor, and will fight to the
last—that you know. Don’t imagine I particularly
want to live. Life has not been a bed of roses for
me of late years, and I have often latterly felt a


little tired of it; certainly when I lost my mate.
I am prepared for death if it comes, and do not fear
it; this I say reverently. Keep the life in my body
if you can, for my work is not finished ; the only
terror death can have for me is the thought that it
may come too soon. I don’t want —I don’t want—
His voice fell to a whisper, then ceased. He
appeared to be drowsy, but only for a few minutes ;
he roused up again, wonderfully, and finished the
sentence in a strong voice. “ I don’t want to sink
into the grave with my debts unpaid ; it has been
my constant prayer ; it would be dishonour for my
dear children.” The tears coursed down his wasted
cheeks as he lifted up both hands palm to palm.
Every hour hot poultices were laid on back and
chest. There was silence in the room, and the
patient spoke no more, as mutely the watcheis
performed their duties. Once, when his temperature
was taken, he looked inquiry at the doctor. It was
mounting fast, and he knew it. All day neuralgia
had hovered about both temples, settling down at
night viciously in the right temple. All the doctor s
skill had failed to stop it, and each cruel stab jerked
up the patient’s right arm ; but through it all his face
never lost its calm, resolute look. The fight was a
desperate one ; each side had all its reserves engaged
in the struggle between man and death.
At midnight the patient in a hoarse voice declared
the fight unfair. How could he battle with the
pneumonia while neuralgia was hammering at his
head ? “ Stop that, Pills,” he implored, and he would
beat the other. Almost as he spoke the neuralgia


moved over to the left temple. “A shift of wind,
Pills,” he muttered. In half an hour the awful pain
was gone entirely, defeated by doctor and nurse.
A look of intense relief came over his face, and as
he fell into a doze he muttered, “ Becalmed, Pills ; we
shall win through yet.”
The rooms opposite John Steele’s were occupied
by a worthy spinster of certain or uncertain age,
who made no secret of her admiration for her
neighbour ; and whenever they met, on the landings
or in the lift, her hero found it difficult to bring the
conversation, entirely one-sided, to an end. More
than once the doctor had slyly warned him of his
danger, and affected to believe that John’s blushes
looked suspicious.
“Beware of Priscilla,” for so they had, for some
unknown reason, agreed to name the siren of the
flat. “Remember poor little Miss Tox, and that
innocent’s matrimonial designs in your favourite
‘ Dombey and Son.’ ”
During the day and night the great town had
been full of the turmoil and cries of a general
election, and tenants of the flat were arriving at all
hours, more or less noisy. Long past midnight the
last lift vomited forth upon the landing a scuffling
party of “ free and independent ”; one of them
stumbled up against Priscilla’s bedroom door, and
that vestal forthwith let out a scream loud enough
to be heard in the adjoining rooms. The suffering
man, without looking up, whispered, “Woodpecker,
Priscilla must be defended.” The doctor was
intensely amused at the words, and at such a critical


time He leant forward in his chair, face buried
between his knees, his shoulders shaking silently like
a jelly, with suppressed merriment. It was a good
sign for the patient.
At two o’clock, when the temperature was taken,
he gave David Lynnt a look of dismay ; the rise had
increased. At this rate the crisis, whether for good
or evil, would not be long delayed. The night nurse,
a delicate woman, showed signs of exhaustion ; she
had been kept moving all the night. The doctor
whispered to her to go into the next room and get
a rest, and from that time forward the two friends
performed as tenderly as two women all the duties
of nursing the sick man. The patient never dis-
covered the change, and burning with fever, kept
calling out :
« Nurse, I’m thirsty. Nurse, give me a big drink
this time. Give me a "whole bucketful.
At times some half-delirious words escaped him.
Suddenly he sat up in bed with open eyes glaring
at vacancy, and speaking hurriedly.
« David, we must begin all over again. In the palm
of my hand are a few grains of sand and scraps of
mother-earth, all that now remains of the past, but
enough to begin again another eternal system better
than the last. I tell you there is plenty of time;
we have a hundred thousand years before us. Give
me my book, the book of fate and death ; there is a
book-fiend in the room, a mere worm ; turn him out,
I say.”
“ John, lie back, dear .friend, and take your rest.
David and I are with you ; all will yet be well.”


Hard, callous man, accustomed to seeing death in
every form, his voice broke with emotion as he
busied himself with the thermometer.
Speaking audibly for the ear of the patient, he
remarked to David Lynnt, shortly afterwards, that
the rise in temperature was arrested. In another
hour he announced, in an excited whisper, a fall of
one degree, and, good sign, the insatiable thirst was
abating.
When at earliest dawn a gleam of light cheered
the room, the fall in the patient’s temperature was
still more marked ; the doctor’s face wore a look of
triumph as he glanced at the companion of his
night s watch. They busied themselves making a
pot of tea, and all three partook—the patient silently
and eagerly swallowing a large cupful. A few
minutes later and his regular breathing announced
that he was in a sound sleep, which lasted several
hours.
The day nurse, warned to come early, softly
entered the room with a large bunch of fresh flowers
in her hand. Stepping to the window she let in
Heavens soft morning sunlight. Turning round, she
and David Lynnt listened reverently to the doctor’s
short but fervent prayer of thanks for the victory.
The fight was over, fought to a finish.
As the two friends walked away to seek the
freshening-up their tiring vigils of the night just
passed rendered necessary, “ Pills,” as the worthy
doctor was affectionately named by the old sailor-
friend for whose life he had battled the night
through, took David’s arm with a sly look in his


u ii ■ ——f 3Mt
»• - /
\ ftck H
v .. > *, *WIT M * , ”^ r i
l - JK '^P-jifL
-if %t
HnL%h|
U(C ■ - ■ ft 1 ■'Vvl
-.flBr- ■„, MjFJ| , tLi
fa s jfe>ttjna




eyes. David was not unprepared for what was to
come ; a long experience of the doctor’s ways and
weaknesses taught him not only to brace up in
readiness for the infliction that he knew with so
much certainty was at hand, but fend it off if by any
sort of good fortune he could contrive to do so. In
a word the good old fellow, dear to friends and
patients, had a favourite weakness for Greek mytho-
logy, and never lost an opening for lugging his
darling study into conversation. The Greeks of old
were well enough in their way, declared his much-
tried intimates, but tiresome and quite out of fashion,
they voted ; and moreover made fun of it all when
retreat was cut off and escape impossible, for the
doctor was skilful at buttonholing his victims.
“ Dauvid lad, ye ken weel that picture by Leighton
—the Alcestis ;it was on view here in oor gollery a
few months, ye’ll remember,” the doctor urged,
lapsing into his native Doric—a certain sign of the
coming Greek story, thought worn-out David.
“ I do indeed,” he replied testily ; “my memory
would be going fast if I didn’t, Doctor. But con-
sider, I’m tired, hungry, thirsty ; I want a bath, a
cheroot, and a snooze for an hour or two; I want
anything but to talk of Alcestis after such a terrible
night—or at any time. Spare me now, my best of
doctors, and I’ll give you a chance of bowling at
me with that awful Greek mythology, after I obtain
the much-needed restoration.”
“ Mon, aa’l maybe forget aa’ aboot et the next tame
we hae a crack.”
“ No such luck, dear Doctor ; you’ll lug in your


confounded mythology wherever we are. There’s no
getting away from it or you,” he cried, laughing,
“ when you turn on the hose. I really fear you’ll
make yourself disliked, if such a thing were possible.
How often have we implored you to give up worry-
ing us about those impossible old Greeks. Great
heavens, what we’ve all borne from you ! ”
“ But, Dauvid lad,” began the old doctor coaxingly,
“ consider noo an’ lesten.”
“Not a word, you shameless old sawbones, will
I listen to about Alcestis now ; I’ll bolt. Human
nature under present trials is unfit for the Greek
mythology; it’s only intended for men in health,
and I’m half dead with fatigue. It might do me a
serious injury, and besides, I know what you’re
going to tell me ; I’ve heard it from you a dozen
times already, whenever you’ve come away from
a ‘ case ’ that fits it. Have mercy do, after such a
night-watch.”
“ Weel, weel,” said the doctor, “ad admet the
season, perhaps, is no just tamed for Greek mythology.
Ye know, Dauvid, ad thenk aa’m a bet geeven to
the delaightfu’ study, et’s aa’ways fresh tae me and
must oot. Aa’ the neght ad could see that gran’
fellow Hercules feghting for the body of Alcestis.
No, aa mean John Steele. . . . What! gone off are
ye, Dauvid ? I don’t remember ever telling ye the
mestical story before the noo. Lord save us! come
awa’, mon, and I’ll postpone Alcestis for a more
judeecious tame. What’s that ye say, puppy ?
‘ When Greek meets Greek ’ —l canna mak oot
raightly what he means—hoot, toots. I’ll order


breakfast, aa’m thcnking. Fuleish lad, ye are,
Dauvid, wi’ aa’ ye chances; there’s mony a brau
carl wad loe to hear tell o’ the Alcestis.”
Half an hour later, David Lynnt, fresh from his
bath, looking into the great club dining-room, found
it tenanted by two solitary individuals —one, a dis-
consolate waiter with a bewildered half-amused look
in his puzzled face ; the good old doctor the other,
sitting at table sound asleep with head resting on
arms across a warm breakfast plate.
David looked his question at the waiter.
“ I can’t think what’s gone wrong, sir, with the
doctor. After you left the room he ordered breakfast
—a good one it is too —but before I could bring
in the porridge ordered to begin with, he settled
his head down on the table as you see him, and
in a moment seemed to go fast asleep. Thinking
he’d wake up again as soon as I began to rattle the
plates, I brought in the entire order, even to the
strawberries, and put all down on the table around
him ; but it will be stone cold in a few minutes.’’
“ Aha,” laughed David quietly to himself, as he
surveyed his old friend’s kind white head slum-
bering peacefully in a soup plate and surrounded
by a substantial halo of the choicest items in the
breakfast menu. “Speak in whispers, waiter, or he
may wake up and mar my plan. His breakfast shall
be mine ; save me the trouble of ordering. I’ll im-
pound it and soon put the good things out of sight;
they shan’t grow cold while I’ve an appetite to
appease. A capital find I’ve made this morning:
earned it too. The grilled kidneys are perfect. What


a fine feast the good old fellow laid out for himself!
What fun it will be when he wakes up and finds
the cupboard bare ! Hush, not a word ;by George,
he’s stirring ! ”
“ Dauvid, ye shameless cuckoo,” cried the doctor,
waking up with a start. “ Whare’s maa breakfast ?
What! you’ve gone through it aa’ to the marmalede
whiles I’ve takken forty winks. Mad, certie; but
you’ve got much to answer for—l’ll tell aa’ hands
how I’ve been served the day.”
“If you do,” cried David, securing the plate of
strawberries, “ I’ll tell where I found your head this
morning, and its aureole of loaded dishes. Never
mind, old friend, there’s plenty where that came from.
Cry quits, order a fresh breakfast, and while it’s
cooking go off and get your bath.”
“ Mon, Dauvid, yer’e giving gude advice, for
about the first tame in aa’ yer lafe. I’ll awa’.”


PART 111
CHAPTER XXVII
PROPONTIC I
“ ‘ THEN,’ cried young Napo-o-lee-on, grasping
vy his mother by the hand. ‘ Now, mother,
do-o-o have patience, until I’m able for to com-
ma-and.’ ”
“ That’s right, William —the last line rapidly ! ” ex-
claimed Fortune, looking in on Sailor Bill at work
in his cabin on the morning after the yacht was
at sea. “ Can any authority inform us how many
verses there are in that mournful ditty of yours?
I can affirm to twenty-two myself, and feel sure
there are as many more. When the military glutton
of your song ceases craving for more worlds to
conquer, give your special attention to my dear
old friend, Mr. Steele, who is a guest with us this
voyage, and let me know when he is ready to visit
the deck.”
Sailor Bill, or William as he had been officially
christened since taking service with Fortune, was


no longer the stripling of the early gold-hunting
days. His years were few in those free happy times ;
they were now many, but his gaiety and humour
were unabated.
The sword that Tommy the Nut had so often
threatened to drop on his head had fallen, but
Bill had not found the blow so destructive as terror
had long pictured to his simple mind. The sword
fell on him in Sydney, where he one day found
himself in the custody of two “jollies,” as Bill
promptly named his captors. Fortune proved a
friend in need and lost no time in obtaining a pardon
from the commodore of the station, but had a stiff
fine to pay for his favourite’s liberty. The gloomy
incident, however, had an ending that sent Bill into
hornpipes of rejoicing, as it led to the discovery
and arrest of Tommy the informer, likewise deserter,
who duly found his way to the cells, where a little
sober reflection convinced him that he had “ poured
out the baby with the bath.” On visitors’ days Bill
regularly saw his old shipmate, who had grown as
savage as an old baboon. Whether it was by accident
or design did not transpire, but amongst the luxuries
Bill usually brought with him was a packet of nuts,
which the sentiy, who knew his prisoner well, thought
an appropriate gift.
One beautiful day when near the tropics steering
north for the Great Barrier Reef, Fortune and
his friend found themselves in their easy-chairs on
deck, side by side, disinclined for reading, but not
for a cheroot and gossip. i
John Steele opened the conversation by remarking


on the fine crew "he had seen about the decks and
the numerous officers.
“You certainly do the thing well, Fortunatus ; the
men are a fine body and the officers look smart,
all dressed, I observe, in man-of-war fashion, but
you seem to have a very large crew.”
“ To-morrow, if you are well enough, you shall go
round the ship with me and view the batteries, you
will then better understand why cur crew is so
numerous. This is the second steam yacht of the
same name I have had built for me. Ihe first was
in the southern seas with me, about ten years ago,
when your grand colonies were entering the acute
stage of the land boom troubles ; and glad enough
I was to shorten my visit.
“Some few years after, I was cruising in the
eastern seas with my wife and son and a pleasant
party of guests on board, when we called in at
Yokohama. I never dreamt that the yacht would
not leave that port my property, but, strange to
say, so it turned out, as I hinted to you before. I
very soon saw good reasons for the belief that the
Japanese Government intended fighting China ; the
little people were not in the least afraid of the yellow
giant of the East.
“ The Propontic then was the same as her name-
sake now, well armed with the best modern guns,
and carried an equally good crew ; many of the men
and officers are still with me on board. She was
quite as big as this vessel, but not so fast, though
very speedy. I was very proud of her, as indeed I
am of this yacht. She was what I have always


determined any steam-yacht of mine should be, a
credit to her country, not solely given up to pleasure,
but fit for the service of the State if ever called
upon.”
“You use the old-fashioned spelling of her name,”
remarked John Steele. “When I was a lad in the
Levant trade, we pronounced it Propontis. I
think I can put my finger on the passage in Othello
where you get your name from.”
“ I have always been much impressed by that fine
language ; you will find the words engraved in more
than one part of my yacht; it is our motto. ‘ Like
to the Pontic Sea, whose icy current and compulsive
course ne’er feels retiring ebb but keeps due on,”’
he quoted. “It reflects the image of our grand
country’s history, and we may be sure it ever will.
“At the time, in Japan, I am speaking of, I had
a large sum in gold and silver coin in the yacht’s
strong room —a hundred thousand pounds or two.
It had been my rule ever since I possessed a steam-
yacht to carry large sums of ready cash on board.
You may think it an eccentric habit of mine, but
there is method in it, and I have found the plan a
capital means for increasing my wealth, as in this
case, at least, you will shortly perceive.
“The Japanese Admiralty were much impressed
by my vessel, as indeed was only natural. There
was nothing like her, in point of usefulness, in their
whole navy, which was not large at that time, and
not only badly wanted enlarging, but was being en-
larged rapidly. It was soon made apparent to me by
the Japanese that they would give much to possess


her. She was well adapted for despatch work, and
with her valuable armament could give a good
account of herself if called upon to do so.
“ It was no part of my plan to sell the yacht;
the idea was quite repugnant to me ; moreover, it
would be inconvenient to be turned out of her
so far from home, and there were other reasons.
The Japanese interpreted my reserve aright ; the
courteous little people evidently hesitated to make
direct proposals to a private English gentleman
for the purchase of his yacht —his floating home in
fact; but for all that, they had set their minds on
having her, and succeeded.”
“ I’m quite anxious to learn how they overcame
your scruples.”
“ You shall hear. It was intimated to me that
his Majesty the Emperor had signified his desire to
pay the yacht a visit. I had been presented to his
Majesty after my arrival, and of course made great
preparations for the imperial reception, which I con-
sidered a distinguished honour, little thinking that
the sale of the yacht would arise out of it. The
Emperor duly came on the promised visit with a
brilliant suite, examined the vessel minutely, and was
most gracious in his speech and bearing towards me,
even going so far as to observe that he wished he
possessed so fine a yacht.
“It was both courtly and skilful, —yacht for the
Emperor ; not necessarily, mark you, warship for the
navy. I bowed low to the compliment from his
Majesty, intimating that my yacht was at his
Majesty’s command. What else could I do? The


occasion demanded that I should be a courtier ; there
was no alternative.”
“ But how did you manage about the cash on
board ? ”
“ Easily and profitably. I had seen much of the
Japanese war preparations, both ashore and afloat,
and was greatly impressed. The spirit of the people
ran high and the nation was ready. On the other
hand, I knew the Chinese, their conceit and unreadi-
ness ; and I foresaw that the Japanese would be likely
to get in with the first blow, which as a fact they
did when, in course of time, they struck out. In a
word I decided to back the noble little people with
both money and yacht.
“ When next day the head of the Admiralty came
on board, and learned for the first time of the treasure
in the yacht, he was greatly astonished ; but still
more so when I made it a condition that the Govern-
ment took both ship and money.
“A large sum in ready cash at the beginning of
a costly war was a perfect God-send. I took long-
dated exchequer bills in payment, which were safe
in the Bank of England within six weeks, finally
leaving profit enough to build a couple of similar
yachts. It was certainly enormous, but then I took
a big risk. Ihere was no haggling; they made a
splendid offer; I closed with it ; they took over ship
and treasure, and were delighted with their bargain,
d rue, as I have said, I didn’t care to part with our
floating home, but there was solace of a kind in it.
“ Several of the crew and two of the officers took
service with the Japanese, and I learnt from them


afterwards that the Propontic more than came up to
expectations, proving a most valuable addition to
the fleet even at her enormous cost. I contracted
for a duplicate of her by cable with up-to-date im-
provements. By the time we reached England she
was well on in the building, and she it is you are
now afloat in, John.”
“ It was certainly a masterly stroke of business,
and I enjoy your story ; but I can easily understand
the disinclination you must have felt in selling such
a bonny craft, even at your own price. I don’t
suppose you’ll let this one go as you did the last.”
“ I don’t know that, John ; all depends on whether
my country ever needs her. In such an event she
would be handed over cheerfully, and as a free gift
to the State, of course ; of that you may be perfectly
sure.”
“ I can’t tell you, Fortunatus, how pleased I was
to find that sailor-servant of yours on board ; he
lost no time in recalling to my memory your early
days in Melbourne. Except the gray hairs that
come unbidden to all of us, he looks the same happy
little man that danced his inimitable hornpipes in
your dining-room for the guests’ amusement after
dinner. Those brown eyes that danced as merrily
as his legs have the same dog-like look of devotion
in them.”
“He has never faltered in his devotion for me,”
said Fortune, “ and young Edward shares it ; is more
a friend than a servant, and would die for either
of us. On board he is invaluable. Looks after my
guests and every fine evening sings and dances for


the watch on deck. He is bones, banjo man, and
clog dancer, and is the only person on board who
can raise a smile on Old Bailey’s face. But he’s
lately taken to sentimental songs, which I scarcely
appreciate ; you know how all seamen secrete a sort
of shamefaced weakness for them.”
“ I d°> indeed. There were times on board ship
when I have permitted myself the luxury of roaring
out a lugubrious ditty as my contribution to fore-
castle festivity.”


CHAPTER XXVIII
PROPONTIC II
WHEN next day Steele came on deck, his
improved looks were generally noticed.
“ Aha,” said Fortune, “ cotton-wool gone by this
time, I hope; we shall soon have you in buckram.
Now come round with me and I will introduce you
to our guests from Capetown, and the ship’s officers.
This done, you shall come with me forward ; I want
to show you the invalids’ quarters on board here,
where you will perceive we have comfortable sea-
lodgings for two or three score of sick folk, medical
attendant, and nurses, which I always carry on board.
“ It has ever been my rule to take hopelessly sick
people with me from the ports we call at, who need
a change of air, and would probably never recover
health without it. I have done this ever since I first
owned a steam-yacht; it is one of the humble attempts
I make of showing gratitude to Heaven for all
its kind gifts to me and mine. The Propontic is
thought of gratefully in most of the European ports.
Wherever we call in I usually find a few stubborn
cases in the hospitals, not incurables, but wanting
a sea change to make a perfect cure. These are


thankfully entrusted to our care by the hospital
authorities, and at end of the cruise returned
home again in safety—invariably cured. I make
no difference in nationality, and have had as many
as sixty patients on board at one time. Good food
and attendance and the sweet sea breezes are usually
all the tonic that the poor creatures need ; and I
assure you my wife and I have our reward in
boundless gratitude,”
“ How did you manage about your sick folk when
you sold the last Propontic to the Japanese?”
“ Luckily I had no ‘ cases ’ on board with me
that voyage, nor have I this, except a dozen friends
or so in the cabin, all more or less badly wounded
officers from the Boer war. It might have proved
very embarrassing in China to bring more with me.
There will be fighting, I feel sure, and if we are in
luck the Propontic may take a hand.”
John Steele’s face brightened up, “ What! in the
fighting, did you say ? Then, Fortunatus, you won’t
be so hard-hearted as to keep me out of it. Man
alive, you couldn’t if you tried ! Give me a station
in the gun-drill to-morrow, or make me carpenter’s
mate ; you remember my early history.”
When John Steele turned in that night, his
thoughts ran on Fortune. The years of prosperity
had influenced him for good. His was ever a fine
nature, he recalled, and it was in no way impaired
by riches. But was he a happy man ? Using an old
sailor’s expression, he thought this “ dubersome,”
and while thinking of a reason why, John fell into
a healthy sleep.


On board the Propontic, as she glided like a wraith
through the water, were Zenobia, her son Edward,
the young Arab prince—son of Fortune’s Arabian
friend, the sultan near Aden —and the invalid officers
from the Cape ; all the latter badly, a few danger-
ously, wounded ; and of course Old Bailey.
When John Steele first embarked he noticed a
face not quite strange to him, but he was too listless
from bad health to identify the owner. Afterwards
he recalled the man who in old days was never far
away when Fortune was visible. Guide, philosopher,
friend, manager, adviser, companion—no one ever
discovered his real status. When chattering with
Fortune on deck, Old Bailey, as everybody called
him, would sit or walk with them, sometimes join
in the conversation, but usually silent and pre-
occupied. He would come and go in an objectless
sort of way, and always unnoticed ; but ever as of
old, with his peculiar glassy eyes turned towards
Fortune whenever he spoke. No one appeared to
be conscious of his presence; he was seldom seen
conversing with any person, unless with Zenobia ,
and at such times he appeared to be mostly a
listener.
Fortune took so little notice of Old Bailey, that
he seemed to be unaware of his existence at any
time. Old Bailey’s special duty on board was the
charge of the treasure and accounts. At night,
whenever cards were introduced, it was amusing to
watch his eager play : bending over his cards with
jealous eyes, scanning the play narrowly, grasping
his petty gains with talon-like fingers, or losing the


trifling stakes with deep anxiety—uttering never
a word.
A few days before reaching Hong-Kong, Fortune
delighted John Steele by taking him on a second
round of inspection of the batteries, two of the
invalid officers going with them. On all fine days
there was gun-drill, and to the eyes of the soldier-
officers the weapons were worked with surprising
skill—two gunnery instructors being carried for
teaching purposes. The after battery, which con-
sisted of two quick-firers, was in charge of Edward
and the Black Prince. Fortune, himself thoroughly
drilled and experienced both in the navigation of the
ship and her fighting gear, expressed privately to
Steele his great delight at the smart efficiency of
both the youngsters and their battery.
The forward battery consisted of one quick-firer
only, of rather heavier metal; but the pride of
Fortune, and indeed of the entire crew, were con-
centrated on the two Long Toms amidships. These
were kept, when the yacht was at sea, on a movable
platform on the lower deck, the exercises and drill
pertaining to them being conducted there; but by
means of fine mechanical contrivances the guns, with
their platform and turret, could be raised to the
upper deck and fought in that position. The design
was to fight these heavy guns in smooth water or
for river-work, and only from the upper deck. Each
gun in the yacht possessed independent armour
protection.
“ I assure you,” observed Fortune, “ our guns are
not here as mere ornaments. The officers and crew


in the yacht are kept up to man-of-war efficiency, as
you have noticed, and we have more than once been
closely inspected and put through our facings by
naval officers invited for the purpose, whenever we
find ourselves on an admiral’s station.
“I’m a great believer in arming our fast steam-
yachts, and I think I am the first yacht-owner to
set the example. The pleasures of yachting are in
no way diminished by keeping the vessel in a
position to serve our country. I have ever thought
that should be the first duty with loyal Britons. It
certainly is with me ; and you know ‘ a volunteer is
better than two pressed men,’ John. As a rule the
guns are kept stowed away, and ‘ quakei guns used
in their place for practice ; but at present they are
in use, as you perceive—ready for business. ’


CHAPTER XXIX
FRENCHMAN AND TEUTON
“ XT OW, old friend, I’m just in the humour to-day
f° r a crack with you, so start a subject for
discussion between the puffs of our after-breakfast
cheroots.”
“When you came on deck,” said John Steele in
reply, “ I was thinking what an interesting sea
experience you must have enjoyed in all the years
of your yachting career; not mere pleasure yachting
either, I suspect, both from what I see and you
tell me.”
“ No, I think I can fairly claim to have made my
pleasures at sea in the yacht useful to hundreds of
the poor, and of some slight service to my country.
All the logs of each cruise are carefully preserved,
and some day the skeleton records may be clothed
with much that is of interest to the world.”
“ I was greatly interested by that passage inside
the Great Barrier Reef you took the Propontic
through ; it’s my first experience of those waters.”
“Half a dozen times, at least, I’ve been through
in my yacht. The passage always impresses me by
its vastness and importance ; many hundred miles


in length, about an average of thirty-five miles in
width, and all the work of tiny marine insects, never
idle. The formation of the great passage is unique-
nothing to compare with it anywhere. It is stupen-
dous evidence of what the coral-making insect can
accomplish in submarine architecture. Australia
should be proud of that remarkable water-way, and
place a high value on its naval importance.
«if ever you clothe those skeleton logs you
mentioned, I imagine you can tell the world much
of your visits to ports and peoples. Of late years
in particular, you must have seen and heard much in
Europe that was disagreeable to an Englishman,
in some continental ports, at least.
“ Much indeed,” said Fortune. “ You are quite right
in your surmise. During the last few years, for that
reason, I have seldom entered a French or German
port. When first I went yachting, the people-
speaking of the French—were pleasant enough to
deal with. Whatever they thought of us British,
they covered it up with a sort of polite veneer,
but of late years I have observed no attempt made
to conceal what can only be described as brutal
hostility towards us, wanting, I thought at times,
but little to set it all aflame. Indeed, I often felt
especially after living in Paris for a week or two —
that the French, at least of the city, have altered
very much both in character and appearance, not
to us only, but to themselves.
“You see no longer, or at least not so often, that
delightful springiness, nor hear so frequently the
gay, rippling laughter of which the French alone


of all the Europeans were the possessors. They
might have been insolent, contemptuous of your
island clumsiness, indifferent to your national self-
respect , but all this was accompanied by a cheery
semi-polite manner—eyes dancing with the fun of
it. You couldn’t for the life of you take them
seriously. But now the French—those of them you
note in the streets of Paris—look sullen at times,
and marked with fixed discontent. An opportunity
for rudeness is seldom neglected, and is even thrust
in your face, especially if you hail from Perfide
Albion, in a manner there is no mistaking. They
seem to me to be altered for the worse, look
pre-occupied, like people constantly indulging in
memories of better days and lost opportunities,
jealous the while of a neighbour’s prosperity. They
give you the idea, John, of a disappointed people,
and you can’t miss seeing it in the Frenchman’s
face. Ihe pity of it! for they are certainly a great
race,”
“ 1 suppose what the French have suffered in war
and revolution since Malbrouk finished with them,
is ieally at the bottom of this alteration you are
speaking of. Poor devils, what they must have
suffered from the Germans, especially in all that
goes to make life worth having. Depend upon it,
allowances made, they have come through their
troubles with wonderful self-respect and control.
Just consider how they have been compelled to
suppress their natural feeling since the Franco-
German war. We know, lor one of their best men
has confessed it, that all good Frenchmen ever


thought, but never spoke, of revenge for provinces
lost. Such a habit of introspection must of necessity
change a people, even to their looks and language.”
“ All things considered, the French, on the whole,
have shown wonderful self-restraint. I don’t suppose,
John, that any nation on earth would, after some
two hundred years of war and misfortune, present
such a brave front to the world. But having said
this, you find, unfortunately, it is about all you can
say for latter-day France. No people have shown
so much of the pride that goeth before a fall; no
people who have fallen so often and still stand up
to it like the fine fellows they really are.”
“ You are severe, but, I’m afraid, correct. I say
‘ afraid,’ because it seems to me that even now
Frenchmen may be riding for a fall —a worse tumble
than ever.”
“ I chime in with you there, and for this reason ;
that the next stumble will be followed by a fall
that will quiet France for all time, and the blow,
I fear, is more than likely to come from us.
“ This is said more in sorrow than anger, and
with the feeling strong within me, that nothing but
a change in French treatment of England can
avert war in the long run. Look at the position
of the two countries —near, and should be dear,
neighbours. On the north of the Channel, every-
thing that makes for peace and friendship; on
the south of it, everything that makes for unrest
and aggression. Pin-pricks everywhere, raw places
kept smarting; hostility shown at all times, in
season and out of season ; insults in showers, not


always sparing our most revered and exalted, and
only barely falling short of national contumely;
their public men, admirals, generals, ex-ministers,
pushing forward with schemes for the invasion and
destruction of a friendly State, whose sole offence
its prosperity, whose sole attraction its plunder.
“ Those amongst us who take the trouble to con-
template the attitude of the French towards our
country are bewildered to find an entire people
filled with one absorbing desire, and that the hope
of some day destroying a harmless but successful
neighbour across the Channel. Surely there will
come a sharp awakening; not perhaps to the country
whose thoughts and words are ever of invasion, but
to the people opposite who are for ever threatened
with attack.
“It’s a terrible state of things for individual or
nation, the knowledge that there is a man next
door, or nation close to, ever ready with unsleeping
vigilance to pounce upon and destroy the neigh-
bour living in a state of false security. Is our
glorious past and magnificent present to lie at the
feet of some luck chance of successful invasion ; the
bright light of a civilising future to be quenched by
the tiger-monkeys of the Seine, or of any invaders,
for that matter ? *
“Try another cheroot, John, and light the small
end, as dear old Colonel Newcome says. To resume :
the attitude of watchful hostility has been maintained
by France for many decades, and may be for many
* Written in 1900.


more, without effect. But the feeling may suddenly
arrive to the peace-loving neighbour that the con-
dition of affairs has become intolerable; that the
gnashing of teeth and whetting of tusks for his special
warning must cease, once for all.
“The sleepy lion will some day perhaps awake
to realise that the situation is full of acute danger
to all he holds dearest. It’s true he is safe just now ;
but what if an outbreak in India, another in South
Africa, God knows what, or where ? Should he wait
with eyes closed for the opening the fates may give
his enemy to rend in pieces, and quench in blood
and fire, a glorious national life ? ”
“No need to answer your questions—the fates
will settle it all,” said Steele. “ But my own insig-
nificant opinion is that John Bull might some fine
day decide to neither wait for fates nor French nor
Germans.”
“ It’s very difficult to say what is best. The old
country is hard to move, but harder still to restrain
when her blood is up. I confess to you, John, that
I have for years past been greatly drawn to what
I don’t doubt you will laugh at as a fad. All the
same, I have worked myself up into the firm belief
that nothing else in this world will cure French
restlessness and designs of invasion. More than
that, I firmly believe my plan would lead to the
lasting peace of Europe. It is that Britain,” re-
marked Fortune, looking very serious, “ should
re-possess herself of Calais! There ! my secret is
out ; you may well look astonished.”
“ Astonished, my dear friend, I’m staggered. It’s


pure midsummer madness, or fadness, on the part
of an otherwise sensible man.”
“ Of course you do ; the suggestion staggered me
when first it came into my head; I hardly dared to
give it thought. But I can look at my proposal now
dispassionately, and in the confident belief that
sooner or later our country will see the absolute
necessity, for the sake of her peace and security,
of again laying the lion’s paw upon Calais. In
this lies the only solution of England’s difficulty.
“ For a time, after this idea of Calais took possession
of me, I used to feel like a conspirator, going about
with my bosom full of perilous stuff; and until
now I never spoke my thoughts aloud. This fact,
of itself, indicates the condition of mind common
to most Englishmen. Observe, John, that every
possible and impossible plan for the invasion of
England—the seizure of Chatham, the capture of
London, the destruction of defenceless coast-towns—
are quite fit and proper subjects for French discus-
sion ; not confined to a reptile press either, but by
men of rank, ex-ministers, admirals and generals
high in their service. Naval estimates are specially
designed for the destruction of British commerce.
“On the other hand, you never hear the question
publicly raised in England for attack on France.
Why, if such a question as the capture of Calais
became a subject for public discussion by British
naval or military men, what a pow-wow would
be heard in France! ”
“ It would be worth while starting the discussion
in England for the fun of the thing. God ! what


a fury of indignation our Gallic friends would work
themselves into. An angry ant-heap would about
describe it. What! that we should dare to talk
of invading France cUrie, and by the men of Perfide
Albion! They possess no brains, these island bull-
dogs—mashed turnips only. But joking apart, I think
it’s time we dropped the unwise habit of speaking
with bated breath for fear of hurting our dear
neighbours’ feelings, any of them. A little plain
speaking, and damn the odds, might do a world
of good,” remarked bluff John Steele, who still
indulged himself in a good round oath whenever
the subject called for one. “Calais considered as
an open door into France might have a capital
effect, if only for discussion, and the British people
would hear no more frothy talk of invasion by
the Frenchmen.”
“ John, don’t turn it into a joke ; let us consider
that idea of mine seriously. Calais lies on the north
flank of France. In our hands, no French army
dare march eastwards upon any neighbour’s frontiers
without our approval. It would take more strength
than France possesses, or is ever likely to possess,
to make an aggressive movement east, and hold
back a British army from a flanking march out of
Calais, at one and the same time. The mere threat
would be quite sufficient to quieten the country.
On the other hand, how well it would work for
France if her eastern neighbour attempted an in-
vading movement into her ! England in posses-
sion of Calais would have it in her power to raise
the warning finger, and prevent the invasion of


her ancient enemy, by the paramount position
held at Calais. It would have saved France from
the Germans !
“Yes, John, the more I think of it, the more I
am persuaded that for England’s safety—for Europe’s
peace —we should re-possess ourselves of Calais.
“ I don’t pretend to offer an expert’s opinion,
but it seems to me that France could present no
successful resistance to a British attack on Calais.
The place seems made for final British occupation,
and modern cannon may be destined to effect its
conquest. The town lies low, without any natural
defences. On the opposite shore lie Dover cliffs,
several hundred feet high ; even now as we talk
the gun is most likely designed that will carry its
shell to Calais green. Depend upon it, the next
war with France will be our last, as Calais will
then pass into our hands again, for all time.
“ Except for the naked fact that Queen Mary
and her Spanish husband contrived to lose Calais
for England some three hundred and forty years
ago, it is surprising how little we know of the
event, or its history during the two hundred and
eleven years the town was English. Up to its
conquest by our third Edward, and his heroic son
the Black Prince, the place was a thorn in the side
of Britain. History tells us very little about this,
but we may judge of the feeling in the England of
that time by the persistent determination of the
victor of Cregy to secure Calais, which, by the way,
took him twelve months to reduce.
“ From that time forward up to its loss by Queen


Mary, we hear little or nothing of French pin-pricks
or aggression so far as England is affected. The open
door into France must have been efficacious in its
influence upon the people. Even during the Wars
of the Roses—that long wasting period of British
history—peace reigned between the two countries
fairly well. France remains England’s ‘ sweet enemy ’
even up to Marlborough’s time, when Calais had long
been lost to us. Butin reality, dreams of invasion and
conquest are returned to again and again, even from
the time Calais is restored to the arms of France.
Her ascendancy really commences from the re-
taking of Calais.
“ Whether it is monarchy or revolution, or the
changes from republic to empire and vice versa ,
the monotonous cry to invade England is heard,
yesterday, to-day, and doubtless again to-morrow.
“ They say threatened men live long, John, but
I never heard that threats prolong life. The thing
grows tiresome and irritating ; if ever France loses
Calais, she will know the why and the wheiefore.
“ One word more before I finish,’’ remarked Fortune.
“ I have ever been puzzled by the apparent unconcern
of England after the loss of Calais. Excepting
Queen Mary’s broken-hearted remark about the
surrender —and, mind, for all that she did nothing
to save Calais —but little is said in contemporary
history about the shameful loss. What was the
reason for this apathy? Was it that the people
of that day were out of sympathy with their queen,
and instinctively distrusted her Spanish husband,
and that in consequence they failed to see any reason


why they should regard her misfortunes as theirs
also? In the next reign—her great sister’s—they
were ready enough to do battle on land and sea
at her bidding, aye, and without it. It’s all very
puzzling. Even Shakespeare makes no moan over
the loss of Calais ; his only references to it are as an
English town.”
“By George!” cried John Steele, “there goes
the tiffin bell, of much more importance to a hungry
man than Calais. But while we flourish our knives
and forks, I will add another word or two to yours
about a second of Old England’s neighbours, Germany.
France is not all to blame. She might make out
a case against us ; but with the other it is nothing
but pure envy.
“ 1 remember,” he observed, “ a funny song out
of a comic opera, very popular in its day, dilating
on the importance of being born an Englishman.
That frivolous ditty is one of the many proud ways
we have of setting up as the salt of the earth, that
continentals hate us for. All Europe can’t be
English, you know, that s certain,” said the hungry
man between mouthfuls of cold ham ; “ but if I was
compelled to change my nationality, I would prefer
to be of any nation—even a Frenchman—rather
than ‘jump-up’ German, as an Australian black-
fellow would express it. The Germans are beyond
question a splendid race with great qualities, but
they can never be suspected of secreting the one
in particular that qualifies them to inherit the earth,
or at least the huge cantles of it that belong to Old
England. They are rightly named the Chinese of


Europe, by those who have seen and appreciate the
marvellous and untiring industry of both peoples ;
but we may rest assured, that not until the German
bull-frogs are distended to the enormous proportions
in mileage and numbers possessed by China will
Germany be as safe from dismemberment.
“ There is no need to bother about the insults the
British people good-naturedly passed over almost in
silence —I won’t condescend to say suffer and who
seldom stop to cast them back again. Its this sort
of pride and indifference on our part, this difficulty
Britons have in taking the continental threats seriously,
that most galls the dear neighbour nations. We don’t
and we won’t stoop to conquer ; but all of them alike
feel this pride of ours, and grind their impotent teeth
in rage and hatred. They ‘ bite the granite.’ ”
“No need to labour this view of the case ; but come
to your reasons, John, for saying nothing would tempt
you to turn German. I want to hear that.”
“So you shall, but let me come to it in my own
fashion. The reason I most deeply feel, is sticking
out of every map of Europe for all those who choose
to study it. The Germans themselves see it in-
stinctively, and know what a shadow it casts over
them, better than most people, I fancy. It speaks
in a thousand tongues, looks it out of countless eyes,
not friendly ones, either. They see a hand we can-
not see, hear a voice we cannot hear. One false step,
one such a trouble as we have been precipitated
into with South Africa, and the Fatherland will
forthwith be ground to fine powder between the
upper and nether millstones of Russia and France,


her dear either side neighbours. The geography
of north Europe is inexorable as against Germany—
mushroom empire. She lies between two great fierce
devouring eyes, glaring Polyphemus-like from east
and west upon their common neighbour, lying
unquiet and hysterical between them. It is the
nightmare of Germany.
“Now while I am on this subject, a few words
more and I will finish my parable. All Germany
resounds with the Teiitonicus furens , while the man
in Britain s streets goes on his plodding way rejoicing,
scarcely giving a second thought to his clamouring
German cousins—if they are cousins—listening
perhaps with one ear, and paying no more serious heed
than he would to the ‘tinkling of the camel’s bell.’
Depend upon it, Fortunatus, the Germans know their
danger, and the consciousness of it makes them
frantic. Byron has in one well-known line described
both Germans and French as we see them to-day:
then shrieked the timid, and stood still the brave *
“ How ominously still and watchful France is!
The noisy clamour the Germans contrive to keep
up, an undignified sort of tin-kettling, is merely
another Chinese plan for frightening their enemies,
and the same by pulling hideous faces ; which we may
be sure won’t succeed when the day of reckoning
arrives, nor divert it either.
“ 1 have g iven you, as well as lam able, all the
reasons for the belief that is in me ; and to this let
me add that the German Fatherland lies at the mercy
of the only two countries geographically capable
of uniting to crush her, willing both to wound and


strike. ‘ Sufferance is the badge of all their (Teuton)
tribe.’ Now, Fortunatus, finish the ‘crack,’ and
let’s go on deck for a game of cribbage. I promise
you I won’t try the German game they play with
Old England,” said John, with a merry twinkle in
his eyes. .
“ I must confess I never gave the attention to the
German geographical position you have done, but
I can see what you mean. Before we retire to
cribbage,” Fortunatus rejoined, “let me say a few
words about England’s assumed danger in war-time
supposing she were to lose her command of the
sea for a period. It makes me laugh when I hear
both continentals and British declaring that in such
event starvation and surrender would await us.
Depend upon it, if ever such a day of disaster
threatened England, the Government in power would
at once see that land enough was put under cultivation
in the British Isles to yield enough needful grain
for the people’s wants. It could be done in seven
months; during that period the country would
continue to worry through somehow, no doubt. I
don’t share the fears of the starvationists at all. A
little judicious compulsion, plenty of fertilisers, a good
bonus for every bushel of grain produced, and with
God’s blessing food enough would be forthcoming
to keep the wolf from the door, and confound our
enemies.


CHAPTER XXX
FILTHY LUCRE
HAT are you to do with the contents of
v V your strong room, in the event of the
admiral accepting the yacht’s services and sending
her noith to Paku ? said John Steele to his friend,
when chatting together next day. The speaker’s
health had improved by leaps and bounds, and he
was now, by the doctor’s gracious permission, allowed
a couple of smokes a day.
“ I see your mind is running on the chance of
a fight, my true Briton, with the hope of looting the
gold on board, perhaps,” said P'ortune, with a smile.
“ 1 shall be guided by the admiral’s advice and
land the treasure, if he says the word.”
“ 1 once thought and believed myself a millionaire
but my dream at its best fell far and away short
of your millions, Fortunatus. Judging by what I
see, you are putting your money to good use, but
you must find it difficult to decide how to dispose
of it all finally.”
At this moment Zenobia appeared on deck, and
her husband at once stepped forward to receive
and lead her to an easy-chair. He never failed in


attention to his wife, always the same courtly gentle-
man to the woman who would ever hold the first
place in his heart. On her part, she took it all as
a matter of course, scarcely concealing her indifference.
No one looking on could possibly tell whether
Fortune perceived his wife’s ungracious manner. If
he did, it was wonderfully well concealed.
“ Sit here, Zena, with us. The day is hot, but we
shall find it hotter still when we reach Hong-Kong.”
“ Are we so near ? How well the yacht has steamed
this voyage! ”
“ That docking and painting down south has
improved her pace greatly, my lady,” remarked John
Steele to Zenobia.
“ It has been a long run from Capetown, Mr. Steele;
I shall be glad to have a fortnight on shore.”
« I fancy your wish will be gratified, my dear
Zena. If we are ordered north by the admiral, it
will be unwise to take on you and the sick officers.
I shall miss you greatly, as you know, but John
Steele here will keep up my spirits. As you came
on deck, Zena, my old friend, shooting his arrow
in the dark, remarked that I must find a difficulty
in settling the division of my millions. I sometimes
wish somebody else had both the difficulty and the
millions.”
Old Bailey, hovering near as usual, muttered
“ No, no, Fortune, no difficulty.”
“ My wife knows that it has from the first been
a deeply cherished design with me to devote to
charitable and religious purposes a large share of
those millions. There are enough of them and to


spare, after leaving our dear Edward more than
required for the utmost wants of a life-time, legacies
to all and sundry, and last, but not least, a very
generous settlement for my dear wife should she
survive me ; by that I mean more than enough for
any woman to stand possessed of.”
Old Bailey listened intently, labouring under
suppressed excitement, his eyes, looking with glassy
stare at Fortune, shifting inquiringly to Zenobia.
It was a curious study for John Steele, this sudden
introduction into a deep family discussion, and dis-
creetly he held his tongue. From one face to the
other Old Bailey kept turning his head, evidently
expecting and fearing something more.
“ I fear dear Zena does not entirely approve of
my notions. 1 hate the idea of doing anything
important without her approval. It is the knowledge
that she does not fall into line with me that has
delayed me up to now in coming to any decision.
In my eyes it is so important that we should agree
in this, for we have never differed in our married
life, John. My dear Zena’s wishes go far with me
but this question of the millions must soon be de-
cided. It is not right to leave it unsettled, especially
as we are going to the wars, old friend.”
John Steele at this moment caught a glimpse of
Zenobia’s face, and found it by no means a pleasant
one to look at. He was struck with the fierce look
in her dark inscrutable eyes. Oddly enough, she
had made no response whatever to her husband’s
remarks j evidently it was not the first time by many
the subject had arisen between them. Lifting her


sullen eyes, she rose and moved away to a seat near
one of the wounded officers. She appeared at dinner
that night looking radiant and gracious in a beauti-
ful frock and diamonds ; no trace of the morning’s
strange emotion remained.
Fortune had not noticed her silence when making
his remarks, which were directed mainly to John
Steele, and discussion was not invited. But the
latter was deeply puzzled by the look on Zenobia s
face. That she had made up her mind about the
millions, he felt certain there could be no doubt,
and woe betide the man who had the temerity to
oppose her. He thought of Jaels cruel eyes, and
how they must have gleamed with unholy joy when
Sisera sought refuge in the terrible woman s tent.
There was nothing to warn the wretched man of
his impending fate, no sign of the awful event so near.
Was there danger to Fortune, and was he, like Sisera,
to go unwarned ?
“ Nonsense ! ” was John’s silent exclamation ; he
would dismiss the horrid doubt from his mind. But
one conclusion he could not avoid : it was open, palp-
able ; the wife returned no single heart-beat of love
to a devoted and affectionate husband ; while he, on
his side, strangely failed to perceive an indifference,
growing to repugnance, that was palpable to all
around.
“ Going to the wars! ” her husband had said to
her. How could a wife with a spark of affection hear
those words without emotion ? thought the sturdy
old fellow.
Old Bailey’s leisure and attendance were more than


c\ er in demand by Zenobia. His glassy eyes as
usual followed every movement of Fortune, but he
appeared to take no part in the conversation. There
was much to say—and it was said eagerly—but no
word came from him. Impressed he evidently was,
for he nodded his head from time to time in approval
or assent.
John Steele, passing their chairs to join young
Edward and his father, heard Zenobia’s last remark
to Old Bailey before leaving the deck :
There must be no will, mind—you must see to
that.”
The same old subject, thought the listener—
“ Filthy lucre ! ”
Coming to his wife, one arm round Edward’s neck,
Fortune said:
“Zena, dear, our observations to-day enable me
to tell you that in about three hours we shall be in
Hong-Kong— certainly before nightfall—where I shall
learn the admiral’s wishes, and get letters from my
Japanese friends.”


CHAPTER XXXI
READY, AYE, READY
WITHIN the time mentioned, the Propontic was
anchored at Hong-Kong and her owner
reading his despatches. In a very few minutes the
news went like wildfire through the yacht—the
admiral had ordered them to Shanghai ; the news
from the north was serious ; fleets assembling in
the Gulf of Pechili; allied troops moving ; fighting
imminent.
Before hurrying on shore Fortune, putting a loving
arm round his wife, told her of the events moving in
North China, and the orders from the admiral.
“ I shall go on shore at once, Zena, and secure your
rooms at the hotel. To-morrow, the first thing, let
your maids have everything in readiness for landing.”
“ Now, John, into the shore-boat with you, and
you, Edward, and the prince,” called out Sir Fortune,
looking sharply around. “Why, bless me, where
on earth are you all ? What! in the boat already ?
Is this the discipline of the Propontict John Steele,
I’m ashamed of a patriarch like you showing the
youngsters a bad example. Wait until I get you
all before the Taku forts.”


“ When you do, sir, you’ll find us all you can
desire,” said young Edward ; and in return the father
looked fondly into his son’s face. All on board were
elated at the news, and at once went alertly about
the business of preparing for coal and stores. Every-
thing was soon completed, and the Propontic was to
be ready for sea by the next evening.
The following morning saw Fortune making
thoughtful arrangements for his wife’s comfort on
shore. A sumptuous suite of rooms was secured, and
the seriously wounded officers were also carefully
provided for. The few others point-blank refused
to leave the yacht—the hope of a fight settled that
question.
The day drew on ; the last coal barge was along-
side ; farewell to wife must be made—perhaps the
last. Fortune had made a hopeless effort to induce
Edward to remain with his mother, pointing out her
loneliness with both son and husband absent.
Edward said plain out that his mother would not
be lonely; no need for him to stay behind for that
reason.
Then, my dear lad, have you reflected on the
terrible break-up it would be for your mother if it
came to pass that neither of us returned to her ?
I have told you that fighting is certain to follow
on the Chinese arrogance ; the way to Tientsin and
Pekin must of necessity be kept open, and of
necessity the admiral will attack the Taku forts.
If so, and we are sent to the front, the Propontic will
be fought to a finish, I have no manner of doubt; you
know, my son, what might result to us both from that.”


“ It’s no matter to mother what happens, sir, so
long as she possessed all the money to be happy
with. What would the officers and men think of
me if I, your son, was absent when the fighting
began ? There’s the Black Prince, too—what would
he think ? Father, dear, you couldn’t be so unkind
as to leave me behind now.”
His son was right, he could not be so unkind.
But he looked puzzled ; Edward’s words were very
strange, and then his peculiar allusion to the money.
His brow clouded over and he looked more than
usually thoughtful.
Between son and mother, it pained Fortune to
know, there was little if any affection. He deeply
lamented the fact, thinking Edward must surely
be to blame. As usual with him in any question
about his wife, he was blind. About her there could
be no question —she stood alone, blessed among
women. In her there could exist no flaw; she
was his non-pareil.
The money, the money, he thought; how grieved
that he and his wife differed about it. But herein
was a question of duty ; his mind was made up ,
nothing could be allowed to influence him. With
a sigh of relief that he had at last come to a decision,
he resolved to have the will drawn up and signed
at Shanghai before going north into danger.
Ordering Edward to beat up the party on shore,
and be ready at the wharf with the launch, he passed
quietly into his wife’s room to say good-bye.
Zenobia was in one of her absent-minded moods,
her side face turned to her husband. She was gazing


across the harbour to the Propontic , unconscious
of his presence.
He stood silent for a few seconds, his eyes resting
fondly on her still beautiful form. He felt that she
was very dear to him. Time had made no change
in her, nor could it make any change in the deep
affection he bore for this—to him—paragon of
women.
Coming rapidly to her side, he took her gently
in his arms. “ Zena, dearest woman, the launch
awaits me at the wharf; steam is up in the yacht,
as you can see for yourself; we must separate for
a little; kiss me, love, and let me depart.”
Languidly she arose and embraced her husband,
her face held up for his kiss (as of old he remembered
with brimming eyes), but he did not reflect that
there was no kiss in return for him. Disengaging
herself, she said: “ Old Bailey is going with you by
my wish. I knew you wanted him to stay here and
look after me, but really, Fortune, I would sooner
be without him. He’s no company at the best of
times, and can’t even be trusted now to fetch and
carry. Besides, in any case you know he won’t be
happy away from your side.”
And so they parted ; one thankful that it was so
well over, the other grateful that the dearest of
women had borne the parting with such fortitude,
but never a doubt of her affection. That was quite
out of the question with Zenobia’s husband.
The run up to Shanghai was rapidly made,
Fortune being anxious to impress the admiral with
the yacht’s capabilities. After anchoring he lost


no time in waiting on his Excellency and formally
tendering the yacht’s services.
His reception was most gratifying, and an official
inspection of the vessel was to be made at once.
“ Sir Fortune,” said the fine old sailor, I must say
I don’t like adding the Propontic to my fighting
force, and I shall avoid doing so if possible, you
may be sure; but we are short of suitable gunboats
for the shallow waters of the Peiho, and its needs
must when the devil drives, just now, so you may
yet get your chance.”
“Your Excellency doubtless refers to the she-devil
at Pekin? lam sure you will regard my yacht
with more favour when you get your officer s report.
Meantime I have considerable treasure on board,
and if you order us north, would like to know
whether you advise my landing it here ; the money
is at your disposal if needed for the fleet or
Government.”
“ Certainly,” exclaimed the chief of the British
fleet. “ I had forgotten you had treasure aboard.
Don’t remember you mentioned that in your letter ;
some of it will come in very useful just now.
I have a requisition made upon me by the viceroy
of the Lower Yangtse for the loan of a cool hundred
thousand to pay his soldiers’ arrears. It is of great
importance just now to the peace of the river and
Shanghai to let him have the money. Better land
all the treasure for safe keeping in the British con-
cession ; it will be well guarded, I promise you.
“ Well, Dunsford,” to an officer at salute, “ you
have lost no time in making your inspection of the


Propontic. What do you make of her ? Will she do
for us, do you think? What is your report?”
“ I have nothing but good to report, your
Excellency. With some few small alterations she
will prove a very effective addition, and she will
need a dozen more gunners to stiffen the gun crews.
We had a short drill-test with all three batteries,
and I was much pleased with the results.”
“ Well, what about officers, Dunsford ? ”
“She will require a commander to fight the ship,
and two juniors, besides a couple of warrant officers j
with these additions she will answer very well, your
Excellency. I assure you, sir, the owner of the
Propontic possesses a remarkably fine vessel, that any
officer might be proud to command.”
If you think so, Dunsford, you shall take com-
mand yourself. Let me know the names of the two
officers you select to go with you.
Sir Fortune, the Propontic will shortly have a
good opportunity of showing her metal. The bulk
of the fleet steams north for the Peiho late to-
morrow, As your yacht is so fast, I will ask you
to get aw’ay to sea for Wei-hai-wei at daybreak
to-morrow; you will find some work there to do as
a preliminary. By the time you get that done, I
daiesay you will find me with the fleet close at your
heels. Now, au revoir, and many thanks.”
Delighted at the prospect of engaging in a service
to his country, however risky, Fortune hurried back
to the yacht, where he was soon joined by Lieutenant
Dunsford and tw r o senior midshipmen. The latter
weie at once taken charge of by Edward and the


Black Prince, while Fortune, mustering all hands,
handed the Propontic formally over to the command
of the new captain.
Old Bailey was on deck anxious for new r s, which
Fortune gave him without delay. Events had followed
with such rapidity, and preparations so absorbing,
there could be no time for Fortune to interview
lawyers with regard to the will. It flashed through
his guilty mind that Fortune might never return to
make one.
Taking the old man’s trembling arm he retired
with him to the cabin, and was not surprised to hear
Old Bailey’s pitiful confession, that he could not go
a mile further, separated though he would be from
his Fortunatus. The thought of war was too much
for him ; he could not and would not take any personal
part in it.
Kindly and gently Fortune pointed out that his
presence in the yacht was not necessary, nay, better
that he should remain behind. Thinking to appease
the old man, he prepared and handed him precise
instructions for the will, with orders to employ a
solicitor at Shanghai to have the important docu-
ment drawn up and sent on to him in the north,
there to be signed and sealed before the fighting
commenced.
Going on shore to the British concession, Fortune
soon had Old Bailey lodged in comfort at the chief
club ; thence to the bank to make generous provision
for supplies. Where Old Bailey was concerned there
was never any stint of money, which all went one
road. He possessed the gambler’s insatiable appetite


for more and more, impossible as the devouring sea
to satisfy.
In due course two events happened. Old Bailey
sent off a long message to Zenobia, to which the
reply promptly came ordering his return at once to
Hong-Kong ; and at daybreak the Propontic steamed
past the flag-ship and, saluting, steered north for
the Gulf of Pechili at full speed.


CHAPTER XXXII
AT THE FRONT
“XT ow > J ohn ’ we are in deep salt sea again '
IN I’ve not had time to exchange a word with
you. What did you think of our admiral ? I saw
you talking together ; you both appeared very
friendly on a short acquaintance.
“Before I said a dozen words, he discovered I
had once been a seaman, and my coat of arms a
pair of shirtsleeves. When I told him a bit of my
early history and hinted my hope that he would
send the Propontic into the brown of it at Taku,
I thought he would have put his arm round my
neck. I won’t repeat all he said of you, Fortunatus,
though I know you haven’t a particle of vanity. It
was certainly pleasant hearing for me, and every
word of it deserved.”
“ I was much impressed by the fine old sailor,
and quite understand his influence over all he comes
into contact with; British or foreign, it’s all the
same, I’m told. I met him once at Cowes during
the yachting week ; but if you desire to see a sailor
at his best, it must be on his own quarter-deck. He
comes of a long line of seamen who were making


naval history so far back as Henry VIII. A great
aristocratic name he bears. Depend on it, John,
both soldiers and sailors love to have aristocrats to
lead them ; and our admiral is one, if long descent
goes for anything.”
Do you observe Dunsford ? He’s as busy as
the devil in a gale of wind. I’m glad you hold
yourself aloof, Fortunatus. The sooner officers and
men understand him the better. They’ll soon learn
to appreciate their fighting commander, or I’m much
mistaken.”
Before sunset the following night the Propontic
anchored in Wei-hai-wei, and the commander
received orders to embark the Chinese regiment
stationed there, tents and baggage, and convey them
to the Peiho River.
At peep of day next morning the embarkation
took place, and when the yacht left the harbour,
Fortune had the satisfaction of seeing the smoke of
the British fleet about ten miles astern.
“ How well the yacht steams! ” exclaimed Dunsford,
coming down from the bridge; “ she came along
from Shanghai splendidly. We shall arrive off the
river mouth, Sir Fortune, and be nicely clear of
the Yellow Tommies by the time the admiral anchors
the fleet.”
“ I like the look of those Chinese soldiers,”
said John Steele. “They are well set up, and any
one can see what a fine state of discipline they’re
in.”
I ve had the decks of the Propontic covered with
visitors in many ports,” Fortune remarked, “ but I


never felt so moved as when I saw this, the latest
addition to her Majesty’s army, march on board.
What great events may spring out of this ! An
Anglo-Chinese army may yet assist in safeguarding
the north-eastern frontiers of our Anglo-Indian
empire.
Next morning early, every indication pointed to
important movements. The flags of nearly every
maritime nation of importance flew from the men-
of-war assembled off the Peiho ; steam-launches,
busy as ants, passing between the various ships;
boats innumerable flitting to and from the shore.
The British flag-ship seemed to be the centre of
interest, and as signal followed signal first one and
then another of the gunboats and torpedo-catchers
weighed anchor, and steamed slowly up-stream to
their rendezvous close to and within range of the
Taku forts.
The large warships were unable to enter the
river, and the work of tackling the forts, should
the desperate alternative arise, must of necessity
be left to the lighter vessels—there was no help
for it
It was well known to all on board that several
of the guns in the forts were of far heavier weight
than anything in the allied gunboats, and the
admirals doubted whether the Chinese commanders
meant fighting their guns ; but if they did, why, then
have at them by sea and land. White pluck and
courage would prevail against the yellow men.
When the last of the gunboats had passed up
the river, Fortune, looking blankly at John Steele,


remarked that he feared the Propontic had been
forgotten, or the admiral’s plans had undergone
some change.
“ 1 think,” said Dunsford, “ that the yacht draws
rather more water than the best depth in the river j
but as the wind favours the tide, I think the diffi-
culty, if that is all, might be overcome. Besides,
coal enough can be thrown overboard to adjust the
difficulty.”
At this moment a launch from the flag-ship came
alongside with a message from the admiral, ordering
the commander, owner, and son to report on board
at once.
On reaching the flag-ship, Fortune was invited to
the admiral’s cabin alone.
“ I daresay you have been wondering why no
orders to follow the gunboats up-river have reached
the Propontic, Sir Fortune. I am much exercised
in my mind about both yourself and your young
son. If you were a part of my fleet I should not
gi\ e either of you a second thought, but you are
volunteers merely, and I think I should give you a
word of warning before you commit yourselves to
what I now have reason to believe will be a san-
guinary fight. I have information that the Chinese
guns may open fire upon us at any moment.”
Continuing, the admiral said ; “ Have you con-
sidered, Sir Fortune, that in the fight both you and
your young son may be cut off? You are a British
subject of enormous wealth, and you have but one
son. I won’t ask you to remain behind on board here,
while your ship goes into the scrimmage, but Ido


ask you, and that solemnly, to leave your son with
us. Shall I send for him ? ”
“ Do, your Excellency, for I feel quite as you do,
but short of ordering him to keep out of the coming
fight—which I cannot bring myself to do—l will
back up your arguments. Indeed, I assure you, I
have tried already to dissuade him.
When Edward entered the cabin, the admiral took
his boyish hand in his weather-beaten palm. “ I
suppose you expect me to order the Propoyitic to
the battle-front, Younker?”
“ We all do, sir.”
« I’ll be bound you do. But suppose both you and
your good father here get knocked over; you are
not ordinary people, you know, of no account. Con-
sider for a moment, dear lad, you have no brother
or near relative to bear the responsibility of your
father’s vast wealth. Lord ! what a scramble for the
money there’d be if you both get killed. I purposely
avoid bringing in your dear mother’s name; the
law, of course, would protect her in the succession.”
Edward’s face hardened ; the admiral’s concluding
words had done more harm than good. Turning
his face away from his dear, loving father, for fear
his resolve might weaken, he declared in a quiet
firm voice, without the slightest appearance of dis-
respect : “ Then, sir, you’ll have to put me in irons,
for I’ll jump overboard, and swim the Propontic ,
rather than be out of the fight, and my father in it.”
“ Damn it all ! ” roared the admiral ; “so would
I, boy. There, take him away, Sir Fortune,” he
growled, “ and God bless you both. Sentry, pass


the word for Lieutenant Dunsford ; I have some last
instructions for him.”
Within twenty minutes the Propontic was under
weigh, and with a Chinese pilot on board soon
reached her position before the forts at Taku.
Dunsford’s orders from the admiral were to keep
the Propontic on the outer line in the deepest water
for fear she might ground and become a fixed target
for the forts. “ Now, off you go, Dunsford. I shall
have a special eye for the ProponticP
In a few minutes after anchoring, the commander
sent word to have everything on board in fighting trim,
as the Chinese general had returned a defiant reply
in answer to the demand by the allies to surrender
the forts, and might open fire at any moment.
All on board were in a state of bustle and excite-
ment, “eager for the fray.” To save appearances,
John Steele, Edward, and the Black Prince had
retired to the saloon out of sight of the crew, and
were indulging in a break-down to the Gaelic chorus
of “ Hey Firminianach ! Ho Firminianach ! ”
Fortune looked in upon them unobserved, his
face rather more serious than usual. The admiral’s
words had sunk into his mind and deeply impressed
him. He felt that the family fortunes and their
two valuable lives were shortly to be staked. Was
he doing right with his dear son ? What if the
fortune of war took either of them, or even both?
But in any case, was it not now, when they were
before the enemy, too late to indulge in doubts and
qualms? His ardent wish to have an opportunity
of some day fighting his country’s enemies with his


own craft and guns was about to be gratified. It
was a time to rejoice, not repine ; and with this
thought uppermost, casting away care he slipped
gaily in among the dancers and joined in the break-
down.
“Now, John, you blood-thirsty old pirate, a pretty
example you are showing my youngsters,” exclaimed
Fortune, panting after his exertions. “ Old fools are
the worst of fools, I’ve heard, and now I’m certain
of it.”
Outside the saloon, all by himself, Sailor Bill was
indulging in a hornpipe for his own private rejoicing.
Skipping here and there with surprising agility,
dancing eyes and merry legs, he was happy at the
thoughts of the coming fight; caring nothing for
the danger closing in, the tragic events that were
to follow.


CHAPTER XXXIII
THE BATTLE
DL NSFORD had been his rounds and, entering
the saloon, ordered the two youngsters to their
battery. All hands were to sleep at their posts,
in readiness for a sharp return-fire as soon as the
first Chinese gun was heard. “You’ll find me on
the bridge, Sir Fortune, when you want me. You
and Mr. Steele will see as much of the fun, when
it begins, as you have stomach for, if you station
yourselves there.”
“For the last week,” exclaimed John Steele,
laughing, “ I’ve been going through a course of
ammunition drill, sir, and I m engaged as a superior
kind of powder-monkey to the after battery, where
the two dear lads are stationed.”
“ So that’s where you’ve been every day, old mole,
when I missed you at gossip time,” rejoined Fortune!
The Propontic was silent as the grave—lights
masked, fires banked, the bells silent. It only needed
a sharp \\ ord of command to raise all hands like magic.
\\ illiam, exclaimed Fortune, observing his servant’s
presence on deck. “ You know my orders ; go below
out of danger.”


“I’ve never disobeyed you, Mr. Fortune, sir, not
once in all the years I’ve been your man, but go
below and leave you and Mr. Edward I won t, sir,
not even if you call it mutiny. Besides, sir, said
Bill coaxingly, “ what’s the good ? There’s no place
in this yacht safe from shells out of those big guns
over there. She’s not made to keep them out, I
know.”
Whether it was the reasoning that prevailed, or
the appealing look in his eyes, matters not, for no
more was said, and the brave little fellow remained,
seldom seen by his adored master, but keeping close
and watchful not far away.
At about an hour or so before daylight a single
gun was heard, fired from a Chinese battery. It
required no word of command; at once e\eiy one
was standing alert, ready at the guns. In another
moment an appalling roar and crash of cannon
deafened their ears. The storm of battle had burst
in fury upon ships and forts.
The admiral, on the deck of his flag-ship, listened
to the horrid music. “By God ! they’re at it hammer
and tongs,” exclaimed the old sailor. “ I’d give
something to be with them.”
On board the yacht Dunsford and his officers
were delighted at the splendid work done by the
guns, the fire of the two Long Toms in the central
battery extorting his emphatic praise.
Being in the rear of the allied ships, it was
necessary at times to fire over the in-shore ligating
line of war-steamers. It soon became evident to
Dunsford that their outside position was in reality


most dangerous. The wild firing and bad aim
of the Chinese guns caused their shells to pass
frequently over the inner gunboats. For half an
hour the splash of the shells could be seen and
heard all round the Propontic.
Dunsford was not sorry to note a lull in the shore-
firing, which lasted a very welcome half-hour. Day
was about breaking, a streak of dawn appeared
in the east—where dawn comes with a rush—and
with it a fierce renewal of the fire by the forts. It
soon appeared to Dunsford’s experienced eyes that
more than one of the gunboats had received
serious injury.
Dunsford was well aware of the danger to a
comparatively weak vessel like the Propontic , if one
of the big gun shells struck her fairly. Looking
round for Fortune, he found he had taken up a
position close to the after battery, within which his
son was serving at the guns.
At this moment the crash and roar of an awful
explosion was heard. A magazine on shore had
blown up, utterly destroying one of the forts
and hundreds of Chinamen ; and at the same time
the boats from the ships containing the landing
parties, who were to assault the forts, were seen,
to Dunsford’s intense relief, heading for the shore.
“Not too soon,” muttered Dunsford to himself;
the fire is too hot to last. We ll fight it out here
where she lies, come what may ; but I wouldn’t give
much for the Propontic if this hellish fire continues.”
Crash ! almost as he spoke the blow had fallen.
A shell from one of the big guns in the nearest fort


struck the Propontic fairly on the quarter, about ten
feet from the stern-rail. The burst of the terrific
missile, incredible though it may look, sliced off the
whole of that portion of the side and deck, like a
carrot. The ship shook throughout from stem to
stern, and heeled over under the weight of the
tremendous blow. Twenty feet further amid-ships
would have utterly destroyed the beautiful yacht.
Fortune, running to the scene of the damage, leant
over the side, and finding, to his delight, that the
injury was well clear of the water-line, ran forward
to the bridge and gave Dunsford the important
information.
“ You’ve relieved my mind, Sir Fortune ; I feared for
a moment that it was all up with us. I shall continue
to fight the ship while she floats—the guns in the
heavy battery are making splendid practice.
Fortune had barely reached his stand at the after
turret, when a second big shell came on board, this
time passing through both sides of the turret at the
top, but luckily without bursting. The awful con-
cussion, however, threw down every occupant of the
turret more or less injured, and tearing it away from
the deck fastenings, toppled it over partially on to
the bulwarks and deck. Fortune lay underneath,
dead or dying.
They were the last two shells fired by the Chinese.
The battle, so far as concerned the ships, was over ;
the rest of the work was effectually completed by
the landing parties.
Soon the poor fellows were carried tenderly down
below to the cockpit. Dunsford was the first to miss


Fortune. John Steele, peering round the ruined
turret, quietly remarked :
“ He’s here, sir, and one of the men with him;
the men will have to lift the turret bodily a bit to
get them out.” When this was done with the utmost
care, and Fortune lifted upon the stretcher, he
followed his son to the cockpit.
Turning the ship’s head down-stream, Dunsford
soon anchored the yacht near the flag-ship, hastening
on board himself with his report. The admiral at
once ordered a senior surgeon to assist in an ex-
amination of the wounded on board the Propontic ,
thoughtfully ordering the sunset-gun to be dis-
continued for the time.
The two surgeons found the men from the after
turret unconscious, but without any serious bodily
wounds. Though the concussion caused bleeding
from nose, eyes, and ears, there was no fatal in-
jury to any of them, and next day all were doing
well.
Edward’s first thought, after regaining conscious-
ness, was to inquire for his father. Where was he ?
Why didn’t he come to see him ? The young Arab
prince was the least injured, and, deeply distressed
about his friend, took an opportunity of crawling
away to a screened-off space, where all attention
seemed to be concentrated. Looking in, he returned
to Edward, and cautiously told what he saw.
Edward turned his head and wept copious tears
for his dear father ; shaking with suppressed sorrow,
he gave himself up to despair. His father was
dead or dying ! He knew well that he had sheltered


behind the turret. How many times he had seen
his kind eyes—he felt sure they were his—looking
through the slot to make certain of the safety of
those at the gun! The shell that struck the
turret, he cried, had upset it upon his dear father.
He saw plainly now what had happened, and why his
father could not come to him.
“ No, no, Ali, let me alone, you can do no good ;
my father is dying. Oh ! my father, my dear
father ! What shall Ido ? What shall Ibe without
you ? ” .
The prince crawled quietly away again, and re-
turned this time with John Steele, who found words
of hope and consolation for young Edward.
The second body drawn out and carried below
was scarcely recognisable as Sailor Rill s, so smashed
and blood-stained was it. The terrible condition
of the man made all present shudder, the more
so that the surgeon pronounced him still breath-
ing. No one could explain how it was that Bill
came to be under the turret ; the dying man never
referred to what had happened, and Fortune could
not testify. But the belief was general that the
devoted little fellow, watching, cat-like, over his
master’s safety, was in time to rush in and share
the danger he could not avert.
Hanging between life and death, the favourite of
the whole ship continued alive but unconscious
until sunset next evening, one of the cooks being
placed in special charge of the dying man. John
Steele felt greatly cut up, giving orders that he
was to be called the moment any change took place,


and when towards sunset this happened, he found
the devoted little creature sinking fast, but in a
semi-conscious state.
With glazing eyes the shattered man felt feebly
for John’s hand, evidently mistaking him for the
loved master. The events of the fight, the smash
of the turret, and his own terrible injuries he
had never once referred to. His wavering mind
returned to early youth, it had worked back to
boyish days, and he was again a deserter. His
grasp on Steele’s hand tightened as he muttered in
delirium.
“What, Tommy? the knife ! No, you don’t De-
serter, am I ? Ah ! Mr. Fortune, sir, there’s the old
German there ! there ! look ! ”
A peaceful calm again fell upon the torn and
broken frame, while night grew on apace. Quietly
John Steele waited at the bedside, one hand kept
upon the other’s wrist. It seemed at length to
the watcher that some deep-seated influence was
at work faintly stirring in the dying man’s
breast; striving painfully to find an outlet for
escape, and tell its story, perhaps to make con-
fession. His strange, mysterious whispering com-
menced again, and appeared to take a more close
and intimate note. To the watching listener it
felt like an offer of confidence, secret and pitiful.
Presently the feeling grew strong upon him that
he was called upon to give ear to the feathered
words of a whispered message; at first quite un-
intelligible and confused, but repeated again and
again, until in a flash of intuition the meaning of it


all was revealed, and that in broken words made
familiar and even amusing to the rugged old sailor
who sat and listened. The whispered message was
at length through the pain-twisted lips, from the
far-away infinite beyond, like faint voices from the
stars, and John had pieced the delayed, disjointed
whispers into complete sentences. His eyes lighted
up with delighted memories of early seafaring days,
for the simple whisperings formed the chorus of
an old “chantey” roared out scores of times in
the ship’s forecastle.
“ For we think so, and we hope so, but we don’t
know,” were the whispers over and over again re-
peated, that had reached to John Steele’s astonished
ears. Simple and unmeaning as they first sounded,
they struck the listener anew, bringing a re\erent
feeling that the queer old chorus was strangely fitted
to the awful surroundings. John recalled that that
well-worn “ chantey ” was a song of rejoicing among
sailors, the first month at sea past, the dead horse
overboard, and wages recommencing. John Steele’s
mugged cheek flushed at the old memories the
dying sailor’s broken message brought back to him,
and the big solitary tear that rolled down did not
make it a whit less manly as he held closer Sailor
Bill’s hand.
Death was hovering near ; all the signs were made
plain upon the dying man s battered face. A slight
flutter passed through the entire body, a strong
audible whisper, and instantly, as though by magic,
the clouds dispersed and left the pain-tortured
brain alert and clear. He spoke a few abrupt words


sensibly, but in haste, as though time was short,
and he knew it.
“ There’s five hundred pounds of my savings in
the bank, sir—that money is for Mr. Edward. I’ve
no blood relations, all gone.” This said, the suffering
man remained silent, but still quite conscious.
The cook, invariably called “doctor” by sailors,
hovering around the sick-bed, heard the words, and
bending eagerly forward, thought he saw an opening
for himself.
“ Well, sir, I do think William might remember
my services to him. I’ve never closed an eye for
the nursing. Why, I can’t tell how many jellies
and things I’ve made for him, and if he didn’t eat
them ”
“ That—will—do,—Mr.—Fortune,—sir.” The cook
looked with greedy eyes for what was to come next.
A last gleam of intelligence lighted the dying man’s
brain, enough at least to enable him to appraise
the services rendered. With eyes closing in death,
the cold dews already damp upon his brow, he
muttered: “You—may—give—that—there—doctor—
a—pound,—sir.” The cook retreated softly from the
cabin under a stern glance from John Steele.
The end was close ; the “ fell sergeant, death ”
present to remove his prisoner. The eyelids made
a faint effort to open, the lips a last attempt to speak.
John Steele leant over and listened intently for the
last whisper. It came faintly, but clearly, and it
said : “ Mr.—Fortune,—sir,—l’m—a—deserter—once
more.”
John Steele, himself an old sailor, bowed his head


in genuine sorrow and respect for the good and
faithful servant who lay lifeless before him. As
he tenderly covered the dead man’s face, the words
of England’s finest sea song came crowding in upon
his memory: “Faithful below he did his duty, and
now he’s gone aloft.”


CHAPTER XXXIV
IS IT DEATH?
TO say that every man in the fleet, from the
admiral downwards, deplored what had hap-
pened to Fortune, is to state the case mildly. All
were impressed by the heroism of both father and
son. That a private English gentleman’s yacht
should turn up so opportunely, and adding her guns
to the desperate contest, help to secure victory, was
nothing short of glorious. In man-of-war Jack’s
language, she waltzed in with her Long Toms,
and gave the Chinkies a taste of her cornfetti.”
The examination of Fortune disclosed some serious
wounds to head and right shoulder—none fatal ; but
what gave the surgeons most cause for alarm was
the heart action and general condition of the entire
nervous system. Dunsford, who was present, ex-
plained exactly the position of Fortune at the
moment the shell struck the turret. “ I saw him,
at the moment, standing close to the rear side leaning
against the turret, looking through his glasses at
the forts,” he explained to the surgeons.
To those skilled men, this evidence explained
the alarming condition of the patient’s heart and
nervous system. The awful smashing blow on the


turret had produced a terribly jarring effect through
and through his frame. He was in grand bodily
health at the time, fortunately, otherwise the con-
cussion would have been fatal. As it was, nothing
but constant care and watchful attention would
save his life ; above all things there must be no
noise, the slightest sound would be injurious, special
precautions must be observed, or recovery might
prove very doubtful.
When this report reached the admiral, he gave
orders for the gaping hole in the yacht’s quarter
to be made secure by wood and canvas only; not
a hammer was to be used. This done, the Propontic
might leave for Shanghai. The fighting being over,
Dunsford gave up command, the old captain re-
suming charge, having orders to take the vessel into
shelter if, at any time on the voyage, the weather be-
came unfavourable and trying to the patient s nerves.
By the time the Propontic dipped her flags in
silent farewell of the fleet, both Edward and the
Black Prince were sufficiently recovered to attend
to Fortune, and with John Steele they took turns
night and day watching and nursing. Edward would
allow no others near his father.
For days Fortune remained unconscious, the con-
stant twitching of the eyelids showing plainly the
lingering effects of the concussion. The slightest
noise caused the whole body to quiver. The doctor
was reticent about his patient; it was an interesting
and most uncommon case, in his experience. The
symptoms were certainly serious, but life remained,
and nature was perhaps silently working for a cure.


That night, as Edward and the faithful Black
Prince paced the deck, he mused about the father
lying desperately sick in his cabin. A youthful
student of the Idylls , his thoughts ran upon the Pass-
ing of Arthur. To Edward the dear deeply-wounded
father was his Arthur. The Propontic was the
dusky barge upon which he lay so like a shattered
column. Was he also to leave, and pass away to the
Isle of Rest ? There was no queen to lay his head
upon her lap and drop bitter tears against his brow,
nor alas! could there be. At this stage Edward’s
thoughts were filled with anguish ; bitter tears rolled
silently down the lad’s cheeks ; while his friend, the
prince, softly squeezed his arm in silent sympathy.
One sunny day, as the yacht drew in slowly to
Shanghai, Edward’s eyes brimmed over when he
was told by the surgeon there was hope that his
father would certainly recover. But precautions must
on no account be relaxed, he insisted, and above
all things there must be no noise. Not a sound,
not a voice must be heard by the patient, not a
visitor allowed near him. These conditions observed,
and recovery, he predicted, would be rapid.
For John Steele, Edward had a sincere regard,
putting implicit confidence in his guidance. It was
decided between them that the yacht should be
moored in the outer anchorage away from the in-
trusion of visitors. There was also the unspoken
thought in both, that this plan would make it easy
to dissuade both Zenobia and Old Bailey from
going on board to the invalid, should they come
to Shanghai from the south. John Steele, who


knew more than Edward, was resolved that, come
what might, Fortune should have fair play.
He knew that no will had been signed as intended,
nor was it likely that one would be now—perhaps
for months. Until the will was made, Fortune
would be in daily, hourly danger. He dared not
utter the thoughts that were in him. Naturally of
a trusting disposition, he had grown profoundly
suspicious where his friend was concerned. His
mind was made up, and he would now act on the
invitation Fortune had once given him to complete
the cruise. He would certainly not leave until the
Fropontic was in an English port again.
From time to time letters had been sent to
Zenobia, giving exact accounts of her husband’s
condition, hinting that it would be advisable for
her to remain at Hong-Kong until the yacht arrived
there. She acted willingly on the advice given, but
Old Bailey was promptly sent north to Shanghai,
and as promptly warned by Edward that the surgeon
would permit no visit to his father, nor would he be
allowed on board the yacht. John Steele, silent but
wakeful, took his own measures, and was rewarded
by learning one day from the sentry, that Old
Bailey had come alongside in a shore-boat, and
tried, unsuccessfully, to force his way on board.
What object could the old follower have in trying
to get on board to Fortunatus, in spite of peremptory
warnings to keep away, he thought to himself?
From that moment John Steele’s suspicions were
fastened with bulldog tenacity upon Old Bailey.
There was a plot of some kind he now felt certain.


Well, there must be a counterplot was his firm de-
termination, and loyally he acted up to it.
The days passed, and the three faithful watchmen
were delighted to find Fortune no longer submerged
and in danger, but afloat. In a few days he became
more cheerful and buoyant. The ship’s surgeon
counselled continued precaution, and promised from
that time a rapid cure, as his patient, he explained,
possessed a fine resilient constitution. It was now
purely a question of nerves, and they were rapidly
drawing again to their normal condition.
The effect of recent events on the patient was most
noticeable. He was serene and calm in demeanour,
never once referring to the terrific memory of the
Taku fight, or his own illness. He manifested no
desire to speak of wife or Old Bailey ; took no interest
in the preparation openly made for the yacht’s
departure for Hong-Kong. Greatly changed as he
was, it seemed more mental than physical. The
kindly, gentle manner remained, and his face had
lost its old-time serious look. The change was a
subtle one, impossible to define, but it was there all
the same ; and John Steele, for some vague reason
unknown even to himself, found comfort in the fact.
The Propontic was to be made seaworthy at
Hong-Kong, where a couple of weeks’ stay would
be necessary for the purpose. The treasure left at
Shanghai on the voyage north was at length
embarked, and the yacht steered for Hong-Kong;
Edward s heart full of unspoken thanks for his
father’s perfect recovery ; Fortune proud of his son
beyond words.


CHAPTER XXXV
AS YOU WERE
ON arrival at Hong-Kong, Zenobia received
Edward, her son, with characteristic indiffer-
ence, and her husband the same as on his leaving for
the north : instead of kissing, her cheek coldly
turned for his kiss, the same, he recalled sadly, as
when he left her for Shanghai.
This time, however, Fortune, with reddening face,
noticed her cold, even formal, reception. Gently
rallying his wife, he joked mildly about their return
from the wars—“ Sons of Mars, covered with scars,”
but all without response. She declared, truly enough,
that Hong-Kong had been distressingly hot, the
weather had upset her health, it was too hot even
for sentimental emotion.
Never in their married life had Fortune seen
anything in his wife’s demeanour or conduct that
was not perfect in his eyes ; but the change that
had long since come over her was now made quite
apparent to him, and painfully he realised its full
meaning when she turned her cheek for his kiss, but
offered none for him in return. His ideal somehow
had departed, perhaps for ever. What a void it left in


his faithful heart! The thought gave him pain. Could
that be the real Zenobia sitting before him, unloving
and imperfect? The scales had been knocked off his
eyes by the shattering blow at Taku. He loved
his wife dearly ; she would ever reign supreme in his
heart ; but he was no longer blind ; she was no
longer perfect, and the thought was anguish.
The stay at Hong-Kong was not a pleasant one,
and the fever was rife in the town. Zenobia
constantly complained of the heat. She was more
than ever preoccupied, and frequently in earnest talk
with Old Bailey, upon whom she exercised increased
influence. The gap between her and her husband
seemed to grow steadily, and she appeared quite
indifferent whether it was noticed either by him or
others.
To John Steele the change in both husband and
wife was marked, but most in Zenobia. She was
frequently gloomy and silent, answering in mono-
syllables, repelling conversation. Evidently brooding
over some real or fancied injury, she appeared to be
rapidly approaching a condition of mind unsafe for
herself or her husband, one or the other, most
probably the latter. She seemed painfully suspicious
of her husband’s movements if he went alone into
the town, and eager to know who he had seen during
his absence. These were the only occasions she took
any interest in him, and her curiosity was the more
peculiar from the fact that it was invariably sated
by Old Bailey, who brought her each day an exact
account of the daily movements of Fortune.
It would have appeared mere affectation on the


part of Fortune to pretend ignorance of his wife’s
altered condition, and especially to his old friend.
Indeed, he found it a relief to open his mind.
“ John, you hoary old fire-eater, we shall be at
sea again in a couple of days, and not too soon,
for I notice all hands looking pasty-faced Edward
in particular. And as to my wife, you must have
noticed the great change in her appearance of late.
The disturbance appears to be entirely mental in
her case, I fear ; indeed, I feel quite certain it
is so. She is fretting about my determination to
make those important endowments in the great
colonies of the southern seas. I hate going against
her wishes in anything, but in this matter of the
surplus millions I am quite resolved. It is with
me a sacred duty, and as soon as we reach London
the necessary documents will be signed, by which
one-third of my great wealth will be given away
to the countries where good fortune has enabled
me to accumulate my millions.”
“You have so many millions, that I feel bound
to approve of your decision. But for that fact, I
should take Lady Pomeroy’s view, and say, keep
the money in the family. What is your wife’s
precise objection to your plan ?
“ She objects on the ground that she and her son
have the best and only right to the money—all of
it. She won’t listen patiently to me when I explain
that there is more money for Edward than he can
possibly need in a lifetime, and for her, more than
she could know what to do with, after my death,
supposing I go first. To all this she has but one


monotonous answer, ‘ Don’t give away our money ;
we want it all ourselves.’
“My poor Zenobia even gets excited over the
question, and on one occasion lately worked herself
into a fit of anger. I thought she would have
struck me—she looked daggers. To appease her
I promised to do nothing about the will for the
present, but she is distrustful and employs Old
Bailey to watch me wherever I go. It is a grievous
condition of affairs, and her distracted mind causes
me much solicitude.”
“ What view does Edward take about your design
for the money —and Old Bailey ? ”
“My dear Edward approves, and always has, of
my plans. It’s true he is but a youth; but we
have ever been so united, and he enters so intelli-
gently into my plans and reasons, that I feel
strengthened by his support.
“ Old Bailey, on the contrary, has quite gone over
to Zenobia’s side, and groans disapproval whenever
the subject is mentioned. I really believe he thinks
it would be better for me to give him the millions
than let them go away as I propose.”
“What on earth would the old hunks do with
them ? I fancy you have been pretty generous to
him, Fortunatus. His wants are few, and no ex-
pensive family to bring up. Why, he must be a
wealthy man by now ! ”
“ Old Bailey is a poor man, though I have enriched
him repeatedly, and only ceased giving when I
found out his secret. He never can retain a shilling
longer than it takes to lose it at the gambling-table.


He has been an inveterate player from the outset,
and it was in the true gambler’s spirit he first re-
solved to attach himself to me —a mere youth—
because he believed me to be lucky. The greed of
a ‘wolfing’ gambler is ever upon him —the greed
to win other men’s money. But he never seems
to enjoy that delight himself —he is a confirmed
loser.”
“Now I begin to understand,” thought John Steele
afterwards, when alone. “ I can see better since
the truth about the old follower came out. He has
transferred his allegiance from husband to wife for
the promise of a bribe. By Heavens ! the plot
thickens, and peril is indeed ahead of Fortunatus.”
Turning from side to side in his bed that night,
John Steele’s thoughts kept running on the strange
position he found himself in. It was evident Fortune
had no suspicions, nor would it be wise to hint
danger from his wife ; his loyalty towards her was
too strong to hear such an assault upon it. Yet
there was danger—daily, hourly danger to him.
He had promised to put off making his will; the
palpable design was to gain time ; with opportunity
there might never be a will. A desperate and
demented woman and a brainless old man, both
greedy beyond words, might easily succeed in
quenching the only life that stood in their road to
almost boundless wealth. John Steele found it diffi-
cult to decide how to act for his friend’s safety.
Next day the yacht went to sea on her voyage
to Europe, and he instantly felt the relief that
action brings to a mind jaded by anxiety. Looking


round the deck at Zenobia and her husband, he
thought both appeared to share in the relief he
felt himself. If they did it was not for long. Next
morning at daylight Fortune was standing at John’s
bedside with the information that Edward was down
with the fever, and several of the crew also.


CHAPTER XXXVI
IN TERROR
SIR FORTUNE declared his intention of taking
part in his son’s nursing, and with this object had
a bed made up dose to the invalid’s cabin. Nothing
would induce the Black Prince to be separated from
his dear Edward. He was Asiatic, he argued, and
impervious to fever ; no fear for him. He would stay
with his sick friend and share in the nursing.
While deeply grieved at Edward’s sickness, John
Steele felt satisfied with the events which would
lead, in a great measure, to a temporary separation
of husband and wife.
It solved, for a time at least, much of the difficulty
which had filled his thoughts regarding the safety
of Fortune ; but, while he felt his mind greatly
relieved, he still felt an ill-defined dread of some-
thing about to happen. The uneasy feeling had
for its cause the gloomy appearance of Zenobia’s
face. Some one’s doom was written over the lower-
ing countenance. Whose was it ? he kept thinking
to himself; and the horrid thought ever intruded
itself that it could be no one but Fortunatus’s.
They fell into some such arrangement for nursing
2 57 1 7


as arose after Fortune was struck down at Taku,
only that Edward was this time the invalid. John
Steele’s watch ran from midnight to eight in the
morning, when Fortune relieved him.
Zenobia seldom came near her son’s cabin, and
never asked after his condition ; but soon after day-
light she would occasionally stray from her own
sumptuous rooms and venture a look-in at Edward.
John Steele was invariably pacing the deck outside
the sick lad s cabin ; none but old sailors understand
how necessary and comforting the habit is.
At such times she seemed to be in her dark hour ;
the far-away look was on her face. Absolutely
silent and preoccupied, she never appeared to be
aware of any one’s presence, though at times her
gaze rested on John Steele’s face. Why she made
these visits it was impossible to guess ; she took
no interest and apparently had no motive, usually
passing away afterwards to her own domain. A
servant brought a large jug of ice-cold tea and claret
in readiness for Fortune, a favourite drink of his in
the tropics, when he arrived to relieve the watch
on Edward.
One morning she was standing idly by, when
the seivant brought in the jug and set it down.
The trivial act drew her attention, and she looked
at John Steele with inquiring eyes. “ Not for me,
my lady ; for Sir Fortune.” Long and intently she
glared at the jug, took it up, tasted the contents,
and set it down, then, to John’s wondering atten-
tion, fell into one of her frequent moods of gazing
with lack-lustre eyes at vacancy. This continued for


several minutes, until approaching footsteps made
her start; her sallow face turned an angry red ; a
gleam of fury came into her eyes as she turned
swiftly and passed away. It was her husband she
heard coming !
All the troubled thoughts that filled John Steele’s
mind before Edward’s illness came back again with
a rush ; he was utterly bewildered by what he had
seen, the tragic look on her face.
Next morning Zenobia repeated her visit, and
again John Steele was pacing the deck on his watch.
Her face carried the same look of doom upon it;
absorbed by one deadly thought, her awful eyes
looked hungrily round for the jug. Gliding towards
it slowly, she deliberately held over it a small
colourless phial, and poured in the contents. There
was no hurry, no concealment, nothing guilty in
her look. She appeared to see no one, though
John Steele stood so close that they almost touched.
She stood some minutes glaring at the jug, then lightly
turned away, behaving, John thought, just as though
she had come and gone unseen and unsuspected. Poor
overwrought brain, he now knew she was quite
irresponsible for her actions, and he also knew well
that her mind was full of active and deadly peril
for her husband.
When Fortune arrived to take his watch, John
contrived, clumsily enough, to knock the jug over
on to the deck, rather to his surprise.
“ A change from your eternal tea and claret will
be best for your health, Fortune, I have reason to
think. I feel shaky after my last night’s watch,


somehow—a cup too low, I think. I will order coffee
this morning, and we will both have a tot of the
ship’s rum in it.”
Upon one excuse or another he delayed his de-
parture for an hour, and then, feeling the danger
past, stumbled off to bed, but not to sleep.
Gazing out of his cabin port-hole on the restless
waters, he continued for hours watching the waves
as of old, when in his dear wife’s chamber, overlook-
ing the sea, his perturbed brain knew no rest.
The skipping flying-fish rose and fell in hundreds ;
one actually passed through the port-hole on to his
bunk, and remained gasping out its life unnoticed.
Over and over his thoughts traversed the past,
taking every event in proper order, up to the
arrival of Fortune in his sick-room in the great
Australian city.
At length his thoughts took definite shape. “ I feel
sure,” he muttered softly to himself, “ there is a fatality
in my presence on board; it is providential. No
power on earth can save Fortune unless I act firmly,
and not then, perhaps,” he thought with terror. “He
must not only be warned against his own wife, but
precautions must be taken. My cri de coeur must be
heard, even at the risk of offending. Better anything
than see my dearest friend lie stiffening in a mur-
derous death.”
He awoke again, after a troubled sleep, to find
Fortune once more at his bedside. This time it
was with news of Old Bailey.
“He has been taken with fever, and is in a
dangerous condition. I observed him closely at


Hong-Kong, and since we came on board, and do
you know, John, I fear my old follower for some time
past has taken to dram-drinking. The surgeon
hints as much, and seems to think there are com-
plications. He is very wild in his talk, and constantly
sends for me to his bedside. He wishes to say
something of real or fancied importance, but can’t
make up his mind to speak out plainly.
“My news is not all bad, I thank God,” said
Fortune reverently. “My dear Edward has taken a
rapid turn, and I left him quite free from fever, but
very weak.”
“ You delight me with your report,” the old sailor
replied, “but you can’t expect me to be sorrowful
on Old Bailey’s account, especially as I feel sure
he has helped to bring your wife into her present
dangerous state of mind.”
“ Dangerous, John ? What on earth do you mean ?
I hope you don’t use so strong a word about my
dear wife without ample justification.”
“ I am thankful you have given me an opportunity
of speaking. I must unpack my heart, even at the
cost of paining you, Fortunatus. Listen ! I have
watched, as you know, at Edward’s cabin for this
week past. Once, twice, and again thrice, your wife
has made her appearance on my beat, in a strange
objectless manner. Silent and preoccupied, she
came and went, without noticing my presence, and
but that I knew she was quite awake —it was near
eight o’clock in the morning—l might have thought
her sleep-walking.
“ Twice she has stood gazing at vacancy, with


despair and gloom in her eyes, until she heard your
footsteps approach to take your watch after mine.
On each of these distressing visits, she turned and
hurried away with burning face and flashing eyes,
when she recognised your footsteps. On the last
visit, this morning, said John Steele, speaking in
a solemn voice and very slowly, “ she did something
in my presence, standing close beside me, almost
touching, but not appearing to see me.” John
hesitated, he looked pathetically at his friend. How
could he dash to the ground the dear fellow’s deep
and abiding love, mistaken as it was, for the wife
it had been so long his delight to love, honour, and
protect ?
Fortune had his face turned away. His broad
honest shoulders were shaking, his shapely head bent
upon his bosom. Grasping John Steele’s hand like a
vice, he said in hoarse tones, which sounded strange
both to himself and his friend : “ I won t hear another
word against my dear, not even from you, John.”


CHAPTER XXXVII
WARNING
THE Propontic , steaming swift and smooth, was
now passing the south of Ceylon and heading
for Aden. The delight of the Black Prince at the
early prospect of returning to his beloved Arabia was
too great for words, but was concealed under a
dignified exterior, which sat well upon the handsome
youth. It was solely to his beloved friend Edward,
to whom hfe was devotedly attached, that he showed
emotion at the prospect of returning among his own
people, his future subjects.
For his father, the sultan, he had brought many
presents, collected in every land. He had brought
more, and what he well knew his warlike father would
value beyond all earthly gifts ; he had wounds to
show, gained in honourable combat and on the side
of his father’s friends and allies, the English.
To his soul’s friend Edward, who he vowed was
never to pass from his heart, he laid bare his inmost
thoughts in lofty and dignified Arabic. The contrast
between the two youngsters was never more marked
than at this moment ; it exemplified the contrast
between the east and the west, and, as usual, the


influence of the western came uppermost and pre-
vailed. Jumping off his lounge, Edward, now quite
strong again, caught the young prince by the waist
and whirled him round in a mad, giddy dance. For
several minutes they went through more gleeful
pranks and capers than clowns in a circus, only
ceasing at length from sheer exhaustion.
“Now, Ali, old boy, no one of your Arabian
countrymen would believe it possible of you. Your
reputation for native dignity and demeanour depend
entirely on my silence. If you were at an English
public school, and about going home for the holidays,
that’s the sort of horse-play you’d take part in three
times a day at least.”
“ And you, Edward of mine,” said Ali, in his
pleasant, lisping English, panting after the unwonted
exertion, “you must yet be a Dervish in my country,
plenty backsheesh for dancing Dervish there.”
The kindly lads were happy, full of hope and
delightful anticipation ; but upon them both, in
common with all on board, there stretched a menacing
shadow, out of which a stroke as of death might
flash, instant and silent as lightning.
As the yacht sped upon her way Old Bailey made
no real progress towards recovery. On the contrary ;
the crisis of the fever had passed, but he gained
no strength. Body and soul seemed to Fortune,
who watched tenderly over his old friend, at war.
It was a stricken field upon which the unequal
conflict was waging. The body, kept alive by
stimulants, lay utterly defeated and at the mercy of
the enemy’s next attack. The ship’s surgeon thought


he might linger for weeks, even months, if it was
permitted him to last long enough for the yacht’s
arrival in his native seas. On the other hand he
was afraid, he said warningly, that a sudden shock
or surprise might divorce body and soul —even a
tropical thunder-storm —so weak was Old Bailey’s
hold on life.
Fortune was made aware that the old man knew
of his dangerous state ; there were times when he
was speechless from utter prostration, though quite
conscious of the presence of his only true friend at
his bedside. Invariably after such attacks he had
confessions to make of sins both of omission or
commission ; and as often he was soothed and com-
forted by sweet and kindly words, comforting to the
dying man’s soul as priestly absolution.
The wealth that Fortune had from time to time
heaped upon his lap, he whispered, was gone to the
last penny, dissipated at the gambling-table. There
was a neglected wife —who would shortly be a widow
—had never received a husband’s real love and pro-
tection. “ A lone woman,” he gasped, “ bereaved by
death of her children. Aye me ! ”
To Fortune this revelation came with poignant
surprise. The existence of Old Bailey’s wife he had
never suspected ; it came upon him with a shock.
Had he been so selfishly occupied with thoughts of
his own Zenobia that his mind contained no room
for a faithful follower’s helpmeet ? With something
akin to a guilty feeling, he whispered back to the
failing old man an earnest assurance of protection
and support for his widow if the worst happened.


“ The worst will happen, Fortune,” repeating his
words, “ and soon. I am dying and know it, but
before I go you must hear still another confession.
I have sinned and fallen short in my allegiance to
you, my best and only friend. Not alone have I
sinned in this ; there was a partner with me and she
tempted me. I was easy to tempt when it became a
question of your millions. I repent, I have repented
in bitter tears, but, oh! my forgiving God above,” he
moaned, “ she repents not of the hellish plot we
formed together. Save her, Fortune, don’t let her
soul be lost ; she is too good for that,” he gasped,
“ and save, save yourself, for you are in hourly
danger of your life.”
He would have gone on to say more, much that
was horrifying, but the excitement was too great;
the dying man had fainted.
“ The old, old story of Adam and Eve,” thought
Fortune. “It was shabby of our first father to lay
the blame on his Eve. Man has not altered a little
bit since the tragedy of Eden. Here is Old Bailey
actually laying the blame of what was doubtless some
imaginary or at least exaggerated sin of his own
upon Zenobia, the woman, as of old.”
Fortune had a character of rare beauty, and it
was difficult to understand the wonderful calm and
simplicity of his mind in the face of recent events.
First John Steele and now Old Bailey both uttering
solemn warnings of danger to his life, and both
pointing to one, the same, quarter. It would be
affectation to pretend ignorance that these warnings
were against his wife, and it would be equally


impossible for him to believe for one instant that she
harboured in her gentle bosom any thought but
affection for her husband.
He would not conceal from himself that Zenobia
was greatly deranged in health, both body and mind ;
that must be evident to all; but there could be no
real cause for anxiety. The surgeon was of opinion
that she had suffered from fever at Hong-Kong,
which had left behind mental disturbance. It would,
he said, pass away if left unnoticed. He fell into a
fit of musing and ascended to the deck, where,
almost unconscious of the presence of John Steele
and Edward, he dropped heavily into a deck-chair.
How pained his son was to note the look of unrest
on his father’s face! To both men he looked worn
and haggard. First his own desperate sickness, his
son’s, his wife’s strange condition, now Old Bailey’s
coming end. The spectacles he had found it
necessary to wear since the battle at Taku con-
tributed to the aged look on his face which had of
late become so noticeable.
With scarcely a smile or word of salute, so unusual
with him, he absently pulled out his cigar-case and
lighted a cheroot. Not a word passed as he lounged
back and watched the blue smoke curling upward.
He smoked on oblivious of all around him ; no one
spoke ; his thoughts were with Zenobia. How fondly
they rested on that, the central figure of his life !
How completely lost in thought he was in the
contemplation of the happy married life he had spent
with her—their perfect mutual confidence. Never
once had she given him pain or cause for distrust.


A second and third cheroot were consumed before
he had finished with his thoughts.
They had not at the last been unpleasant; he had
taken a retrospect of his career and it had brought
up nothing but cheerful memories of his life’s
companionship. He could not, and more, he would
not, believe in danger from Zenobia as within the
range of possibility. Never had distrust of the dear
woman he verily believed the best on earth entered
his head, and it should not do so now, no matter
what the result. He did not look for proof; would
not listen, even if it came to him as “ proof of holy
writ.” If ignoring the suspicions all around him
meant death to Zenobia’s husband, better so, than
an existence with love crushed out and confidence
dashed to pieces. Such was Fortune, the man.
He rose at length from his chair, stretching out
his arms like a man waking from a deep sleep,
feeling and looking himself again. The old kindly,
serious look was in his eyes; he had a few cheerful
words of gentle raillery for Steele and Edward.
They had never moved or broken silence during
the whole time.
His mind was again serene and at rest, henceforth
to harbour no more doubt. He stood faithful and
believing now and for ever. A confident smile over-
spread his handsome face, his eyes lighted again
with recollection of the day he first brought home
his bride—his Zenobia. “ Here, by God’s rood, is
the one maid for me,” he thought and felt that day ;
and so he would think and feel to the last.


CHAPTER XXXVIII
ARABY THE BLEST
IN another day the Black Prince was in an ecstasy
of delight at the first distinct view of the land
of his fathers, and at daybreak next morning the
Propontic entered the anchorage at Aden, after an
absence of two years.
Long before leaving China, despatches from
Fortune and the prince had been sent under cover
to the governor of Aden, and by that gentleman
forwarded on to the sultan, apprising his Majesty
of the coming of the Propontic. The sultan, with
dignified haste, thereupon set out from his capital
for Aden, arriving there with a picturesque and
brilliant cortege before the yacht’s arrival.
The first calls made by Fortune and the Black
Prince after landing, accompanied by Edward and
John Steele, were, as a matter of duty, on the
governor. That done, they passed on to the out-
skirts of the town, where the sultan’s camp had
been pitched. No one, not even his friend Edward,
looking at the prince could have suspected the
youth of the state of excitement he was really in.
Outwardly cool, apparently indifferent, to the hun-


dreds of familiar faces around him, he contrived
admirably to preserve a patient exterior while wait-
ing the appearance of the palace officials, whom he
knew well would presently emerge from the pavilion
with words of welcome to Fortune and his son
Edward, and with the sultan’s gracious invitation
to enter.
Arab etiquette demanded that the guests—the
strangers within the gates —should first be received
and welcomed. The prince, apparently overlooked,
remained outside in the company of the chiefs and
officials, who, if they spoke at all, did so in whispers.
The people around kept a respectful distance looking
their admiration, but restraining for the time all
signs of enthusiasm for the returned prince.
Within the pavilion, Fortune and his son had
advanced bowing low to the sultan, who, by an
imperceptible motion of his eyes, ordered seats for
his honoured guests upon the sacred carpet itself.
Coffee and sherbet were mutely and leisurely brought
and offered.
The sultan, like many of his subjects, had more
than a mere smattering of English. Both Sir
Fortune and Edward were fairly well up in Arabic,
and between them the dialogue became lively and
interesting. The pavilion was full of eager listeners,
who followed with deep interest all that passed,
waiting with calm faces but flashing eyes for the
conversation to turn upon the battle in the distant
black waters, where, it was known, the warships
of the “ Great Empress of the West ” had been
fired upon.


Every detail of the fight had been made known
to the sultan and his people. Had not their own
prince, heir of his mighty father, fought and bled
there, helped to gain the victory there, and been
wounded there ?
Every polite inquiry on both sides, that Arab
courtesy and custom demanded, had been made,
and at length there came a pause in the ceremonial.
Edward, on a whisper from his father, then stood
up and impressively reminded the sultan that his
companion in arms, who had fought at his side,
and been wounded at the same gun-turret —his
Majesty’s own son, Prince AH, was at that moment
awaiting permission to enter the pavilion and salute
the sultan, his father. Might he, Edward, then
leave the presence and bring in before his august
father the dutiful son, without the tent, who awaited
the royal welcome and blessing?
These words Edward spoke slowly in pure Arabic,
and the effect on the assemblage was deeply marked,
though courtly etiquette demanded silence.
The handsome, black-bearded chieftain, descen-
dant of a long line of warlike rulers, was perhaps
more deeply moved than any man within the
pavilion. Practised as he was in the art of self-
control, he found himself taken unawares, but for
a moment only. With the edge of his jewelled
hand he shaded his glistening eyes, bowing his
head toward Edward in sign of approval.
When, a few seconds later, Edward returned hold-
ing the prince by the hand, both stopped still within
the opening awaiting the sultan’s pleasure. There


they stood, at the moment, the central figures in
the great tent, a handsome couple of modest-looking
young gentlemen dressed in British naval uniform.
But to the eyes of both fathers, and of all in the
pavilion, they were a pair of intrepid young lions,
worthy alike of sires and peoples.
On beholding these two young men Arab eti-
quette went flying to the winds. Instantly a great
shout arose, another and another followed, the crowd
outside took up the cheers, which continued un-
ceasingly. The sultan, frowning, himself the first to
act, knew exactly how to manage his people, and
that the moment had arrived when Arab self-
restraint was no longer safe to insist upon. Leaving
the dais, he took both youths by a hand. Passing
swiftly through the tent opening, he pushed the
prince gently forward amongst the people, telling
them in forcible Arabic —a language containing a
vast wealth of penetrating expletives —that his son
was their son, and not to make donkeys of them-
selves before the English strangers, their best friends
and guests.
In a few minutes Arab dignity was restored,
nothing but a suppressed buzz remained ; the sultan’s
forcible language had produced the desired effect.
Seated afterwards in private conference, it was
then agreed between the sultan and Fortune that
all should start the following day on the return
journey to the capital; where, after arrival and rest,
a few days were to be given up to sport and games
in honour of the visitors. The sultan moreover
suggested a further journey to meet the chiefs of


w * 't J
_rt _ '
iM*^»
THE SCENE IN THE SULTANS PAVILION
f To fact P




certain tributary Arab clans inhabiting the mountain
country within his frontier.
All these plans gave John Steele great relief of
mind. He felt that while Zenobia continued in her
present diseased mental condition, the only safety
for her husband lay in his absence from her side.
It was with openly expressed satisfaction that he
declared in favour of the sultan’s programme, and
highly approved of the suggestion that they should at
once return to the Propontic , there to make all ready
for the land journey, and order the yacht to be
taken on to the sultan’s seaport, about a hundred
and fifty miles further up in the Red Sea. There
she could lie in perfect safety until the party returned
on board from the interior.
Fortune gave the necessary orders and took silent
farewell of Zenobia. He had learned the wisdom
of the surgeon’s advice that she was best left alone
unnoticed, so far as it was possible to do so.
Edward meantime had busied himself collecting
an ample supply of guns, revolvers, and ammunition
for the journey—costly weapons of the most recent
invention, fondly called “ ironmongery ” by the
light-hearted youth. “ And don’t omit to put up a
few magazine rifles for presentation to the chiefs ;
they are sure to be welcome,” remarked Fortune,
The journey to the sultan’s inland capital was
made without incident. Both Fortune and his son
had made the visit on previous occasions ; but to
John Steele the trip was one of endless interest,
increased by the knowledge that he had his deaf
friend with him, under his eye and in safety.


Arab sport of every kind filled each day’s bill.
The sultan and his chiefs were untiring in their
efforts to please their visitors, and each evening was
given up to recounting the day’s incidents. Fun,
frolic, sport, or danger —and there was always enough
of the last to make hunting the most delightful
of pastimes.
After several happy days the sultan announced
to Fortune that the noise of the guns had made
the game wild, and they might go further afield,
he suggested. If his honoured guests would give
more of their society to the sincerest of their friends
and lovers, he would order out the camels for an
early start in the morning, and journey away to
the frontier hills he had previously spoken of. He
had, as a matter of courtesy to the clans, sent off
messengers intimating the intended visit, and the
rank and importance of his English friends. The
messengers had within the hour returned with
assurances from the chiefs, and promises of welcome.


CHAPTER XXXIX
TRIBES ON HIS FRONTIER
POOR sultan ! frequently unhappy and in danger,
but never despairing. “ Uneasy lies the head
that wears a crown,” were words Fortune had
frequently quoted to him from his own country’s
greatest bard. And the sultan was no exception,
he pointed out. The tribes, he shrewdly suspected,
from whom the promise of welcome had been received,
were as likely as not to evince a keen desire to end
their nominal ruler’s life before the visit terminated.
Fortune, who knew the history of the state well,
both from sultan and chiefs, might have written it
down in one word—“ blood.” The story of the
country’s unhappiness seemed to be interminable,
beginning hundreds of years ago. What gave it a
hopeless, despairing aspect, was the self-evident fact
that the internecine troubles of the petty sultanate
arose out of its geographical characteristics. The
slopes of the mountains, with their water-shed, fell
naturally towards the state. Beyond the hills was
desert ; beyond the plains, the Red Sea. It was no
question of separating from a tyrannical majority, or
calling in a powerful neighbour. The only alternatives
were the Red Sea or the desert, or the annihilation


of one side in the struggle, or the other ; and more
than once in the history of the land it had nearly
reached the last dire extremity.
Summed up shortly, the results from time im-
memorial had been “ battle, murder, and sudden
death.” The present sultan’s father had died in
battle, his father before him, and the reigning prince
was not at all likely to die in the harem. There
were periods in the history of the country when
something near depopulation threatened from the
sword. At the present time the land was fast
recovering from a period of exhaustion, such as
followed our Wars of the Roses. The trouble was
ever with the young up-growing generation. The old
men of the clans remembered with horror what had
happened in their youth, or they had listened with
childish terror to the tales of their grandfathers.
Unfortunately, hot-headed youth had no memories,
and in the long run it usually prevailed over the
grey-beards.
The signs of the times, with his knowledge of the
country’s history, indicated to Fortune that another
bloody period was at hand. He had talked the
position over with the sultan many times, and
brought the influence of a cultured mind to bear.
It was certainly a strange experience for Fortune to
take the teaching of his own country’s history and
apply them to this comparatively little Arab state:
the awful desolation of his own dear land during
the Wars of the Roses, and the glorious restoration
of all that was great and noble in it when the two
roses were blended and happily became one.


“ Kindness,” Fortune preached to his dusky friend,
“ patience, honest dealing, and truth let these
prevail, and the reward will surely follow in unity,
peace, and concord.”
It was a good omen for the future that the present
sultan was a ruler singularly free from the faults of
his predecessors. In addition, he had strengthened
his influence in the land, even up to its extreme
frontiers, by cultivating a wise friendship with that
greatest of all eastern powers —the British Govern-
ment.
The visit of an occasional warship, with absolute
non-interference, had greatly impressed the whole
country. Indeed, it was mainly this fact, of little
apparent importance, that had more than anything
else operated in the minds of the divided peoples to
keep them from again flying at each other’s throats.
Fortune hoped that this visit to the chiefs of the
mountain clan might be turned to the service of his
friend, the sultan, and his subjects.
He had made inquiry of the sultan regarding the
precautions taken against surprise ; and when the
meeting between the sultan and his nominal subjects
took place, Fortune, whose knowledge of Arabic
character was considerable, felt satisfied that there
was no cause to fear any collision. The flint would
not meet the steel this time ; no blood would be shed
save what came from the game. They enjoyed three
days of capital sport with the hill men, who were
greatly impressed by the guns and shooting of the
visitors.
On the evening before starting on the journey to


the harbour where lay the Proponhc, Fortune pre-
sented to the principal chiefs of both sides the whole
of the splendid firearms they had brought with them.
He addressed the chiefs and pointed out that hence-
forth he, his son, and his friend were in their hands
unarmed, and he felt quite confident they would
unite to escort their visitors in honoured safety to
the seaport.
More than this he declared—and here the sultan,
standing up, took his hand : he not only invited the
chiefs to visit his great ship and view her power
and treasure j but he would engage in his own name,
and in the name of the sultan, that they should
return to their beloved hills in absolute security.
The chiefs took the night to reflect, and in the
morning declared their trust in Fortune’s word,
and were themselves willing to make the journey
to the seaport as an escort to their visitors.
Starting for their destination, they followed the
direct road, avoiding the sultan’s capital, and in a
few days entered the, coast town off which lay the
Propontic as arranged.
Hastening on board, Fortune found everything
much the same. The surgeon’s report of Zenobia
was unaltered ; he thought she would be likely to
improve when the ship entered European waters,
not before. Meantime, she evinced no desire to
cause anxiety and was perfectly docile ; but all
cases of the kind were dubious, especially on board
ship, which was the worst possible place for such
patients. He counselled getting her to England
as quickly as possible.


Old Bailey, the surgeon reported, still lingered
on. The case, he felt sure, was quite hopeless, and
the end not far off. Lady Pomeroy had visited him
more than once, but the sick man had become so
excited each time, it was found necessary to stop
the visits. The patient’s ardent wish was to sec
Sir Fortune.
Anticipating the surgeon’s suggestion that the
yacht should start homewards as soon as possible,
Fortune had induced the sultan, some days before,
to send forward a special messenger, at speed, an-
nouncing their approach, and carrying instructions
from Fortune to get everything in readiness on board
the yacht for the entertainment of his guests. This
done, sailing orders would follow immediately.
When next day the sultan and all the chiefs as-
sembled on the Mole, they were conveyed to the
Propontic by a flotilla of the ship s boats, escorted
by numerous native craft. Fortune, standing bare-
headed at the gangway, received the sultan and chiefs
in state ; the Black Prince for the last time donning
his naval uniform in which to help in the reception.
Adopting Arab fashion, the first duty to the
guests was to place food and drink before them,
which was done at a luncheon table loaded with
every kind of delicacy that ship and shore could
provide. Wine the guests, as good followers of
Mohamet, would not touch. At the end of the feast,
Fortune with his officers led the sultan and the
other visitors round the vessel, delighting their eyes
with an exhibition of gun-drill, in which both Edward
and the Black Prince took their parts.


By this time the yacht had been got under weigh
and taken out to sea for a few miles.
Those of the chiefs who had never seen marine
engines at work were taken below and shown the
beautiful machinery going at full speed; but the
full measure of the day’s wonders had not yet been
filled. Fortune had caused the ship’s treasury to
be thrown open for their eyes to behold.
Leading his guests to the compartment, he pointed
out the chests containing the enormous treasure
in coin stored therein ; and removing the lids of a
dozen of the boxes, loosed for the special occasion,
he displayed to the wondering visitors their glittering
contents. This was not all. Addressing a few words
in an undertone to the sultan, his Majesty intimated
to the chiefs their host’s desire that every man
present might, if he so desired, fill his pockets with
the silver and gold.
Not a chief moved. The sultan smiled proudly
back to his host. “ The chiefs,” he said, “ desired
to take none of his wealth ; they were poor and
content, and could do without gold or silver. But as
a memento of the greatest of earthly monarchs, they
would each accept one gold coin on which her image
was imprinted.”
Fortune, delighted at this display of fine feeling,
escorted his Arab guests to the shore ; and after
taking dignified leave, he passed on to the sultan’s
tent, for a few last words of counsel and farewell.
The sultan, in measured, graceful language, ex-
pressed his deep gratitude to Fortune for what he
had done for the prince, his son.


“ It was the one thing wanting,” he said simply,
“ and will bear good fruit hereafter with my people.
It is not the only service for which I shall ever be
your debtor. You have this day done more to
impress on the frontier chiefs that my influence with
your nation is great and tangible —more so than
anything I might assert, which they would believe.
This also will bear good fruit.”
“ Now, Sultan, we must part ; the night grows late
and steam is up for England. Before I leave you,
be assured that the prince, your son, will be a worthy
successor. Put trust in the lad, for he is worthy of it.
For yourself and your people, especially the turbulent
hill men, ponder over the advice you have graciously
permitted me to give you. Bring into play the new
policy of patience and kindness, truth and honest
dealing ; and when I come again this way —soon,
I hope—I shall find your land smiling with content.”
“ The sun above will not shine for me until my
eyes rest on thy face again. May Allah have thee
in His keeping,” the sultan muttered hoarsely, as he
grasped hands in farewell—it was all emotion allowed
him to utter.
“ May Allah have me in His keeping,” Fortune
kept repeating to himself, as he was pulled off to the
yacht with John Steele. “ May Allah have me in
His keeping,” he silently prayed as the waves lapped
the boat’s side, bringing a vivid reminder of past
days in the embrasure of the old castle in Jersey and
the babbling water.
“I feel to-night, John, strangely moved. Can it
be that the crisis of my life approaches and revolves


unseen ? A vague sense of helplessness has taken
possession of my mind for the first time in my
career. Look up at the trembling stars, John, the
fateful stars. Out-topping and all-knowing, they seem
to regard us, helpless mortals that we are, from their
vaulted deeps with lidless eyes in silent disdain.
Is our future theirs to control? Are they without
mercy ? ”
“The only sense I feel, not a vague one either,
is that I am desperately sleepy, with the feeling that
I would give anything to be lifted from where I sit
here and put straight into bed and to sleep. Go on
talking, Fortunatus, but I can’t promise either to
listen or chat back. My head keeps butting for-
ward like a goat’s. I feel delightfully tired.”
“What am I,” muttered Fortune, lost in thought
and unheeding, “ that those stars should be mindful
of me? ‘ May Allah have me in His keeping,’” he
repeated again, this time thinking aloud ; “ I am but
an infant crying in the night.
“ That moon away beyond,” he continued softly,
“ rising high above the great cliffs of Arabian littoral,
seems to stare at me out of the darkling blue of its
velvet cupola with detective eye, as though ready
to tell what she knows of earth’s secrets. She looks
like a vast aqueous mirror into which man is for
ever gazing unsatisfied. Will he ever, I wonder, see
his conceited face reflected in that silvered surface,
or his fate lettered out in handwriting so clear that
those who run might read ? Would I read my fate
if now, at this moment, it was set forth upon that
revolving disc? No! a thousand times no! Not I,


indeed, if it told me what might endanger or sour the
love I bear my Zenobia. John Steele, I say, look
up, you are nodding ; the day has been too hot and
busy for you ; see how the Propontic looms out there
under the land, dark and shapeless. In that floating
home of mine, where rests all I hold dearest in the
world, wife and son, I am to find my fate perhaps !
But I don’t seek to know what it is to be, John,
you dear old sleepy-head.
“ Now here we are alongside at last, after a long
pull against wind and tide. Ship ahoy ! On deck,
there; show a light over the side.
“ At dawn we start on our voyage to England, and
whether or not we find happiness when we reach
there, we shall be home again once more in dear old
England. Good-night; sleep well, comrade. Fortu-
natus is himself again.”


CHAPTER XL
DEATH IN THE POT
BY dawn the Propontic was under weigh, steaming
for Suez, and soon after Fortune was at Old
Bailey’s bedside. He was shocked at the change
and at once saw the truth of the surgeon’s forecast.
All that day he lingered about his old follower’s
cabin, as much from anxiety as from regard for the
old man’s evident desire to keep Fortune in his
sight. There was plainly something terrible to be
divulged—involving life and death even. But Fortune,
his mind quite settled, resolved not to listen, gently
dissuading the sinking man from any further con-
fession.
He knew all that the erring old sinner had to con-
fess ; the perilous stuff was all unbosomed or guessed
at. Even at the risk of his life he would hear no more.
Soothingly he spoke to his dying tutor of old days,
of the ancient school and old palace buildings, and
the green trees with the cawing rooks, and the
thoughtless schoolboys beneath their flight across
the great play-grounds, where kings and queens had
walked and talked.
The old man slept at last. He had been wakeful


for long hours awaiting the return of Fortune, and here
he was at his side again, his once boyish student, the
youth he had firmly believed a favourite of the gods.
He had followed him for twenty-five years, he kept
muttering. He would follow him for ever, for all
eternity, he cried, feebly attempting to rise.
“ You can do no more good, Sir Fortune,” said the
surgeon. “ Let him sleep now ;he may awake again,
or go off like an infant without waking. Best if
you do not stay here, sir. I shall be close at hand.”
When late in the afternoon Fortune looked in on
the dying man again, he observed that Old Bailey
lay muttering to himself with his face to the cabin
louvres. Looking closely, he observed that one of
them was broken, a knot-hole probably ; and stooping
he found that he could look through to the far end
of the dining-saloon, where sat Zenobia, her right
arm in a black sling.
Wondering at what he saw, he found the surgeon
and asked for an explanation.
“ I should have reported to you, Sir Fortune, that
Lady Pomeroy had scratched her arm by accident,
but the injury is really quite trifling ; the sling was
provided more to humour a whimsical fancy than
anything else.”
If Fortune had kept his eye a second longer at
the knot-hole, he would have seen what was rousing
Old Bailey’s failing senses. To the dying man the
black sling would have had no interest, but for the
continued movement of Zenobia’s right hand in and
out of the sling, to the table.
A large tumbler, such as in the tropics was placed at


the side of each diner, was standing exactly at the place
at the table invariably occupied by Fortune. What
Old Bailey feebly watched was a white hand thrust
out quickly, like a snake’s head, held for an instant
over the tumbler, and withdrawn as quickly back
into the sling. Not once, or twice, but the same
unmeaning action was continued until long after
his eyes had closed in sleep.
The sleep of death was slowly but surely rising
upon him, like the inexorable tide. His weary eyes
ceased from watching through the louvre ; he was
alternately drowsy and wakeful. Impatient nature
was drawing him down to the “blind cave of eternal
night,” and as often body and soul recoiled and
delayed the final journey.
Again he was all awake, sharp and alert. The
woman’s figure was still visible through the broken
knot-hole ; the white hand still flashed out, poised
for an instant over the tumbler, and withdrawn.
He glanced at her face and shuddered. Would
such faces come about him to that bourne where
he knew he was so soon to travel, and from which
he knew there would be no return ?
It was a face of doom he saw; the face of a lost
soul—of horror-haunted, despairing Judas. He
looked once more through the louvre. Thank
God! the face of doom was gone. Old Bailey,
relieved and peaceful, slept again. Time passed—
an hour —more.
The usual dinner-call by the ship’s band had
been stopped. A servant announced instead at
each person’s cabin that dinner was served, Fortune,


John Steele, and Edward were standing each at his
usual seat awaiting Zenobia, who presently swept
in from her apartment. Her husband, with never-
omitted courtesy, handed her to a seat at the head
of the table. This night it pleased her to appear
more than usually radiant in a lovely costume, and
flashing with diamonds.
Her appearance jarred upon all three of the men.
It was not in keeping with the awful event about
to take place in the neighbouring cabin. But it
answered another purpose —if purpose there was
in her distraught mind. It diverted attention
from the gloomy face, the tragic eyes, of the wearer.
A statement of Edward’s was taken up and
discussed in undertones. Fortune, to support his
view, sent his servant for a book of reference.
Slowly putting on his spectacles, he turned sideways
from Zenobia, to get the light of the lamp on the
book, and commenced reading.
Surely he was now delivered into her hands,
his fate sealed, his life forfeit to a mad woman’s
unreasoning hatred ; and that woman his own dear
wife. To think that such a life as his should be
quenched by a murderess !
Zenobia with horrid alertness was instantly ready to
act. Like the flash of a scimitar, the deathly dart of a
snake’s head, the white hand flew out, and, poising
for an instant only over the tumbler beside her
husband, drew back swift and unnoticed.
Unnoticed? No, no! not unnoticed! A pair
of dying eyes, open for the last time on earth, glared
through the louvre at the scene. The lights over


the dinner-table burned bright, every detail stood
out with awful distinctness.
There was the black sling across Zenobia’s guilty
bosom, hiding a trembling merciless hand.
“ What was that shining object held in her fingers ? ”
Old Bailey muttered. Fortune, he noted, was turned
away from her, his drinking-goblet visible to the
dying watcher.
“ Dear God ! ” he faintly exclaimed. “ What was
that white hand doing there so busy ? ” He had
watched it during the afternoon occupied in the same
way. It was a lightning flash of dying intelligence
that struck across his poor worn-out brain.
“ Ah, dear Christ! ” he shrieked aloud, “save him,
save my Fortunatus.”
When John Steele looked up he saw with horror
Old Bailey in his white bed-clothes, staggering
towards them, shrieking, “ Poison ! poison ! I say.
Save my Fortunatus!”
They were the last words he uttered. Falling on
the deck, he gave a gasp, another, and rolled over
on his back.
Edward and John Steele were at his side in an
instant—too late! The old follower would not
awake again. He was asleep this time, and for ever.
Fortune was the first to see the white ghost-like
figure of Old Bailey appear in the doorway ; but he
did not move; the book dropped from his hand. In
his spectacles, with the light shining from behind,
he had plainly seen pictured in the glasses Zenobia’s
awful act. What he saw did not surprise him ; his
mind had for days been prepared for some vague


■ .jj
HMtefrr ~ jiJ^I
r* ' • pii i jni ; ■imBHiII ;
" MWKm
t ■•£r**~ -/- > *|i
i-" ” *%*>•$ I 5]
I ji«B .aiy^i'r|
►J
o
5


*


danger, he knew not what, and now it was face to
face with him, and brought mental relief.
Swiftly stretching out his hand backwards, he
caught Zenobia’s in his; and then, turning slowly
around, he looked calmly, lovingly, into the awful
quailing eyes of the insane woman who would have
murdered her husband.
Without a word of reproach the silent drama went
on slowly to its termination. Dropping her hand,
and gazing deep into her eyes, he took up the goblet
and raised it to his lips.
It was too much for the poor demented woman.
The clouded brain cleared, but only for a moment,
as she realised her husband’s intention.
Throwing out both arms, she pitched forward
swooning upon his shoulder, smashing the poisoned
glass to fragments in her fall.
Fortune had the erring and suffering woman in
his arms—love and forgiveness in his heart, from
which they had never been absent. He carried her
to her cabin, and watched by her side the night
through, comforted by the thought that not a soul
living knew of the poison he alone knew of, or saw
the mad act. It was his secret, and she still remained
his Zenobia.


CHAPTER XLI
FINIS
THERE remains but little more to narrate.
Fortune took the Propontic to England at her
fastest speed, anxious to lose no time in placing his
Zenobia under the care of the highest brain specialists
in the land.
It was not until after many weeks of observation
that medical authority would give any sort of opinion,
and even then, Fortune had to be satisfied with
dubious pronouncements.
They had before them an exact account of Zenobia’s
appearance, demeanour, and utterances from the
time the question of the surplus millions first arose
between husband and wife for discussion.
From the yacht’s surgeon they had obtained an
exact and technical account of Zenobia’s state of
health in China, and of her slight attack of fever
in Hong-Kong.
Still the specialists were puzzled by the case,
and far from satisfied. Their keen practised in-
tellects found something wanting, some chapter in
her life not opened to them. Questions followed
fast; they must know every incident in her life


back to her marriage. For instance she had borne
children ; one was still alive, two had died in infancy
—baby girls ? Yes.
Gently, thoughtfully the questions kept coming,
one arising out of another, and centred at length
around the bereaved mother and her children.
To Fortune, who at last realised the drift of the
questions, the interview had become both painful
and distressing. He looked and felt it; and exactly
in proportion to his now palpable distress, the skilled
men pushed home their questions, until the whole
facts were laid bare. The birth of the two baby
girls, their early death, the continuous sorrow of
their mother, and lastly, the all-important fact of
that mother’s indifference to the latest born, her son
Edward—an indifference never overcome.
At this last admission by Fortune the great
specialists looked seriously at one another, and skil-
fully changed the subject, to give him time for re-
flection.
Beads of perspiration appeared on his brow, and
ran in streams down his face. Fortune was pro-
foundly moved ; pale and anxious he faltered out in
broken sentences that there was a terrible confession
still to be made. He knew how necessary it was to be
open, and the unwisdom of concealment; he would
not now cover up any fact of importance, however
painful.
Then and not till then Fortune related, in a voice
broken by sobbing agitation, the story of Zenobia’s
attempt on his life, and its frustration on board
the yacht.


Anxious not to leave the afflicted husband without
hope, the doctors pointed out that the bracing
English winter would certainly benefit the patient.
A renewal of bodily strength might work for good ; at
that stage of the case it was impossible to say more.
“Wait? John,” said Fortune, talking over Zenobia’s
state with his old friend for the hundredth time ;
“that will I, while there’s life. But it is hard that I
should not be allowed to see and talk to her. The
doctors object on the ground that she must not see
any one whose appearance would revive memories,
or cause agitation in the slightest degree. She is
to be cut off from the past so far as can possibly be
managed. All her surroundings and occupations
are new, she is encouraged to garden, keep pets and
form new plans in and out of the house every day.
May God prosper all our efforts.”
“ What do you think yourself, Fortune, of your
wife’s chances of recovering a healthy mind?”
“ I don’t like to think of it, John. I would not care
to give my opinion if I had one. I dare not come to
any sort of conclusion, even to myself. I live in hope
that she will yet be restored to me, and that is all
I permit myself. I have been allowed to see her
from a distance, but it did not help me in any way,
as 1 was not allowed to speak.
“ Here in this beautiful England we shall remain,
Edward and I, in close neighbourhood of her asylum,
hoping patiently, and praying always for her recovery.
But I cannot expect you to devote any more of your
life to me, my staunch old friend. I know well in which
direction your thoughts have winged of late, John ;


many are the signs I have noted that you are
contemplating a return flight to the newer world
in the ‘ long wash of Australasian seas.’ ”
“ You have read the signs aright, Fortunatus. I have
for some time past been receiving important letters
from David Lynnt; and indeed of late, cable messages
urging my return. It appears that a genuine upward
reaction in the value of real property (that phrase I
distrust so much) is taking place throughout the
country, which I rather think affects my position to
a very important degree.”
“When do you start? Your going I take for
granted.”
“ My purpose holds to depart by the next mail-
boat, and it will be with a heavy heart I leave you.
You brought me out of the land of bondage, where I
lay in sickness and despair. Would God I could do
as much for you, dear Fortune, dear friend.
“ All may yet go well, John, and I am not entirely
without hope. That ever remains ; none can deprive
me of it.
“ I did not tell you that the Admiralty have
accepted the Propontic , and she is now a unit in the
navy, a free gift from me to the nation. I had no
heart to keep the ship lying idle in port for an in-
definite period ; but if my prayers are answered, and
my dear Zenobia ever restored to me, I shall build
another yacht, and resume my old happy occupations.”
“ How thankful I shall feel to hear that you are
building again, Fortune. It would be a good omen
indeed, and if happily it should come to pass, one
stipulation I will now insist on in advance.”




*■


)
'


/V
& #23. Z
F74FL
3 1508 02085968 7
ZV O y


:
. ' '
