

Forty-Five Years
Public Librarian
Mr. ALFRED J. TAYLOR
(i Chief Librarian and Secretary Tasmanian Public Library, Hobart)
SOME INCIDENTS IN HIS CAREER
A MANY-SIDED AND USEFUL LIFE
Published by "The World” in appreciation of Mr. Taylor's public
services, January 14th, 1919
Hobart -•
Labor Papers Limited Print, Collins Street
1919








Forty-Five Years Public Librarian
Mr. A. J. TAYLOR’S CAREER
A MANY-SIDED LIFE
u I feel in this (Tasmanian Public Library) that
I have left something for the benefit of the public
which will last long after I have gone. I have
put the best of my life's work into it. This is a
matter of great gratification to me.”
In these words Mr. Alfred J. Taylor,
the veteran Librarian of the Tasmanian
Public Library, summarised his life’s
work in connection with that institu-
tion. A great life work his has been —45
years spent in incessant labor in the
cause of enlightenment and education.
Now t , broken under the strain, he lies a
very sick man. Still, though disease
may have claimed his body, his faculties
remain unclouded, and his wonderful
memory is as retentive as ever.
For the past seven months Mr. Taylor
has been suffering from an exhausting
illness, and his condition is still a source
of anxiety to his relatives and friends.
He is, how r ever, bearing his infirm’ty with
fortitude, and is comforted by the many
letters of sympathy from all parts of the
Common wealth which ho has received
during his illness. His familiar face has
been much missed by frequenters of the
Public Library, and many old friends are
praying that he may ultimately be re-
stored to health and to his old place
among the books he loves so well.
Early Days.
It is not often that a public servant
fulfils the duty of one office for so long a
period as Mr. Taylor has done, and when
tnai office has been filled so creditably
for 45 long years, it is fitting that some-
thing relative to the man and his work
should, be presented for the benefit of the
readers of “The World,” who in many
instances are his near acquaintances and
friends. From many sources the fol-
lowing story of Mr. Taylor’s interesting
career has been taken. Unfortunately
Mr. Taylor himself was too ill to give
much information about his life and
vork.
Born at Hobart on March 24, 1849. Mr.
Taylor will now barely have reached his
seventieth birthday. Shortly after his
birth his parents moved to New Norfolk,
now a station on the Derwent Valley
railway line. Here Mr. Taylor lived for
20 years. He was delicate as a child,
and early in life met with an accident
that permanently lamed him. On ac-
count of this he was kept from school,
and really has only had less than _ six
months’ school education in h’s lifetime.
He had. however, a great thirst for know-
ledge. “I live to learn” has been the
motto of his lifetime. At that time 3d.
would only buy an eight-page book,
without a cover, and this class of
literature was generally related to
what is known as the “goody-
goody” type. But by borrowing
books Mr. Taylor was able to read in-
cessantly and widely, so that while yet
in his teens he was appointed Librarian of
the New Norfolk Library. Later he open-
ed a circulating library on his own ac


count, with a stationer’s shop attached,
hut business not proving lucrative, he
accepted an offer made by the late Mr.
W. F. Brownell, and became accountant
in the big business now so well known
as Brownell Bros., of Liverpool street.
Librarian at Hobart.
In 1873 the Librarianship of the Tas-
manian Public Library at Hobart became
vacant, and Mr. Taylor was the select-
ed candidate for the post from among a
long list of applicants. Since becoming
Librarian h e has upon several occasions
attended conferences of librarians held
on the mainland, and is well known
throughout the Commonwealth. Some 20
years ago, when a Librarian was requir-
ed for the lending branch of the Sydney
Public I/brary, with a salary of £4OO
a year attached to the office, Mr. Taylor
was selected for the post. ' Unfortunate-
ly. just then a new Civil Service Act
was passed in New South Wales, and
under the regulations the Minister of
Education was unable to confirm the ap-
pointment.
Carnegie Bequest.
Some 12 years ago Mr. Carnegie, the
American mill’onalre, offered the Cor-
poration of Hobart a sum of £7500 for
the building of a new Library. The
munificent offer was readily accepted, on
the conditions laid down. Credit is due
to Mr. Taylor for the designing and ar-
rangement of the rooms in the building,
and the simple and effective system of
classlflcafon adopted was the work of
Mr. Taylor, who put into it the best of
the knowledge he had gathered in his
travels : n England and on the Contin-
ent. Shortly before this he had been
granted six months’ leave of absence, and
he bad seized the opportunity to visit
Colombo, Naples. Rome, Florence. Venice,
Genoa, London, Paris, and Ireland.
Publications.
Mr. Taylor is well-known throughout
the Commonwealth for his writings In
the leading and other columns of Tas-
manian and mainland papers, and for Ms
publicarion of many pamphlets bearing
nrnn religion, technical education, the
reform of the criminal law, public in-
strncpon. extension of the parliamentary
franchise, reform in hospital and asylum
See back page of cover
FORTY-FIVE YEARS PUBLIC LIBRARIAN
Cure for Consumption.
management, and sociological questions
generally.* It was due to a series of
leading articles which he wrote in the
eighties that technical education was be-
gun in Tasmania. Mr. Taylor also com-
posed and published music of his own,
and wrote a drama. “Clouds and Sun-
shine,” that was performed and appre-
ciated. Examples of his use of the brush
and pencil are to be found on the walls
of the rooms of his home. He is also
an artist photographer in landscape and
figure. In 1900 he started a Tasmanian
“School Journal,” which he continued to
bring out every month at his own ex-
pense for tw 7 0 years. Nearly the whole
of the journal was written by himself.
The contents varied from a serial story
to articles on such interesting and in-
structive subjects as “Chir Rocks and
Minerals,’’ “Our Native Animals, “Our
Birds,” “Botany,” “Physmlogy," ''Hy-
giene,” and so forth, and was used in all
schools of Tasmania. Perhaps one of
the most useful pamphlets he has pub-
lished is that on epilepsy and crime. Mr.
Taylor, with his study of criminology,
has given a large amount of attention to
the subject of medical jurisprudence, and
in the pamphlet referred to has for the
first time brought together in printed
form the leading authorities on the im-
portant subject referred to. An American
firm is likely to re-publish the matter
contained in the pamphlet—for which
Mr. Taylor has received much commen-
dation in the press, and from men of
legal and medical standing.
When Mr. Taylor was about 19 years of
age he was suffering from consumption
and began a system of self-treatment by
the inhalation of sulphurous acid fumes,
w : th the result that he acquired perfect
health, and became a strong and robust
man. In tbe course of experiments with
himself he attained results which en-
abled him to predict that when the cause
of consumption was discovered it would
be found to be due to the presence of a
low form of vegetable life. The famous
discovery, made ten years afterwards by
Professor Koch, verified this prediction.
Mr. Taylor published the results of h's
experiments, and has since received many
hundreds of letters from all parts of


Australia, England, and elsewhere, mak-
ing inquiries, and he has the satisfaction
of knowing that in every State ol!
the Commonwealth his treatment has
effected many cures, and that its
value is beginning to be re-
cognised by medical men. Mr. Taylor
made this a work of benevolence and
love, and has refused all offers of fees for
the advice he has given. Mr. Taylor
has just issued a second edition of his
pamphlet, after 50 years experience.
Mining Speculations.
Many years ago Mr. Taylor visited
the West Coast, at considerable risk
to himself. Silver bad just been dis-
covered, and the locality was a terra
incognita, the place being a wilderness.
He became chairman of several prospect-
ing companies, and may be regarded as
one of the pioneers of the West. By
blow-pipe analysis he discovered several
minerals new to Tasmania. As the
result of speculations in mining corn-
pan es Mr. Taylor stood in the disastrous
period of the bank failures to realise a
fortune. When the Bank of Van Die-
men's Land at Hobart went under he
was advised by bis brokers to sell his
stocks at once, but as he knew that there
must be a heavy fall in values presently
he refused to make h'mself rich at tne
expense of others, and so held his shares
till his fortune melted away before his
eyes.
Public Life.
Mr. Taylor has several times been ask-
ed to stand for the State Parliament, and
at one time a gentleman from New Zea-
land, who held that he was wasting his
Lnieuts in Tasmania, offered to pay half
his expenses if he would stand for the
Federal Parl’ament. Mr. Taylor was so
devoted to his Library duties, and tbe
opportunity afforded by his position to
make more perfect his education, that he
declined these requests, although there
can be no doubt that had he taken up
public life he Avould A T ery quickly have
reached a leading position : n the political
life of the State.
Defence of Free Speech.
Mr, Taylor is. perhaps, one of the most
widely read men of the Commonwealth,
and there is scarcely a subject one can
broach that he is not remarkably well
FORTY-FIVE YEARS PUBLIC LIBRARIAN
To Alfred J. Taylor, Esq.,
acqua'nted with. The late Bishop of
Tasmania, Dr. Mercer, often referred to
him as a walking encyclopaedia of know-
ledge. The same cleric also remarked
once at a public meeting that for moral
courage- Mr Taylor was one of the brav-
est men he had met. It will be remem-
bered that upon two occasions he ma n-
tained his right to free public utterance
in public matters, apart from the dis-
charge of his duties as a public offi-
cial. Efforts were twice made to silence
him, but the whole of the papers in the
State, as well as members of the Gov-
ernment and the Deader of the Opposi-
tion, were unanimous in his support. Two
large public meetings were held, and
people of all classes and denominations
came to bis support, with the result that
his position was vindicated by public
opinion, and he established, not only his
right to freedom of speech, but the right
of all other public officials also. After the
last public meeting he was presented with
the following address:—•
Ch ef Librarian and Secretary of the
Tasmanian Public Library. Hobart.
Sir, —The following resolutions were
unanimously carried at a demonstration
at the Town Hall, Hobart, on Monday,
August 23, 1915, in defence of free pub-
lic utterance:—
“That this meeting desires to place
upon record its appreciation of the
splendid stand taken by Mr, Alfred J.
Taylor, the Public Librar an, in de-
fence of liberty of free public utter-
ance, inasmuch as that gentleman has
ttvice jeopardised bis pos lion and liv-
ing by asserting tb e rights of citizen-
sh'p, which he could not forego wstn-
out prejudicing the common interests
of the community, and seriously im-
perilling the bas : c principles of gene-
ral civic freedom.”
“That a copy of the above resolution
be signed by the Speaker of the House
of Assembly, on behalf of this meet-
ing, and duly engrossed and present-
ed to Mr. Taylor, w’th the hope that
he may be long spared to continue in
an office which he has filled with -redit
to the community and to himself for
a period of 40 years.”


Signed, on behalf of a public meet-
ing held at the Town Hall on Mon-
day, 23rd of August, 1915.
W. A. WOODS,
Speaker of the House of Assembly.
At a time when the teachers under the
Education Department werJ suffering
under the oppression of a tyrannical Di-
rectorship, Mr. Taylor toon up the cud-
gels on their behalf, and passionately
pleaded thjir cause with voice and pen.
He never rested until a Royal Commis-
sion was appointed, the cause of all the
trouble removed, and room made for the
appointment of a more just and able
Director, who has deservedly won the
respect and confidence of the teachers.
Said the head teacher of one of the city
schools at the time; “We were slaves,
and Mr. Taylor set us free!” For this
Mr. Taylor is held in grateful remem-
brance throughout the State.
Married Life.
Shortly after his acceptance of the
Librarianship, Mr. Taylor married Mss
Mary Anne Forde, whose parents came
out to Tasmania in the same ship which
brought the late S r John Franklin as
Governor to the colony. The issue was
one son, who died in infancy. For many
years he has resided in an interesting
home in D’Arcy street, South Hobart,
where he has lived an ideally happy life
with his wife. At this home Mr. Taylor
has a most remarkable private museum,
where there s exhibited over 3500 speci-
mens of the minerals of Tasmania and
other States, and over 600 objects of
ethnographical interest, all of which pos-
sess the rare merit of being genuine. Be-
sides these he has some 90 casts of the
heads of celebrated cr minais and men
of note. Mr. Taylor is a keen student of
criminology, and has collected these casts
for the study of this subject.
His cleverness in the reading of charac-
ter may be judged by the following inci-
dent: —
When Emperor William of Germany
came to the throne, Mr. Taylor was look-
ing at a very fine portrait of him, and
said to some of his friends, “This is a
mentality that borders on madness; look
at the width of the base of the brain, and
the squareness of the jaw. There is
nothing like it in Europe. This man is
FORTY-FIVE YEARS PUBLIC LIBRARIAN
Refuting the Pundits.
an autocrat, and has the power to declare
wai Unless he should die, become in-
sane, or commit suiciidd, he may one day
ring a bell, declare war, and light a torch
that will set all Europe in flames.”
How far this prediction has been veri-
fied readers of “The World” may judge
for themselves.
Interested in Medicine.
Mr. Taylor purchased one of the first
X-ray machines that came into the
Commonwealth, and made many inter-
esting experiments with it. He has al-
ways kept himself well posted up in the
latest discover es in medicine, and his
one regret is that he never had the op-
portunity of qualifying himself for the
medical profession. Although self-taught,
medical men from other States have ex-
pressed their astou shmeut at the wide
extent of knowledge that Mr. Taylor
possesses in this direction. He took
the trouble to go through a course of
“Massage” in order that he might give
this valuable form of treat™ P nt to per-
sons too poor to pay for it. and with re-
markable results, and when the South
African war broke out offered to go to
the front to assist in giving massage
treatment to wounded osldiers and write
letters for them.
When the first contingent left Tas-
mania for the great war just concluded,
and by permission of the Commandant,
500 copies of a leaflet on venereal d's-
eases from the pen of Mr. Taylor were
distributed among its members.
In 1903, when small-pox reached Tas-
mania, 10,000 copies of a pamphlet by
Mr. Taylor, “Is It Good to be Vac-
cinated ?” were distribute* 1 I ' Tr order of
the Hon. the Clref Secretary (Dr.
M‘Call) throughout the State.
His name is a household word among
the poor.
In this as in other matters, he has been
assisted by his really wonderful memory.
On one occasion he was able to bowl out
the London “Times’’ when it was claim-
ed in the leading columns of that
journal that a certain gas had
not been iiqirfied. Mr. Taylor on
reading the statement immediately turn-
ed up an article in a periodical many


years old, which contained a full de-
scription of tiie liquification of the gas
mentioned. On another occasion the
“Scientific American’" and •‘lllustrated
London News” and the “Review of Re-
views” came out with startling illustrat-
ed articles announcing the discovery of
a wonderful temple in the head of the
Great Sphinx. The articles professed to
give an account of the discovery.
Mr. Taylor on reading these accounts at
once wrote to the local press, pointing
out that the whole story was a hoax, as
Miss Edwards some 35 years before had
described how a tablet had been uncov-
ered in one of the temples of Egypt
which explained all about the Bpii'nx.
That Mr. Taylor's surmise was correct
was proved by the fact that American re-
porters afterwards admitted that they had
fabricated the whole story in order to
“pull the leg” of a Harvard professor who
was away on a holiday.
Knowledge of Art.
When Mr, Taylor went to Rome he took
with him a letter of introduction from
Archbishop Delaney. This letter enabled
him to be present at a reception granted
by His Holiness Leo XIH. Mr. Taylor
was shown the contents of the wonder-
ful Vatican Library, including the “Codex
Vaticanus,’ the manuscript which was
used, with others, in the last revision of
the English Bible.
His knowledge of art enabled h’m
when in Rome to criticise the great piece
of statutary known as the Laocoon group.
Mr. Taylor declared that the right arm of
the principal figure completely destroyed
the Greek line of beauty, which should
run through the figure. Here again he was
proved to be right, because it was after-
waids shown that the portion he criticis-
ed had been a restoration. That the right
arm was in the wrong position was
afterwards verified by the discovery of
the original arm. When it was placed in
position it at once rested on the line of
beauty which Mr. Tayior maintained
should be the case. Mr. Taylor is a
vice-president of the Tasmanian Art
Society.
In Controversy.
In controversy Mr. Taylor scarcely has
an equal, because he is so filled up with
facts, that his arguments come like
FORTY-FIVE YEARS PUBLIC LIBRARIAN
Politics.
shrapnel with crushing and destructive
force. As an illustration it may be
mentioned that when Alfred Tennyson
died, the then editor of the local “Church
News” referred to the poetry of the
dead Laureate as “lacking in the element
of faith.” Mr. Taylor wrote a crushing
reply, quoting many passages from the
writings of Tennyson to prove the ab-
surdity of the charge. Dr, Montgomery,
who was then Bishop of Tasmania, per-
sonally wrote to Mr. Taylor, thanking
him for the refutation he had published
in the “Church News,” and promptly
changed his editor of that journal. But
Mr. Taylor never loses his temper or
his courtesy, and as people have got
to learn that he has no axe to grind, his
opinions are treated with the respect
and confidence they deserve.
In politics Mr. Taylor is a Liberal,
with a strong leaning towards Labor
ideals.
In a pamphlet on “Empire Building,”
which hfe published a year before the war
commenced, he made a very correct fore-
cast of the attitude which America would
be likely to assume in the event of a
crisis that would jeopardise the independ-
ence of Great Britain, as will be seen from
the following extract from the pamphlet
referred to: “For any ill-feeling that may
exist between the English and the Ame-
ricans I blame that portion of the press
that has helped to keep aLve the spirit of
jingoism and political jealousy, which
should have been permitted to die out
long ago. When I publicly expressed the
opinion some short time ago that, in the
event of a final crisis, that would jeopard-
ise the supremacy of the British Empire,
Americans would be found taking sides
in her defence, a military officer said, “I
do not agree with you, Mr. Taylor. Not
one of them would stand up for us. They
would stand by and see our downfall
without stretching out a hand to save
us.’ ” Recent events have proved Mr.
Taylor to have been correct.
Since the first Bill introduced by Mr.
Gladstone in the eighties in favor of
Home Rule for Ireland, Mr. Tay-
lor has been a staunch Homd Ruler,
and on the public platform and In the
press has many times advocated the


right of Ireland to self-government. He
has always maintained that the readiest
solution of the difficulty would be found in
a referendum that would give each county
the right of an expression of opinion on
the question at issue. Mr. Taylor points
out that this would be a very different
thing to allowing Carson or anyone else
arbitrarily to say which counties, if any,
should be allowed to stand out from
Home Rule.
Now that there is to be a League of
Nations for the preservation of peace, Mr.
Taylor is of opinion that even full au-
tonomy might be granted to Ireland
without future evil result.
Other Activities,
At different times Mr. Taylor was elect-
ed a member of the Howard Associa-
tion, the Royal Geographical Society, the
Linnean Society, and Royal Colonial In-
stitute, London ; the Austral Salor, Mel
bourne* Ballarat 'School oi Manes, Tas-
manian Royal Society, and ATari-
ouis other literary, benevolent, and
scientific societies. For many years he
has been the local representative of the
Royal Humane Society of Australasia,
and has obtained many medals and cer-
tificates for persons who have risked
their livds in saving the lives of others.
He was one of the founders of the free
kindergarten schools in Hobart, and for
■some years has had the control of funds
for assisting indigent consumptives and
d’scharged prisoners. He was appoint-
ed one of the Tasmanian Commissioners
for the last Exhibition held on the main-
land.
Religion.
Mr. Taylor’s religion is best illustrated
by the relation of a dream whicn one of
his frends had of him. “I saw a ring
of penny pieces,” she said to Mr. Taylor,
“slightly overlapping each other, and on
each penny piece was engraved the name
of one of the world’s many religions. In
the centre of this ring was a single penny
piece, and your name was engraved upon
it. The rim of this penny piece touched
the rim of all the other penny pieces.”
A 1064119
FORTY-FIVE YEARS PUBLIC LIBRARIAN
That is the real relation in which, Mr.
Taylor stands to all religions. It is scarce-
ly necessary to say that as a result Mr.
I'ajior is respected by all denominations.
He has preached on the mainland and
here in Methodist, Presbyterian, Con-
gregational, Baptist, and Unitarian
Churches. When in London in 1905 he
represented Tasmania at the annual
conference of the Unitarian Churches,
and delivered an address. He was in-
vited to preach at Oxford and Guil-
ford, and preached in Loudon at the his-
torical Unitarian Church in Avhich the
Disraeli family peAV is still maintained
in its integrity, and in the graveyard of
which the remains of one of Oliver
Cromwell’s secretaries lies buried.
Mr. Taylor’s most recent crystallisa-
tions of thought in matters relating to
theology and religion are to be found in
a pamphlet h e published in 1912, “Some
Thoughts Towards a Reconsideration of
Our Religious Beliefs.” “This,” said
Mr. Taylor to the writer of this notice
of his life “is my confession of faith.”
‘‘After Life’s Fitful Fever.”
In all services rendered, Mr. Taylor
has never accepted any recognition there-
of. “My religion,” he said, “is to relieve
suffering wherever I find it.” Wfien
sympathy was expressed for him in his
lameness as having handicapped him in
his life, he has always said, “I would
not have had that left out for any-
thing. It has been the making of me. It
made me studious and sympathetic Avith
all forms of suffering.” Mr. Taylor him-
self suffered much when he first met with
his accident, and many people, no doubt,
would Lave considered it a great burden,
but he holds an entirely different view.
“I have had a good innings, and I am
quite prepared for the call when it comes.
Death has no sting for me, nor will the
graA T e have any victory over me. I feel
that aftdr life’s fitful fever I shall sleep
well.”
Truly Mr. Taylor’s life has been a
full and useful one. He will have
earned his rest whenever it may come to
him.


13/2/19.
Mr. A. J. Taylor,
Tasmanian Public Library.
H0B2RI.
Dear Mr. Taylor,
I have to thank you for the very interesting "Forty- five
Years Public Librarian" pamphlet. You have indeed had a busy
and useful career, and I hop© will long be spared to us - even
if only as a looker-on. To be a mere looker-on will be a new
experience to you; but the time must arrive some day to all cf
us.
With kind regards.
Yours faithfully,
«
«2J


PAMPHLETS & PAPERS
ALFRED J. TAYLOR
{Chief Librarian Tasmanian Public Library, Hobart)
Capital Punishment : Reasons why the Death Penalty should be Abolished
Additional Notes on Capital Punishment.
The Bible and Capital Punishment.
Fallible Tribunals: Execution of Innocent Persons.
Epidemic Crime : A Result of Capital Punishment.
The Death Penalty.
Epilepsy and Crime : A Chapter in Medieal Jurisprudence.
Overpressure in Education : An Inevitable Consequence of Payment by
Results.
Tasmanian School Journal (2 volumes)
Free Education.
Advice Gratis : Being Friendly flints to Parents
Imperial Federation versus Australian Independence.
Empire Building.
Trade Unionism as a Factor in Social Evolution.
Notes on the Value of Labour in the Production of Wealth.
Some Questions of the Hour.
Notes on the CocO“de-IVler (Double Coeoanut of the Seychelles Islands.)
The Study of Mosses.
A Chat about the Aborigines of Tasmania.
The Cure of Consumption by Sulphur Treatment.
Ditto, second edition (2,000), After 50 years Experience.
How to Prevent the Spread of Consumption.
Bubonic Plague : A Paper for the People
Venereal Diseases.
The Problem of the Nations: A way of Preventing the Spread of
Venereal Diseases.
Decline of the Birthrate in Australia and what it means.
Facts and Figures relating to Vaccination.
Is it Good to be Vaccinated ? (10,000 distributed by Government.)
The Deadly House Fly : The Champion Killer of Babies.
Some Thoughts towards a re-qonsideration of our Religious
Beliefs.
Sunday Sermons (I volume)
Sunday Conversations for the People (50).
Is there Eternity of Punishment?
Prayer.
Religious Worship : Unity without Uniformity
What the Autumn Leaf saw, heard and said— A Card for Hospital
Nurses.
Introduction to Essay on “ Free-Will and Determinism.
Clouds and Sunshine : A Drama.
Leading and other articles published in the Press of the
Commonwealth (several volumes)
