

FORWARD
BY THE RIGHT!
A STATEMENT
BY THE
TORY REFORM
COMMITTEE
Price 3d.
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers), Ltd.
LONDON: NEW YORK: MELBOURNE
1943


The following members of the Tory Reform Committee
have affixed their signatures to this Statement.
CHAIRMAN :
Viscount Hinchingbrooke {Dorset, S.)
JOINT SECRETARIES :
Capt. Peter Thorneycroft {Stafford).
Hugh Molson {High Peak).
Adams, Maj. S. V. T. {Leeds. W.)
Astor, Viscountess, C.H.
{Sutton).
Astor, Hon. W. W. {Fulham, E.)
Beit, Sir Alfred, Bt. {St. Pan-
eras, S.E.).
Bower, Norman {Harrow).
Critchley, A. {Liverpool, Edge
Hill).
Digby, Capt. S. Wingfield
{Dorset, W.).
Duckworth, G. A. V. {Shrezvs-
bury).
Entwistle, Maj. Sir Cyril,
K.c., m.c. {Bolton).
Etherton, Ralph {Stretford).
Gammans, Capt. L. D. {Horn-
sey).
Gates, Maj. E. Everard {Mid-
dleton & Prestwick).
Glyn, Maj. Sir Ralph, Bt., M.c.
{Abingdon).
Grigg, Sir Edward, k.c.m.g.,
k.c.v.0., d. 5.0., m.c. {Altrin-
cham).
Gunston, Maj. Sir Derrick, Bt.,
m.c. {Thornbury).
Hammersley, S. S. {Willesden,
E.). . .
Hogg, Capt. the Hon. Qumtm
{Oxford).
Keeling, E. H., m.c. {Twicken-
ham).
Keir, Mrs. Cazalet ( Islington,
E.).
Kerr, Hamilton {Oldham).
Lancaster, Col. C. G. {Fylde).
Linstead, H. N. {Putney).
Lipson, D. L. {Cheltenham).
Lucas, Maj. Sir Jocelyn, Bt.,
m.c. {Portsmouth, S.).
Marlowe, Lt.-Col. A. A. H.
{Brighton).
Nield, Lt.-Col. Basil {City of
Chester).
Orr-Ewing, I. L. {Weston-
super-Mare).
Perkins, Flt.-Lt. W. R. D.
{Stroud).
Prior, Com. R. M., d.s.o,
D.S.C., R.N. {Aston).
Robertson, D. {Streatham).
Storey, S. {Sunderland).
Tate, Mrs. M. C. {Frame).
Tree, Ronald {Harbor ough).
Wedderburn, H. J. Scrymgeour
{Renfrew, W.).
Winterton, Rt. Hon. Earl
{Horsham & Worthing).
Wootton-Davies, J. H., {Hey-
wood & Radcliffe).
Wright, Group Capt. J. A. C.
{Erdington).
York, Maj. Christopher {Ripon).
House of Commons, London, S.W.i


A STATEMENT BY THE TORY REFORM
COMMITTEE
What is the Tory Reform Committee ?
The Tory Reform Committee consists of a number of Con-
scrvative Members of Parliament who have combined for
political action.
The Committee was originally formed in February, 1943, with
the object of encouraging the Government to take constructive
action on the lines of the Beveridge Scheme. Since that time,
however, the Committee’s work has not been restricted to
Social Reform.
We have been able to work together on such apparently distinct
issues as the Beveridge Report, the Catering Bill, Post-War
Civil Aviation, War Pensions, Education,
Agriculture, and Forestry. Working on such a wide variety of
subjects, we have found that there exists among us a common
outlook on the principles which, in our view, should govern
the conduct of political affairs.
The Reason for this Statement
I he great material needs of human society are peace and an
adequacy of the essentials of life for every"human being. No
political party can fail to reflect in its policy the overwhelming
demand of the British people for those ends. There is some
disposition to-day to think that this identity of ends destroys
the significance of party politics. This is not so; the vital
difference between parties has been, and will continue in normal
times to be, in the means by which these ends are to be achieved.
If there are still any Conservatives whose political ambition is
to return to the conditions which existed between the wars, or
who regard the Party merely as a convenient organisation for
exposing the fallacies of Socialism, they are to-day of small
account. The Conservative Party has in the past rightly in-
sisted upon realistic and responsible methods in dealing with
political problems. Our opponents have frequently en-
deavoured to represent this realism as reaction and seek to
make grandiose promise a substitute for great achievement.
We affirm our loyalty to the heritage and belief in the traditions
of the Conservative Party. As members of that party we are
confident of its ability to lead the nation to its objective in both
war and peace. It will do so if it combines a passionate love for
the ideals and traditions of the British peoples with fearless


boldness in adapting our institutions to a changing world.
Yet boldness in conceiving ends must be matched by a resolu-
tion, vigour, and realism in devising the means. That there is
no contradiction between these qualities will be apparent to
the nation which has watched with pride the unfolding of our
Prime Minister’s strategy and the operations of our Eighth
Army. These qualities will be needed no less in facing the
problems of reconstruction and peace.
It is for these reasons that we have decided to set out the
principles which guide us, as progressive Conservatives, in our
approach to the political situation which exists to-day. We
have not attempted in this document to lay down a detailed or
comprehensive policy, but in setting out the principles we have
sought to illustrate them by reference to certain specific
problems.
PRINCIPLES OF TORY REFORM
i. The Principle of National Unity
The spirit of national unity, developed in war and consecrated
on the battlefield, must be preserved in the period of recon-
struction. To-day the problems of one section of the com-
munity are rightly regarded as the problems of the whole.
This process has been not only material but spiritual, and the
chief task of statesmanship will be to maintain that unity and
carry that spirit on into the years of peace. If, however, this
unity is to be preserved there must be the same readiness as
in war for each in his own degree to make sacrifices to the
common good. There must be give and take between all
classes of the community, between employers and workers,
town and country, if the national objectives are to be obtained.
Examples.
(a) Attitude of Conservative Party. —The statement that
“the Conservative Party is a National Party or it is
nothing” has never been truer than it is to-day. The
Conservative Party never has fallen, and never must fall,
into the error of the Labour Party in claiming to represent
one section or class of the community alone. Its con-
tribution to unity in peace-time will be to present, from
time to time, comprehensive programmes for the attain-
ment of aspirations common to the people as a whole.
(b) Employers, Shareholders, and Workpeople. —The standard
of living of this .country can only be restored and improved


if maximum production is regarded as the joint respon-
sibility of capital, management, and labour, working as
partners. We consider that a man who invests his skill
and labour in an industry should feel an interest in and
exercise an influence over that industry, equal in degree,
if not in kind, to that exercised by a man who invests
his savings. To this end we welcome the extension of
the system of Production Committees. In the develop-
ment of this system the Trade Union movement has a
vital part to play. The Trade Unions are a typical example
of that spontaneous growth which is characteristic of the
best in our national institutions. We believe that in the
future they will make still greater contributions, not
merely by dealing with questions immediately affecting
working conditions, but also by making their members’
wide experience of practical problems available for the
purpose of increased efficiency.
Investors and particularly small investors must be
enabled to safeguard their interests by the ability to
secure full disclosure of the financial results of under-
takings in which they are interested. The opportunity
offered by the proposed revision of the Companies Act
should be taken to improve the existing methods whereby
shareholders are represented and to bring them into more
effective consultation.
Subject to those safeguards, management must be given
full and unhampered freedom in making the day-to-day
decisions which are necessary in order to ensure the
efficient running of a business.
(c) Contributions and Benefits. —In the past there has been
an unhealthy division of the people into “two nations”.
Recently the line has been drawn between those who pay
income tax and those who pay insurance contributions.
The transfer of wealth which has already taken place
makes it certain that the major part of the State’s
expenditure in the future can only be found by small
taxpayers, many of them weekly wage-earners. It is for
this reason that we welcome the introduction of a scheme
for income-tax collection on current earnings.
Just as under the Beveridge scheme all are required to
subscribe their premiums, so in the larger spheres of State
expenditure all will be required to contribute by their
3
NATIONAL UNITY


taxes. This fact alone demands the closest scrutiny of all
expenditure to see that no one section of the community
shall benefit unduly at the expense of any other.
(d) Town and Country. —We reject the false division which
has in the past been made between the interests of town
and country, A prosperous agriculture will, at the same
timy, produce essential supplies of fresh food for the
townsman and provide in return a market for his goods.
We consider that the cultural traditions of our people are
largely founded upon a full and vigorous country life and
that the countryside will be an amenity increasingly under-
stood and enjoyed by all as we rise in wealth and educa-
tion.
(e) Compulsory Military Service. —We regard compulsory
military service as an essential part of our democratic
system. National unity in our view demands, as one of
its obligations, that every man should undergo military
training in order that he can defend the country in which
he lives, and enable it to play its proper part in any inter-
national system for security against war. We therefore
favour compulsory military training for an adequate period
for all young men.
2. The Principle of Empire Unity.
When the British Commonwealth and Empire stood alone
against the Axis only the unity of all classes and races gave us
power to hold out. In the future this country alone can have
but a limited influence in world affairs, and individual Dominions
taken by themselves would have still less. A united. British
Commonwealth and Empire can play a vital part. Such unity
would not involve any derogation of the right of self-government
possessed by this country and the other Dominions. Indeed
we believe that attention should be transferred from abstract
questions of political status to such practical problems as
Imperial Defence, Air and Sea Transport, Broadcasting and
Communications, Education, Research, Economic Development,
and Migration.
For these purposes, and in order to ensure that at any peace
conference the Dominions should adopt a common policy, w T e
regard arrangements for an Imperial Conference as a matter of
urgent importance.
4
EMPIRE UNITY


Examples.
(a) Foreign Relations. —The unity of the Commonwealth is
no mere British interest; it is a matter of great importance
to those who desire peace throughout the world. Only
as a united Commonwealth can we play our proper part
with America, Russia, and China in any international
organisation which may be devised for world security.
(b) Imperial Defence. —The events of this war and the growth
of air power should, in our view, alter our whole concep-
tion of Imperial Defence. It will no longer be sufficient
to say that each part of the Empire is primarily responsible
for its own local defence unless at the same time adequate
Imperial forces of all arms are so disposed throughout the
world that they can be moved in sufficient time to defend
any threatened points.
(c) Economic Affairs. —The economic importance of a state
or group of states depends, among other things, upon the
population they control, the amount and variety of their
natural resources, and the size of their internal markets.
Only if the Commonwealth be regarded as an economic
unit can it deal with America and Russia upon equal
terms. We consider, therefore, that the nations of the
Commonwealth should be free to order their economic
relations with each other, as are the States of America or
the various Soviet Socialist Republics, without necessarily
incurring claims to equal treatment from foreign powers.
( d) Colonies. —There are at present two Empires. The one
a free association of independent and self-governing
States; the other a number of widely dispersed colonies
administered with a few minor exceptions directly by the
mother country. In our view steps must be taken
whereby the Dominions will be enabled to take an increas-
ing part in framing the policy on which these Colonies are
administered, and v/e look forward to the time when many
of the Colonies will themselves achieve full independent
status.
We favour some system of regionalisation as the best
method of attaining these various objects. We recognise,
however, that an Imperial Conference must decide on the
machinery it considers best for this purpose.
(e) India. —We believe that means can be devised whereby


India can share to the full the fruits of that victory which
her soldiers will have played so worthy a part in winning.
We acknowledge the pledges that have been given, but we
recognise that the deadlock which at present exists
between different units and communities in India makes
it difficult for us to take effective action until it is resolved
by Indians for themselves.
We are agreed upon the need to offer every assistance
within our power to Indians in the solution of this problem,
and we are determined to maintain conditions in India in
which a peaceful solution can be worked out.
3. The Principle of the Interdependence of Nations.
The Foreign Secretary has described this principle as the great
lesson of the twentieth century. It is our firm determination
to make the application of this principle the basis of our foreign
policy. For any nation, and particularly the British Common-
wealth, isolation must mean disaster.
We recognise that the unity which has been achieved within the
British Nation and Commonwealth, and in great measure among
the United Nations in time of war, cannot be achieved in inter-
national relations in peace except in the fullness of time and
after the expenditure of effort. In our view sound measures
for international co-operation, security, relief, currency, or trade
only result from the frank submission of national views by
strong nations in a spirit of give and take. The creation of
international organisations may follow such discussions and we
ourselves see good ground to hope for successful development
along these lines. Such hope is, however, based on the assump-
tion of adequate domestic strength and preparation, and can
never be regarded as an excuse for weakness or inertia at home,
as it sometimes has been in the past.
Examples.
(a) Security against War. —It may in the future be found
possible to establish some form of international police
force. If this is so we are determined that the British
Commonwealth shall play its full part in such an organiza-
tion, In the meantime we consider it to be essential that
those military organisations for consultation and joint
action which exist between the United Nations should be
maintained.


(b) Removing the causes of War. —The interdependence of
nations is economic as well as political. Restraint against
aggression will in the long run be ineffective unless it is
accompanied by constructive steps to remove the causes
of dispute. The joint machinery of war must be adapted
to the needs of peace. Organisations of the nature of
the Middle East Supply Centre should be continued.
The International Labour Office and the Hague Court,
which have proved themselves to be effective organs of
co-operation, should be revived.
We regard the spirit and method of joint enterprise
exemplified at Hot Springs Conference, designed to
secure ample food supplies to every nation, as the pro-
totype to be followed in international action in the
future.
(c) Stages of Collaboration. —The extent to which nations
are prepared to collaborate in international organisations
must, in our view, tend to increase. The growth of such
organisations will inevitably be by stages.
It would be reasonable to expect in the near future a
greatly increased degree of collaboration between the
English-speaking peoples.
The welfare of the human race will depend in the im-
mediate post-war period on mutual co-operation and
understanding between the British Commonwealth, the
U.S.A., the U.S.S.R., and the Republic of China. The
final structure of any world organisation must clearly be
founded on an even broader basis than co-operation of
this type.
The predominant part which the Great Powers must take
in matters of security does not detract from the unique
contribution which the smaller Powers can make.
Whether these smaller nations decide to make their
contributions individually or by regional groupings, we
accept the view that the Great Powers must establish a
framework of stability within which all nations can
develop.
4. The Principle of Full Development of Resources.
An expanding economy is shown by our past history and that
of the United States to be vital to the wealth and welfare of the
people. The British Commonwealth and Empire has before
7
INTERDEPENDENCE OF NATIONS


it an opportunity of expansion not inferior to that of the United
States in the last century. We reject restrictive policies born
of timidity or lack of imagination. ■
We recognise the need to ensure that British industry is at
least as well equipped as that of its industrial rivals. The
maintenance of high standards of industrial efficiency is at
once a condition of securing the things we want and a principal
contribution to full employment and an expanding economy.
Examples.
(a) Full Employment. —In Britain we consider the working
out of a full-employment policy to be an essential and
urgent task of government. The solution of this problem
is of importance not only to this country but to world
economy. There is inevitably a conflict between plan-
ning the employment of all and the freedom of each to
choose what kind of work he will do. It is comparatively
easy to maintain full employment in an authoritarian
State. The supreme test of parliamentary democracy
will lie in its ability to reconcile planning for full employ-
ment with the liberty of the individual.
There is considerable agreement among economists that
the demand for capital goods is the factor which deter-
mines the activity of trade, and this in turn depends upon
the investment of savings. We therefore consider that
the Government must so influence or, if necessary, control
the volume and timing of expenditure on capital goods
as to ensure an adequate demand for them at any given
time.
It is also necessary to deal with unemployment caused
by the decline in the prosperity of an individual industry.
For this purpose it will be necessary to secure a wider
diversification of industry in any one area, provide for
increased facilities for training, and create conditions in
which labour can be made mobile without undue hardship
to the individual.
(b) Empire Development. —Full development of the resources
of this country is not enough. The whole potential
wealth of the British Commonwealth and Empire must
be utilised in the interests of their own and other nations.
In such practical matters as Air Transport and general
communications, in the reclamation and development of
8
FULL DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES


the land, in the movement of capital and labour on a
scale hitherto unthought of to the places where they are
needed, common action must be taken to develop the
vast resources of the Commonwealth, and joint machinery
should be set up to facilitate the process.
(c) Export Trade. —We reject alike the defeatism of those
who despair of regaining or increasing our pre-war
overseas trade, and the unrealistic view that this country
can dispense with exports. Exports are essential in order
to pay for imports of food and vital raw materials. The
virtual loss of our overseas investments makes the re-
establishment and, indeed, the substantial increase of
our export trade essential if this country is ever to regain
the standard of living to which it has been accustomed.
This can be achieved only if the Government pursues a
far-sighted policy of assisting the development of back-
ward countries in consultation with our export industries,
and if industry is enterprising in the quest for markets,
and efficient in producing and selling the goods which
overseas countries will need from us.
(d) Research. —We regard the production of high-quality
goods as being the special field in which this country
can in the future expect to lead the world. The nation
which in a few years has produced Television, the
Spitfire, and Radio Location, should be capable of out-
standing achievements in peace-time production. Such
achievements will call for the devotion of far greater
resources in men and money to the task of scientific and
technical research. Our educational system must there-
fore make provision for the increased numbers of trained
scientists that will be required for this work.
(e) Agriculture. —Agriculture is one of our greatest national
assets and of indispensable value to the whole community.
In our view, landowners, farmers, and farm-workers who
conform to a reasonable standard of efficiency must be
assured of fair rewards for their efforts by a guarantee of
stable prices. The public for their part must be satisfied
by the maintenance of some form of Government super-
vision that the industry is being efficiently conducted in
the national interest. f i
(/) Post-War Employment of Women. —We do not consider


that the nation can afford to exclude women from em-
ployment on the grounds of sex. Jobs should be open to
the most efficient individual, man or woman, and payment
should be based on that principle. There should be no
automatic dismissal of women on marriage, whether from
Government or other employment.
(g) Birthrate. —If this country fails to show an increase in the
birthrate, it will be handicapped in its efforts towards
economic prosperity. Not only will the diminishing
number of workers be limited in the standard of living
which they can achieve for themselves, but they will find
it hard to provide a reasonable standard for the sick and
ever increasing proportion of aged persons. In our view
the birthrate may be increased if the nation will provide
better conditions for women who bear children, and
arrangements are made whereby larger families cease to
be one of the principle causes of poverty. We regard the
extension and improvement of our maternity services of
such urgency that they should be carried out even in
time of war.
5. The Principle of the Practical Approach,
Common sense has been the distinguishing characteristic of the
British approach to politics, business, science, and agriculture.
We have little faith in abstract theory or preconceived ideas,
and consider that evolution based on knowledge of the facts
and of what is practicable gives better and quicker results than
violent change.
In order to develop the kind of conditions in this country which
we desire we shall need to use all the enterprise, private and
public, of which we are capable, and we accordingly reject the
false antithesis between the two. If there is a broadening field
for state ownership of certain monopolies and state direction of
the main lines of our production policy, there is equally a need
to revive at the earliest moment a widespread, healthy, and
vigorous private enterprise.
Examples.
(a) National Planning. —Much confusion of thought has arisen
on this subject as a result of false analogies drawn from
the practice of authoritarian nations. In war-time, it is
true, a democratic government can plan virtually all the


activities of the nation because of the existence of the
common objective of victory.
We reject the view that planning can play so extensive a
part in peace time, when the consumer’s demand controls
production. But in the state of full employment to which
we look forward, Government must by persuasion estab-
lish that its objectives command the general support of
the people. It must provide itself with the necessary
statistical and other information to guide it in correlating
demand and supply of man power, materials, and savings
needed for these objectives. It must be prepared to use
the necessary powers to overcome any obstruction to the
general will.
Agreed programmes for example on Housing, Health, and
Education will be of little avail unless builders, doctors,
and teachers, and the requisite materials and savings, are
made available as required by time-table.
(b) Public Control. —The direct control by Government of
certain activities is not a new thing and the field of such
control will vary with the circumstances and may tend
to expand. The test in every instance must be the
public interest. It is to be remembered that the public
interest is served not only by people who consciously set
out to serve it, but also by those who in pursuit of their
own calling and in order to make a profit are led to display
the qualities of enterprise, adaptability, and efficiency. We
are determined, therefore, to maintain conditions in which
the small trader can grow and prosper, and thereby enrich
the community in which he lives. As businesses grow
larger, other factors have to be taken into consideration,
though bigness and badness are not, as is often assumed,
synonomous. We consider, however, that a point does
come where an individual firm or group of firms obtains
a position of dominance in some aspect of our national
life—a dominance which it should neither exercise nor
wish to exercise, without the counsel and authority of
government itself.
(c) Private Profit. —Profit or loss gives a clear indication of
what people want to buy and provides a check on the
efficiency of its production and distribution. For these
purposes it is the only practical criterion available, but we do
not accept private profit as the sole test of public advantage.
11
THE PRACTICAL APPROACH


( d ) Banking. —The volume of bank money is already regulated
by the Treasury, and the Bank of England acts in that
sphere as a mere Treasury agent. The nationalisa-
tion of the Bank of England would, therefore, make no
practical difference. Since the Big Five Joint Stock
Banks distribute credit to individuals and firms, it is
in the interests of the public that their credit-worthiness
should continue to be decided by the Banks which exist
to serve them and not by a State-managed concern.
The Joint Stock Banks should therefore not be national-
ised, though their general policy must be subject to
scrutiny.
(e) Use of Land. —We believe that the private ownership of
land serves a useful purpose. We recognise, however,
that the physical reconstruction of the country can only
be effective and the amenities of the countryside can only
be preserved, when the Government is prepared to take
control of development rights upon a national basis. If
this is done we believe it to be possible by the full use of
private and public enterprise to create an adequate supply
of houses of high standard for our people within ten years
of the end of the war.
6. The Principle of Individual Freedom of Choice.
We believe in the freedom of the individual to think, speak,
write, vote, and buy as he wishes, subject only to the over-
riding interests of his fellow citizens.
Examples.
(a) Electors. —Universal adult suffrage and freedom to per-
suade others by speech and writing are our political
heritage. We regard the Parliamentary institutions of
this country as the best safeguard of individual liberty.
We desire to maintain the democratic principle in local
as well as national politics. We consider that the
machinery of local government is capable of development
and improvement, but we are determined that locally
elected representatives shall continue to play a useful and
important part in the administration of local services.
(b) Property Owners. —The freedom to vote secured by our
Parliamentary institutions is not of itself enough. It must
be buttressed by an increasing measure of economic


independence in the individual. For this reason we
regard private property as indispensable to political
freedom and consider that a wide-spread distribution of
private property should be the aim of Parliamentary
government.
(c) Parents. —The best education possible must be provided
for every child capable of benefiting by it irrespective of
his origin or the wealth of his parents. At the same time
we insist that the parent should be free to choose any
form of education which he can secure for his child, and
for which he is prepared to pay the cost. We regard any
suggestion that parents should not be allowed to spend
their money on educating their children, when they
cannot be prevented from spending the same money
upon them in less useful ways, as unreasonable and
detrimental alike to the welfare of the children and the
proper development of our national educational system.
(d) Doctors and Patients. —A comprehensive national health
service is needed as much for promoting good health as
for curing ailments. We consider it essential to the
proper working of such a service that as much freedom of
choice as is possible should be maintained for both doctor
and patient, and that the present opportunities for
individual research should be retained.
(e) Customers. —The consumer, and the consumer alone,
knows what he wants and must be free to express his
choice by his purchases. This freedom is as fundamental
to economic democracy as is the vote to political
democracy.
7. The Principle of Trusting the People
Our pride in British history and institutions and our belief in
the value of organic growth are not incompatible with vigorous
and rapid development. The changes that are needed can be
speeded up without harm to the best in our traditions if the
people are continuously kept informed. This principle has
been followed successfully in the past by such leaders as
Disraeli, Lord Randolph Churchill, and Joseph Chamberlain,
and we believe that the failure to follow it in recent years has
impaired the mutual trust which existed between elector and
elected.


Examples.
(a) Defence. —We are determined that this country shall
never again be in a position of inadequate strength to
meet its commitments. We consider that one of the
main causes for our unpreparedness for this war was the
ignorance of the bulk of the population of the danger
with which we were faced. In the future we consider
that the burdens and sacrifices involved in the main-
tenance of adequate armaments will only be supported by
a nation kept adequately informed of the problems
involved.
(b) Demobilisation and Resettlement. —A plan for demobilisa-
tion, however well devised, will not succeed unless its
nature and objects are fully understood by all concerned.
It must be explained to them now. At the end of the
last war, carefully prepared plans had to be abandoned
because the Services did not understand and therefore
would not accept them.
(c) Housing. —In the period immediately after the war a
housing shortage is inevitable. The hardships and in-
conveniences which must result will only be tolerated by
a people which is kept fully informed of the problems
involved, the programme which has been decided upon,
and the practical steps which are being taken to imple-
ment it.
8. The Principle of First Things First
We believe that much of the frustration of modern politics and
many national misfortunes in the past have arisen from failure
to distinguish the essentials among our national objectives.
Without prejudice to long-term policies, the greatest effort at
any time must be applied to reaching definite and practical
objectives.
Examples.
(a) War. —Until victory, the prosecution of the war must take
precedence over all other subjects.
(b) Transition. —Victory may come suddenly and plans for
the demobilisation and reconstruction must be ready.
The major part of the effort that can be spared in war-
time should be directed to preparing practical policies
for immediate application, rather than to devising
grandiose long-term programmes.
14
TRUSTING THE PEOPLE


(c) Peace. —It would be politically dishonest to pretend that
a new heaven and a new earth can be found in all fields
of national activity at once. Here, also, the essentials
must be selected and pursued within the limits that the
Nation can afford. Money is the measure of economic
effort but is neither its servant nor its master.
In our view these peace-time essentials are :
(i) That after the war Britain should retain adequate
armaments and compulsory military training in order
that her contribution to security may be integrated
with those of the rest of the Commonwealth in a
single military system appropriate to a world power.
The Commonwealth must then play its part with the
other United Nations in any international organisation
which exists or may come into being for the preserva-
tion of world peace and order.
{2) Full employment as a condition of individual self-
respect and independence, and as a guarantee that
the maximum national effort is being harnessed to the
national objectives.
(3) The provision of homes for all of an adequate standard.
By an adequate standard we mean homes which
provide reasonable amenities and privacy for all who
live in them, and in which a healthy people will be
content to dwell and bring up families.
(4) The establishment of an educational system, general,
religious, and technical, which will enable any child
to develop his capabilities and character to the full.
(5) Social Security guaranteed by adequate minimum
wages and a system of social insurance on the lines
proposed by Sir William Beveridge. Such security
implies a corresponding obligation on the part of
individuals who are capable of so doing to contribute
by their labour to the national wealth and the estab-
lishment of a preventive and curative health service
to ensure that the maximum number can so contribute.
Our desire to secure the young, the sick, the workless,
and the aged against want was the common ground
which originally brought us all together. We have
put this last because we believe that those in need of
15
FIRST THINGS FIRST


relief on that minimum scale will be few if we all
apply the same energy, intelligence, and good-will
to the constructive tasks of peace as we have to the
destructive work of war.
9. Conclusion.
It is in accordance with the above principles that w r e are
approaching political problems. We believe that by so doing
we shall help to achieve a good standard of life for the individual
within the community. A good standard of life depends upon
spiritual as well as on material values. It includes enjoyment of
the fundamental freedoms and a feeling of fellowship in the
individual with the world in which he lives, a belief that he is
useful to others and that this usefulness will be recognised by
them.
We have deliberately insisted on the need for an expanding
economy and for those practical steps necessary to restore and
augment the national wealth. In the distribution of that wealth,
however, we are not content to rely upon the blind working of
the law of supply and demand. Social justice requires that
basic human needs should be ascertained and that it should be
a first charge upon society to meet them.
The determination of what these needs are and of the steps
necessary to meet them is a matter in which all must play a part.
The increasing scale and complexity of national affairs and the
failure to adapt the machinery of democracy to modern circum-
stances have tended, in the past, to exclude the ordinary citizen
from public affairs and induced a widespread apathy. War
has shown the readiness of the people of this country for public
service when the need was evident and the means available.
This contribution by the ordinary citizen in war will be needed
equally in time of peace. We are determined to devise ways
in which this can be achieved.
Pride in the glorious past of the British nation is meaningless to
individuals who feel that they have no stake either in its present
or its future. We desire to establish our institutions on a broader
and more democratic basis, in which all can justly feel that they
are writing some part of the history of the times in which they
live, and are making a useful contribution to posterity.
PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY
THE FLEET STREET PRESS, LONDON, E.C.4


