

(llje (irinml) of Ht. JllilDrc6, UrraD M’tm't
luttlj Jltargarct iHonata.
FOURTH ANNUAL
COMMEMORATION SERVICE
IN HONOUR OF
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
Founder and First Governor of Australia, horn
in the Ward of Bread Street, October n, 1738.
The Service will be held this year on
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 13TH, at 3 p.m.
THE ADDRESS will be given by
Lt.-Col, Sir Archibald Weigall, k.c.m.g.,
Chairman of the Royal Empire Society, Northumberland Avenue.
THE LESSON will be read by the President of the
Admiral Arthur Phillip Commemoration Council,
Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield
OF PIYTHE, G.C.V.0., C.B.E. LL.D.
The Service will be attended by
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Mayor, Sir Percy Vincent,
The Lady Mayoress and The Sheriffs of the
City of London and The Rt. Hon. Sir Austen
Chamberlain, k.g., m.p., Master of the Cordtvainers
Company , and Lady Chamberlain
A Reception will be held after the Service at Cordwainers Hall, by
kind invitation of the Company.
Will the Congregation please remain in the Church while the
Reception Committee proceed to Cordwainers Hall in time to receive
them there. Tickets should be given up at Cor diminer s Hall.




Jfflrm af Sterfrta.


Zbc Service.
Organ Music.
2.30— 3 P-ir.
The Clergy and Officers of the Ward and Church to meet the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs, The President (Viscount Wakefield), the Master of the Cordwainers
Company (Sir Austen Chamberlain) the Chairman of the Royal Empire Society
(Lt.-Col. Sir Archibald Weigall), and conduct them to their seats.
Hymn
“ We Love the Place, O God.”
‘ Lord
I have loved the habitation of Thy House and the place where Thine
honour dwelleth.”
w E love the place, O God,
Wherein Thine honour dwells.
The joy of Thine abode
All earthly joy excels.
It is the house of prayer
Wherein Thy servants meet,
And Thou, O Lord, art there,
Thy chosen flock to greet.
We love the word of life,
The word that tells of peace,
Of comfort in the strife,
And joys that never cease.
We love to sing below
For mercies freely given.
But O, we long to know
The triumph song of heaven.
Lord Jesus give us grace
On earth to love Thee more.
In heaven to see Thy face
And with Thy Saints adore.


Minister : I was glad when they said unto me :
Choir ; Our feet shall stand in Thy gates, O Jerusalem.
Minister ; The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.
Choir : The world and they that dwell therein.
O Lord, open Thou our lips.
And our mouth shall shew forth Thy praise.
O God, make speed to save us.
O Lord, make haste to help us.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be,
World without end. Amen.
Praise ye the Lord.
The Lord’s Name he praised .
Psalm LXVII
Deus Misereatur.
OD be merciful unto us, and bless us ; and shew us the light of his
'T countenance, and be merciful unto us :
That thy way may be known upon earth : thy saving health among
all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God : yea, let all the people praise thee.
O let the nations rejoice and be glad : for thou shalt judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.
Let the people praise thee, O God ; yea, let all the people praise thee.
Then shall the earth bring forth her increase : and God, even our own
God, shall give us his blessing.
God shall bless us : and all the ends of the world shall fear him.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world without
■end. Amen.


The Lesson
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, CHAPTER XII.
THE RT. HON. THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD OF HYTHE, G.C.V.O
Te Deum Laudamus
The Te Deum will be sung as an act of Thanksgiving.
[Jubilee Music by Mar chant, Organist of St. Paul’s).
praise thee, O God ; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
All the earth doth worship thee : the Father everlasting.
To thee all Angels cry aloud : the Heavens, and all the Powers therein.
To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin ; continually do cry,
Holy, Holy, Holy : Lord God of Sabaoth ;
Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty : of thy Glory.
The glorious company of the Apostles ; praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets : praise thee.
The noble army of Martyrs : praise thee.
The holy Church throughout all the world ; doth acknowledge thee;
The Father : of an infinite Majesty ;
Thine honourable, true : and only Son ;
Also the Holy Ghost; the Comforter.
Thou art the King of Glory O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting Son : of the Father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man : thou didst not abhor
the Virgin’s womb.
When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death ; thou didst open
the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.
Thou sittest at the right hand of God : in the Glory of the Father.
We believe that thou shalt come : to be our Judge.
We therefore pray thee, help thy servants : whom thou hast redeemed
with thy precious blood.
Make them to be numbered with thy Saints ; in glory everlasting.
O Lord, save thy people ; and bless thine heritage.
Govern them : and lift them up for ever.
Day by day : we magnify thee ;
And we worship thy Name : ever world without end. Amen.


Let us pray.
The Lord’s Prayer.
Prayer for the King,
and all in authority under him.
LMIGHTY God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech Thee
to bless our Sovereign Lord, King Edward, and all high and low in
his Great Empire, the Ministers and Parliaments in all his Dominions,
that they may order all things in wisdom, righteousness and peace, te
the honour of Thy holy name and the good of Thy Church and people ;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Prayer for Australia and the Homeland.
ALMIGHTY God, whose Divine Providence ordereth all things and
guides and rules the destinies of Nations and Peoples : We thank
Thee that out of much toil and heroic struggles our beloved and honoured
Australia has become a great and distinguished Member of the British
Empire and Commonwealth.
We honour Australia, always loyal and in times of danger ever ready
to give her full offering of Life, Strength, Means and Resources to serve
and help the Motherland in the day of trial. We pray that every blessing
spiritual and material, may by Thy Divine Grace, follow her in the path of
Honour, Loyalty, Peace, Fidelity and Many enterprise.
Bless O Lord and strengthen for their high duties the Ministers and
Governments of the Commonwealth of Australia and grant that all therein
may be united in the bond of brotherhood, in prosperity and peace and in
the Fellowship of the Faith.
Forgive, O Lord, the faults, neglects and errors of the past in the course
of our Empire development and grant us wisdom to fulfil Thy laws of Eternal
righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A Prayer for ourselves.
JDLESS, O Lord we beseech Thee our Country and Empire having in mind
more nearly at this time, our City of London and this our Ward of
Bread Street in their connection with Australia, the home of our kindred.
May the link between us be more and more strengthened as the days go by
with true loyal love and esteem. May each help the other in fair and
hard times, learning forbearance in differences and living for a great ideal
of Empire and commonweal, and handing on the best and noblest traditions
of our Race through Him, the example to all mankind, Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.


Australian Patriotic Song
Advance Australia Fair.
Sung by Choir of 10,000 voices at the Inauguration of the Commonwealth.
AUSTRALIA’ S sons, let us rejoice,
For we are young and free ;
We’ve golden soil, and wealth for toil.
Our home is girt by sea.
Our land abounds in nature’s gifts
Of beauty rich and rare,
In history’s page let every stage
Advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.
Beneath our radiant Southern Cross
We’ll toil with hearts and hands.
To make our youthful Commonwealth
Renowned of all the lands ;
For loyal sons beyond the seas
We’ve boundless plains to share,
With courage let us all combine
To advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.


‘ Now Praise We Great and Famous Men.”
N ow
praise we great and famous men,
The fathers named in story ;
And praise the Lord Who now as then
Reveals in man His glorjA
Praise we the wise and brave and strong,
Who graced their generation ;
Who helped the right, and fought the wrong.
And made our folk a nation.
Praise we the great of heart and mind
The singers sweetly gifted,
Whose music like a mighty wind
The souls of men uplifted.
So praise we great and famous men,
The fathers, named in story ;
And praise the Lord Who now as then
Reveals in man His glory.
William George
Tarrant
The Address
LIEUT
■COL. SIR ARCHIBALD WEIGALL, K.C.M.G.
(.Formerly Governor, South Australia ),
Chairman, Royal Empire Society.


Hymn
Jj'IGHT the good fight with all thy might,
Christ is thy Strength, and Christ thy Right;
Lay hold on life, and it shall be
Thy joy and crown eternally.
Run the straight race through God’s good grace.
Lift up thine eyes, and seek His Face ;
Life with its way before us lies.
Christ is the path, and Christ the prize.
Cast care aside, lean on thy Guide ;
His boundless mercy will provide ;
Trust, and thy trusting soul shall prove
Christ is its life, and Christ its love.
Faint not nor fear. His Arms are near.
He changeth not, and thou art dear ;
Only believe, and thou shalt see
That Christ is all in all to thee. Amen.
National Anthem
The Lord
Mayor and Sheriffs, and Reception Committee, leave the Church
for Cordwainers Hall, Congregation remain.
Music on
the Organ ; "Epinikion” (Song of Victory) Cyril Rootham.
“ Land of Hope and Glory ” Elgar.
The Blessing




PAHCO PRESS, Emerald Street, W.C.i


A.D. 1936
jEtlbwb, !E«aiJ
THE ADMIRAL PHILLIP COMMEMORATION COUNCIL
Tuesday Afternoon , October 13th, at 3 o’clock
The Rt. Hon. THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD of
Hythe, G.C.V.0., C.8.E., LL.DAlderman of the
Ward of Bread Street and President of the Council
and the Members of the Committee
cordially invite
to attend
The Fourth Annual Service in commemoration of
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP
(born in the Bread Street Ward on the 11th of October 5 1738
Founder of Sydney and Australia , 1788)
to maintain and strengthen the good and cordial relations of the
City of London and Australia.
Tea afterwards at the Cordwainers ’ Hall
by invitation of the Company.
R.S.V.P. to F. W. Mander, M.A., The
Cordwainers ’ Hall, 7, Cannon Street, j


Secretaries
Patron
Mr. F. W. MANDER, M.A.,
Ward & Vestry Clerk,
7, Cannon Street, E.C.4
H.R.H.
THE DUKE OF KENT,
K.G.
THE OFFICIAL SECRETARY,
Australia House, Strand, W.C.2
President
Col. & Alderman The Rt. Hon.
VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD
Mr. R.E.H. BAILY, C.8.E.,
The Royal Empire Society,
Northumberland Avenue, W.C.2
OF HYTHE,
G.C.V.0., C.8.E., LL.D.
Bbmiral Hrtbur Ipbtlltp memorial*
(St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street, E.C.4)
CORDWAINERS HALL,
7, CANNON STREET, LONDON, E.C.4
12 th January 1937.
Dear Sir,
Goimemoration Service, October 13th 1936.
With reference to your letter to me of the
13th June last I now have pleasure in enclosing you
some copies of the pamphlet above Service
which you may like to have, together with copy of "The City
Press" giving an account of the proceedings.
Yours faithfully,
John A. Ferguson Esq.,
Chambers,
The Industrial Commission of
New South Wales.
142, Phillip Street,
Sydney,
