



FOREWORD
TO try in some slight way to record the history of the First Australian Field
Ambulance from its inception in 1914 up till the close of the Greatest War in
modern History, by incident, joke and story, as well as to permanently record
its Honours and its Noble Dead has been the idea of the compilers of this little
Souvenir Book.
The contributions were all offered by members of the Unit, the great bulk of the
letterpress coming from the pen of Lance-Corporal Burton, while the drawings were
done by Privates Sheppard and Dunne. The Roll of Honour and List of Decorations
are the work of Private Turnidge.
It is hoped that a copy of this book will be found in the homes of every Officer,
Non-Commissioned Officer and Man who has passed through the Ambulance Records.
The cost of publication is a charge on Regimental Funds, and as these were contributed
to by everyone who has passed through the Unit, it was thought that this would be a
very fair way of distributing them.
That th is work will fill a place in our homes, as a reminder of sad days, of glad days,
of hard work and recreation, of friends and sometimes of enemies, of four and a half
years lived under all sorts of conditions is the sincere wish of its compilers.
Belgium, February , 1919.
Lt. -Colonel.




DIARY
SYDNEY TO EGYPT
Ambulance was formed on 24th August, 1914, at Queen’s Park, Sydney, solely
of New South Wales men, and about two months were spent in camp before the
order came to embark.
Apart from camp routine, nothing of interest occurred, except, perhaps, the “ trying
out ” of the Transport drivers, an operation which caused endless amusement at the time.
This section of the Ambulance, with their horses, embarked on the “Clan MacCorquodale”
about the ioth of October, but orders were cancelled, and they returned to camp until a week later,
when the whole Unit embarked, the Transport on their old boat, the remainder on the “ Euripides.”
At Albany a number of other Transports arrived, and on the ist November the whole convoy
and escort moved out of the Bay. Ten days later great excitement was caused on board by the
hurried departure of H.M.A.S. “Sydney,” one of the escort, and shortly after a “wireless”
announced the sinking of the “ Emden,” a cheering message to all on board. Colombo was
reached on the 15th November, after an uneventful voyage, and Aden was sighted ten days later.
Then followed Suez, the wonderful canal, and Port Said, and at Alexandria the Unit left the boat
and proceeded by train to Mena Camp.
CAIRO .... On these sands of Mena, under the shadow or the ancient Pyramids, a vast
assemblage of tents sprang up, roads were made, and men drilled in the hottest of suns and under-
went strenuous training for four months. During that time they studied the language, manners,


and customs of this Eastern country and its people, invaded their Mosques and Mahommedan
Temples, climbed the Pyramid of Cheops, and gave “ backsheesh ” to the natives.
To describe Cairo would be impossible in so limited a space, but it is hardly necessary to recall
incidents already inscribed on the memories of those who were in Egypt with the First Division.
Recollections of Heliopolis, Shepperd’s, and the Continental, the gharri drives, the first Christmas
abroad, the memorable Wazza fracas ; of the Eastern Bazaars and the street hawkers, of the
persistent “ Gypo ” bootblacks, with their “ Give it shine, Mister ! Kiwi ! ” or the vendor of fruit,
with his “ Orangees, very nice, very sweet, very clean, very good; three for half! ”... Who did
not pay a visit to the indescribably filthy streets of the Wazza, or has swallowed “ Pyramid Beer ”
in the cafes, or listened to the unintelligible music of a native band ?
Many incidents—too many to record—took place in that old Eastern city, some regrettable, some
pleasant, and at last, fit and hardened bv the training, the Unit left Alexandria on the 3rd April,
bound for Lemnos Island, which was reached on the 7th of the same month.
GALLIPOLI—CHRISTMAS, 1915
) landing was made at Lemnos except for route marches, and the time was spent
on board in training and practising landings trom the transport with full gear
and equipment. At one o’clock on the morning of the 25th, the boat sailed out
of Lemnos Bay, and arrived at Gaba Tepe about eight.


The infantry of the First Division had successfully effected a landing some hours earlier, and at
ten o’clock the Ambulance bearers went ashore and commenced their duty of carrying the
wounded from the forward posts to the beach, where pinnaces and barges conveyed the stretchers
to the waiting transports in the Bay. At first the bearers were carrying from every part of the
line, but after the second week the work was confined to the Third Brigade. The days were hot,
and water was very scarce, and at night the sea would be alive with hundreds of men enjoying
the cool waters, and this was a secret “Johnny Turk ” never knew. Shortly after the “ Triumph”
was sunk a number of barrels were observed floating shorewards one day, and a curious spirit
salvaged one and broached it. The contents proved to be wine, and the news soon spread, with
the result that many of these barrels found a resting place in quiet places along the shore. Water
was obtained from the beach, where it was stored in tanks, and very often the waiting line of men
would be forced to depart hurriedly, by a few shots from “ Beachy Bill” or from the gun at
Anafarta. Casualties were light in the Ambulance, the first man killed being Pte. Abbot, who
was hit by shrapnel while returning to his post. The months dragged by with very little to
relieve the monotony, except, perhaps, the demonstrations of the 29th May,
3rd June, 7th July, and the “Lone Pine” display, and no doubt everyone will
remember the sniper who swept the beach with a machine gun from the
direction of Gaba Tepe, and caused a number of casualties.
The tent division of the Ambulance remained on board the transport during
this time, and on the 27th of June a number of them went to Cape Helles to
assist the R.A.M.C. bearers, and returned on the 2nd July. Finally, on the
Our Old ©ill


9th September, the Ambulance left Anzac at evening and arrived at Lemnos next morning.
They proceeded to Sarpi Camp, Mudros West, and the days following were devoted to exercise
and recreational training. On the 17th November the troopship was boarded once more, but
tempestuous weather prevented its departure, and disembarkation took place. The Unit did
not return to Anzac again, the evacuation of the Peninsula by the British being made on the
19th December.
Christmas, 1915, spent on Lemnos Island, was celebrated very quietly. All
were awaiting orders to move, and kits and baggage were packed ready for
shipping, and no special arrangements could be made in these circumstances,
so the season passed over without event.
Whilst on the Island the Unit Football team played some splendid “ Rugby”
matches, the most notable being, perhaps, those against the New Zealanders,
Engineers, and the 13th Battalion. Some keen matches were played with
the 3rd A.G.H. team also, and the Ambulance won two out of three games.
William


SPECIAL ORDER
ISSUED BY GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON,
ON 24TH APRIL, 1915
Soldiers of France and of the King:
BEFORE us lies an adventure unprecedented in modern war.
Together with our comrades of the Fleet we are about to force
a landing upon an open beach in face of positions which have
been vaunted by our enemies as impregnable.
The landing will be made good by help of God and the Navy,
the position will be stormed, and the war brought one step nearer
to a glorious close.
“ Remember,” said Lord Kitchener, when bidding adieu to your
Commander, “ Remember, once you set foot upon the Gallipoli
Peninsula, you must fight the thing through to a finish.” The
whole world will be watching our progress. Let us prove worthy
of the great feat of arms entrusted to us.
(Signed) lAN HAMILTON,
General.


TEL-EL-KEBIR—SERAPEUM
N the 2nd January the Unit left Lemnos for Alexandria, and proceeded to
camp at- Tel-el-Kebir. On the 15th the transport rejoined from Maadi, after
trekking from Mex Camp, Alexandria, a fair distance. This section of the
Ambulance did not land on the Peninsula, as the rough country at Anzac did not
permit of the use of the transport, and they were ordered to return to Egypt, much to
their disgust; At Tel-el-Kebir the Unit remained until the 14th February, when
the Canal was crossed and a camp pitched at Serapeum —two miles inland. One Section opened
a dressing station at the railhead, and C Section was detached and afterwards became part of the
14th Field Ambulance. On the 6th March a large batch of reinforcements arrived from
Cairo. Serapeum days were spent in drill, canal swims and rescuing tents and equipment from
the sand-storms, and the only item of importance was the visit of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales in
the middle of March. About this time there were constant rumours of the Australians going to
France, and on the 21st an advance party left for Alexandria, and embarked on the “ Ivernia.”
At 5.30 p.m. on the 22nd the remainder “ struck camp” and marched to the entraining point,
where a bitterly cold night was spent in the sand. At 1 o’clock in the morning a train-load of
open trucks rolled in. This was our train, and we sat and shivered until our destination was
reached at 10 a.m.


FRANCE
URING the night the transport, with the troops “ stowed ” safely (in all respect
to the word) left Egypt behind and steamed out into the Mediterranean. Several
exciting incidents took place as the old tub zig-zagged about, and it was rumoured
afterwards that we nearly met a “ sub.” one day, and I remember we were
'4ft called into Malta on that particular occasion, and spent several hours in the outer
harbour. However, we reached Marseilles without mishap on the 29th of March, and
disembarked at noon the next day. That afternoon a long troop train steamed out of
the city and climbed up into the hills amidst glorious scenery and picturesque villages. The
warm reception, the smiling demoiselles with their shy curiosity, the red-tiled houses, and
the streams, shining silver in the sun, will always be remembered. All that day and the next
we rolled along, past Paris, through Amiens, up the coast, until at 3 o’clock on the morning of
the 3rd we tumbled out at Steenbecque. Cramped and tired, a march did not appear welcome,
but interest in the new surroundings helped to keep our spirits up, and it was well after daylight
when a halt was made at our billets, and tired men flung themselves down on blankets and
waterproofs and slept far into the afternoon. A week of gas lectures and drill, a move to
Outtersteene, where some very cold weather was experienced, then on to Nouveau Monde, where
a rest was made for a month, during which time “ A” Section worked a M.D.S. and “B” Section
were in the line. It was a good war then : no shells of any size, estaminets within 600 yards of


the line, and perhaps two stretcher cases a day. The only excitement was supplied by “ Fritz ”
when he sailed over in a “ Fokker ” and laid a few eggs.
From Nouveau Monde the Unit went to Doulieu, and on the 19th of June “ B ” Section moved to
Ploegsteert, the famous Plug Street of Bairnsfather fame, and on the 4th of July the remainder
joined them. It was here that our first casualty in France occurred, a stray shell killing Private
Bull on the Neuve Eglise road.
On the 1 ith the Unit entrained at Bailleul, and arrived at Doullens at 6.30 p.m.
Now came one of the worst marches in the experience of the Ambulance. From
7 o’clock in the evening until 3 o’clock next morning, with heavy packs and
blankets, with very few halts, along dark, strange roads, and through numerous
villages, until at the end only a straggling line of beings remained of an
Ambulance, and men did not trouble when the billets were reached to undress,
but dropped where they stood and slept.
On again at 10 o’clock, but only a short way, and a stop was made the next day
James H. fin at Allonville, in which village the Unit remained until the 16th. Vadencourt
Wood, with its huts hidden in a forest of tall trees, was the next home for a few days, and
Warloy, our final destination, was reached on the 20th. The next two days were spent in
preparing for our entry into action at Pozieres.




POZIERES—MAMETZ
a late hour on the night of the 22nd the bearers of the Ambulance commenced
to enter the field of operations, and at 5 o’clock on the morning of the 23rd
“B ” Section went into action, to be followed later by “A ” bearers. Casualties
came early, two men—Privates Johnson and Mackie —being killed at “Casualty
Corner ” before they had carried a case, and several were wounded within a few minutes. The
toll for that day was heavy indeed, and it is marvellous that casualties were not larger in view of
the extremely severe shell fire through which the squads had to bring the wounded. The work
was very heavy, and no relief could be given until the 27th, when all the squads came back to
Warloy. Here also there had been no rest, every available man working his hardest to cope with
the stream of severely wounded cases that poured into the dressing station day and night from the
battlefield. On the 30th the Unit handed over to the 4th Field Ambulance and moved to
Wargnies, where “C” Section was again formed, and on the 15th of August the Ambulance took
over Becourt Chateau, and the bearers of the three sections went into action
again at Pozieres. This time the work was lighter, and casualties were not as
numerous, the most lamentable incident being the deaths of Lance-Corporals
Elliott and Lehane and Privates Smith and Cunningham by a direct hit on their
dug-out. Relieved on the 22nd by 2nd Division Ambulances, the Unit proceeded
to Beauval and entrained at Doullens for the North. The ensuing two months
were spent at Remy Siding, near Poperinghe, during which time a successful
12


Sports Day was run off, and several good games of football were played. A move came in
October, and a few days were spent at Nordausques, on the Calais road, before entrainment took
place at St. Omer for Bouchon, in the South, and on the 23rd motors transferred the Brigade to
Buire, on the Ancre River. Another memorable march took place on this occasion to Becordel
through mud and water, over marshes and bogs, until the march ended in a struggle to keep
upright, and the accommodation that night did not improve matters. Next morning a few
more kilometres were attempted in mud and slush, with mules splashing playfully as they
passed, and no dry place to rest when a halt was given. Mametz Wood proved a nightmare to
men and transport, and the cooks especially laboured under very trying conditions the whole
period. They were days of incessant rain, short rations and dug-outs full of water, and a sigh
of relief came when orders arrived to move on. The bearers marched to the Advanced Dressing
Station at Longueval, and went into the line on the right of Flers village. The tent divisions
and transport moved back to Buire.
FLERS—BULLICOURT
DVANCED Ambulance work in
account of the awful state of
carry at night, as once off
the Flers operations was extremely difficult on
the country, and it was practically impossible
the track and a squad would be hopelessly
bogged. Casualties during both operations were light, as were also the rations. The
rain, cold and mud told heavily on the men, and the relief on the 15th November was more than


welcome. The shell-pitted countryside was one huge quagmire of liquid mud, and stretcher-
bearers floundered and fell, dragged their tired limbs up, and struggled on, caked with mud, wet
through, with boots that squelched water at every step, and flapping oil-sheets which let in the
driving rain and sleet sweeping across the field. Squads returned and crawled despondently into
leaky dug-outs to snatch a few moments’ rest before another case roused them out once more.
Feet became like blocks of ice, and after each trip socks were removed and
wrung out, and the wet feet rubbed vigorously to restore circulation. During
the later days at Flers weather conditions improved slightly, but the work
throughout was arduous and heartbreaking, and everyone felt happier when the
Division was withdrawn from the sector and the Ambulance bearers moved to
a camp on the Amiens road near Buire, where the main body of the Unit
were running a Corps Rest Station. It was about this time that the first snow
fell, and the weather turned bitterly cold. On the 21st November the bearer
sections were sent to the M.D.S. at Becordel, and they afterwards went from
there to Bernafay Wood on the sth December, and spent Christmas —a cold,
cheerless one—at Longueval. They were finally relieved on the Bth of January,
and came back to Buire. In the last week of the month another move was
ordered, and once more the Ambulance passed under the leaning Virgin and Child of Albert
Church and marched out along the old Pozieres road to Bazentin-le-Petit and relieved the
i/i Northumberland Field Ambulance, taking over their sector of the line on the 27th of January,
while the transport stayed at Bottom Wood, and went later to “ Red Cottage Farm ” at Fricourt.
February and March were very cold months, with snow and severe frosts, and water was carried
*4


home “ in lumps,” and one started forth for washing water with a bucket and
a pick. The sections were divided in this action, “C ” being on the left,
at Hexham Road, and the others on the right, or Edwards Post sector.
Cases were taken down to Longueval on light railways, and many will still
remember the wild rides on the return trips down the inclines, and the
language and abuse when the truck jumped the rails and pitched all and
sundry into the snow, or when someone changed the points at the Junction, and
a compulsory race along the wrong line ensued. Luckily casualties were, on an average, light,
except,* perhaps, when a raid would result in a busy night. During the last week of February the
Hun began his retirement to his new positions, and work became heavier, especially on the
morning that he attempted to break through at Le Barque. Artillery fire was confined to “ 8 inch ”
and “ whizz-bang ” varieties, but casualties amongst the bearers were very light, although the Unit
was unfortunate in losing their Colonel during one of his visits to the forward posts, and he was
succeeded some time later by Lt.-Colonel Brennan,* M.C. Relief from the line came on the
6th of March, and part of the Ambulance marched to Fricourt, and the
remainder, with the exception of the Tent Division, went to Becordel, and were
attached to the 7th Field Ambulance. An advance party left Fricourt on the
21 st March for Buire, and were joined by the remainder of the Unit (except
“ B ” Section) in time to move the whole camp from there to Aveluy on the
Ist April. Shortly afterwards a move was made back to Bazentin-le-Petit,
and the transport returned to Fricourt for stabling. The Bearer Sections
went on to Bapaume, and “A ” and “B ” went into action at Hermies,


whilst “C ” remained, making roads, at the newly established Dressing Station at Beuguy.
Afterwards they, also went forward, and the three sections rejoined those left at Bazentin, at
Pozieres, on the 24th April. On the 4th of the following month the bearers of the two
first Sections reported to the 7th Field Ambulance at Vaulx, and the Bullicourt fighting
took another toll of the Unit. Every Ambulance lost heavily, as the fighting was severe,
the artillery was very concentrated, and bearers were sniped as they carried across the
open country. “C ” Section at this time were at Becourt Chateau, but some went back to
Pozieres, and the Tent Division and Transport later on moved to Bellevue Farm, and were
attached to the 15th Field Ambulance. On the 15th May “C” Section went by motors to
the advanced area, and a week later the whole Unit re-assembled and moved to Henencourt, and
settled down to enjoy a well-earned spell. Football and cricket, Inter-Ambulance, and Divisional
sports, concerts, and other amusements filled in the time, and many of the old men wounded
at Pozieres, Flers and Bullicourt returned from hospital. “C ” Section Tent Division had an
enjoyable month at Doullens attached to No. 3 Canadian Stationary Hospital. When orders
came to leave most of the Unit at Henencourt were sorry ; but the war was still on, so the
Ambulance packed up and entrained at Edgehill for Cassel, marching from there to Bavinchove.
Whilst in this village it rained incessantly, and soon a move was made to Swartenbrouck, a few
kilometres out of Hazebrouck. This town suffered at this time from daily shelling from long-
range guns, and every night, without fail, would be heavily bombed by large night-flying machines,
but luckily we escaped any stray missiles.


YPRES
N the 9th of September “A” and “C ” Sections proceeded to the M.D.S.
at Dickebusch, and were welcomed by a shower of bombs from a“Fritzy”
plane as soon as they arrived. “B” joined up on the 14th, and very shortly
afterwards a number of the bearers left for Ypres, and on the early morning of the 18th a shell
burst on the cobbles of Menin Road, and twenty of our best men became casualties, three
being killed and three dying of their injuries later in the day. Next day all available bearers
moved into action, and the following days were crammed full of hair-breadth escapes and exciting
incidents. On the morning of the 21st Glencorse Wood was taken, and this tangled, shell-holed
area of splintered trees later was shelled for twelve hours with “ 8 inch ” shells and drenched with
gas ; but our bearers carried through it all day and far into the night. The Polygon Wood and
Racecourse battles will be described in many books, and only reference is needed here ; but through
all those days of artillery demonstrations, heavy casualties and trying conditions the Ambulance men
kept the forward posts clear of wounded, and evacuated cases speedily and effectively to the dressing
stations in rear. On the 23rd the bearers went back to Wippenhoek for a rest, went in again on
the 26th, then proceeded to the M.D.S. at Dickebusch, where they remained until the 30th. On
that date motors conveyed them to dug-outs on the Ypres Canal, and early next morning the
squads “ took over ”on the sector to the left of their old one. It was a misty grey morning, and
now and again a “ 5.9 ” would suddenly whine, thud, and the report of the explosion seemed to
be uncanny and unreal. The dreaded “ corduroy track ” was in this sector, and well it earned its


ghastly reputation. Built of logs and baulks of timber, and starting from the Menin Road, it
wound over the ridges right up to Westhoek, and being the only road for traffic it was at intervals
heavily shelled, and many, many men, horses and mules were killed on that fated road. Early
on the morning of the 4th October one of the fiercest actions of the Ypres fighting took place,
and during that day casualties were heavy, and many Ambulance men were included. It was in
this action that Major Hunt, one of the bravest and coolest of men under shell-fire, was killed
whilst out supervising the evacuation of the wounded. Much could be written about the splendid
work done on the dreaded Menin Road and Corduroy Track by the motor-drivers and the
transport, who, despite the heavy shelling, evacuated the cases with a coolness and disregard for
danger worthy of the highest praise.
When the Unit was finally relieved and went to “ Devonshire lines” camp the ranks had become
very weakened, but they went into action again on the 23rd October, and came out altogether
on the Bth of November to rest at Samer, near Boulogne, until the 27th, when a move was made
to Dranoutre, in the North. Here the Unit settled down until the 29th January, when an
advance party moved to Ravelsburg, and during the stay here a very successful Bal Masque was
arranged, and a great evening was spent. On the Ist March the Unit took over the station at
Kemmel, and “B ” Section went to “ Hill 60” for duty. On the night of the 18th March Fritz
started to shell Kemmel, and next day was very active in the vicinity of the camp and village, and
as there were no signs of the cessation of the firing, the station was moved to La Clytte on the 2 Ist.


STRAZEELE—METEREN
HE Ambulance left the North on 6th of April, and disentrained near Amiens, but
were suddenly recalled, and arrived at Hondighem as the Hun was making a push
through for Hazebrouck. Troops were rushed away from the train, and “C”
Section opened a Dressing Station at Borre, while the bearers went forward
and carried from Strazeele village, which was a very hot corner for some days.
Later on this sector and the Meteren one became much quieter, and the
Division remained in the area until August. The headquarters of the Ambulance were at
La Kreule, and one section went back there every sixteen days for a rest. A dressing station was
opened at Caestre for a while, but afterwards all evacuating was done through Borre. The first
fortnight in the area will long be remembered. Every cellar was full of liqueurs, wines and
champagne ; pigs and cows were still on the farms, and peas and potatoes were in the fields.
The wheat, barley and oats were still uncut, and it was difficult to imagine that it was but a mile
or so to the “ front line ” ; everything was so quiet and peaceful. Towards the end of our stay
the artillery fire became much heavier. Our men made daring raids almost every day, causing
Fritz endless trouble and a reckless expenditure of ammunition, and a considerable area of ground
was wrested from his grasp. The Ambulance cars did great and valuable work in this sector.
The drivers had many narrow escapes, and the cars bore the marks of various hits by pieces of
shell. On the 16th June it was thought that Fritz would attack and endeavour to take
Hazebrouck, and everyone will remember the formidable defences and traps set for him ; but
nothing happened, and a little while after we took Merris off him.


AUGUST—SEPTEMBER 1918
HE Unit were relieved from the line on the 2nd August and took the train at
Wizernes, 30 kilometres distant from Borre on the 6th. At Pont Remy, near
= Abbeville, they disentrained and marched round the countryside until 11.30 at night,
when a halt was made at the village of Vauchelles-les-Domart. From here motors
should have taken us on, but somehow they failed to appear, and we marched a distance
of 19 kilometres to St. Savour, and from there motored to Allonville Wood, where we bivouacked.
Reveille went at six the next morning, and the bearers moved off at seven for the M.D.S. at
Corbie, and went on again from this place during the afternoon to the A.D.S. at Bayonvillers.
That night was spent in trying to get warm and wondering whether Fritz had many ijiore bombs
left. “ Fall In ” was at mid-day, and five kilometres were covered across newly captured country
to the cross roads near Vauvilliers and from here squads were attached to battalions and moved up
into the line with them. Perhaps the worst part of these actions were the continuous bombing
raids every night carried out by gigantic enemy machines, and around Rosieres they were par-
ticularly active, bombing and machine-gunning roads and dumps. Apart from this and a few
heavy barrages, the work was not hard or trying on the bearers, and casualties were comparatively
light. On the 16th they moved back to Vaux-sur-Somme, and a general clean-up took place, with
plenty of swimming and diving to occupy the days. The Tent division, during the time the
bearers were in line, moved from village to village until they picked Vaux as a home. On the
21 st of August squads were again attached to the various battalions and went into action for four
days during the Proyart and Chiugnolles fighting. The remainder of the Ambulance formed an
20


A.D.S. at the latter place until the 26th, when a general move was made to Morcourt, and about
ten days were spent here in swimming, aquatic sports, etc. After this we found ourselves, per
medium of motor-buses, in the Mont St. Quentin area and in the typical chalky shell-holed wastes
of the Somme. After a day at Doignt, an A.D.S. was opened at Buire and “A ” and “B ”
Sections of bearers went up forward to Roisel and Tincourt, to be withdrawn on the 24th of
September. The whole Unit entrained at Peronne on the 26th, and reached Pont Remy, after
marching from Longpres, early next morning. The long awaited, talked about, promised spell
had come at last, and the next five weeks were spent in luxury and ease, with periodical visits to
Abbeville. During this period a Unit Sports and Fancy Dress Ball were held, and both were a
success in every way. During our sojourn in the Buire area—on the 22nd September, to be exact —
the 1914 men of the Unit left for Australia, and on the 3rd of October another batch left from
Pont Remy, and the Unit seemed strange without the familiar faces of its old
pioneer members. With comfortable billets and friendly people, the weeks at
this clean little place passed very quickly, and it was much regretted leaving,
perhaps, one of the happiest and home-like villages the Ambulance had ever
been in. Orders came to move on the sth of December, but they were cancelled
and repeated several times before we finally moved out and waved goodbyes to
the mademoiselles, madames, and W.A.A.C.’s of Pont Remy on the 7th.


THE ARMISTICE—BREAKING UP OF UNIT
HE end of October and beginning of November were notable for the collapse of Turkey
v and Austria, to be followed on the 11th of November by the cessation of fighting in
France and the signing of the Armistice. At this time, the Ambulance, with the
exception of the Transport, had reached Bazuel, near Le Catou, and were joined by a
v large batch of reinforcements. The Transport reached the village on the day of the
Armistice, having received the glad news on the road. On the 13th the Unit moved to Busigny,
and after a week had elapsed started out on what was thought then to be a march to the Rhine,
but this collapsed at Solre-le-Chateau, near the Belgian border, where a halt was made until the
15th December, and only one more move took place, to Biesmes Chateau, in
the Charleroi district, and another Christmas and New Year were quietly
and unostentatiously celebrated, with a fervent hope that next year’s dinner
and celebrations would be in more cheerful and exciting surroundings, and
with only a memory of the four years of hardships and pleasures spent in the
field with the FIRST AUSTRALIAN FIELD AMBULANCE.
Sporting
R. Owens/, 9
THE representative Rugby team of the Ambulance was known throughout the
Division, and in the earlier days in France they possessed a fine team of players,
with the international “ pro,” Tom Richards, as full-back, and a perfect set of forwards
and three-quarters. Up to the time they met the Bth Field Ambulance the team was
22
Dobber


unbeaten in France, but many of the old boys had gone, and a certain amount of the combination and confidence
amongst the players had vanished. Nevertheless, they still played a good game against all comers. During
February, 1918, a representative team journeyed to Rouen to meet the 2nd Australian General Hospital, and
succeeded in bringing home “ the ashes,” as well as enjoyable recollections of Paris, which they visited on the
way back. After the 19 14 men left very few
time practically none of the original players
excitement and interest were the “ Hobo ”
from the Unit; and play would be wild and
than in a professional match. Other rules
it was difficult to keep together a decent
programmed. A number of cricket
fairly successful results were obtained,
attended always, and a good deal of interest
Morcourt the Aquatic Carnival gave
capabilities, and competition was very keen,
to come many will look back on those
petition, and thoughts will dwell on the
Solre-le-Chateau, as well as those happy
Demoiselle
f'T''HOSE of you who were in the £
X recall the orders, good advice, di
: good
dished
matches were played, and at the present
remain. The matches that caused the most
matches, when one team met another, both
terribly fast, and more casualties occurred
(Soccer and Aussie rules) were played, but
team, and no startling matches were ever
matches were played at Henencourt, and
The several Sports Meetings were well
was taken in the entries and events. At
swimmers an opportunity to display their
but the water was rather chilly. In years
days when Unit met Unitin friendlycom-
Neuve Eglise matches, Henencourt, and
days spent at Doulieu and Poperinghe.
gvßillets*
old “ First ” during the Serapeum days will
out to us prior to our departure for France,
in billets fully or partially furnished. Men
and sweet dainty demoiselles, and waited
leave the land of sand, stinks and 'sin for
how we would be billeted with the people, v2L
fell to dreaming about arm-chairs, cosy fires,
impatiently for the day when they would |


this beautiful France. On the 30th March a troop train pulled out of Marseilles full of eager, expectant, happy
“ Aussies,” and 63 hours later the destination was reached, and we marched along the cobbled roads, our eyes
trying to pierce the darkness which hid from our sight our beautiful
demoiselles and cosy billets. Our first spell was in the “ Grand
Place ” of Hazebrouck (I wonder why such places are not used for
spells now). As we neared the farmhouse we were to billet at we
espied one of the demoiselles, as we thought, that we had heard so
much about. She was wending her way to a field in our direction,
and was coming towards us. What excitement ! What craning
of necks ! She came nearer and—What a crash ! What a thud !
Our “ ideal tart,” our Venus, looked like a badly filled sack tied
in the middle, a head enveloped in a field hat protruding from one
end, from the other, boots, size TEN. When we recovered our
thoughts and senses we found ourselves at our billets, and our
spirits rose again.
It looked like an old barn, with an earthen floor, and plenty of
skylights and ventilation in the tiles. Obviously it had been used
for other purposes than a first-class hotel, and we looked and
waited, confident that some mistake had been made. We all man-
aged to squeeze in, and threw ourselves on the mother earth for a
few minutes’ rest before breakfast. Something darkened the door-
way, and to our amazement we saw a herd of cows gazing down
mournfully at us, and as they turned away we could see hot,
scalding tears streaming down from their sad eyes. No one spoke
until a husky voice mumbled from the corner : “ Gawd blimey ! ”
we’ve gone and beat the poor old for their shed.” So we
had. Another Gutzer. J p. M c .
ORDERODDITIES
It is impressed on all ranks that care is to be taken that From to-day all bugle calls will be sounded from
no damage is done to the Pyramid. Routine Orders. * the letter box. Routine Orders.
24




p X/f, 7“ H e blew in at Sec Bois, was only
O 1 vl Lv y JL L a handful, but created enough sen-
sation for ten men. The Ambu-
lance was not run to his satisfaction
so he obtained the position of Orderly Officer. He had plenty of weak spots, but
“Changing the Guard” was his pet subject. As we were “Red Cross blokes,” we
didn’t carry rifles, so we did the grand ceremonial without ’em.
We were “ some guard,” and “ diggers” walked miles to see us “change.” It had
been the custom to report each Section “ correct ” at tattoo, a duty the N.C.O.
performed; but this did not suit the military expert, and he ordered a parade for tattoo, and turned
out himself next night to see it done. “A” and “B” Sections survived the ordeal, but “C” were
not so fortunate. It was 9.30. The lame and lazy were in bed, the ravenous were devouring
“eggs and chips” in Madame’s kitchen, and only a few stragglers were on parade. The 0.0. got
annoyed. All, however, went well until the roll was called.
“ Private Smith.” No response.
“ Private Jones.” “In bed,” shouted the parade. The 0.0. fumed.
“ Bridge.”
A fit of coughing was heard in the farm-house. Private Bridge had nearly choked himself with
“chips” through trying to answer his name. The 0.0. went mad. “Fall in, every man,” he
roared. Within a few minutes the road was filled with figures in all stages of undres9. Some
wore overcoats, some “ Blighty ” pyjamas, and some only their little short shirt. Some wore boots,
and others were without. Civilians were curious, but one glance wgs enough for the boldest
mademoiselle, and several cases of nervous breakdown occurred amongst the timid. The 0.0.
realized the position. “You are given ten minutes to put on enough clothes for a route march,”
he said, and thus ended the first part of the comedy. We fell in again, and things went smoothly
until it came to numbering off. Numbers “ one ”to “ nine ’’ answered smartly, but the next man
26


answered “ Out, you —”, and another uproar resulted. At length the party moved off, and some-
body started “A little child shall lead them,” and forty odd voices took it up. The 0.0. was
frantic. He bellowed out order after order with no effect, and cries of “ Where does he come
from ?” would be heard, and someone else would answer “ From Melbourne; can’t you smell the
Yarra?” Our Arbourites would then be asked to claim him, and the honour being refused, Queens-
land would be dragged in. After over an hour of this a halt was made, and the 0.0. spoke. “ I
am not a (roars) and I don’t come from Queensland (cries of “What about the Yarra?”),
and I didn’t come down in the last flood (“You didn’t come down at all”), and I will have
discipline even if we march until morning ” (long and continuous cheering).
The march was restarted, but matters were no better, and after another address which was more
an appeal, we were given “About turn” and headed for home. The pace soon grew very hot,
and at the next spell
the 0.0. was “down
and out.” He sat down
on the roadside and
wept. Itwasoneo’clock
in the morning when
we reached our billets,
and the beaten leader
crawled home to bed.
There was a tattoo in
the oldstylenextnight,
and no Orderly Officer
was present.
J. F. Me


Our
ker
T was “salvaged” after Fritz left Tincourt, and towed back to Buire. Lying in state, it drew
X as many visitors as the Tower of London. On the move this culinary outfit vomited forth
sparks and smoke like a t.b.d. in distress, and when a halt was made for dinner, crowds assembled
to see our cooker gallop into action,
unlimber and dis-
salvo of “ Pork and
ladles. Long lines
received stew and
ing boilers after
ten minutes, per-
depended on the
along the road,
thought deeply
demerits of this
personal effects,but
our rattling, Hun,
charge salvo after
Beans,” dixies and
of ravenous persons
tea from its steam-
waiting, perhaps,
haps longer. Much
quantity of wood
Wise men sat and
over the merits and
addition to our
as time went on,
smoking piece of
kitchen furniture became indispensable, and is not on any demobilization list, but lies, minus
wheels, in the cookhouse to fry the morning bacon and stew the tea until no more “ patrons ”
are left, and only its faithful stoker remains to weep on its greasy body.
R. Owens j l%


They was issued, so they told us,
To protect our noble ’eads
From the flyin’ bits of shrap. of Fritzy make,
But for washin’ in the mornin’
They was just the very thing,
You could ’eat the bloomin’ water in a shake
In the ole tin lid
In the days of ’eavy fightin’,
When the pieces whizzed abaht,
And the gamest cove among us did a run,
The blanky bit of head-gear
Seemed to shrink to ’arf its size,
And the way you sat and shivered was no fun
In the ole tin lid
The Old Tin Lid
When the blanky war is “ finis ”
And in “ Aussie ” you are back
With the missus and the kids out on the farm,
The old war-worn head-gear
Will repose, perhaps, in peace,
And the mice will rear a family free from harm
In the ole tin lid
* *
In the billets there’s a corner
Where a nail is needed bad,
And the steel lid as a hammer is just it.
Round the flick’ring light of candles
There’s a poker school in play,
And the pile of “onks ” is growin’ just a bit
In the ole tin lid
If your dixie’s got a hole in,
And you’r stuck to cook a feed,
Why, cobber, its as simple as can be.
Just rip out the inside lining
And tip in your M. and V.,
With a fire you’ve there a meal just “ toot
In the ole tin lid. ....
the sweet’
R. Owens /, 9


MONTAUBAN ! Longueval ! ! Flers !! ! Will memories of these waterlogged geographical expressions
ever fade?
Yet we had some pleasant recollections of lite at the A.D.S. at Longueval, where nightly the Boshe shells
glided over the tops of the “ bow ’’ huts and “ phutted ” somewhere away down the valley. Who among the
old “B ” Section will ever forget the many incidents connected with the name of one, a Lance-Corporal, who
is now safely ensconced on a troopship, en route for sunny
when the infantry “ digger ” stood for hours in trenches,
his lower extremities in danger of being torpedoed, the
cases of “ trench feet ” were many, and veritable armies of
men were carried down day and night, on the light railway,
to the A.D.S. There, the swollen feet were dressed,
beautifully swathed in white bandages and the patient
transported, through mud and slush, to a light truck
which was pushed down to the improvised hospital train
in the valley, a mile or so away. It was in evacuating
these patients that our Lance-Corporal shone out like a
Polar Star. Some were carried on stretchers and others
pick-a-backed between the dressing room and the truck.
“ B ” Section, on night duty, always slept in a cold dreary
semi-dugout arrangement like a hut,and nightly our faithful
Southern
climes. In those days of rain and snow,


N.C.O. stood on guard to herald the approach of the small train, with its load of “ trench footers.” As soon as
the smoke of the engine was visible against the flickering “Very lights” on the horizon, then his head would be in
our domicile door, and he would shout, “ Come on, nah, Bladin’s Squad and Ower’s Squad, I want you to unload
the trucks.” Members of these Squads would consign the corporal to places worse than “ Flers,” but eventually
would unload the train
and turn in again to wait
until they would be
wanted to carry the
patients down to the
hospital train. Thirty
minutes, perhaps, would
elapse before theraucous
voice would again break
the silence with “ Come
on, nah, I want yer all.
I’ve got two stretcher
cases and six picky-
backs.” Again the
aroused hut occupants
would wish the Corporal
all sorts of luck in the
under-world, and would
proceed to dress, and
would be almost ready
when the voice would
be heard again.
“ 1 don’t want yer, you
can all go back to bed.
I’veconvincedtheMajor
that it’s no use sending
the men away yet.”


A bullocky would have learned some new words if he had been present during the next few minutes, but very
soon all were back in the blankets, attempting to sleep. Not for long, however. The Major would chase
round after the Corporal, asking why the patients had not gone, and ordering them away immediately. Back
would come our tormenter. “ You’ll all have to get up nah ! There’s four stretcher cases and ten picky-
backs.” More abuse, as we struggled into tunics and boots, then a rush through the darkness to the evacuation
hut, to be first for the lightweights, and then, by the momentary light of a flare, a long line of men with bulky
burdens would be seen, picking their way through the mud to the decauville track, and an hour would pass
before they would again cuddle into the blankets, with a silent prayer that not again that night would they hear,
“ Come on nah, I want yer all.” But still, old John was ever a good chap, and his name will live long in the
memories of the “ B” Section of 1916.
Number Three.
Reminiscences
“ A/'OU don’t know “Spotty,” well I’m blowed, and you’re an Amb’lance man,
X Why in my days we used ter let him cook,
Hqrse-riding, jockeying, was his game ; my tip an “ also ran,”
He weren’t no rider, judging by his look.
Then 1 remember well a cove who chewed a fat cigar,
A “ patent drink ” he founded ; some wet tack.
And then there’s “Bib,” a funny guy he was ; a “two-up ” king ;
He’d ’ead ’em, tail ’em, lose and win ’em back.
I s’pose you met old “ Sol ” ; ’e was a great chap, Sol ; a sport,
A cheerful sort of cove who never cared.
His “cobber,” “Hank,” was just the same as ’im, a bouzer sort,
The two was fond of’ops when “onks” was spared.
Then there was a guy, a stoutish sort o’ gent, who drilled us bands ;
I just can’t think, what was his bloomin’ name.


He used to yell, when we was drillin’ hard, “ Now, swing them hands,”
You know him, Yes ! that’s him ; the very same.
And how’s old Ted, the bloke who served the booze, the canteen hobe,
And “ Weary,” and that chap that wore the bars ;
That sergeant cove ; got ’it at Pozieres, and just arrove,
When things was getting warm, amongst us stars.
And speakin’ of them sort, I thinks of “ Clif,” our good old “ Clif,”
He was a man if ever one was, then,
And “ Perky ” was the same, and “ Snowy ” Chud ; a boshter clique,
I tell yer, in those days, why, we had men.
You say the Unit’s busted, is “mafeesh,” the cobbers gone.
Well, s’pose they must come home one o’ these days.
I’ll keep my “ peepers” skinned and—My Gawd! its after one.
You’ll have a booze, in memory ?—and I pays.
R. Owens/,,
Rammy
THERE is a man whose memory will live long in the recollections of “B” Section. He was a Major,
wore spectacles, and was a constant patron of the morning tub. He was also absent-minded at times, a
pleasant fault. I remember one morning at our first, baths in France, where we had a laundry adjacent. Our
Major arrived about io a.m., hands in his pockets, as was his usual wont, and seeing Kelly, a noted member
of the Baths staff, enquired, “ Where am 1 Kelly, eh?” “You’re at the Baths, Sir,” replied Kelly. “I’m
not,” retorted the Major. “ Oh, yes, you are, Sir.” “Well, I oughtn’t to be, I ought to be at the Laundry,”
and leaving Kelly rather bewildered, he delicately picked his way across the duck-boards in the direction of
the Laundry.
Another incident, at Mametz, that home of mud and misery, is unforgettable. Seeing Reynolds, one of the
original members of the Unit, some distance away, he hailed him. Reynolds laboriously made his way over


His usual greeting to one with whom he was not well acquainted took the form of which his interrogation of
Bella Phillips is an example :
“ What’s your name ? ” he asked one day. “ Don’t tell me, don’t tell me. I know ... Eh ? . . . What is
it ? . . . Begins with a . . . What is it, eh ? eh ?” “ Phillips, Sir.” “Phillips, eh ? Phillips ! Knew it was
smashed trenches and through debris and mud to where the Major was standing. “ Yes, Sir,” he grinned.
The Major looked at him over his glasses, hands, as ever, in his pockets. “ Know a better place than this,
Reynolds, eh ? Eh ! Reynolds ? ”
His absent-mindedness extended particularly to fellows’ names. He happened upon another Reynolds once,
and made the usual query as to his identity.
“ Reynolds, Sir,” replied “ Bert.’’ “ No, you’re not Reynolds, you’re not Reynolds ! ” Bert looked rather
startled, and persisted that he was Reynolds. “Oh ! you’re the other Reynolds, the long thin Reynolds.
Eh ? eh ? ”
something beginning with an ‘ F
His keen interest in sport was well known,
particularly in his Section’s efforts to gain
superiority over “A ” in cricket. It was
rumoured that much money passed between
other officers and himself in that halcyon period
before the first Somme battle.
His love of horses, and how he gained the title
of “ the galloping Major ” during the prepara-
tion for an historic race, in which eventually
he was prevented from entering through an
accident, need no recounting here. It is a
long way from the fields of Poperinghe to the
Bathurst Plains, but all “B ” Section of his
command are unanimous in the wish that the
latter has better fortune in store for him than
he had in the former, and that he may some-
times remember the days he spent in France.
OUR LAST BILLET IN BELGIUM
J. O. B.




W • H • SMITH & SON
STAMFORD STREET
LONDO N • SB
