



FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE






ELLEN TERRY
FOUR LECTURES ON
SHAKESPEARE
Edited with an Introduction by
CHRISTOPHER ST. JOHN
MARTIN HOPKINSON LTD
23 SOHO SQUARE LONDON


FIRST PUBLISHED APRIL 1932
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction / ✓ ✓ ✓ 7
The Children in Shakespeare’s Plays ✓ ✓ 25
The Triumphant Women / / ✓ ✓ / 79
The Pathetic Women / ✓ / ✓ / 125
The Letters in Shakespeare’s Plays ✓ ✓ 171




INTRODUCTION
Ellen Terry gave these Shakespearean lectures, or
discourses as she preferred to call them, at various times
in various places in Great Britain, America, Australia
and New Zealand for a period of about ten years (1911
to 1921). With the exception of‘The Letters in Shake-
speare’s Plays’, which appeared in The Atlantic Monthly
in America, and in The Windsor Magazine in England,
in December 1921, the lectures have not been pub-
lished in any form until now. Negotiations for their
publication were frequently started in Ellen Terry’s
lifetime, but came to nothing for many reasons, only
two of which need be given here. Naturally editors
and publishers were most keenly interested in the lec-
tures at the time Ellen Terry was delivering them, but
she was then opposed to their being made accessible
in print, chiefly on the ground that they had been com-
posed to be heard, not to be read. She appealed to me
as her literary henchman for advice, and I agreed that
without the improvisations she made when she was
lecturing, without the illumination of her views and


ideas provided by her acting of the interpolated scenes,
her lectures would be only half themselves. Readers
who had not heard them might wonder why scholarly
critics had welcomed them as an important contribu-
tion to the study of Shakespeare, and why they had
proved immensely popular with the general public.
When Ellen Terry’s apparently inexhaustible store of
youth and vigour, which enabled her to keep old age
at bay until she had entered her seventy-sixth year,
gave out, and she was forced to retire from public hfe,
I recalled the proverb that half a loaf is better than no
bread, and urged her to prepare a version of her lec-
tures for publication. But by that time she was
tragically unequal to the task.
I have spoken of myself as her ‘ literary henchman ’,
and it is true that from the year 1903, the date at which
my friendship with her daughter Edith Craig estab-
lished a close relationship with her, she invoked my
services on all occasions when she had to write some-
thing for publication, or make a speech, or give an
interview. lam the more willing to admit this, now
that the publication of some of her best letters, those
written to Bernard Shaw, has proved conclusively that
a collaborator was a convenience to her rather than a
necessity. She had no difficulty whatever in express-
ing herself in writing. Her literary style, graceful.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


vivid and direct, might make many skilled profes-
sional authors green with envy. Bernard Shaw re-
marked, when he brought Edith Craig his collection of
letters from Ellen Terry, with the suggestion that they
should be published separately : ‘ She had naturally
that simplicity of expression which it takes most writers
years of hard labour to acquire.’ I know that I learned
more about the art of writing from her than from
anyone else. I often felt at the time I was assisting her
in the composition of her autobiography that I was
the apprentice and she the master craftsman.
‘ Oh, I couldn’t say that ! ’ she would exclaim as I
read her my written record of some incident in her life
she had related to me. ‘ Well, how would you like it
put ? ’ I would ask, rather mortified, for I had taken
great pains to put off myself, and put on Ellen Terry,
in the passage she had interrupted. Immediately, if she
were in the mood, she would flash out ‘ how ’ in living
phrases which made my own more ‘ literary ’ ones seem
dull, pompous, stiff stuff in which not a breath of life
stirred. My value to her as a collaborator did not
consist so much in the skill with the pen I had acquired
in the practice of my profession, as in my ability to
control my self-esteem when it threatened to become
troublesome and be an obstacle to my surrender to her
wishes.
INTRODUCTION


The system on which we worked at these lectures
was much the same as that we had adopted in her
autobiography, published in 1907 under the title The
Story of My Life, Ellen Terry, by her side a Globe
edition of Shakespeare, on the title-page of which
she had written * Sir, here is a poor friend of yours
that loves you’, talked, and I made notes. Some-
times I became so much absorbed in watching ‘ the
lovely nervous knitting of Ellen Terry’s brows ’
(Rebecca West’s fine phrase) that I wrote without
looking at the paper, and this blind writing was often
illegible. Perhaps we ought to have had an efficient
shorthand-writer in the room during those debates, in
which I often played the part of the devil’s advocate,
disputing Ellen Terry’s theories as the best method of
inducing her to tell me how she had arrived at them,
but it would have been difficult to arrange, as they
took place at odd hours in odd places, and were
frequently interrupted.
From the rough scenario supplied by my notes, I
would labour to construct something answering to the
description of a lecture. At different stages of its pro-
gress I used to show it to Edith Craig, a discriminating
critic, and her helpful ‘ That’s not a bit like mother ’
led to the excision of a great many stilted literary ex-
pressions. The thing was more ‘ like mother ’by the
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


time it was in a state to be read to her. The day she
snatched the manuscript away from me, the want of
variety in the pace of my reading having made her
impatient, and began reading it to me with impromptu
additions, I was satisfied that out of this material,
quarried originally from her mind, and then rough-
hewn by me, she would be able to create something
in her own image.
This creation occupied her for a long time. When
she first delivered the lecture, several copies of which
she had printed in a type large and bold enough for
her to read it without spectacles, she adhered more or
less faithfully to the original version. By 1915 she
had transformed it with cuts, transpositions, and the
incorporation of many of her platform improvisations.
The critic of The Times who wrote after hearing her
lecture on the pathetic heroines of Shakespeare that
‘ wherever and whenever she speaks it will always be
different and always fresh ’ may not have meant that
she would never give the same lecture, but this is what
actually happened. Not only did she make several
different versions for different types of audiences; she
gave each particular audience improvisations inspired
by its response. The text printed here is a blend of
the four texts she used most frequently during her
tours.
INTRODUCTION


The idea of her lecturing originated as far back as
the year 1903 when she was touring the provinces with
her own company in a repertory of plays. She con-
sented during her visit to Glasgow to give a talk on
Shakespeare in aid of the funds of the local branch of
The Ladies Theatrical Guild. She considered several
subjects for this talk, among them ‘ Shakespeare’s
Children but eventually chose ‘ The Letters in
Shakespeare’s Plays ’, chiefly because she was under the
impression that they had never been talked or written
about before. 1 She was very jubilant at having dis-
covered what she described as £ a neglected corner of
Shakespeare’s world ’, and had a special affection for
this lecture, first given at Glasgow to a very small
audience. She included it in her repertory, when she
went to the United States in 1910 to give a series of
lectures, but it never went as well with audiences as its
successors. The lectures on Shakespeare’s Heroines
were the most popular. They gave Ellen Terry
better opportunities for exercising her own art and in
time became an epitome of her Shakespearean imper-
sonations. Some idea of the impression they made
when first given in London at the Haymarket Theatre
in May 1911 can be gathered from the following pas-
1 The only book I know on the subject, Shakespeare as a Letter >
Writer, by R. L. Megroz, was not published until 1927.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


sage quoted from a contemporary criticism in The
Daily Telegraph :
It was as if the record of those brilliant Shake-
spearean seasons at the old Lyceum, extending over a
period of years, had been compressed into two brief
hours, and memory flew back to the days when Henry
Irving and Ellen Terry reigned supreme at that theatre,
and by their marvellous art created a gallery of por-
traits which no one who had the privilege of looking
upon will ever permit to lapse into oblivion.
The critic of The Times probed Ellen Terry’s achieve-
ment more deeply, I think, showing its value to the
new generation that had grown up since the Lyceum
days, when he wrote :
It is a happy thing for England as well as for Miss
Terry that she has found so effective a way of bringing
home to Shakespeare’s country men and women the
inner meaning of his plays and the charm of her own
art.
‘ Blow that word charm ! ’ Ellen Terry often said
after reading criticisms of her performance. ‘ There is
something more in my acting than charm.’ So it may
have been a greater pleasure to her to read these words
by another critic about her lecture on the heroines she
styled ‘ Triumphant ’ :
The Recital showed how much brainwork a great
actress puts into her study of a part. Take all the
INTRODUCTION


‘ triumphant ’ women Miss Terry dealt with—
Beatrice, Rosalind, Volumnia, Portia—when you
have heard what she has to say about the character of
each one, you will realize how poor your conception
of them was, compared with what she reveals to you.
This brainwork Ellen Terry put with indefatigable
industry, not only into the composition of these lec-
tures, but into their delivery. Nearly every line in the
copy she most frequently used is annotated by some
instruction to herself about the way it should be
spoken. ‘ Take time.’ ‘ Quiet.’ ‘ Keep still.’ ‘ Low
voice—almost intone—grave, solemn.’ ‘ With humour,
rather reckless.’ ‘ Ingratiating, irritating, babyish.’
‘ Horror, not loud.’ ‘ Dark, fierce, violent.’ ‘ Rather
cross.’ ‘ Quick and quiet.’ ‘ Whisper.’ I opened a
page at random, a page in her study of Juliet, and from
it have transcribed these stage directions. On the fly-
leaf there are some general reflections which may help
the reader to conceive how the words of the lecture,
like the words in the scenes introduced, were vivified
when they were spoken by Ellen Terry.
Get the words into your remembrance first of all.
Then, (as you have to convey the meaning of the words
to some who have ears, but don’t hear, and eyes, but
don’t see) put the words into the simplest vernacular.
Then exercise your judgment about their sound.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


So many different ways of speaking words ! Be-
ware of sound and fury signifying nothing. Voice,
unaccompanied by imagination, dreadful. Pom-
posity, rotundity.
Imagination and intelligence absolutely necessary
to realize and portray high and low imaginings.
Voice, yes, but not mere voice production. You must
have a sensitive ear, and a sensitive judgment of the
effect on your audience. But all the time you must be
trying to please yourself.
Get yourself into tune. Then you can let fly your
imagination, and the words will seem to be supplied
by yourself. Shakespeare supplied by oneself! Oh !
Realism ? Yes, if we mean by that real feeling, real
sympathy. But people seem to mean by it only the
realism of low-down things.
To act, you must make the thing written your own.
You must steal the words, steal the thought, and convey
the stolen treasure to others with great art.
It has often been remarked that Ellen Terry spoke
the language of Shakespeare as if it were her native
tongue, and in these communings with herself there is
revealed something of the process by which she
arrived at that state of grace in which his words be-
came her words.
His world too became her world : she was entirely
at home in it, as these lectures alone are left to testify
now that she is dead. She speaks in one of them of
INTRODUCTION


its being ‘ more real to some of us than the actual
world but I have never met anyone as familiar with it
and its inhabitants as she. She lived on the most
intimate terms with Shakespeare’s men and women,
and was always discovering something new about their
idiosyncrasies. She told Henry Irving once that
Shakespeare was the only man she had ever really
loved. ‘ When I was about sixteen or seventeen, and
very unhappy, I forswore the society of men. . . .
Yet I was lonely all the same. I wanted a sweetheart.
Well, Shakespeare became my sweetheart ! I read
everything I could get hold of about my beloved one.
I lived with him in his plays.’
It was undoubtedly a great grief to Ellen Terry to be
prohibited at last from collaborating with her sweet-
heart in the theatre. Acting, from whatever it pro-
ceeds, goes back at last to the body. The body of this
actress remained beautiful in age, but it could not be
the body of Juliet or of any of Shakespeare’s youthful
heroines. Ellen Terry was happy in finding in these
lectures a means of presenting women she could no
longer represent, of showing what a lifelong study of
them had taught her about their attributes. The
opinion expressed by Bernard Shaw in his preface to
Ellen Terry and Bernard Shaw : A Correspondence that
Ellen Terry ‘ could do without the stage both as artist
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


and woman ’ seems to me, who know how she
hungered for it during the last twenty years of her life,
to be ill-founded. The hunger was appeased to some
extent by the opportunities for acting the lectures
gave her.
What impression they will make on a reader who
never saw Ellen Terry act I find it hard to conjecture.
My share in their composition hinders me from ex-
pressing a disinterested opinion of their merits. I may
be wrong in thinking that Ellen Terry hits the right
nail on the head every time when she is analysing
Shakespeare’s characters, and giving her views about
their impersonation in the theatre. Her comments on
the characters of Juliet, Desdemona and Cordelia seem
to me particularly good examples of her penetrating in-
sight. They should do much to destroy the accepted
notions of these characters, and induce actresses to
abandon the traditional way of playing them.
The proof that Ellen Terry herself was never satis-
fied with the lectures lies in her unremitting efforts dur-
ing ten years to improve them. She told me once she
feared her revisions of the text had made them ‘ dread-
fully patchy It was in this critical mood that she
wrote under the title of the lecture on the Pathetic
Heroines : ‘ Shreds and Patches ’. Thereby hangs a
rather amusing tale. One of her numerous volunteer
INTRODUCTION


and amateur secretaries inserted this sub-title in the
matter for a handbill, announcing that she was going to
lecture at the Hampshire House Club. I have a copy
of this handbill preserved by Ellen Terry as a curiosity.
‘ Ellen Terry ’ (in huge type) ‘ has consented to give a
discourse on Shakespeare’s Heroines :
‘ Shreds and Patches.’
What a name for the poor ladies ! ! ’ is the comment
in Ellen Terry’s writing.
To help the reader to see and hear her breathing into
these ‘ shreds and patches ’ the life which quickened the
blood of her audiences I insert a vivid description of one
of her lectures which she herself prized. She cut it out
of the journal in which it appeared and pasted it on to
the flyleaf of her most richly annotated copy of 6 The
Pathetic Heroines’, with the note ‘ This is very good.’
(The description refers, however, to the lecture on
‘ The Triumphant Heroines ’.) On the same flyleaf
is the inscription, a beautiful specimen of Ellen Terry’s
beautiful handwriting : * Gloria in altissimis Deo, et in
terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.’ Was this the
way Ellen Terry got herself ‘ into tune ’ for the lecture ?
I like to think so.
Miss Ellen Terry in her day has played many parts,
but it is questionable if she ever found role more fitting
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


than that which she assumed so easily and successfully
last night. It in a sense epitomized these others, and
further permitted full and free play for her own win-
some and magnetic personality. Interesting and
illuminating as was the lecture, one discovered the
chiefest charm in the lecturer. The dark green hang-
ings and the lighting arrangements threw into relief all
the play of her mobile features; her robes of crimson
fell into easy-flowing lines with each graceful gesture
of her eloquent hands. Her voice possesses still much
of the power and clarity of youth, and carried convinc-
ing proof of the yet youthful spirit. There was much
of eloquent suggestion in her visible appreciation of
the graciously accepted flowers ; in the manner in
which she swung a chair into position ; in her turning
over of the written pages on her lectern. Her asides
and impromptus were as pregnant with intention as
her set speeches.
She is speaking of the German Shakespearean
theatres enthusiastically, and then, her eye penetrating
the empty dimness of the hall, she adds with playful
irony : ‘To which the people flock and flock.’ It is
interesting to hear one who has taken part with Irving
in sumptuous Shakespearean revivals dismiss super-
fluous dramatis personae as ‘ Lords, attendants and all
that sort of thing.’ She is quick to seize on a platform
palm as a suitable hiding place for Beatrice in her de-
lightful reading of the garden scene. ‘ You see that it is
a bower ? ’ And her hearers did, succumbing readily
to the old hypnotic scenery of Globe Theatre days.
INTRODUCTION


‘ I never could endure a reading of a character which
entailed a sacrifice of beauty,’ she says, and then naively
to an applauding audience : ‘ I’m glad you think so
too.’ She is confidential, and informs us that she is
partly Irish, partly Scottish, and that she is sure the
Scottish part takes care of the Irish.
There is nothing conventional about her method or
her matter. Of the scene between Benedick and
Beatrice in church, she remarks : ‘ I intended to skip
it; I think now I’ll read it.’ Which she does to the
great beatitude of her hearers. Continually in her illus-
trative acting she visualises memories of old Lyceum
days, and bygone performances of Shakespearean
heroines whom she herself made truly triumphant.
In the brief hours one has the compressed and fragrant
essence of a whole Shakespearean season. What could
be finer than the contrast she suggested between
Virgilia and Volumnia in the scene from Corio-
lanus ? What could be more delightful than her
reading of the Falstaffian love-missives received by
Mistress Ford and Mistress Page unless it were to have
been present at that memorable representation of these
same merry wives by Mrs. Kendal and Ellen Terry
herself? What could be more fitting than the note
on which she closed in her wonderful declamation of
Portia’s eloquent appeal, which as the actress finely
phrased it ‘ is in spirit as beautiful as the Lord’s Prayer
on which indeed it is modelled ’ ?
The lecture was marked with much literary style ;
it was full of little points of illumination not only
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


of the Shakespearean text itself, but of the actress’s
method of approaching it. We may congratulate
Miss Terry on having discovered so effective a method
of conveying to her audiences the inner meaning of the
Shakespearean plays ; her audiences may congratulate
themselves that the method promises the great actress
still a very considerable future among them.
The word abideth. lam hopeful that the publica-
tion of these lectures, even though they are only the
scenarios of the plays Ellen Terry acted on stage and
platform, promises her a future far more considerable
than this writer prophesied. They may be read long
after all who heard them have vanished from the earth.
CHRISTOPHER ST. JOHN
INTRODUCTION


NOTE
Ellen Terry made her own ‘ acting version ’ of the
scenes from Shakespeare’s plays interpolated in her
lectures, and it has not been altered. The text is
based for the most part on the Globe Edition.


THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS




THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS
When the project of my giving some lectures on
Shakespeare was first discussed, it occurred to me that
as I had begun life as an actress by impersonating one of
the children in his plays there would be something
appropriate in my beginning life as a lecturer with a
discourse on the subject of these children. The idea
attracted me all the more strongly, because they have
not been studied as exhaustively as their elders. In the
course of a long life, many hours of which have been
spent poring over the guide-books to that imaginary
world of Shakespeare’s, more real to some of us than
the actual world, I have come across only, the briefest
references to the children. How many can you claim
to know intimately ? Forgive my putting this ques-
tion, inspired by the confession of a friend, when I told
her the subject I had in mind for my first lecture, that
the only child in Shakespeare she could remember was
Arthur in King John. ‘ The child who had his eyes
put out,’ she added, a proof that even her memory of
Arthur was rather dim !


You are amused, and I have no doubt you can all do
better than that. Still lam hopeful of being able to
make your knowledge of Shakespeare’s little boys
deepen and glow. Yes, nearly all his children are of
the male sex, one obvious reason for his predilection
for it being the number of well-trained boy actors
available for children’s parts. There was in the Eliza-
bethan theatre, as Rosencrantz tells Hamlet, £ an aery
of children, little eyases that cry out on the top of ques-
tion, and are most tyrannically clapped for it.’ That
‘ sense of idiosyncratic character ’, which Mr. Bernard
Shaw, who as you know is no bardolater, considers one
of Shakespeare’s greatest assets as a dramatist, is as
manifest in his children as in his adults. But no more
clearing of the throat. ‘ Shall we clap into’t roundly,
without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse,
which are the only prologues to a bad voice ? ’ That
suggestion made by one of the young pages who sing
that lovely ditty ‘ It was a lover and his lass ’ in the
Forest of Arden, ought to be acted upon by all speakers
and lecturers.
So let me £ clap into ’ Mamillius, little Prince
Mamillius, son and heir to Leontes, King of Sicilia, in
whose palace The Winters Tale begins.
It is fifty years ago and more since I made my first
appearance on the stage as Mamillius. When I spoke
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


as a child and thought as a child I wonder whether I
was able to reveal all I see now in this lovely child s
part. The saying that the child is father to the man
throws light on it. It is easy to recognise in Mamillius
that imaginative, philosophic, poetic temperament
which in its maturity is so frequently studied by
Shakespeare. In his childish treble he pipes a few notes
of the music poured out in profuse strains by Romeo
and Hamlet. Try and imagine them when they were
children. You will see little boys very like Mamillius.
‘ Come, my gracious lord, shall I be your play-
fellow ? ’ says one of his mother’s ladies-in-waiting.
Visualise the scene. The royal mother is ill and
tired. She has complained that the child so troubles
me ’tis past enduring.’ Her ladies must amuse him,
satisfy his need for someone to play with.
Mamillius
No, I’ll none of you.
First Lady
Why, my sweet lord ?
Mamillius
You’ll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.
Second Lady
And why so, my lord ?
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Mamillius
Not for because
Your brows are blacker ; yet black brows they say
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen. . . .
Second Lady
Who taught you this ?
Mamillius
I learnt it out of women’s faces.
Then he turns to the lady who speaks to him as if
he were ‘ a baby still ’ :
What colour are your eyebrows ? ’ Her reply
‘ Blue, my lord ’ strikes me as one of those feeble jests
some adults wrongly think will ‘ amuse the children ’.
Mamillius is not amused. He rebukes the lady for
trying to fool him.
Nay, that’s a mock. I have seen a lady’s nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
An observant and wise babe ! We may assume that
when his mother was barred from his presence £ like
one infectious ’ it was impossible to throw dust in his
eyes. There are lines which prove that he is conscious
of the reason. He may be too young to realize the na-
ture of the charge his madly jealous father, the victim
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


of ‘ fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle for
girls of nine has brought against his mother, but he
knows she is in disgrace and he takes it terribly to
heart.
He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened and fixed the shame on’t in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languished.
In Swinburne’s Study of Shakespeare, there is a
lovely passage about Mamillius which I must read to
you. The happy ending to The Winters Tale could
not console Swinburne for his loss.
‘ I have in me’, he writes, ‘ so much of the spirit of
Rachel weeping in Ramah as will not be comforted
because Mamillius is not. It is well for those whose
hearts are light enough to take comfort in the substitu-
tion of his sister Perdita for the boy who died of
“ thoughts high for one so tender ”.’
These words, I should remind you, occur in Paulina’s
speech describing the death of the young Prince.
Paulina, Hermione’s champion, is quite sure he died of
a broken heart :
Whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemished his gracious dam.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


‘ Even in her daughter’s embrace Swinburne goes
on, ‘ it seems hard if his mother should have utterly-
forgotten the little voice that had only time to tell her
just eight words of that ghost story which neither she
nor we were ever to hear ended. .. . Anyone but
Shakespeare would have sought to make pathetic
profit out of the child by the easy means of showing
him, if but once again, as changed and stricken for
want of his mother. . . . Shakespeare only could find
a better way, a subtler and deeper chord to strike, by
giving us our last glimpse of him as he laughed and
chattered with her “ past enduring ”... It may be
that we remember him all the better because his father
whose jealousy killed him, and his mother for love of
whom he died, would seem to have forgotten the little
brave sweet spirit.’
The glimpse we get of Mamillius with Leontes is
enough to make us feel that the child is puzzled by his
father’s attitude to him, and rather scared. He does
not chatter spontaneously, but answers the questions
put to him in a few mechanically dutiful words.
‘ Mamillius, art thou my boy ? ’ ‘ Ay, my good
lord.’ £ How now, you wanton calf! Art thou my
calf?’ ‘ Yes, if you will, my lord.’ Why these ques-
tions ? Leontes, tortured by jealousy, is observing
Hermione and Polixenes all the time he asks them.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


The suspicion his wife is unfaithful now breeds another.
She may have been unfaithful before. What if
Mamillius is not his son ?
. . . They say we are
Almost as like as eggs : women say so,
That will say any thing.
Affection for the child struggles with this monstrous
suspicion.
Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye : sweet villain,
Most dear’st ! my collop ! Can thy dam ?—may’t
be ?
Then the unhappy man is reassured :
Looking on the lines
Of my boy’s face, methought I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreeched
In my green velvet coat . . .
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman.
That was the time when Leontes and Polixenes,
brought up together, were close friends. ‘We were,’
Polixenes tells Hermione, as ‘ twinned lambs that did
frisk i’ the sun.’
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day tomorrow as today,
And to be boy eternal.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


We learn in the first scene of the play that their
friendship had outlasted their boyhood. Separated by
‘ royal necessities’, one becoming King of Bohemia,
the other, King of Sicily, they had kept up a corre-
spondence and sent one another presents. Who could
have foreseen that when these friends met again as
men, they would soon become enemies ? Beware
the green-eyed monster indeed ! It gets such a grip
of Leontes that within a few weeks of Polixenes’
arrival at his court he is planning to kill him.
Polixenes is vaguely aware of some hostility in his
friend’s attitude. ‘My favour here begins to warp ’,
he says. That is the real reason for his anxiety to cut
his visit short, although he pleads that his affairs drag
him homeward. Hermione, urged by Leontes to
press him to stay, makes light of this excuse. Find a
better one ! Tell us you are longing to see your son
again, and we shall have to let you go !
How Polixenes adores this son, Florizel, who is
about the same age as Mamillius, we know from the
answer he makes to Leontes’ question :
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours ?
Polixenes rr ,
It at home, sir,
He’s all my exercise, my mirth, my matter.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Now my sworn friend, and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all;
He makes a July’s day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.
It is pure conjecture, but I think reasonable conjec-
ture, that Shakespeare in these lines is describing what
his son Hamnet meant to him. And I believe that the
grief he felt when Hamnet died is reflected in the pas-
sionate lamentations of Constance in King John over
the loss of her only son. Those who have attempted
to compare the order of the plays with the order of
those events in Shakespeare’s life which are reported,
if not authenticated, tell us that shortly before writing
King John Shakespeare had visited Stratford for the first
time after ten years’ absence. We may assume that
then he learned to know and love Hamnet, and that
Arthur, who is not in the least like the Arthur in the
historical play from which King John was adapted, was
studied from the life. If so, Hamnet was a singularly
tender, unselfish and sweet-natured boy. When
Arthur is taken prisoner, his first thought is of his
mother:
‘O, this will make my mother die with grief! ’
And indeed the news does nearly kill her, makes of her
‘ a grave unto a soul: holding the eternal spirit against
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


her will in the vile prison of afflicted breath.’ This
vehement, intemperate, ambitious Constance expresses
her grief with a violence which justifies Cardinal
Pandulph’s rebuke : ‘ Lady, you utter madness and
not sorrow.’
This steadies her for a moment. We hear her now
speaking more calmly, quietly and slowly, and are
more deeply moved :
Thou art not holy to belie me so :
I am not mad ; this hair I tear is mine :
My name is Constance ; I was Geffrey’s wife ;
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost :
I am not mad : I would to heaven I were !
For then ’tis like I should forget myself:
O, if I could, what grief should I forget !
Preach some philosophy to make me mad
And thou shalt be canonized, Cardinal.
If I were mad I should forget my son,
Or madly think a babe of clouts were he :
I am not mad.
There is none of the ‘ unadvised scold ’, as Queen Elinor
calls Constance, in this pathetic speech, nor in the one
inspired by King Philip’s sarcastic remark that the dis-
traught mother is as fond of grief as of her child.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form ;
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fare you well : had you such a loss as I,
I could give better comfort than you do.
The mother, I think, felt the separation more poig-
nantly than the son. Arthur speaks of the grief it will
cause her, but never of missing her, of longing to see
her again. They have little in common, the ambitious
worldly woman, stirring up everyone to support her
son’s claim to the throne, and the diffident unworldly
boy who does not think he is worth the ‘ coil that’s
made for me ’, who says he would be as merry as the
day is long ‘ so I were out of prison and kept sheep ’.
Constance’s bitter tongue makes Arthur wince.
‘ Peace ! ’ he pleads, when she is rude to those she sus-
pects of treachery to his cause.
‘ Come to thy grandam, child ’, says Queen Elinor,
in the scene in which John is bargaining with Arthur’s
supporters, promising to compensate the young prince
if his claim to the throne is abandoned.
‘ Do, child ’, says Constance jeeringly.
‘ Go to it grandam, child.
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
Give it a plum, a cherry and a fig !
There’s a good grandam ! ’
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


‘ Good my mother, peace ! ’ And as Arthur says
this he bursts into tears. 4 His mother shames him so,
poor boy, he weeps.’ This remark of Elinor’s enrages
Constance, and leads to fresh recriminations. The two
queens quarrel with a violence which fully accounts for
poor little Arthur’s piteous wish that he were £ low
laid ’ in his grave.
The scene between Hubert and Arthur in the prison
is one of the best-known scenes in the plays. Probably
all of you learned it by heart when you were children.
As Shakespeare says in one of his sonnets : ‘ Things
grown common lose their dear delights ’, and this beau-
tiful scene may have lost some of its power to move
you because it is hackneyed. This has not been my
experience, however. I find it more poignant as the
years go on, and have cried over it many times since
the day I first cried over it when I was rehearsing the
part of Arthur with Mrs. Charles Kean. She grew so
angry with me because I failed again and again to show
the anguish of Arthur when the executioners enter with
the cord to bind him, and the irons to put out his eyes,
that she gave me a good hard slap ! Then real tears
poured from my eyes, and my voice was shaken with
sobs as I pleaded with Hubert to drive the men away.
‘ That’s right ! That’s the way ! ’ Mrs. Kean shouted
in a great state of excitement. ‘ Good child ! Now
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


remember what you did with your voice ... remember
everything, and do it again ! ’ I did not need another
slap to make me cry ... I thought: ‘ Red hot irons in
my eyes would hurt far more.’ This was my first
lesson in using my imagination. I was taught that day
that if we would express emotion naturally in the
supernatural language of great dramatic poetry, we
must first imagine the emotion in our own terms.
Take care of the truth in Shakespeare’s lines, and the
poetry will take care of itself. 1
Before we take leave of Arthur, who does not live
long after Hubert has spared him, leaping to his death
from the high wall of the castle when he is attempting
to escape, let us consider what a rare character Shake-
speare has created in him : an angelically good little
boy who is not a prig ! Swinburne, who wrote such
touching words about Mamillius, confessed that he
could say nothing about Arthur. ‘I am not minded
to speak of him. There are one or two figures in the
world of Shakespeare’s work of which there are no
words that would be fit or good to say. The place
they have in our fives and thoughts is not one for talk.’
So as he lies on the stones beneath the castle wall, com-
1 Extracts from the scene between Hubert and Arthur are given in
some of the texts of this lecture, but as Ellen Terry seldom read them,
they have been omitted here. —C. St. J.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


mending his soul to heaven, let us say no more than
‘ Good-night, sweet prince, and flights of angels sing
thee to thy rest.’
Arthur, as I have suggested, may have had an
original in Shakespeare’s boy Hamnet. Perhaps little
Will Page in The Merry Wives of Windsor is a sketch of
Shakespeare himself in his youth. I feel that Shake-
speare was thinking of his efforts to learn Latin at the
grammar school at Stratford when he wrote that de-
lightful scene in which Mrs. Page is taking her boy to
school, and on the way meets his schoolmaster, Sir
Hugh Evans. All the Latin phrases introduced are to
be found, I am told, in the grammar which Shakespeare
must have used. A very droll scene it is. Mrs. Page
insists, as there is no school to-day (Master Slender
having secured the boys a holiday), on Sir Hugh’s put-
ting Will a few questions in his ‘ accidence ’. ‘My
husband says my son profits nothing in the world at
his book.’ Will might well be put offby the frequent
interruptions of Mrs. Quickly, the village gossip, who
makes some highly ingenious guesses at the meaning of
the Latin words, but he keeps his head, and does well
enough to justify his mother’s remark : ‘ He is a better
scholar than I thought he was.’
Shakespeare left school when he was still very
young—at thirteen it is said. What did he do then ?
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


It is all conjecture. We may guess, if it pleases us, that
he knocked about, doing odd jobs, picking up some
knowledge of the world. It is quite possible that as in
that little ‘ grammar ’ scene in The Merry Wives of
Windsor Shakespeare was drawing on his memories of
his schooldays, so in other scenes in the same play in
which Robin, Sir John Falstaff’s page, plays a part, he
was using some of his own experiences after he left
school and ran wild.
We know from a passage in Henry IV that it was
Prince Hal who got Robin his job with Falstaff, but
we learn nothing of the boy’s antecedents. There is a
suggestion that he was not born in the gutter in the
statement that Falstaffhad the boy Christian, and ‘ look
if the fat villain have not transformed him ape ’. Yet
he exhibits the precocity of the guttersnipe who almost
from infancy has had to shift for himself. I figure him
an undersized, wizened little creature, for children
must have plenty of sleep, and plenty of good nourish-
ing food to be well-grown, chubby-faced and plump-
limbed. Robin’s life with Sir John and his boon
companions, a roystering lot, could not have been
good for his health. But it appears to have sharpened
his wits. He knows how to ingratiate himself with
the ladies. The merry wives, Mrs. Page and Mrs.
Ford, who draw him into their conspiracy to fool his
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


master, both take to him. They are amused at the self-
assurance of the ragged little imp, who pays them com-
pliments like a grown-up gallant. ‘ How now, my
eyas-musket, what news with you ? ’ says Mrs. Ford,
or to translate her greeting into language more
familiar to you : £ Hullo, you little cock-sparrow,
what have you been up to ! ’ ‘My master, Sir John ’,
replies the cock-sparrow, ‘ is come in at your back
door, Mistress Ford, and requests your company.’
Mrs. Page
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us ?
Robin
Ay, 111 be sworn. My master knows not of your
being here, and hath threatened to put me into ever-
lasting liberty if I tell you of it; for he swears he’ll
turn me away.
Mrs. Page
Thou’rt a good boy ; this secrecy of thine shall
be a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doub-
let and hose.
If Falstaff had found out that his page was the merry
wives accomplice in making a fool of him, it is doubt-
ful whether he would have turned him away, for this
smart little lad was very useful to him. One of his
jobs is to do the fat knight’s shopping. We hear of
his being commissioned to go to Master Dombledon’s
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


shop and buy satin for Falstaff’s new short cloak and
slops. The wily Master Dombledon refuses to give
FalstafF credit, and Robin comes back without the
satin :
‘ He said, sir, you should procure him better assur-
ance than Bardolph. He would not take his bond
and yours. He liked not the security. ’
It is in this scene, which you will find in Henry IV,
Part 11, that FalstafF tells Robin that if Prince Hal put
him into his service for any other reason than ‘ to be set
off, why then I have no judgment ’. FalstafF can always
see a joke at his own expense. Does he not boast that
he is not only witty in himself, ‘ but the cause that wit
is in other men ’ ? So he knows what the Prince was
up to when he gave him this little snippet of a page.
What a funny pair they would make ! The contrast
in size would be a fresh source of inspiration to the
men of all sorts who take a pride in girding at the fat
knight ! But no one gets more fun out of the con-
trast than the fat knight himself. ‘ I do here walk
before thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed all her
litter but one,’ ‘ Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art
fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels.’
And so on.
Robin has other qualifications for being FalstafF’s
page than that of ‘ setting him off ’ physically. He is
THE CHILDREN IN PLAYS


an alert and resourceful boy, and serves bis master well.
His loyalty to him is proved, in spite of those occa-
sions when he joins in the sport of ragging him, by the
fact that he does not desert him when he is down and
out. Robin remains in Falstaff’s service until his
death. By that time the boy has seen a great deal of
the seamy side of life. His schoolroom is the Boar’s
Head Tavern, his schoolmasters are drunkards and
wastrels. He is encouraged by them to swagger and
be impudent. When he makes fun of Bardolph’s red
nose, a standing joke in Falstaff’s set, he is applauded
and given money.
‘ A’ calls me e’en now, my lord ’, he tells Prince Hal,
‘ through a red lattice, and I could discern no part of
his face from the window. At last I spied his eyes, and
methought he had made two holes in the ale-wife’s
new petticoat, and so peeped through.’ The Prince
is delighted. ‘ Has not the boy profited ? ’
Bardolph is ‘ asking for it ’, I feel, when he tells his
young tormentor to shut up.
‘ Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away ! ’
* Away, you rascally Althaea’s Dream, away ! ’
Robin retorts.
Now where did he pickup that name for Bar-
dolph ? From his master, I expect. It is new to the
Prince.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


‘ Instruct us, boy. What dream, boy ? ’
‘ Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamed she was de-
livered of a firebrand, and therefore I call him her
dream.’
The Prince
A crown’s worth of good interpretation. There
’tis, boy.
Poins
O that this good blossom could be kept from
cankers ! Well, there is sixpence to preserve
thee.
Five-and-six, a big sum in those days, for cheeking
Bardolph ! Well, who would grudge it to Robin ?
I am sure he needed the money, for Sir John did not
pay his wages regularly, and let him go about in rags.
Bardolph’s comment, ‘An you do not make him
hanged among you, the gallows shall have wrong ’, is
none the less pertinent. If the boy had not had his
head screwed on the right way he might have deterio-
rated in such company and come to a bad end. But,
as we find out later on (in Henry V), he sees through his
associates, and has too much contempt for them to
make them his model.
Frightened as he is when Falstaff is taken ill, not
knowing what to do for him, and rushing off to Pistol
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


and his wife (our old friend Mrs. Quickly) for help,
he doesn’t forget to tease Bardolph :
‘ Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master,
and you, hostess. He is very sick, and would to bed.
... Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets
and do the office of a warming pan. Faith, he’s very
ill.’
Mrs. Quickly-Pistol runs off at once, and, like Robin,
is alarmed at poor old Sir John’s condition. In the
street outside her tavern, the old gang are brawling as
usual. The quarrel this time is about eight shillings
Pistol owes Nym. It becomes so fierce that swords
have been drawn by the time Mrs. Quickly comes back,
and begs them to come in to Sir John.
‘ Ah, poor heart ! he is so shaked of a burning
quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold.
Sweet men, come to him.’
The next thing we hear about Sir John is that he is
dead. There they all are sitting outside the tavern, his
friends and his boy, each one mourning his loss, for
each one in his way loved the fat knight. It is a
wonderful scene, rich in implications. It is surely one
that Robin has for the time lost his pert, confident
manner, and is looking what he feels, a forlorn little
boy without a friend in the world, in Pistol’s words :
‘ Boy, bristle thy courage up.’ I think they are all
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


grateful to Pistol for breaking the gloomy silence.
They find it a relief to talk about the dead man. But
better I should read you the scene than describe it.
Bardolph
Would I were with him wheresome’er he is, either in
heaven or in hell !
Mrs. Quickly
Nay, sure, he’s not in hell: he’s in Arthur’s bosom,
if ever man went to Arthur’s bosom. A’ made
a finer end and went away an it had been any
christom child : a’ parted even just between twelve
and one, even at the turning o’ the tide : for after
I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with
flowers and smile upon his fingers’ ends, I knew
there was but one way ; for his nose was as sharp as
a pen, and a’babbled of green fields. ‘ How now,
Sir John ! ’ quoth I: ‘ what, man ! be o’ good
cheer.’ So a’ cried out ‘ God ! God ! God ! ’ three
or four times. Now I, to comfort him, bid him
a’ should not think of God : I hoped there was no
need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.
So a’ bade me lay more clothes on his feet: I put
my hand into the bed and felt them, and they were
as cold as any stone ; then I felt to his knees, and
they were as cold as any stone ; and so upward and
upward, and all was as cold as any stone.
Nym
They say he cried out of sack.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Mrs. Quickly
Ay, that a’ did !
Bardolph
And of women.
Mrs. Quickly
Nay, that a’ did not !
Robin
Yes, that a’ did ; and said they were devils incarnate.
Mrs. Quickly
A’ could never abide carnation : ’twas a colour he
never liked.
Robin
Do you not remember, a’ saw a flea stick upon Bar-
dolph’s nose, and a’ said it was a black soul burning
in hell-fire ?
Bardolph
Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire :
that’s all the riches I got in his service.
The old Falstaff gang go off to the war in France,
and their conduct at the front makes Robin ashamed
of being their ‘ boy ’. In the scene before Harfleur
when they have to be hounded to the attack, we hear
his candid opinion of Nym, Bardolph and Pistol :
As young as I am, I have observed these three
swashers. lam boy to them all three, but all they
three, though they would serve me, could not be
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


man to me, for indeed three such antics do not
amount to a man. For Bardolph, he is white-
livered and red-faced, by the means whereof a’ faces
it out, but fights not. For Pistol, he hath a killing
tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof a’
breaks words and keeps whole weapons. For Nym,
he hath heard that men of few words are the best
men, and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest a’
should be thought a coward. But his few bad
words are matched with as few good deeds : for a’
never broke any man’s head but his own, and that
was against a post when he was drunk. . . . Nym
and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching. . . .
They would have me as familiar with men’s pockets
as their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes
much against my manhood. ... I must leave
them, and seek some better service ; their villany
goes against my weak stomach and therefore I must
cast it up.
Sensible boy ! But he finds it difficult to break with
his old associates, his sole legacy from FalstafF, and get
another job. He is still with Pistol when the English
army are at Agincourt. It never seems to occur to
him to try and get into touch with the King who in
his wild Prince Hal days employed him. Perhaps he
is deterred from the attempt by the memory of that
dreadful day when Sir John had met the King coming
from his coronation, and the King had snubbed his
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


master, pretending at first that he did not know him.
For a moment Robin had thought it might be only a
joke. How often the prince had played such tricks on
Falstaff ! But he had never seen the prince look like
this before. That cold haughty stare made Robin un-
comfortable. And when the prince spoke, his words
and his manner left no doubt at all that he was in
earnest:
I know thee not, old man : fall to thy prayers :
How ill white hairs become a fool and jester !
I have long dreamd of such a kind of man,
So surfeit-swell’d, so old and so profane,
But, being awaked, I do despise my dream.
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest :
Presume not that I am the thing I was :
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,
That I have turned away my former self;
So will I those that kept me company.
It was in vain after that for poor old Sir John to try
and bluff Robin and the others with the assurance that
‘ he would be sent for in private ’, that ‘ the King must
seem thus to the world.’ They knew the truth. After
Falstaff’s disgrace, it is doubtful whether any one of
them would have dared to approach the King and beg
a favour of him for the sake of old times.
Hardly has Robin made up his mind to leave the
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


‘ three swashers ’ when two of them, Nym and Bar-
dolph, are hanged. And so would Pistol be, in Robin’s
comment, ‘ if he durst steal anything adventurously.’
The last time we see the boy, he is in Pistol’s company
acting as interpreter between that bragging rascal and
a French prisoner. Robin’s French is quite fluent. Did
he learn to speak the lingo from Prince Hal, or from
FalstafF in London, or did he pick it up during his few
weeks in France with the army ? lam curious about
everything that concerns this child for whom I have
a great affection. It makes me sad that he should be
denied the chance of that ‘ better service ’ to which he
aspires, and be killed at Agincourt while in the rear
minding the baggage. His remark that the ‘ French
might have a good prey of it ’, if they knew of it, ‘ for
there is none to guard it but boys ’, is characteristic of
the sharp-witted youngster. He is always alert and
observant.
Allowing that the English, as he implies, were care-
less, this massacre of the innocents seems to me none
the less a disgraceful business. I share the indignation
of the Welsh commander, Fluellen, with the cowardly
rascals, the refuse of the French army, who were guilty
of it.
£ Kill the poys and the luggage ! ’Tis expressly
against the law of arms : ’tis as arrant a piece of
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


knavery, mark you now, as can be offer’t: in your
conscience, now, is it not ? ’
Gower agrees and adds that it’s certain there’s not a
boy left alive. These ‘ glorious dead ’ are not men-
tioned by King Henry when he reads out the Agin-
court roll of honour. ‘ None else of name ’on that
roll, he says, after Edward Duke of York, the Earl of
Suffolk, Sir Richard Ketly and Davy Gam, Esquire.
It seems hard that the King should never know that
the boy he put in Falstaff’s service died in his own.
Poor little chap ! Fame, which after his first experience
of fighting he says he would give ‘ for a pot of ale and
safety ’, is denied him at the end.
The majority of little boys have a natural tendency
to militarism, and in young Marcius, the son of the
great Roman soldier Coriolanus, it has been en-
couraged by his grandmother Volumnia, who boasts
that if she had a dozen sons, she would rather eleven
died for their country than one * voluptuously surfeit
out of action ’. The child, too, we are expressly told,
has inherited his father’s qualities. He does not favour
his mother, the gentle timid Virgilia, who is too acutely
sensitive to the horrors of war to take pride in the
heroism of soldiers. She is not as glad as Volumnia
that Marcius would £ rather see the swords and hear a
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


drum than look upon his schoolmaster I imagine
that she looks distressed when their neighbour, the
Lady Valeria, who has called on them bursting with
the latest news from the front, tells the story of Marcius
and the butterfly :
O’ my word, the father’s son : I’ll swear ’tis a very
pretty boy. O’ my troth, I looked upon him o’
Wednesday half an hour together : has such a con-
firmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly : and when he caught it, he let it go again ;
and after it again ; and over and over he comes,
and up again : catched it again ; or whether his fall
enraged him, or how ’twas, he did so set his teeth
and tear it: 0,1 warrant how he mammocked it !
‘ One on’s father’s moods ’, says Marcius’s proud
grandmother exultantly. His mother’s comment :
‘ A crack, madam ’, suggests that she thinks his exhibi-
tion of childish temper is nothing to boast about,
rather something to be apologised for, on the ground
of thoughtless youth. ‘ Crack ’ here is used in the
Elizabethan sense of ‘ mischievous boy ’.
Marcius speaks for himself only once in the play ;
he is a very important figure in the action all the same,
most important of all on that memorable day when
Volumnia dresses him in a mourning habit, and leads
him forth with his mother and the Lady Valeria, and
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


other great ladies of Rome (all in mourning too), to the
place outside the walls where the Volscians are en-
camped. I should perhaps remind you what is the
object of this journey. Coriolanus, having quar-
relled with the Roman tribunes, has been banished, and
is now returning to take vengeance on his own country-
men with the aid of a foreign army, the very army he
had defeated once in the service of Rome. His friend
Menenius has pleaded with him in vain to spare the
city. Volumnia’s intercession is its last hope. Prob-
ably little Marcius is too young to understand the
situation. All he knows is that they are going to see
father, and beg him not to do something shameful and
wrong. His grannie has told him to be a good boy,
and not forget to kneel down when she speaks to father.
So far we may imagine. Now let us come to the
reality, described in Shakespeare’s most magnificent
manner. Coriolanus, who has turned a deaf ear to the
appeal of Menenius, and told him harshly that his
wife, his mother, and his child now mean nothing to
him, is deeply moved when they appear before
him.
My wife comes foremost; then the honour’d mould
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection !
All bond and privilege of nature, break !
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


. . . My mother bows,
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod : and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries, ‘ Deny not Let the Volsces
Plough Rome, and harrow Italy ! I’ll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.
Virgilia
My lord and husband !
Coriolanus
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
Virgilia
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.
Coriolanus
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny ; but do not say
For that ‘ Forgive our Romans.’
Coriolanus embraces his wife, mingling endearing
words with his kisses. Then he becomes suddenly and
sharply conscious that he has taken no notice of his
mother :
You gods ! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Leave unsaluted ; sink, my knee, i’ the earth ;
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.
Volumnia
O, stand up blest !
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee. . . .
She draws his attention to Valeria, and while he is
saluting her, pushes forward little Marcius:
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.
Coriolanus
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst
prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i’ the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee !
Volumnia
Your knee, sirrah !
Poor Marcius ! He has forgotten all about that
kneeling business, and I imagine he blushes and nearly
cries with confusion when his grannie gives him a
shove to remind him. Surely it is to cheer him up
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


and help him to keep back his tears that his father says
‘ That’s my brave boy ! ’ Having got Marcius on to
his knees according to plan, Volumnia goes on :
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself
Are suitors to you.
Coriolanus { beseech you, peace :
Or if you’ld ask, remember this before :
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Rome’s mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
To allay my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.
Volumnia
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing :
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already : yet we will ask ;
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither ; since that thy sight, which
should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with
comforts,
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Constrains them weep and shake with fear and
sorrow ;
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His country’s bowels out. . . .
We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win ; for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy country’s ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children’s blood.
At that word ‘ tread ’, young Marcius sets his teeth
as on the day he mammocked the butterfly.
A’ shall not tread on me ;
I’ll run away till I am bigger, but then I’ll fight!
This pathetic little outburst of pugnacity, with its
touch of the discretion which is the better part of
valour, affects Coriolanus more than his mother’s
taunts and his wife’s tears. He feels himself to be
weakening, and with the words ‘ I have sat too long ’,
rises to go away. Volumnia is quick to notice his
emotion, and presses her advantage. Her arguments
become more forcible, her words more eloquent :
Thou know’st, great son,
The end of war’s uncertain, but this certain,
POUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be dogg’d with curses ;
Whose chronicle thus writ : ‘ The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroyed his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorr’d Speak to me, son.
Why dost not speak ?
Think’st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs ? Daughter, speak you :
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy :
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. There’s no man in the
world
More bound to’s mother ; yet here he lets me prate
Like one i’ the stocks ! Thou hast never in thy life
Show’d thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request’s unjust,
And spurn me back ; but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest . . .
He turns away :
Down, ladies : let us shame him with our knees.
. . . Down ! An end :
This is the last : so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold’s :
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels, and holds up hands for fellowship,
THE CHILDREN IN PLAYS


Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny’t.
Once more Volumnia depends on young Marcius
to conquer Coriolanus. Still he holds out, and now
she speaks daggers, barbed with irony :
Come, let us go !
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother ;
His wife is in Corioli, and his child
Like him by chance !
Coriolanus is stung to the quick by this contemp-
tuous speech, but he says nothing. What indeed is
there for him to say ? He can only make a gesture of
entreaty to his mother to stop. At least this is the
inference to be drawn from her next words :
Yet give us our dispatch :
I am hush’d until our city be afire
And then I’ll speak a little.
At that he takes her hand, and according to one of
Shakespeare’s rare stage directions, ‘ holds it, silent ’.
She has prevailed, but, as he tells her after his first
agonized cry : ‘ O mother, mother, what have you
done ?’, most dangerously. She has saved Rome, but
at the price of her son’s life.
We get a glimpse of another child in Macbeth. The
scene in which he appears is so often omitted from
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


acting versions of the play that you may never have
seen it. I had not, until last year when the Eliza-
bethan Stage Society produced Macbeth in its entirety.
Those who cut the scene may plead that it is not of
great importance in the action, but it is so vividly
human that it is a shame to deprive audiences of it.
The child, who is not given a name in the list of char-
acters, but described simply as ‘ Boy, son to Macduff ,
must be made incarnate in the theatre for us to realize
how wonderfully he is made. Before I let him speak
for himself (unlike young Marcius he is very talkative)
I should like to conjure up the situation in which we
meet him. Lord Ross has come to tell Lady Macduff
that her husband has fled into England. She knows
nothing of the cause of his flight, and resents his having
left her and her young children unprotected in a lonely
castle in Fife in these bad troublous times.
Lady Macduff
What had he done, to make him fly the land ?
Ross
You must have patience, madam.
Lady Macduff
He had none :
His flight was madness : when our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.
THE CHILDREN IN PLAYS


oss You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
Lady Macduff
Wisdom ! to leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion and his titles in a place
From whence himself does fly ? He loves us not :
He wants the natural touch : for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear and nothing is the love ;
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.
oss My dearest coz,
I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o’ the season. I dare not speak much
further ;
... I take my leave of you :
Shall not be long but I’ll be here again :
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward
To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you !
Lady Macduff
Father’d he is, and yet he’s fatherless.
Ross
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort:
I take my leave at once.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


He goes away, and Lady Macduff, after seeing him
out, begins to talk with her boy ; a little boy, I think,
not more than five years old :
Lady Macduff
Sirrah, your father’s dead :
And what will you do now ? How will you live ?
Son
As birds do, mother.
Lady Macduff
What, with worms and flies ?
Son
With what I get, I mean, and so do they.
Lady Macduff
Poor bird ! thou’ldst never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin.
Son
Why should I, mother ? Poor birds they are not
set for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.
Lady Macduff
Yes, he is dead : how wilt thou do for a father ?
Son
Nay, how will you do for a husband ?
Lady Macduff
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Son
Then you’ll buy ’em to sell again.
Lady Macduff
Thou speak’st with all thy wit.
Her son is indeed a sharp-witted child, not easily
bluffed. There has been something in his mother’s
voice and manner which has made him doubt that his
father is dead. Now he expresses a doubt that she is
just to him :
Son
Was my father a traitor, mother ?
Lady Macduff
Ay, that he was.
Son
What is a traitor ?
Lady Macduff
Why, one that swears and lies.
Son
And be all traitors that do so ?
Lady Macduff
Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be
hanged.
Son
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie ?
Lady Macduff
Every one.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Son
Who must hang them ?
Lady Macduff
Why, the honest men.
Son
Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are
liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and
hang up them.
Lady Macduff
Now, God help thee, poor monkey ! But how wilt
thou do for a father ?
Son
If he were dead, you’d weep for him ; if you would
not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have
a new father.
Lady Macduff'
Poor prattler, how thou talk’st.
Poor prattler ! In a few minutes his clever tongue
is silenced for ever. It is the last and perhaps the worst
of Macbeth’s crimes—this brutal murder of Lady
Macduff and her innocent babes. Well may Macduff
say when the news reaches him :
Did Heaven look on
And would not take their part ?
The young Princes in Richard 111 are, I think, more
widely known than any of Shakespeare’s children
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


except Prince Arthur. Yet the difference in their
characters may not have struck everyone who has
read or seen the play. The elder brother, Prince
Edward (that same prince of history who had such a
tragically brief reign as Edward V) gives the impres-
sion, thanks to Shakespeare’s skill in revealing character
in a few strokes, of being a serious-minded, studious
boy, with quiet dignified manners. He is a great
contrast to Prince Richard, Duke of York, a smart,
lively child with a clever but rather pert tongue. It is
York whom we meet first in the play, in company
with his grandmother, the Duchess of York, his
mother, the widowed Queen of Edward IV, and
Archbishop Rotherham. The elder Prince is not
present. He is on his way, travelling from Ludlow to
London for his coronation. The Archbishop speaks:
Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton ;
At Stony-Stratford will they be tonight :
Tomorrow, or next day, they will be here.
Duchess of York
I long with all my heart to see the prince :
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
The Queen
But I hear, no : they say my son of York
Hath almost overta’en him in his growth.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


York
Ay, mother ; but I would not have it so.
Duchess
Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.
York
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talk’d how I did grow
More than my brother ; ‘Ay ’, quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
‘ Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow
apace.’
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make
haste.
Duchess
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee :
He was the wretched’st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious !
Archbishop
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.
Duchess
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
York
Now, by my troth, if I had been remember’d,
I could have given my uncle’s grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touch’d mine.
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Duchess
How, my pretty York ? I pray thee, let me hear it.
York
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old :
’Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
Duchess
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this ?
York
Grandam, his nurse.
Duchess
His nurse ! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.
York
If ’twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
Queen
A parlous boy : go to, you are too shrewd.
Archbishop
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
The Queen
Pitchers have ears.
We get the impression from this vivid little scene —
such a good scene to act —that York is the kind of boy
who takes a delight in pulling his elders’ legs !
His brother is not that kind. I can’t imagine his
wishing he had seized an opportunity to make a
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


‘ biting jest ’at his uncle’s expense! When we first see
him, he looks grave and thoughtful. He has a great
deal on his mind besides his approaching coronation, an
ordeal for a boy of thirteen. The arrest of his favourite
uncles—his mother’s brothers, Lord Rivers and Lord
Grey—has been a shock to him. He is beginning to
doubt the good faith of his other uncle, Richard, and is
not to be bluffed by Richard’s assumption of affection.
This is all false, Edward thinks, when Richard says :
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts’ sovereign :
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
The boy answers coldly :
No, uncle ; but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy :
I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Richard tries again :
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world’s deceit:
Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
Your grace attended to their sugar’d words,
But look’d not on the poison of their hearts:
God keep you from them, and from such false
friends !
The Prince looks at him searchingly : and with the
contemptuous exclamation, ‘ God keep me from false
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


friends ! but they were none,’ turns away to greet the
Lord Mayor, who has come to receive him on his
entry into London. Later in the scene he again mani-
fests his distrust of Richard :
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation ?
Gloucester
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower :
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.
Prince
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord ?
The ‘ lord ’ he addresses now is my lord of Bucking-
ham, who is in the conspiracy to put Gloucester on the
throne.
Buckingham
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place ;
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
Prince
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it ?
Buckingham
Upon record, my gracious lord.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Prince
But say, my lord, it were not register’d,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As ’twere retail’d to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.
‘ So wise so young, they say, do never live long,’
his uncle mutters under his breath, and the Prince is not
too much absorbed in his conversation with Bucking-
ham to notice it :
Prince
What say you, uncle ?
Gloucester
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
The Prince appears to be satisfied that this is what
Gloucester said, but I think he keeps his eye on him, as
he expresses the opinion that it is the word which gives
life to fame.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man ;
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valour live :
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror ;
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
I’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,—
Buckingham
What, my gracious lord ?
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Prince
An if I live until I be a man,
I’ll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king !
Buckingham
Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.
The Princes greet one another. Notice that York, a
born tease, immediately quizzes his brother about his
new dignity.
Prince
Richard of York ! how fares our loving brother ?
York
Well, my dread lord ; so must I call you now.
Prince
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which, by his death, hath lost much majesty.
Gloucester
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York ?
York
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth ;
The prince, my brother, hath outgrown me far.
Gloucester
He hath, my lord.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


York
And therefore is he idle ?
Gloucester
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
York
Then he is more beholding to you than I.
Gloucester
He may command me as my sovereign,
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
York
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
Gloucester
My dagger, little cousin ? With all my heart.
Prince
A beggar, brother ?
Forgive me for interrupting the scene here to
emphasise the necessity, when reading a play, of trying
to visualise it in action. Our success will depend on
the amount of study we give the lines. The greater
the dramatist the richer his lines in implications. What
is the implication when the Prince says * A beggar,
brother ? ’ Surely that he thinks York is behaving
with a lack of dignity, and must be stopped. A further
implication, suggesting what we players call ‘ business
is that York thinks his brother rather dense not to dis-
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


cern that his begging is only a mock. I imagine that
he gives Edward a warning wink, or nudge—some
signal to shut up ! At any rate Edward does shut up
and York goes on ‘ ragging ’ uncle Gloucester for a
time unrebuked :
Prince
A beggar, brother ?
York
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
Gloucester
A greater gift than that I’ll give my cousin.
York
A greater gift ! O, that’s the sword to it !
Gloucester
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
York
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts;
In weightier things you’ll say a beggar nay.
Gloucester
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.
York
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
Gloucester
What, would you have my weapon, little lord ?
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


York
I would, that I might thank you as you call me,
Gloucester
How ?
York
Little.
At this Edward breaks silence. Perhaps he sees
that York has gone too far, that his impertinence has
made their uncle really angry.
Prince
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk :
Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.
York
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me :
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me ;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
This sally certainly justifies Buckingham’s comment:
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons !
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself;
So cunning and so young is wonderful !
Richard has had enough of ‘ little prating York ’
and his bold, quick, ingenious taunts. He hurries the
Princes off to the Tower, not without a protest from
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


York, who in this as in everything, proves he is much
sharper than his brother :
York
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord ?
Prince
My lord protector needs will have it so.
York
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Gloucester
Why, what should you fear ?
York
Marry, my uncle Clarence’ angry ghost;
My grandam told me he was murder’d there.
Prince
I fear no uncles dead.
Gloucester
Nor none that live, I hope.
Prince
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord : and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
Although the men who were hired to murder the
Princes are described as ‘ flesh’d villains, bloody dogs ’,
they could not speak of their deaths without weep-
ing.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


There they lay asleep, ‘ girdling one another within
their innocent alabaster arms A book of prayers lay
on the pillow, which, said Forest, one of the murderers,
‘ almost changed my mind His fellow, Dighton,
seeing him weaken, seized the pillow and pressed it
down on the children’s lips. That is all we are told,
lam thankful to say. Tyrrel, from whom we hear of
the murder, spares us horrible details, and is lavish with
beautiful ones such as :
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk
Which in their summer beauty kissed each other.
I think now I have presented all the children of
whom Shakespeare makes a separate study. We hear
of a lovely Indian boy, the cause of all the trouble be-
tween Titania and Oberon in A Midsummer Night's
Dream ; we see Queen Elizabeth as a baby at her
christening in Henry VIII. , and Perdita as a baby, left
by Antigonus, either for life or death, in a desert
country near the sea. .. . Then there is Moth,
Armado’s page in Love's Labour sLost, a * well-educated
infant ’, as his master calls him, but a little too pre-
cocious for my taste. What a clever answer he makes
when he is asked how he has purchased his experience.
*By my penny of observation ’. That explains well
enough how Shakespeare gained his knowledge of
THE CHILDREN IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


children. He was a keen observer of human beings
at all ages, * from the infant muling and puking in the
nurse s arms , to ‘ the lean and slippered pantaloon
with spectacles on nose piping and whistling in a
voice ‘ turning again to childish treble
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN




THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN
‘ One said it thundered ; another that an angel spake ’.
There you have in a nutshell the great mass of litera-
ture on the subject of Shakespeare ! What more
natural than that students of his plays should arrive at
such a variety of conclusions about them ? Don’t we
all see in any work of art what we bring to it ? We
can’t avoid bringing what is part and parcel of our-
selves, temperament and culture for instance, but we
can, if we will, leave behind such things as theories,
preconceived notions, prejudices, and predilections.
When we approach Shakespeare, whether in the
theatre or in the class-room or in the hbrary, we should
certainly leave behind any rigid theory we may have
formed, or picked up ready-made, for there is a danger
of our trying to shrink or stretch everything, scenes,
characters and lines, to fit it. I know this from ex-
perience. When I was preparing this lecture, I soon
realised that all Shakespeare’s heroines could not be
discussed in it, even in the most superficial way; I


should have to devote two lectures at least to them.
This involved some sort of classification. The arrange-
ment which seemed to me least arbitrary was to bring
the happy women in the comedies together in one
group, and make up the other of the sorrowful women
in the tragedies. But no sooner had I stuck on the
labels £ triumphant ’ and ‘ pathetic ’ than I felt this
division into types was a mistake. Shakespeare’s
characters are far too idiosyncratic to fit this or that
mould, and we can make them fit only by the process
known as ‘ wangling ’. I have kept my labels as a
convenience, but you will find that in the * pathetic ’
group there are women who have nothing more in
common than a tragic fate, and that the ‘ triumphant ’
group includes women of very different temperaments.
Please don’t think any * theory ’ is implied in my
classification. I leave theories to the scholars. An
actress does not study a character with a view to
proving something about the dramatist who created it.
Her task is to learn how to translate this character into
herself, how to make its thoughts her thoughts, its
words her words. It is because I have applied myself
to this task for a great many years, that I am able to
speak to you about Shakespeare’s women with the
knowledge that can be gained only from union with
them.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Wonderful women ! Have you ever thought how
much we all, and women especially, owe to Shakespeare
for his vindication of woman in these fearless, high-
spirited, resolute and intelligent heroines ? Don’t
believe the anti-feminists if they tell you, as I was once
told, that Shakespeare had to endow his women with
virile qualities because in his theatre they were always
impersonated by men ! This may account for the
frequency with which they masquerade as boys, but
I am convinced that it had little influence on Shake-
speare’s studies of women. They owe far more to the
liberal ideas about the sex which were fermenting in
Shakespeare’s age. The assumption that ‘ the woman’s
movement ’ is of very recent date—something pecu-
liarly modern—is not warranted by history. There is
evidence of its existence in the fifteenth century. Then
as now it excited opposition and ridicule, but still it
moved ! Such progress was made that Erasmus could
write : ‘ Men and women have different functions,
but their education and their virtues ought to be equal.’
He was shocked at the ignorance of young ladies of
rank in the Low Countries. They were not nearly as
well educated as their contemporaries in France, Italy
and England. The scholarship of Lady Jane Grey,
who at thirteen could read Plato in the original; of
Mary Stuart, who at sixteen delivered an extempore
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


oration in Latin ; of Queen Elizabeth who made trans-
lations of the classics, was not exceptional in the class of
society which received any education at all. Vives,
the Spanish tutor of Katharine of Aragon, who accom-
panied her to England, urged, like Erasmus, that girls
should be given as good an education as boys. Then,
as now, some people thought this most undesirable.
What use was learning to a woman ? It might even
have the dreadful result of making her less attractive
to a man ! The masculine dislike of the intellec-
tual woman is expressed by the critic of Vives who
wrote :
‘ From a braying mule and a girl who speaks Latin
good Lord deliver us ! ’
That women were teased about wanting to 4 wear
the breeches ’ is clear from an Italian caricature, dated
1450, which represents some fashionable ladies of the
period struggling awkwardly to pull on men’s trunk-
hose !
Much more could be said to emphasise the point
that the real women in Shakespeare’s time inspired
his general conception of femininity, but I am conscious
that it is about time I ‘ cut the cackle ’ and came to
‘ the ’osses ’, that is, to Beatrice, Portia, and Rosalind,
and the other heroines in my ‘ triumphant ’ group.
Yet there is one bit of cackle I am unwilling to sacrifice.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


I must read a contemporary description of a great lady
of the Renaissance period, Margaret of France, be-
cause it might have been written about Shakespeare’s
Beatrice :
‘ Her eyes are clear, and full of fire ; her mouth is
fine—intellectual with something of irony, of benevo-
lence, and of reserve. A singular countenance where
the mind and the heart both rule.’
Beatrice to the life ! Her brilliant mind has a
strong deep heart for its consort. Her cousin Hero
criticises her for being too much under the sway of her
mind :
Her wit
Values itself so highly that to her
All matter else seems weak.
Her uncle Leonato endorses this criticism when he
tells Beatrice that she will never get a husband if she is
so shrewd of her tongue. Yet when her heart speaks
seriously, Beatrice listens seriously and obeys its com-
mands.
‘ By my troth a pleasant-spirited lady ’, says Don
Pedro. The actress who impersonates Beatrice should
remember that testimonial. Beatrice’s repartee in her
encounters with Benedick can easily be made to sound
malicious and vulgar. It should be spoken as the
lightest raillery, with mirth in the voice, and charm in
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


the manner. An ounce of practice is worth a pound of
theory, so I will read one of the scenes in which the
merry lady Beatrice and the merry gentleman Bene-
dick cut and thrust at one another, making several
palpable hits. The teasing merry lady begins the
verbal fencing bout:
I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior
Benedick : nobody marks you.
Benedick
What, my dear Lady Disdain, are you yet living ?
Beatrice
Is it possible disdain should die while she hath such
meet food to feed it as Signior Benedick ! Courtesy
itself must convert to disdain if you come in her
presence.
Benedick
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain lam
loved of all ladies, only you excepted ; and I would
I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart;
for truly I love none.
Beatrice
A dear happiness to women : they would else have
been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank
God, and my cold blood, I am of your humour for
that : I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than
a man swear he loves me.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Benedick
God keep your ladyship still in that mind : so some
gentleman or other shall ’scape a predestinate
scratched face.
Beatrice
Scratching could not make it worse, an ’twere such
a face as yours.
Benedick
Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
Beatrice
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
Benedick
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and
so good a continuer ! But keep your way i’ God’s
name. I have done !
Beatrice
You always end with a jade’s trick. I know you of
old.
The result of this duel is a draw. Another, con-
ducted in masks during a revel at Leonato’s house, ends
in a victory for Beatrice. She is in particularly good
form that night, ‘ huddling jest upon jest ’, says her
victim, ‘ with such impossible conveyance upon me
that I stood like a man at a mark with a whole army
shooting at me ’. The absurdity of the situation strikes
Benedick’s friend and prince, Don Pedro. Here are
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


two people strongly attracted by one another, and un-
willing to admit it, because both are afraid of the
admission being laughed at. The scheme concocted
by Don Pedro to get them out of their impasse is very
ingenuous and simple, but not to be despised as it is
successful. When a man and a woman are in this
position : ‘ Does she love me ? I don’t know.’
‘ Does he love me ? I don’t know ’, they need a Don
Pedro to clear up the matter. He has the wit to see
that Beatrice is the wife for Benedick, and Benedick
the husband for Beatrice. ‘ I would fain have it a
match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three ’
(he is speaking to Beatrice’s uncle Leonato, her cousin
Hero, and Hero’s Claudio who is going to be married
to her the next day) ‘ will but minister such assistance
as I shall give you direction.’
Don Pedro either gave better ‘ direction ’ to Hero,
or she carried out his plan better, for her way of work-
ing on Beatrice is far more intelligent than the men’s
way of working on Benedick. The stories which
Benedick, hidden in the arbour, hears them tell of
Beatrice’s passion for him are so absurd that it is sur-
prising he does not suspect a trick. The conversation
between Hero and Ursula which Beatrice overhears
has a more genuine ring. It seems quite natural that
Beatrice should take it seriously, and be convinced that
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Benedick loves her, but is determined not to give her a
chance of mocking at his love. Beatrice is proud, but
not vain. It is because she is not vain that she recog-
nises the element of truth in what Hero and Ursula
say about her.
Hero
. . . She cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endeared.
Ursula
Sure I think so ;
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
Hero
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward : if fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister ;
If black, why Nature, drawing of an antique,
Made a foul blot !
• • • • •
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds ;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out.
Ursula
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Hero
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable ;
But who dare tell her so ? If I should speak
She would mock me into air.
And much besides. When the conspirators have
finished and gone their ways, satisfied that they have
limed the bird, according to Don Pedro’s instructions,
Beatrice comes forward and unpacks her heart in
words. Very difficult words for an actress ; not very
effective, but charged with the passion of a strong, deep
heart ! I have played Beatrice hundreds of times and
never done this speech as I feel it should be done :
What fire is in mine ears ? Can this be true ?
Stand I condemn’d for pride and scorn so much ?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu !
No glory lives behind the back of such !
And, Benedick, love on. I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand.
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band ;
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Beheve it better than reportingly.
Nevertheless if Benedick had failed Beatrice when
she denounces his friend Claudio for the infamous
charge he brings against Hero at their wedding, for
which she would have Benedick punish him even with
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


death, she would have cast him out of her heart. ‘lf
you are not for me you are against me, and the man
who is against me in this is not the man for me is
implied in everything Beatrice says to Benedick in the
church scene.
Notice that all the men, except the Friar, are in-
clined to think there must be something in Claudio’s
accusation ! Even Hero’s father, Leonato, asks
whether it is likely that Claudio, who loved her so that
‘ speaking of her foulness ’ he ‘ washed it with tears ’, is
lying. Even Benedick is so ‘ attired in wonder ’, he
doesn’t know what to say. The evidence that Hero
has a lover, that on the eve of her wedding she was
with him, is given by men for whom Benedick has
respect and affection. If Don Pedro and Claudio are
mistaken, they must be the victims of some diabolically
ingenious plot. What more probable than that
Pedro’s brother John who detests Claudio is at the
bottom of it ? Benedick’s loyalty to his friends makes
him anxious to find some excuse for them. His
attitude is incomprehensible to Beatrice. He knows
not what to say indeed ! In her opinion there is only
one thing to be said, and blazing with indignation, she
says it :
O on my soul, my cousin is belied !
There is only one thing to be done. The slanderer,
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


who has had the brutality to shame Hero in public,
must be punished. That is a man’s job, and Beatrice
is deeply disappointed in Benedick for not volunteering
for it. Instead he gives his support to the friar’s scheme
for bringing Claudio to repentance by giving out that
Hero has ‘ died upon his words ’.
This is the situation when Benedick and Beatrice are
left alone together in the church. Let them now
speak for themselves. 1
Benedick
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while ?
Beatrice
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
Benedick
I will not desire that.
Beatrice
You have no reason. I do it freely.
Benedick
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Beatrice
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that
would right her !
1 On the margin of the page of the manuscript in which this scene
occurs Ellen Terry flashed down the words ‘ Not emotion. A passion *
in the handwriting Bernard Shaw said * is as characteristic and
unforgettable as her face ’.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Benedick
Is there any way to show such friendship ?
Beatrice
A very even way, but no such friend !
Benedick
May a man do it ?
Beatrice
It is a man’s office, but not yours.
Benedick
I do love nothing in the world so well as you : is
not that strange ?
Beatrice
As strange as the thing I know not. It were as
possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as
you : but believe me not; and yet I lie not: I
confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. lam sorry for
my cousin.
Benedick
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Beatrice
Do not swear, and eat it.
Benedick
I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make
him eat it that says I love not you.
Beatrice
Will you not eat your word ?
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Benedick
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest
I love thee.
Beatrice
Why then, God forgive me !
Benedick
What offence, sweet Beatrice ?
Beatrice
You have stayed me in a happy hour ! I was about
to protest I loved you.
Benedick
And do it with all thy heart.
Beatrice
I love you with so much of my heart that none is
left to protest.
Benedick
Come, bid me do anything for thee.
Beatrice
Kill Claudio.
Benedick
Ha ! not for the wide world !
Beatrice
You kill me, to deny it. Farewell.
Benedick
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Beatrice
I am gone, though I am here : there is no love in
you : nay, I pray you, let me go.
Benedick
Beatrice —
Beatrice
In faith, I will go.
Benedick
We’ll be friends first.
Beatrice
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with
mine enemy.
Benedick
Is Claudio thine enemy ?
Beatrice
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath
slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman?
O that I were a man ! What, bear her in hand
until they come to take hands ; and then with public
accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated rancour,
—O God, that I were a man ! I would cat his heart
in the market-place !
Benedick
Hear me, Beatrice —
Beatrice
Talk with a man out at a window ! A proper
saying !
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Benedick
Nay, but Beatrice, —
Beatrice
Sweet Hero ! She is wronged, she is slandered, she
is undone.
Benedick
Beat—
Beatrice
Princes and counties ! Surely a princely testimony,
a goodly count ! Count Comfect! A sweet gallant,
surely ! O that I were a man for his sake, or that
I had any friend would be a man for my sake !
But manhood is melted into courtesies, valour into
compliment, and men are only turned into tongue,
and trim ones too ; he is now as valiant as Hercules
that only tells a lie and swears it ! I cannot be a man
with wishing ; therefore I will die a woman with
grieving.
Benedick
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
Beatrice
Use it for my love some other way than swearing
by it.
Benedick
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath
wronged Hero ?
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Beatrice
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Benedick
Enough, I am engaged. I will challenge him. I
will kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By this
hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account. As
you hear of me, so think of me. Go, comfort your
cousin : I must say she is dead : and so farewell.
This wonderful scene throws such a flood of light
on Beatrice’s character that an actress has little excuse
for not seeing clearly what kind of woman she has to
impersonate. Yet however it may be now, there is
evidence that in the past she was not taken seriously
enough. Even in the church scene I have just read to
you the idea was to make her indignation rather comic.
When I first rehearsed Beatrice at the Lyceum I was
told by Mr. Lacy, an actor of the old school who was
engaged by Henry Irving to assist him in some of his
early Shakespearean productions, of some traditional
‘ business ’ which seemed to me so preposterous that I
could hardly believe he really meant me to adopt it.
But he was quite serious. ‘ When Benedick rushes
forward to lift up Hero after she has fainted, you
“ shoo ” him away. Jealousy, you see. Beatrice is
not going to let her man lay a finger on another
woman ’. I said, ‘ Oh, nonsense, Mr. Lacy ! ’ ‘ Well,
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


it’s always been done he retorted, ‘ and it always gets
a laugh I told him then that not only was it impos-
sible for me to do such a thing, but that it was so incon-
sistent with Beatrice’s character that it ought to be im-
possible for any actress impersonating her to do it !
I came off victorious in that tussle with Mr. Lacy, but
was defeated in another with Henry Irving over a
traditional ‘ gag ’at the end of the church scene. I
had omitted this gag, ‘ Kiss my hand again ’, when I had
first played Beatrice in the provinces, and I was appalled
at finding that I was expected to say it at the Lyceum.
My tongue refused to utter the obnoxious words, im-
possible to the Beatrice of my conception, for many
rehearsals. Then one day Henry said : ‘ Now I think
it is about time to rehearse this scene as we are actually
going to play it, so, Miss Terry, we must please have
the gag ’. I did not like to show any insubordination
before the company, so with a gulp, I managed to obey,
but I burst into tears ! Henry was most sympathetic,
I remember, but would not budge. I went home in a
terrible state of mind, strongly tempted to throw up
my part ! Then I reflected that for one thing I did not
like doing at the Lyceum, there would probably be a
hundred things I should dislike doing in another
theatre. So I agreed to do what Henry wished, under
protest.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


I have played Beatrice hundreds of times, but not
once as I know she ought to be played. I was never
swift enough, not nearly swift enough at the Lyceum
where I had a too deliberate, though polished and
thoughtful Benedick in Henry Irving. But at least I
did not make the mistake of being arch and skittish,
and this encourages me to think I could have played
Rosalind well.
I have been Beatrice ! Would that I could say ‘ I
have been Rosalind ’. Would that the opportunity to
play this part had come my way when I was in my
prime ! I reckon it one of the greatest disappoint-
ments of my life that it did not ! In my old age Igo
on studying Rosalind, rather wistfully, I admit.
A contemporary of Shakespeare’s writes that ‘ those
who are illustrious by long descent reveal their nobility
beyond possibility of mistake. They have in them a
simplicity, a naive goodwill, a delicate good feeling
that separate them from the arrogant assumptions or
false noblesse ’. Of such is Rosalind. She shows
these qualities of the well-bred at all times, as unmis-
takably when ‘ caparisoned like a man ’ she is roughing
it in the Forest of Arden, as when in the dignified dress
of a lady of rank she is leading a sheltered life at her
uncle’s court.
This uncle who has usurped her father’s dukedom
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


has not exiled her with him, but kept her to be a com-
panion to his daughter Celia. Rosalind has adapted
herself to this subordinate position with a good grace.
It has been made more tolerable by the devotion of
Celia ; she does all she can to prevent her cousin from
feeling the change in her circumstances. Her resigna-
tion to it annoys the Duke. He finds offence in the fact
that she gives no offence. Of late, says one of the
courtiers, Le Beau, he
Hath ta’en displeasure ’gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father’s sake :
And on my life his malice ’gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth.
It does, with a vengeance, in the scene I am going to
read to you. It takes place in a room in the palace.
The cousins and friends—they are what we should call
now ‘ good pals ’ —enter, and from Celia’s first words,
we gather that there is something wrong with Rosa-
lind to-day. She is in low spirits, and disinclined to
talk. Since that wrestling match when a handsome
youth threw the Duke’s famous wrestler Charles,
succeeding where hundreds of challengers had failed,
Rosalind has had much to make her thoughtful. She
has fallen in love at first sight. She is quite sure she has
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


found her mate in the wrestler, whom she has identi-
fied as Orlando, the son of an old friend of her father’s,
yet the chances are against their meeting again. The
Duke had shown his hostility to Orlando plainly
enough. Rosalind reflects sadly how different things
would be if this were still her father’s palace. Then
Orlando would be a welcome guest. However, she
shakes off her depression when Celia rallies her (as I
have already pointed out, she is well-bred), and is soon
joking about her troubles :
Celia
Why cousin ! Why Rosalind ! Cupid have mercy !
Not a word ?
Rosalind
Not one to throw at a dog.
Celia
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon
curs; throw some of them at me : come, lame me
with reasons. ... Is all this for your father ?
Rosalind
No, some of it is for my child’s father ! O, how
full of briers is this working-day world !
Celia
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
holiday foolery ; if we walk not in the trodden
paths, our very petticoats will catch them.
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Rosalind
I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in
my heart.
Celia
Hem then away.
Rosalind
I would try if I could cry ‘ hem and have him !
Celia
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
Rosalind
O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself!
Celia
. . . But turning these jests out of service, let us talk
in good earnest. Is it possible, on such a sudden,
you should fall into so strong a liking with old Sir
Rowland’s youngest son ?
Rosalind
The Duke, my father, loved his father dearly.
Celia
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his
son dearly ? By this kind of chase, I should hate
him, for my father hated his father dearly ; yet I
hate not Orlando.
Rosalind
No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Celia
Why should I not ? doth he not deserve well ?
Rosalind
Let me love him for that: and do you love him be-
cause I do. Look, here comes the duke.
Celia
With his eyes full of anger.
And the Duke comes blustering in, followed by
* lords, attendants ’ and that sort of thing. He is in a
great rage, all fuss and noise. He speaks to Rosalind
in a bullying tone :
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste
And get you from our court.
Rosalind
Me, uncle ?
Duke Frederick
You, cousin ;
Within these ten days if that thou be’st found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.
Rosalind takes this threat with dignity. She asks
gravely and quietly for an explanation :
I do beseech your grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence,
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic, —
As I do trust I am not, —then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your highness.
Duke Frederick
Thus do all traitors;
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Rosalind
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Now this is exactly what the Duke cannot do. So
beside himself with rage, the rage of a man who knows
he is in the wrong, he bellows out:
Thou art thy father’s daughter : there’s enough.
Rosalind (with a touch of irony —my stage direction
this!)
So was I when your highness took his dukedom :
So was I when your highness banish’d him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord ;
Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
What’s that to me ? My father was no traitor ;
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Then little Celia intervenes :
Celia
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
Duke Frederick
Ay, Celia, we stay’d her for your sake ;
Else had she with her father ranged along.
Celia
I did not then entreat to have her stay ;
It was your pleasure, and your own remorse :
I was too young that time to value her ;
But now I know her : if she be a traitor,
Why, so am I : we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learn’d, play’d, eat together ;
And wheresoe’er we went, like Juno s swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
Duke Frederick
Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more
virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips ;
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have pass’d upon her. She is banish’d.
Celia
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege,
I cannot live out of her company.
The Duke is staggered at this. He still thinks of his
little Celia as a child, and here she is standing up to him
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


without any childish fear. ‘ You are a fool he re-
peats. Then he turns to Rosalind, and threatens her
again :
You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
With this he blusters out of the room, furious that
Rosalind shows no signs of being intimidated. She
breaks down, however, when she is left alone with
Celia, and Celia puts her arms round her and tries to
comfort her.
Celia
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.
Rosalind
I have more cause.
Celia
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful: know’st thou not, the duke
Hath banish’d me, his daughter ?
Rosalind (smiling now, I think )
That he hath not.
Celia
No, hath not ? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one :
Shah we be sunder’d ? shall we part, sweet girl ?
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


No ; let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us.
And do not seek to take your change upon you.
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out;
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I’ll go along with thee.
Rosalind
Why, whither shall we go ?
Celia
To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.
Rosalind, the cleverer one of the two, had not
thought of this ! It does seem a good idea, but she
sees how difficult it will be to carry it out:
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far !
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
Why that’s nothing ! We can make ourselves look
ugly ! That, in plain prose, is what Celia says next:
I’ll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you : so shall we pass along,
And never stir assailants.
Now they plan the whole thing out in a twinkling.
They have forgotten everything except what fun it will
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


be, and are in rollicking spirits ! Such is the resilience
of youth.
Rosalind (in great glee, I think )
Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man ?
A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand ; and—in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman’s fear there will—
We’ll have a swashing and a martial outside,
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.
Celia
What shall I call thee when thou art a man ?
Rosalind (bursting with laughter, I think)
I’ll have no worse a name than Jove’s own page ;
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be call’d ?
Celia
Something that hath a reference to my state :
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
Rosalind
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father’s court ?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel ?
Celia
He’ll go along o’er the wide world with me.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Leave me alone to woo him. Let’s away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment !
So these gallant young things set off for the Forest
of Arden, a beautiful setting for the beautiful idyll of
Orlando and Rosalind, an idyll that begins in jest and
ends in the tenderest earnest,
I said at the beginning of this discourse that Shake-
speare’s characters are far too idiosyncratic to be
divided into types. Yet it does strike us when we
become familiar with them that he has a predilection
for a certain kind of temperament. The temperament
with which he most frequently endows his heroes is—
well I can find no better description of it than 4 thought-
ful ’. It is even more difficult to describe the tempera-
ment of his heroines. The majority of them are
women of strong character, high-mettled, quick-
witted, and resourceful. But Shakespeare’s predilec-
tion for them did not prevent him from drawing with
equal skill women of a different temperament. There
is no play which provides us with a better proof of this
than Coriolanus. Coriolanus’s timid, sensitive wife
Virgilia, filled with terror for his safety every time he
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


goes into action, is as masterly a creation as his lion-
hearted, patriotic mother Volumnia.
We meet them first in Coriolanus’s house. The
great soldier is away, fighting the Volscian enemy, and
they are sitting together, conversing over their sewing.
Volumnia rebukes her daughter-in-law for being
nervous and depressed :
I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself in
a more comfortable sort: if my son were my hus-
band, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein
he won honour than in the embracements where he
would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied, when youth with comeliness plucked
all gaze his way, when for a day of kings’ entreaties
a mother should not sell him an hour from her be-
holding, I, considering how honour would become
such a person, that it was no better than picture-like
to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was
pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to
find fame. To a cruel war I sent him ; from whence
he returned, his brows bound with oak. I tell thee,
daughter, I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he
was a man-child than now in first seeing he had
proved himself a man.
Virgilia
But had he died in the business, madam, how then ?
This question shows that poor Virgilia is not made
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


of the stuff of Roman matrons. Volumnia, who is,
replies :
Then his good report should have been my son ;
I therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely : had I a dozen sons ... I had rather had
eleven die nobly for their country than one volup-
tuously surfeit out of action.
A gentlewoman comes in and announces that the
Lady Valeria is come to visit them. To talk about the
war, Virgilia knows. It is the last straw.
‘ Beseech you ’, she cries out in anguish, ‘ give me
leave to retire myself.’
4 1 never heard such nonsense ’, Volumnia thinks,
and pushing Virgilia back into her seat, says sternly :
4 Indeed you shall not.’ Then, sniffing the news from
the front that Lady Valeria, always well-informed
about the war, has called to tell them, Volumnia breaks
into a gallop of rhetoric :
Methinks I hear hither your husband’s drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair. . . .
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus :
‘ Come on, you cowards ! you were got in fear
Though you were born in Rome ! ’ His bloody
brow
With his mail’d hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man that’s task’d to mow
Or all or lose his hire.
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Virgilia
His bloody brow ! O Jupiter, no blood !
Volumnia
Away, you fool ! It more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy.
How true it all sounds, and how Roman ! Yet it
has been said that whether Shakespeare’s scene is
Athens, Rome, Verona or Egypt, whether the period
is classical or renaissance, his characters are all English
and all Elizabethan. This very play Coriolanus is
quoted in evidence. Shakespeare makes a mob in
ancient Rome talk and behave like a mob in the
London of his own day. He did not see much differ-
ence between them. But was there so much ? Those
words, ‘ Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as
this multitude ’, are surely true of the mob at all times
in all countries. But when Shakespeare is dealing with
individuals, he often shows remarkable insight into the
different temperaments of different races. You have
only to compare The Merchant of Venice with The
Merry Wives of Windsor to become convinced of this.
In The Merry Wives the characters really are Eliza-
bethan and English. Shakespeare is studying his com-
patriots and contemporaries in this joyous farce. Here
is the English race in a holiday mood, enjoying itself
very much as it does now on a Bank Holiday. Mrs.
110
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Page and Mrs. Ford in the same group as Volumnia !
That may seem odd to you, but after all I am talking of
‘ triumphant heroines and no one can deny that the
hoax these merry English wives carry out on the fat
knight, John Falstaff, is a triumph for them. The
characters of these two women are very different, as I
hope to demonstrate by reading you the scene in which
they decide to ‘ larn ’ the amorous old ruffian that
wives can be merry, and yet honest too.
Mrs. Page comes on reading a love-letter from him :
Mrs. Page
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-time
of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them ?
Let me see.
* Ask me no reason why I love you ; for though
Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him
not for his counsellor. You are not young, no more
am I ; go to, then, there’s sympathy : you are
merry, so am I; ha, ha ! then there’s more sym-
pathy : you love sack, and so do I; would you
desire better sympathy ? Let it suffice thee, Mistress
Page,—at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice, —
that I love thee. I will not say, pity me ; ’tis not a
soldier-like phrase ; but I say, love me. By me,
Thine own true knight,
By day or night,
Or any kind of light,
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


With all his might
For thee to fight. John Falstaff.’
0 wicked, wicked world ! One that is well-nigh
worn to pieces with age to show himself a young
gallant ! What an unweighed behaviour hath this
Flemish drunkard picked out of my conversation,
that he dares in this manner assay me ? Why, he
hath not been thrice in my company ! What should
1 say to him ? Why, I’ll exhibit a bill in the parlia-
ment for the putting down of men. How shall Ibe
revenged on him ? for revenged I will be, as sure as
his guts are made of puddings !
Mrs. Page is interrupted at this point by Mrs. Ford,
who comes on, all in a flutter, an open letter in her
hand. I always see Mrs. Ford as a rather demure
little body, less free and easy in her manners than
Mrs. Page, yet with something in her eye which is
distinctly coy, something which makes Mr. Ford’s
jealousy not altogether irrational. It is that ‘ some-
thing ’ which accounts for Mrs. Ford’s being rather
flattered by Sir John’s attentions. It is clear that she
is disappointed when she finds he is paying them to
Mrs. Page too.
But let us go back to the scene :
Mrs. Ford
Mistress Page ! trust me, I was going to your house.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Mrs. Page
And, trust me, I was coming to you ! You look
very ill.
Mrs. Ford
Nay, 111 ne er believe that; I have to show to the
contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel !
Mrs. Page
What’s the matter, woman ?
Mrs. Ford
0 woman, if it were not for one trifling respect,
1 could come to such honour !
Mrs. Page
Hang the trifle, woman ! take the honour ! What
is it ?—dispense with trifles—what is it ?
Mrs. Ford
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or
so, I could be knighted.
Mrs. Page
What ! thou liest ! Sir Alice Ford ! . . .
Mrs. Ford
Here, read, read ! Perceive how I might be
knighted ! Did you ever hear the like ? ‘ Thine own
true knight.’ I shall think the worse of fat men as
long as I have an eye to make difference of men’s
liking. ... ‘By day or night.’
Mrs. Page
‘ Or any kind of light.’
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Mrs. Ford
‘ With all his might.’
Both
‘ For thee to fight—John FalstafF.’
Mrs. Page
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and Ford
differs ! To thy great comfort, here is the twin-
brother of thy letter !. . . I warrant he hath a
thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
different names —sure more—and these are of the
second edition : he’ll print ’em !
Mrs. Ford (rather disappointed, I think, as she compares
the letters )
Why, this is the very same ; the very hand, the very
words. What doth he think of us ?
Mrs. Page
Nay, I know not !. . . Let’s be revenged on him :
let’s appoint him a meeting : give him a show of
comfort in his suit, and lead him on with a fine-
baited delay, till he hath pawned his horses to mine
host of the Garter.
Mrs. Ford
Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O,
that my husband saw this letter ! It would give
eternal food to his jealousy !
Mrs. Page
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too :
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


he s as far from jealousy as I am from giving him
cause; and that, I hope, is an unmeasurable distance.
Mrs. Ford
You are the happier woman.
Mrs. Page
Let’s consult together against this greasy knight !
Come hither !
And off they go, arm in arm, seething with plans for
revenging themselves on Falstaff. If we followed them
we should have some fun, broad Elizabethan fun—it
might shock some of you—but time is short, and we
have yet to go to Italy and meet Portia of Belmont.
No one can tell us how Shakespeare got what we
call ‘ local colour He may have been to Italy. He
may not. It is ‘as you like it His Venetian topo-
graphy is amazingly accurate, but that proves nothing.
He could have got it out of a book, or picked it up
from an Italian traveller he met in a coffee-house in
London. It does not matter. What does matter is
that the genius of the man enabled him in The Merchant
of Venice to give the very echo to the place where the
Adriatic is enthroned. This is why I believe in repre-
senting Portia as a Venetian lady. There are many
different ways of playing the part. I have tried five or
six ways myself, but I have always come back to the
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Italian way, the Renaissance way. In Germany, and
allow me here to pay my tribute to Germany—yes I
must, although you don’t want me to, I can see I—for 1 —for
honouring Shakespeare worthily by frequent per-
formances of his plays—in Germany there is a tradi-
tion that Portia is a low comedy part. The German
Portia is compelled by this tradition (or was when I
was last in Germany. Things may have altered) to
appear in the Trial Scene in an eighteenth-century wig,
horn spectacles, a barrister’s cravat, and a fierce
moustache. Well, there is something to be said for it.
As Sancho Panza remarks, ‘ an ounce of laughter is
better than a pound of care ’. Besides, the prodigious
wealth of implication in Shakespeare’s plays, which
makes them all As You Like Its, allows of a great
variety of interpretations. But from my point of
view, no interpretation entailing a sacrifice of beauty,
whether to mirth or to realism, can ever be satisfactory.
Portia is the fruit of the Renaissance, the child of a
period of beautiful clothes, beautiful cities, beautiful
houses, beautiful ideas. She speaks the beautiful
language of inspired poetry. Wreck that beauty, and
the part goes to pieces.
1 This parenthesis was interpolated by Ellen Terry during the
war. I have preserved it as an interesting record of her independence
of mind.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


I think Georg Brandes, the Shakespearean com-
mentator I have found of most use to me as an actress,
sums up Portia’s character as well as it can be done,
when he writes that ‘ in spite of her self-surrender in
love there is something independent, almost masculine
in her attitude towards life. This orphan heiress has
been in a position of authority from childhood. She
is used to acting on her own responsibility, without
seeking advice first.’ It makes me rather impatient
when I am told that it is strange that a woman of this
type, in the habit of directing herself and directing
others, should be willing to be directed by a man so
manifestly inferior to her as Bassanio. I think if we
take the trouble to enquire into the motives at the back
of the famous speech of surrender, it will not strike us
as either strange or repellent.
Remember that Portia so far has had everything
given to her. She is the spoiled child of fortune, or
would be if she were not so generous. It is this
excessive generosity which partly explains her offering
with herself all she has to the man she loves. We
have to take into account too that she is a great lady.
‘ Noblesse oblige ’ was not an empty phrase in her day.
Even in our own day a well-bred person who is rich
is always anxious not to wound anyone who is poor
by even a breath of patronage. When I have added
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


that the first-fruit of love is humility, I need say no
more in explanation of Portia’s attitude to Bassanio.
It seems quite natural that she should assure him that
her spirit
Commits itself to yours to be directed,
As from her lord, her governor, her king.
Myself and what is mine to you and yours
Is now converted : but now I was the lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen o’er myself; and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same myself
Are yours, my lord.
If the speech jars on you—surely such heavenly
word-music cannot jar, on the ear at any rate —it is
because you take it too literally. I don’t mean that
Portia is not in earnest. A Cardinal is in earnest when
he washes the beggar’s feet, but he does not commit
himself by this gesture of humility to making a practice
of it ! It is clear that Portia’s gracious surrender is a
‘ beau geste ’, and little more. The proof is that she
retains her independence of thought and action. The
first thing she does after her marriage is to lay her own
plans for saving Antonio’s life, without so much as a
‘ with your leave or by your leave ’ to her lord and
master !
The general opinion of Bassanio is unflattering. I
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


don’t know why he is considered such a poor specimen
of manhood. My impression is that he has great
charm. His loyalty to Antonio is in his favour. He
does not let his friend down when he is in trouble.
What reason is there to suppose that he will let Portia
down, and that she will bitterly regret her marriage ?
We must not infer that he is stupid because of his failure
to recognise Portia in her lawyer’s robe at the trial.
The impenetrableness of a disguise is a dramatic con-
vention. Shakespeare employs it over and over
again.
I have often been asked whether I think Portia s line
of pleading in the Court is her own. Was the quibble
by which she destroys Shylock’s case, and so saves
Antonio, her own idea, or did it originate with the
learned Bellario ? This question interests me more
than the one whether the quibble was justified. The
answer to this second question is simple. Desperate
evils demand desperate remedies. I am driven to
think we are dreadfully sentimental nowadays when I
hear people say Shylock was infamously treated. He
had laid a trap for Antonio, and there was nothing un-
just in laying a trap for him. If we regard the Duke’s
sentence as harsh, especially that clause about Shy-
lock’s presendy becoming a Christian, we ought to
remember that in our own day far more violent
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


animus against the Jewish race has been displayed than
in this Venetian Court centuries ago.
But to go back to the question : Who thought of
the trap in which Shylock was caught ? It is my be-
lief that it was not a man ! I have an idea that the
learned Bellario told Portia at once that the law could
not help Antonio. If he turned o’er many books with
her (as he says in his letter to the Duke) it was to instruct
her in the statutes by which Shylock, in any event,
could be punished, not in the hope of proving the bond
invalid. He advised her to try an appeal to Shylock’s
mercy, and if that failed, to try another to his cupidity.
If that failed, well then I fancy the learned Bellario may
have suggested trying a threat. Let the Jew be
warned of the consequences of exacting his pound of
flesh. To my mind, and I have always tried to show
this in the trial scene, Portia is acting on a precon-
certed plan up to the moment of pronouncing sen-
tence ; then she has an inspiration, and acts on that.
Hence her ‘ Tarry a little ; there is something else ’.
There has flashed through her brain suddenly the
thought that a pound of flesh is not quite the same
thing as a pound of flesh and blood. (We know how
careful lawyers have to be when drawing up legal
documents, to specify exactly what is meant. That is
why they are so terribly long.) She tries to disguise
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


her apprehension, that this may be a distinction without
a difference, and says firmly :
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood.
I am convinced that this bit of casuistry was not con-
ceived by Shakespeare as being carefully planned. It
strikes me as a lightning-like inspiration—just such an
inspiration as a woman might have when she is at her
wit’s end, and is willing to try anything to avoid defeat.
Well, whatever view one takes of it, it is impossible to
admire it, although it may be defended on the ground
that the end justifies the means. From this point in
the trial scene the sympathies of a modern audience arc
with Shylock. Portia’s moment is when she appeals
to him for mercy.
That famous mercy speech ! To me it will always
be a thing * ensky’d and sainted ’. I often pray that to
the end of my life I may be able to do some justice to
these inspired words, written I feel sure to the glory of
God, with faith and adoration. The speech is a noble
kinsman to the Lord’s Prayer, on which indeed it is
modelled. It urges with the same beautiful simplicity
the same beautiful ideal of justice: ‘ And forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that tresspass against us.’
Portia
Then must the Jew be merciful.
THE TRIUMPHANT WOMEN


Shylock
On what compulsion must I ? tell me that.
Portia
The quality of mercy is not strain’d,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath : it is twice blest;
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes :
’Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown ;
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and majesty,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
But mercy is above this sceptred sway ;
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power doth then show hkest God’s
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That, in the course of justice, none of us
Should see salvation : we do pray for mercy ;
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy.
I have done. I want you to go away with those
words in your ears, and to try and make them a living
force in your hearts.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


THE PATHETIC WOMEN




THE PATHETIC WOMEN
In my lecture on those women in Shakespeare’s plays
I classified as ‘ triumphant ’ —and although the label
has been criticised, none of my critics have supplied me
with a better one—l said there was good reason for
believing they were tall —strong physically as well as
mentally. I cannot produce any evidence that the
women I am going to talk about in this lecture were
small and slim, of rather frail physique, but that is how
I see them with my mind’s eye. Viola in the male
attire she assumes after she has been shipwrecked on the
coast of Illyria looks a slip of a lad. Ophelia, natur-
ally slight, becomes like a wraith of a woman when
her wits go astray. Othello towers over his fragile
Desdemona. I don’t conceive Lady Macbeth as a
robust muscular woman, but as a delicate little crea-
ture, with hyper-sensitive nerves. This may be the
explanation of my calling these heroines ‘ pathetic ’.
Little creatures are pathetic, I think, whether birds,
kittens, or children.


Viola, says her brother Sebastian when he believes
her dead, ‘ bore a mind that envy could not but call
fair It is a lovely, rather than a brilliant mind,
Viola is less witty than either Rosalind or Beatrice.
She seldom says a clever thing. She often says a
beautiful thing. Shakespeare has put into her mouth
some of the most exquisite word-music he ever wrote.
Of her it may be said that ‘ her tongue’s sweet air’s
more tunable than lark to shepherd’s ear ’. This was
the Viola that Ada Rehan brought on to the stage. I
shall never forget the beautiful tone of her voice in
Viola’s reply to the Duke’s question : ‘ How dost
thou like this tune ? ’
‘ It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is throned,’
The Duke’s exclamation : ‘ Thou dost speak
masterly ! ’ seemed very much to the point. And oh,
what wonderful things Ada did with her voice in this
speech ;
Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house ;
Write loyal cantons of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
Halloo your name to the reverberate hills,
And make the babbling gossip of the air
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Cry out ‘ Olivia ! ’ O, you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth,
But you should pity me !
Then, if ever, we heard the true Shakespearean
music, and I for one was so completely enchanted by
it that I could not agree that Ada Rehan’s Viola was
too sophisticated. Years later when I saw my niece
Phyllis in the part I realised however that she, with her
extreme youth, and a heaven-born instinct for acting,
had been able to supply something that was lacking
in Ada Rehan’s Viola. Phyllis was but seventeen
years old, and had been on the stage hardly a year
when she gave this exquisite preformance.
Viola has a golden heart as well as a golden voice.
She listens with the most tender sympathy and patience
to Duke Orsino’s rhapsodies about Olivia. Imagine
Rosalind or Beatrice in Viola’s situation ! Could
either of them have resisted a jest at the unfortunate
Orsino’s mad passion ? When Rosahnd’s Orlando
tells her that neither rhyme nor reason can express how
much he is in love, she smiles and chaffs him :
Love is merely a madness, and I tell you deserves
as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do :
and the reason why they are not so punished and
cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the
whippers are in love too.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


When Viola’s Orsino tells her that he will never
accept the situation, never believe that Olivia cannot
love him, she speaks to him as tenderly as if he were a
sick child clamouring for a toy which must be denied :
Sooth, but you must.
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia : you cannot love her ;
You tell her so : must she not then be answered ?
An honourable, unselfish girl, this Viola. She does
not shrink from the very painful task imposed on her
of pleading for Orsino to Olivia. And into this
vicarious courtship she puts all the passion of love she
feels for Orsino :
If I did love you in my master’s flame,
With such a suffering, such a deadly life,
In your denial I would find no sense.
I would not understand it.
Viola, I take it, is very young. Her character seems
undeveloped when we compare it with Beatrice’s.
That may be the explanation of the fact that the part
has often been played well by very young actresses.
As I have already told you, my niece, Phyllis Neilson-
Terry, played it beautifully at the age of seventeen.
The part of Desdemona gives an actress far more
difficult problems to solve. I know no character in
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Shakespeare which has suffered from so much mis-
conception. The general idea seems to be that Des-
demona is a ninny, a pathetic figure chiefly because she
is half-baked. It is certainly the idea of those who
think an actress of the dolly type, a pretty young thing
with a vapid innocent expression, is well suited to the
part. I shall perhaps surprise you by telling you that
a great tragic actress, with a strong personality and a
strong method, is far better suited to it, for Desdemona
is strong, not weak.
There is something of the potential nun in her. She
is more fitted to be the bride of Christ than the
bride of any man. Shakespeare implies this in the
lines :
So opposite to marriage that she shunned
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation.
Her virginal heart is profoundly moved by the
meeting with Othello. Unlike the wealthy, curled
darlings, this is a man who has suffered many distressful
strokes. The story of his life rouses her compassionate
interest. As Othello says:
She lov’d me for the dangers I had pass’d,
And I lov’d her that she did pity them.
Whereas the handsome faces of the curled darlings had
seemed ugly to Desdemona because their minds were
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


ugly, Othello’s face seemed fair to her because his
mind was fair.
I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,
And to his honours, and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
Desdemona does not use that word ‘ consecrate ’
idly. Love to her is a sacrament,
I have said she is a woman of strong character Once
she has consecrated herself to Othello, she is capable
even of ‘ downright violence ’ of all the conventions
for his sake. But I think by nature she is unconven-
tional. Othello’s doubts that she is chaste are usually
made to seem absolutely monstrous in the theatre,
because Desdemona’s unconventionality is ignored.
She is not at all prim or demure ; on the contrary, she
is genially expressive, the kind of woman who being
devoid of coquetry behaves as she feels. Her manner
to Cassio might easily fertilize the poisonous seed of
suspicion lago has sown in Othello’s mind. The per-
tinacity with which she begs Othello to reinstate
Cassio does not strike me as evidence that she is a rather
foolish woman, lacking in insight. Let an actress
give a charming ‘ I’m really not asking much of you ’
tone to Desdemona’s suit to her husband, and a very
different impression will be produced. Her purity of
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


heart and her charity (charity ‘ thinketh no evil ’) are
sufficient explanation of her being slow to grasp the
situation. It is not until she has been grossly insulted
and brutally assaulted that she understands. Her be-
haviour from that dreadful moment should surely con-
vince us that she is not a simpleton, but a saint.
There is no scene in the tragedy which throws more
light on Desdemona’s character than the one in the
fourth act between Desdemona and Emilia. Let us
study it together. It takes place in Desdemona’s room.
Othello has just roughly ordered his wife to go to bed,
and Emilia is helping her to undress.
Emilia’s life has made her cynical about virtue. No
wonder ! For one thing, lago is her husband ! She
would not be surprised at frailty in any woman, even
in Desdemona. And after all, is this frailty anything
to make a fuss about ? There is a curious anticipation
of modern ideas in Emilia’s attitude.
Desdemona
Dost thou in conscience think—tell me, Emilia, —
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind ?
Emilia
, There be some such, no question.
Desdemona
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ?
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Emilia
Why, would not you ?
Desdemona
No, by this heavenly light !
Emilia
Nor I neither by this heavenly light.
I might do’t as well i’ the dark.
Desdemona
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ?
Emilia
The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price
For a small vice.
Desdemona
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
Emilia
In troth, I think I should—and undo’t when I had
done. . . .
Desdemona
Beshrew me if I would do such a wrong
For the whole world. . . .
I do not think there is any such woman.
Emilia
Yes, a dozen. . . .
But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
And pour out treasures into foreign laps,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us ; or say they strike us :
Or scant our former having in despite ;
Why, we have galls, and though we have some
grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them : they see and
smell,
And have their palates both for sweet and sour
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others ? Is it sport ?
I think it is : and doth affection breed it ?
I think it doth : is’t frailty that thus errs ?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have ?
Then let them use us well : else let them know
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Desdemona
Good-night, good-night: heaven me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.
She has listened patiently. ... Yes, there may be
such women . . . but there are others who, like her,
could never pick ‘ bad from bad ’. Emilia in her heart
knows this. There will be no reprisals from Des-
demona. Her love for Othello is not of the sort which
‘ alters when it alteration finds ’.
‘ O, who hath done this deed ? ’ cries the distraught
Emilia a few hours later when she finds Desdemona
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


near to death, and the innocent victim of lago’s
devilish plot, with a supreme effort of the love which
does not seek its own, whispers faintly the chivalrous
falsehood :
Nobody ; I myself. Farewell :
Commend me to my kind lord.
Yes, it may be true. Desdemona may have taken
her own life. Emilia is pondering this, I think, as she
holds her dear mistress in her arms, and then seeing
she is dead, lays her back on the disordered bed. She
hears Othello’s voice saying, ‘ Why, how should she
be murdered ? ’ and although she answers ‘ Alas, who
knows ?’ I think she means : ‘ You know ! ’ She is
beginning to blaze. ‘ You heard her say herself it was
not I.’ ‘ She said so ’, oh yes ! And Emilia moves
away from the deathbed, with the enigmatic remark :
‘ I must needs report the truth.’ Othello seizes her by
the arm :
She’s, like a liar, gone to burning hell !
’Twas I that killed her.
Emilia has plenty of courage. She is alone with a
murderer, a crazy murderer. It is to this that jealousy
has brought the noble Moor. She must know that she
risks her life by angering him, but she does not care.
The slur on the dead woman makes her reckless.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


O the more angel she
And you the blacker devil !
But I must not spoil this wonderful scene by quoting
snippets from it. Listen to it, and see Emilia in an
ecstasy of rage, a human volcano in eruption, pouring
out a lava of abuse :
Othello
She turn’d to folly, and she was a whore.
Emilia
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
Othello
She was false as water.
Emilia
Thou art rash as fire to say
That she was false : O, she was heavenly true !
Othello
Cassio did top her : ask thy husband else.
0,1 were damn’d beneath all depth in hell
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
Emilia
My husband !
Othello
Thy husband.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Emilia
That she was false to wedlock ?
Othello
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I’d not have sold her for it.
Emilia
My husband !
Othello
Ay, ’twas he that told me first :
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.
Emilia
My husband !
Othello
What needs this iteration, woman ? I say, thy hus-
band.
Emilia
My husband say that she was false !
Othello
He, woman ;
I say thy husband ; dost understand the word ?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest lago.
Emilia
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day ! He lies to the heart :
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
Do thy worst :
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.
Othello
Peace, you were best!
Emilia
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull ! O dolt !
As ignorant as dirt ! thou hast done a deed—
I care not for thy sword ; —l’ll make thee
known,
Though I lost twenty lives !
She knows no fear. How she shames the fearful,
those who fear the opinion of the world, or fear to
make themselves ridiculous, or fear the consequences,
and so are silent in the defence of truth.
I, peace !
No ! I will speak as liberal as the north ;
Let heaven, and men, and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.
It is significant that the chivalrous champions of the
honour of the living Hero, as of the dead Desdemona,
should both be women ! Significant, and original.
Shakespeare is one of the very few dramatists who
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


seem to have observed that women have more moral
courage than men.
He endows Juliet, a very young girl, with the in-
ward freedom which produces this courage. I said
just now when I introduced Desdemona that she has
been the victim of a great deal of misconception, and
I think this is true of Juliet too. Her age may be one
of the reasons for this. To us now a girl of fourteen
seems a mere child. There is any amount of evidence
that in days when the average span of human life was
shorter people arrived at maturity sooner. At four-
teen, they were not children but adults, and Juliet, at
what fourteen meant to Shakespeare, is older than her
years. There is some truth in the saying that an actress
cannot play Juliet until she is too old to look like Juliet.
Whatever her age let her remember that Juliet is some-
thing more than a great lover. She is a great poet.
£ Truly when I heard Romeo saying : “ Ah, she
doth teach the torches to burn bright ! ” truly my
whole being kindled ; I became a flame. ’
The actress, to whom those words are attributed by
D’Annunzio, had a vein of poetry in her which must
have helped her to understand Juliet.
From the first the joy of this passionate young
Italian (Shakespeare derived this legend of love and
death from Italy and did not attempt to anglicize it)
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


in finding her mate is overcast by a presentiment of
sorrow :
My only love sprung from my only hate.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late.
This ‘ love eternal in a moment born ’ in a Capulet
for a Montague is doomed from birth. It is the con-
viction of this which explains the swiftness of Juliet’s
surrender, the boldness of her subsequent actions.
Her courage fails her only once in the play.
She is fearless when she confesses her love :
My bounty is as boundless as the sea ;
My love as deep ; the more I give to thee
The more I have, for both are infinite.
She is fearless when she marries her Romeo sec-
retly. She is fearless when he is banished and she has
to face dangers and difficulties alone. .. . During the
brief time between her marriage and her death, her
situation is indeed terrible, but it does not break her
spirit. There is one moment when, driven to desper-
ation, she thinks of putting an end to her life, but like
Joan of Arc, she recants her recantation.
When she parts from Romeo she cannot conceal
her sense of their impending doom :
Juliet
O think’st thou we shall ever meet again ?
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Romeo
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Juliet
O God, I have an ill-divining soul !
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb ;
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.
Yet that dreadful vision does not appal her, nor
weaken her resistance to her worldly parents. . . .
She fights their plan to marry her to Paris, first with
courage, and when courage is useless and she is over-
come by * force majeure ’, with cunning. Shake-
speare gives a terrible picture of parental tyranny in the
scene I am going to read to you ;
‘ Why, how now, Juliet ? ’ says her mother, irritated
at the sadness of which she does not know the cause.
Juliet
Madam, I am not well.
Lady Capulet
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death ?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with
tears ? (You silly child).
. . . But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl !
Juliet (rather ironically, I think)
And joy comes well in such a needy time :
What are they, I beseech your ladyship. . . .
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Lady Capulet
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman
The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Juliet ( horrified )
Now by Saint Peter’s Church and Peter, too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste ; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo . . .
( Resolutely, though she cannot restrain her tears)
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet.
Lady Capulet
Here comes your father ; tell him so yourself
And see how he will take it at your hands.
[Enter Capulet.)
Capulet
How now ! A conduit, girl ? What, still in tears ?
Evermore showering ? . . .
How now, wife ?
Have you deliver’d to her our decree ?
Lady Capulet
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.
Capulet
Soft ! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How ? will she none ? doth she not give us thanks ?
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Is she not proud ? doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom ?
Juliet
Not proud, you have ; but thankful, that you have :
Proud can I never be of what I hate :
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
Capulet
How now, how now, chop-logic ! What is this ?
‘ Proud and ‘ I thank you and ‘ I thank you not
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Juliet
Good father, I beseech you on my knees
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Capulet
Hang thee, young baggage ! disobedient wretch !
I tell thee what: get thee to church o’ Thursday
Or never after look me in the face :
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
This is too much for Juliet’s nurse, old time-server as
she is. Besides, she is cognizant of the situation. She
alone in the Capulet household knows that Juliet is
married to Romeo.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Nurse
God in heaven bless her !
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Capulet
And why, my lady wisdom ? hold your tongue.
Good prudence ; smatter with your gossips, go.
Nurse
I speak no treason. May not one speak ?
Capulet
Peace, you mumbling fool !
Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,
For here we need it not.
Then after a long diatribe on the subject of ungrateful
daughters, Capulet delivers his ultimatum.
Thursday is near ; lay hand on heart, advise :
An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee.
He goes away. That is his last word. In her ex-
tremity Juliet appeals to her mother and her nurse for
help. Both women have been shocked at Capulet’s
violence, and have tried to calm him down, but they
have no notion of supporting Juliet against him.
Juliet
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


O, sweet my mother, cast me not away !
Delay this marriage for a month, a week ;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Lady Capulet
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word :
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
And she goes away. That is her last word. Poor
Juliet gives a despairing cry ‘ O God ! ’ as her mother
leaves the room. But she is not cowed. There is
plenty of fight in her yet, and she thinks she has a
faithful ally in her nurse!
Juliet
O nurse ! how shall this be prevented ?
What say’st thou ? hast thou not a word of joy ?
Some comfort, nurse.
But all the comfort this depraved old party has to give
is that there is nothing for Juliet to do but make the
best of a bad business, which she insinuates is not so
bad after all.
Nurse
Faith, here it is :
Romeo is banish’d ; and all the world to nothing.
That he dares ne’er come back to challenge you ;
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he’s a lovely gentleman
Romeo’s a dishclout to him ! . . .
Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
Your first is dead ; or ’twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.
Juliet is accustomed to her old nurse’s vulgar jokes,
but this one makes her indignant. Her eyes blaze.
Juliet
Speakest thou from thy heart ?
Nurse
And from my soul too ;
Or else beshrew them both.
Juliet ( sternly )
Amen !
Nurse (puzzled and rather frightened at the girl’s
manner)
What ?
Juliet [drawing her Italian weapon of dissimulation )
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in ; and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence’ cell,
To make confession, and to be absolved.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Nurse ( relieved )
Marry, I will. And this is wisely done.
And she ambles out of the room, unconscious that
she has appalled her nursling. But we know !
Juliet, left alone, denounces her in these magnificent
words ;
Ancient damnation ! O most wicked fiend !
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times ? Go, counsellor ;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I’ll to the Friar, to know his remedy :
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
The Friar does not fail Juliet, but he demands a great
deal of her. The success of the remedy he suggests
depends on her courage and cunning. She is to go
home, and pretend to give her consent to the marriage
with Paris. The night before the wedding she is to
take a potion which will make her unconscious.
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest.
The Friar guarantees that this state will last for forty-
two hours, and that everyone will be deceived, and
think she is dead. Her body will be taken to the
ancient family vault of the Capulets. ‘ There shall
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Romeo come *, and ‘ he and I will watch thy waking *,
Friar Laurence assures Juliet . . . She might well shrink
from the ordeal, but she does not. She holds out
eager hands for the vial, containing the potion :
Give me, give me ! O, tell not me of fear !
The change in her is noticed by the Nurse directly
she comes home : ‘ See where she comes from shrift
with merry look ! ’ she says to Capulet. He is in a
better humour than when we saw him last. The pre-
parations for Juliet’s wedding to Paris are going
smoothly. All the invitations have been sent out,
extra cooks have been hired, and so on. The silly
child has no doubt been brought to her senses by Friar
Laurence, and he won’t have any more trouble with
her. So he greets Juliet quite affectionately :
How now, my headstrong ! Where have you been
gadding ?
She, mindful of Friar Laurence’s instructions,
assumes a very humble and docile manner, and asks
forgiveness for her disobedience. She uses the weapon
of duplicity very cleverly. Her parents are defeated
by it, completely taken in. The father congratulates
her on her change of heart, says what a wonderful man
the holy friar is (he is indeed !) and goes to the County
Paris to tell him all is well.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


In the next scene of the play Juliet is in her bedroom
with the Nurse, still acting a part. O that the nurse
would go ! It is all that Juliet can do to hide her
impatience, as the old woman plagues her to decide
what she is going to wear at the wedding. {Anything
will do /)
Ay, those attires are best : but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons.
Then her lady mother fusses in. Can she help ?
(‘ I have a lot to do, of course, hut still if you want me ’ —
‘ I want you to go; I want to he alone.’)
Lady Capulet
What, are you busy, ho ? need you my help ?
Juliet
No, madam ; we have cull’d such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state tomorrow :
So please you, let me now be left alone.
Poor dear ! She’s looking very tired. ( And very
strange, Lady Capulet, I wonder you don’t notice it!)
She ought to go to bed at once and rest. So mother
and nurse bid her good-night, and leave the room.
Juliet is alone now, alone with her purpose, alone
with her terror. Yes ! For one brief moment she is
terrified ! The old familiar faces are still dear to her in
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


spite of everything. .. . Perhaps she will never look
on them again. She is used to having her nurse within
call at night. Many a time that dear nannie has
soothed her when she has been restless, and comforted
her when she woke shuddering from some bad dream.
She is shuddering now, and the impulse to cry out for
help is so overpowering that she can’t resist it. But
hardly has she yielded and called ‘ Nurse ! ’ than she
remembers that she could do nothing for her. She
must face this terror alone :
Farewell ! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life :
I’ll call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse ! What should she do here ?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial !
What if this mixture do not work at all ?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning ?
No, no, this shall forbid it; lie thou there.
[Laying down her dagger.)
What if it be a poison, which the Friar
Subtly hath minister’d to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour’d
Because he married me before to Romeo ?
I fear it is : and yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me ? there’s a fearful point !
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes
in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes ?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night
Together with the terror of the place,—
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are pack’d :
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud, where as they say
At some hours in the night spirits resort :
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes’ torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad :
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears ?
And madly play with my forefathers’ joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud ?
And in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains ?
O, look ! methinks I see my cousin’s ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier’s point: stay, Tybalt, stay !
Romeo, I come ! This do I drink to thee !
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Ah, if that could be done, as it should be done ! An
actress must be in a state of grace to make that speech
hers ! She must be on the summit of her art where
alone complete abandonment to passion is possible !
Juliet, I once read, but where I cannot remember, is
the first sign of a change in Shakespeare’s ideas about
women. This is something to ponder. It seems to be
true that up to the period of his first tragedy, his women
characters reveal a certain antagonism to the whole sex.
Think of Adriana in The Comedy of Errors, of
Katherine in The Taming of the Shrew. They don’t
inspire us with love or admiration. The hysterical
Lady Anne in Richard 111 is frankly a study of feminine
weakness. Helena in All's Well that Ends Well, and
Julia in Two Gentlemen of Verona belong to the ‘ door-
mat ’ type. They bear any amount of humiliation
from the men they love, seem almost to enjoy being
maltreated and scorned by them, and hunt them down
in the most undignified way when they are trying to
escape. The fraud with which Helena captures
Bertram, who has left his home and country to get
away from her, is really despicable. Coleridge must
have forgotten Helena when he wrote : ‘ln Shake-
speare all the elements of womanhood are holy.’ 1
I He had not forgotten her, however. He actually refers to Helena
as * the loveliest of Shakespeare’s characters ’!—C. St. J.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


What was the cause of the change which drew Shake-
speare to the creation of great-hearted, great-minded,
lovable women ? There is a theory, and a very plaus-
ible one, it seems to me, that when he first came to
London and began writing comedies, he was still
smarting under the disillusionment of his own unfor-
tunate marriage. The women characters are either
like the unamiable shrew that his wife was, or like the
patient Griselda that he thought she ought to have
been !
Then Mistress Mary Fitton came upon the scene, a
fine creature in spite of that fault she had to excess, and
the ‘ powerful might ’ of her vivid personality widened
and intensified the vision of the man who loved her.
... I am attracted by this theory, but I have to warn
myself and you of the danger of becoming obsessed
by any one theory about Shakespeare ! The web of
life, he tells us, ‘isof a mingled yarn and this is true
of the web of life in his plays. Mary Fitton is only one
strand in it. If we believe the legend of his passionate
love for Mary Fitton—and why should we not, since
there is no smoke without fire?—we shall think it
extremely probable that she was the begetter of many
of those touches of aristocratic pride, of brilliant
spirits, of witty speech, in his portraits of women. It
says much for Shakespeare—and for her too—that in
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


spite of the unfortunate and unhappy outcome of his
devotion, he was not embittered. With one notable
exception, Cressida, the women in the plays of his
maturity afford evidence of this.
What a wonderful study of a mother he gives us in
Constance in King John. That inordinate love, that
inordinate grief, how well we who are mothers can
understand both !
There is an equally wonderful study of a daughter
in King Lear. Perhaps some of you have a daughter,
who like Cordelia is extremely reticent, loves you
dearly, but never gushes. Perhaps there is a daughter
here who knows exactly what Cordelia means when
she says her love is ‘ more richer than her tongue ’.
‘ Made she no verbal question ? ’ Kent asks the
man who has taken Cordelia the news of the cruelty
which has been meted out to her father by her sisters,
and he answers :
’Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of ‘father’
Pantingly forth, as if it press’d her heart :
Cried ‘ Sisters ! Sisters ! Shame of ladies ! Sisters !
Kent ! Father ! Sisters ! What, i’ the storm ?
’i the night ?
Let pity not be believed ! ’ There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamour moisten’d : then away she started
To deal with grief alone.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Burning shame, Kent says in this same scene, keeps
Lear from going to Cordelia in his extremity, but when
they meet again she makes things beautifully easy for
him. It is doubtful whether she even remembers how
cruelly he once misunderstood her. She never re-
proaches him for having disinherited her, and given
her dower to her sisters. Her one thought is to make
up to him for their brutality and pour balm into his
wounds :
O my dear father ! Restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips ; and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made ! . . .
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the warring winds ?
To stand against the deep dread bolted thunder ?
. . . Mine enemy’s dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire ; and wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
In short and musty straw ? Alack, alack !
’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes ; speak to
him.
We can tell from this how shy she is. She becomes
embarrassed directly her father is conscious.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


The Doctor
Madam, do you : ’tis fittest.
Cordelia
How does my royal lord ? How fares your Majesty ?
Lear
You do me wrong to take me out o’ the grave :
Thou art a soul in bliss ; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.
Cordelia
Sir, do you know me ?
Lear
You are a spirit, I know ; when did you die ?
Cordelia
Still, still, far wide.
Doctor
He’s scarce awake ; let him alone awhile.
Lear
Where have I been ? Where am I ? Fair daylight ?
lam mightily abused. I should e’en die with pity,
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I will not swear these are my hands: let’s see ;
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
Of my condition !
Cordelia i i
O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hands in benediction o’er me :
No, sir, you must not kneel.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Lear
Pray, do not mock me :
I am a very foolish, fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less ;
And, to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Methinks I should know you, and know this man ;
Yet I am doubtful : for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is ; and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me :
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordeha.
Cordelia
And so I am, I am.
Lear
Be your tears wet ? yes, ’faith. I pray, weep not:
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me ; for your sisters
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong ;
You have some cause, they have not.
Cordelia
No cause, no cause.
Kind and dear princess ! Still waters run deep !
That sums up her character. Cordeha is a most diffi-
cult part. So little to say, so much to feel ! Rarely
does an actress fathom the depths of those still waters.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


A greater contrast to Cordelia than Cleopatra could
hardly be conceived. The moral contrast is suffi-
ciently obvious. I am not referring to that, but to
the contrast between Cordelia’s reticence and Cleo-
patra’s ebullience. I think Cleopatra is the most ex-
pressive of all Shakespeare’s heroines. She can put all
her emotions into words, and she gives me the impres-
sion sometimes of saying more than she feels. I be-
lieve Shakespeare conceived her as a woman with a
shallow nature, and I should like to see her played as
such. If she were not idealized in the theatre, it would
be clear to us that Shakespeare has done what no other
writer, novelist, dramatist or poet has done—told the
truth about the wanton. Yes, Cleopatra is that, and
if she is represented as a great woman with a great
and sincere passion for Antony, the part does not hang
together.
It is said that Shakespeare had many collaborators in
Henry VIII, but I’ll be sworn Queen Katharine is all
his work. Who but Shakespeare could have shown
in a few deft touches how the elements are mixed up in
this nature, pride and humility, rebelliousness and resig-
nation, hardness and softness ? Katharine is another
example of Shakespeare’s sensitiveness to racial char-
acteristics. Surely she is as Spanish as Volumnia is
Roman and Juhet Italian. It is the punctilious
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Spaniard, who sick unto death, rouses herself to rebuke
a messenger who has failed in respect:
You are a saucy fellow :
Deserve we no more reverence ?
The Queen’s faithful old servant Griffith intervenes
as the ‘ saucy fellow ’ does not take the hint.
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behaviour : go to, kneel.
Shakespeare had something to go on when he
created this queen. Her history, and very recent
history it was to him, was well known. But the queen
of his imagination, Hermione in The Winter’s Tale, is
every bit as grand and gracious a figure. The loyalty
Hermione shows to the husband who has slandered her,
without abating a jot of her dignity, reminds us of
Katharine’s to Henry. Hermione has been cruelly and
falsely accused. Yet she has more pity for her accuser
than for herself. She knows that jealousy has made
him for the time insane, and that when he comes to his
senses he will suffer agonies of remorse.
How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have punished me !
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Dignity under a false accusation, unwavering love in
spite of it, were evidently greatly admired by Shake-
speare, for he exalts them again in Imogen. I am
‘ foolish fond * of this heroine. When I am asked
which is my favourite part, her name rises spontaneously
to my hps. She enchants me, and so I can find no fault
in her. Well, lam in good company. Two poets,
Tennyson and Swinburne, loved Imogen above all
Shakespeare’s women. Swinburne calls her the
‘ crown-flower ’ of his genius. And Bernard Shaw
says she is an enchanting person of the most delicate
sensitiveness, and of the highest breeding and courage.
She needs the highest courage, for she is made to suffer
trial after trial. When I came to know her well—it
was in 1896, the year Cymheline was produced at the
Lyceum —I was able to understand how, after all the
crimes her husband Leonatus Posthumus has com-
mitted against her—the worst I think is his writing that
lying love-letter to bring her to Milford Haven within
reach of his revenge —she can throw her arms round
him and say in an ecstasy of tenderness :
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you ?
Think that you are upon a rock ; and now
Throw me again.
That is just what a very impulsive person would
say ! And Imogen is impulsive above all things.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


Her impulses are always wholehearted ones too.
She never does anything by halves. This is shown
very clearly in her scene with lachimo in the second
act. Her indignation with him for traducing her
husband and trying to undermine her loyalty is in-
tense, but it passes quickly when lachimo, seeing he
has made a mistake, begins to praise him.
At the words:
. . . Such a holy witch
That he enchants societies unto him ;
Half all men’s hearts are his—
she is radiant again, and has forgotten her resent-
ment.
‘ You make amends ’, she says generously. So swift
are Imogen’s changes of mood that the actress who
plays her has hard work to make her a consistent
character. Her heart has reasons that reason cannot
understand.
It seems strange to me that anyone can think of
Lady Macbeth as a sort of monster, abnormally hard,
abnormally cruel, or visualize her as a woman of
powerful physique, with the muscles of a prize-
fighter ! But it is clear from records of some per-
formances of the part, and from portraits of the
actresses who gave them, that it can be done ! I have
already told you I conceive Lady Macbeth as a small,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


slight woman of acute nervous sensibility, and now I
must try to tell you why. I don’t think my concep-
tion is contradicted by the lines in which Lady Macbeth
reproaches Macbeth for his pusillanimity. As I con-
strue them, they support it.
I have given suck, and know
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me ;
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums,
And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.
Are not these lines capable of this construction :
‘ I would do all that I couldrit do, all that would be
utterly false to every natural instinct and feeling of
mine, rather than break such an oath as the one you
have sworn.’
This frenzied appeal is surely the expression of the
desperation Lady Macbeth feels at the sudden paralysis
of Macbeth’s faculties in the hour of action. He must
be roused, he must be roused. Is all they have gone
through to be for nothing ? She is beside herself. We
really ought not to take her wild words as a proof of
abnormal ferocity.
She has never failed her husband yet. The relation
between them is not that of master and subject. They
are on the terms of equals. She has always been fully
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


cognizant of his plans, and helped him to carry them
out. Macbeth calls her ‘my dearest partner of great-
ness ’, and it is as partners they engage in crime. The
wife is compelled to take up the burden of action when
the husband, who being a dreamer finds it intolerably
heavy, lays it down. Lady Macbeth’s nervous force
sustains her until Duncan’s murder is accomplished.
Then she collapses, and faints ! I suppose I can say :
‘ That's womanly ’ !
Henceforth she is ‘ troubled with thick-coming
fancies ’. In plain prose she has a nervous break-down.
She is haunted by the horror of the murder. It preys
upon her mind, and saps her physical strength. She
dies of remorse. Surely this is good evidence that she
is not of the tigress type, mentally or physically.
From all accounts by Mrs. Siddons’s contemporaries,
there would seem to be no doubt that she played Lady
Macbeth on the ‘ tigress ’ lines, creating a woman of
inhuman strength (an ‘ exultant savage ’ says one
witness), but her memoranda about the part prove that
she did not see her like that. She thought that Lady
Macbeth was ‘ fair, feminine, nay, perhaps even
fragile ’. If there was such a difference, as this note
indicates, between the great actress’s theory and
practice, it would not surprise me. I know that I
have expressed opinions in these lectures about some of
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Shakespeare’s women which do not coincide with
those I have expressed in my acting. It is not always
possible for us players to portray characters on the stage
exactly as we see them in imagination. Mrs. Siddons
may have realized that her physical appearance alone—
her aquiline nose, her raven hair, her flashing eyes, her
commanding figure—was against her portraying a fair,
feminine, * nay, perhaps even fragile ’ Lady Macbeth.
It is no use an actress wasting her nervous energy on a
battle with her physical attributes. She had much
better find a way of employing them as allies.
I once had in my possession a little pencil sketch—
oh where is it now, the lost, stolen or borrowed
treasure !—of Mrs. Siddons making her exit in the
sleep-walking scene. It was given me by that member
of her family we used to call ‘ young Kemble ’ long
after he became old Kemble. He told me it was the
work of a contemporary who had seen Mrs. Siddons
as Lady Macbeth, so the representation of the exit may
be assumed to have some value as a record. It con-
firms the tradition that it was made in the whirlwind
style, a tradition which has led some people to imagine
that this was the style in which the actress played the
whole scene. I have wondered and wondered about
that, and always come to the conclusion that it is
improbable, almost impossible, for technical reasons.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


A story told me by Henry Irving is something to go on.
He had the story from a Mr. A., who was alive until
quite recently. Mr. A.’s father frequented a coffee-
house in the City. Another regular customer was a
very old man, still very handsome, and very deaf.
‘ That’s John Philip Kemble ’. The waiters used to
point him out with pride to the other customers.
‘No one dare speak to him. He loses his temper when
he don’t hear, and he often don’t, because he’s deaf’
However, Mr. A.’s father, a theatre enthusiast, kept
on watching for an opportunity for getting into con-
versation with the old actor, and one day it came when
after handing him the mustard, he was rewarded by a
genial ‘ Thank’ee, sir.’ This encouraged him to
s l lout _he had to shout it —‘ I wonder if you could
tell me something I want to know about your sister
Sarah ? ’
The handsome old man frowned. The question
had to be repeated several times before he spoke.
‘ Sarah ? Oh yes —you’re quite right. She was a
fine actress.’
This was baffling, but Mr. A. persisted :
‘ I want to know what she did in the sleep-walking
scene.’
‘ Sarah cut the sleep-walking scene ? Oh dear no !
She didn’t cut a word ! ’
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


‘ What was her method in the scene ? ’ Mr. A.
bellowed.
‘ Method ? Sarah’s method ? Let me think. Sarah’s
method ? Well, let me see — ’ He rubbed his chin
thoughtfully. ‘ She never moved ! ’
I don’t know what Mr. A. made of this, but it con-
veys a great deal to me about Mrs. Siddons’s treat-
ment of the scene. The effect of her whirlwind exit
must have been tremendous after that immobility.
4 But soft ! The fair Ophelia ! Sweet rose of May ! ’
The whole tragedy of her life is that she is afraid ; I
think I am right in saying she is Shakespeare’s only
timid heroine. She is scared of Hamlet when trouble
changes him from the ‘ point-devise ’ lover—the
‘ glass of fashion and the mould of form ’ —into a
strange moody creature, careless of his appearance,
bitter in his speech, scornful of society. She is scared
of her father, and dare not disobey him, even when he
tells her to play the spy on Hamlet. She is scared of
life itself when things go wrong. Her brain, her soul
and her body are all pathetically weak. It is not sur-
prising that she should think Hamlet mad, for all he
says in the scene in which she returns his presents is
completely beyond her. If this scene is rightly acted,
we feel a great compassion for the poor girl, whom
Hamlet at once loves and hates. I think it ought to be
THE PATHETIC WOMEN


suggested from the first that there is something queer
about her, something which explains her wits going
astray later on. Her father’s murder is assigned as the
reason, but it seems more likely that this shock de-
veloped an incipient insanity. Ophelia is really mad,
not merely metaphorically mad—with grief.
The mad were harshly treated in Shakespeare’s day.
Ophelia escapes the dark house and the whip, but she
is avoided by everyone. The poor demented creature
wanders about by the river, in and out of the palace
rooms, without a soul to look after her. Her father is
dead, her brother is away, the King and Queen shrink
from seeing or speaking with her. * I will not speak
with her ’, Queen Gertrude says impatiently. ‘ What
would she have ? ’
Ophelia makes them feel particularly uncomfortable
for reasons implied by Shakespeare in this speech by a
gentleman at the court, a very valuable speech to the
actress, who can learn from it how the famous ‘ mad ’
scene ought to be played :
She is importunate, indeed distract. . . .
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There’s tricks i’ the world ; and hems, and beats
her heart;
Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense : her speech is nothing,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection ; they aim at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
When Laertes returns he hardly recognises his sister,
£ the fair Ophelia ’, ‘ the rose of May in this poor
derelict. ‘ Had thou thy wits, and didst persuade
revenge ’, he cries, ‘it could not move thus.’ And I
think there is no ‘ sane ’ scene in Shakespeare which
moves us as much as this ‘ mad ’ one, this beautiful
painful scene in which Ophelia prattles and sings,
making one think, as the observant courtier says, ‘ there
might be thought, though nothing sure.’ 1
‘Come, my coach ! Good-night, ladies ! Good-
night, sweet ladies; good-night, good-night.’
1 When Ellen Terry delivered this lecture she usually left her
reading-desk at this point, and acted the scene. She judged it impose
sible to read it. She ended the lecture with Ophelia’s last words,
which are printed above.
THE PATHETIC WOMEN




THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS




THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS
There have been times during the preparation of these
lectures when, thinking of the great mass of literature
on the subject of Shakespeare, I have despaired of
finding anything to say about him which has not been
said before. I recall some lines in one of his sonnets
which describe better than I can what I have felt about
my task :
If there be nothing new, but that which is
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
That, labouring for invention, bear amiss
The second burden of a former child.
Nevertheless I have some reason for believing that
the subject of this lecture—the letters in Shakespeare’s
plays—has not been dealt with before. The letters are
not as familiar as the songs, which have frequently been
published together in many different forms. When I
suggested to a scholarly friend that a little volume of
the letters, with notes on their writers and readers,
would be welcome, I was told that there were too few
for such a publication. This induced me to count


them for the first time, and perhaps you will be as
surprised as my scholarly friend was to hear that they
number thirty-four ! And all these thirty-four letters
are well worth reading for their intrinsic interest. A
letter is a favourite device with dramatists, but few of
them do more than make it serve its explanatory
purpose. Shakespeare does much more. The letters
he wrote for his characters are human documents,
one of the many proofs that he was never driven by the
exigencies of the theatre to depart from the truth.
They are all the more precious because they are the
only letters written by him which have been pre-
served. Were there many letters from him to his
family, his friends, his fellow-actors, his fellow-
dramatists, which have perished ? I doubt it. It
seems unlikely that he was a prolific letter-writer. He
crowded his great life’s work, which has made Eng-
land more honoured throughout the world than the
achievements of her great soldiers, sailors and states-
men, into a score of years. He did not begin his career
as a youthful prodigy and he died when he was fifty-
two. What with adapting plays, creating them, re-
touching them at rehearsal, writing sonnets, acting,
managing companies of actors and having a good time
with his friends, he could not have had much leisure
for pouring out his soul in letters. The man who does
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


that is, as a rule, an idle man, and Shakespeare, I feel
sure, was always busy.
People often say we have no authority for talking
about Shakespeare as a man at all. What do we know
for certain about his life ? Well, I agree with Georg
Brandes (my favourite Shakespearean commentator)
that, given the possession of forty-five important works
by any man, it is entirely our own fault if we know
nothing about him. But perhaps these works are not
by Shakespeare, but by a syndicate of dramatists, or by
some fellow who took his name ! That fellow Bacon,
for instance ! The pursuit of these fantastic theories has
always seemed to me a waste of time. I wish we had just
one authentic letter of Shakespeare’s to put a stop to it.
The first letter I am going to read is a love-letter.
Love-letters seldom interest anyone except the lover
and the beloved. Their contents and their form alike
are seldom distinguished by originality. Brilliant
people and stupid people use the same vocabulary.
Shakespeare is right in making the intellectual Hamlet
begin his love-letter to Ophelia in the conventional
language of gallantry :
To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beau-
tified Ophelia—ln her excellent white bosom—
and so on.
THE LETTERS IN PLAYS


The poem which follows is in the same exaggerated
strain :
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
But never doubt I love.
Then Hamlet, always self-critical, feels the emptiness
of these artificial phrases and expresses himself more
simply and spontaneously :
O dear Ophelia, lam ill at these numbers; I have
not art to reckon my groans; but that I love thee
best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this
machine is to him, Hamlet.
Is he sincere ? Does he really love Ophelia ? There
has been nearly as much argument about this as about
his madness. The truth seems to be that he was deeply,
passionately in love with Ophelia, yet was fully con-
scious of her limitations. The revelation of his
mother’s frailty then filled him with loathing for this
passion of love. He began to see it in its ugliest
aspect, stripped of romance, and despised himself for
having been swept away by it. His attitude in the
scene in which Ophelia returns his presents is evidence
of this. Brutality and tenderness are mingled in it.
His words are those of a man who loves, and hates the
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


base and impure elements in love. ‘ I did love you
once ’ ‘ I love you not he cries, and both these
assertions are true. His struggle to cast Ophelia out
of his life is eased by the discovery that she is too weak
to stand by him and can be made the tool of his
enemies. But he does not forget her. Her tragic
death moves him deeply and wrings from him the
confession of the truth he may often have denied, in
anger at being enslaved by love :
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not, with all their quantity of love,
Make up my sum.
‘ The fair Ophelia.’ * The rose of May.’ She was
very beautiful, this poor weak-witted girl, and Hamlet
was subjugated by her beauty. Who can doubt it ?
In writing those ‘numbers’, at which Hamlet says in
his letter he is ill, Proteus, an expert lover, excels. I can
imagine this gentleman of Verona spinning off yards of
amorous doggerel without the slightest effort. Of his
letter to Julia we hear only the few broken sentences
she can decipher from the bits she pieces together after
she has repented of having torn it up. ‘ Kind Juba ’ :
‘ Love-wounded Proteus ’ : ‘ Poor forlorn Proteus ’ :
‘ Passionate Proteus.’ But they are instructive. It is
clear that there was more about Proteus than about
THE LETTERS IN PLAYS


Julia in that letter ! Well, it is not unusual for lovers
to be more interested in themselves than in their mis-
tresses. Valentine’s letter to Silvia is a good illustra-
tion of this. We hear this letter in its entirety.
Valentine plays prettily enough with words; his
rhymes are neat, but the note of genuine emotion
is never sounded in this jingle :
My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly,
And slaves they are to be that send them flying :
O, could their master come and go as lightly,
Himself would lodge where senseless they are lying !
My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
While I, their king, that thither them importune.
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest
them,
Because myself do want my servants’ fortune.
I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
That they should harbour where their lord should be.
What a contrast between the ‘ love ’ expressed in this
letter, a mere selfish desire for the gratification of the
senses, and the love which does not seek its own,
expressed in the wonderful letter from Antonio to
Bassanio ! Of all the letters in the plays this is the one
which moves me most.
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my
creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond
to the Jew is forfeit; and since in paying it, it is
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


impossible I should live, all debts are cleared between
you and I, if I might but see you at my death. Not-
withstanding, use your pleasure ; if your love do not
persuade you to come, let not my letter.
Antonio’s love has all the tenderness of a woman’s:
(‘ Sweet Bassanio ’ !) : the trustfulness of a child’s:
(I have only to tell him of my plight and he will help
me) ; the generosity and manliness of a true friend :
(Don’t feel that you owe me anything. It’s all right,
but I would like to see you once more and grasp your
hand) ; the unselfishness of a devoted wife’s, or a de-
voted mother s : (You mustn’t think of coming all
the same, if it puts you out). Truly a divine letter !
Our manner of expression is determined by the age
in which we live, but in this letter it is the thing ex-
pressed that seems to have changed. It is impossible
to study Shakespeare’s plays closely without noticing
that to him friendship was perhaps the most sacred of
all human relations. Valentine offers to sacrifice
Silvia to Proteus. Bassanio says that his wife matters
less to him than the life of his friend. To an Eliza-
bethan audience this exaltation of friendship did not
seem strange. Two of Shakespeare’s comrades,
Beaumont and Fletcher, lived together ‘ on the Bank-
side, not far from the playhouse ’, and had the same
clothes and cloak between them ’ ; and there were
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


many such all-sufficing friendships. That attractive
old sinner, John FalstafF, was cut to the heart when his
friend Prince Hal publicly denounced him. His
affection for young Harry is a lovable trait in his
character ; and who does not feel sorry for him,
worthless old waster as he is, when the Prince answers
his salutation : ‘ God save thee, my sweet boy ’, with
the freezing rebuke : ‘ I know thee not, old man ;
fall to thy prayers ’ ? But when Falstaff wrote the
following letter, Prince Hal had not finished sowing his
wild oats, and was still on intimate terms with the
* old man ’. He had, however, as the letter shows,
begun to show a preference for the company of Poins,
which makes Falstaff fear his influence is on the wane.
It is Poins who reads the letter to the Prince, and we
may be sure he gives the references to himself an
ironical emphasis :
Sir John Falstaff, knight, to the son of the King,
nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales, greeting :
I will imitate the honourable Romans in brevity.
... I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I
leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins ; for he
misuses thy favours so much, that he swears thou
art to marry his sister Nell. Repent at idle times as
thou mayest, and so, farewell.
Thine by yea and no, which is as much as to say,
as thou usest him, Jack Falstaff with my familiars,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


John with my brothers and sisters and Sir John with
all Europe.
The effect of the letter on the Prince is not to make
him distrust Poins, but to inspire him to pay Falstaff
out for presuming to criticise his friend, ‘ How
might we see Falstaff bestow himself to-night in his
true colours and not ourselves be seen ? ’ Poins sug-
gests that they should put on two leathern jerkins, and
wait upon the fat knight, who is supping with Mistress
Doll Tearsheet at the Boar’s Head, at table as drawers.
This prank (the last Prince Hal plays on Falstaff, for
soon after his visit to the Boar’s Head, he mends his
madcap ways and becomes dignified, sober and vir-
tuous) is the theme of one of the most broadly comic
scenes in the second part of Henry IV. Falstaff pre-
tends not to recognise the drawers, but I think the
Prince is right in his surmise that he knew who was at
his back, and revelled in the opportunity for scoring off
them. The spectator of this scene should, if the actor
who plays Falstaff sets off his wit with charm, be able
to say as sincerely as Doll Tearsheet : 1 love thee better
than I love e’er a scurvy young boy of them all.’
When we meet Falstaff again in The Merry Wives oj
Windsor —in which play Shakespeare had to bring him
out of his grave, ‘by request ’, because he was so popular
in the theatre that audiences wanted to see him in
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


another play—we still love him, but we have to admit
he has deteriorated. His wit is not so brilliant. He
has become more garrulous, in his letters as well as in
his conversation. You may remember that he writes
two love-letters, word for word the same, to two
women living in the same town, who, as he must have
known, met often and exchanged confidences. This
alone shows that the Falstaff of the Merry Wives is not
quite the man he was in Henry IV. Perhaps this is
because he does not carry his sack quite as well !
Still there are some delightfully Falstaffian touches in
the letter Mrs. Page reads, chuckling at having ‘ ’scaped
love-letters in the holiday-time of her beauty ’, and
now being ‘ a subject for them ’ :
Ask me no reason why I love you ; for though Love
use Reason for his physician, he admits him not for
his counsellor. You are not young, no more am I;
go to, then, there’s sympathy : you are merry, so am
I ; ha, ha ! then there’s more sympathy : you
love sack, and so do I; would you desire better sym-
pathy ? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page, —at the
least, if the love of soldier can suffice, —that I love
thee. I will not say, pity me ; ’tis not a soldier-like
phrase ; but I say, love me. By me,
Thine own true knight,
By day or night,
Or any kind of light,
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


With all his might
For thee to fight,
JOHN FALSTAFF.
This letter tickles us as much to-day—that is when it
is read aloud, for in print it is not very funny—as it
tickled Shakespeare’s contemporaries over three cen-
turies ago. Wonderful, for humour is the element in
drama most affected by time. Remove a joke from its
place in time, and it ceases to exist as a joke. The
human sense of what is tragic has changed very little ;
but the human sense of what is comic changes almost
as rapidly as fashions in dress. So comedies soon begin
to 4 date ’. It may be because Shakespeare saw and used
the fun of the relatively durable things in life, that
it has not become obsolete. His comedy is not
always ‘ quite nice ’, but it is quite mirth-provoking,
that is, if it is not treated academically. If a modern
audience does not laugh at Shakespeare’s jokes, blame
the actors !
The letter that Maria, in Twelfth Night , palms off
on Malvolio as Olivia’s has all the material for
making us laugh ; but I have seen the material used
on the stage in a way which justified the sad
solemnity of the audience. Given good comedians,
the situation in which Maria’s letter is read will always
be good fun. It begins in verse—the fashionable
THE LETTERS IN PLAYS


medium for a love-letter in Shakespeare’s time —and it
must have been difficult for Shakespeare to write such
bad verse as this !
Jove knows I love ;
But who ?
Lips, do not move ;
No man must know.
I may command where I adore ;
But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore :
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life !
Maria is not much of a poet, but when she takes to
prose, she shines !
If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars lam
above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. Some are
born great, some achieve greatness and some have
greatness thrust upon ’em. Thy Fates open their
hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them ;
and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast
thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be opposite
with a kinsman, surly with servants ; let thy tongue
tang arguments of state ; put thyself into the trick
of singularity : she thus advises thee that sighs for
thee. Remember who commended thy yellow
stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered.
I say, remember. Go to, thou art made, if thou
desirest to be so ; if not, let me see thee a steward
still, the fellow of servants and not worthy to touch
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Fortune’s fingers. Farewell, She that would alter
services with thee,
THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.
Then follows the postscript; and Maria had re-
served her great coup for the postscript:
Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling.
Thy smiles become thee well; therefore in my
presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee !
Shakespeare was no Puritan. He probably enjoyed
bear-baiting, and yet, unlike many of his con-
temporaries, felt sorry for the bear. So after writing
this scene, in which Malvolio is baited and deluded
and made to look a fool, he is able to write another in
which our sympathies are roused with the victim of
Maria’s ‘ sport royal ’. Malvolio’s letter to Olivia
makes us see the sport in its cruel aspect.
By the Lord, Madam, you wrong me, and the
world shall know it. Though you have put me
into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule
over me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well
as your ladyship. I have your own letter that in-
duced me to the semblance I put on ; with the which
I doubt not but to do myself much right, or you much
shame. Think of me as you please. I leave my duty
a little unthought of and speak out of my injury.
The Madly-used Malvolio.
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


Although written in circumstances calculated to
make the best servant ‘ a little ’ forget his duty, this
letter is full of the dignity of service, and a just rebuke
to those who hold their ‘ inferiors ’ up to ridicule.
From a letter from a steward in a gold chain, pre-
serving his dignity in an undignified position, I turn
to one from a groom. A plain fellow this. I see him
sitting down, laboriously scratching out a few illegible
sentences. But they are straight to the point, and they
have their dramatic value in adding a vivid touch to
the portrait of Cardinal Wolsey in Henry VIII.
My Lord, — The horses your lordship sent for, with
all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and
furnished. They were young and handsome, and
of the best breed m the north. they were
ready to set out for London, a man of my Lord
Cardinal s, by commission and main power, took
em from me, with this reason : His master would be
served before a subject, if not before the King ;
which stopped our mouths, sir.
There is a tedious letter in Loves Labours Lost, which
must have amused Shakespeare’s contemporaries be-
cause it satirizes the affectations of their day. Armado’s
style in this letter is only a slight exaggeration of that in
which people wrote to Queen Elizabeth. They used six
long words when one short one would have conveyed
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


tneir meaning, and racked their brains for pretentious
and extravagant compliments. Here is a sample of
Armado s euphuism. It is written to Jaccjuenetta, a
country girl, who has attracted the magnificent
Spaniard,
A man in all the world’s new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain.
The magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua
set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar,
Zenelophon ; and he it was that might rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici ; which to annothanize in the vulgar,
O base and obscure vulgar !—videlicet, He came,
saw, and overcame : he came, one ; saw, two ;
overcame, three. Who came ? The king. Why
did he come? To see. Why did he see? To over-
come. To whom came he? To the beggar. What
saw he? The beggar. Who overcame he? The beg-
gar* The conclusion is victory; on whose side ? The
king s. The captive is enriched ; on whose side ?
The beggar s. The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose
side? The king s; no, on both in one, or one in both.
And so forth !
Of course the drollness of the letter lies chiefly in its
having been written by the magnificent Armado to a
stolid illiterate peasant girl. In the theatre we have
seen them both and can appreciate the absurdity of this,
especially if Boyet, who has to read Armado’s pedantic
the letters in Shakespeare’s plays


circumlocutions, is a good actor. But if he is a wise
one he will beg leave to cut some of them, as I confess
I have done !
There is another letter from Armado to the King
which is an even choicer specimen of Elizabethan
jargon. Did I hear a groan ? It’s all right ! lam not
going to read it ! lam going to stop at telling you that
it is a lesson to us all to let our yea be yea and our nay
nay. Armado’s never are. He scorns to tell the King
that he went for a walk in the evening at six. He
must write that he ‘ betook himself to walk ’, that the
time was ‘ about the sixth hour when beasts most
graze, birds best pick, and men sit down to that
nourishment called supper ’ ! Well, there are plenty of
modern Armados. Jargon is still talked and written.
Don’t they say in the House of Commons that ‘ the an-
swer to the question is in the negative ’ ? That strikes
me as a very Armado-like circumlocution for ‘ No ’.
‘ I say she never did invent this letter ’, exclaims
Rosalind, after her first glance at the rhymed jingle
that Phebe sends her under the impression that she is
a handsome young man. Rosalind accuses Phebe’s
shepherd lover, Silvius, of its authorship, but he swears
Phebe wrote it :
I know not the contents : but as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenour.
Shepherds and shepherdesses in the Forest of Arden
are apparently well educated, and have no need of the
services of a professional letter-writer. Yet, if we did
not know to the contrary, we should think Phebe
must have employed one. This is the sort of stereo-
typed thing the parish letter-writer would turn out:
If the scorn of your bright eyne
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect !
Whiles you chid me, I did love :
How then- might your prayers move ?
He that brings this love to thee
Little knows this love in me ;
And by him seal up thy mind ;
Whether that thy youth and kind
Will the faithful offer take
Of me, and all that I can make :
Or else by him my love deny,
And then I’ll study how to die.
I don’t know whether it was the custom in Shake-
speare’s time for women of rank to rely on their
stewards to write their letters for them. But in All’s
Well that Ends Well Bertram’s mother instructs her
THE LETTERS IN PLAYS


steward, Rinaldo, to write to her son for her, and
leaves him to compose the letter :
Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife.
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Rinaldo evidently did his job well, for we hear later
on that the letter ‘ stings Bertram’s nature ’, and that
on the reading of it ‘ he changed almost into another
man ’. Bertram ends his letter to his mother with
‘My duty to you ’. He is not on good terms with her,
but he does not forget to be externally filial and polite.
An odious young man, yet Helena, whom he treats so
outrageously, is annoyingly infatuated with him.
Thus, Indian-Hke,
Rehgious in mine error, I adore
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more.
My next letter-writer, Leonatus in Cymbeline, plays
his wife a dirty trick. But in all ages a man whose
jealousy is roused is forgiven much. Leonatus is
devoted to Imogen, yet he can make her chastity the
subject of a wager with a man who scoffs at the idea of
any woman being chaste.
He writes and asks her to welcome this man of
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


whom he has every reason to think ill. He goes so far
as to describe lachimo to her as ‘ one of the noblest
note, to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied.
Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your
trust.’ ‘So far I read aloud ’, says Imogen ; and adds
that the rest of the letter warms ‘ the very middle of my
heart a letter written by a husband who cannot
believe in her fidelity to him without proof, and has
sent a comparative stranger to test her virtue !
It is not surprising that when lachimo returns with
his catalogue of all the furniture in Imogen’s room, and
a careful description of the mole on her left breast,
cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops i’ the bottom
of a cowslip ’, Leonatus should ‘ see red ’ ; but there is
really no excuse for his sitting down and writing a
base falsehood to lure his wife to her death. How
differently Imogen behaves when lachimo traduces
Leonatus to her ! She is not only indignant; she is
reasonable and sensible. When he urges her to be
revenged, she says that, if it were true, —but she will
not let her heart be abused in haste by her ears, —re-
venge would not help her. And what wisdom there is
in her reply to lachimo ;
If thou wert honourable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek’st.
the letters in Shakespeare’s plays


She sees through this man, but naturally does not
see through this letter from Leonatus :
Justice, and your father’s wrath, should he take me
in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as you,
O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me
with your eyes. Take notice that lam in Cambria,
at Milford Haven : what your own love will out
of this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
increasing in love,
LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.
There is not a word in this letter to make Imogen
doubt its sincerity. Even a wife, made suspicious by a
guilty conscience, could not find anything in it to
alarm her. The trap has been skilfully laid for the
unfaithful wife Posthumus believes Imogen to be,
and she who is faithful and devoted is an easy prey.
She is in such an ecstasy of joy at the thought of the
reunion with her lord that it is natural she should not
observe the strange demeanour of her lord’s servant,
Pisanio, who has delivered the letter. Posthumus has
written a second letter to Pisanio, a brutal letter
ordering the poor fellow to put Imogen to death.
That I should murder her, ... I! Her !
Those shameful words, —
‘ Do’t : the letter
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


That I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity.’—
are pounding in Pisanio’s brain, making his heart sick
while Imogen goes into transports of delight over the
journey to ‘ blessed Milford ’ :
O, for a horse with wings ! Hear’st thou, Pisanio ?
He is at Milford Haven : read, and tell me
How far ’tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day ? Then, true Pisanio,
Who long’st, like me, to see thy lord : who long’st—
O, let me bate, but not like me—yet long’st
But in a fainter kind :—O, not like me ;
For mine’s beyond beyond—say . . . how far it is
To this same blessed Milford, and by the way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
To inherit such a haven !
When Imogen reads her husband’s letter to Pisanio
it is a horrible shock to her. ‘I, false ! ’ She is
appalled at his believing it. She had not believed when
he was slandered. His desire to be revenged, to
punish her with death, seems to her a trifle in compari-
son with his want of faith in her. But she is one who
never does things by halves. Love, compelling her to
forgive, she forgives with all her heart. Posthumus,
when he finds he has been deceived, calls himself
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


‘ a credulous fool and other harsh names, but Imogen
refrains from rubbing it in. The nearest thing to a
reproach she utters is :
Why did you throw your wedded lady from you ?
Then, without pausing for an answer, she says with
extravagant generosity :
Think that you are upon a rock, and now
Throw me again.
To love when all goes well is very easy. To love
when the loved one has behaved like Posthumus is not
so easy. It requires a self-abnegation which is rare
in women, but rarer still in men !
Macbeth’s letter to his wife is interesting, not only
because it is one of those rare tributes that a man some-
times pays to the share his wife has had in the making
of his career, but because of the light it throws on the
visionary element in Macbeth’s character. The goal
of his ambition is a material thing,—an earthly crown,
—but he believes in the supernatural nature of his
‘ call ’.
They met me in the day of success; and I have
learned by the perfectest report, they have more in
them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in
desire to question them further, they made them-
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


selves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I
stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from
the King, who all-hailed me ‘ Thane of Cawdor ’ ;
by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me,
and referred me to the coming on of time, with
‘ Hail, King that shalt be ! ’ This have I thought
good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of great-
ness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing,
by being ignorant of what greatness is promised
thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.
4 My dearest partner of greatness ! * Is not that a
wonderful revelation of the relationship between this
husband and his wife ? Is not the whole letter a
wonderful revelation of the man’s character ? A man
who was driven by dreams into crime.
As an example of Shakespeare’s skill in turning the
dramatic device of the letter to other purposes than
that of explanation, Bellario’s letter to the Duke in
The Merchant of Venice is about the best one could
choose. Besides being a model of what a letter should
be, clear, succinct, fine in sound as well as in sense, it is
a masterly preparation for Portia’s entrance in the
Court Scene, and an instruction as to how the actress
ought to play that scene. Portia is not to behave with
feminine inconsequence and provoke laughter by her
ignorance of legal procedure, but to conduct herself
like a trained advocate. The letter makes Portia’s
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


success in. the role of a learned young doctor of Rome
convincing to the audience.
Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of
your letter I am very sick ; but in the instant that
your messenger came, in loving visitation was with
me a young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthasar.
I acquainted him with the cause in controversy
between the Jew and Antonio the merchant. We
turned o’er many books together. He is furnished
with my opinion ; which, bettered with his own
learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough
commend, comes with him, at my importunity, to
fill up your grace’s request in my stead. I beseech
you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let
him lack a reverend estimation ; for I never knew so
young a body with so old a head. I leave him to
your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better
publish his commendation.
What a lot of things there are to think over in this
letter ! And what pictures it conjures up ! No
Italian painter could make us see more clearly the
learned Bellario receiving his young visitor and in-
structing her how to conduct her case. Shakespeare,
with the vision of genius, saw Italy when he was
writing The Merchant of Venice as when he was writing
Julius Caesar he saw ancient Rome. It may be true, as
Ben Jonson reports, that he knew * small Latin and
less Greek ’, but that did not hinder his making this
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


letter of warning to Caesar typically Latin in its con-
ciseness :
Caesar, beware of Brutus ; take heed of Cassius ;
come not near Casca ; have an eye to Cinna ; trust
not Trebonius; mark well Metellus Cimber;
Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast wronged
Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these
men, and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest
not immortal, look about you ; security gives way
to conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee !
Thy lover,
Artemidorus.
The whole plot of the play and the guiding motive
of each character can be found in these pithy sen-
tences.
If we compare this letter with the long-winded
effusion from Armado to the King in Loves Labours
Lost we get a good idea of the infinite variety of style
that the dramatist had at his command, and of his
insight into the characteristics of different races at
different times. He knew that the Romans were
masters of brevity. He knew that the Italianate Eliza-
bethan euphuists were masters of verbosity. And he
can reproduce the style of both to the life.
In Henry IV Hotspur reads a letter, and this time it is
the man who reads it, not the man who writes it, on
whom our attention is concentrated. We see a quick-
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


witted, courageous fellow, impatient of cautious
people who see both sides of a question and are afraid
of going too far. We see the ‘ extremist ’, with all
his good points and his bad ones. ‘ But, for mine own
part, my lord ’, writes Hotspur’s correspondent, ‘ I
could be well contented to be there, in respect of the
love I bear your house ’.
Hotspur
He could be contented ; why is he not, then ? In
respect of the love he bears our house ; he shows in
this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our
house. . . . [reads] ‘ The purpose you undertake is
dangerous.’ Why, that’s certain ! ’Tis dangerous to
take a cold, to sleep, to drink; but I tell you, my lord
fool, out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower,
safety. ‘ The purpose you undertake is dangerous;
the friends you have named uncertain ; the time
itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the
counterpoise of so great an opposition.’ Say you
so, say you so ? I say unto you again : you are a
shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie. What a
lack-brain is this ! By the Lord, our plot is a good
plot as ever was laid ; our friends true and constant:
a good plot, good friends, and full of expectation ;
an excellent plot, very good friends ! What a
frosty-spirited rogue is this ! Why, my lord of
York commends the plot and the general course of
the action. ’Zounds, an I were now by this rascal,
I could brain him with his lady’s fan.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


There is real ‘ vinegar and pepper ’ in this outburst
of Hotspur’s. Compare it with the mock 4 vinegar
and pepper ’ of Sir Andrew Aguecheek’s swaggering
challenge to Viola in Twelfth Night. Sir Andrew is,
as you know, a very devil of a fellow. He is quite
sure that this letter is bold enough to strike terror into
the heart of the most confident enemy :
Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy
fellow. Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind,
why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason
for’t. Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my
sight she uses thee kindly ; but thou liest in thy
throat; that is not the matter I challenge thee for.
I will waylay thee going home ; where if it be thy
chance to kill me, thou killest me like a rogue and a
villain. Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon
one of our souls ! He may have mercy upon mine ;
but my hope is better, and so look to thyself.
Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn
enemy,
ANDREW AGUECHEEK.
Besides Hamlet’s letter to Ophelia, there are two
other letters from him in the play which are often
omitted in acting versions. The first is to Horatio,
and manifests Hamlet’s complete confidence in his one
loyal friend :
Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give
these fellows some means to the King ; they have
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a
pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase.
Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a com-
pelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant they got clear of our ship, so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me
like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did :
lam to do a good turn for them. Let the King
have the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me
with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I
have words to speakin thine ear will make thee dumb,
yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter.
These good fellows will bring thee where I am.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for
England ; of them I have much to tell thee. Fare-
well.
He that thou knowest thine,
HAMLET.
The actual words of the second letter, to the King,
are harmless enough, yet somehow they convey a
threat. ‘ What is he driving at ? ’ Claudius is
puzzled ; he can make nothing of these studiously civil
lines, and reads them to Laertes to find out what im-
pression they make on him :
High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked
on your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes; when I shall, first asking your
pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my
sudden and more strange return.
HAMLET.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


‘ Naked ! ’ Claudius exclaims. ‘ And in a post-
script here he adds “ alone
In Antony and Cleopatra, Shakespeare adopts the
method of making someone give the substance of a
letter, instead of reading the actual words of the writer.
Twice Octavius Caesar enters ‘ reading a letter ’, and
twice we have to trust to his honour that he is giving
a fair summary of the contents. His account of the
letter which brings news of Antony is probably
coloured by his jealousy of the great rival. I feel he is
exaggerating when he says :
From Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike
Than Cleopatra ; nor the Queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he ; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall
find there
A man who is the abstract of all faults
That all men follow.
Octavius is anxious to justify himself in the eyes of
the world for hating Antony, and what more likely
than that he should make the most of anything his
correspondent has written to Antony’s discredit ?
Antony was, as he is represented here, a voluptuary,
a hard drinker and a great guzzler. But he was also a
THE LETTERS IN PLAYS


great soldier, and a great leader of men. He loved
luxury, yet he set an example to his subordinates in
bearing the hardships and privations of war with
fortitude. It is said he refused all comforts denied to
the rank and file. It was only when he was £ on
leave ’ that his cooks had to put a fresh boar on the
spit every hour so that he could dine when he pleased.
So that ‘ abstract of all faults that all men follow ’
is a misrepresentation, Shakespeare emphasises one of
his faults, a tendency to ‘ talk big ’ and strike big
attitudes. His challenge to take Octavius on in single
combat is an example of this weakness.
Octavius exclaims : ‘He calls me boy ’ (this time
Octavius’s words ring true, and we feel he is reporting
the incident accurately) :
And chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
He hath whipped with rods ; dares me to personal
combat !
Caesar to Antony ! Let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die.
Timon of Athens’s last message to the world is
melancholy reading ! Our ‘ gentle Shakespeare ’ can
be fiercely and savagely cynical at times. Timon makes
his grave on the ‘ beached verge of the salt flood ’, and
erects his own tomb ‘ upon the very hem o’ the sea ’.
FOUR LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE


A soldier takes an impression in wax of the inscrip-
tion scratched on it, and brings it to Alcibiades :
Here lies a wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft.
Seek not my name : a plague consume you wicked
caitiffs left !
Here lie I, Timon, who, alive, all living men did hate.
Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not
here thy gait.
Alcibiades, with a generosity that we should imitate,
finds the noble element in this last effort at consistency
of a consistent hater of men :
These well express in thee thy latter spirits :
Though thou abhorr’dst in us our human griefs,
Scorn’dst our brain’s flow and those our droplets
which
From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven.
Those are appropriate words with which to bring
this little study of an unfrequented corner of the great
world of Shakespeare’s mind to an end ! ‘My faults
forgiven ’ I know, I say farewell.
THE LETTERS IN SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD.
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, GLASGOW


