

f 4 C £
STRICTLY PRIVATE d CONFIDENTIAL.
FOUR REPORTS
UPON THE
Jutdmmti (iScntorth) (Kjold <sxM,
NEAR BATHURST,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
,/m




FOUR REPORTS
UPON THE
lurluunc (tiuitoortli) (Bold Afield,
NEAR BATHURST,
NEW SOUTH WALES.


Vacher & Sons, Printers, 29, Parliament St., and 62, Millbank St., Westminster.


VACHER » SONS, LITH. 29. PARLIAMENT STREET/ LONDON.




Report of C. S. Wilkinson, Esq., F.G.S., Government Geological
Surveyor.
Department of Mines,
Sydney, sth May , 1881.
The Under-Secretary for Mines,
In accordance with your instructions I have
inspected the Wentworth Gold Field.
All the principal gold workings on this field are situated
within portion No, 56 of 1,033 acres in the parish of Huntley,
county of Bathurst, six miles from the town of Orange, on the
main road to Bathurst, and two miles north-east from the Great
Western Railway.
The gold deposits are of two characters, reef and alluvial, the
latter having been derived from the degradation of the former.
Both of these sources have yielded large quantities of gold
within the last eighteen years. They were chiefly worked
during the early part of that period, but latterly the alluvial
deposits have not been worked, and at present only the Reform
Gold Mining Company is raising stone from the reefs.
This comparative cessation of mining operations is, I am
told, attributable, not to the absence of payable gold in the
deposits, but to the following facts : —Firstly, that the deposits
have been worked as far as was possible with the ordinary
appliances ; secondly, that, in the case of reefs below the water
level, the oxidized ores passed into undecomposed sulphurets,
which were difficult of treatment; thirdly, that the terms
upon which the land was leased from the proprietor of the
estate were not such as to enable the ordinary miners with
small capital to accept them ; and, lastly, that where this


difficulty was overcome,’ mismanagement of the mining works,
owing chiefly to the peculiar mode of occurrence of the reef stone,
caused cessation of operations.
The reefs occur at the junction of serpentine and hornblendic
felsite, the latter in places passing into diorite. Along this line
of junction is what the miners term the lode, which, at the
surface, is a fissure six feet or more in width, extending in
direction S. 50° E. (or nearly south-east and north-west), for a
distance of 50 chains.
It is filled with a red sandy ferruginous clay, containing
hard siliceous accretions of irregular shape, locally termed
clinkers. This lode dips to the north-east, at an angle of about
65°, though in some places it is nearly vertical. The hornblendic
felsite forms the foot wall and the serpentine the hanging wall.
In the felsite, at varying distances along the lode, the quartz
veins, from a few inches to six feet thick, coming in from the
west and abutting against the lode, which they appear to follow
down, and form irregular qrrartz “ pipes ” or “ shoots,” dipping
diagonally along the lode towards the east. These veins have
only been found to contain payable gold where they occur in the
lode and form the shoots. The old workings upon sixteen of
these shoots were pointed out to me by Mr. W. H. Newman (the
present manager of the Reform Gold Mine), who has witnessed
the opening of nearly all the mines on this lode. These old
workings had either fallen in or were full of water, so that I
could not examine them beyond noting their positions at the
surface, where the lode appeared to possess more or less the same
character throughout.
In the Reform Mine the vein or shoot known as the “ Uncle
Tom” vein is being worked at a depth of 387 feet. I examined
it at this level, and found the vein 5 feet 6 inches wide, and
extending along the junction of the serpentine and felsite for a
length of 43 feet. The walls of the lode are here nearly vertical,
but the vein or shoot of ore dips easterly at an angle of about
50 degrees. The vein stuff consisted of quartz, calcite, felsitic
rock, and serpentine, with veins and irregular masses of
arsenical and iron pyrites disseminated throughout the mass,
which assumes a serpentinous character as it approaches the


hanging wall of serpentine, and in this part of the vein occurs
the greater portion of the rich gold-bearing arsenical pyrites.
At this level the sinking is nearly dry. The whole of the vein
stuff is taken out and sent to the surface, where it is sorted, the
pieces consisting almost of pyrites, being hand-picked and packed
just as they are in barrels for transmission to Swansea, whilst
the rest of the stone is put through an eight-stamper battery and
over quicksilver and blanket tables, by means of which most of
the free gold is obtained and the pyrites collected These
pyritous tailings are then also shipped to Swansea. Mr. Newman
informs me that the pyritous stone sent to Swansea gives
returns at from 60 to 80 oz. of gold per ton. One sample of
3| cwt. gave at the rate of 103 oz. of gold and 21 oz. of silver
per ton. The free gold obtained from the crushing battery
averages from h oz. to 1 oz. per ton, and the blanketings from
7 oz. to 16 oz. of gold per ton.
The “Uncle Tom” vein has continued without a break from the
surface to the depth at which it is now worked, but the upper por-
tion, also rich in gold, consisted of the above-mentioned ferruginous
sandy clay and clinkers, which are the result of decomposition.
I am informed that the “ Phoenix ” vein (which has been
worked to a depth of 200 feet) and the “ Homeward Bound ”
vein, at a depth of 500 feet (which is the deepest level yet
attained on the field), possess characters similar to those of the
“ Uncle Tom ” vein at its lowest level, and that the other
thirteen veins which were worked, some of them with very rich
returns to various depths (the deepest shaft not exceeding
180 feet), also exhibited the same decomposed ferruginous
character until the water level was reached, when the sulphurets
made their appearance, and the gold became consequently more
difficult of extraction.
The upper or decomposed portion of the lode contains
numerous minute crystalline grains of magnetite, which has
probably been derived from the serpentine of the hanging wall,
for this rock is seen to contain considerable quantities of
magnetite in the thread-like seams disseminated through it.
o o
Between the veins the intervals in the lodes do not contain
payable gold.


From the nature of the bounding rocks and the mode of
occurrence of these veins, I am of opinion that their gold-
bearing character will not diminish as they are followed deeper,
though the yield may be expected to fluctuate occasionally; yet
the rich pyritous stone obtained at the lowest levels in the
“ Reform ” (387 feet), “ Phoenix ” (2UO feet), and “ Homeward
Bound ” (500 feet) mines, shows the persistent richness of the
veins; and this receives further confirmation when we consider
that above the present surface probably many hundred feet of
rock, with the veins traversing them, have been removed during
the erosion of the valley in which the gold field is situated.
This is a very important consideration, for it gives assurance
that these veins or shoots may be profitably worked to greater
depths, but owing to the limited horizontal extent (from 20 to
50 feet) of each shoot along the lode, they will each probably
have to be mined separately, somewhat after the system now so
economically carried out in the “ Reform ” mine under the able
management of Mr. Newman.
About 200 yards distant from this lode is a large quartz reef
6 feet thick. It has a brecciated appearance, due to the reef
consisting of a very close network of veins. It occurs in horn-
blendic felsite, and the quartz is of a similar character to that
forming the veins in the felsite adjoining the lode above
described. It is probably one of the same system of veins. 1
am informed that this large reef has only been prospected to a
depth of about 40 feet. It was found to contain pyrites, but no
gold was visible. I think, however, that it should be further
explored, and special attention given to any portion of it or
brack veins from it, which may be found to come in contact
with or traverse the belt of serpentine which lies between it
and the present known auriferous veins; for from close exami-
nation which I have made of this serpentine, and of the manner
in which the gold and pyrites occur in the “ Uncle Tom ” vein,
I am of opinion that the vein fissures have chiefly derived
their metaliferous contents by infiltration from the serpentine
formation.
Before concluding my remarks upon this important gold
field, I would here refer to its auriferous alluvial deposits. These


are of two ages—the one of recent formation, forming the surface
soils and alluvial flats, which have been worked out; and the
other is of very much older date, and consists of coarse gravels
which once formed the beds of the streams which in the Tertiary
Pliocene period drained the surface of this country, and were
afterwards covered over by volcanic rock.
One of these ancient river beds or leads, known as the Chapel
Hill lead, has been worked for nearly half a mile along its course,
and several thousands of tons of gravel or wash raised, yielding, I
am told, from 1 oz. to soz of gold per load or ton. This lead
proved rich, as might have been expected, seeing that its channel
had been eroded directly across the lode or line of gold-bearing
veins, and it had therefore received all the gold liberated and
swept down from these veins.
But I would specially draw attention to what appears to be
another lead also running across the same line of reef, at a point
about twenty-two chains from where the Chapel Hill lead crosses.
The course of this lead is indicated by a flow of basaltic lava about
three chains wide where it crosses the line of reefs, and it then
extends in a south-westerly direction as if to a junction with the
other lead. The character of this lead has not yet been proved,
but some years ago Messrs. Newman and party sank a shaft on
the side of it, and report to have found very promising indications
—drift, fossil, wood, &c, such as were found in the Chapel Hill
lead, but they were unable to continue their prospecting owing to
the great quantity of water met with. This lead should certainly
be tested, and this might easily be done by sinking a shaft through
the basalt a few chains to the south-west from where it crosses the
line of reef.
Should it, as I anticipate, be found payable, it will be a
discovery of great importance to this district; for as it forms one
of the ancient systems of drainage channels, it must extend for a
considerable distance and be connected with other branch leads,
and will therefore afford a field for a large number of miners.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) C. S. WILKINSON, F.G.S.,
Geological Survey or-in- Charge.


Letter from Mr. John J. Lane, R.M., Warden nf the Orange
Division of Bathurst Gold Fields.
Orange, April 20 th, 1881.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 12th instant, requesting
me to furnish the fullest information I could possibly give, from
my own personal knowledge upon the Wentworth Gold Field, I
have the honour to submit the following report for your considera-
tion :
The Wentworth Gold Field is located near the head of the
Summer Hill, known as the Frederick’s Valley Creek, and
consists of a grant from the Crown to W. C. Wentworth, of one
thousand and thirty-three (1,033) acres. The. whole estate is
abundantly watered, and the land of an excellent agricultural
character, being chiefly composed of decomposed basalt.
The township is similar to the usual type of an Australian
village or small town, and is situated on the Great Western Road,
about five miles from Orange, and two from the Huntley station
of the Great Western Railway. It comprises an excellent public
school, post and telegraph offices, stores and hotels, together with
churches, both Anglican and Catholic.
The Great Western Road going towards Orange passes through
Frederick’s Valley, which is well watered by the creek or rivulet
of that name. This creek is called the Summer Hill lower down,
and at its confluence with the Lewis Ponds Creek the town of
Ophir is situated, and at this spot the first gold in Australia was
discovered bv Mr. Hargraves. Where this road traverses the
Wentworth Gold Fields, there is on the northern side a small hill
leading towards the creek, from which crops out a very strong
wide quartz reef. On the southern side of the road, the land
gently rises about the village, and running nearly parallel with the
road, not more than 50 yards from it, is the main auriferous lode
of the gold field.


It is plainly apparent from the different bearing of these lodes,
that they must form a junction at some point within the Gold
Field, and these bearings, the strikes and dips being known,
must approximately determine the position where this junction
will take place. In my opinion, operations of an extensive
character, undertaken at or near this position, would not fail to
bring about the most favourable results. The late Rev. Dr. W.
B. Clarke, the indefatigable and successful geologist, always
pointed out this spot as likely to be fabulously rich. His theory
was, that when these lodes met, there would be found an enor-
mous hunch, or bonanza, of the richest auriferous ore, and
certainly up to the present time the mining operations have
verified his predictions in the production of ore, which becomes
richer as the mine increases in depth.
Gold was found in this locality almost immediately after Ophir
had been discovered, and so long as ore rich in free gold could
be obtained, the field was worked with the simple apparatus
employed by the common digger; when, however, a depth had
been obtained where oxidising influences no longer affected the
ore, which depth was always below the water line, then the
rude appliances of the digger were no longer effectual, and the
mine was consequently abandoned. In only two cases have the
deep workings been made, the “ Reform ” and “ Golden Point.”
Some thirty (30) claims of about eighty (80) feet each have
been more or less worked on the main line of the lode, besides
the alluvial ground on the flat near the creek, and other drift
discovered underneath the basalt. Some of these claims were
marvellously rich, as more than one hundred thousand (100,000)
oz. of gold have been sold in bars and dust to the bankers
and storekeepers of Orange. It will be impossible for me in the
limits of this report to give full details of all these claims, I
shall therefore only mention several of the best known, and the
class of ore that was obtained from them.
The claim known as the “ Phoenix ” has been altogether the
richest on the gold field. From the surface (to about one
hundred and fifty (150) feet deep the gold was free. The
pyrites had been almost completely oxidised, exceedingly rich
crushings were the rule at the “ Phoenix,” and frequently over one


hundred (100) pounds weight of gold were got from a bucket of
stuff. At a greater depth, and below the water line, the ore
changed mostly to sulphides, but continued very rich, and the
last three (3) tons crushed from the extreme depth of the mine,
which is only two hundred and six (206) feet, yielded seven
hundred and sixty (760) oz. of gold. There can be no doubt
that on this portion of the lode, the cap of the reef was located,
and reasoning by analogy, it is only fair to suppose that its great
richness will continue to a considerable depth, probably over two
thousand (2,000) feet.
The next claim to this was abandoned on account of the
water, but an adjoining one, called the “ Lawyer’s,” got excellent
ore, and in one spot obtained as much as two hundred (200)
oz. of gold from four (4) buckets of stuff.
The “ Industry Rewarded,” only eighty (80) feet from the last-
mentioned claim, from one crushing of twenty-and-a-half
obtained two thousand seven hundred (2,700) oz. of gold.
The “ Perseverance ” also realised immense returns, getting
stuff which yielded in some places forty (40) oz. to the bucket.
The “ Uncle Tom,” now called the “Reform,” is one of the
two mines I alluded to as having been worked to any great
depth. This mine has been worked continuously for about
seventeen (17) years, and is now about three hundred and fifty
(350) feet deep. The ore at this depth consists of free or
floating gold in the serpentine, and compound sulphides of
gold, silver and iron ; as a rule this last-mentioned ore forms in
pipes and pockets, or bunches. The extreme richness of some
of these bunches is truly astonishing, yielding in assays con-
siderably over a thousand (1,000) oz. of gold to the ton.
This mine is now managed by Mr. Henry Newman, and the ore
is classified as follows :
1. The stone or ore as it comes to the surface is hand-picked,
and the best lumps are sent away to England entire. They are
then crushed, sampled, and sold through Messrs. Johnson,
Matthey & Co,, and yield from fifty (50) to two hundred (200)
oz. to the ton.
2. The second quality ores and a portion of the serpentine
are crushed for the free gold, and the slimes treated in order


that the pyrites may be saved. This latter quality, chiefly
sulphides from the best slimes is exported as No. 2, and generally
yields from twenty (20) to forty (40) oz. per ton.
3. The refuse from No. 1 ore is crushed, and the free gold
obtained by the use of mercury in the usual way. The sulphides
collected on the blanket tables are exported as No. 3, and generally
assay from fifteen (15) to thirty (30) oz. per ton.
4. The slimes from the refuse are washed in small sluice boxes,
and the pyriteous portion, cleared in a somewhat rough manner,
is sent away as No. 4 quality, yielding on an average from
eight (8) to twelve (12) oz. per ton. In all these quantities of
ore there is also a quantity of silver, which increases in direct
proportion to the depth of the mine.
The “Golden Point” and “United Mines” yielded more than
one hundred thousand pounds (£100,000) worth of gold. On
this ground they have sunk considerably over four hundred
(400) feet, and the workings are the deepest on the gold field.
The sulphides at the lowest level yielded two hundred (200) oz. of
gold and sixteen (16) oz. of silver to the ton.
It is worthy of note that this point is the nearest to the
massive quartz reef instanced at the commencement of this
report, with reference to the late Rev. Dr. W. B. Clarke’s
opinion.
I cannot conceive a more advantageous field for systematic
mining operations on a large scale, similar to those which are
carried out on the celebrated Comstock lode, in the neighbour-
hood of Virginia City, Nevada, in America, where the workings
have been carried to a depth of over three thousand (3,000) feet.
The “ Wentworth ” lode seems to be of the same character
as the “ Comstock,” the peculiarity of rich compound sul-
phides sometimes taking the form of small pipes, then
opening out into pockets of greater or less extent, while in all
cases there is a well-defined lode. There is, however, one
remarkable difference, which is, that while the “ Comstock ”
bonanzas give sulphides containing hundreds of ounces of silver,
and sixteen (16) or twenty (20) oz. of gold, the sulphides of
the “ Wentworth ” contain several hundred ounces of gold to
sixteen (16) oz. of silver to the ton. In reality, with the excep-


tion of the two workings I have especially indicated, the whole
of the gold field is practically unworked as regards the sulphides ,
the claims having been abandoned when the water became too
strong for the appliances of the mines.
I am not an engineer to advise as to the methods that should
be employed to drain the ground, so as to work at the depths
required; but I feel assured, ami am borne out in my opinion
by all the old and intelligent miners on the gold field, that with
proper engineering appliances for converting it into maxketable
Gold, an enormous source of wealth would be speedily developed,
giving employment to thousands, and an immense revenue to
the owners.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) JOHN J. LANE, R.M.,
Warden for Orange Division of Bathurst Gold Fields.
Report of Mr. H. N. Newman, the Manager of the Reform
Gold Mining Company.
This is a short but reliable report of the Lucknow Gold Field,
compiled from 18 years’ experience and personal knowledge : a
field, comparatively speaking, unknown.
Lucknow is a mining township consisting of in all some 1,033
acres, only a very small portion of which has been actually
mined upon; untouched there are some 800 acres odd of rich
agricultural land, securely fenced and permanently watered,
This property is distant six miles south-east of the prosperous


town of Orange, and some 32 west of the city of Bath urst; the
Main Western Railway line is but one mile distant ; the Main
Western Road‘runs through the estate, which has a frontage to
Summer Hill Creek of over 1 i mile, with a never-failing supply
of water-. This township is the very centre of an auriferous
tract of country : to the south-east is the well known Frederick’s
Valley, to which allusions have so often been made by two of
our most reliable geologists, viz., the late Rev. W. B. Clarke
and Mr. Stutchbury, and is surrounded by hundreds of acres of
untried basalt country. Gold has been picked up on the surface
upon many occasions after rainfall. Upon the south-west lie the
“ Forest Reefs,” Trumpy Swamp, Alluvial, Brown’s Creek,
Flyer’s Creek, and many other mining centres, all proven very
rich in gold and silver ; upon the north-west the first gold ever
discovered in the Colonies was obtained ; upon the north-east
are the far-famed “ Hill End Reefs,” which have given out so
many tons of gold ; upon the north-north-east is Ophir, to
which is due Australia’s greatness ; upon the north-north-west
are the Iron Bank Reefs and alluvial workings, also Stoney
Creek, rich in auriferous deposits ; besides other minor localities
of less note, so that beyond a doubt Lucknow is the very core of
mineral wealth.
The township consists of a public school lately completed by
the Government at a cost of £1,500, a Church of England and
Roman Catholic chapel, post and money order office, telegraph
office, a wholesale and retail general store, two hotels, two
butchers’ shops, one baker’s shop, one blacksmith’s shop, one
boot and shoe factory, one saddle and harness factory, and thirty
places of residence, five of which are purchased property ; the
right to mine, however, being reserved by the original owner,
there are four mining and crushing engines, and two batteries
upon the field.
The mining portion of the estate, or rather, I should say, the
portion so far mined upon, was principally held by miners of
from two to eight men in a party under a monthly tenancy only.
Commencing at about one mile from the south-east boundary is
a claim I will call No. 1. This was known as “ Nicholl’s,” and
was worked some 17 years since; from this some exceedingly


rich quartz was obtained at a depth of 120. In com-
parison with other claims I shall have to mention in my short
report, this one was not very rich upon the "whole, although
some parcels gave a very satisfactory result ; for instance—7
tons of vein gave 84 oz. of gold=l lb. weight to the ton ;
this ground was abandoned at 120 feet on account of heavy
water (manual labour could not compete with it), and with the
tenure of a month this can be easily understood. It was no
inducement to erect machinery even had the men the necessary
means so to do ; this claim has never since been operated
upon, but undoubtedly is a rich and valuable property.
No. 2 claim was known as the “Snobs’,” designated such for
the reason that those working the same were shoemakers by
occupation, and this being almost their first venture one can easily
imagine how indifferently the ground was mined • however, the
spirited sons of the last fairly surprised a great many by the
way in which they stuck like wax to their work ; they eventually
succeeded in striking the lode and obtaining prospects from 15
to 20 oz. to the dish. Several good piles of dirt, known as
Brown’s vein, gave a yield of hundreds of ounces. I am
sorry to say this ground was abandoned at an early stage through
heavy water, and has never since been worked. Only a few days
since I saw two of the men alluded to, and had some conversa-
tion about the workings when left : they gave me to understand,
and without hesitation, that where they left off, which was as
far as they could reach down their hands in the water, they
could pinch up gold in their fingers. I had no reason to doubt
the remarks, as I know of many other claims that had rich gold
proven, but the water was too heavy and the tenure too short.
No. 3 claim was a very small one, it was known as the
“ Crinoline,” 40 feet of ground, two men’s ground, but in which
many participated, I being one of the many. By referring to
my old pocket-book I find an entry which states I gave £125
cash and £75 out of the proceeds for one quarter of a share, or
one eighth of the claim = 5 feet of ground. Further on another
entry appears (a very pleasing recollection) in red pencil—“ £3OO
worth of gold divided this week from dish prospects.” This little
ship was worked to 115 feet, from which many thousands of


ounces were obtained in the short space of fifteen months.
Pyrites, known at that era as mundic, was left in the bottom.
No. 4 claim, the “ Shamrock,” 80 feet of ground. This claim
also was exceedingly rich, a great many thousands of ounces
were obtained during the two years it was worked; at one time
as much as 1,330 oz. of amalgam was obtained from prospects
alone by dish washing during a fortnight ; one small pile of dirt
consisting of only a few tons gave a yield of 112 oz. per ton;
several other crushings gave from 50 to 100 oz. per ton. This
ground was abandoned at 120 feet from the same cause as the
previous claims, water and short tenure.
No. 5 claim, the “ Golden Gate,” was quite equal, if not
superior, to the “ Shamrock; ” as much as 1,500 oz. of gold
was obtained from seven tons of vein. There were several
crushings from this claim of surprising richness, which was
eventually abandoned, as usual, from the ordinary causes.
No. 6 claim, the “ Morning Star.” This luminary was a very
early set, although as much as 3 lb. weight of gold was washed
from a dish of vein. Several small parcels gave fair returns,
but not up to the general average of gold-getting in those days;
certainly the property was in very bad hands, and was but a
short time operated upon before it was abandoned.
No. 7 claim, “ Spicius,” or the “ United Miners.” This
property was in most excellent hands, was well and systemati-
cally worked for some time, with credit and profit to the owners;
was only 80 feet of ground, but returned over £50,000 worth of
gold and silver within the year. It was worked by manual labour
to about 120 feet, then by horse power to 140 feet, and eventually
abandoned from the usual cause. This is a magnificent piece of
ground, and worth a lot of money.
No. 8 claim, the renowned “ Golden Point,” 80 feet of
ground, was only equal to a claim I have yet to mention,
known as the “ Homeward Bound.” For the first six months
the “ Golden Point ” men worked upon the vein, they netted the
almost fabulous sum of £42,000 worth of gold. This claim was
Avorked by hand to 122 feet, then by horse to 145 feet, but had to
succumb to the evil of heavy water and the monthly tenure, but
left in good gold.


No. 9 claim, “ Devlin’s.” No vein was discovered in this
piece of ground, although very rich prospects were repeatedly
obtained in the shallow levels.
No. 10 claim, 80 feet of ground known as “ Bullocky’s.”
In the early days they were unsuccessful in finding a vein
originating in their ground, and was abandoned, but in years
afterwards this became a most valuable property on account of
the famous “ Homeward Bound ” underlying at a depth into the
claim. Of late years there must have been £20,000 worth of
gold taken from this property; it was left as pyritious stone
that will yield more by assay, over 80 oz. to the ton at some-
thing like 500 feet deep. This fact should go a long way to
prove the permanency of the various veins upon this most
remarkable field.
No. 11 claim, the famous “Homeward Bound,” my own and
called such by me, because I was upon my way home to Sydney,
via Lucknow, when I was induced to try my fortune once more,
having but seven shillings and a half in my treasury after
leaving the Forbes gold field. I started this claim myself,
having traced the gold from alongside the road by dish washing
to a certain distance up the hill, which was at the time one
mass of basalt boulders, I discovered the gold to be coming
from under the boulders in a kind of light yellow clay, and
dipping much into the hill, which rose very fast. I decided to
sink and cut this streak of yellow clay higher up the hill. I put
the hole down a few feet, but had a difficulty in persuading even
one of my good mates to assist in bottoming. I at last suc-
ceeded in getting one to join me. So absurd was considered the
project, that we were known as the Mad Men, and our hill as
Madman’s Hill, and no doubt, if some of the issues of a weekly
paper printed at Orange some 17 years since could be found,
references would be found highly interesting. The Western
Examiner, long since defunct, said; —“ The prospectors upon
Madman’s Hill have nothing, and the general opinion is they
never will, unless it be a strait jacket each.” The very next
issue of the same rag had a very different tale to chronicle; in
large letters, occupying nearly half a column, was to be ascer-
tained that the prospectors of the “ Homeward Bound ” had


struck rich gold, the first dish 9 oz. of gold, and from three small
buckets no less than 54 lb. of the precious metal. This was
the advent of the veins, this was the first shaft sunk upon the
famous Lucknow gold lode. We tried ten loads in an old
puddling machine, as there was no crushing plant upon the field
at the time; from it we obtained 2,000 oz.; the refuse or sludge
we collected, and by the time a crushing plant was erected the
grass had grown over the sludge. We dug up the sludge, and
mixed it with stones and bottles, in all, sludge, stones, and
bottles, 12 tons (originally only 10 tons); this gave a yield of
2,096 oz. We had but 40 feet of ground, which gave us
£28,000 for the first nine months’ work. So still I was not
“ homeward bound,” for I have remained here, and am still here
to place upon record some of the richest finds ever known upon
this or any other field. We abandoned at 190 feet from the
cause attributed to others, but the vein was worked by engine
power to 500 in the Bullocky’s, and eventually Devlin’s
ground by underlaying. In this property rich pyrites were found,
the same as finds its way monthly to Johnson, Matthey & Co.,
Hatton Garden, London, from the Reform Gold Mining Company.
The last stone taken from the “ Homeward Bound ” vein, at 500
feet, realised 112 oz. to the ton, and 13 oz. of silver. This being
the deepest sinking upon the field shows conclusively the per-
manency of the veins. U pon the property is erected a 25 horse
power brass engine, with pump, winding gear, wire rope, black-
smith’s shop, and all requirements complete.
Nos. 12 and 13, each four men’s ground, proved blanks, no
veins were found in them.
No, 14, known as the “John Bull,” was nearly equal to
“ Bullocky’s.” Through a similar cause, viz., that of the vein in
the adjoining ground underlaying into it, nothing of much moment
occurred in the shallow ground, but at a depth many thousands
of ounces were obtained.
No. 15, the “Uncle Tom,” at present better known and
appreciated as the Reform Gold Mining Company. This pro-
perty, I may say, has never ceased working (although it has
changed hands and names many times) for eleven years, except-
ing when waiting for machineiy, which is sufficient evidence of


its value. The vein in this property is unanimously admitted to
be the main vein of the field, has always been the largest and
strongest in every particular, and bears every feature of per-
manency. It has been worked so to speak through four claims,
underlaying from one to the other, starting from the grass, and
is now 387 feet deep in the underlay, which is about 1 foot in 3.
Samples from this level took the prize against all comers at the
Sydney Exhibition, besides a diploma of merit. The vein is
35 feet long, and averages 6 feet wide; contains four grades of
ore, which are shipped monthly to Hatton Garden, London
First, is Ho. 1, bulk stone, picked by hand when x’aising; sent in
its natural state for treatment. This yields froxxx 60 to 103 oz,,
and at times more per ton. The last return to hand, April,
1881, gave 103 oz. of gold and some 17 oz. of silver per ton in
bulk; samples tried, sent after exhibiting in Sydney, and which
took the prize before alluded to, went over 1,000 oz. to the ton,
and some 40 oz. of silver. The other 3 grades of ore are
obtained by streaming the sand, after putting the crushed stone
over blanket tables, with various streams of water; this I’equires
cai’eful treatment, othei’wise a loss is sure to exxtail by finely-
crushed ore floating away. This Company have several known
veins in their property, but are concentrating their labour upon
one only; four of the veins known to exist have given out their
thousands of ounces in years past. Only one has been seen
for years deeper than 150 feet at most, and payable. They
were all of them worked by small parties of two and four men,
years since. Upon the “ Reform ” property is erected two sub-
stantial engine sheds, iron roofed; thei’e are two main shafts.
Ho. 1, 300 feet deep, the vein is 87 feet deeper on the underlay;
Ho. 2 shaft, 200 feet deep. Upon Ho. 1 shaft is al6 h.p, Robey
winding and pumping engine, wire rope, breaking strain 20 tons
to the inch; pump, ladders in shaft, blacksmith’s shop, with all
requirements. Ho. 2 shaft has upon it a 25 h.p. horizontal
engine, with pumps and winding gear attached; also an eight-
head stamper battery, large Chilian mill, each roller weighing
two tons; blanket tables, &c., all in full operation and thorough
and complete working order. Shipments of ore leave regularly
every month, two will leave this month, while the slope at


present coming down shows sufficient for several when dressed
for the market. This vein has turned out more gold and silver
in its term of 17 years than many gold fields of great extent
have done altogether, and its present appearance would justify
the belief that the predictions of the late Rev. W. B. Clarke and
our present geologist, Mr. Wilkinson, will be fulfilled, viz., the
greater depth attained, the greater the reward. I have been
expecting a visit from Mr. Wilkinson daily, and have postponed
ray report until now. That gentleman, however, not having
favoured me so far, I have bean compelled to proceed ; I am in
hope still that I may yet have -the pleasure of including his
valuable opinion before I close. I need hardly say I am sure it
will be highly satisfactory, judging from the most favourable
opinion expressed by that gentleman of samples of an entirely
new make of stone I recently submitted for his examination. I
am very happy, and at the same time very grateful, over the
many and great interests taken by Mr. Wilkinson in our px-ogress ;
I am very much indebted to that gentleman oxx behalf of our
Company for his many kindnesses, and look upon his visit as a
great boon to the district generally.
No. 16 claim, the “ Perseverance,” four men’s ground,
woi'ked many yeax-s since to 180 feet deep, from which level to
the surface nxany thousands of ounces wex-e taken. A record of
the retux-n I have mislaid, but I believe it can be obtained from
one of the banks at Oi’ange—l think the Commercial. I have
seen from 14 to 20 oz. washed fi’om a cap of dirt, 40 oz. from a
nail can, and 122 oz. fx-om an ordinary txxb of dirt. There were
several good crushings, bxxt what they actually were I caxxnot
say, havixxg lost my record of them; bxxt of this I am sure,
they were quite up to the usxxal average in those days. This
claim was left on account of heavy water.
No. 17 was rightly called the “ Hard to Find.” No vein of
any consequence was discovered in this 80 feet, but the lax-gest
specimen ever found xxpon this field was discovered upon the
sxxrface. I had not the pleasxxx'e of seeing it myself, but have it
described by those who did as being about 11 cwt. It was sent
to England ixxtact by the late William Wentwox-th, Esq., who at
that time was the owner of this estate.


No. 18, the “ Industry Rewarded,” well named, and well paid
were the owners. They at first searched too far below the joint
of dionite and serpentine, not knowing the strange peculiarities
of the field, and spent much valuable time to no good end.
Eventually they tried higher up, and fortunately hit the joint
6 feet from the surface: 6 tons of vein gave them simply
800 oz. of gold ; at 35 feet, 10 tons gave 730 oz.; at 90 feet,
a small parcel of 3 tons gave 210 oz.; at 130 feet, ton gave
the almost absurd return of 960 oz. of gold = 2,700 oz. of gold
from 20-j tons in all, or £B,lOO in value. There were several
minor lots, of which I kept no record. This claim was abandoned
through heavy water, and on account of not being able to
procure a longer tenure than a month.
No. 19, “ Dutchey’s.” No vein was discovered in this claim.
No. 20, “ Kinghom’s.” No gold was obtained, to my know-
ledge, in the shallow level, but at 100 feet a vein of pyrites was
cut, with large quantities of water, and, being hand-worked, was
abandoned. They also being but monthly tenants, no induce-
ments were given to erect the necessary machinery; so, like its
predecessors, it had to succumb, and has never since been
operated upon.
No. 22, known all over New South Wales and Victoria for
its richness, was the “ Phoenix.” The yields obtained at various
times by different little companies are, comparatively speaking
verging upon the fabulous. Upon the guess at one time, so
exceedingly rich was the surface vein, that it was carried in
handbarrows direct to the furnace upon the hill, and the gold
run into bars. One gentleman, now gone over to the great
majority (John Russell, Esq., of Sydney), arrived upon the field
at about 3 o’clock in the afternoon, and offered no less a sum
than £I,OOO an hour for permission to work upon the vein until
sundown, which, I need hardly say, was refused. At a depth of
80 feet, two bullocks were yoked to pull the stuff therefrom,
which at that time was sent up in iron tubs attached to heavy
chains; but so exceedingly rich was the vein upon one occasion,
that these animals could not lift the iron tubs from the level.
Quantities of this rich material were carelessly washed by most
inexperienced hands in the rudest of fashion. Primitive puddling


machines and Long Toms, sometimes cradles, were useck 510
such thing as a stamper battery was in vogue in those early
days of gold-getting. The consequence was an enormous loss
occurred. Many hundreds of ounces were, years afterwards,
obtained from the waste in the creek, I knew of the creek being
taken up threes different times and washed to great advantage,
and afterwards again picked up and passed through a crushing
mill, paying handsomely. Enormous quantities of gold are
reported to have been appropriated by the employ6s, some of
whom suffered for their indiscretion. This mine is now 200 feet
deep, and I might say unworked. Three tons of vein, the last
taken out, from the deepest level gave a yield of 760 oz.
Upon this property is now a 25 horse-power horizontal engine,
pumps, jager, winning gear with 6 in. flat rope; attached is a
10-head stamper battery, quicksilver tables, one of Munday’s
patent buddies, also one of Holmans and Tomkins’s patent
surface pumps, blacksmith’s shop, &c., altogether covered with
an iron roof, making a complete and valuable mining plant,
which with judicious management should be one of the grandest
mining ventures in New South Wales.
No. 23, the “ Happy.go-lucky,” four men’s ground. Worked
by four sailors who knew nothing whatever of mining at the
time, hence the term “ Happy-go-lucky.” They worked very
well, or rather hard. They were certainly a comical party;
however, they were very lucky for„ a time. At 40 feet they cut
the lode, and upon several occasions washed over 200 oz. to the
tub. They obtained large quantities of gold, but on account of
their insobriety it was impossible to ascertain correctly what they
did get. They got the ground into such a bad state from an
insufficient knowledge of working, and by picking the eyes out of
the ground, that it at last became too unsafe to work. It was not
fit to go into at 100 feet, and was abandoned.
No. 24, the “ Rise and Shine,” three men’s ground, was
worked, or rather mined by, if anything, an inferior set of hands
to No. 23. Several very satisfactory crushings were taken out,
but I cannot state actual results. It was abandoned at 80 feet.
The balance of the ground to the south-east boundary, about
quarter of a mile, is comparatively untried ground; nothing,


with the exception of a late discovery, having been done upon it.
This discovery is some 300 feet distant from Claim No. 23, and
is called “ Scotty’s Find ” upon Jackass Flat. It has not been
many months opened; rich prospects have been taken out; but
being in much lower ground, is greatly troubled with water. A
hand pump was erected, and—absurd as it may appear, the
fact remains the same—half an hour after being put to work it
refused duty, and upon being examined, the bucket of the pump
was discovered to be full of exceedingly fine gold. I saw it
washed out. Great things are naturally expected from this
ground, but nothing short of machinery, and that good, will
develop it. A horse pump has since been erected, but proved
too primitive. This claim is now idle, I think, at 20 feet. It is
a valuable piece of ground, without doubt.
Upon the flat below this claim many parties have worked for
years, from time to time, with varied success. The sinking is
but a few feet. Nuggets of different sizes are repeatedly being
found.
Upon the hill to the south-west, about 500 yards distant, is a
basalt formation. Alluvial wash is known to exist. A shaft was
put down some fourteen years since and a trial crushing taken
out by a party named Miller. The lode is either 80 or 90 feet
wide, the wash about 2 feet thick. The trial put through at the
Phoenix mill returned some 12 dwt. per tin. This alluvial if
opened to the public as upon Government ground, and upon such
or other liberal terms, would offer profitable employment for a
large population; but under the old regime is valueless, the
royalty required excessive, and the tenure an absurdity. There
are many other such formations upon this estate which have
never been sunk upon for similar reasons. Some have ventured,
and been well repaid. An instance is that upon the hill known
as Chapel Hill. The first hole bottomed was partly at my
instigation, although I was not allowed to participate in the
result, as agreed. However, it proved a payable claim. Eight
men’s ground, bottomed in 2 to 3 feet of wash, having a width
of fully 100 feet, which gave a yield of from 1 to li oz. per ton.
Being dug and shallow, only 80 feet paid well. Next upon the
same hill was the Chapel Hill claim, and was just such another


as No. 1. Then came the “Result,” eight men’s ground, I being
one, and it is so called as partly the result of my idea that
a vein existed in the hill. The wash here was better and the
run more defined. It was taken out for 150 feet wide, and
contained from 2 to 3 feet of dirt. The yield was from 1 to
2 oz. to the ton. This claim also being dug paid very well.
Immense piles of wash dirt came out of this claim—as many as
1.000 tons in a pile—which gave grand dividends. The next in
rotation was the “ Reserve,” so called from the fact that the
Commissioner then in charge reserved this claim himself, but
eventually parted with most of the interests. This piece of
ground turned out the best upon the hill. The wash was taken
out for 200 feet wide, and of a thickness of 2 to 3 feet. It
crushed from Ito 5 oz. to the ton. There must have been some
5.000 tons of dirt taken out of this claim. I am aware of
£1,400 being paid for crushing expenses upon one occasion ;
the owners reaped many golden harvests from this claim. It had
a rock roof, and was easily worked.
The next was the last claim worked upon the hill. It was
called No. 4. It did not pay quite as well as the “ Reserve ; ”
nevertheless, it was a good claim. The wash was taken out for
fully 500 feet wide, with an average of 3 feet of dirt; consequently
returned many thousands of tons, which paid very well. This
lead has never been followed up since, although several parties
have made application for permits to prosecute the search. I
myself only last month, on behalf of a party desirous of testing
the continuation of the lead, offered £lOO per year for the
ground. This was refused. I shall be glad to take the ground
at this price at any time. I have no hesitation in saying there is
profitable employment for years upon the alluvial deposits alone
in this field for a very large population, if the ground could be
obtained at anything like a fair rent and tenure.
In conclusion, I may state that this report of the returns and
resources of this field are intended as an item to be included in
the industries of New South Wales, shortly to be published.
They are given from no interested motives whatever, other than
as a thorough believer in the permanency of the alluvial and
lode deposit of this field, and a great desire for their develop-


raent. I give the few facts which I have endeavoured to describe
from my own personal knowledge and experience, which extend
over a term of now some eighteen years, and, should occasion
require, can produce endorsements of equal antiquity as to the
authenticity of my remarks contained in the report, which gives,
upon the whole, but a very faint shadow of the actual riches
obtained, and yet to be obtained, from this comparatively un-
known field—the “ Eldorado ” (as designated by our geologists) of
New South Wales.
This reminds me that I had almost forgotten to draw attention
to a most particular portion of the field. Upon our eastern
boundary, or, I should say, the eastern boundary of the “ Reform”
propei ty, is an immense quartz reef, mining north-north-east and
south-south-west. This reef was pointed out to me some fifteen
years since by the late Rev. W. B. Clarke as the main vein of
the field from whence the gold in great abundance would sooner
or later be obtained. I did not, I confess, think seriously of the
advice so generously given, but since then many years have
elapsed and circumstances transpired which places the theory
almost beyond doubt, that a grand junction of all the various east
and west veins must transpire with this main vein, seeing that
one and all have been proved to be going direct for this the
fountain head. We are now but a stone’s throw from this very
spot, as are most of the other veins, all of which have been
undeniably very rich. I have now not the slightest hesitation in
believing that this undisturbed vein is the principal, and will
before long be made to give up its hidden treasures. It does not
require much force to make one believe what an immense show of
gold will transpire when the junction of all those veins takes
place. I know of nothing that would give me greater pleasure
than the sinking of a main shaft, to at once and for ever settle the
question. I conceive it now a certainty that the so junction
could be obtained by so sinking, and I strongly recommend it to
the owners of the property.
H. IST. NEWMAN,
General Manager , Reform Gold Mining Co.
Lucknow, April 20 th, 1881.


Copy Letter , H, W. Newman, Esq., to John Cosgreve, Esq.
Lucknow, N. S. Wales,
December 21 st, 1882.
John Cosgreve, Esq.,
278, Waghley Road,
Birmingham, England,
Dear Sir,
I am duly in receipt of your favour of 18th
October, 1882, which has had my mature consideration, and now
reply to your several questions.
I am not at present in the position to warrant my putting in
£5OO in your proposed syndicate, although I believe it a better
investment than I have gone into. T have put nearly £2,000 in
the property adjoining directly this of Mr. Wentworth’s, and
<£1,500 in some 2,400 acres south-west of Mr. Wentworth’s, so
you see I have gone in pretty well around here ; but had I had
any idea of yoar proposals would not have gone in for either.
I have been some very considerable time waiting and wanting to
get up a syndicate for your venture, but did not see any chance,
hence my speculation adjoining. Still, after lam made aware of
all particulars concerning matters, of which I at present know
nothing at all, I may possibly manage to join, if required of me.
However, I will now answer your questions as asked.
ls£ What would be my estimate of a trial shaft?
A trial shaft! What do you mean by such a shaft ? If you
want to try for unknown veins, then a trial shaft might be necessary,
and it would depend entirely upon the nature of the sinking and
depth, with other possible contingencies, so that, as such a shaft
would be quite useless, in my opinion, and I do not see how I
could estimate the cost of such a one unless you pointed out to me
the class of ground you were going to sink upon, then I could tell
you, probably, pretty closely. Seeing that the main vein in our


“Reform” Mine is but 162 feet from the boundary of Mr.
Wentworth’s estate, and, no doubt, many others, I should advise,
if you want to feel sure of a good thing, to make no bones about
it, but make up your mind to put a permanent main shaft down
to cut this vein, with machinery alongside to work it, and anj;
others that may be cut in cross driving, in a similar fashion to
what we do in the “ Reform.” Our present main vein is now
in the workings 430 feet, and is dipping at an angle of 45°;
and, as your ground is 162 feet easterly, the vein may naturally
be expected to be cut at 650 feet deep in your property. The
other two veins which we are working are further west, and
must undoubtedly, if continuous, go into the same ground, only
further west. I have some returns of a small parcel to-day
from one of them, which has gone at the rate of 119 oz.
of gold and 16 oz. silver per ton. But we will surprise you
directly, I am thinking, as soon as I get my new machinery which
is ordered here. Well, this shaft would cost, I should say,
£2,000, but it would do for ages, and could work any quantity
of ground from it for many a score years, if payable to do so. At
this shaft I would propose to put the principal machinery, i.e. ,
winding, pumping, and crushing plant, permanently. I know of
such a plant some 40 miles from here that can be purchased very
cheap. It is everything that is required, and cost £6,000 (six
thousand). The price for it is £2,000. It was a fancy venture of
a monied man ; but he would not be told his views were wrong ;
nay, however, he is quite satisfied now, and knows a lot more than
he did, for which he has paid something like £20,000. He says
he does not mind it, as he has fully convinced himself that he
knows nothing about what he thought he knew a lot. Well, if
you are going in for Mr, Wentworth’s land, I would strongly
advocate the purchase of the machinery, as you get it actually
given you. However, perhaps that is no business of mine.
How then, the principal vein I have told you woiild be, or
should be, cut at 650 feet level ; but there are several veins shewn
upon the surface, notably Dr. Clarke’s and Mr. Wilkinson’s fancy
spot—the “ Big Reef,” as it is known as. This would require
sinking upon as it contains a quantity of ore, and I could not say
but it might be gold bearing at a few feet; anyhow, it has never


been tried in the property, and gold can be obtained in the grass
by dish washing now, evidence of something carrying gold within
the reef or not, but the same reef is my fancy above all reefs and
veins, after , of course, the vein known to be good, and which we
are now working, and of which I have made allusion.
No. 2. Alluvial Deposits.—Well, there is no use my taking up
too much time about this. I will merely say there are hundreds
of acres of basalt country virgin ground, exactly similar in every
respect to the same apparent run of basalt country adjoinirg and
continuous to the Forest Reefs, where a shaft has just been
bottomed at 200 feet on wash which yields 1 oz. per ton. Our
present Government geologist connects it right away with our run
of wash without the slightest hesitation. Our alluvial wash has
varied in depth, width and quality, of course, as may always be
expected, seeing that the bottoms under basalt is as the waves of
the sea. Our wash was from 20 feet to 630 feet wide, from 6
inches to 3 feet thick, and from 6 divt. to 5 oz. gold per ton; that
there are are numerous runs of alluvial in the property is the
universal opinion. I have four favourite spots which I would
advocate sinking upon right away ; the depths of these runs of
basalt runs from 120 to 200 and sometimes 250 feet deep.
A 200-feet shaft, securely timbered, without machinery at all,
would cost about £6OO. It would be best to have a small engine,
say 8 horse power, that could be shifted about if necessary. The
main one 1 have alluded to would do all the crushing for the
Company. The cost of the small engine of course is merely
nothing.
No. 3. At what depth is gold first met with in alluvial?
Upon the surface sometimes. As I explained it was to be had in
close proximity to the “ Big Reef,” but the runs of alluvial under
basalt from 120 to 250 feet deep.
No. 4. Water Difficulties.—l presume you mean in con-
nection to the main shaft. I could take with ease all the water
that could be made, with the engine and pumps I have spoken of,
if any was cut in alluvial. I could do the same with the Bor 10
h. p. there. We are used to water, and make it a rule never to
make a start at all unless prepared to do battle with the water.
This is always an understanding—would be only absurd starting


without such—merely waste of money—in fact no one but an
idiot would attempt it.
No. 5. What kind and amount of machinery will be required,
building, & c.; and would the same be fit for permanent work
afterwards 1
Well, I have told you all about the machinery, I think, and
repeat it would do permanently.
As to buildings, of course the machinery would have to be
covered in, and would recommend the usual thing, viz., weather
boards and (1 iron.
No. 6. Could I undertake the management?
Yes, with pleasure, if I am appointed permanently—not for a
month or two, and after giving the benefit of 21 years’ experience
to have to give place to some greenhorn, who would mess up all
my starting points, and resulting in, perhaps, a loss and disgrace
to the district. I will have nothing to do with it unless I have
sole control on the ground ; but if you wish it, I will be only too
glad to give the full benefit of my experience to any one you may
propose to appoint as manager in place of myself, pi’ovided you
start with him and promise to finish with him. I will also shew
anyone you authorise to receive the information as to my pet
places to sink upon, free of cost or charge of any kind to the
syndicate. At the same time, I would only be too happy to have
the opening up of the estate if you thought fit to give it me, i.e.,
full control , not otherwise. If you can’t give me all your confidence,
I don’t want any part of it. I have always been used to have all
placed in me, and, as I am now 45, could not be satisfied otherwise;
however, you please yourself. If you can’t ascertain enough at
home about me to induce such, don’t hesitate to appoint anyone
you like and know, and I will assist you all I can. Well, that is
enough about this matter. Next comes
No. 7. Engineer, &c., practical miners, captains, &c.
My own mate is my engineer, and has been for over 18 years;
and when I want any assistance with a heavy job, get one from
any of the many workshops in Sydney or Orange. Practical
miners.—l can get any number by putting an advertisement in
the local paper; and being here so many years, and paying the
best wages in the Colony, viz., 50s. per week, 8 hours, have the


best men. As they come quickly, my jobs generally being
payable, their office is as good as permanent if they save their
money. When I say my jobs generally being payable, I mean my
ventures, those I have been connected with, I have only had
three failures in 21 years, and they were small matters. One was
a Cooperative Company, who spent £I,BOO, another ditto £250,
and the other spent £I,OOO. This last one stopped through no
fault of the property, which is a splendid thing now, and is a lease
of 21 years with 11 years to run, for which I have offered £2,000,
but on account of a disagreement of the holders can’t be sold.
I hold a fifth of the same. On the other hand, I was connected
with one property bought for £450, sold for £22,000 ; one bought
for £3,500, and sold for £11,000; one bought for £I,BOO, and
sold for £25,000 ; one bought for £25,000, and sold for £60,000 ;
one cost £l2, sold return £28,000; and one bought for £20,000,
for which I got them an offer of £40,000, and they would not sell
under £60,000, That is all the ventures of any consequence I
have been associated with, excepting those I have told you, in the
early part of my letter, I am now in ; so you will by this see I can
get any number of good men when occasion requires.
No. 8. Labour.—l have answered this in No. 7.
No. 9. Is clay, stone, &c,, handy if required?—Any quantity
on the ground within a yard of where the machinery would be
erected. Bricks and timber to be obtained at the respective
yards in Orange, distant between five and six miles.
No. 10. Engineers to report upon works done, or in a way of
completion.—This you can get done any time by writing to the
best shops in Sydney, if necessary; but, presuming you would have
some supervision in the Colony, they could report progress, beside
myself, to your satisfaction, I should hope. But that is a matter for
your own consideration.
No. 11. Best engineers in England, with a knowledge of sunken
fields. —I do not know any.
No. 12. Also local proprietors.—This I have answered already.
No. 13. Engineer on Reform Mine, &c.—This I have replied
to also.
No. 14. Prospectuses for guidance, &c.—l enclose you all you
want in this respect.


No. 15. How far would £3,000 go towards the venture pro-
posed 1 ? This I have also answered when explaining the machinery
and shaft required as within suggested by me, not far as you can
see, unless you determine to first seek for alluvial with an 8 or 10
h. p., and if successful try vein afterwards This is also a matter
for your consideration.
I have now answered, I think, all your questions, and I trust in
a manner you thoroughly see through. If not, I shall be glad
to give any further information in my power at any time, whether
appointed to act for you or not, as I am an enthusiast over this
property, and nothing would give me more pleasure than to open
or assist in opening it, as you deem fit. I have had correspon-
dence with Mr. Wentwoi’th’s agent in this matter, who no doubt
will duly advise you of the same.
Now, then, what I meant in the early part of my letter by
saying, “ after I am made aware of all particulars, &c.”
I mean, I do not know if you will have the whole estate to
prospect, and retain the whole afterwards if payable gold is found,
or if you will only have so many acres of it. If so, those coming
in alongside may get the best of it.
1 don’t know what tenure you have.
I don’t know if you intend to pay a Royalty, how much, or if
you intend to make a freehold of the lot, or a portion of it.
1 would also like to know if those you propose taking in the
syndicate are stickers, or if they would jib at a little difficulty in
getting in the right track. Many a good thing has been left, and
a large loss incurred, through having one faint heart in the crowd;
and many a good man has lost his precious good name as a manager
in consequence, while a duffer has come in at the eleventh hour,
for others who have taken the venture up, and thereby built up
for himself a reputation from the ruins of the better man, and all
through one faint heart being in the Company, Better by far not
start at all, unless you make up your mind that every confidence
is placed in the members of the Company as to stability, the
manager, and the ground being auriferous.
Now I don’t know that I can say much more this time that can
be of service to you, unless you want me to give you the names of
some gentlemen to whom you can refer as to my being worthy of


your confidence. In such cases, as I have given so far. I have
pleasure in mentioning a few, to one or the whole you may refer
if necessary for the information :
C. S. Wilkinson, Esq., Govt. Geologist, N. S. W.
Thos. Dalton, Esq., M.L.A., Orange.
Win. Clarke, Esq., M.L.A., Orange,
Jas. Dalton, Esq., J.P., Orange.
E. Nathan, Esq., Mayor of Orange.
Jas. Torpy, Esq., J.P., Orange.
P. Burke, Esq., J.P., Orange..
Wm. Moulde, Esq., J.P., Orange.
The Mgrs. of the A. J. S. Bank, N. S. W.
Coml. Bank, Orange.
B. O. Holterman, Esq., M.L.A., St. Leonards, Sydney.
I don’t know whether 1 need occupy your time any further on
this score, but in the event of your deciding to honour me, I
will do my best, whatever the result may be, for the interest of
the Company, for which service I shall ask as salary £5OO a
year, payable quarterly, the engagement to be for not less than
two years. Should you be able to do better in your estimation
for the interest of the Company, as I said before, I will do all I
can for you by way of advice for nothing
Wishing you success, and thanking you for corresponding with
me, remain
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) H. W. NEWMAN.
P.S.—Like the ladies I must finish importantly. I have just
had an interview with my underground Boss. He tells me of a
very “ Bonanza ” just cut below. Thinking you would like to
see a sample with this, I send you four small pieces extremely
rich in gold. After you have put them in water you will see
their richness much better. If you get them assayed, I would be
glad to have result as a check.
H. W. N.




3 1508
01200002


