

FOUR LECTURES
ON
ARMAGEDDON
BY
CHARLES P. VVAUCHOPE
Delivered in St. Andrew's Church (Christadelphian), Adelaide.
August, 1914. Repeated September. 1914. by request
and printed from shorthand notes
slightly revised
SECOND EDITION
PRICE THREEPENCE
ADELAIDE
G. HASSELL * SON. PRINTERS, 104 CURRIE STREET
1915






"THE EARTH FULL OF THE KNOWLEDGE
OF THE LORD AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEA’lsax,. J
THE TABERNACLE OF GOD TO BE WITH MEN. rev xxu
! JERUSALEM TO BE THE THRONE OF THE LORD, jeh.™
ON a
i THE RIGHTEOUS /&. <4. THE MEEK
f" SHALL REICN /v V TJ>\ SHALL IMHERIT
ON THE EARTH /Q? '\'>\ THE EARTH
'the lord -'A ,J
ALL FAMILIES h' l r \-f\ THE RIGHTEOUS
OF THE EARTH * SHALL BE KING OVERAUd ; SHALL BE
TO BE BLESSED P -j—J RECOMPENSED
IN ABRAHAM .W\ \T® CftRTH fijf IN THE EARTH
£/ THE WICKED SHALI
A s“ H ).?,dict Nftfi BE ROOTED OUT
| ™ OF THE EARTH
f "THE EARTH ABIdETH FOR EVERrccJ
THY KINCOOM CONE THY WILL BE DONE ON EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN „„„
JESUS CHRIST THE CREAT DELIVERER AND DESTINED KINC TO RULE
ALL NATIONS REMOVE OPPRESSION. POVERTY. WAR ETC. AND REICN
AS PRINCE OF PEACE TO THE CLORY OF COD THE FATHER. SIUS™,
“IF ANY MAN THIRST. LET HIM COME UNTO ME AND DRINK "john w*
“WHOSOEVER WILL. LET HIM TAKE THE WATER OF LIFE FREELY kv.h.|
“HE THAT BELIEVETH AND IS BAPTIZED SHALL BE SAVED" mark-H


FOUR LECTURES
ON
ARMAGEDDON
BY
CHARLES P. WAUCHGPE
Delivered in Sr. Andrew's Church (Christadelphian). Adelaidt
August. 1914. Repeated September, 1914, by request
and printed from shorthand notes
slightly revised
SECOND EDITION.


Copies of this book, 3d. each , or 20s. per
100, may be obtained from the Printers
or the Lecturer.


PREFACE.
The sudden and generally unexpected European War which
startled the war in August, 1914, was primarily responsible for
the delivery of the following lectures.
The religious body— Christadelphian with which the lecturer is
associated, has always held that the Bible prophetically delineates
the movement of human kingdoms. Many changes have been
noted in this respect by history—particularly that of the last
century, and it indeed seems most probable that prodigious and
vital changes will be the outcome of the present war.
Considered in the light of official papers, it appears self-evident
that an attempt to undermine British national supremacy has been
made by Germany, for which the time is not yet ripe. Apart from
the question of conquest, the present war is bristling with great
evidences that the Most high ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and
giveth them to whomsoever He will.” Meanwhile the sound of
war’s alarms will continue, and humanity will be shocked at the
daily story of carnage which will be told until the sword has been
sheathed with honour or dishonour, and the nine powers now in
the throes of strife will, in an altered form, gradually return to
normal conditions. Nations will, however, continue to study war
with future objects; a condition divinely assigned to them until
the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord
and His Christ.
Many hundreds, hitherto strangers to the theme, heard these
lectures and appreciated them in August' and again in September.
At times the building was full to overflowing, and the request to
repeat was complied with in the hope that the Bible might emerge
from its enforced hiding, to be studied in a new light. That this
has been so is already evidenced.
Very many desired that the lectures might be circulated in print,
and the committee appointed for that purpose concurred in its
advisability. The requisite means having been readily subscribed,
they are now published in the cause of Christ.
hull recognition is made of the services of all who, unstinting in
their efforts, helped in the work.
Acknowledgments are likewise tendered to the authorities used
and quoted, especially to the Bible, without which the subject is
nothing.
That much good may be accomplished to the honour and glory
of God is the earnest hope of
THE LECTURER.
74 Rundle Street, Adelaide,
South Australia,'
December, 1914.


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.
The demand for the first edition exceeded expectations, and this
is sent forth in the hope that it will continue to attract attention to
Armageddon, which is yet to be witnessed in the eartn.
Much has occurred to cause belief that we are living in staitlu g
times and prophecy has been further substantiated in the changed
Son of Turkey It seems all-probable that her decline has
been accentuated by her change of front towards Britain who,
while her friend, could not let her dissolution occur unnoticed.
Now however, the drying up of the Euphratean power may take
place quickly, apart from British intervention, without involving a
breach of the Berlin treaty mentioned in this book, and by this
means prepare the way for British control in Palestine which will
not be agreeable at a later date to the “King of the North
Should another edition be needful, it is hoped that important
events may advise the sign of the coming of the Son of Man.
C. P W
April, 1915.
CONTENTS.
Lecture I
WHAT IS ARMAGEDDON ?
Lecture II
PRELUDES TO ARMAGEDDON
Lecture 111
ARMAGEDDON IN OPERATION
Lecture IV
THE SEQUEL TO ARMAGEDDON


WHAT IS ARMAGEDDON?
My clear friends—l did not expect, when first
delivering these addresses, that so much cncoui age-
ment to repeat them would be afforded me, for I
little thought that the subject of Armageddon was of
such importance in the public mind. In repeating
them, I have to tell those who may have been here on
the former occasions that they will naturally hear a
great deal of repetition; if not in language, certainly
repetition of facts.
We want to build a house, as it were, and need to
inspect all the material of which the house, is com-
prised. Nothing should go into that building that will
not bear the closest scrutiny. Let us be sure that
when completed it will stand the test that all buildings
should stand; and in laying the foundation to-night of
that building, I request you to take the utmost liberty
of bringing your most critical minds to bear upon
everything that may be said in the course of these
addresses. I make this request, not in the spirit of
boastfulness, but in the spirit of enquiry, because if
the deductions I make are wrong, they are useless alike
to you and to myself. Being the foundations of belief,
unless they can stand the test —the severest test —of
criticism, it is not the kind of belief that is well-
pleasing to the Author of religious truth. Again, I
ask that you will be good enough, in your interests and
mine, to" put these foundations of religious belief to


ARMAGEDDON
the strictest examination that you can. and. having
done so, should you find that I am in disagreement
with the Bible, you will be good enough to let me
know. If, on the other hand, it should be found that
your religious belief has been in disagreement with the
Bible, it is for you to say what course you will pursue,
although it may be permitted of me to advise that you
take the wiser course.
A STRONG FOUNDATION
Before we begin with Armageddon, it is neces-
sary to note the basal features of the subject, for while
they are very simple, they are also very important.
We have a great and interesting subject before us, and
require a foundation on which to build the remarks
which are to follow. There are two prominent features
to which we must give due attention, and these two
features are not generally current in religious circles.
The one feature is a strip of land, which is the geo-
graphical aspect; and the other is a man, who becomes
the cental figure of Armageddon—the Man Christ
Jesus. You will not wonder at my speaking of Jesus
Christ as a man, when you have referred to what
prophets and apostles have said, for Paul, the apostle,
spoke of Jesus as the “Man Christ Jesus”; Peter, the
apostle, spoke of Jesus as “The Man approved of
God.” Isaiah, the prophet, spoke of Him as “The
Man of Sorrows,” and so, in telling you that the
central figure in the subject of Armageddon is the
Man Christ Jesus, I do no violence to the examples
set me in the Bible. On the other hand, we have the
territory of Armageddon—that is, the place in the
geography of the world where the battle of Armaged-
don will be witnessed. This strip of territory is
known in geography as Palestine; it is known in reli-
gious belief as the “Land of Canaan,” as the “Land
of Promise,” as the “Promised Land.” Perhaps our


ideas differ on that feature, but to me it is the land
promised by God to a certain nation with a special
object in view.
To avoid confusion in the treatment of this subject,
we must pay the strictest attention to these two basal
features, which become, as it were, the two foundation
stones. Jesus Christ is spoken of in the Bible as the
“Chief Corner Stone” in God’s plans, and the Holy
Land certainly is a vital stone in the building of God’s
handiwork, because He has chosen it above all the
geography of the earth, and our Bible—which we, as
Christians, should appreciate—has the whole of its
operations concentrated in the Holy Land, or “The
Land of Promise”; and, apart from Jesus, and apart
from Palestine, there would be no Armageddon to talk
about, and thus, in our conception of things, we believe
it quite necessary to fasten the mind upon these two
central features, so that there may be an easy under-
standing of the matter which is to follow.
Christ, therefore, provides the personal element in
Armageddon, and Palestine provides the geographical.
I wish to observe just here that the Promised Land,
which in our younger (jays we used to sing about as
the Heavenly Canaan, filling our hearts and minds,
had no geography at all, because we believed that the
Heavenly Canaan was situated “beyond the bounds of
time and space,” which surely is a splendid definition
of nowhere. But the Promised Land of the Bible has
a literal geography encompassing it, while the central
figure in Armageddon is also a reality. He is not a
myth. The Man Christ Jesus lives to-day because God
raised Him from the dead. He lives to-day because
He is at God’s right hand. He lives to-day, whether
we care to believe it or not, or whether we wish it so
or not. He is a reality, just as the Promised Land is
a reality, a land which our own eyes may witness if we
travel.


STATE OF THE PUBLIC MIND.
Armageddon is very prominent in the public mind
of late. I do not know whether it is quite so promi-
nent to-day as it was five or six weeks back, when the
present conflict plunged the whole world into a state
of semi-despair; but there is good reason to believe
that, in the minds of men, Armageddon has become
something more of a reality than ever it did before.
Whether that conclusion be the outcome of fancy, or
whether it be the outcome of fear, we know not; it
may be both, but by some means many minds have
been drawn to the Bible expression which never before
took any notice of it.
The term and the subject of Armageddon belong
exclusively to the Bible. This book is responsible for
the expression, and though there have been of late
many definitions as to what Armageddon is, the Bible
is not responsible for those various conceptions which
have been brought to public notice. If we would have
a proper conception of Armageddon, there is only one
interpreter for us, and this interpreter is the Bible.
The question has been asked throughout the whole
civilized world concerning this war: “Is it Armaged-
don ?” This has been frequently asked, and though
perhaps the public mind has, in a measure, been quiet-
ened of late, it will agitate again, and probably before
the present European conflict is over. Many have,
either from fear or fancy, asked the question: “Is it
Armageddon?”—and have quietened down in their
enquiry, not being very desirous of knowing whether
it is or not. I remark that in all probability, before
the present European conflict has subsided and given
way to peace, the same question: “Is it Armageddon?”
will rise from their lips and demand an answer; and
those who are here to-night, I believe, will be in the
position of being able to supply it when the time
arrives. But there is a prior question needing con-


sideration. and that is: “What is Armageddon?” for
it is useless to ask: “Is it Armageddon?” until we
know what that term means. This brings us to the
subject of our enquiry to-night, viz.: “WHAT IS
ARMAGEDDON ?”
I remarked that the Bible is the only authoritative
source that will give us an answer, and we must there-
fore rivet our attention on what the Bible has to say.
I do not know whether we will agree, as I produce the
evidences from the Bible, but if you would like me to
talk about Armageddon without the Bible, I frankly
tell you I do not know anything about it; and if, in
my foolish moments. T should talk of things of which
I know nothing, I am not prepared to take that stand
when I speak to an intelligent people, and so, if you
take the Bible from me, I can tell you nothing
about Armageddon. Further than that, Ido not believe
any man can give an interpretation of this subject
apart from the Bible. The closer he sticks to the
Bible, the nearer he is to the right explanation; the
more he leaves the Bible, the further he wanders into
the field of speculation and doubt, of which we have
had plenty of late from men, who, by their professions,
should have stuck most religiously to the Bible rather
than have given us an expression of their own con-
ception.
Let me, then, again ask you to go with me to the
Bible, and from its pages deduce the interpretation of
our enquiry as to what is Armageddon.
WHAT THE BIBLE REALLY OFFERS HUMANITY.
But let me digress, so that I may lead up to these
conclusions by another pathway. The Bible offers
mankind something—it first offers a code of morals,
by which mankind may live righteously in the sight of
God and in the sight of his fellowman. It also offers
mankind something beyond the present life, for if the
Bible could only offer us something for—at the most —


three score years and ten. it certainly would not be
worth the position it claims and which it occupies in
the Christian world; but it offers to mankind some-
thing after this life; and it is here, friends, where your
religious belief and mine may differ; but, be that as
it may, you will permit me boldly to state what the
Bible teaches me in that respect. I believe that the
Bible offers mankind a hereafter on the earth, and not
outside of it. Perhaps, you will say—and rightly, too.
—for I beg that you will take no remarks of mine as
being worth anything unless they can be well substan-
tiated from the Bible—“ What proof have you, sir, for
saying that the Bible offers mankind a hereafter on
earth?” I cannot give you all the reasons available,
but I will give you a few. I take you to the Scriptures,
and perhaps if you have not your Bibles with you,
you may be able to take advantage of the chairman’s
request that you have pencil and paper at work.
Proverbs ii., 21. tells us that “The upright shall dwell
in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it. but the
wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the trans-
gressors shall be rooted out of it." Here is shown
what the hereafter will be for the two classes of man-
kind—the upright are to dwell in the land, and the
perfect will remain in it; and the wicked are to be
cut off from the earth, and the transgressors-rooted
out of it.
At the 10th chapter and 30th verse, you will read
that the righteous will never be removed. You may
ask: “From where?” and it will immediately tell you
that they will never be removed from the place that
the wicked will be removed from, which is the earth.
“The righteous shall never be removed from the
earth, but the wicked shall not inhabit the earth.”
You may say: “But they do.” Exactly, and that is
why it points to the hereafter, and not to the present,
because the unrighteous now do inhabit the earth


equally with, and perhaps in a greater sense than, the
righteous.
Again, let me refer to Psalm xxxvii.—a long Psalm,
but full of information on this particular point, and the
Psalm from which Jesus Christ Himself quoted in
offering the hereafter to mankind.
At verse 9 you read words quite in harmony with
those from Proverbs, thus: “Evildoers shall be cut off,
but those that wait upon the Lord they shall inherit
the earth”—not some place out of it. Or, again, in
the 11th verse: “P>ut the meek shall inherit the earth;
and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace.” That is not so to-day, and it therefore remains
for the hereafter to produce that condition. Or, at the
22nd verse: “Such as be blessed of God shall inherit
the earth, and they that be cursed of Him shall be
cut off.” Verse 29: “The righteous shall inherit the
land and dwell therein for ever.” Do you believe that
the righteous dwell in the land for ever? The promise
of God is that they shall, and if you believe that the
Bible is the book from which Christianity takes its
belief upon the hereafter, it tells you that the righteous
shall inherit the earth and dwell therein for ever.
That is why I ask you to compare your belief with
mine, and in a few words I have given you some of
the reasons why I so believe.
JESUS THE GREATEST AUTHORITY.
But, again, take Jesus as the illustration of perfect
teaching in such a vital matter, and we find Him
promising just the same thjng. recorded in the sth of
Matthew at the sth verse: “Blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the earth,” and, of course, no one
goes outside of the earth to inherit their everlasting
possession. When a man comes into his inheritance,
he comes into it. but does not go out from it.


Or, again, let me take you to the sth of Revelation,
verse 10, as the last word on the matter, in which John
illustrates what he saw of the redeemed, out of all
kindreds and tongues and peoples and nations, who,
future to his day and future to our day also, are sing-
ing a new song to their Redeemer, saying: “Thou hast
made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall
reign on the earth: ’
You may wonder what all this has to do with
Armageddon. It has everything to do with the sub-
ject, because Armageddon stands related to this earth,
and if we are going to be rooted out of it—which is
the punishment for the wicked—we can snap our
fingers at Armageddon, for it matters nothing. But
the Bible has promised, God has promised, as the author
of the Bible —and I am not afraid to confess my belief
in that fact —that the righteous shall reign upon the
earth, and these lectures will lead us up to see the
means by which that conclusion is reached.
The Bible not only offers a hereafter to mankind
upon earth, but it guides the transaction of human
affairs to that end. In the Book of Daniel. 4th chapter,
17th verse, you will read these words: “This matter
is by the decree of the watchers; and the demand by
the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living
may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom
of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will, and set-
teth up over it the basest of men.”
This is a statement made some six hundred years
before Christ by the Prophet Daniel, who had the
revelation from God to the effect that then—when
Daniel was speaking to Nebuchadnezzar, who had
besought him to interpret his dream —that the Most
High ruled then in the kingdoms of men, and the
Most High does not change, for He is immutable.
Therefore He rules in the kingdoms of 'men to-day,
and what we are witnessing in Europe is but one of


those apparently natural things by which God reaches
the purpose which He has pre-detennined.
THE FINGER OF GOD.
If you turn to the second chapter of Daniel and the
2 ist verse, there you will read these words: “Blessed
be the name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom and
might are His: And He changeth the times and the
seasons: He removeth kings, and setteth up kings:
He giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to
them that know understanding. He revealeth the
deep and secret things: He knoweth what is in the
darkness, and the light dwelleth with Him.” Thus
God sets up kings and removes them, that in the end
His will might be accomplished in the earth, and we,
as earth-born creatures looking at it from the natural
point of view, are unable to see the finger of God in
the affairs of humanity. We think that human affairs
all work out because mankind controls them, or we
attribute things to fate; but the Most High is behind
these matters, and His purpose, and His plan, and the
destiny of mankind, is gradually being unfolded. In
our day we are witnessing one of the epochs in history,
when a considerable change will come over the face of
the nations, leading up to the time when God will
interpose in a very emphatic fashion.
But the Bible goes further than is generally accepted,
by giving emphatic assurances of the futurity and
permanency of the planet of which we are inhabitants.
I could spend a whole night discussing the pros and
cons as to whether the earth is to be consumed. You
can take my assurance for it (after twenty years’
study of the Bible) that this earth will never be burned
up; it will never lose its balance and topple into the
infinitude of space; it will revolve as long as the sun
and moon endure—if we can believe the Creator of
the planet. Who is also the author of the Bible; for
He has told us right away at the beginning of the


Bible, the Bth chapter of Genesis, 22nd verse, that
the earth would no more be cursed, “While the earth
remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat,
and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not
cease.”
I do not know what those words may mean to you,
but they tell of a permanency and a continuity of exis-
tence for the planet upon which we reside; and neces-
sarily so, for if the promise is that in the hereafter
mankind shall become perpetual inheritors of the earth,
surely such an inheritance necessitates the continual
existence of the planet! For, if the earth pass into
oblivion, as commonly taught, what becomes of the
everlasting inheritance of the righteous?
But go with me to the 115th Psalm, and there, in
the 16th verse, we read: “The heaven, even the
heavens, are the Lord’s.” I used to think that there
would be a time when we would inherit some particular
spot in the heavens, but I have since learned that they
are not for man, they are the Lord’s: “The earth hath
He given to the children of men.”
In the 72nd Psalm, sth verse, we read these
words: “They shall fea-r Thee as long as the sun and
moon endure, throughout all generations.” He (the
Lord Jesus Christ) "shall come down like rain upon
the mown grass as showers that w'ater the earth. In
His days shall the righteous flourish”—because the
righteous shall inherit the earth—“and there shall be
abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.”
THE DESTINY OF EARTH.
I would like to read more, but dare not take the
time. If you require one decisive remark upon the
matter, turn to the first chapter of Ecclesiastes and the
latter portion of verse 4. There we are told what we
know, what we have experienced, and what our
ancestry has experienced—that one generation passeth
away and another cometh. Men at my time of life


have seen one generation pass away. Men at the time
of life of our chairman here have seen two. “One
generation passeth away, and another generation com-
eth: but the earth abideth for ever.” It does not pass
away; it does not change. I want to connect up
Armageddon with these things, for if the present
trouble in Europe demands the query: “Is it Armaged-
don ?” we might first of all look to see what Armaged-
don is.
I have an extract here from Chambers’s Encyclo-
paedia.” Armageddon is a large subject. It may not
be to the mind of a very great man, but it takes me
four nights, at least, to give a bare outline of it from
the Bible, whereas the writer in “Chambers’s Encyclo-
paedia” settles the whole question in ten lines, in which
lie says that: “It is the great battle-field of the Apoca-
lypse, in which the final struggle between good and
evil is fought.” Without wishing to be rude, and
apologizing to the writer if I happen to be so, I con-
tradict that, as being unscriptural; for he has forgotten,
if he knew, and has omitted anyhow, the important
fact that there is to be a thousand years after
Armageddon before the final struggle between good
and evil is to be fought. That, friends, is a sample of
the wisdom of this world on the subject of Armaged-
don, which corresponds with my own experience since
I last addressed you on the matter from this platform;
for a reverend friend of mine told me, when handing
a book to me, that it would knock all the Armageddon
business out of me if I would only read it. I asked
him if it was better than the Bible. He was not pre-
pared for a question like that, and he said: “No.”
“Then,” I said, “I will take the Bible,” and I take the
Bible in preference to the wisdom of the world, and if
the Bible be wrong, 1 must go down with it; but I
prefer not to go down with the wisdom of mankind.
Certainly, Armageddon is not what the writer in
“Chambers’s Encyclopaedia” says it is. It may be the


greatest calamity in history, but it certainly is not
what he says. There is to be a thousand years’ reign
of the Man Jesus in the earth—which will be duly
proved, friends; but in the meantime I state the fact
that there is to be a thousand years of peace in the
earth before the final struggle between good and evil
is fought. There is to be what is spoken of in the
Christian world as the “Millennium.” But what is
this Millennium? I will give you some more of
“Chambers’s Encyclopaedia”—probably by the same
writer, for I suppose these encyclopaedias have a very
prominent religious man to write up religious subjects,
and he is no more right regarding the question of the
Millennium than he is upon the subject of Armaged-
don, for he says: “It is a long, indefinite space of
time.”
Well now, everybody knows that the word “mille”
means “a thousand,” and “Millennium” “a thousand
years,” but he says: “It is a long, indefinite space of
time, during which the Kingdom of the Messiah will,
according to the belief of many Christians, be visiblv
established on the earth. . . . The Christian belief was
developed by the oppression and persecutions to which
they were long subjected.” He might have accurately
said that the Christian belief in the second coming of
Christ arose from what Christ told them when He was
in the earth, but he says: “It was an idea evolved or
developed in the mind. The chief basis is the ardent
hope for a visible divine rule upon the earth.” What
would it accomplish, I ask, if the hundreds of thou-
sands of mankind had an ardent hope? Would it
produce anything to such an end ? He says : “Accord-
ing to the general opinion, the Millennium was to be
preceded by great calamities,” whereas the Bible says
that it zvill be preceded by great calamities.
"The early Christian fathers delighted themselves
with promises of the glory and magnificence of the
Millennial Kingdom.” These, I submit, are some cheap


sneers at the subject of the Millennium, which is
rooted in the Bible. But let me pass on. As for the
word “Armageddon,” it is of Hebrew origin, and is a
Hebrew compound word, consisting of three words,
and the authority from whom I take it—Dr. John
Thomas, a very able Hebrew and Greek scholar—says
that the first portion of the word, “Anna,” means
literally “Heap of sheaves,” and “gai” means
“valley,” and “don” means “judgment,” so that the
full meaning of the word “Arma-gai-don,” in the
Hebrew tongue, means “Heap of sheaves in the valley
of judgment.” In these words we have the idea of
reaping into a valley for judgment. Bear that thought
in mind, and remember, also, that the Greek expression
of the same word is “Plar-magedon,” as we have it in
the margin of the Revised Version, in the 16th of
Revelation, which is the only place where the word
occurs. But I will refer to that again later.
ARMAGEDDON A HUGE STRUGGLE.
Now, let me repeat that Armageddon, doubtless,
will be the greatest struggle in the earth's history, and
for proof I take you to the Prophet Zephaniah, 3rd
chapter and Bth verse: “Therefore wait ye upon Me,
saitli the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the
prey; for My determination is to gather the nations,
that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them
My indignation, even all My fierce anger: for all the
earth shall be devoured with the fire of My jealousy.
For then will I turn to the people a pure language,
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord to
serve Him with one consent.”
Again, turning to the 66th chapter of Isaiah, 15th
verse, you will read these words: “For, behold, the
Lord will come with fire, and with His chariots like a
whirlwind, to render His anger with fury, and His
rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by His


sword v ill the Lord plead with all flesh; and the slain
of the Lord shall be many.”
These two references indicate that there will be a
great struggle in the history of mankind before the
establishment of God’s purpose in the earth.
But now, go to the last book of the Bible, Revela-
tion, 16th chapter, 14th verse, and we learn that Arma-
geddon is to be a gathering of the world-powers for
their destruction. In the 13th verse we read concern-
ing some “frog-like spirits which came out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the
beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet; for
they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which
go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great day
of God Almighty.” This is the Battle of Armageddon.
And in the 16th verse we are told to what locality
these kings of the earth and of the whole world are
to be gathered. “He gathered them into a place called
in the Hebrew tongue “Armageddon,” of which I have
already told you the meaning.
THE LOCALITY OF ARMAGEDDON.
The locality of Armageddon is expressed in the 16th
verse, and it is further elaborated in Zechariah, 14th
chapter, 2nd verse: “I will gather all nations against
Jerusalem to battle”—which is the war of God
Almighty, or Armageddon—“and the city shall be
taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished;
and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and
the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the
city. Then shall the Lord go forth and fight against
those nations, as when He fought in the day of battle.
And His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of
Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east.”
W e have now come back to the Promised Land.
We have come back to the Land of Canaan, and found
our way there with the Man Christ Jesus. He is


there in the battle of the great day of God Almighty.
Thus, Armageddon of Revelation, and the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, in Zechariah, are identical. Before I
prove their identity, let me take you to one reference
in the 3rd chapter of Joel, Ist and 2nd verses: “In
those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again
the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I will gather all
nations, and will bring them down into the valley of
Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there.”
Joel, stating in the 14th verse what will take place,
says: “There will be multitudes, multitudes in the
valley of decision.” Therefore, in the valley of Jeho-
shaphat there are to be multitudes of slain, which
enables us to understand the meaning of the word
“Jehoshaphat.” Literally, it is “The Judgment of
Jehovah,” or “The Judgment of God.”
The word “Armageddon” means, as we saw, “Heap
of sheaves in the valley of judgment,” and “Jehosha-
phat” means “The Judgment of Jehovah,” so there is
a similarity of meaning between the two prophetical
writers, who deal with Armageddon each from his
respective point of view.
AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR.
Returning to the 16th of Revelation, in the 15th
verse, which I did not quote, we find another important
feature, having to do with the Man of our subject,
when the nations have been gathered to the battle of
the great day of God Almighty. For when they are
being gathered into that place, called in the Hebrew
tongue “Harmagedon” (Revised Version margin), we
are told: ‘‘Behold, I come as a thief.”
The Man Christ Jesus returns to the earth at the
time when the nations have been gathered against
Jerusalem to battle; when there are multitudes in the
valley of decision; when the slain of the Lord are
many; at the time of the great day of the war of God
Almighty; and when the kings of the whole earth and


the nations are gathered unto the place called Arma-
geddon—then Jesus Christ is to return to the earth
in a thief-like fashion —when the world is unprepared
for Him. He used this simile in the course of His
own remarks when He said that if the goodman of
the house had only known when the thief would come
he would have been waiting for him ; instead of which
the thief came while he slept. Jesus said : “He ye there-
fore ready, for in such an hour as ye know not, the
Son of Alan cometh.”
His thief-like advent takes place simultaneously with
the Battle of Armageddon, and it ushers in the King-
dom of God. But you may want proof that He is
coming back to the earth, and I take you to the 14th
chapter of John —a chapter which is often taken to
prove that we are going to Jesus, but which really
proves that He is coming to 11s —“In My Father’s
House are many mansions: if it were not so I would
have told you. I' go to prepare a place for you.” He
has gone to prepare in the Father’s House a place for
His disciples. “And if I go” (which He did) “and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you unto Myself; that where I am, there ye may be
also.”
Christ is coming back, and we have no proof that
any are going to Him, unless these very words can be
misconstrued, which are found in the 13th of John,
33rd verse, where He says to His own beloved disci-
ples : “Little children, yet a little while I am with you.
Ye shall seek Me; and as I said unto the Jews, ‘Whither
I go ye cannot come,’ so now I say to you.” But “I go
and prepare a place for you . . . and I will come again
and receive you unto Myself.”
Now again, in Acts, the Ist chapter and nth verse,
we are standing by faith on the Mount of Olives, with
those disciples who were anticipating the establishment
of the Kingdom of God in the hands of Christ, and
who had been distressed some forty days previously


when He was wrenched from them by wicked men,
and crucified and slain. Contrary to their expectation,
He rose from the dead and re-appeared to them, and
for forty days journeyed with His disciples, telling
them more about that Kingdom of God, of which they
had heard Him speak before His death, and they asked :
“Lord, wilt Thou at this time restore again the King-
dom to Israel?” He did not tell them He would, but
a little while afterwards they were very saddened to
find that He, whom they had expected would now
restore their beloved city and kingdom and throne to
their nation, was removed out of their sight. Visibly,
this time; not by death, but in life, for a cloud received
Him out of their sight; and whilst they wondered with
amazement, astonishment, and dismay, two men stood
by them, and said: “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing up into the heavens? This Jesus which is
taken from you into heaven shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven.”
They saw Him go; the earth witnessed His depar-
ture; He has never returned. Had He come again,
Armageddon would have taken place. But He is
coming back. The thief-like advent of Christ has not
happened; He is to come in like manner as His disci-
ples saw Him go.
Fn the 22nd chapter of Revelation, 12th verse, we
have the expression of His. own mind upon this very
point: “Behold, I come quickly; and My reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall
be.” To the righteous—eternal life and the inheritance
of the earth. To the unrighteous—everlasting destruc-
tion by being rooted out of the earth.
TROUBLOUS TIMES.
Hut there is a time of trouble in connection with the
second advent of Christ, of which Daniel treats very
tersely, but very decisively, in the T2th chapter of his
book, at the TSt verse. I want you to understand that


I am only laying the foundation to-night, and believe
we shall see in subsequent addresses that in connection
with Armageddon Christ will return when there shall
be a time of trouble. “At that time Michael shall
stand up” (Christ Jesus —“The Man Christ Jesus,”
“The Approved of God”) “and there shall be a time
of trouble such as never was since there was a nation,
even to that same time.”
W e think that the time of trouble, through which
our day is passing, is severe enough for anything, and
it is hard for our finite minds to conceive a more
agonizing state of affairs existing throughout the
world than that which we witness to-day, nor can we
picture a worse time of trouble awaiting the earth, but
it is stated that there will not have been such a time
until then.
Jesus, in the 21st of Luke, specifies something rela-
tive to it at the 24th verse, when He tells us that the
Jews, at the destruction of Jerusalem, “shall fall by the
edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into
all nations; and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of
the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.
And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon,
and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring. Men’s
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
those things which are coming on the earth: for the
powers of heaven shall be shaken.”
Or. again, as He expressed it, recorded in the 24th
chapter of Matthew and the 6th verse: “Ye shall hear
of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not
troubled; for all these things must come to pass, but
the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against
nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall
be famines and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers
places. All these are the beginning of sorrows.”
Look at the 30th verse: “And then shall appear the
sign of the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all


the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the
Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and great glory.”
THE COMBATANTS.
I will take you now to the 38th chapter of Ezekiel,
the 2nd verse, where you will read who these Arma-
geddon combatants are: “Son of Man, set thy face
against Gog, of the land of Magog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him.” Those
are some of the combatants—Gog, of the land of
Magog, and the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
In the sth verse we have others: “Persia, Ethiopia,
and Libya.” In the 6th verse: “Gomer, and the house
of Togarmah.”
They are the forces arrayed on one side in the
Battle of Armageddon. Against them, at the 13th
rerse, we find that there are to be: “Sheba, and Dedan,
and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young
lions thereof.”
Concerning the geography of these, allow me to
give you just a brief indication to-night, and I will
deal more fully with the matter in subsequent
addresses.
The names of the nations of our day are the names
given to them by the proud possessors of them, in their
own language. Britain has not always possessed her
present name, for in the time of the Phoenicians she
was called “Baratanac,” afterwards “Britannia.” And
so with other nations. The land which we find called
“Germany” on the map had a different name at the
time when Ezekiel wrote; as also had France and
Russia.
Josephus, a historian a little later than Christ, tells
11s who these nations were. From his book of
“Antiquities” I have extracted these words: “Japhet,


the son of Noah, had seven sons. They inhabited so
that beginning at the mountains of Taurus and
Amanus, they proceeded along Asia as far as the
River Don, and along Europe to Cadiz, and settling
themselves upon the lands which they lighted upon—
which none had inhabited before; they called the
nations by their own names; for Comer founded those
whom the Greeks now call Galatians, but were then
called Gomerites. Magog founded those that from
him were named Magogites, but who are by the Greeks
called Scythians."
Meshech was one of the sons of Japhet, from whom
it is supposed that our modern Moscow derives its
name; while Tubal was another from which the
modern Tobolski derives its name. Rosh you will have
no difficulty in identifying with Russia. Most pro-
bably Magog represents Germany; the chief prince of
Meshech is that power known as the Russian power;
and Corner is connected with that part of Europe
known as France. You may wonder at this, for you
may think it impossible that Russia, Germany, and
France could ever be under one head.
I intend producing some very interesting matter in
the next lecture, which I have looked up since the last
course of addresses, and think it will astonish you to
find the matter so clearly defined in a prophetical way.
I leave it now, telling you that Sheba and Dedan
and the merchants of Tarshish, with the young lions,
is the British Power. The British symbol is the lion,
and the British nation is known as a merchant power.
The merchants of Tarshish and all the young lions
include the Indian territories, these Australian and
New Zealand States, South Africa, and Canada, who
will set up a growl in sympathy with that of the
mother lion, when the time comes to take the field
against the power which will try to possess and to
over-run the Holy Land.


THIS WAR ARMAGEDDON’S SHADOW.
The present war, then, leads us to this conclusion —
that it is not Armageddon, because the time is not yet
ripe for that, hut it most probably is a shadow that
Armageddon is approaching. Further, the locality of
the present conflict does not coincide with the geo-
graphy of Armageddon. You cannot say, nor can I.
what the result of the present war will be. In all
probability there will be some complications between
the present friends in the battle-field, which may make
them the bitterest foes in the days to come, for the
Russian horde has yet to be pitted against the British
Power as enemies in the battle-field of Armageddon,
although to-day they are allies.
‘‘The seventh angel sounded, and there were great
voices in heaven saying: The kingdoms of this world
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of His
Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever.’’—Rev.
xi., 15. To this great consummation the battle of
Armageddon will perform its part.
Friends, I had more to say to-night, much more than
I could have said in the time at disposal, but which I
must necessarily leave. (A voice from the audience:
“Go on all night.”) Just in conclusion, I hope you
will pardon me for having exceeded the time which I
set to speak to you. It is a subject which, with know-
ledge of it, becomes not only interesting but very fas-
cinating, for it reaches out past the darkness of this
day to the time when all national darkness will be dis-
pelled and the Sun of Righteousness will arise with
healing in His wings.


PRELUDES
TO ARMAGEDDON
My dear friends, —For the benefit of those who
were not here on Sunday evening, I wish to say that
the foundation for the subject of “Armageddon” has
two main features, the one being, the Man Christ Jesus;
the other the strip of territory known in geography as
Palestine. I want to emphasize these two features, be-
cause attempting to understand the subject of Arma-
geddon and leaving Jesus Christ and the Holy Land
out of the question, will be only speculative and value-
less, and 1 wish to say right here and now, that the
gospel of Jesus Christ is deeply associated with the
subject of Armageddon. At first sight this appears to
be an anomaly, but on closer acquaintance it will be
found that Armageddon is a notable part of that
gospel.
His gospel, when understood, shows how the opera-
tion of Armageddon will affect the reality and the
practical issue of that which He preached, because the
strip of land in which Armageddon will be enacted
will be the seat of His government and His kingdom
when these have been established in the earth.
CHRIST’S KINGDOM NOT YET ESTABLISHED.
You will observe then that I have made no allow-
ance for the establishment of Jesus Christ’s Kingdom
up to the present period of time. That is so. Christ


ha> not established His Kingdom. The gospel which
He preached was the gospel of the Kingdom of God,
and it was declared by God that Christ was to be the
king who would sit upon David’s throne, and reign over
that kingdom. Jesus Christ has not sat upon David’s
throne. It therefore follows that the Kingdom of God
has not yet been established, nor will it be until in the
hands of Jesus Christ, David’s throne is restored:
when Armageddon having spent its fury, the nations
of the world are brought into subjection to Him, who,
having returned from heaven, takes unto Himself His
great power, and reigns.
Jesus Christ is to reign in the earth as literally as
King George is reigning in Britain to-day. This under-
stood, gives us a good idea as to the necessity for Him
in the matter of Armageddon.
The land promised to the Jews; and which has long
lain desolate, is the land that God intends to restore,
and give to it more than its former glory. That land
was the basis of very definite promises which God
made to the people in ancient days. That these pro-
mises were not fulfilled at the time of Christ, nor since,
is easy to prove, because after Christ we have the
writer to the Hebrews after enumerating many of the
old worthies, stating that, “They died in faith, not hav-
ing received the promises, but having seen them afar
off. and were persuaded of them.” You will find this in
the nth chapter. They died, not having come into a
fulfilment of the promises which God had made; and
there is, therefore, a force of meaning in the words of
Paul, found in the 15th Romans, Bth verse, where he
remarks that “Jesus Christ was a minister of the
circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made unto the fathers;” that is, the Jewish
fathers.
There are two points here to which we must pay
strict attention. The first is, that the promises made
by God were considered by Him to be so important


that He ratified them by Jesus Christ in His day.
Consequently the fact that Jesus Christ came to con-
firm these promises proves that they had not been ful-
filled. but were then awaiting fulfilment.
We are then left in this position—that up to the time
of Christ and the Apostles these promises made by
God unto the fathers had not had a fulfilment; they
were then promises; and they are still; for a promise
is something which is not yet executed. So that the
unfulfilled promises made by God unto the fathers ap-
pertain—as we shall see—to that strip of territory
known as Palestine, which will become the arena of
Armageddon, as it will also become the seat of the
throne of Christ when He restores the throne of
David.
VALUABLE PROMISES.
You might permit me then to go back to these pro-
mises, as we find them recorded in Genesis, in order
to have a clear understanding of what they are. If
I told you that they were certain things, and did
not bring proof, you would be quite at liberty to
challenge my deductions. But you and I are bound
down by one authority, which authority is the Bible.
Take it away, and Christian people have no reli-
gion, except what each may mentally manufacture
for one's own conception, and by which each be-
comes a law unto one’s self. But this we cannot
do as a Christian people, with the Book of our
religion in our midst, for it claims attention, and
directs us to certain things. It assures us of the past;
it tells us of the present; and binds us to the future;
and that past and present and future have entirely
to do with the earth. Therefore, these ancient pro-
mises become the more significant, because Jesus
Christ confirmed them. We find by reference to 13th
Genesis, 14th verse, that "the Lord said unto Abram,
after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now


thine eyes, and look from the place Vcliere thou art
northward, and southward, and eastward, and west-
ward. For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I
give it, and to thy seed for ever.”
But we are told that Abraham never inherited the
land; therefore we can understand how he died in
faith, not having received the promises. “I will make
thy seed as the dust of the earth; so that if a man can
number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also
be numbered. Arise, walk through the land in the
length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it
unto thee.” I said that Abraham had not inherited it.
I say it on the authority found in the 7th Acts, when
Stephen standing before the Sanhedrim told them that
their father Abraham had not so much land as to set
his foot on, and surely no person in this audience
l>ossesses less of the earth than that.
Turning to the 15th of Genesis, the 18th verse, we
have these words, ‘‘ln the same day the Lord made a
covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I
given this land from the river of Egypt unto the great
river, the river Euphrates,” &c., &c.
We have on the map, before us, the territory which
was promised to Abraham and his children after him,
which land they have never permanently possessed.
And I might further bring to your notice that this
covenant with Abraham was, in truth, the gospel
preached by Jesus; that this was the gospel which had
been first preached to Abraham; for if you look at the
3rd Galatians, and Bth verse, you will read that, “The
Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
nations through faith” (and Abraham died in faith,
not having received the promises), “preached before
the gospel to Abraham saying, In thee shall all nations
be blessed.” Then Paul proceeds to tell the Galatians
how this would be accomplished, reminding them that
God had made promises to one of Abraham’s pos-


terity in whom all the families of the earth should be
blessed; and that one was Jesus Christ.
CHRIST’S GOSPEL NOT HIS OWN INVENTION.
This, then, was the gospel which Jesus Christ
preached, for He preached no other thing than that
which the prophets had said should happen. The
gospel preached to Abraham, and the gospel of Christ
are not two gospels, they are one, and before these lec-
tures on Armageddon are over, I hope that we shall
see how Christ and Abraham and David, and David’s
and Christ’s throne; and the Kingdom of Israel, and
the Kingdom of God, have all the one and the same
inseparable connection.
These considerations will bring some features into
view which will make Armageddon a reality, and the
Gospel of Christ a reality also. These promises stand
related to Armageddon in this way: firstly, they have
the same geographical features. The battle of Arma-
geddon is to be fought in Palestine; and, furthermore,
the promises made to Abraham are to have their fulfil-
ment there.
The chief personal feature in Armageddon is the
Lord Jesus Christ. As King of kings He will subdue
all the opposing nations of mankind; and at the same
time the personal subject of the Abrahamic promises is
also Jesus Christ, so that the whole question connects
itself up in a very simple fashion.
FIRST PRELUDE.
Let me now go to these preludes of which I have to
speak to-night. The first prelude is inseparably con-
nected with Armageddon in the form of the Jewish
movement. I have been speaking to you about Jewish
promises; now I want to notice just why the Jews are
not in possession of the Holy Land, and why these
Jewish promises have not yet been fulfilled. Their
final persecution and dispersion date from the fall of


Jerusalem, when the Roman Empire laid siege to it,
and conquered it. They, the Jews, have never since
been in possession of the Holy Land; they have been
driven out of it, and possession has been precluded
for several reasons. First, that there was a disper-
sion to take place before they should take posses-
sion of the land which God promised, Moses has
wonderfully foretold; for if we refer to Deuteronomy
we shall find ourselves standing with Moses, some
3,50° years ago, in that wilderness marked on the map
before you as Stony Arabia, and we shall hear him
speaking to the people, whom he had delivered from
the bondage of Egypt, of many things, but none will
impress us more than the sad features which are
brought to us in the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy; for
naturally we would have thought that Israel was then
on its way to the Holy Land to become the proud pos-
sessor of it, and secure 'the fulfilment of the promise
which God had made. But in the 49th verse of this
chapter, Moses says, “The Lord shall bring a nation
against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as
swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou
shalt not understand.” In verse 52, he proceeds to say
that that nation “Shall besiege thee in all thy gates,
until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein
thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall
besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land,
which the Lord thy God hath given thee. And thou
shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God
hath given thee, in the siege and in the straightness,
wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee.”
If you have read the account of the destruction of
Jerusalem you will know that, although this was
written 1,600 years before that event, it could not have
been more literal if it had been written after the de-
struction of Jerusalem, it is so true to the things that
were then enacted.


Further on. in the 62nd verse, we read these words:
“Ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as
the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou
wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God. And
it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over
you to do you good, and to multiply you, so the Lord
will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you
to nought; and ye shall be plucked front off the land
whither thou goest to possess it. And the Lord shall
scatter thee among all people from the one end of the
earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve
other gods; which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, even wood and stone. And among these nations
shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy
foot have rest.” And I ask you whether anything at
all in the history of Israel has been more faithfully ful-
filled than this prediction by Moses, 3,500 years ago.
Under our own eyes, in our own lifetimes we have
seen some of these things fulfilled to the very letter.
But there is something else awaiting Israel, for Jesus
indicated, when He spoke to them of the impending
destruction of their city, that there was to be a foreign
occupant in possession of their land for a long period.
In the 21 st of Luke, 24th verse, we have the words of
Jesus. In this chapter He is referring to an event
which was to happen some years after He spoke, tell-
ing them that the stones of their temple would not be
left standing one upon another. He told them that that
was only the beginning of many troubles which should
overtake them. He told them that there should be
great destruction in their land, and great among
the people; that they should fall by the edge of the
sword; that they should be led away captive into all
nations. That is just what Moses had also told their
fathers. Jesus is confirming the declaration of Moses,
if it were needed. He said that Jerusalem should be
down-trodden by the Gentiles until the times of the
Gentiles were fulfilled. There, in a sentence, we are


told how long Israel was to be dispersed; for the period
Jerusalem was to be in the dust. And what would
happen at the end of it? There was to be a change,
for only until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled
would Jerusalem be down-trodden, and Israel be scat-
tered unto ail nations. In our own lifetime we are able
to see indications, very plentiful, that Israel is being
restored to her land; and that the time of the Gentiles
simultaneously is being fulfilled. For to-day the
Gentile power in possession of Palestine is the least
powerful of all the kingdoms of men. That Power is
Turkey, of which I shall presently speak.
JEWISH DISPERSION AND RETURN.
Seeing that the Jews have been dispersed; seeing
that it was foretold that they would be dispersed; and
seeing, furthermore, that their dispersion has been so
faithfully fulfilled to the letter; we have a guarantee
that their restoration will surely follow, and it is this
restoration that we are looking for. Moses (Deuter-
onomy 30th chapter) says something that has to bear
on it, in these words: “It shall come to pass, when all
these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the
curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call
them to mind among all nations, whither the Lord thy
God hath driven thee. And shalt return unto the Lord
thy God, and shalt obey His voice according to all that
I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul; That then the
Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have com-
passion upon thee, and will return and gather thee
from all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath
scattered thee. If any of thine be driven out unto the
utmost parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy
God gather thee, and from thence will He fetch thee:
And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land
which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it;
and He will do thee good, and multiplv thee above thv
fathers.”


Had you and I lived a hundred years ago. and
awaited assurance of these things, we should not have
been able, as we are to-day, to put our hands upon that
promise, and say, "It is being fulfilled, because befoie
our eyes, at the present time there are incontrovertible
facts proving that Israel is having this fulfilled unto
them by God.
Or, again, look at 11th of Isaiah, 10th verse: In
that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people: to Him shall the
Gentiles seek, and His rest shall be glorious. And
then, Isaiah indicates the nations .of the earth, by
name, from which Israel is to be gathered, for lie
shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall as--
semble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the
earth.”
Here we have Isaiah, some hundreds of years later
than Moses, speaking to the same effect.
A NATIONAL RESURRECTION.
In the chapter we read to-night, the 37th of Ezekiel,
you may have noticed that it spoke of bones which
stood upon their feet, and after having come together
the ilesh came upon them, and muscle came upon
them; and these bones represented a great army,
which had no breath until God commanded the wind
from the four corners of the earth to enter into them.
Then they rose and stood upon their feet, and became
an exceeding great army.
In that prophecy of Ezekiel you have the promise of
the national resurrection of Israel.
But passing down in the chapter, to the nth verse,
Ezekiel says: “Then He said unto me, Son of Man,
these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they
say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are
cut off for our parts.” And it has looked until the pre-
sent time that the promises made by God, unto the


fathers, would never have their fulfilment. So much
so that Israel is depicted as being in a state of despair
because of it.
“Therefore prophesy and say unto them. Thus saith
the Lord God; Behold, O My people, I will open your
graves and cause you to come up out of your graves,
and bring you into the land of Israel. And ye shall
know that lam the Lord, when I have opened your
graves, O My people, and brought you up out of vour
graves. And shall put My spirit in you, and ye shall
live, and I shall place you in your own land” (Not in
the land of the nations where they have been scat-
tered). “Then shall ye know that I the Lord have
spoken it, and performed it, saith the Lord.”
God has not only spoken concerning these things, but
when this is enacted He will have performed them.
Now let me pass on, and in conclusion on that point,
call your attention to Micah, who, in the 4th chapter,
and verses 6-8, says something to the same effect: “In
that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that
halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and
her that 1 have afflicted: And I wifi make her that
halteth a remnant, and her that was cast far off a
strong nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in
Mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.”
That has not been fulfilled. When it is, God’s King-
dom will have come, for which we all pray, and His
will shall be done on earth as it is in heaven.
I remarked that Christ indicated some change at the
close of the Gentile times, which is what we see; be-
cause the Holy Land is being brought back from that
desolated state, and becoming a very important factor
in the earth to-day; and there is more to follow. Go
for a moment to the 38th chapter of Ezekiel, for there
we find that a portion of Israel is to be safely dwelling
in Palestine at the time of Armageddon. In the 14th
verse we read these words: “Therefore, son of man,
prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord God:


in that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely,
shalt thou not know it? And thou shalt come from thy
place out of the north parts, thou, and many people
with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great com-
pany, and a mighty army.”
Last Sunday night, just at the conclusion of the ad-
dress, 1 drew your attention to the fact that this pro-
phecy was directed by Ezekiel against Gog, of the
Land of Magog, the Chief Prince of Rosh, Meshech,
and Tubal; and I identified those powers, by the aid of
the history of Josephus and the map, with Germany,
Russia, and France. And here, in this verse, as if to
confirm the geography, he speaks of this power coming
out of the north parts. And they are coming; that con-
federated power is coming into the Holy Land as a
cloud to cover it for a purpose, which will obtain when
Israel is dwelling safely therein.
You will find, if you look at the nth verse: “Thou
(Gog) shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled
villages; 1 will go to them that are at rest, that dwell
safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having
neither bars nor gates.”
RECENT ASSURANCES.
I want to tell you now, that visitors to the Holy
Land are able to indicate, in the plainest of language,
that things are happening there just as this prophecy
would require. Since I addressed von before there
has come into my hands, from a friend in Britain, a
book entitled, “Palestine and the Jews” (F. G. Jann-
away). It is the record of the travels of the author,
who has a great interest in Palestine and the Jewish
people, and who on many occasions has made it an ob-
ject of visit that he might study the characteristics of
that place. He says, referring to the state of Jerusa-
lem as it is to-day, and comparing it with what it has
been: In 1827 there were not more than 500 Jews in
the whole of Palestine. In 1856 the Hadrian Edict


was removed, and the Jews invited to return. In 1875
the ‘Jewish Colonisation Fund’ was founded. In 1891
Baron Hirsch’s scheme was floated. In 1896 Dr. Iheo-
dore Herzl startled the whole of Jewry with his idea of
a Jewish State. And if you have followed the move-
ments of the Jewish world you will have been struck
with the response to these schemes. He proceeds to
say that: “In Palestine, as a whole, we find, in place of
the 500 nondescript Jews in the land when Sir Moses
Montefiore visited it in 1827, there are now 500 two
hundred times over! And that, comprising Jews who
are displacing and supplanting the unbusinesslike Gen-
tiles. whether the latter be Christian or Moslem. Of
these 100,000 Jews, 65,000 live in and around the Holy
City itself.”
That tells you from the pen of a traveller who last
year visited the Holy Land, the condition of the people
existing there to-day; and there is much of like in-
terest in his book. But that will do for the present,
concerning these people of whom God has said so
much.
This, then, is the first Prelude to Armageddon—that
Israel will be dwelling safely in the land of Palestine
\vhen Armageddon bursts upon the world.
SECOND PRELUDE.
Now we come to the Second Prelude. This has to
do with the “Abomination of Desolation,” which has
been in possession of the Holy Land for centuries. It
is a people and power known by the title of the “Un-
speakable Turk.” Foreign Powers have occupied the
Promised Land ever since the destruction of Jerusa-
lem. The Romans had it for some hundreds of years;
then there were let loose from the East a succession
of military hordes, which finally established the Sara-
cenic Power in that land. They demolished the eastern
part of the Roman Empire, and extended their terri-
tory well across into Europe, but they were stopped;


because there rose up another power, which we know
as the Turkish Power. This desolated them, and es-
tablished the Ottoman Empire, which has been in pos-
session of the Holy Land ever since, and a great
portion of Europe.
A great deal of the territory in the south-eastern
section of Europe at one time belonged to Turkey, but
to-day there is only a little portion left in the posses-
sion of the Sultan. A mere scrap remains, and that
has yet to go, and it seems as if it will go before very
long.
All those other Gentile occupants have been re-
moved out of the Holy Land, and the Turk is likewise
doomed to go, and his lease seems to be just about ex-
piring at present. With its expiry there comes into
view a very powerful feature of Armageddon. If you
turn to the 16th chapter of Revelation, you will find
a Power identified, in language from which there is no
escape, as applying to the Turk.
In the 9th chapter, we have that brought out in these
words, at the 14th verse: “Saying to the sixth angel
which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which
are bound in the great river Euphrates.” That, as
I told you just now, applied to those four Saracenic
powers which spread eastward from the Euphrates
until they were well into Europe.
TURKEY’S RISE AND FALL.
The Ottoman Power is indicated in the 16th chapter
of Revelation, for in the 12th verse you read these
words: “And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon
the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was
dried -up, that the way of the kings of the East might
be prepared.”
That tells ns why the Euphratean Power is to
vanish; because there are kings from the’East, who
are to come into possession of that territory. It also
tells 11s that the Turkish Empire, which is the Euphra-


tean Power, is to become evaporated ; and so at this
juncture I want to draw your attention to the condi-
tion of the Turkish Power within the last century.
Tillinghast, 250 years ago wrote, as indicating who
this Power was in Revelation, spoken of as the Eu
phrates: “By the River Euphrates we are to under-
stand the Ottoman, or Turkish nation.” Two hundred
and fifty years ago there was no Power in the eaith so
great as the Turkish, which was preserved until 1820,
when it was checked through foreign war and internal
trouble. At that time there broke out the Greek insur-
rection. and the establishment of the two piovinces of
Wallachia and Moldavia.
1821/2 —Persian eruption. . ?
1( 527 Greece established a kingdom under Allies pro-
tection —England, France, Russia.
1826 Internal revolt, destruction of Sultan’s Jani-
zaries.
,828—Sultan appealed to Mahommetan fanaticism
against Russia which nearly ended in
Turkish evaporation. Time not ready.
] 82*) —France took Algiers and made it a Fiench city •
18^2/3 —Egyptian Pasha attacked lurks in S}iia and
Holy Land.
]B^8 —He again aspired to Sultan’s throne and reach-
ed Smyrna en route to Constantinople.
In 1912 we saw the Balkan States break out into
combustion, which ended in their reducing the power
of Turkey in that part of the world so much that
having lost Adrianople, she was threatened with the
loss of Constantinople. Had there been no Balkan war
two years ago, it seems as if there would have been no
European war to-day. . .
A chaplain of the British Embassy resident in Coiy*
stantinople from 1821 to 1831, wrote thus: \v itliin
the last twenty years Constantinople has lost more than
half its population. Russian and Greek wars are a
constant drain upon the Janizaries. Ihe plague is con-


tinually active. Between 300,000 and 400,000 have
been prematurely swept away in one city.”
THE END OF TURKEY.
We do not wonder then, with these facts before us,
that we see the Turkish Empire so nearly evaporated
as it is to-day, and so far from him being the ‘'Un-
speakable Turk,” and so far from him being what Mr.
Gladstone designated him, viz., “The Sick Man of
Europe,” we can look at him further, and regard him
as “The Sick Man of Asia;” for he has practically no
territory in Europe now, and his Asiatic dominions are
threatened. They are threatened because the Russian
Power, which seems bent on sweeping down will never
be satisfied until, as we shall see presently, she has
abolished the Sultan's power and throne.
Now, let me, in regard to this second prelude say,
that it looks as though the evaporation of the Euphra-
tean Power was nearly completed. When it is com-
pleted Armageddon will be upon us. The first prelude
requires that Israel shall be in the Holy Land; the
second prelude requires that the Turkish Power now
in possession of it will be dried up, which paves the
way for what we read in the 38th of Ezekiel.
THIRD PRELUDE.
We now come to the third prelude; and this reveals
a very mighty Power who will claim possession of the
Turkish Empire, as J have just indicated. It goes into
the land, as stated in the 38th of Ezekiel, and up to the
land of unwalled villages. Israel then is safe in the
land of Palestine. At this time she has cattle, and
goods; and has become a wealthy people there. She
has no king, it is true, but is looking forward to one.
The Jewish people never expect a king until their
Messiah comes, and then they believe they will be the
chief of all the nations of the earth. We, as Christians,


say, “Well, they had their Messiah, and they put Him to
death;” but the Jews do not believe that. However,
the time is coming when they will be forced to recog-
nize, by what they see, that their Messiah has been iri
the earth, and they did crucify Him. However, at that
time they will be in the Holy Land, and they will have
cattle, and goods in plenty, and will dwell in the midst
of the land. They will come out of the nations where
they have been scattered, and be a prosperous and
peace-loving community. And they will not be under
the Turkish Power, because it will have gone.
RUSSIA’S DESIGNS.
The natural question will arise, “Who is going to
have control over the territory of the Turkish Empire
when it has gone?” We can see at a glance that there
is no Power on earth who considers herself more en-
titled to the Holy Land than Russia. Russia wants it,
it seems to me,’ for several reasons. First of all, a por-
tion of her fleet is always bottled up in the Black Sea.
To-day she cannot get her ships of war through the
Dardanelles, because Turkey says, “You may not,” and
Turkey holds the key, with consent of the other
Powers. Then again, Russia will want to have some
authority in the Suez Canal. She is cut off from all
commerce with the East. She will try to control the
eastern portion of the Mediterranean, and endeavour
to secure some power in the Persian Gulf; she will
try to push her territory down southwards s.o that she
can threaten any Power which attempts to interfere
with her; that she may have control of the Far Eastern
railways, right across to Japan, that much of the
wealth of the East may come through her hands. This
is the aim of Russia; and is what her great statesman
laid down. The will of Peter the Great gave her the
obligation that she was never to rest until she con-
quered the whole world: and this brings us to a point
of great importance.


GOG, A JEWISH ENEMY.
First of all, that Power which is revealed as the
Gogian, is to be an enemy to the Jews. The religion of
the Tews has been bitterly distasteful to the Russians.
The political affairs of the Jews have likewise been the
same; and when the Jews are dwelling in Palestine,
Russia will hate them because of their religions and
political tendencies. She has always been an enemy to
the Jews, and we can well remember not many years
back there broke out atrocities in Armenia, when the
Jews were persecuted, and Russia did not . interfere.
And so right back through history Russia has, of all
the nations of the earth, been the most powerfully
antagonistic that the Jewish people have had.
Let us now turn to the nth chapter of Daniel, be-
cause I want to identify Russia with this Power of
whom Daniel speaks, in the 40th verse, “At the time of
the end” (I ask you to notice that it is at the time of
the end, and is not yet fulfilled) “shall the king of the
south push at him, and the king of the north shall come
against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with
horsemen, and with many ships, and he shall enter into
the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.“ Bear
these thoughts in your mind, because as we go to
Ezekiel' presently they will come into view more plain-
ly. “He shall enter also into the glorious land, and
many countries shall he overthrown; but these shall
escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the
chief of the children of Ammon. He shall stretch
forth his hand also upon the countries; and the land
of Egypt shall not escape.”
EGYPT AND RUSSIA.
Now, we know that Egypt is in the possession of
Britain at this time, who has suzerainty, or control,
over it, as far as applies to the Suez Canal; but the
control of Egypt will yet fall into the power of the


“king of the north,” and the Libyans and Ethiopians
shall be at his steps —or in our language they
will be prepared to follow him. Just when he
has everything his own way, “tidings out of the
east and north shall trouble him. We learn
that something will happen to interfere with his
movements. “And, therefore, he shall go forth
with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make
away many. And he shall plant the tabernacles
of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy
mountain” (i.e., between the Dead Sea and the
Mediterranean), “yet he shall come to his end, and
none shall help him.” That is the destiny marked out
for the king of the north, as given in Daniel.
Now, turn to the 38th chapter of Ezekiel, verses 1
to 7: “And the word of God came unto me, saying, Son
of Man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog,
the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy
against him. And say, Thus saith the Lord God, be-
hold I am against thee. O Gog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal. And I will turn thee back, and
put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth,
and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them
clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company
with bucklers and shields, all of them handling
swords.”
Please observe the affinity between that and the
statement of Daniel, who informs us that he should
come like a whirlwind, with chariots and horsemen,
and many ships, and should enter into the countries,
and shall overflow and pass over, and that the Libyans
and Ethiopians should be at his steps. “Persia,
Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield
and helmet: Gomer and all his bands; the house of
Togarmah, of the north quarters, and all his bands;
and many people with thee. Be thou prepared, and
prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are
assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.”


WHO IS GOG?
Now, let me see whether we can better identify these
verses in Ezekiel, with what we read from Josephus,
on Sunday night. I might begin by saying that Gog,
of the land of Magog, is the Czar of all the Russias;
the land of Magog is Germany, and the land of Gomel*
is France. But you may want to know how we find
that Germany is the land of Magog? How do we find
that France is the land of Gomel*? Well, we have to
go back to the time of Ezekiel if we would learn the
names of those territories, and when we get these we
find, that in Ezekiel’s time these places had different
names from what they have to-day. Josephus, writing
in his book of “Antiquities” tells us that “Japhet, the
son of Noah, had seven sons. They inhabited, so that
beginning at the mountains, Taurus and Amanus, they
proceeded along Asia as far as the River Tanais
(Don) and along Europe to Cadiz (a city of Spain)
and settling themselves in the lands which they lighted
upon, which none had inhabited before, they called the
nations by their own names; for Gomel* founded those
whom the Greeks now call Galatians (Gauls), but
were then called Gomerites. Magog founded those
that from him were named Magogites, but who are by
the Greeks called Scythians.”
Which were the nations that the Greeks in the time
of Josephus called Scythae, and which they called
Galatae? Careful examination will show that both of
these nations, after the flood, migrated westward into
Europe. Later the Scythae went eastward into Rus-
sia. That is as Josephus understood it.
It is an easy matter to find from other ancient wri-
ters that the original Scythae was in Europe. After-
wards the Scythians migrated and went into Russia,
and then into Siberia; but if we can find which were
the nations that the Greeks called Scythae and Galatae,
we are able to understand which places are described
by Ezekiel as Magog and Gomer. And so there is


little difficulty, although not sufficient time to do it as
clearly as one would wish, to show that Gog, of the
land of Magog, and the house of Gomer and all his
bands, and the house of Togarmah of the north, and
all his bands pertain—Gog to the Great Power, the
Czar of all the Russias; and Gomer and Magog to the
lands which we now call France and Germany.
Just here I want to bring in another thought. We
are living in very marvellous times to-day. We all
wonder what is going to be the outcome of the present
struggle in Europe. Sometimes we think that the
German power may be mighty enough to beat off the
others. Sometimes we are led to think that the
Russian power will be so destructive that there will
be nothing of Germany left presently. And, again,
we think that the internal condition of Germany will
operate so as to cause an internal rebellion, and before
long there will be no German Empire left, but a
republic established in its place.
A WONDERFUL FORECAST.
In my hand I have a book, which is splendid in its
explanations on this matter, written sixty-four years
ago, and I desire to read this part as showing the
deductions of the writer (Dr. John Thomas), who
long since is dead and gone to his grave; while we live
and can vouch for the accuracy of his deductions on
the lines lam laying down. He says: —“I think there
cannot be the shadow of a doubt that the Autocrat of
Russia, when he shall have attained to the plenitude of
his power and dominion, is the subject of the pro-
phecy contained in the thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth of
Ezekiel. This personage at present is only ‘Autocrat
of All the Russias,’ that is, of Ros, Mosc, and Tobl;
while the Emperor of Austria holds the position of the
Gogue and Magogue. But as we have seen elsewhere,
the Austrian and German Empire is doomed to extinc-
tion by fire and sword; so that when this is broken up
the Gogueship will be assumed by the Autocrat, or


‘prince of Rosh, Mosc, and Tobl.’ Having proved, as
I think, that the phrase, ‘Gogue of the land of Magogue’
signifies Emperor of Germany, and that the particular
emperor referred to will also be the prince of Ros,
Mosc, and Tobl—that is, at some time hereafter, and
that not far off, a Czar of Russia will be both Emperor
of Germany and Autocrat of All the Russias.”-
“Elpis Israel,“ p. 393.
At the time this author was writing, the German
Power had not come into the prominence which we see
her in toAlay; but, as noticed elsewhere, the German
Empire is doomed to extinction by fire and sword. I
have also a piece of poetic writing by Fortunatus,
Bishop of Poitiers, in which he introduces those rivers
in Western Europe, with which we are, perhaps, more
familiar to-day, owing to the war, than we have ever
been before. He introduces all these rivers which are
the scenes of the present-day conflict, thereby acknow-
ledging that in those days they looked upon the power
then in possession as Gog. Dr.. Thomas says: “Gog,
of the land of Magog, signifies the Emperor cf Ger-
many, and that the particular Emperor referred to
will also be the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal.
That is at some future time hereafter, and that not
far off, the Czar of Russia will be both Emperor of
Germany and Autocrat of All the Russias.” Now, I
leave that citation to you for what it is worth. It
struck me when I read it as a remarkable forecast of
what we see happening in our own day, and I think
there can be little doubt about it, when looking at the
prophecy of Ezekiel, that Germany, with Russia pound-
ing at her on the east; Belgium and France pounding
at her from the west; and Britain pounding at her on
the high seas and on the land, must be ultimately
squeezed out of her power. The Bible requires that
the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal shall be the
Power which shall control the major portion of
Europe at the time of Armageddon.


RUSSIAN EXPANSION.
Let me show just here how Russia . has ex-
panded during the last one hundred years. At
the same time 1 can show you how (meat
Britain has, although our map does not go far
enough to permit of it so easily. But this map in my
hand, which is a modern production —(“A Literary
and Historical Atlas of Asia,” J. M. Dent, London)
shows the Russian advances in Central Asia since 1800.
The most central of the Russian territory in Asia in
the year 1800 was about the northern part of the Cas-
pian Sea. This map marks out those parts which
have since been acquired, and gives the dates of their
acquisition. So that Russia has made, almost unob-
served, some great strides southward during the past
hundred years. Now, let me read to you from this
book, “Palestine and the Jews,” another extract con-
cerning Russia, because it has much to do with things
as we find them to-day. The author says here: “The
achievements of Russia in and around Jerusalem alone
can only be adequately appreciated by those who have
personally surveyed what she has done, and is doing.
On the west side of the city, not far away from the
principal gates, she has purchased between thirty and
forty acres of ground, surrounded it with huge walls
and gates, and erected within the enclosure quite a
number of buildings. In addition to what the Russians
are pleased to describe as ‘accommodation for pil-
grims,’ but which we and others, who have learnt to
‘call a spade a spade,’ consider far more suitable for
barracks, capable of housing some ten thousand
troops; she has there the Imperial Consulate and
offices, a large hospital, etc. But that is not all. As
we stood upon the outer edge, as it were, of the east
side of the Russian quadrangle —from thence we had
an uninterrupted view of the whole of Jerusalem below
us, and of the Mount of Olives beyond and above—
there, right up on the top of that mount, stood, in bold


relief against the sky-line, a huge and high tower,
which also belongs to the Russians. It is over one
hundred and sixty feet high, which, in view of the
fact that the mount is two hundred feet above Jeru-
salem, means that any sentry on duty at the top of
the tower would have a most commanding view of
everything going on in the streets of the city, and all
around. From that tower signalling could be carried
on with a fleet in the Mediterranean off Jaffa; in fact,
at least once during our stay there, searchlight practice
was being carried on during the night. In addition
to the tower, there has been much building carried on
by the Russians in the immediate vicinity, on land also
owned by them.”
GERMANY IN THE HOLY LAND.
Having given you that very interesting extract about
Russia in the Holy Land, let me read just a little bit
concerning Germany’s preparations, too. “Naturally,
the interested reader will be constrained to ask: “Is it
at all likely that Germany will play 'second fiddle’ to
Russia?” The writer did not know last year that this
war would break out, and that Germany would be in
the squeezed position that we see her in to-day. “But
in that matter we must not forget—nay, we will do
well to keep in mind—the old German Emperor’s dying
advice to his grandson, the present Emperor, William
11. It was this: 'Treat Russia with the greatest pos-
sible consideration when you come to the throne.’ ”
(He has, hasn’t he? And is getting it back with in-
terest !) “And upon that advice and its reception, upon
the intents and purposes of Germany with regard to
Palestine, our intimate knowledge with the ‘lie of the
land’ obtained first hand, and that, too, on the spdt,
has made most manifest that the continual aim of
Germany is like that of Russia—to worm itself into
things Palestinic. For just a little to the north of the
Russian settlement on the Mount of Olives, the Ger-


man Government has bought a large tract of land, and
erected thereon a huge range of buildings, known as
‘The Victoria Augusta Settlement,’ not the least signi-
ficant and important erection being a very high tower,
not unlike, and which they claim is several inches
higher than, the Russian tower already referred to.”
These will be very valuable buildings in the time to
come, and you may be sure they will be put to their
best use. Gog will be in the land at the time of
Armageddon, and his dominion will comprise those
lands which I have marked out on the map.
FOURTH PRELUDE.
This point brings us to our fourth prelude. It
introduces the antagonist of Gog, with which we are
very much more familiar, and under whose flag we
are pleased to say we serve—the British Power. That
is the Power which has always been as friendly to
Israel as the Russian Power has been unfriendly, and
it is, therefore, naturally, a Russian enemy.
At the present time Britain and Russia are allies in
the conflict, but there is no telling what will happen,
for history records such strange things. We find
those who were once the fastest friends, in the national
sense, the bitterest enemies at a later date, and vice
versa; and when the settling up of the present Euro-
pean war is over, if it is over before Armageddon, we
may find that Britain and Russia are not such friends
as they appear to be to-day. But it is Britain who is
to be the latter-day antagonist of that Gogian Power,
who is to come down into the Land of Palestine.
We have the identification in the 38th chapter
of Ezekiel, 13th verse: “Sheba, and Dedan,
and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young
lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to
take a spoil ? Hast thou gathered thy company to take
a prey, to carry away silver and gold, to take away
cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?”


Here is a challenge emanating from a power who
is to antagonize the Gogian Power when he attempts
to descend into the land of Israel for the purpose of
laying it waste; and that Power is spoken of as the
“merchants of Tarshish and the young lions thereof.”
BLESSED BRITAIN.
It is too late to-night better to identify the Tarshish
Power with Britain, but I content myself for the pre-
sent with saying that this Tarshish is a merchant
power and a maritime power. A power whose symbol
is the Lion, and whose colonies to-day can be recog-
nized as the young lions, and who, for the sake of
assisting the old mother lion, are ready for a growl,
and already are growling. And so we may find, if we
live until then, that at “the time of the end,” Britain,
because of her treaty, and because of her faithfulness
to the people of God, will defend them at no matter
what cost, against the invasion of a Power which has
l>een their bitter enemy in the past.
Now, that brings us to a thought, contained in
Genesis, by which we see a fulfilment of the promise
made so far back as then. At the 12th chapter, 2nd
verse, God is speaking to Abraham, saying: “And I
will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee
and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the
earth be blessed.”
And Britain is blessed to-day. She has a treaty in
regard to Belgium, which has made her largely respon-
sible for being in the present conflict; for had Britain
chosen to regard that, as the German Ambassador
suggested—as being only “a scrap of paper,” which
could be torn up—she need not have been in the war.
She has another treaty —a treaty in regard to the Holy
Land. She has made a treaty, which if she chooses to
regard only as a “scrap of paper,” may prevent her


being in the latter-day conflict; but Britain’s honour
will be placed at stake, as it has been recently, and for
that reason, and because of her determination to
defend her honour at all costs, Britain will—in her
endeavour and declaration to protect the Jews —find
herself as being in the grasp of a very powerful enemy,
viz., “the king of the north.”
ANOTHER TREATY.
I want, in conclusion, to tell you what that Palestinic
treaty is, which exists to-day, just as one existed in
regard to Belgium. It is here. “Mr. Justin McCarthy,
the historian of the century, in his comprehensive
work, ‘History of Our Own Times,’ says: ‘Another
secret engagement was that entered into with Turkey.
The English Government undertook to guarantee to
Turkey her Asiatic possessions against all invasion, on
condition that Turkey handed over to England the
Island of Cyprus—for her occupation.’ ”
That Treaty was made on 4th June, 1878, many years
after the treaty made with Belgium, which Britain
has duly honoured right up to the present. Disraeli
made this other treaty at the conference in Berlin, and
the historian says: “By a secret treaty between the
British Government and the Ottoman Empire, 4th
June, 1878, the former promised to defend Asiatic
Turkey against further aggression by Russia in return
for permission to occupy Cyprus.”
Cyprus was handed over. It stands there to-day, in
the Mediterranean, as the seal to the treaty which has
been made, and so long as Britain is in occupation of
Cyprus, so long will she have before her the act of
her own hand, because she has declared she will pro-
tect the Turkish Dominions in Asia against foreign
invasion.
We can understand at this juncture what a terrible
war it would have meant for Britain had she given a


guarantee to protect Turkish European dominions
against foreign invasion. Fortunately, she did not
undertake to do that, and the time has not yet come—
although it will come with Armageddon—when she
will be asked to honour her word and give effect to her
pledge.
This writer, just in conclusion, draws attention to
another thought: “On the ioth July, 1878, Cyprus was
occupied by the British, under the provision of the
celebrated Turkish Convention, by the terms of which
the island is to be occupied by Great Britain until
Batoum, Kars, and Erzorum are restored to Turkey
by Russia.”
CYPRUS A BRITISH POSSESSION “UNTIL”
Britain is to occupy Cyprus until then, and I ask you
to imagine how long that “until” will last before Russia
gives anything back to Turkey.
Now, friends, I have occupied a long time on these
preludes. I do not know whether I have gone very
far, but it seems to me that there is a good deal of
matter which has been left out. I think I have one
other extract, which is the utterance of a man who has
come prominently into our notice, because he is the
Prime Minister in England. Mr. Asquith, speaking
so recently as the ioth of November last year (1913),
said, as if to show that the treaty was not going to be
dishonoured: “There is one other matter —and I fear
only one—in these recent troubles in the East, which
gives us cause for satisfaction. It is that the Asiatic
provinces of Turkey have not been involved in the
conflict. It is the desire of His Majesty’s Government
that the integrity of these dominions should not be
infringed. We could not see without lively concern
anything that threatened the holy places, or their pos-
sible transfer from Mussulman possession We
wish to see no invasion of the territorial integrity of
Asiatic Turkey We, in Great Britain, gladly


offer any help which the Turkish Government may
ask in the prosecution of that direction.”
Here we have the fact brought home to our notice
that when Russia attempts —as she assuredly will—to
root the unbefriended Jews out of the Holy Land, and
take possession of the then defunct Sultan of Turkey’s
dominions, Britain will be called upon to stand by that
treaty, as she has stood by the one which is involving
her in the present war.
These four preludes, then, friends, in their un-
speakable importance—for so I regard them—bring us
to Armageddon in operation, and of that subject I am
to speak next Sunday evening. But existing conditions
are not ripe to conclude that the war which we see
operating in Europe to-day is Armageddon.
I thank you very kindly, friends, for your long and
patient hearing to-night.


ARMAGEDDON IN
OPERATION.
My dear friends, —To-night I wish to make a little
confession to begin with. It is, that last Wednesday
night I so far exceeded the time which I had set for
myself, that I was somewhat afraid there would be
more vacant chairs than full ones at this lecture. It
is not so, however, and I thank you for being here to
hear this subject of Armageddon in Operation. If I
discourse at length, the only apology I can make is
that it will be the Bible keeping us, because to-night,
perhaps, more than on the other evenings. I wish
to connect up the different links from the Bible,
that it may give us an unbroken chain when we
have finished on the subject of Armageddon in Opera-
tion. It is not an easy task, but it is rendered sim-
pler when one sees an audience prepared to listen
patiently. T have no need to ask you to do this, be-
cause on other occasions you have been extremely
good.
FUTILE PEACE CONFERENCES.
Let me commence by saying that there is always
some effort on foot among the nations of the world
to bring about a state of universal peace and brother-
hood. During my own lifetime I can remember
several occasions when the leaders of the various
nations have come together in conclave to seek an


agreeable means by which warfare might be set
aside, and all the nations of the world might live
in international unity. So far from that being the
case, we unfortunately witness to-day the fact that
these peace conferences have been futile. In some
cases agreements which have been arrived at in
times of peace have been passed over when a critical
moment has arrived, and before the nations of the
world, who were parties to those agreements, were
fully aware of it, they have become plunged into
conflict.
I might say here that it is not the policy of the
Bible to have a world-wide state of peace this side
of the Millennium. I hope you will not think me
pessimistic, but I am speaking thus because the
Bible aids me in this decision. The world will
never know peace until the Prince of Peace has
come to it, and so long as the Prince of Peace is
absent —whom you know, as well as myself, is the
Lord Jesus Christ—so long will man be at enmity
with his fellowman; for until human nature is
changed, it will break out in the future, as it is
doing to-day, and has done through all the ages.
A THOUSAND YEARS OF INTERNATIONAL
PEACE.
We are looking, therefore, to Armageddon in
Operation, because it will be a struggle of such a
nature as to eliminate for a thousand years the
war-like attitude of mankind against his fellow-
man, during which time the Prince of Peace will
establish peace in the earth; for a thousand years
mankind will respond to that peaceful reign, enjoy-
ing all its benefits, appreciating all its virtues, and
rejoicing before God in accordance with the purpose
for which He created man. Nor is it my policy to
tell you to-night what will happen at the end of the
thousand years; that belongs to the lecture which
follows.


There is another feature in connection with these
peace proposals which comes from time to time to
our notice—it is the opinions of statesmen and war
experts, who are continually launching forward the
idea that military training—universal military train-
ing at that—is necessary to induce peace. I ask you
whether the opinions of such statesmen and war ex-
perts are established by what we see to-day. It
appears as though the nations, having trained them-
selves for war, were so eager for it that they could
no longer restrain an opportunity. It has now come;
in a fashion unexpected, sudden, and terrible; it has
come when there seemed to have been no occasion
for it. It has come when the whole outside world
seemed unprepared for it; and thus, whilst there has
been peace on the leaders’ lips, there seems to have
been war in their hearts.
A MORE EXCELLENT WAY.
It is not a fact then that the best way to secure
peace is to be prepared for war. The best way to
secure peace is to be prepared for peace, and the best
way to secure war is to be prepared for war, and this
latter we have to-day because we were prepared for
it. But as I remarked, the opinions of war experts
and military statesmen are shown to be fallacious
when the opportune time arrives. “Train up a child
in the way he should go, and when he is old he will
not depart from it,” said the wise man. Train him
to be a soldier and he will want to fight when the
moment arrives. Train our knickerbockered boys in
military camps, and they will want to be military
men. And that is what the nations of the world are
doing to-day. They are training their boys for the
bloodiest battle that the world will yet witness; and
much more so than it has ever witnessed. They are
preparing for the Battle of Armageddon.
This military training, so world-wide to-day is


tending to that time, when nation shall rise up against
nation, more than we see at present. On the other
hand, if it were possible to bring into operation the
commandments of Jesus Christ, there would be no
war. We are also shocked at the present war in
Europe, because it is between nations who profess the
Fatherhood of God, and the brotherhood of man;
and yet with all that, they seem to have been unable
to check it. The answer to this anomaly is found in
the fact that they have trained, and are thereby pre-
pared. They have built up solid armies, and estab-
lished great navies, while underlying these armies
and navies there was the spirit for the conflict, which
now obtains. And what is worse is this —whilst in
times of peace, a man, in the heat of anger, who may
give a death blow to a fellow man is a criminal, and
a murderer, and treated as such; in times of war
wholesale murder and butchery are legalized, and
permitted; and the more lives one nation can destroy
of another, so much the happier is that nation for the
deaths of its enemies. That is a feature of warfare
which we cannot understand, nor does it stand to
the credit of men and women who profess to follow
the Prince of Peace; no, it stands as a contrary fact.
THE PEACE AND SAFETY CRY.
In contrast to these theories of war experts, let me
take you to what the Apostle Paul has said in his
letter to the Thessalonians, ist Book, sth chapter
and the ist verse, “But of the times and the seasons,
brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you. hor
yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord
so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they
shall say, Peace and safety”—(and after this war
is over, the old cry will be raised, “We have fixed up
everything at last, and there will be no more war; we
are quite secure from a repetition of this awful
bloodshed, we will dwell in peace and safety)—


“When they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child; and they shall not escape. But
ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief.”
Armageddon will begin its operation when the
nations of the world on the verge of trouble are say-
ing, “Peace and safety.” Christ and the prophets
have foretold a time of universal trouble. I take you
to the 3rd of Joel, and verses 9-17. “Proclaim ye
this among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the
mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let
them come up. Beat your plowshares into swords,
and your pruning hooks into spears: let the weak say,
I am strong. Assemble yourselves and come, all ye
heathen, and gather yourselves together round about:
thither cause your mighty ones to come down, O
Lord. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to
the valley of Jehosaphat: for there will I sit to judge
all the nations round about. Put ye in the sickle for
the harvest is ripe.” T stop just here to recall your
attention to the fact that the meaning of Armaged-
don, as indicated in the first lecture, is “heap of
sheaves in the valley of judgment,” and T said that it
indicated a reaping time for judgment; and that the
word. “Jehoshaphat” signified “the judgment of God.”
Now here is Joel confirming that in this verse. “Put
ye in the sickle for the harvest is ripe” (for reap-
ing). “Come get you down; for the press is full,
the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Mul-
titudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the
day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The
sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars
shall withdraw their shining. The Lord also shall
roar out of Zion, and utter His voice from Jerusalem;
and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the
Lord will be the hope of His people, and the strength


of the children of Israel. So shall ye know that 1 am
the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, My holy moun-
tain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
strangers pass through her any more.”
You will see the connection between this, and what
follows presently. Now, I take you to Isaiah, 13th
chapter, verse 6. “Howl ye; for the day of the Lord
is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the
Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and
every man’s heart shall melt. And they shall be
afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them;
they shall be amazed, one at another; their faces
shall be as flames. Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to
lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners
thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the
constellations thereof shall not give their light: the
sun shall be darkened in his going forth ; and the moon
shall not cause her light to shine. And I will punish
the world for their evil, and the wicked for their
iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud
to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the ter-
rible.”
Observe the great similarity between the words of
Isaiah and Joel. In the 17th of Isaiah, the 12th verse,
we read this: —“Woe to the multitude of many
people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas;
and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing
like the rushing of mighty waters! The nations shall
rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shall
rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be
chased as the chaff of the mountains before the
wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the
morning he is not. This is the portion of them that
spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.” This
prophet speaks as the representative of the nation of
Israel.


“WHEN SHALL THESE THINGS BE?”
Now, turn to Matthew, and see where the Lord
Jesus Christ has confirmed the prophets, because I
told you last Sunday night that He came to confirm
the promises made unto the fathers, and He came to
confirm the prophets likewise. In the 3rd verse of
the 24th chapter, His disciples who came unto Him
privately, asked Him, “Tell us when shall these things
be, and what shall be the sign of Thy coming,
and of the end of the world? And Jesus answered
and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive
you. For many shall come in My name, saying, I
am L hrist; and shall deceive many. And ye shall
hear of war and rumors of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but
the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against
nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there
shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes,
in divers places. All these are the beginning of sor-
rows.”
And at the 29th verse, “Immediately after the tri-
bulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and
the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall
tall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of
the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all the
tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son
of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory.”
If this means anything, it means that at a time of
trouble such as is attested here, He is to reappear in
the earth in the manner described by Himself.
These events—and there are many more I could
quote indicate that world-wide conflict which intro-
duces to the world Armageddon in operation. It will
be no longer a thing to talk about, and.to dread; it
will be a calamity to avoid, if it were possible; a
calamity from which all those who become partici-


pants in it will wish to escape; but as we have not
arrived at the Armageddon period it is yet possible
there are those here who may take advantage of the
way of escape, before that dread happening bursts
upon the unexpecting world, because, in operation,
Armageddon will be an awful event—a natural event,
too, by which I mean, that it will come about as an
act in the experience of nations, without premedita-
tion, in a perfectly natural way.
PREPARE WAR!
No one, to look over the nations of the world to-
day, would think that they were preparing themselves
for Armageddon. No one would conclude, when see-
ing the British nation building her ships of war;
when beholding the German Empire putting her mil-
lions of men through military training; and other
nations likewise, that these nations are preparing for
that fierce conflict, which will yet take place. For
these men, and these ships will have a use; they are
not being established for nothing. Armageddon will
break upon the world in a very natural fashion, as
the outcome of that preparation for war, of which
Joel told us just now.
But it has a sublime consummation and sequel,
Ezekiel tells us, for he deals with Armageddon in de-
tail, more than any other biblical writer, and one of
the details which he affords us is that it reaches a
sublime consummation at the right time.
We have this in the 39th chapter of his prophecy,
and the 21st and 22nd verses, where God speaking
through him, says, “I will set My glory among the
nations.” Surely it is not contended that the glory
of God is set among the nations to-day, but God has
declared that it will be so. “I will set My glory among
the nations, and all the nations shall see My judgment
that I have executed, and My hand that I have laid
upon them. So the house of Israel shall know that


I am the Lord their God from that day and forward.
And the nations shall know that the house of Israel
went into captivity for their iniquity.”
THE CONSUMMATION.
There is a sublime consummation to Armageddon
when it reaches that stage. But you may want to know,
friends, if I can tell you whether we are nearing the
time of Armageddon. I wish we were. I wish that
I could tell you to-night that this European conflict
was introducing us to Armageddon, for this reason—
not that I want you or myself to become participants
in it, but because it will introduce the world to that
Millennial reign of peace, which the world needs,
and for which it in great measure unconsciously
prays when it says, “Thy Kingdom come, Thy will
be done on earth as it is in heaven.”
There is nothing fearful about Armageddon to
those who know how to escape it, in the Bible-re-
vealed manner; but when it comes it will overtake
men as a thief, that is, it will overtake them unex-
pectedly. Generally speaking, the time is not now ripe
for Armageddon, for the reasons which I enumerated
last Wednesday night, when I put before those who
listened a series of preludes, which must occur be-
fore Armageddon can take place. I will summarize
these to-night, in a few words for your benefit. The
following features seem to point to that conclusion.
Now, the 16th chapter of Revelation, verse 12, says,
“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the
great river Euphrates.” I want to say, for the bene-
fit of those who perhaps do not know, that these
angels which are seen by John as recorded in the
Book of Revelation, indicate periods of time in the
affairs of men. The Book of Revelation gives a
digest of the history of the world from the time of
John down to the time when Christ shall appear in
the world again. And the sixth angel is that period


of time in the doings of mankind when this angel
pours out his vial upon the great river Euphrates,
which, as I have said previously, is a Power re-
presented by that river. The Power which is repre-
sented by the Euphrates, is that in possession of Tur-
kish territory when the sixth angel pours out his vial.
The fifth angel period has passed; the sixth angel
has poured out his vial and the Power in possession
of that territory is gradually drying up, as a conse-
quence. Two years ago when the Balkan War was
waged, we saw the remainder of the Turkish Domin-
ions in Europe yet further curtailed, so that to-day
the Turk has merely a small portion there, virtually
leaving him only with his Asiatic provinces.
Turkey is the Euphratean Power w ; hich is to be
dried up, as the result of the sixth angel pouring out
his vial upon it. We are living in that period, and
the longer we live, the more do we see the Turkish
Empire evaporating, so much so indeed, that it looks
quite probable that some complication in the present
struggle in Europe, will make way for the complete
demolition of the Sultan’s Empire. He does not
know to-day which side to take. Cable news at one
time informs us that he is inclined to mobilize his
troops; at another that he has partially demobilized
them. Reports say he is purchasing cruisers from
Germany, and at another time he has abandoned the
idea. The conclusion points to the fact that “The
Sick Man of Europe” has almost become “The De-
funct Man of Europe,” and is rapidly becoming “The
Sick Man of Asia.” It appears as if his last gasp
were very near.
With the further drying up of the Euphratean
Power we may expect the beginning of Armageddon.
THE GATHERING OF THE NATIONS FOR
DESTRUCTION.
Joel, 3rd chapter, Ist verse, says, “For behold, in
those days, and in that time” (which time I want you


to note) “when I shall bring again the captivity of
Judah and Jerusalem, I will also gather all nations,
and will bring them down into the valley of Jehosa-
phat, and will plead with them there for My people,
and for My heritage Israel, whom they have scattered
among the nations, and parted My land.”
The valley of Jehosaphat is situated just outside
the walls of Jerusalem, a part of the Sultan’s domin-
ions. Armageddon will take place in those days, and
in that time when the captivity of Judah and Jerusa-
lem has been brought to an end.
Last Wednesday night I was able to tell you from
the pen of a friend who last year visited the Holy
Land, and who made a lengthy stay there in order to
study many features in connection with it, that there
were now in and around Jerusalem 65,000 Jews, out
of the population of 100,000 in Palestine; whereas
one hundred years ago there were only 500 Tews to
be found in the whole of the land; so that we are able
to see the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem is ending
and they are being brought to their own land.
I want you to go to Jeremiah, 30th chapter. Look-
ing at the third verse, we have this expression, “For
10, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring
again the captivity of My people Israel and Judah,
saith the Lord: and I will cause them to return to
the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall
possess it.”
Now at the 7th verse—the time is indicated—
“ Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it:
it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be
saved out of it. For it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the Lord of Hosts, that I will break his yoke
from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and stran-
gers shall no more serve themselves of him.”
In the 24th verse we are told that “The fierce
anger of the Lord shall not return, until He have done


it, and until He have performed the intents of His
heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.”
IN THE LATTER DAYS.
We are, therefore, in the latter days of the dis-
persion of Israel. We are now in the time when the
Euphratean Power is being evaporated, and also in
the time of which Jesus spoke, as recorded in the
21 st chapter of Luke, verse 24, “And they (the
Jews) shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall
be led away captive into all nations, and Jerusalem
shall be trodden down by the Gentiles.” It has been,
to the letter, trodden down of the Gentiles, since the
fall of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. But there is an end to
its “treading down,” viz., “until the times of the Gen-
tiles have been fulfilled.” The time of the Gentile
Power now in possession of the Holy Land is nearly
fulfilled, as I have shown you. The Turkish Sultan
is almost without a voice in regard to the government
of his own country. And then there is a change to
take place, according to the words of Jesus, who in-
dicated, that, whilst the Gentile Power was in occupa-
tion of Jerusalem the Jewish nation would be dis-
persed into all nations, but correspondingly with the
decadence of the Gentile Power, the return of Israel
to their own land would obtain. We are living in
that time.
MICHAEL THE GREAT PRINCE.
Going to Daniel, who, in the 12th chapter, speaks
very importantly regarding our subject, we read that
he forecasts in his Ist verse a time of unprecedented
trouble, “And at that time shall Michael stand up.”
(This Michael is no other than the Lord Jesus Christ,
ift a representative capacity. The word “Mi-cha-el”
means, “ ‘Who’ or ‘one’ like God,” and Christ returns
to the earth as the Vicegerent of God.) He is “the
great prince which standeth for the children of Thy


people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a nation even to that same
time; and at that time thy people shall be delivered,
every one that shall be found written in the book.”
It might seem that the present time of trouble could
not be eclipsed. There is a greater awaiting the earth,
and it will come at a time when Michael will stand up;
when Armaggedon is in operation, because He has a
very important part to work out in that crisis.
And then we are told by Zechariah, in the 14th
chapter, and first verse: “Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of
thee.” Then verse 2: “For I will gather all nations
against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken,
and the houses rifled and the women ravished; and
half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the
residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those
nations, as when He fought in the day of battle.”
JERUSALEM THE OBJECT OF HATRED.
Jerusalem is to become the object of national hatred
and bitterness. It will be the scene of the Arnta-
geddon conflict, and the valley of Jehosaphat, outside
the walls of Jerusalem, is the valley which Joel speaks
of as “The valley of decision,” and I suggest to you
that these are a series of warning posts, by which we
may know our whereabouts in relation to the time of
Armageddon. At its operation there will be a partial
restoration of the Jews to their own land, rich and
peaceful; that, however, is but a prelude to the
greater restoration which will follow after Armaged-
don.
I want you to turn to the 43rd chapter of Isaiah, at
this moment, and read these words: “But now, thus
saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and He that
formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art Mine.


When thou passest through the waters (of affliction) I
will be with thee; and through the rivers they shall not
overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou
shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle
upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One
of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom,
Ethiopia and Sheba for thee. Since thou wast precious
in My sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have
loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and
people for thy life. Fear not; for lam with thee; I
will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from
the west. I will say to the north, Give up; and to the
south, Keep not back: bring My sons from afar, and
My daughters from the ends of the earth.”
WHO WILL ASSIST IN RESTORING ISRAEL?
This provides work for somebody; it provides work
for a nation, a Power, which has means at its disposal
to use them in the interests of the Saviour of Israel.
That nation must be a mercantile Power, and is indi-
cated in the 18th chapter of Isaiah. The Revised Ver-
sion gives a somewhat different rendering to the
Authorized, and I read from the Revised: “Woe to the
land of the rustling of wings, which is beyond the
rivers of Ethiopia. That sendeth ambassadors by the
sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, say-
ing, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and
peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning
hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose
land the rivers have spoiled.” This is the call of Isaiah
the Prophet, to that Power whose land is shadowing
with wings beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, designating
for them the work which they have to do.
That, I suggest, provides work for the ships of Tar-
shish, and at this juncture it may be well if I make a
further attempt to identify Tarshish with Britain. In
the first place we can see that a merchant power is in-
volved ; that it is a maritime power, and a power that


is friendly to the Jews; and under these three headings
there is no nation but Britain which can comply with
the requirements. But, further than that, it is called
“Tarshish and all the young lions,” by Ezekiel.
There are supposed to be three or four Tarshishes
mentioned in the Bible, but in reality we can
only find two, and it is significant that in every
case any interpretation fits in as being applicable to
Britain, because she stands possessed to-day of all
those spots which have been indicated as Tarshish in
aneient times, so that looking at it from that point of
view, there is no other nation who can comply with
the designation of Tarshish. But, further, as I said
the other night, “the merchants of Tarshish and the
young lions thereof’’ speak, and the heraldry of the
British realm and British coinage is a lion and lions,
and these things, although feebly regarded by some,
are strong when we come to look at them in con-
junction with all the other evidences which exist; for
no other nation takes the lion as the symbol of its
standard, and its power.
BRITAIN’S OPPORTUNITY.
Leaving that thought, because I have not further
time to pursue it —Britain’s opportunity will come to
protect Israel when the Turkish power has vanished.
There is an interruption to come to the peace of Israel,
for we find the prophet Ezekiel, in the 38th chapter
was instructed thus—“ Son of man, prophesy and say
unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord God: In that day when
My people of Israel dwelleth safely in their o\*n land,
shalt thou not know it.”
Gog will know it, and will make use of his know-
ledge, for it is quite evident, quite apparent to-day,
that the Power we identified as Gog, of the land of
Magog, the chief prince of Rosh, Meshech and Tubal,
is no other than the Russian Power. We will see pre-
sently what an enormous confederated power this will


be. We have been alarmed during the past few weeks
to learn of the immensity of the Russian Army. We
were told, whether it be true or not we cannot say, that
the Czar was sending down no fewer than eight
millions of troops to invade Germany. When we re-
member that this is part of Russia’s own strength, and
when added to that strength, in the time of Armaged-
don, there will be the strength of the land of Magog,
which we identified as Germany, and the land of
Gomer, identified as France, we can well see that the
Prophet Ezekiel expresses a most significant thought
when he says, in the 4th verse, that they would be “a
great company;” or, as in the 9th verse, “Like a storm
—like a cloud to cover the land.”
The Gogian Power is a huge confederated force,
which interferes with the peace of Israel when they
are dwelling safely in their own land, which is the time
when Tarshish and all the young lions will wake up.
Britain, as we saw on Wednesday night, when reading
from the authorities which I quoted, has undertaken to
protect—has guaranteed to protect—the Sultan’s
Asiatic Dominions against all invaders. The price paid
for that by Turkey was the island of Cyprus. It is a
place of arms, which neither Britain nor any other
Power which has yet possessed it, has made use of, but
which Lord Beaconsfield agreed to accept as the price
of the treaty which Britain entered into with Turkey
at the Berlin Conference in 1878:
BRITAIN DILATORY IN THE HOLY LAND.
Britain has clone nothing in the Holy Land, whereas
I was able to show you that both Russia and Germany
are very actively engaged there at present in their
operations; but Britain having undertaken to protect
the Sultan’s Asiatic Dominions against foreign in-
vasion—when she awakens to the fact that the time
has come for her to put into operation her Treaty,
which she has signed, and which has been sealed by the


transfer of Cyprus—will realize that she has to
combat a mighty Power in the land of Israel, and will
be scarcely prepared for it; none the less, never
daunted, she will make the effort, while the con-
sequences will be left to Him who guides the govern-
ments of all mankind.
Russia will sweep into the Holy Land with other in-
tentions. This is indicated in the 38th of Ezekiel, 10th
verse: “Thus saith the Lord God; it shall also come to
pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy
mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought. And thou
shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages;
I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all
of them dwelling without walls, and having neither
bars nor gates. To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to
turn thy hand upon the desolate places that are now in-
habited, and upon the people that are gathered out of
the nations,” viz., the restored people of Israel, “which
have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst
of the land.”
RUSSIA A MIGHTY POWER.
In the 15th verse we are told from where he will
come: “And thou shalt come from thy place out of the
north parts.” (And we can see by the map at a glance
that the north parts relative to the Holy Land are Rus-
sian territory.) Let me stop, because I have been
challenged about the geography of this matter. It is
all very well for us in these days of enlightenment,
with these maps before us, to say—“ That is north,
and that is east, and that is west, and that is south,
but we must remember that Ezekiel had not these
maps; they were not in existence; and if I were
to show you from a book which I have, some of
the conceptions of the world in the earliest times,
you would not be able to understand the geography
of the earth. We must not be too critical about
geographical features, but content ourselves with


things in general. Ezekiel tells us that this mighty
power, these hordes of military men, are to come
from their place out of the north parts. Daniel, in
his nth chapter, 40th verse, indicates this power, as
“The king of the north,” and proceeds to tell us in the
verse which follows, that the northern king is to enter
into the glorious land and overthrow many countries.
At the 44th verse he says: “But tidings out of the east
and out of the north shall trouble him; therefore he
shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to
make away many.” There are some very perplexing
tidings awaiting Gog when he attempts to invade the
Holy Land; he is to be disturbed by some news coming
out of the east, and out of the north.
Why Ezekiel should have said “out of the north,”
I do not know, but from out of the east we are told
that Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of
Ammon shall come; when Sheba and Dedan shall be
allied with Tarshish. Sheba, as we all know, is now
called Aden—in the Red Sea. Dedan is a tract of
territory formerly known as Muscat, and Britain has
so much authority there that some few years back she
brought her men-of-war to bear upon it, that it might
be subjected to her.
EVIL TIDINGS FOR GOG.
These things that are to trouble Gog will come out
of the east, and out of the north. I can only, therefore,
suggest that Britain is the north from whence the news
will come which will have such a troubling effect on
Gog. The word will issue, of course, from the centre
of the British Government, and Gog receives, as we
see from the Book of Ezekiel, at the 38th chapter, the
13th verse, a challenge. “Sheba and Dedan” (and I re-
peat, that Sheba and Dedan are related to Britain to-
day), “and the merchants of Tarshish” (whom I have
endeavoured to further identify with Britain, and can
find no other power approximating identification),


“with all the young lions thereof” (which I have
identified with all Britain’s oversea dominions—lndia,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Canada, and
elsewhere), shall say unto Gog, Why have you come
into the Holy Land ? “Art thou come to take a spoil ?
Hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to
carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and
goods, to take a great spoil.” “Do you not know that
I, Britain, have undertaken to guarantee the Turkish
possessions against foreign invasion? Do you not
know, Gog, that I have given my word to protect the
Jews safely in their own land?” The challenge goes
forth, and the ultimatum is issued, which brings these
opposing forces into the conflict of Armageddon. I
leave you to imagine what the allied power of Gog will
be with his enormous hosts, descending like a cloud to
cover the land; and I further leave you to conceive
what Britain’s strength will be, when all the confedera-
ted strength of her Dominions is brought to bear
against the Power of Gog, who additionally receives
the infliction of divine anger, according to Ezekiel,
commencing at the 18th verse of the 38th chapter:
“And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog
shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord
God, that My fury shall come up in My face. For in My
jealousy and in the fire of My wrath have I spoken.
Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the
land of Israel; and I will call for a sw r ord against him
throughout all My mountains, saith the Lord God;
every man’s sword shall be against his brother. And
I will plead against him with pestilence and blood; and
I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the
many people that are with him, an overflowing rain,
and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.”
AN ANCIENT DREAMER.
This is the summary of Divine anger. In the 2nd of
Daniel, the same result is indicated, in different lan-


euaee- when Nebuchadnezzar had his dream inter-
preted to him by Daniel. The king had seen in his
dream an image, a colossal image, standing before him,
which represented the kingdoms of men in their en-
tirety, from the time of his own Babylonian power,
until—as indicated by Daniel—the whole of that image
was brought to nothing. If you look with that thought
in your mind, at the 34th verse, you will understand
what it means when it says: “Thou (Nebuchadnez-
zar) sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands,
which smote the image upon his feet, that were of
iron and clav, and brake them to pieces. Then was
the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold
broken to pieces together, and became like the chart
of the summer threshing floors; and the wind came.,
them away, that no place was found for them, and
the stone that smote the image a great moun-
tain, and filled the whole earth.”
When the kingdoms of men are gone, what shall
take their place? It will be the kingdom of our Lord
and His Christ. His kingdom will have come, and then
God’s will shall be done upon earth.
THE GOGIAN SMASH.
I want further to draw your attention to what this
conflict of Armageddon means in relation to the deci-
mation of the hosts of Gog. At the 39th of Ezekiel Ist
verse, you will read these words: Therefore, thou
Son of Man, prophesy against Gog, and say. Thus
saith the Lord God; Behold I am against thee, O Gog,
the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and I will turn
thee back, and leave but the sixth pait of thee. (Sup-
posing we reckon that there are twelve millions of men
engaged in that Armageddon, of which only a sixth
part will be left, that is two millions out of twelve mil-
lions who will escape.) ‘‘And will cause thee to come
up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the
mountains of Israel: and I will smite thy bow out of


thy left hand, and will cause thy arrows to fall out of
thy right hand. Thou shalt fall upon the mountains
of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that
is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds
of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be de-
voured. Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I
have spoken it, saith the Lord God. And I will send a
fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly
in the isles: and they shall know that I am the Lord.”
Next we come to the cleansing of the land (nth
verse) : “And it shall come to pass in that day that I
will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the
valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and
it shall stop the noses of the passengers; and there
shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and thev
shall call it the valley of Hamon-gog.”
In the 12th verse we are told how long it will take to
do this: “Seven months shall the house of Israel be
burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. Yea,
all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall
be to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified,
saith the Lord God. And they shall sever out men of
continual employment, passing through the land to
bury with the passengers those that remain upon the
face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven
months shall they search. And the passengers that
pass through the land, when any seeth a man’s bone,
then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have
buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog. And also the
name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they
cleanse the land.” 3
, se we are told how long they shall be
in further cleansing the land of the weapons of war.
is come and it is done”—(Armageddon is over)
saith the Lord God; this is the day whereof I have
spoken. And they that dwell in the cities of Israel
shall go forth, and shall set on fire, and shall burn the


weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows
and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears,
and they shall burn them with fire seven years, bo
that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither
cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn
the weapons with fire, and they shall spoil those tnat
spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith t e
Lord God.”
You will remember that I quoted from a chaptei in
Isaiah where these exact words were used. Their
identification with one another is complete. In the
17th verse, a peculiar invitation is proffered in this lan-
guage : “Thou Son of Man, thus saith the Lord God;
Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast
of the field, assemble yourselves, and come; gather
yourselves on every side to My sacrifice, that I do sac
rifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountain*!
of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood. Ye
shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood
of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of
goats, of bullocks, all of them fadings of Bashan. And
ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye
be drunken, of My sacrifice, which I have sacrificed for
you. Thus ye shall be filled at My table with horses
and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of
war, saith the Lord God.”
We have a counterpart written by John in the 19th
chapter of Revelation, 17th verse: “And I saw an
angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of
heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the
supper of the great God; that ye may eat the flesh of
kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty
men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond,
both small and great. And I saw the beast, and the
kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together


to make war against Him that sat on the horse, and
against His army.”
He that sits on the horse is the Lord Jesus Christ,
the King of Kings, and they that are with Him are the
kings and lords over which He is to be Chief King and
Lord.
THE GREAT DELIVERER.
Christ comes at this stage of Armageddon to the
rescue of His people, as we saw remarked by Daniel,
12th chapter, ist verse. The kings that will accompany
Jesus on this mission we noticed in the 16th chapter of
Revelation. I have quoted from this before, to tell you
of the drying up of the Turkish Empire. Now I quote
it to show that simultaneously with the drying up of
the Turkish Empire, “the way of the kings of the east
might be prepared.” These are not human kings, al-
though I know that there are some who contend that
they are. These are the glorified saints, who come—as
John has told us in Revelation—wdth their Chief
King and Chief Lord. I will have more to say upon
that in another connection.
In the 19th chapter of Revelation, verse 15, there
is another thought upon which I wish to speak. ‘ Whilst
it has all to do with the return of Christ, this I par-
ticularly desire to emphasize: “Out of His mouth goeth
a sharp sword”—(this does not mean that the Lord
Jesus Christ is a man of war in the carnal sense)
“that with it He should smite the nations: and He shall
rule them with a rod of iron; and He treadeth the
winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty
God. And He hath on His vesture, and on His thigh
a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS.”
There aie people who think that Christ is to return
to this earth as a man of peace. He once came as a
man of peace, and was crucified as a vagabond. When
He comes again it will not be as a man of peace, not


as a Man of Sorrows; it will be as the King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, from whose mouth there will issue
a declaration to bring the nations of the world into
submission to Him by force. By the breath of His
lips He shall slay the wicked.”
AN UNPREPARED WORLD.
The world has had approximately 2,000 years to
prepare itself for the coming of Christ. Even now it
is not prepared for Him, and when He returns it will
set itself in array against Him, as indicated by the
Psalmist in his 2nd Psalm. Turn to it. “Why do the
nations rage, and the people imagine a vain thing ? The
kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against His
anointed, saying: Let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us. He that sitteth in
the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in
derision. Then shall He speak unto them in His wrath,
and vex them in His sore displeasure. Yet have I set
My king upon My holy hill of Zion.”
Jesus will be accompanied by these kings of the east,
most of whom have been redeemed from the grave
where they have lain for years, and perhaps for cen-
turies of years, but who have been resurrected, and
judged by Him, and immortalized, and made equal
unto the angels, so that they cannot die any more, for
“death hath no more dominion over them.” Jesus
comes into the Holy Land as the King of the Jews.
He comes into the Holy Land from Bozrah, Mount
Teman, and Paran. If you turn to 3rd
chapter, 3rd verse, you will read these words: “God
came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount
Paran,” which may be taken as prophetical of the
judicial visit of Christ to earth.
THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST.
Let us get back to geography again. This little
tongue marked on the map in the western portion of


Arabia is the Sinaitic Peninsuja, the history of which
is familiar because of the doings of the children of
Israel, when Moses led them out of Egypt through the
Red Sea, and in this Peninsula is situated Mount
Teman and the Wilderness of Paran. It has been sug-
gested that these words in Habakkuk refer to those
parts as being the judgment seat of Christ, where He
will gather those who have made a covenant .with
Him. At His coming He raises them from the
dead, and gathers them together with those who are
alive at His coming, either to that spot, or some
other, for judgment. Be that as it may, we find Him
entering the Holy Land via Bozrah, and it has been
suggested that He leaves the wilderness of Paran
and marches through a portion of Arabia, which
brings Him and His host unto the place where the
conflict is to begin; and when the struggle between
Tarshish and the young lions, and the Gogian Power
is at its height, He arrives at Bozrah, of which I shall
now speak. In the 63rd chapter of Isaiah we have
reference to that, “Who is this that cometh from
Edom, with dyed garments, from Bozrah? This that
is glorious in His apparel, travelling in the greatness
of His strength?” The answer comes back to that
question, “I that speak in righteousness, mighty to
save.”
Another question, “Wherefore art Thou red in
Thine apparel, and Thy garments like him that tread-
eth in the winefat ?” The people of Israel are repre-
sented as asking these questions of Him whom they
see approaching their land at the time of the Arma-
geddon slaughter. His answer is, “I have trodden
the winepress alone, and of the people there was
none with Me; for I will tread them in Mine anger,
and trample them in My fury; and their blood shall
be sprinkled upon My garments, and I will stain all My
raiment. For the day of vengeance is in Mine heart,
and the year of My redeemed is come.” “I looked,


and there was none to help; and I wondered that
there was none to uphold; therefore Mine own arm
brought salvation unto Me; and My fury, it upheld
Me. And I will tread down the people in Mine anger,
and make them drunk in My fury, and I will bring
down their strength to the earth.”
THE MARCH TO JERUSALEM.
He passes towards Jerusalem, which is a little fur-
ther west from Bozrah, and then we find by the 24th
Psalm a scene is enacted there. The Psalm is very
enigmatical, until this thought is brought to bear upon
it. The gates of Jerusalem are closed against this
King of kings, Who is the Mighty One from Bozrah.
“Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up,
ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall
come in.” And the question is asked, “Who is this
King of glory?” There is an answer, “The Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle,” —the
battle of Armageddon. “Lift up your heads, O ye
gates, even lift them up ye everlasting doors; and
the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of
glory ? The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of glory.”
After a conference at the gates of Jerusalem,, there
is realized this very utterance of Jesus, given in the
days when He walked the earth, as He stood before
Jerusalem and said, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent
unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a hen gathereth her brood under
her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your house is
left unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you,
Ye shall not see Me, until the time come when ye shall
say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord.” And the gates and bars shall lift up, and the
King of glory shall come in. He asserts His power, as
recorded in Zechariah, 12th chapter, 2nd verse: “Be-
hold I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto


all the people round about, when they shall be in the
siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem. And
in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone
for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall
be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be
gathered together against it.”
In like manner we find John speaking in the ist
chapter of Revelation, at the 7th terse, “Behold, He
cometh with clouds: and every eye shall see Him,
and they also which pierced Him, and all kindreds
of the earth shall wail because of Him.” The people
ask Him, “What are these wounds in Thy hands?” 1
He replies, “These are those which I received in the
house of My friends.” Truly, “They shall look upon
Him whom they pierced.”
The first and the last Armageddon in earth’s his-
tory will have come and passed away. There will
then be a new experience awaiting the earth: the
armies and the navies of the nations will be dissolved,
there will be no further use for them, because a new
condition in the earth will obtain for the first time,
“glory to God in the highest, peace on earth and good-
will among men.”
And perhaps I should close now with this pertinent
enquiry: Who of us will witness Armageddon in
Operation, and who will escape it? Who will partici-
pate in that glorious sequel to Armageddon, of which
I will speak next Wednesday night, if the Lord will.
I thank you very kindly, friends, for the patient
hearing you have again given me during to-night’s
lecture.


THE SEQUEL TO
ARMAGEDDON
My dear friends, —Have any of you ever tried to
race the clock in the work you have undertaken to
do? That has been my unfortunate attempt on each
occasion that I have addressed you, for I find that
I have more matter than I have time to convey it,
and I have had in my former efforts to stop before
finishing my intended work. lam offering no apology
for so long detaining you last Sunday night. It would
appear to be too humourous to make another confes-
sion to-night as I did then, but I would like to turn
the clock face down, and go through with what I have
in hand, uninterrupted. It is very good of you to
sit here so long, and listen to my utterances on Arma-
geddon. But the subject of Armageddon, bear in
mind, is not nearly finished when I have done; on the
contrary, it is really only begun, and maybe some of
you desire to pursue it further. It is in your hands,
and not in mine.
EARTH THE SCENE OF DIVINE PLANS.
It is a subject that brings us in close touch with the
divine purpose. That purpose has been operating
upon this planet which we call earth for six thousand
years, longer perhaps; yet in the time of its con-
summation there is to be a great change, and those


who live in the earth now, if it be their portion to
live in the earth then (not by reincarnation, but by a
resurrection from the dead), will realize that, con-
cerning this great plan, the half has never been told,
and much less understood.
You have, for three nights past, been listening to
the sad side of the earth’s history, which consummates
with Armageddon in operation. To-night let us turn
over the blackened pages of earth’s history, and trans-
port ourselves, by faith, to that happier aspect of
things, where it is revealed that the change now im-
pending will usher in the desired purpose for which
God created this planet. It would be an abortion if
the earth had already yielded her best possibilities, for
then would God be responsible for a huge failure,
whereas the only failure in His creation is—Man.
The world has been groaning for six thousand years
under human misrule and misgovernment, in all the
nations of the earth. Those kings who have reigned,
and the peoples over whom they have reigned, have
gone to their dust. The peoples living to-day, and the
kings who rule over them, will in like manner pass
away in the arms of death, because the kingdoms of
men are not permanent—they are but a means to the
better end; and to-night we arrive at the turning-
point in our consideration of Armageddon, when in
place of natural and human rulers there is to be
established on their ruins a wise, an unfailing, and
infallible, immortal rulership, in the person of [esus
Christ.
A SAD DEFECT IN CHRISTIAN BELIEF.
There is one sad defect in Christianity, if you will
permit me to remark it, since its professed followers
are not in the attitude of looking for the object of
their worship. Instead of looking for Christ, Christi-
anity is expecting to leave the earth and go to Him
in Heaven; whereas if Jesus made to His disciples


one promise more emphatic than another, it is that
which says, “If I go away I will come again.” We
have the proof of His intended return thus —that if
He went away, He will come again. If it can be
shown that He did not go away, it is also proved that
He will not come again. But being convinced that
He left the earth, and that He is not in the earth
to-day, to be reasonable we must also be convinced
that He is coming back. We have the reference in the
14th of John, 3rd verse, from His own lips: “And
if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you unto Myself; that where I am, there
ye may be also.” He left the earth, and therefore He
will return to it.
“A CERTAIN NOBLEMAN.”
Let us now consider a parable which He uttered,
found in the 19th chapter of Luke. A parable is a
word-picture teaching something other and greater
than itself, and this picture, beginning at the nth
verse, brings home to us those words which we have
just quoted from the 14th chapter of John. “And
as they heard these things, He added and spake a
parable, bechusc He was nigh to Jerusalem, and be-
cause they thought that the kingdom of God should
immediately appear.”
Evidently the people were looking for the establish-
ment of the kingdom of God, which was associated
in their minds—and, I believe, rightly—with the re-
stored kingdom of Israel.
“He said, therefore, A certain nobleman went into
a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and
to return.”
If that means anything, it means this—that Jesus
is persuading them from their conception of the imme-
diate establishment of the kingdom of God, because
the time was not ripe for Him to be King of that
kingdom, seeing that He had to go away, as the


nobleman, to receive for Himself that kingdom, after
which He would return. Before He went He gave
His servants certain talents to make use of during His
absence, saying “Occupy till I come.” He did not
say, “Occupy till you come to Me.” “But his citizens
hated him, and sent a message after him, saying.
We wil-1 not have this man to reign over us. And
it came to pass in due time that when he was returned
(from the far country), having received the kingdom,
he commanded these servants to be called unto
him.”
Jesus has not yet returned to the earth. He has not
yet received the kingdom, nor has He called His
servants unto Him to take account of their trading
during His absence; but He is coming. At this point
last Sunday night we left the subject of Armageddon;
for, by reference to the Prophets and the Psalms, we
saw the picture of Him entering into Jerusalem at
His second advent, and after conference at the gates,
the bars and gates were lifted up, and the King of
Glory entered into Jerusalem, which Jesus Himself
has certified as being the “city of the Great King.”
If He did not mean Himself as the Great King, whom
then did He mean? . -
CHRIST ABSENT,—UNTIL
But the time of His departure, or absence, from
the earth is measured off. He is absent from the
earth to-day, but He will return to it, if we may
believe His own words. Paul, writing to the Church
at Rome, at the nth chapter and 25th verse, makes
some reference to the Gentiles, and their position in
the divine programme. “For I would not, brethren,
that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest you
should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness
in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in.” Israel has been, and still is,


blind in part, and will remain so until “the fulness
of the Gentiles be come in,” and then, “There shall
come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob.”
We are now prepared for what Peter, in the 2nd
chapter of Acts, expresses at the 33rd verse, “There-
fore being by the right hand of God exalted, and
having received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Spirit, He hath shed forth this, which ye now see and
hear.” This was the Pentecostal Effusion.
Peter then makes two significant statements. The
first is, “For David is not ascended into the heavens.”
Why had David not ascended into the heavens? Be-
cause David had not been promised that he should.
“But he saith himself, The Lord saith unto my Lord,
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy
footstool.”
The time for the absence of Jesus from the earth
is measured, first by the times of the Gentiles, and
then by His foes’ ascendancy over His people, until
they have been made His footstool. Or again, as
Peter further indicates in the 3rd chapter and 19th
verse, “Repent ye, therefore, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, when the times of re-
freshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.
And He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was
preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive
until (the time allotted for Him to be at the right
hand of God) the times of restitution of all things,
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy
prophets since the world began.”
I submit to you, on these three testimonies, that the
absence of Christ from the earth will reach its ter-
mination when the “times of restitution” have arrived;
when Christ’s “foes have been made His footstool”;
and when “the times of the Gentiles have been ful-
filled”; and these three testimonies are in perfect


agreement with other testimonies which I have ad-
duced in previous lectures.
He is revealed, then, to the earth after Armageddon
has spent its fury; and we observed previously how
that would take place. He inherits the Promised
Land, which is the land God covenanted to all the
families of the earth as their everlasting possession,
through Abraham and his posterity. Jesus returns to
the earth, and inherits the Promised Land, and be-
comes David’s promised heir to David’s throne.
PROVE ALL THINGS!
I am making these statements just as strongly as
I can, because I want them to go home to your minds.
They may bring a new feature into your conception
of things, which may cause a disturbed condition to
exist in your minds with regard to your religious
belief; but your religious belief and mine are not
worth a scrap of paper unless they will stand the
test of investigation.
When Jesus sits upon David’s throne in Jerusalem,
in the land of Palestine, He will fulfil the very pur-
pose for which He was sent into the world, the record
of which we have in Luke i. and verse 30. There
is the appearance to the mother of Jesus of a heavenly
visitant, who informed her of the purpose of His mis-
sion—that she should have a Son, and should call His
name Jesus. “Pie shall be great, and shall be called
the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give
unto Him the throne of His father David. And He
shall reign over the House of Israel for ever; and of
His kingdom there shall be no end.”
Jesus has never fulfilled this function yet. He did
not do it in the days of His flesh, and 'because His
disciples wanted to take and make Plim the King of
David s throne by force, when He was nigh unto
Jerusalem, He spoke that parable in Luke xix., re-


THE SEQUEL TO ARMAGEDDON 87
ferring to His departure from them to receive the
kingdom, after which He would return.
Now, that connects up the mission of Jesus Christ
with His own words, and with the subject of the
sequel to Armageddon.
In the 24th Isaiah, to which I now take you, we
have a further reference to the same effect, at the
19th verse: “The earth is utterly broken down, the
earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceed-
ingly.” (Armageddon in operation will cause it.)
“The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and
shall be removed like a cottage, and the transgression
thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and
not rise again. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones
that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the
earth. And they shall be gathered together, as
prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut
up in the prison, and after many days shall they be
visited. Then the moon shall be confounded, and the
sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in
Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His ancients
gloriously.”
THE CORONATION OF KING JESUS.
Jesus is to be crowned in the earth, and what more
fitting than that the scene of His humiliation should
be the scene of His glory? He was humiliated by His
own people, in His own land. He has promised to
come back to that land, and we have seen that He is
to receive the kingdom of His father David, to sit
upon David’s throne, in Jerusalem; and that throne
He declared to be the seat of the Great King in
Jerusalem. When the coronation of King Jesus is
celebrated, it will be the greatest coronation that the
world has ever witnessed. More glorious than the
combined coronations of all earth’s kings, and it will
be a sight unparalleled for those who are permitted


to participate in it. And it is fitting, I say again, that
the spot which saw Him humiliated should see Him
exalted, and apparently His exaltation is in the near
future. We have the testimony of His enemies that
He was what the prophecies required, and also what
His own teachings required of Him. We have the
testimony of Pilate, whom we may describe as His
greatest public enemy, who gave the word that He
was to be put to death, although, as Pilate himself
said, I find no fault in this Man.” He washed his
hands, saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this
righteous Person; see ye to it.” And the people all
answered and said, His blood be upon us, and our
children.” And for two thousand years that crime
has weighed against that nation, for truly His blood
has been upon them, and their children; but, as we
read to-night, they are to look upon Him whom thev
pierced.
PILATE ANSWERS HIS OWN QUESTION
Turn to the record we have of that tragedy in the
different gospels. I refer to the one found in 23rd
Luke, 38th verse. When Pilate put upon the cross
of Jesus that superscription, “This is Jesus, the King
of the Jews,” he only expressed a very emphatic
truth. Had Jesus sat upon David’s throne, He would
have 1 eigned over David’s people, which was the
Jewish people.
Or, again, as we have it in the Gospel of Mark, by
more of His enemies, the same suggestion in different
words (15th chapter, verse 31): “The chief priests,
mocking, said among themselves with the scribes. He
saved others; Himself He cannot save. Let Christ,
the King of Israel, descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe.” And from the testimony
supplied we think there was superabundant evidence
in what He had said and done in the course of the
short three and a half years’ ministry to convince them


that He had more than human power behind Him;
still, the time was not yet ripe for Him to be the
King of Israel, though that is the function awaiting
Him.
We have it again, from the Prophet Zechariah, 14th
chapter, 9th verse. But first look at the 4th verse,
which is an introduction to the 9th, and from which
you will get a connection which brings the reality of
the return of Christ very near home, because it gives
us the geography of the place that is to see Him when
He does return.
“And His feet shall stand in that day upon the
Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the
east, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst
thereof toward the east and toward the west, and
there shall be a great valley; and half of the moun-
tain shall move toward the north, and half of it
toward the south.”
JESUS TO BE A WORLD-WIDE MONARCH.
That makes the 9th verse easily understandable,
for it says: “And the Lord shall be King over all the
earth: in that day” (that is, the day of His return to
the earth, when Armageddon has spent its force, and
His coronation is a thing of the past), “in that day
shall there be one Lord, and His name one.”
I feel my inability, friends, to force home to you
the strength of the conviction I have in my own mind
upon these points. But there they stand in black
and white in the Bible, for the understanding of each
one of us. We clearly see that when He is enthroned
in Jerusalem, earth’s laws are to issue from that
source.
If I am speaking more steadily to-night, it is because
I desire that these final words on the subject of Arma-
geddon may get right into the hearts and minds of
everyone here.


We identified Britain with Tarshish, as a mercan-
tile power, but the ships of Tarshish that are to be
broken in that day most likely are the ships of war,
for there will be no longer any use for them; there
is to be no more war of nations on the sea nor on
the land while Christ is enthroned at Jerusalem.
A BEAUTIFUL CITY.
The 48th Psalm, Ist verse, says: “Great is the Lord,
and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in
the mountain of His holiness. Beautiful for situa-
tion, the joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion; on
the sides of the north, the city of the great King.
God is known in her palaces for a refuge. For, 10,
the kings were assembled, they passed by together.
They saw it, and so they marvelled; they were
troubled, and hasted away. Fear took hold upon
them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail. Thou
breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.”
And the Psalmist tells us that this city is beautiful
for situation. It might be only a little fad of mine,
but looking at Jerusalem as situated on a map of the
world, you will notice that its position really is the
most central on the face of the earth. It is easily
accessible from western parts by reason of the Medi-
terranean Sea. It is accessible to all eastern parts
because of the railways running through the length
and breadth of them; the same, too, with Africa and
Australasia by water. It is accessible from every spot
on the face of the earth, and the thought may strike
you as novel, but it certainly is “beautiful for situa-
tion.” More than that. Mount Zion is to be “the
joy of the whole earth.”
We may pause at this juncture, because I have had
a letter awaiting me here to-night from an enquirer,
who asks me to reply to a letter in one of the daily
papers this week, in which the writer endeavours to


identify Australia with the chief feature of the Mil-
lennium. Well, it seems to me that the writer of this
letter, who claims for himself a species of clairvoy-
ance, has no need to go to the Bible for evidence, as
he does, because if his clairvoyance is reliable the
Bible is not necessary; but the Bible will not support
the idea of Australia being the chief seat of the
Millennial reign of Christ. The Millennial reign of
Christ will be world-wide, and the city of the Great
King, which Jesus identifies as Jerusalem, in the 25th
chapter of Matthew, supplies the whole argument as
to where the law is to emanate from, and it is Pales-
tine, and not Australia. That will be sufficient, so far
as this friend’s remarks, found in the papers, are
concerned. (Applause.)
Passing from that, let me take you, in further proof
of the idea, to 2nd of Isaiah: “The word that Isaiah,
the son of Amoz, saw concerning Judah and Jeru-
salem.” (That gives 11s the geographical identifica-
tion.) “And it shall come to pass in the last days that
the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established
in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills; and all the nations shall flow unto it.
And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His
ways, and we will walk in His paths: for out of
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem.” (It will take more than “special
clairvoyance” to make Jerusalem a part of Australia.
—Renewed applause.) “And He shall judge among
the nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they
shall beat their swords into plowshares” (this is
the bright side of the history of the world—the swords
are to be beaten into plowshares), “and their spears
into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more.”


THE END OF WAR.
I said on Sunday night that I wished the present
conflict in Europe was Armageddon, because just
behind it is a happy consummation; and earth must
go through this European conflict, and I know not
how many others after it, but certainly the Battle'of
Armageddon, before it will realize that condition of
things of which Isaiah speaks.
Go to Obadiah, and see what that prophet has to
say at the 17th verse: “But upon Mount Zion shall
be deliverance, and there, shall be holiness; and the
house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.” They
have not yet possessed their possessions, they have
been driven through the extent of the whole earth,
from pillar to post, without having a place for the
soles of their feet. But, “Saviours shall come up on
Mount Zion, to judge ihe mount of Esau; and the
kingdom shall be the Lord’s.”
Israel’s condition will then be changed, because their
King, whom they crucified, will be in the earth, sitting
upon David’s throne, to reign for ever and ever.
Look at the 60th chapter of Isaiah, and see the
beautiful picture he draws concerning that time:
“Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the dark-
ness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and His
glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall
come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all
they gather themselves together, they come to thee:
thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall
be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see, and flow
together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged;
because the abundance of the sea shall be converted
unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee.” . . . “Who are these that fly as a cloud,
and as the doves to their windows. Surely the isles


shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish (Britain)
first, to bring their sons from far, their silver and
their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy
God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because He hath
glorified thee. The sons of strangers shall build up
thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee;
for in My wrath I smote thee, but in My favour have
I had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shall be
open continually; they shall not be shut day nor
night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of
the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.
For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee
shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted.”
CONVINCING EVIDENCES.
There is much more to the same effect, but I dare
not take the time to read it all. Turn further, to the
next chapter, the 6ist, 4th verse, and you will read
these words: “And they shall build the old wastes,
they shall raise up the former desolations, and they
shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many
generations. And strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen,
and your vinedressers,. But ye shall be named the
priests of the Lord; men shall call you the ministers
of our God; ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles,
and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.”
Likewise much more in the same strain, as you may
read for yourselves in that chapter, and also in the
62nd.
A CHANGED WORLD.
As a result, the international condition of the whole
world will be changed, and have its effect, as found
in Revelation, nth chapter, 15th verse.' On Sunday-
night I indicated to you that the sounding of the
trumpets of these angels and of the pouring out of


their vials, were representative of times in the epoch
of the kingdoms of men. In this verse we read of
another period of time yet ahead of ours, when the
seventh angel shall sound his trumpet, and there are
great voices in heaven, saying, “The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
His Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever.”
The kingdoms of this world have not yet become
the kingdoms of our Lord and His Christ. When
the wealth of the nations is brought to Him; when
the Gentile kings have fallen down and offered obeis-
ance to Him; when He reigns as King of the whole
earth, then there will be but one kingdom, and that
will be the kingdom of God, which is spoken of as
“The Kingdom of our Lord, and of His Christ,” and
Christ will reign for ever and ever. No more an
earthly ruler will sit upon an earthly throne, and when
that time comes the international conditions will be
quite different from those existing to-day. The king-
doms of the world —the kingdoms of men—will be
subjugated to Christ.
We have previously had a quotation from the 2nd
Psalm, which we can afford to repeat, in the hope
that they will reach the minds of some here to-night.
There the Psalmist says, in the ioth verse, “Be wise
now, therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges
of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and
ye perish from the way, when His wrath is kindled
but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust
in Him.” Then the 2nd verse: “The kings of the
earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel to-
gether, against the Lord, and against His anointed,
saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast
away their <;ords from us. He that sitteth in the
heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in de-
rision. Then shall He speak unto them in His wrath,
and vex them in His sore displeasure. Yet have I


set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.’’ And more
which follows.
Similarly do we find the 72nd Psalm speaking in a
convincing strain, thus: “Give the king thy judg-
ments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's
son.”
AN UNPARALLELED RULER.
Now, I ask yon at this juncture to take your minds
hack through the past history of the earth, and see
whether there has ever been known in the earth a
ruler, or a company of rulers in amalgamation, who
correspond to the subject of this Psalm.
“He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and
thy poor with judgment.” (That has never yet been
done in the history of the world.) “He shall judge
the poor of the people, He shall save the children of
the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.
They shall fear Thee as long as the sun and moon
endure, throughout all generations. He shall come
down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that
water the earth. In His days shall the righteous
flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the
moon endureth. He shall have dominion also from
sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
down before Him; and His enemies shall lick the
dust. The kings of Tarshish (Britain), and of the
isles, shall bring presents; the kings of Sheba and
Seba shall offer gifts. (British possessions.) Yea,
all kings shall fall down before Him: all nations shall
serve Him. For He shall deliver the needy when He
crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper.
He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save
the souls of the needy. And He shall live, and to
Him shall he given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also
shall be made for Him continually; and daily shall
He be praised. His name shall endure for ever; His


name shall be continued as long as the sun. And men
shall be blessed in Him; all nations shall call Him
blessed.”
A SMALL BUT POWERFUL STONE.
Christ is the subject of the Psalms, and He becomes
the little stone power, revealed to Nebuchadnezzar by
the Prophet Daniel, as the instrument hewn out of the
mountain, without hands, which struck that colossal
image at the feet, and reduced it to powder. The
image represented the whole of the kingdoms of men,
right down to the time of the manifestation of the
little stone destroying power, which, in place of the
image becomes a great mountain, filling the whole
earth. This you may read for yourselves in the 2nd
chapter of Daniel—l content myself with a bare out-
line of it for the present.
When the kingdom of Christ, or the kingdom of
God, fills the whole earth, it succeeds to the kingdoms
of men, and at once there is realized the gospel of the
kingdom of God, which was the subject of Christ’s
gospel, and also the prayer which He made, “Thy
kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, as it is
in heaven.” God’s will can never be done on earth,
whilst the kingdoms of men are in their present posi-
tion. It can only be when the kingdom of God exists,
and when Christ reigns over a conquered world, that
the message, which the angels on Bethlehem’s plain
uttered at the time of His birth, will be realized:
“Glory to God in the highest; on earth peace, and
goodwill among men.” That this is not so to-day I
have no need to tell you.
When He returns, however, into the Holy Land,
Jesus will be accompanied by those kings of the east
of which I have previously spoken. They are the
resurrected and immortalized saints who, among men
of all ages, have put their faith in God, and who, at
His judgment seat in the Sinaitic Peninsula, have


been found worthy of eternal association with Him.
He has raised them from the dead in accordance with
His own words, found in the sth of John, as well as
in the nth chapter, wherein He declared Himself to
be “the resurrection and the life.” He illustrates and
manifests His life-bestowing power to these kings of
the east, who, now incorporated with Him in nature
and in purpose, have received the reward which He
promised. At such time effect will be given to the
teaching found in 13th Matthew, 41st verse: “The
Son of Man shall send forth His angels, and they
shall gather out of His kingdom all things that ofifend,
and them which do iniquity. And shall cast them
into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.”
THE FURNACE OF FIRE NOT ETERNAL
TORMENT.
. I suggest that the “furnace of fire” will be Arma-
geddon in operation, a prefigurement of the “lake of
fire” found in the 20th chapter of Revelation.
In the 43rd verse of the 13th of Matthew we are
told that “Then shall the righteous shine forth as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears
to hear, let him hear.” Jesus is indicating here,
parabolically, what is to take place, at His coming, to
those who have given adhesion to His words. Also
in the 12th of Daniel, and the 2nd verse, many that
sleep in the earth shall wake, some to everlasting life,
and some to shame and everlasting contempt. “And
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness
as the stars for ever and ever.”
In the sth of Revelation, this company of people
is represented by John, at the 10th verse, as being
the redeemed out of all the kindreds and tribes, and
peoples and tongues, and nations, saying to Christ:
“Thou art worthy to take the book, and open the


seals thereof; for Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed
us to God by Thy blood. And hast made us unto
our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the
earth.”
This latter thought, it appears, is not very accept-
able to some professing Christians; but there it is.
Nor am I the author of it. It says that the saints
shall reign on the earth, and Jesus also promised that
“the meek shall inherit the earth.” They are to be
elevated to that position in. the terms of the covenant,
found in the 3rd Revelation, at the 21st verse: “To
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in
My throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with My Father in His throne.”
There is a sharp contrast between the Father’s
throne, where Christ is now sitting, and the throne
which He will establish in the earth, where those who
overcome are promised to sit with Him.
REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.
There is punishment provided for sinners—viz., that
awful “outer darkness,” which ends in eternal death;
and further than that, in the 14th chapter of Zecha-
riah there is recorded the punishment for all those
who are locally and generally rebellious. At the r2th
verse we read: “This shall be the plague wherewith
the Lord shall smite all the people that have fought
against Jerusalem; their flesh shall consume away
while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall
consume away in their sockets, and their tongues
shall consume away in their mouth. And it shall come
to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the
T.ord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold
everyone on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand
shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour. And
Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth
of all the nations round about shall be gathered to-
gether, gold, and silver, and apparel in great abun-


dance. And so shall the plague of the horse, of the
mule, of the camel, of the ass, and of all the beasts
that shall be in these tents, as this plague. And it
shall come to pass that everyone that is left of all the
nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go
up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord
of Hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles. And
it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the
families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the
King, the Lord of Hosts, even upon them shall be no
rain.”
A DIVINELY-APPOINTED DROUGHT.
1 think that you will agree that a continued absence
of rain will be quite sufficient to bring people to their
senses. Though people pray continually and earnestly
for rain in our land to-day, it is withheld; and if rain
should not come for another twelve months, it is easy
to make a forecast of the attitude of the people in this
part of the world. But let it be understood that the
absence of rain in the Kingdom age will be a direct
visitation from God, to whom, as a consequence, allegi-
ance will quickly be made.
Such is the punishment for those who will not
identify themselves with God’s requirements. There
is to be a long age of imperfect blessedness, however,
before this earth is to be finally emancipated from the
thraldom which has possessed it. Turn to the nth
of Isaiah, 6th verse, and without reading all, I would
like to draw your attention to the first four verses,
wherein the Lord Jesus Christ, as Ruler of the earth,
and the conditions of His reign, are indicated: “The
wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the
young lion and the fading together; and a little child
shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed;
their young ones shall lie down together; and the
lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suckling


child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
vveaned chfld shall put his hand on the cockatrice’s
den. I hey shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy
mountain: for the earth shall be full of the know-
ledge oi the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. And
in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the
Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.” Read
the remainder at your leisure.
A NEW SONG.
In the 26th Isaiah we have the chapter opening w : th
these words: “In that day shall this song be sung in
the land of Judah: We have a strong city; salvation
will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open ye
the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the
truth may enter in. I hou wilt keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on Thee, because he
trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for
in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.”
Oi again, in the 35th chapter: “The wilderness and
the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the
desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.” I would
like to read the whole of this chapter, but cannot take
the time. At the 45th verse it is written: “Be strong-
feai not; behold your God will come with vengeance,
even God with a recompense; He will come and sa\e
> ou. I hen the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and
the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall
the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert.” . . . “No lion shall
be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon
it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall
walk there. And the ransomed of the Lord shall re-
turn, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy
upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.”


NEW POLITICAL HEAVENS AND EARTH.
In the 65th chapter the Prophet gives us something
further, at the 17th verse: “Behold, I create new
heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind. But be ye glad
and rejoice for ever in that which I create; for, be-
hold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people
a joy. And 1 will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in
my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more
heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be
no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that
hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an
hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed. And they shall build
houses and inhabit them; and they shall plant vine-
yards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build
and another inhabit, they shall not plant and another
eat (as in our day), for as the days of a tree are
the days of My people, and Mine elect shall long enjoy
the work of their hands. They shall not labour in
vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the
seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them. And it shall come to pass, that before they
call, 1 will answer, and while they are yet speaking
I will hear. The wolf and the lamb shall feed to-
gether, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock;
and dust shall be the serpent’s meat. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain, saith the
Lord.”
A PRODIGIOUS CHANGE.
1 submit to you, friends, that this will be a pro-
digious change, to take place on the face of the earth,
as the result of Armageddon, when Christ is King of
the whole earth. There will then, in His day, be
no revenues collected and wasted; there will be no
standing armies; and no navies on a permanent war
footing. 1 hese things will be lost in the absolute lack


of their necessity; earth’s wars will be over; there
will be, as I have many times indicated, “peace on
earth,” because the Prince of Peace will reign.
Turn now to the 46th Psalm; look at the Bth verse.
“Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desola-
tions He hath made in the earth. He maketh wars
to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaketh the
bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth
the chariot in fire. Be still and know that lam God:
l will be exalted among the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth.”
Likewise in the 72nd Psalm, from which I have
already quoted to-night.
MILLENNIAL BLESSEDNESS.
This glorious condition will continue for a thousand
years—the Millennium will then be in operation, fur-
nishing a thousand years of peace and blessedness to
all nations, in all parts of the earth. For we have
the information on that point conveyed to us in the
20th chapter of Revelation, in the 2nd verse, where
we read: “And He laid hold on the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him
a thousand years. And cast him into the bottomless
pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he
should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand
years should be fulfilled.” (This Satanic power, which
is the carnal mind of man, has not been annihilated,
but it has been suppressed.) “After that he must be
loosed a little season.” “And I saw thrones, and they
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them:
and 1 saw the souls of them that were beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and
which had not worshipped the beast; neither his
image, neither had received his mark upon their fore-
heads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years.”


TWO PERTINENT QUESTIONS.
Where is Christ to reign? We have abundantly
shown it to be in Jerusalem. Where are these to
reign? “Thou hast made us unto our God a kingdom
of priests, and we shall reign on the earth.
And then, we are told at the 6th verse, “Blessed
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection;
on such the second death hath no power; hut they
shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign
with Him a thousand years. And when the thousand
years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison, and shall go out to deceive the nations which
are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog,
to gather them together to battle, the number of whom
is as the sand of the sea.”
This Gog and Magog, at the end of the thousand
years, are not the Gog and Magog that we have con-
sidered in the Battle of Armageddon. The terms are
•synonymous, but the powers are not the same. The
Gog and Magog of Ezekiel came from their “northern
quarters”; the Gog and Magog in Revelation come
from the “four quarters of the earth.”
The first is only a partial representation of God’s
infliction upon those who rebel against Him. This
last one represents the universal infliction, and the
last, of God’s wrath upon rebellions mankind. Human
nature revolts, as we see by these verses, and is finally
wiped out of existence altogether. This, then, is the
final overthrow of evil. Only partakers of the Divine
Nature may then live.
During the reign of Christ all His enemies are
subjected to His power, and crushed. Tt js not. often
recognized that the burial service contained in the
tsth of Ist Corinthians tells us so; but we find, if we
look at the 24th verse: “Then cometh the end (this
millennial reign of Christ), when He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;


when He shall have put down all rule, and all authority
and power. For. He must reign, till He hath put all
enemies under His feet. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death.”
WHY DEATH REIGNS SUPREME.
Death reigns supreme because sin is in the world;
and thus we have the writer to the Romans saying:
“By one man sin entered into the world, and death
ky sin, ai ? f l so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned.” Our common lot is death, and until
Christ exterminates the enemy, it will remain. It will
continue while there is sin operating in the earth.
I his brings us to a happier feature, found in the
22nd of Revelation, 3rd verse: “There shall be no
more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it; and His servants shall serve Him.”
The earth has been cursed to mankind ever since
the inception of sin into the world; but it is to be
removed, partially during, and completely after the
Millennium, for “the Lamb shall be in it,” that is, in
the earth, instead of the curse, for it is impossible that
both these could reign simultaneously.
NO MORE DEATH.
Tn the 2rst chapter we are told, at the 3rd verse, by
John, who sees the new heaven and new earth, which
is prefigured also in the 56th of Isaiah: “I heard a
great voice out of heaven saying, Behold the tabernacle
of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and
they shall be His people, and God Himself shall be
with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe
away all tears from their eves; and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are
passed away.”
1 his is the grand sequel to Armageddon, and the
final victory which Christ will manifest to the world


as a result of His thousand years’ triumphant reign,
and then in Him will all the tribes of Adam possess
greater blessings than their father lost. At that time
no longer will the “Tree of Life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God,” have its way barred to
those who would partake of it. There will be no
angel standing with double-edged flaming sword to
guard its way, because every inhabitant of earth will
be the possessor, not of a life measured by three
score years and ten. but of a life that knows no end-
ing: for the Great God will be “all in all”; His nature
will be the possession of all, and thus “His glory shall
fill the whole earth, as the waters cover the sea.”
CONCLUSION.
I submit the foregoing thoughts to you, friends, as
pertaining to the great subject of Armageddon.
My work is finished, and it will have repaid me
fully if, as the result of these efforts, feeble though
they may be. one or more of you will turn to God’s
'Word, which alone is “able to make men .wise unto
salvation,” through Jesus Christ our Lord. And if it
should happen, as I hope, that the subject of Arma-
geddon has so impressed your hearts and minds that
in the days to come you desire to seek the Way. the
■Truth and the Life, we shall then, as now, attribute
all the praise and glory to the God of Heaven. Amen !
FINIS




The following books will be useful in studying the subject
matter of these Lectures :
The Bible.
Thirteen Lectures on Apocalypse. By Robert
Roberts. 3/4.
Eureka. 3 vols. By Dr. John Thomas. A wonderful
exposition. Vol. 1, 8/3. Vol. 2, 11/6. Vol. 3, 11/6.
Christendom Astray ! By Robert Roberts. Paper, 1/3.
Cloth, 2/11 and 4/5.
Palestine and thh Jews. By Frank G. Jannaway.
Compiled in 1913, as a result of the author’s visit to
the Holy Land. 1/9.
Elpis Israel. By Dr. John Thomas. 4/10.
Jesus Christ and Him Crucified. By J. J. Andrew.
Gratis.
A limited number of cloth bound copies of this book.
Price, 1/-. This, and other literature, may be ordered through the
Lecturer, or from any Christadelphian meeting place.






BOOKS
Published by
G. Hassell & Son
Adelaide
South Australia
Inquiries are invited from Authors, Editors,
and others regarding the Printing and
‘Publishing of their Works
104 Currie Street Tel. Central 1004


Those Shadowy
Recollections
A LITTLE ANTHOLOGY
OF ENGLISH VERSE
Demy i6mo
9 d -
The Feast of
Adonis
BY
THEOCRITUS
THE GREEK TEXT, WITH AN ENGLISH
VERSION BY
R. J. M. CLUCAS, B.A.
Crown Bvo
6d.
G. HASSELL & SON
. /// Profits from the sale of this 'Bool; will be
devoted to the Belgian Relief Fund
Reflections on
the War
BY
G. C. HENDERSON
M.A. (Oxon.)
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE"
Crown Bvo Bound in Cloth
2/6
G. HASSELL & SON
FOUR LECTURES
ON ARMAGEDDON
BY
C. P. WAUCHOPE
Crown Bvo
3d.
THE TROUBLED
NATIONS
BY
C. P. WAUCHOPE
Crown Bvo
6d. Postage free
G. HASSELL & SON


The Commonwealth Series
W. MUIRDEN, B.A.
The Commonwealth
Arithmetic
Demy Bvo Limp Cloth 2/-
The Commonwealth
Book-Keeping Exercises
Demy Bvo 1/3
The Commonwealth
Grammar
Demy Bvo 1/6
The Commonwealth
Spelling
Crown B vo 4c!.
G. HASSELL & SON
Essential Spelling
BY
D. J. BYARD, M.A.
Crown Bvo
6d.
IN THE PRESS
FLOWERS OF
ROMANCE
BY
HENRY ARTHUR
Bound in Cloth
G. HASSELL & SON
