

El o
jfour flfcemonal Sonnets,
••O'v’O**
In Memoriam A. M. G. 8., Ob. 24th January, 1887.
I.—GOD’S MONUMENTS.
The glorious Artist whose Almighty power
Framed the vast universe His wisdom planned,
Moulds suns and systems with invisible hand ;
Tints sky and ocean, rainbow, grass, and flower;
Investing all things with a precious dower
Of loveliness divinely rich and grand.
lie holds all living souls at His command,
To each allotting its own place and hour.
One He selects to carve a monument
That shows His perfect art and infinite skill
In angels’ eyes, and doth to men present
The saintly type of meek, submissive will.
And thou God’s monument of patience art,
Madonna of the holy life and steadfast heart I
December , 1886.


lI.—AT MORNINGTON.
Where late with her I stood once more I stand,
In widowed loneliness beneath the stars —-
Heaven’s bright lamps shining through life’s
prison bars—
The wavelets rippling on the bleached sea-sand.
And she, the loved one, with whom hand in hand
I walked from youth to age—whilst earth’s loud
jars
Went all unheeded, and the care that mars
The heart’s deep joy her angel-meekness banned—
Has left me, saddened, desolate, forlorn :
But not disquieted : for her dear smile,
Like yon fair star, the herald of the morn,
Beams on my soul the pledge that one brief while
Will find us joined again in deathless love,
Among God’s angels in our home above.
February , 1887.


lII.—LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS.
As one emerging from a death-deep swoon
Gazes around bewildered; for, a change
lias passed upon his life ; the world seems strange
Morning it is not, hut grey afternoon ;
The sun has left the heavens ; the cold moon
Gleams pallid from beyond the distant range ;
A weird, sad stillness wraps the moated grange ;
All things portend the End approaching soon.
So I, emerging from the gloomy glade
In which I lost the loved one, dazed and lorn,
Found life a dreary waste, where all things fade,
Hope dies, Love withers, Friendship turns to scorn
Would God that I were dead ! I inly prayed :
When, lo! she smiled, and all was glorious morn.
March, 1887.


IY. —AT HER GRAVE.
She is not here. Beneath these wild flowers lies
The precious casket only, the pure shrine
Through which in radiant light was wont to shine—
Making his life one long and glad surprise—
The loveliest soul that e’er through lustrous eyes
Beamed love upon a husband. Ah me ! Mine
Through blissful years were both these gifts
divine :
But she has left me for her native skies.
And now in yon far, far off heavenly land
Of light and love, beyond this lower sphere,
She mingles with the immortal seraph-band .
Listen ! Some viewless angel lingering near
Smiles in my eyes, takes with light touch my hand,
Kisses my lips, and whispers I am here.
D. B.
April, 1887. “ Oyama ,” Malvern.
