

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY
OF H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE. —The information given In this
Handbook is not to be communicated,
either directly or indirectly, to the Press
or any person not holding an official
position in His Majesty’s Service.
THIS PAMPHLET MUST NOT BE TAKEN INTO THE
TRENCHES, OR CARRIED BY OFFICERS IN ANY
OPERATIONS DURING WHICH IT MIGHT FALL
INTO THE ENEMY’S HANDS.
FOURTH ARMY.
TACTICAL NOTES.
MAY, 1916
Stationery Services Press, 257, 4000, 5-16.


CONTENTS.
Page
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... 8
General Remarks ... ... ... ... 3
Discipline and Moral ... ... ... ... 4
THE OFFENSIVE ... ... ... ... 5
Selection of Objectives ... ... ... ... 5
General Form of Attack ... ... ... ... 7
Form of Attack by Each Body of Troops on its
Particular Objective ... ... ... 7
The best Formation for Attack ... ... ... 8
Distances between Lines and Extension ... ... 10
General Principles as regards the Employment of
Reserves ... ... ... ... ... 11
The Attack of Defended Localities such as Woods
and Villages ... ... ... ... 13
The Protection of Flanks ... ... ... 14
Keeping Direction ... ... ... ... 15
Consolidation of Trenches and Localities after
Assault and Capture ... ... ... 16
Consolidation of Localities ... ... ... 18
Villages ... ... ... ... ... 18
Woods ... ... ... ... ... 19
(
Employment of Machine and Lewis guns ... 21
Employment of Stokes Mortars ... ... 24
Co-operation of Artillery with Infantry... ... 26
Position of Brigade Headquarters ... ... 28
Inter-communication ... ... ... ... 29
Aeroplanes ... ... ... 29
Balloon communication ... ... ... 31
Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... 31
Diagram showing the general idea of the scheme
of German defences ... ... ... 32




THIS PAMPHLET MUST NOT BE TAKEN INTO THE
TRENCHES, OR CARRIED BY OFFICERS IN ANY
OPERATIONS DURING WHICH IT MIGHT FALL
INTO THE ENEMY’S HANDS.
FOURTH ARMY.
TACTICAL NOTES.
Introduction.
1. These instructions have been compiled from
memoranda and instructions issued by G.H.Q. and
Fourth Army H.Q. from time to time. They will
form the basis on which all the training of troops
in reserve in the Fourth Army during the summer
will be carried out.
General Remarks.
2. We must remember that owing to the large
expansion of our Army and the heavy casualties in
experienced officers, the officers and troops generally
do not now possess that military knowledge arising
from a long and high state of training which enables
them to act instinctively and promptly on sound
lines in unexpected situations. They have become
accustomed to deliberate action based on precise and
detailed orders.
3, Officers and men in action will usually do what
they have been practised to do or have been told to
do in certain situations, and it is therefore all the
more necessary to ensure that a clear understanding


should exist among all ranks as to what action is to
be taken in the different and unexpected situations
that always arise in battle. During an advance
under fire men must possess the habit of looking
spontaneously to their leaders for direction. Even
this in itself is not sufficient. Situations will
constantly arise when there is no officer or non-
commissioned officer present with groups of men,
and the men must realize that, in such a case, one
man must assume leadership on the spot and the
remainder act under his control.
4. With the above objects in view special exercises
should be held during the period of training by
Divisional and Brigade Commanders with their
staffs and subordinate commanders, to consider
the action to be taken by subordinate commanders
in local unexpected situations, such as a portion of
a line being held up, impassable obstacles encountered,
or local counter-attacks by themselves or the enemy.
The artillery programme and co-operation should
be worked out in all exercises and explained to all
concerned.
Discipline and Moral.
5. It has been rightly said that this war will
be won by superior discipline and moral. We
undoubtedly started with the disadvantage of pitting
an undisciplined nation against a disciplined one ;
but this advantage is rapidly disappearing, thanks to
the self-sacrifice of the best elements of the nation.
This self-sacrifice, however, is not enough to ensu're
success unless we attain a high standard of military
discipline. No opportunity, therefore, must be lost
of inculcating discipline into the troops, whether in
the trenches, on the march, or in billets.
Things which may appear trivial matters to those
who have only lately joined the Army are really of
great importance, such as saluting, cleanliness,
tidiness in dress, manner when speaking to their


superiors, strict observance of orders and instructions,
absence of stragglers, etc. All these inculcate a
habit of obedience and self-respect. Men must learn
to obey by instinct, without thinking, so that in times
of stress they will act as they are accustomed to do.
6. We have always prided ourselves, justly, that
our officers lead their men into action, and do not
drive them. This is the ideal we must endeavour to
maintain. It involves not only the.strictest discipline,
but the respect and confidence of the men in their
officers. This respect and confidence can only be
gained by officers by devotion to duty, power of
command, attention to the men’s welfare, constant
study of their profession and the art of leadership,
and, lastly, by setting an example in all those
soldierly qualities that lead to success in war. There
is no one more easily influenced for good or bad
by the example of his superiors than the British
soldier.
Finally , it must he remembered that all criticism
by subordinates of their superiors , and of orders
received from superior authority, will in the end
recoil on the heads of the critics arid undermine their
authority with those below them.
THE OFFENSIVE.
Selection of Objectives.
7. The general scheme of the enemy’s defences
is shown in the attached diagram. The form these
defences take necessitates their being divided up for
the purpose of an attack amongst formations both
laterally and in depth.
The frontage allotted to each formation depends
on the nature of the defences, the lie of the ground,
and the available amount of artillery support and
of other accessories to offensive action.


8. As regards depth, we may take it as an axiom
that the extent of the advance of the troops in one
operation is limited by two factors :
(1) The ground that can be covered by the
artillery.
This we may take as the effective range of heavy
howitzers, assuming it is possible to move forward
our field artillery during the operation. This range
will be 6,000-6,000 yards beyond our front line,
allowing for the howitzers being 2,000-3,000 yards
behind this line.
(2) The limit of endurance of the attacking
troops.
As regards this we must, of course, base our
calculations on the limit of endurance of the troops
who have the greatest distance to go.
9. Under present conditions the limit of the
artillery will sometimes include the second line
system of trenches, but not the third line. This
second line should usually also be within the limit of
endurance of the troops.
The objectives to be attacked, speaking generally
and eliminating the third line system for the reasons
given above, divide themselves naturally into three
well-defined divisions. The front line system, the
intermediate line, and the second line system.
As a first principle the first objective should not
be short of the furthest limit of the enemy’s front
line system, and may include the intermediate line
if within reasonable distance.
The second objective should include the inter-
mediate line and all ground which will give us good
observation over such part of the second line system
as is not clearly visible from our present front.
The third objective, the second line system.


General Form of Attack.
10. If successive objectives at some distance behind
each other have to be captured, experience shows that
each body of troops must be given a definite objective
to attack and consolidate. This objective, as already
pointed out, must be clearly defined both as regards
frontage and depth. When the first body of troops
has gained its objective then the next should pass
through it and in turn attack and consolidate its
objective, and so on till the most distant objective has
been reached.
11. This method may possibly cause slight delay
between the attacks of the successive objectives and
thus lose to some extent the benefit of taking
immediate advantage of the enemy’s disorganisation
and loss of moral. It obviates, however, that con-
fusion and lack of control that is bound to occur when
one body of troops is given too distant an objective,
and reaches it in an exhausted and somewhat dis-
ordered condition, and is in consequence unable to
resist a counter-attack successfully. The passing of
one body of troops through another is, however, a
difficult operation, and requires very careful prepara-
tion and constant practice in drill beforehand, as
well as complete control on the part of all leaders,
and discipline in the troops when the hour comes to
carry it out.
Form of Attack by Each Body of Troops
on its Particular Objective.
12. Each body of troops, in order to carry out its
task of capturing and consolidating its particular
objective, as allotted in accordance with the principles
laid down in paras. 9 and 10, must be very carefully
organised beforehand. Every man must know exactly
what is expectedof him, and every leader must see that
his men act as ordered. The procedure to be adopted
in sub-allotting objectives to the successive attacking
lines of one body of troops must be different Ito that
laid down in the preceding paragraphs for the general
form of attack of the enemy’s defences as a whole.
In this case celerity of movement and the necessity


of taking immediate and full advantage of the stunning
effects on the enemy’s moral and physical powers are
essentially the governing factors. The leading lines,
therefore, should carry right through to the farthest
limits of the objective. The assaulting troops must
push forward at a steady pace in successive lines,
each line adding fresh impetus to the preceding line.
Although a steady pace for the assaulting troops is
recommended, occasions may arise where the rapid
advance of some lightly-equipped men on some par-
ticular part of the enemy’s defences may turn the
scale.
18. Each body will find its own supports and
reserves. Supports will be required for filling up the
gaps in the front lines and carrying on the forward
movement, should the leading assaulting lines not
prove sufficient, the protection of flanks and consoli-
dation of captured positions. Reserves will be
required to meet the unforeseen and to further
protect the flanks of the attack, and to assist in
the consolidation of the captured position.
14. Every body of troops will be given such a pro-
portion of machine guns, Stokes mortars, bombers,
pioneers, and R.E. as its task may demand.
15. All assaulting troops must advance irrespective
of what the troops are doing on their flanks, but
they must take proper steps to guard their exposed
flanks, and higher commanders must, as regards
supports and reserves, act in accordance with paras.
18, 29, 30 and 84.
16. Each line of assaulting troops must leave its
trenches simultaneously and make the assault as one
man. This is of the highest importance.
The best Formation for Attack.
17. There can be no definite rules as regards the
best formation for attack. The most suitable
formation must depend on :
(1) The ground.
(2) The distance and nature of objective.


1 Co. 1 Co. 1 Co. 1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
or
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
1 Co.
or
1 Co.
1 Co.
For an objective of considerable depth with several
lines of resistance, more depth will be required than
with an objective consisting of only one line of
resistance.
This point will have to be carefully considered
when allotting frontages to bodies of troops.
18. There are, however, two main principles to
remember when deciding on the formation in which
to attack: —
(1) The value of depth so as to ensure that there
will be no unnecessary intermixture of units
when the supports and reserves are pushed
up.
(2) The importance of retaining control by
battalion and company commanders until
the last possible moment.
Probably the two best formations for a battalion if
conditions permit are :
or if still greater depth is required on account of
the number of lines of resistance to be attacked :


The frontage allotted to each battalion being
correspondingly decreased.
Distances between Lines and Extension.
19. As a rule, there is a tendency firstly to make
each successive line of attack too thick, and secondly
to allow the lines of attack to follow too closely one
on the other. The temptation is often to try and
carry a position by weight of numbers, when very
frequently good control and direction, after careful
preliminary study of the ground to be traversed
would effect the object with fewer men. On the
other hand, of course, it is of vital importance that
the first one or two lines should be sufficiently strong
to ensure the first blow’being successful, otherwise
the whole attack will be held up. In this connection
it is worthy of consideration that, in many instances,
experience has shown that to capture a trench a single
line has usually failed; two lines have sometimes
failed, but sometimes succeeded; three lines have
generally succeeded, but sometimes failed; and four
or more lines have usually succeeded.
20. The distance apart of the assaulting lines of
men w T ill usually be regulated by the rate at which
the successive lines can be brought up and moved
forward over the parapet. As a general guide, the
leading lines should not be more than 100 yards
apart.
21. Further, experience shows that, if the front
line can be captured, the probability is that the second
and third lines in the front system will fall
comparatively easily, which means that the succeeding
lines of men need neither be so thick as the leading
ones, nor come too close on their heels,
The men in each line should be extended at two or
three paces interval.
22. Every effort must be made to prevent the
supports and reserves getting intermixed with the
firing line too early in the attack. This is a question
of discipline and leading.


23. Units must not be deployed sooner than is
necessary. Once deployed control becomes much
more difficult. Small columns, which can make full
use of the folds of the ground to cover their advance,
are preferable during the preliminary stages of the
advance.
24. In telling off supports and reserves, the
question of the protection of flanks must never be
lost sight of.
General Principles as regards the Employ-
ment of Reserves.
25. Experience has emphasised certain general
principles regarding the employment of reserves, the
ignoring of which leads to failure:
(1) Reserves must be so placed that they can
follow up directly the assault is launched.
(2) Reserves, just as much as any other part of
the forces undertaking the offensive, must
know exactly what is expected of them.
Commanders of reserves must have studied
the ground over which they are to work, if
' possible by personal inspection, in any case
on the map.
(3) Once an attack has been checked it is seldom
helped forward by large numbers of sup-
porting troops being pushed up directly
behind it.
(4) Under existing conditions only one definite
offensive blow can he expected from one
body of infantry in one operation.
26. As regards (l) the reasons are obvious, but
this principle is so important that it will bear
emphasising. In war the human factor is all impor-
tant and must never be lost sight of. There is a
limit to human endurance in battle and once that
limit' is reached the reaction is very severe.


27. British troops can be relied on to go forward
with the greatest bravery and dash, in spite of the
severest losses, up to a certain point. That point
depends on the discipline and moral of the unit, but,
however high these are, there comes a time when
human nature becomes too strong for discipline and
violent reaction ensues. Once that point is reached
and passed it is hard, if not impossible, to recover
the impetus of success. For this reason it is
essential that the reserves should arrive before the
breaking point is reached and the reaction has
commenced. Skokeloff once said that —“ The art of
command in war lies in having fresh troops available
on the spot ready to be thrown into the battle the
moment that those already engaged show signs of
wavering.”
28. To attain this, however, it is not necessary
that reserve troops should be crowded into a confined
space in immediate proximity to the front line. This
will only lead to heavy casualties. What is required
is that each body of troops as it leaves its position of
readiness should be succeeded in that position with-
out undue delay by the next body. From the
moment when the first line of assaulting troops
leaves our front trenches, a continuous forward flow
must be maintained from the rear throughout the
formation. Up to our own front line this flow may
be either above or below ground according to topo-
graphical conditions and the nature of the enemy’s
fire. Once the assaulting troops have left our
trenches, and are pushing on to their objectives, their
movement should be carried out above ground,
29. As regards (3), in case of a check ultimate
success is more likely to be obtained by pushing
resolutely forward on the flanks of the troops which
have been checked.
30. The handling and control of reserves requires
careful consideration and constant practice by com-
manders beforehand, so that they may be able
to make rapid decisions as to how these reserves


should be employed in order to maintain the forward
flow of reinforcements, and ensure their arrival in
time to meet the varied situations that may arise.
81. As regards (4), troops heavily engaged during
the day should not ordinarily be expected to continue
the offensive on the following day, but should be
either actually relieved or arrangements made for
fresh troops to pass through and take up the offensive
role.
The organisation of reserves in depth should be
made with this object.
The Attack of Defended Localities, such as
Woods and Villages.
32. There are, broadly speaking, two methods of
attacking these.
(l) By direct assault.
.(2) By overlapping and surrounding them.
Bach has its merits ; both are difficult operations
and require careful preparation, a high state of
discipline, leadership, and training.
33. Experience in the past teaches us certain
axioms on which to base our decisions as to which
form of attack to adopt.
(a) Troops, which directly assault a village or a
wood, invariably get into confusion and out
of control, and must be reorganised before
they can make a further effort as a formed
body. •
(b) Unless there is a panic in the enemy’s ranks
progress through either a village or a wood,
which has been turned into a defended
locality, will be very slow.


(c) A body of troops, when it discovers that
both its flanks are turned and its retreat is
threatened, is very liable to become dis-
heartened and surrender.
( d ) A deadly form of attack against a village or
a wood, especially the latter, is the lachry-
matory shell. If, however, such form of
attack is adopted it will be found difficult
for the attacking troops to advance through
the village or wood owing to the fumes of
the lachrymatory gas.
( e ) The offensive action of the defenders of these
localities can be entirely neutralised by
heavy bombardments of H.E. shells, smoke,
and lachrymatory projectiles, combined with
a shrapnel barrage on the outskirts, and
troops can advance on either side of the
locality with little loss or interference.
(/) To complete the neutralization, the attention
of defenders of the front of the locality
facing our lines must be held by an infantry
attack, either by the fire or direct assafllt of
a limited number of men.
Bearing these axioms in mind each situation must
be dealt with on its merits. There can be no rules
governing our action in such cases.
The Protection of Flanks.
34. The value of a defensive flank has been
exemplified time after time. This defensive flank
applies not only to large formations but right down
to platoons.
Every unit or formation however small must, in
drawing up its plan for an attack, make careful previous
arrangements for the protection of the flanks of the
attack. In the smaller units this may be done by
blocking the trenches down which the enemy’s


bombers will probably counter-attack and by telling
off parties to “ clean up ” communication trenches on
the flanks of the advance. The defensive flank, in the
case of a larger formation should form a continuation
of our line, so that each new advance may oppose an
unbroken front to the enemy s counter-attacks.
The choice of a defensive flank requires tactical
knowledge and training which, as pointed out in
previous paragraphs, can only be attained by constant
practice and study of the use of the ground.
Keeping Direction.
35. When attacking on a wide front, the question
of each body of troops keeping its direction is an
important one. In undulating country such as that
in which we are operating, this is by no means easy.
Clearly marked objects such as church spires or
chimneys are ideal for giving direction, but thej aie
the exception and other arrangements must be made.
(1) Schemes of attack should be simple and
involve as few changes of direction as
possible.
(2) Compass bearings should be made full use of.
(8) The ground should be previously studied
from vantage points in our lines so as to note
every little object that may assist, such as
copses, houses, trees, etc.
(4) Commanders must ensure that the assaulting
lines advance square with their objective in
the first assault. The troops should get out
of their trenches and form on some
previously arranged line. If no natural
feature is available, a tape laid out during
the night previous to the assault will be of
great assistance.


Consolidation of Trenches and Localities
after Assault and Capture.
36. Consolidation of a captured system of
trenches.
The capture of a system of hostile trenches is an
easy matter compared with the difficulty of retaining
it. A thorough knowledge of the principles, a careful
study and correct use of the natural features of the
ground, and a detailed preparation and organisation
of the work are necessaiy; but success will only
result if there is also an absolute determination on
the part of all ranks to get the work done promptly
and to defend the position captured at all costs.
37. The principles of the consolidation of captured
trenches are, briefly, as follows :
(а) To establish a series of strong points or
centres of resistance, wired all round and
mutually supporting each other according
to the ground. These points should be pro-
vided with machine or Lewis guns at once.
The position of these strong points should
be determined beforehand.
(б) To provide good communication to the rear
from these points.
(c) To arrange for artillery fire to protect the
front and flanks of these points.
(d) To fill in all hostile trenches within bombing
distance of the points occupied.
(e) To establish, if possible simultaneously with
the consolidation of strong points in the
front line, a number of supporting points in
rear. These points should, if the ground
is favourable, be placed to cover the intervals
between the works in the front line.
if) The strong points can later be connected to
form a continuous line.


38. The above principles must be applied with due
regard to the natural tactical features of the ground.
The size and trace of the “ strong points,” as well as
the intervals between them, will vary according to
the lie of the ground and the plan of the hostile
trenches captured.
These strong points should not be too large ; they
should be suitable for one or two platoons. During
the process of consolidation concealment from
artillery observation is of importance.
39. The first essential is speed in rendering the
captured position strong enough to resist the first
counter-attacks. It- is therefore necessary that a
definite plan should be decided on beforehand as to
which points first require attention. This can be
done, in the majority of cases, with great accuracy
from maps and aeroplane photographs, and from a
study of the ground from any point in our lines which
commands a view of it.
40. Preliminary preparations should include :
(а) The provision of material such as sandbags,
wire, etc., also for providing working parties
with tools.
(б) The telling off previously of special parties
for improving the defences, reversing
parapets, and putting up obstacles.
(c) The provision and allotment of machine guns
and Lewis guns.
( d ) The distribution of R.E. parties. Each body
of troops destined to secure the ground
gained should, if possible, be allotted a
proportion of R.E., but it is inadvisable to
divide up R.E. Companies into smaller units
than sections.
( e) Practice in laying out a work quickly on the
ground and in detailing working parties.


41. Assaulting troops should be relieved as soon
as possible by fresh troops in good order and well-
disciplined. This must not be taken to imply that
the duty of securing ground gained is the task only
of the relieving troops. It is an unsound principle
for troops to expect to be relieved immediately alter
an attack, as it wastes valuable time at a critical
period when speed in work is essential. It must be
understood that troops which take up a position must
commence the work of consolidation at once, and
continue it without intermission unless, and until,
relieved.
Garrisons must hold on to their ground; they have
nothing to fear from being outflanked.
Consolidation of Localities.
42. During an advance, when it becomes necessary
to consolidate some locality of tactical importance
such as a village or a wood, the same general
principles hold good as in the consolidation of a
system of trenches. Some notes on the particular
points that require attention in the case of villages
and woods are appended.
Villages.
43. Enlargements from even small scale maps
and aerial photographs give very accurate plans of
most villages, and make it possible to plan the
defence in sufficient detail beforehand. It is essential
that subordinate commanders should be provided
with such plans or photographs in order that t o
general idea of the defence may be quickly and
properly understood.
44. The order of urgency of work is as follows
(a) Barricade and picquet all exits. Establish
centre of resistance near exits to coyer
approaches or any streams or tracks whic i


might serve to guide a counter-attack.
Commence work on keep. Barricade roads.
( b ) Reconnoitre for cellars.
(c) Establish communications, giving cover from
view, radiating from keep to outer centres
of resistance, and from keep to the rear.
(. d) Construct bomb proofs in cellars at centres
of resistance and keeps, false roofs to
cellars, etc.
(e) Complete keep.
(/) Improve communications at (c) above, to give
cover from fire.
{g) Make lateral lines of communication between
centres of resistance.
45. Centres of resistance should be established (if
it is possible to do so) to the flank of conspicuous
buildings likely to afford good targets for hostile
artillery fire.
Woods.
46. As in the case of villages, plans should be
prepared of the locality.
There has been much discussion in the past as to
what part of a wood should be occupied. Experience
has proved that, owing to the great advantages
afforded by cover from view, the position to take up
in a wood is just so far within the outer edge as will
permit of good view into the open. In this con-
nection it should he remembered that in the course of
time shell and rifle fire thins out the edges of woods
considerably. It is therefore advantageous in the
first instance to take up positions slightly in rear of
those which may appear at the moment to be most
advantageous.


47. If, as is often the case, the wood is surrounded
by a hedge there is a natural tendency to make
trenches against this hedge. This is to be avoided.
A hedge forms a very good obstacle against assault
with the addition of a little wire. If it screens the
view it can be quickly thinned.
48. The order qr urgency of work is as follows: —
(a) Establish centres of resistance for all-round
defence at the corners and salients of the
wood. These are the points which are most
liable to counter-attack.
Establish central reserve, reconnoitre, blaze
and clear communications.
The defence of a wood should be very active,
and counter-attacks must be launched against
any hostile troops that may reach the edge
of the wood, in order to prevent a lodgment
that places the enemy on equal terms.
{b) Establish intermediate centres of resistance
and lateral communications.
(c) Establish central keep at junction of rides, or
on near edge of clearing.
49. In the case of large woods and forests, where
the general line of defence runs through the wood, a
line of strong centres of resistance should be estab-
lished across the wood; if possible, behind a road or
other clearing. The near edge of the clearing should
be entangled, and the intervals between the centres”
should be swept by fire. As time permits rays ”
should be cleared, radiating from centres of
resistance and crossing similar rays from adjoining
centres, so as to add to the depth of the field of fire.
These “rays” should be wired and obstacles
arranged so as to break up an attack and force the
attackers into the openings.
A line of intermediate centres, communications,
etc., should also he established as indicated in \b)
above.


Employment of Machine and Lewis Guns.
50. The different characteristics of the two types
of automatic firing weapons must be thoroughly
appreciated before the tactical handling can be
rightly determined.
(a) The Lewis gun is an automatic rifle, very
light, easily carried, does not require a fixed
platform or carriage to obtain accuracy of
fire, is capable of very rapid fire for short
periods, but having no artificial cooling
apparatus is not capable of sustained fire ;
it is now part of the company organisation.
( b ) The Machine gun (Maxim or Vickers) is
nearly double the weight of a Lewis gun,
comparatively heavy to carry and conspicuous
when being carried, owing to its weight,
shape and mechanism requires a fixed tripod
or platform to fire from, is capable of slightly
. less rapid fire than the Lewis gun, is capable
of sustained fire owing to the barrel being
water cooled, it is now part of the brigade,
and not battalion, organisation.
From the above it may be seen that the two most
essential differences are that the Lewis gun is the
more mobile weapon, while the Machine gun is
capable of more sustained fire.
51. Many instances have been brought to notice
in which our infantry assault has been arrested by
the fire of hostile machine guns, which have escaped
the previous bombardment. Even if accurately
located, it has been found very difficult to bring
sufficiently accurate artillery fire to bear on them,
and so knock them out.
52. The Lewis gun, owing to its lightness and
invisibility, may provide the solution to this problem.
It is suggested that Lewis gunners, either under
cover of darkness, smoke, or artillery bombardment,


may be able to creep out into NO MAN’S LAND and
establish themselves in advance of our assaulting
troops in saps, shell holes, ditches, crops, long grass, etc.
From these positions, where it will be difficult for them
to be detected, they will be able to fire on enemy
emplacements, loopholes, and parapets generally, and
so assist the infantry to advance.
The detachments so pushed forward should be
given instructions as to their particular role, which
is to cover the advance of their assaulting troops from
advanced positions, and they should not open fire
unless the situation demands.
53. During the assault, which will probably not
take place at every point along the whole front of
attack, a proportion of the machine guns of the
brigade should be told off to fire on the portions of
the enemy’s lines on the flanks of the points of
assault, thereby assisting the assaulting troops by
preventing the enemy employing flank fire. From
the same positions they may also be able to enfilade
the enemy’s trenches in front of the attacking troops
until the actual moment of assault. Subsequently
they may be able to assist squads, bombing along the
enemy’s trenches to the flank, to join up with the
next point of assault.
54. Some machine guns may also be usefully
employed to search the enemy’s communication
trenches by means of overhead fire from the rear.
Even if the material effect is not great (as long range
fire will generally have to be used to ensure safety
to our troops) the moral effect may be considerable,
and the question of ammunition supply need not be
considered,.as a special dump of ammunition can be
provided beforehand for this purpose.
55. On reaching the objective, the task of the
infantry is twofold, namely, to resist counter-attacks
and to consolidate the positions won.
Owing to casualties, and the general confusion
incidental to an assault, the organisation of the


defence during the period of consolidation often
presents difficulties. During this period the Lewis
gun should be able to play an important part owing
to its great fire power, thereby releasing infantry for
work on the positions.
56. During the period of consolidation blocks in
the enemy’s communication trenches will be made by
special parties told off for the purpose and Lewis
guns may be employed to assist. This assistance
may be given in two ways, either by working in the
trench with the blocking party or by covering the
front of the block with fire from the rear. Each
has its advantages and disadvantages; if the Lewis
gun works actually with the blocking party, its
liberty of action is verv restricted, it may want to
fire to the front and also to each flank at the same
time, its field of fire is very restricted, and the gun
and team are liable to be bombed out and rushed by
the enemy. Covering the head of the block from a
position in the main trench by cross fire gives greater
liberty of action to the gun, which can cover the
trench itself at the same time. The moment a Lewis
gun is tied down to a certain spot it loses the greatest
of its characteristics, namely, that it is a weapon of
opportunity anci should be used as such.
57. While the position won is being consolidated
and protected by Lewis guns, special parties should be
told off to site and build machine gun emplacements.
As regards the siting, considerable assistance can be
obtained from the previous careful examination of air
photos and maps.
58. As soon as the trench is captured and is being
consolidated machine guns, which have been kept in
hand under the Brigadier, should be sent forward to
take over the machine gun defence of the line, and
those which have been employed for flanking and
overhead fire withdrawn into reserve or for such
other purpose as may be required.


As soon as the machine guns are in position, the
Lewis guns will become a mobile reserve of fire
power to supplement that of the machine gun or to
move forward with their companies.
59. The tactical training of all Lewis gun detach-
ments and machine gun companies should be carried
out with the above principles of tactical handling in
view. In addition, technical training on the lines
laid down in the handbooks must be continued in
order to obtain a large reserve of Lewis gunners to
replace casualties. Every officer and N.C.O. in a
battalion should be taught how to handle and fire a
Lewis gun, so as to be able to do so in action should
necessity arise.
60. Technical proficiency of Lewis and machine
gun officers is essential, but in addition they must
have tactical training if they are to be capable of
seizing the opportunities that will arise, and getting
full value out of their weapons. This can only be
achieved by constant practice and careful instruction.
Attention is drawn to the “ Notes on the Tactical
Employment of Machine Guns and Lewis Guns,
S.S. 106, issued by G.H.Q., March, 1916.
Employment of Stokes Mortars.
61. The Stokes Mortar Batteries now form part
of the brigade organisation just as much as do the
machine gun companies, and all plans of attack
should be based on this principle.
62. These mortars possess the following valuable
qualities:—
(1) Mobility.
(2) Rapidity of fire.


(8) Very violent local destructive effect, especi-
ally against buildings and trenches.
(4) A very high trajectory and steep angle of
descent, which enables the infantry to
advance with absolute safety inside their
barrage.
(5) The effect of the shell is very local; that is
to say, the radius of danger of the explosion
in the open is small. This enables the
infantry to follow close on the barrage
made.
(6) The flight of their projectiles when in the air
is plainly visible, so that infantry can crawl
forward and be ready to deliver an assault
before the enemy can recover from the moral
effect of a series of violent explosions.
These qualities render them a most efficient
auxiliary to an infantry advance, and the fullest use
should be made of them.
63. When drawing up plans for their employment
each situation must be dealt with on its merits, but
they should be mainly used to :
(1) Form a barrage on the enemy’s front and
support trenches immediately prior to the
assault, so that the infantry can leave their
trenches and get quite close to the hostile
position prior to delivering the assault.
(2) To accompany each body of attacking troops
and, in combination with Lewis guns and
machine guns, to deal with any portion of
the hostile defence that is holding up the
infantry advance.
64. The question of the supply of ammunition for
the mortars accompanying the attacking troops is
very important, and requires careful drill and
preparation.


The effect of these mortars will probably be so
great, if plentifully supplied with ammunition, that it
will be worth while sacrificing rifles to ensure that
there are plenty of men carrying up ammunition for
the mortars as they advance.
65. A regular chain of supply should be arranged,
as is done with the S.A.A., grenades and Lewis gun
ammunition. In order to enable the infantry *to
become fully conversant with and to have full con-
fidence in these weapons all battalions should be
present at a demonstration where live ammunition
is used.
Co-operation of Artillery with Infantry.
66. The ideal is for the artillery to keep their fire
immediately in front of the infantry as the latter
advances, battering down all opposition with a
hurricane of projectiles.
The difficulties of observation, especially in view of
dust and smoke, the varying rates of the advance
of the infantry, the varieties of obstacles and
resistance to be overcome, the probable interruption
of telephone communication between infantry and
artillery and between the artillery observers and
their guns, renders this ideal very difficult to obtain.
67. Experience has shown that the only safe
method of artillery support during an advance is a
fixed time-table of lifts to which both the infantry
and artillery must rigidly conform.
This time-table must be regulated by the rate at
which it is calculated the infantry can reach their
successive objectives. In drawing up this time-table
the inclination in the past has usually been to over-
estimate the pace at which the infantry can advance.
68. It must be borne in mind that it is better for
the infantry to wait in front of an objective for a


short time till the artillery lifts, thus keeping up an
intense fire till the last moment, than it is for the
artillery fire to be so far ahead of the infantry that
the defenders have time to recover from its effect
before the infantry assault can he delivered.
69. When the artillery make their lifts they must
arrange that there is no cessation of, or diminution
in, the violence of the artillery fire. If the lift is a
long one it should be carried out by stages, as it will
thus protect the infantry advance more effectively,
especially in view of the cloud of smoke and dust
that it will cause.
70. No changes must be made in the time-tables by
subordinate formations without reference to Corps
Headquarters or confusion is sure to ensue. If
divisions or brigades depart from the programme
and call the artillery fire back because part of the line
is held up it means that either the neighbouring
bodies of troops who have not been held up will
probably come under the fire of their own artillery or
at least will be held up by it. Generally speaking the
best method to break down the resistance is for the
lifts to go on as arranged and for the bodies on each
flank to push on, thus taking off the pressure from
the front of the troops held up, leaving fronts which
are still holding out to be dealt with by Stokes
mortars and machine or Lewis guns.
71. Should, however, it be considered advisable
by the Corps Commander-to bring the lift back ample
previous warning must he sent to all concerned and
the programme readjusted to meet the altered
situation. In this case very definite rules must be
laid down as regards the length of this re-bombard-
ment, which should be definitely fixed beforehand and
communicated to all infantry and artillery com-
manders.
The last few minutes of this, re-hombardment
should be intense, so as to give the infantry further


warning as to when it is about to cease. It should
end suddenly and the infantry must be prepared to
assault the moment it ceases.
72. This re-bombardment is difficult to arrange
and should not be resorted to if it can be avoided
and especially until the last lift of the programme
has been reached.
78. One of the most important but at the same
time difficult tasks is to ensure effective support of
the infantry against counter-attacks when their
objectives have been attained.
This requires most careful previous arrangement.
Position of Brigade Headquarters.
74. The guiding principle is that the Commander of
an Infantry Brigade should be where he can best con-
trol such reserves as he has at his disposal and such
artillery as is affiliated to him or placed under his
orders for tactical purposes.
75. Personal influence on the battlefield can,
generally speaking, be seldom brought to bear under
modern conditions, and it is by timely use of his
reserves and artillery that a Commander can influence
an action. So long, therefore, as he can control these
reserves so as to put them into the fight at the right
time and the right place, and is in the closest touch
with his artillery, the fact that he is near or far from
the firing line is of comparatively small importance.
Should all his own reserves have been expended the
situation is somewhat changed, but even then it is
essential for every Commander to endeavour to keep
touch with his immediate superior so as to keep him
informed of his needs in the way of reinforcements.
76. Brigade Headquarters, as well as Battalion
Headquarters, must be prepared to move forward
during the progress of an attack, and it is essential


that communication from front to rear should not
be lost. With this in view it is necessary that the
route to be followed by H.Q. should be well-defined
and known so that runners from front to rear will
know the route to follow in order to guide up the
H.Q. should it be moving.
In the case of Brigade H.Q. it will usually be
inadvisable to state a place to which the H.Q. will
move, as that place may be inaccessible or untenable.
Inter-Communication.
man y f° r ms of inter-communication as
possible must be prepared beforehand to supplement
cable communication, both by the infantry and
artillery.
Signallers for visual signalling and runners must
be trained by all units.
78. In order to further supplement the above
means of inter-communication, certain arrangements
have been made by the E.P.C. for transmitting such
information.
Aeroplanes.
79 Aeroplanes will be told off on each Corps
front as contact patrols. They will fly low and close
behind the line they are watching, they have special
markings, and carry signalling lamps. They will fire
a white light as a signal “ Where are you ? ”
80. These contact patrol observers must have an
intimate knowledge of the ground in their zone: they
must be acquainted with the situation and the
position of all Battalion and Brigade Headquarters so
ar , If il noWn ' They must be specially trained to
watch the movement of troops on the ground, and
to receive signals from positions gained by the
infantry as they advance.
They will transmit their information to Corps
Headquarters by either dropping messages and
sketches, or by wireless.


81. The infantry will arrange for companies in
front line to communicate with the contact patrol
aeroplanes by means of coloured flares or mirrors.
Simplicity is of the greatest importance, and these
signals will indicate only “We are here.” They must
only be made by the leading troops, otherwise the
value of the signal will be diminished as an indication
to the artillery as to what points the infantry
advance has reached. This must be impressed on all
ranks during training.
The signals may be given by the infantry :
(1) On the initiative of Company, Platoon, or
Section Commanders when it is desired to
make their position known.
(2) On the signal from their own aeroplane
“ where are you.”
(8) At certain fixed hours, should it be possible
to lay these down definitely in orders before-
hand.
(4) On reaching a previously arranged position.
82. In addition to the above, Brigade Head-
quarters, and in favourable circumstances, Battalion
Headquarters, will put down ground sheets when
the contact patrol aeroplane is present. They will
communicate with the aeroplane by lamp or ground
signalling sheet. In favourable circumstances
ordinary messages may be sent in this way, but
ordinarily only a simple code will be used, e.y. : —
•
“ I am here ” —Battalion and Brigade station
call repeated several times.
Also a limited number of code letters to convey
important messages.
These signals will be answered by lamp from the
air.


Balloon Communication.
83. Lamp signalling communication will also be
established by day, and more particularly by night,
between Infantry Brigade Headquarters and the
Corps Kite Balloon.
The balloon will transmit by telephone.
84. The above communication with aeroplanes
needs careful practice, and for this purpose special
aeroplanes and observers have been told off for the
contact patrol work in each Corps Squadron R.F.C.
They are always at the disposal of their Corps for
practice in this work. An officer of the R.F.C. should
be present with the infantry to point out the
characteristics and marks of their own contact patrol
aeroplane, and to show when the observer is best
able to see. Every battalion should practice this
inter-communication constantly.
Conclusion.
85. The principles laid down in Training Manuals
in peace have stood the test of war, but various causes,
such as modern inventions and the numbers engaged
on each side, have very materially changed, and will
continue to change, the form that modern Warfare
takes.
This being so we must profit by our experience to
adapt the principles of war to the new conditions as
they develop.
The instructions contained in the preceding para-
graphs are based on our experiences and those of the '
French up to the present time, and the Army Com-
mander feels certain that a careful study of them will
assist officers and men of the Fourth Army to deal
successfully with the task that is before us,
H.Q., Fourth Army,
May, 1916.




DIAGRAM SHOWING THE GENERAL IDEA OF THE SCHEME OF GERMAN DEFENCES.
Yards.
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3.000 j
)
2.000
1,000
f
j
0
\ Third line system, in which there
1 are strong points and defended
localities.
About 3,000 to 5,000 yards behind
j the second line system.
v Second line system, in which there
I are strong points and defended
i localities. Consists of front and
f support lines of trenches.
About 3,000 to 5,000 yards behind
' the front line system.
Intermediate line, in which there
are strong points and defended
localities. 1,000 to 2,000 yards
behind the front system.
Covers the main line of gun
positions.
Front line system, in which there
are strong points and defended
localities. Consists of fire, sup-
port and reserve trenches. Depth,
varies from 200 to 800 yards.




