

mem
FOUR YEARS ENDED
-THE
FIFTH YEAR BEGINS
THE DANGER OF FAMILIARITY
KEEPING PURPOSE AWAKE
The following Address was given by Mr. Sydney De
Loghe (author of (f The Straits Impregnable,**
&c.) to the Melbourne “Ad.” Club ,
Sth August, 1918.
Me. President and Gentlemen,
1 have come here to-day at your invitation to address you
for a few minutes. You have paid me a compliment by
asking me here, and I hope I shall be able to interest you in
what I have to say. A safe rule is that a man should speak
on a matter he knows something about, and so it is my inten-
tion to speak about the war, Ido not wish to pretend that
I know much more than the average man about it, hut for
two years I was a soldier, and since then I have been engaged
on work directly concerned with it.
There are other reasons for my choice of a subject. An
obvious one is that it is the most important matter of the
day, and a happy chance is that yesterday marked the fifth
year of our entry into the war. Gentlemen, four years of
warfare is a long period to look over, and four years ago it
C. 13868.


would have taken a brave man to look forward with squared
shoulders to this time. Now we have put those four years
behind us, and the end of the struggle is not yet in sight.
For we must not let the success of a few days fill us with
a false security. I suppose there is no man in this country,
however indifferent he may be to the current of events, who
has not been moved, and moved right out of himself, by these
days of war. The world is upside down, though so quickly
we get used to change that it requires an effort to bring to
mind the old days of peace. But though we have grown used
to living in great days, and each has met them well or badly,
as he knew how to grasp opportunity, there will be
none, except those who are battening on the pickings of this
business, who will not take back peace when it comes with a
desire never to let it go again, and a new understanding of
its value.
There is no use regretting, but I think the long catalogue of
horrors perpetrated in the last four years has done its work,
and our sensibility to catastrophe has been blunted. Casualty
lists, details of massacres, the torpedoing of ships carrying
women and children do not touch us as they did. And here
lies our danger. Our sense of proportion is going. Oblivious
to the big things round us, we run about on the small errands
of the day, and so our ideals little by little are getting dusty,
and resolution is being put to sleep. We are starting to look
into one another’s faces, and raise our eyebrows, and wonder
if it is all worth while.
Of all virtues, show me a greater than fortitude. The
power to square one’s shoulders day after day when the
original glory has fled out of things, when the first energy
has grown cold, when the friends of the hour have dropped
off, and the crowd has forgotten to shout. It is fortitude
that will win this war —that will sharpen courage, will keep
purpose awake, will lift our eyes up off the ground and hold
them on the tops of the hills. And in the make up of this
nation the stuff of fortitude has already been discovered.
When you hear the word Anzac, what does it mean to you ?
To me, first and last, it is a symbol for fortitude, and when


our grandchildren have taken our present places, and to-day’s
history has come to be written, it is as an example of forti-
tude that the word Anzac will be sought for in our national
pages. The landing was a great thing—the cheerless dawn,
the gloomy water; and, ahead, the morose hills climbing hack
into the sky. There followed battles which each gave a new
rub to the gold of our shields; but those battles are not what
I think of when I reflect on Anzac. It was the remorseless
days following one after another, each longer than the last,
when the sun climbed up into the middle of a brazen sky, and
stared down on the red-hot earth, when the food lost its
savour, when the flies died finally from the heat, when the
axes of the cooks took away the last scrub and the last shade,
and w T e had to slink into whatever cover we could rig up —a
bit of blanket nailed, perhaps, with a bayonet into the trench
sides, beneath which a man could just lie on his back, with
his face and upper body shaded, and shut his eyes and try
to forget he was alive in a dog’s doze. And viler recollections
come to mind. The army began to die of diarrhoea and
dysentery. I am not exaggerating. It was no lesser thing
than that. Every man I saw in those midsummer months
was seriously ill. And at night, when at least one might
have asked for sleep, those things which uncleanness breeds
began to creep about the body. There are more awful
things to be endured than shells and bayonets.
USTot for its battles, not for its tremendous, glorious hours
does Anzac hold now my inspiration; but for that eight
months’ agony endured without complaint. And of all the
men of Anzac comes first to mind a cook to one of the bat-
talions that had its Head-Quarters in Shrapnel Valley. As
Anzac is the symbol for fortitude, so he seems to me a symbol
of Anzac. I take this passage straight out of my diary.
“ There was a cook house down in the bed of the creek
where a cook compounded savory messes from pretty hopeless
materials. I have sat on the bank above on a red-hot after-
noon, wondering how he found the spirit to go on at the
job. That cook grew a beard in time, but he never left it
to straggle as other men did. It was pointed and trimmed.
He talked to nobody, and I wondered what be thought about


down there. Maybe he cooked to forget his miseries. He
cooked and he kept his mouth shut, which was all asked of
him. A fellow can grow into a hero by shutting his mouth on
a remorseless campaign of this kind.”
This has brought me to the point of the matter. Let us
hope when this war is over that we are not living to see
another. Better still, let us hope that war is passing right
out of the world. I am one of those who believe humanity
is outgrowing war. But now we are at war, let us wage it
resolutely to the end. Pour years ago enthusiasm swept
through this country like a wind. Some strange thing had
touched us, and our sight was clear to the issues of the
hour. Justice was menaced by brute strength. Might was
to become right. We swore that this thing should not be.
And for four years we have not let it be. But now fatigue
has put the sweat into our eyes and we have lost sight of
things. We are getting back into the rut of everyday.
What does war mean to you and me? Let us be
careful how we answer, for by our answer we shall
be judged. Each man can get out of war exactly
as much as he is capable of taking. To those of a
haggling spirit it appears a bargain of frontiers, and no
doubt frontiers and those kind of things are part of the make
up. But the hope of wider boundaries will scarcely renew a
man’s courage once it has begun to grow thin. To those of
a limited vision war is no better than a blundering engine
that destroys. How will those men hope to renew their
resolutions with this year. But those who have a finer
sight can reognise a subtler thing in war—a school for the
spirit. As these tremendous days go by, loud enough to be
heard almost, each man of us can rise up and live them to
the full—can find out how to sharpen courage, can learn
that fortitude may be a more enduring thing than stone; in
short, can discover how to divide the shadow from the sub-
stance.
Some few months ago, I was asked to write a number of
articles for recruiting purposes, which articles were pub-
lished in several papers throughout the Commonwealth.


The Sydney Morning Herald, in a generous spirit, printed a
number of these articles in double column on their cable
page, thus affording them great publicity. As a result, I
received many letters of appreciation from men and women.
In my work I had aimed at appealing to the inner feelings
which men seldom speak of among themselves, or whefi
they do, only mention to deride and deny. Well, these many
letters from men and women, written to a stranger who had
expressed something hidden in their hearts, proved to me
that each man conceals a certain idealism, which he may be
too shy ever to give to the light, but which is strong and
sincere nevertheless. It is this idealism which is going to
renew our strength again, and cause us to forget fatigue.
What are some of the things we have to remember?
In the diary of Paul Spielmann, a German non-commis-
sioned officer, are these lines—
“ The inhabitants fled through the village. It was
horrible. Blood was plastered on all the houses. Among
the dead were many old men and women, and one
woman about to be delivered . . . and three children
who had huddled close to one another and had died
together, and this morning, 2nd September, all the sur-
vivors were driven out, and I saw four little boys carry-
ing on two poles a cradle in which was a child of five
or six months old . . . and I saw a mother with her
two little ones, and one had a large wound in the head
and had lost an eye.”
Picked up on the same battlefield was the unsigned note-
book of a German soldier, and in it—-
“We destroyed eight houses, with their inmates. In
one of them two men, with their wives and a girl of
eighteen, were_ bayoneted. The little one almost un-
nerved me, so innocent was her expression.”
And there are to be read in these notebooks of dead men
other things more horrible—bestiality let loose
“ victims eight years of age, victims of eighty ... a gang


hurling themselves in turn on one poor creature . . . nuns
chosen ... a father killed for defending his daughter,
she, poor child, laid upon a table; the matter taken to its
conclusion; fifteen soldiers.”
And then, again—“ a multitude carried off into Germany;
day-long marches and nights spent in enclosures, in a station,
in a church; days without food, and crowded into cattle
trucks ... at Erankenthal, the truck doors opened to
show the school children assembled for the purpose. . . .
And then Lubeck. The men taken one way, the women
another. The people seized haphazard, no compunction in
breaking up a family. Little children in one convoy, their
mothers in another. . . . And now, when some of them
come back! Young men, emaciated, hopeless, broken, with
chests racked with ceaseless coughing, with eyes eloquent of
misery and terror —octogenarians having to be carried on
stretchers, many of them completely worn-out, old men suffer-
ing from bronchitis —-deaths from congestion of the lungs and
heart failure —cases of insanity.” Enough of the vile cata-
logue.
Is this nothing to us? Have we read too many of these
catalogues until feeling has grown sick and died? Has
distance drugged imagination so that we can go about to-
day’s work and let the little events of our morning thrust
these horrors out of mind? Where are the women we care
for? As they move about us, surely they conjure up the
shadows of those other women across the world? Are
children nothing to us that we can forget those little children
across the sea? Here our sick and aged may sit about in
peace; but does this make these other worn-out ones easier
to forget?
In a vision those women and children troop before us.
One by one they pass, and passing, turn their heads to look
at us. What have we done that they should thus reproach
us? It is what we have failed to do. The enemy’s women
and children can boast of their protection, but can ours do as
much ?


It must not be again. It shall not be again. This wild
beast must be thrust back into his den, and the mouth
blocked up. His lustful eyes shall not search out one more
of our women. Hot one more of our little children shall
run screaming from him.
What other pledges have we still unredeemed? We pro-
mised four years ago that justice and freedom should abide
with us and with the children that are to inherit the land,
after us. We have boasted of our freedom generation after
generation, and down the pages of history our fathers have
striven and died for it. Have we become lesser men than
they? I think not; but we live in a land so free that it
is difficult to see the shadow of the prison house which is
so near. There, again, lies our danger. We are weary, and
the sentries nod.
It is four years since we made these pledges, and how
long ago it seems, and what a change come to us all. Our
courage now is dashed with wisdom, and hope has sobered
down. The scars of battle are in all our hearts, as the
scars of war mark some of our bodies. The big boasts of
early days are gone in wind. We have made effort upon
effort, and have not reached the goal. Our first vigour
is' gone, sweat wets our face. And now the new year begins
again, and we have learnt what a year of war means.
The ‘hour is dangerous. Let every man see to the joints
of his armour. We are weary to death. Courage! The
enemy is no less so. And what of ravished Belgium? What
of polluted France? We drew a sword four years ago. It
is blunted 1 now, it is smeared; but it does not return to the
sheath until the purpose for which it was drawn is.
achieved.
Let us use blunt words. The time is ready for them.
We are tired of fighting. We wish more and more for
peace. The craven recognises the day as ripe for the sowing”
of his seed, and raises his voice. Weariness has power to
dull memory and slacken resolution. Our ears hear the craven’s
words against our will. “ Have not the fumes of blood made


you sick?” he says. His words will not be shut out. Them
God grant us again the keen vision we had in the first year
of Avar. Lay naked to our sight once more the stripped
Belgium cities, lay bare to us the trampled lands of
France. Strength will come again into our right arms.
Back into his mouth the craven shall receive his answer.,
“ When the last stones that once were Belgium toAvns have-
been put in their old places, when the final grasses on the
French fields grow straight again, then we shall talk of
peace.” But that will not be to-day. That will not be to-
morrow. Nor next week. Nor next month. For three
hundred and sixty-five days while this year is wearing
out, we must rise up morning after morning and brace
ourselves again.
Courage! The days of war are wearing out at last. There
are signs that the enemy is hard beset. We have, perhaps,
but to renew our strength for one more season, to sharpen
our courage but once again, and peace shall come back, and
our pledges he redeemed.
By Authority; H. J. Gbesw, Acting- Government Printer, Melbourne.
