

S f a
i,6'S~
FRANK CLONE
\uilior
Ethnological
nackromsm
BY BARTLETT ADAMSON








l/r^agf
&uj dvjou tkr-19 so slkaM




FRANK CLUNE
(Author &
naclirontsm
BARTLETT ADAMSON
MELBOURNE
THE HAWTHORN PRESS




QJsay of cfJniroluchon
A first edition of this book, limited to fifty copies,
was produced on 27 November 1943, as a personal
compliment to Frank Clune, the fifty copies sym-
bolising the Fiftieth Anniversary of his birthday.
The proposal was originated, and the book designed
and printed by John Gartner of Melbourne. The
letterpress was specially written for the purpose by
Bartlett Adamson of Sydney, who has been for years
a close personal friend of Frank Clune and has
travelled extensively with him.
The limited edition proved quite inadequate to
meet even personal requests for copies, in addition
to which a strong public demand has developed. It
has therefore been decided to produce this second
edition for public sale, so that the many admirers of
Frank Clune and his writings may discover in which
way he is an ethnological anachronism as well as
a popular author.




FRANK CLUNE
A mind reared on academic standards is likely to
be baffled by the writings of Frank Clune.
These do not conform to tradition. Neither does
Frank Clune, mainly because he is an ethnological
anachronism.
His writings are the most highly personal being
produced in Australia today and any study of the
work must therefore involve a study of the man.
This, to some degree, applies to any writer, any
worker in any art-form.
But in the case of Frank Clune it applies to an
unusual degree, owing to that ethnologically ana-
chronistic factor.
One authority has declared that, in literature, the
style is the man, and from this it should follow that
Frank Clune is above all a stylist.
He is. Such a suggestion, however, might astonish
those who have been trained to think that a writer
can be a stylist only while he is patiently trying to
follow the efforts of some other stylist.
However, the important point is not the question
of style but whether the writings of Frank Clune
merit serious consideration and, above all, whether


they merit consideration if this so inevitably involves
consideration of the man.
Frank Clune, today, is the best, or at least the
second best, seller in the Commonwealth.
That does not necessarily imply literary merit.
Frequently the reverse. But it does imply that his
work has a life quality, and this is an essential, and
the first essential, in any such work. Literary merit,
without life, is merely pre-adamite clay.
Given this first ingredient, there is at least a worth-
while basis for further attempt at assessment of the
writings of this prolific maker of books.
Some of their main characteristics are obvious, such
as originality, individuality, seriousness, irreverence,
humor, intimacy, unexpectedness, flippancy, historic
appeal plus historic exactitude, variety of subject and
treatment, and, finally, an alert journalistic ability
which is more or less instinctive.
There still remains, for an academic mind, the
question whether or not the work has literary merit.
Clearly the catalogue of qualities just listed should
assure success to any writer. It has assured the success
of Frank Clune, the ethnological anachronism, and
it has done so because that catalogue, in turn, is
merely a list of characteristics found in Frank Clune
himself.
Frank Clune is Australian born, Australian in
manner and speech, and substantially, but not wholly,
Australian in point of view. He is of Celtic origin,
and that fact undoubtedly explains much of his


human quality, much of his originality, individuality,
and humor, above all his ability to establish friendly
intimacy with his readers.
His standards are not those of an academician who
has become largely artificial owing to the environ-
ment in which he has been reared.
Frank Clune, in himself, is never artificial, though,
in some of his earlier experimentings with words, his
jokes or attempted jokes may have been highly so.
This applies particularly to Rolling Dorvn the
Lachlan , his first book of importance.
Try Anything Once , his initial effort, might have
been written by anyone with an adventurous back-
ground and a sense of narrative humor. It might
have been a flash in the dark, that one autobio-
graphical book possible, in theory, to anyone.
It was Rolling Down the Lachlan which revealed
Frank Clune as a potential writer. Faulty though it
be, experimental though it was, it gave authentic
indication of possibilities ahead.
Every book Frank Clune has since written has been
an improvement. What is more important, almost
every book he has since written has been technically
an improvement on its immediate predecessor.
This means that Frank Clune, endowed with many
Celtic qualities, has, among others, a quality of adapt-
ability. Without sacrificing his native characteristics
he has been able to adopt and adapt features of tech-
nique which are useful to him in improving his own
instinctive tendencies.


In brief, his writing continually tends to take on
more and more of accepted literary form, as known
to the academicians, yet without losing those original
qualities which constitute the vital factor in his
writings.
To discuss this aspect of Frank Clune in more
detail it is necessary to describe him somewhat more
intimately.
He is a man of restless energy, spontaneous, impul-
sive, hot-tempered on occasion, with a temper which
explodes and passes like a magnesium flare. Probably,
with his intense energy and volcanic temperament,
were it not for this safety-valve of temper, he would
long since have exploded physically and become one
with Casabianca. The boy, oh where was he? Ask of
the winds that far around ....
Allied with his impulsiveness is a generosity of
nature such as one expects to find in Celtic people
and which, in Frank Clune, is certainly to be found
in a very active degree, and in liberal measure.
Other qualities enhance and emphasise these, all
serving to make him a very human character, one
with whom a friendly footing can be instantly
established.
He is always and invariably natural. There are no
pretences or insincerities about him. He has not the
acquired dignity of his period, the dignity of an
alderman or a business magnate or of a consciously
popular author. His is rather the dignity deriving
from that mode of life which endows the Highlander


of Scotland, the Celt of Ireland, with a natural
poise, a lack of consciousness of social inferiority or
superiority.
For this reason Frank Clune acts toward a Cabinet
Minister in Canberra, an aboriginal in Central Aus-
tralia, a millionaire in Melbourne, a Greek restaura-
teur in Goulburn, a murderer in Bathurst Gaol, a
store-boy in Bourke, a station magnate in Mungindi,
or a station cook on the Warrego, all in exactly the
same manner.
Millionaires and conservative Cabinet Ministers
may at first find this a trifle disconcerting, but they
soon realise the compliment implied and begin to
re-act, and to act, as though they were station-cooks
or Greek restaurateurs or aboriginals or some other
admirable sort of citizen.
One of the most entertaining features of travelling
in company with Frank Clune, which I have done
for some thousands of miles, is to note the varied re-
actions of varied people to his invariable naturalness.
One result, already stated, is that Frank Clune at
once gets on a friendly footing with people, makes
himself memorable by his easy unconventionality,
and so far as I have experienced, always leaves the
other person on a basis of firm friendship.
There are advantages in being an ethnological
anachronism.
This quality of friendship permeates his writing,
is instinctive to it, and to a considerable extent
accounts for his popularity as an author.


He does not hesitate to assume that minor details,
of even his family life, will interest complete strangers,
and he is not mistaken.
In this he fortifies instinct with knowledge. He
adopts a familiar style instinctively, and his know-
ledge of practical psychology, in which he is wdl
grounded, confirms him in doing what he naturaly
would do.
As a result his readers feel that they know hin
personally. They feel that he is one of them, actuat<d
by the same human influences as themselves. To then
he is not merely an author but a human being, Thiy
do not know that he is an ethnological anachronisn,
nor would they care if they did know.
In short, he is able to make contact with tie
crowd. But this alone would not explain his succes.
It is one thing to win the interest, even the frienl-
ship, of the public.
But it must then be remembered that the pubic,
in mass, is like a woman, must be first interested,
then excited, finally satisfied.
Frank Clune in his books is able to achieve this
triple-mooded reaction because there is intrinsic merit
to his writings.
The main stream of his books might be described
as giving a vivid picture of today against a revivified
background of yesterday.
Try Anything Once is not in this stream. Nor does
Dig follow this plan, nor D’ Air Devil, nor Donald
Mackay—Last of the Explorers.


The first, as already indicated, is straight autobio-
graphy, while the other three are equally straight
history, with the reservation that Dig is history of a
complex set of circumstances interfused with the
personality of the historian.
In it Frank Clune has not only written the story
of Burke and Wills. He first travelled their tracks,
absorbed the atmosphere, saturated his mind with the
details of that tragic series of happenings, and finally
narrates them with himself in an active partisan role.
Dig is in a class apart, not only among the works
of Frank Clune, but among histories in general. To
some extent it inverts the usual technique of the
author. Instead of himself and his fellows of today
moving and living with history as a background, the
adventures of Dig and of that past period move
and live with Frank Clune as a background.
Most typical of the books of Frank Clune, and
those which, apart from Try Anything Once, have
contributed most to his popularity, are Rolling Down
the Lachlan, Roaming Round the Darling, Sky High
to Shanghai, Free and Easy Land, All Aboard for
Singapore, To the Isles of Spice, Prowling Through
Papua, and Tobruk to Turkey.
It will be noted that each of these titles has action,
avoids the commonplace, is memorable. In most of
them there is a tendency toward either alliteration or
internal rime.
Those devices, often successfully, sometimes un-
successfully, haVe from the first been an obvious part


of the literary mechanism for which Frank Clune
has striven.
Used with restraint and increasing subtlety, they
become gracious instead of being, as at first, some-
what gymnastic.
A comparison of Rolling Down the Lachlan, where
he first consciously started striving for effect, with
Isles of Spice or Tobruk to Turkey, or Indeed any of
his later books, will reveal the distance travelled in
this direction.
The general public is not so fastidious that it will
object to literary devices such as these even when
used in a novitiate manner. Thus, in developing a
style and in passing through a novitiate stage to do
so, Frank Clune suffered no detriment from the point
of view of popularity, though it must be conceded
that some of his academic friends held up their
fountain-pens in horror at some of his rime-puns.
What they failed to realise is that it is better to
make mistakes in striving for freshness than to resort
to marcelled imitations of the past. There was, at
least, an element of life in those very gaucheries.
Frank Clune is not content to accept the facile
way of writing, despite his voluminous output.
He will work over words, phrases, sentences, until
he gets an effect which satisfies him as being at least
something different, something unhackneyed. The
result always has vitality, and more and more as his
style has matured it has developed originality, alert-
ness, vividness.


It is only necessary to read Try Anything Once
to discover the reason for Frank Clune developing
his style in the manner he has done.
First he has the detriment, and the advantage, of
having had very little formal schooling, so that, when
he decided to write a book, his scholastic equipment
was inadequate.
He made up the deficiency more or less by self-
instruction, with little care for such superficialities
as formal rules of grammar, which any sub-editor
can supply, but with careful attention to qualities,
such as humor, unexpectedness of simile or metaphor,
quaint turn of phrase, and so on, features which only
an original mind could devise.
But, again, it is not merely an entertaining style
which accounts for the popularity of Frank Clune.
That popularity is based in subject-matter and this
in turn consists of a clear picture of everyday life
known to all of us, plus a presentation of history
which, being local to the scene of which he is writ-
ing, is intrinsically interesting as history and doubly
interesting because it is linked with the present.
This introduces another facet of the character of
Frank Clune.
It is his flair for historic data, historic locality,
historic dates. In this respect he has an unusual
faculty, one highly developed, and one which enables
him to weave past and present with easy informality.
It is an unusual memory for names and dates, an
ability which enables him immediately to sense the


significance of records, which to one less alert would
have no association.
It was this faculty which enabled him, in Dig,
to disentangle the multiple threads of the Burke and
Wills expedition, and of all the ancillary relief expe-
ditions, and re-weave them into one concerted and
homogeneous narrative, a feat which had not before
been attempted.
It is this same faculty which enables him, on see-
ing a name or date on a monument, in an old
document, or on a tombstone, to associate it instantly
with some event to which it might seem to bear no
relation.
Allied with this faculty is an avidity for historical
correctness. Frank Clune is not content merely to
re-write the stock narratives which are easily avail-
able and which are so frequently inexact. He goes to
fountain-sources for historic data, to original docu-
ments, original records, and will expend unlimited
effort in doing so.
This means that his works in years to come vill
be regarded as authentic sources of information, aid
they will deserve to be so regarded. It means, for he
present, that his historical passages are made corres-
pondingly interesting by inclusion of much new
historical material. This adds to the respect whch
the student of history pays him rather than to he
acclaim which his public accords him.
As an historian, however, he has one defect, ie
records historic facts, but does not interpret then.


This is because he does not comprehend, apparently,
that there are basic causes from which history flows
merely as an effect.
Many writers on and around history have had the
same limitation.
Even so, and assuming that he may never feel
moved to study the deep causes of history, it would
still be the historical facet of Frank Chine’s writings
which most definitely assures permanence to his work.
It may be that he will be read in after years for
some other vital qualities, possibly some qualities at
present not fully appreciated. That is for posterity
to decide. But it can reasonably be assumed, in any
case, that Frank Clune will live as an accessible source
of data regarding past history.
More likely still, he will endure as a source of
reference for much of present history. His works are
so packed with the personalia of today that they will
contain material invaluable to the future historian
of this period.
More, they are also packed so closely with details
of our life of today, ranging from innumerable trifles
to events of note, that they should present to future
generations a vivid picture of our life.
Before trying to summarise regarding this author
who is also an ethnological anachronism, some ex-
tracts, chosen casually from various of his books,
will serve to illustrate certain of his qualities:
"The tea was ... a coagulated chaos of par-boiled
leaves and stale water.”


"Three large red ’roos, travelling east, west, north,
tails pump-handling furiously.”
"Moving mirage looked like bush-fire smoke ad-
vancing across the plain. Low-roofed hill, thatched
with red gibbers, half-submerged.”
"Thousands of birds screeched and whistled among
tall coolabah-trees, shading the pelican-covered islands
in the creek, where flood-waters of the recent rains
swirled over a cobble-stoned causeway used by the
aboriginals for centuries.”
"Our car, besides suffering from senile decay, had
acquired the seven deadly sins, viz., piston slap, body
squeaks, back-axle grunts, gear-box grinds, clutch
chatter, steering shimmy, and gall-stones in the
carburettor.”
In a mood widely different from those above, here
is a picture of Chinese refugees crowded into Shang-
hai during the early days of the advent of the
Japanese terror:
"On the stone steps of an emporium, massed in
serried ranks, are hundreds of sleeping Chinese refu-
gees, men, women, and children, flank to flank,
huddled together for warmth and the comfort of
contiguity.
"They are sleeping the sleep of the unwanted be-
neath Shanghai’s rainy sky. Not on the steps of one
palatial office building, but on the steps of dozens,
and in every alleyway debouching on the Bund, I
saw the snoring heaps of homeless humanity snatch-
ing a few hours of slumber in defiance of the curfew


ban which forbids anyone to be on the streets after
midnight.
"Only once in my life have I seen anything like it,
and that was in a flooded paddock by the Parroo River
in far western New South Wales. The waters had
subsided and I saw hundreds of dead sheep piled
against the barbed-wire, where they had stampeded
in an effort to escape as the flood-waters rose.
"Just so, the flood waters of war and revolution
have risen in the Yang Tze valley, leaving this human
debris piled against the marble ramparts of commerce
in the Shanghai Bund.”
Such writing as that is not merely careful and
vivid. It is brilliant.
He sums up Netherlands Indies, before the Japanese
descent:
"It’s a vast colorful tropic terrain, and vast also
are the problems of statesmanship and diplomacy in-
volved in the conflicts of commerce, race, religion,
and national interests, within that huge expanse of
sea and isles.”
One or two other examples will be sufficient. Here
is the Sphinx:
"I wander downhill to the Sphinx, a couchant
image with a smashed nose, a smirk, and outstretched
paws.”
He explains the Pyramids:
"Then came Cheops. He had a new thought.
The tombs of Luxor were too domestic and old-
fashioned. He decided to build a pyramid to entomb


his body, and to perplex future generations in
perpetuity. . . .
"Thus the Pyramid was born. An orifice was left
exposed so that Cheops, when dead, could be em-
balmed, signed, sealed, and delivered to his sarco-
phagus.
"The tourists still come, by plane and train, by
car and camel, by donkey and on foot, to gape, pose,
and photo in the shadow of the tomb, while poor old
Cheops, who created a myth of hiddenness and a
Sphinx that would not tell, lies in faraway London,
a mummy in a museum, amidst fog, rain, and bomb-
blitz.”
From even a few extracts such as these there
emerges an impression of spacious and particular
observation, an original mind, a vocabulary alive and
extensive, whimsicality, and particularly a disrespect
for many of the traditions. There is also a careful
selection of words, vivid and unconventional sym-
bols, and above all a conversational style.
That last is a highly important factor in his popu-
larity. He is on friendly terms with his audience.
He writes the language of everyday.
These qualities are largely due to the fact that
Frank Clune is thoroughly Australian in the first
place, and that, in the second, he has no inhibitions,
no carry-over of Anglo-Saxon reserve. He is a Celt.
This colors to some extent his reactions to historic
events. Being product of a race which has for cen-
turies been struggling for independence, he has a


natural feeling for anyone else so struggling. This
gives him a sympathetic understanding of such figures
as convicts, certain of the bushrangers, and those
Chinese refugees in Shanghai.
But these reactions, being emotional and not scien-
tific, since they are not based on an understanding
of the basis of history, do not move to their logical
conclusions. They are stated, feelingly, but stated
as dissociated facts rather than as part of the inter-
woven pattern which is the story of the human race.
But because they are stated feelingly they awaken
response in the reader. This faculty is another ingre-
dient in the popularity of Frank Clune. That, and
his humor, which is also essentially of Celt origin.
So, too, is his unconventionality, that quality which
so disconcerts the adherent of academic standards,
and which persists in treating everyone as a human
being.
In discussing these Celtic aspects of Frank Clune
it must be remembered that the clan systems of Ire-
land and Scotland are a survival from remote ages, a
promontory from the past projected almost into the
present.
Those clan systems, and the communal type of
life which they represented, were active until a few
generations ago. Their influence still persists. It de-
marks the Celt from the Anglo-Saxon, and explains
the deep differences of temperament, of outlook.
When that influence is expressed in an intense and
dynamic degree, as in the case of Frank Clune, it


results in qualities which baffle convention and dis-
concert tradition.
There lies the key to the unusual personality of
Frank Clune, the key to his work, the key to much
of his popular appeal.
He is anthropologically a carry-over from a period
long past, a period when life was more natural, more
impulsive, more intimate, more friendly, and in many
other ways more human than the present. In short,
Frank Clune is the kind of man that he is, and the
kind of author that he is, because he has had the
good fortune to be something of an ethnological
anachronism.


Designed and Printed by
JOHN GARTNER
at The Hawthorn Press










