

ilo 1
isr<g
FRANCIS EDWARDS
9 April, iB6O —23 December, 1944.


-Mr. Edwards, in 1933, with one of his grand-daughters.


TT is with very great regret that we announce the death of our
Governing Director, Mr. Francis Edwards, on the 23rd Dec-
ember, 1944, in his 85th year.
The business, established originally in 1826 by G. Stockley, was
taken over in 1855 by Mr. Edwards’ father also named Francis
Edwards who had married Mr. Stockley’s daughter. Upon the
death of Mr. Francis Edwards senior in 1875, his son, at the age
of fifteen, became head of a business which under his energetic
and keen management was to become known all over the world.
The business was moved to the present address in November,
iB6O. In those days its main stock consisted of Theological Litera-
ture, but Francis Edwards decided to branch out into other spheres
and commenced accumulating his immense variety of books on
Literature, Sciences, Arts and, most of all, Travel, in which he was
always so deeply interested. His great stock grew until it was im-
possible to house it adequately, and he therefore decided to rebuild
and extend the premises. In 1912 he built one of the most
attractive book-shops in the world, consisting of six floors, includ-
ing an extremely long shop with well-lighted gallery —one of the
few buildings in the British Isles specially designed as a bookshop.
An old friend of Mr. Edwards, who describes himself as “ a humble
topographical student who owes very much to Edwards’s unflag-
ging kindness in satisfying his interests during 40 years,” writes :
“ Historians, geographers, biologists and lovers of literature
in a wider sense will have read with sorrow the notice of the
death of Francis Edwards. He was as clear an example as
could be found of the influence exercised by direct personal
management of a business —so entirely different from the mere
commercial efficiency of a multiple shop. Directly Mr.
Edwards knew the subject of his customer’s interest, he was
ever on the look-out to report any pertinent material which
had a bearing on that subject —an obscure pamphlet, a pri-
vately-printed leaflet, or a rare edition.”
Throughout his long life as a bookseller, he met many famous
personalities and made a host of friends among book-collectors,
librarians and men of letters. The Victorian novelists Wilkie
Collins and Bulwer Lytton were frequent callers, and he could re-
member Florence Nightingale. In later years his advice had been
of assistance to Lord Asquith, Earl Lloyd-George and John Burns.
His great fondness for birds found a kindred spirit in Earl Grey,


and he used to speak of happy hours spent in the company of E.
V. Lucas and Sir J. M. Barrie. Many well-known Americans,
including A. E. Newton, always called when they came to London.
Among the famous libraries which have owed much to Mr.
Edwards’s keen eye, excellent memory and unflagging zeal, may be
mentioned the Turnbull Library (of New Zealand), Mitchell Li-
brary (of Australia), the Mendelssohn Library and the Gubbins’
collection (both of South Africa).
During the first two years of war he attended business daily, in
spite of the difficulties of travel and the occasional falling of bombs
in the neighbourhood. Failing health caused his retirement at
the end of 1941, but he maintained his interest in the business to
the end, and was always pleased to have news of his old friends.
During his sixty-nine years of bookselling, Francis Edwards
gathered round him a rich and varied collection of his much loved
books, which he delighted to show to anyone interested. He has
left behind a great tradition and a high reputation for fair and honest
dealing, which it will be the aim and endeavour of the directors
and staff to maintain.
Although business has increased during the last five years, the
necessary work has been accomplished with a greatly reduced
staff. At one time during the war, books were selling faster than
they could be replaced, but we are glad to inform our friends, both
here and overseas, that we have been fortunate in buying a con-
siderable number of private libraries and have thus maintained
our stock. Owing to war conditions, these cannot be catalogued
at the present time, but after the war with the return of those
members of the staff who are away on service, it will be possible
again to issue specialised catalogues which were such a feature of
our business.
We should like to thank everyone who has sent messages of sym-
pathy. Francis Edwards is irreplaceable, but we can at least con-
tinue his ideals.
London , March 1945
