

L’Entente Cordiale.
France's
Day
Macquarie Place
Past and Present




GEORGE III.


L'Entente Cordiale.
France's
Day.
Macquarie Place
Past and Present
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
12).\0 1917.


GOVERNOR PHILLIP.


LOUIS XVI. INSTRUCTING LA PEROUSE TO PROCEED TO THE SOUTHERN SEAS.


CAPTAIN HUNTER’S SKETCH OF SYDNEY, 1788 (AUGUST).


L’ Entente Cordiale.
FRANCE'S DAY.
MACQUARIE PLACE-PAST AND PRESENT.
WHEN, on 13th July, 1917, we shall meet in Macquarie
Place, Sydney, N.S.W., to celebrate France’s Day, we
shall be asked to remember other days in our history
when friendly courtesies were exchanged between the
French and English upon the same spot.
That Macquarie Place is of great historic importance may
come as a surprise to many people. But it was there Governor Phillip
first landed in Sydney Cove, and it was there his flagstaff was erected
and the Union Jack of possession hoisted on 26th January, 1788.
Close by was pitched his canvas house, and all the land east of the
stream that ran into the Cove reserved for Government.
As years rolled on, the first house built for the Governor, over-
looking Sydney Cove, gave way for the present one facing down the
harbour. As the city grew in importance, so the Governor’s private
■domain grew smaller to make room for business premises; but
it is curious to observe that all Government administrative buildings
are still on the east side of what was once the Tank Stream.
Very early in our history changes began to be made near the
Quay. The flagstaff was moved to Dawes Point in 1791. The site,
however, was preserved, and when Governor Macquarie put up the
Obelisk to measure distances from, tradition says it also marked the
place of Phillip’s landing. Much of the glory of the “Place” has
been taken away. It has been so reduced in size that to-day the
obelisk almost looks as if apologising for its presence there at all.
However, gathered round it, as we shall be on 13th July, to
honor France’s Day, we shall be standing where our flag was
flying when La Perouse and his officers first came to congratualate
Phillip upon founding in these Southern Seas a colony for Great
Britain, and where many friendly gatherings of the officers of
Loth nations took place, while the French ships were lying in
Botany Bay.


EARLY VIEW OF SYDNEY, 1808.


THE STORY OF THE LANDINGS AT BOTANY BAY
AND PORT JACKSON, JANUARY, 1788.
Governor Arthur phillip, following up-the work
of Cook and Banks (1770), arrived in Botany Bay on the
18th January, 1788, in command of the First Fleet to
found a British colony there.
During the two or three days following his arrival, Phillip
decided that it was not a suitable place for a settlement, so, going
north to Port Jackson, he found what he needed there. He fixed
upon a cove into which a stream of fresh water ran, and, calling it
Sydney Cove, returned in all haste to Botany Bay and ordered his
ships round.
On 24th January, while the necessary preparations were being
made for this move, two strange ships appeared off Botany Bay,
which Phillip rightly conjectured to be “La Bussole ” and
“ L’ Astrolabe,” French ships, on a voyage of discovery round the
world under the command of Jean Francois de Galaup, Comte de la
Perouse. Bad weather prevented these two ships entering Botany
Bay on the 24th, although Phillip sent the “ Supply” to the entrance
to signal them, and they sailed out of sight.
•On the 25th, Phillip returned to Port Jackson in the " Supply,”
leaving instructions for Captain Hunter (H.M.S. “Sirius”) to
follow with the rest of the convoy when the weather was more
propitious, also how to act should the French ships return.
Phillip arrived in Sydney Cove late the same evening, landed
the next morning, 26th January, and, directing that a clearing be
made on the east side of the stream (ye rivulet) for his canvas house,
with a small redoubt and flagstaff to denote the whereabouts of his
seat of Government, he chose the higher ground for the mam body
of his people, on the west of the stream, and arranged that the
military barracks should be placed there also, so as to guard the
proposed township.
When the flagstaff was prepared, possession was taken ot all
the east coa'st of Australia, in the name of King George 111, and a
feu de joie fired.
On this 26th January, 1788, while Phillip was thus preparing
the way for the settlement in Sydney Cove, his ships under Hunter


MONUMENT TO LA PEROUSE, BOTANY BAY.


were making ready to leave Botany Bay. lo their surprise, at
10 o’clock in the morning, the two French \essels returned and
brought-to in the bay. Captain Hunter sent an officer on board
the “ La Bussole ” to enxtend a welcome to La Perouse in Phillip’s
name, asking that, should he wish to land, would he do so on the
northern shore.
La Perouse recounted the events of his wonderful voyage since
leaving Brest, in 1785, and said that during a skirmish with the natives
at the Navigator Islands he had lost several of his officers and some
men, as well as two longboats; that he wished now to set up tvo
other boats he had in frame, also to arrange with Governor Phillip
for a box of despatches to be sent to the French Ambassador in
London by the first English ship returning there.
The “ Sirius ’’and the rest of the convoy then left Botany Bay
and joined Governor Phillip in Sydney Cove on the e\ ening of that
eventful 26th January, 1788.
As early as 3rd February, Phillip sent Lieutenants King and
Dawes to carry his respects to La Perouse at Botany Bay, and to ask
him was there anvthing he could send to him; also to assure him
of the pleasure it would give him to arrange for the safe conduct of
any despatches, &c,, he wished to send to the French Ambassador.
Lieutenants King and Dawes had to row nearly all the \\a\ to
Botany Bay, but were warmly welcomed on “ La Bussole,” and
invited to remain the night. This they were pleased to do.
The French officers and scientific men showed them the
collections of many curious things they had made throughout their
long voyage, and took the greatest pleasure in exhibiting to them
how wonderfully perfect their equipment was. They spoke, too, of
the keen interest Louis XVI had taken in their expedition.
After dining on board “ La Bussole,” the two English Lieu-
tenants accompanied the French officers on shore, and theic they
saw that the French had mounted two guns to guard their camp,
and were already at work upon their boats. Ihey had also elected
an observatory close by, so as to correct the timepieces on their
ships. They had with them a dipping-needle that had been round
the world with Cook, which had been lent to them by the Boaid of
Longitude.
La Perouse took this opportunity to eulogise Cook’s work,
saying, “ Eufin Monsieur Cook a tout fait qu’il ne m’a rien laisse a
faire que d’admirer ses oeuvres”
While at Kamschatka, La Perouse had a plate of copper engraved
And placed near the tomb of Captain Clerke to leplace the original
inscription, which was painted on wood. Captain Clerke sailed with


VIEW OF ABBE L. RECEVEUR’S TOMB.


Captain Cook on his last voyage, and, on the death of the latter,
succeeded to the chief command, but he died on board the
“ Resolution ” on August, 1779, off the coast of Kamschatka, and
was buried on the north side of the harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul.
When Lieutenants King and Dawes were leaving to return to
Port Jackson, La Perouse sent kind messages to Governor Phillip,
thanking him for his thoughtfulness in offering him help, and in
return asked was there anything he needed that the French ships
could supply.
Contrary winds made it necessary to row back, and except when
Monsieur Clouard, captain of “ L’Astrolabe,” came round with the
box of despatches from La Perouse, which he delivered into Phillip’s
care, and when Captain Hunter went in his ship’s launch pay
his respects to the French in Botany Bay, we do not find that “ the
way by water ” was frequently used.
" A track through the bush from Sydney Cove to Botany Bay
was soon fairlv well defined. Visits were paid to Phillip in his canvas
house close by the flagstaff, the French arriving with their “ fowling
pieces,” as much for protection against the natives as to procure
specimens for their collections. .
On the occasion when La Perouse and his suite paid their officia
visit, Governor Phillip sent two horses across to Botany, so that
the journey to Sydney should be made in comfort by the French
Commodore (La Perouse).
A specimen of the clay with which the natives decorated them-
selves was shown to the Abbe L. Receveur, and he pronounced it
fit for making the finest porcelain. A sample of this clay was then
sent to Sir Joseph Banks with the first collection of “ colonial ’’
products. Banks handed it to Sir Josiah Wedgewood, who had it
made into medallions. On one side is a group of figures designed by
Flaxman, the great artist, on the other side the words—“ Made of
clay from Sydney Cove.” Some of these medallions are among the
treasures of the Mitchell Library, and form a connecting link between
us and the noted French visitors of those early days.
The Abbe L. Receveur died at Botany Bay, as the result of the
wounds he had received at Les Isles des Navigateurs, on the 17th
February, 1788, and was buried at the foot of a tree close to where
the French had set up their observatory. On the 10th of March
La Perouse left Botany Bay, and sailed away into the unknown.
His dispatches, sent by Phillip to France, contain the last news
received by his Government from this great navigator.
Many search parties were sent to try and find some trace of his
end, but returned baffled and disappointed. These expeditions


PORTRAIT OF COMMODORE M. BAUDTN,
who followed Flinders, Bass, D’Entrecasteaux, and
Grant on the south coast of Australia and Tasmania,
the accounts of whose voyage (written by Captain
Peron) is one of the most intereting and most
beautifully illustrated books on early Australian
explorations.


came to Sydney, and the French officers, writing of the growth'T the
settlement, made comments upon the beauty of the Governor’s
garden, which ran down to the water’s edge in Sydney Cove, the
beginning of which La Perouse and his staff had witnessed.
In 1825 the commanders of the French frigate “La Thetis’’
and the corvette “ L’Esperance,” acting for the French Govern-
ment, arranged for a monument to be erected at Botany Lay, to the
memory of La Perouse, and a tombstone to be placed on the grave of
Abbe L. Receveur.
But the fate of La Perouse was not for ever to be unknown.
When at Malicolo, in the New Hebrides, in 1827, Captain Dillon,
of the East Indian Co., found many articles in the possession of the
natives that he felt sure had belonged to the La Perouse Expedition.
Upon making inquiries, he was shown the remains of two wrecked
ships upon the reef, and gathered from the natives the story of their
end. He collected all the relics possible and brought them to Sydney
on his way back to England. 1 here the} 7 were delivered to the h rench
Government and identified. So the mystery was cleared up.
On i/jth July, 1917, the French residents of Sydney will place
wreaths upon the Anzac Column in honour of our Australian men
who have fallen in this great war against Germany, and we British
will lay upon the memorial and tomb at La Perouse our wreaths in
honour of the first men of France to visit these shores.
W hile there, we can look across Botany Bay to the tablet placed
upon the cliff opposite to the memory of Cook and Banks, the
Columbus and Maecenas of their age, and remember that on the very
spot upon which we shall be standing La Perouse paid tribute to
their work.
Botany Bay, both north and south, as well as Macquarie Place,
should thus be held by us in reverence.
When our wreaths are placed and we return homewards, let us
remember what this war means to us —the upholding of the freedom
that both the French and British have fought for throughout the
last centuries—and let us resolve that the entente cordiale now
existing between the two great nations will be cemented for ever by
the mingling of the blood of their heroes upon the battlefields of
France.
“ Le sang de nos soldats n’a pas coules en vain, leur heroisme
ne sera pas sterile, sur leurs sepulcres prematurement ouverts,
fleurirout les palmes de la victoire. Jennes hercs defenseurs de nos
libertes levez-vous dans 1’ immortality.”
Sydney: William Applegate Gullick, Government Frit ter— l9l7.


MACQUARIE’S OBELISK.


