

FRANCESCA VASARI:
A TRAGEDY,
IN FIVE ACTS
BY
JOHN FINNAMORE.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.
Melbourne:
W. H. WILLIAMS, PRINTER, 23 LITTLE BOURKE ST. EAST.
AND SOLD BY ALL*IfI)OKSELLEES.
< 1865. V


FRANCESCA VASARI.
A Cragedy
IN FIVE ACTS.
BY
JOHN FINNAMORE.
Angelo. Nay, women arc frail too.
1 sarki jTjA. Ay, as the glasses whore they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women !—Help, Heaven ! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call ns ton times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions arc,j
And credulous to false prints.
Measure for Measure.
:
W. n. WILLIAMS, PBINTER, 23 LITTLE BOUEKE ST. EAST.
18G5.


TO
JAMES SMITH, ESQ.,
PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARIAN OP VICTORIA,
WHOSE NAME
IS SO INTIMATELY AND SO HONORABLY ASSOCIATED
WITH THE PROGRESS OP OUR LITERATURE,
sU|ns UDrama
IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Raymond BeueNGEB 11., Count of Provence.
Philip Berenger, his cousin.
Vincentio, an Italian Nobleman — supposed friend of the
Go u nt.
Delatoue, \
D’Oemasson, KProvencal Noblemen.
Montbeassil, )
Beeteand.
A Courier.
Geecoxee, a Civic Officer ,
Geeaed, \
Jean, \ His dependants.
Paul, )
Pietro, servant to Francesca.
Herald from lion sit lon.
Loeenzo Yasaei, an Italian, friend and partisan of the Count
of Rousillion, and Berenyer’s prisoner of war.
Peancesca Yasaei, Ms daughter—an adventuress.
Bianca, her attendant.
Nobles, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Attendants, dr.
Scene. —Aix, and the adjacent country.
Period. —About the middle of the twelfth century.


FARNCESCA VASARI
ACT I.
SCENE I. —A Street in Aix.
Enter VINCENTIO and PHILIP BERENGER , hurriedly.
Vinceniio. VSdeath, she has vanished !
Philip. Vanished ? Oh, I thought her
Too lovely for a creature of dull earth !
(She sped, as though borne on by unseen wings,
And as she flew she seemed to spurn the ground,
And float along the air !
Vinceniio. ’Tis very strange.
Philip. Why, so are all things spiritual. The air
Is thronged with essences of viewless life,
Which wanton in the sun, and (uncontrolled
By Nature’s laws) such antics play, as well
Might raise our wonder did wo know of them.
Vinceniio. Believest thou in spirits ?
Philip. Ay, Vincentio—
With a conviction most devout.
Vinceniio. My lord,
’Tis not in every ear that I would pour
My confidence. I prize thy (qualities.
And think thou canst assist in my designs ;
Therefore, I give it thee. She who hath ’scaped us
So strangely that our reason is at fault
In labouring to account for ’t—three years since,
Or somewhat more, (ere yet I wandered from
My native Venice), was by my arts seduced.


I won her heart, and the unskilful maid.
By my incitement, fled her father’s home,
And, as the minion of my leisure hours,
She dwelt with me.
But, sated with th’ enjoyment, soon her charms
Began to pall upon my deadened sense,
And I neglected her ;—she quickly found
That, like the wildflower, she neglected bloomed
In lonely beauty ; and, without farewell,
She left me : since when, till within this hour,
I had not seen her. Dost thou still desire
To share in this pursuit ?
Philip. Now more than ever.
Vincentio. Sir, ’tis my nature, —I confess it frankly,—
My memory is such tenacious stuff
As doth disdain the wear and rub of time ;
And whensoe’er a slight is put upon me—
Though but the shade of a conceit —so light
That ’twould uphold position in the air—
It rankles in my bosom, and the flight
Of years but makes’t more ineffaceable !
Yet not alone that she thus fled from me
(Which partly went in hand with my desire),
But for the manner of it—do I nurture
This deadly hate. To thee, my lord,
I will acknowledge—she so boldly published
My usage of her—drawing down upon me
Such general dislike and infamy,
That I was forced to fly from Venice, like
A hunted criminal 1 Thus has fierce hate
Supplanted waning fondness ; and my dreams
Shall ne’er be free of it until she lies
Inglorious at my feet !
Philip. If to that end
I can assist thee, speak.
Vincentio. What think you of
Her beauty 1
Philip. ’Tis the crowning of my fancy !
Vincentio, And wilt thou, to possess that beauty, aid
In her destruction ?


Philip. We have sworn, Vincentio,
A solemn brotherhood; and thy assistance
Thou hast assured to me in an event
Wherein my cousin Raymond int’rest bears
Most adverse unto mine—the tenor of
Which promise, even to the mystic air,
I will not breathe. And shall I then forbear,
When I can serve thee 1 Think, my friend, that I
Hate those thou hat’st, and with the like full soul
Will follow forth thy vengeance as mine own !
Vincentio. Then link thy wit to mine ; and thus conjoined,
With each a sev’ral and important interest
(For thou by me alone canst hope to win her),
We cannot fail our ends ; the means whereto,
And nature of thy service, undefined
Yet float upon my brain. And here I swear
To stint no means, nor leave a trick unpractised,
In the attainment of my wished revenge !
But we are interrupted. Till they pass,
Let’s parley yonder. [They retire up the stage.
Enter Geegoiee, followed by Geraed, Jean and Paul.
Gregoire. Are all your swords drawn, your dagger sheathes
slippery, and your hands out of your pockets 1
Omnes, Ay, your worship.
Jean. Please your worship, my sword is but a sorry hack,
and o’ergrown with rust; -and if there should be any fighting
(which Heaven forbid !), my botches with this weapon might
but damp my comrades’ spirits. I beseech you, let me go.
Vincentio. [Aside.] This fellow uses his weapon as a plea
for his cowardice.
Gregoire. Tie my shoe, Gerard. Let me see thy sword.
Call you this a hack 1 I would not desire a better weapon
to fight Hector ! It might be less blunt with advantage; but
Hercules chose not his club for sharpness ! On my con-
science, a good weapon. The rust is but blood, and it may
yet make thee a hero, Jean, [Returns sword.] Where are
my garters, Gerard 1
Gerard. Your worship has forgotten them. Shall I return
for them to your house I


G'regoire. No, no—we cannot spare yon. Albeit, my legs
look vilely without them. Attend ! Know you every man
his duty, that in the moment of danger you lack not discre-
tion ! Yours, Paul, is to walk backwards behind us all,
thus—[ placing hini\ —that you may baulk treachery ; yours
[to Jenn\ to stand beside me, and let them kill you ere they
touch a hair of my head ; and yours, Gerard—
Gerard. To run, an’t please you, for your worship's
garters.
Paul. I have a family, sir; and should Ibe killed—
Gregoire. Silence, cowards ! Have the noble spirits you
possessed abated to this low ebb 1 No, Gerard, thou hast
the most bravery ; for which consideration I’ll place thee at
the very head of danger !
Gerard. lam not ambitious ; —the honor I covet is the
foot.
Gregoire. Who is master here ? Thou, or 1 1 Sir, it shall
be as I say ■ for if this strange Venetian lady bo indeed a
spy, as is suspected, we know not of what defence she is
capable, nor how she might call the resource of our valour
into requisition. Now, mark me—
[lie instructs them in dumh-show.
Vincentio. [ Apart to Philip.] A strange Venetian lady—
at this juncture ?
Philip. How, if she bo the object of our search 1
Vincentio. ’Twoukl spare our labor. I will speak to them.
Gregoire. Now, each man wear his most appalling frown,
And pucker the smooth surface of his face
To such strange wrinkles that our very looks
May fright away resistance. Follow me. [Going.
Vincentio. [Advancing with Philip. l pray you, sir,
forgive me this intrusion.
Nay, do not fear us, for we mean no harm ;
Or did we so, our strengths wore unavailing
Against your well-disciplined men-at-arms.
With all due courtesy, I crave to know
What lady ’tis of whom you do commune ?
Gregoire. I charge thee, in the names of Law and Justice —
Whereof I am a potent functionary—
Molest me not ! The business lam on


Is of the Seignory ; therefore, uo violence —
Or that same law I serve shall work for thee
A hempen neckcloth ! Thou’rt some plotting spy !
Vincentio, Spcak’.st thus to mo 1 Observe a lower key,
Or to thy cost, I'll show thee what I am !
Shallow diviner ! Feeble twig of office !
lleply to me ; I am a gentleman
Of high estate in Provence. Thou hast hoard
The name, Viucentio ; that name is mine.
Gregoire. In what a halter have I run my nook !
This is my zealousness. [Aside.] Your pardon, sir ;
My watchful fancies, ever laboring
To serve the Court (whereof you are a member),
Bred this suspicion—
Vincentio. Let the trifle pass—
And answer, what’s her name of whom you spake 1
Gregoire. Her name, my lord t Ay, there’s the mystery.
Which she concealing with all studious cure
For two days past, since her arrival here,
Gives me the basis upon which I ground
Suspicion of her loyalty to Provence ;
For she must have some name —and thus concealing it,
I argue, the concealment springs from cause ;
The which, conjointly with these late disputes,
Makes me regard her as a spy of Italy.
Vincentio. Know you no more of her but this i
Gregoire. No more, my lord.
Vincentio. [After a moment's thought.'] A word in private, sir.
Accept this purse—l will have no refusal.
Methinks this lady whom wo do converse of
Was known to me in boyhood. Would you let me
Enter with you into the lady’s house,
That I, remaining outside the apartment
In which you do transact with her your mission,
May ascertain the truth of my surmise
That I have known her 1
Gregoire. Sir, with all my heart.
Vincentio. I’ll not forget this kindness. It were best
[ To Philip
la this, the first foundation of our scheme.


I did proceed alone. Therefore, my lord,
I pray you pardon this abrupt farewell,
To which our good enforces me. The Council
Will shortly sit, determining the answer
Which we shall send back to Rousillon ;—you
Do know my thoughts upon it, and can speak
On my behalf. So farewell for the present.
Philip. Give you adieu. You may depend upon me.
[Exit Fldlij}.
Vincentio. Pray you, proceed, sir, to the lady’s house.
[Aside.] And if it turns out she, my plotting soul
Shall work a full revenge. Auspicious stars,
Shine prosperous on my scheme ! [Aloud.] I follow, sir.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. —An Apartment in the House of Francesca
Vasari.
Enter FRANCESCA and BIANCA.
Francesca. Thou hast not seen this stranger, then 1
Bianca. No, lady.
Francesca. Thank heaven, I have escaped him !
Bianca. Gentle mistress,
What hath befallen thee, that with such dread
Thou dost anticipate intrusion 1
Francesca. With dread ?
Bianca. Your pardon, if I have offended.
I had not so far ventured, dearest madam,
Wert thou less kind, or I less loving.
Francesca. Thy truth
I can attest, Bianca. Thou hast proved
Thy loyalty to me since first there sprung
Acquaintance ’twixt us ; and the love I bear thee
Has not unearned been thine. It is not, dear one,
Through flattery I speak—nor through desire
To pluck more earnest from thy services ;
So should I prove unworthy thy affection r
And if perchance, sweet minion, I withhold
Some secret of my inner soul, ’tis not


In doubt of thee ; but rather that I fain
Would shun all contemplation of the past.
Yet thus far may’st though learn of me, Bianca.
He that I told thee of, Vincentio,
Owes me much bitter enmity (how grown
Avails it nothing), my disgrace and ruin
Were the full crowning of his wish. Yet think not,
Although I would avoid him, that my spirit
Will tamely crouch before him as her master.
Unurged, I am gentle—but the very worm
Instinctive turns on him that crushes it.
The old Italian blood sweeps through my veins ;
And should Vincentio war with mo, ’tis like
He learns the terror of a woman’s rage !
[Noise without.
But hark ! what uproar breaks upon my ear 1
Bianca. Look, madam, yonder where Pietro comes,
Trembling and pale with terror.
Enter Pieteo.
Francesca. [ To Pietro .] Sir, what is it ?
Pietro. Oh, mistress, here is come an armed set,
Who swear that, if we dare resist, our necks
Will grow familiar with the use of rope.
Francesca. What is’t they seek 1
Pietro. Nay, lady, I’m at fault there—
Save ’tis to exercise the sweet vocation
Of hangman, whereto Nature has designed them.
They come this way. Madam, ’tis best to fly them.
[ Exit Pietro, running.
Francesca. What should I think of this ? Is’t possible
Vincentio can have chosen this base course
To strike for his revenge i Oh, how the dread
Of any chance our wishes plead against
But makes the mind th’ inhospitable host
Of that which awes it 1
j ßianca. Droop not thus, dear mistress ;
Sweet mistress, give not way unto these fears.


Francesca. Fears I I have none ! Why, lot him do hi*
worst !
I will array my wit against his venom !
The sun that reared intemperate revenge
Within his bosom has bestowed on me
As warm a spirit, which will never learn
To bear unmoved the thwaitings of his will !
Gn’f/uire. [IFiV/mcg] Bind faster, Paul and do thou
stay to guard them. The rest, follow me !
Enter Geegoiee, Gbeaed and Jean.
Gerard. Egad, I never knew till they surrendered that
I was half so valiant !
Jean. I’ faith, nor I !
Gerard. But victory gives courage. What’s more to do \
Francesca. [To Grctjoire .] How now, sir; by what light
do you molest
My house’s peace, inspiring with confusion
All my dependants, and myself with wonder ?
Gre/joire. Hem ! Lady, I’m a Justice, and appointed
To seek the State’s weal—lady, no offence !
I’m thought a gentleman, and can assure you
That several ladies look to me for marriage ;
For though, perhaps, I now look somewhat rough,
I’m very much superior when I’m gartered !
Francesca. Well, sir, and what of this I
Greijoire. I merely wish
With knowledge of my gentleness to calm you ;
And then, with all the speed of eloquence,
To make my business known. The case lies thus
Two days since, you arrived here in this city ;
And though such disaffection reigns abroad
That strictest scrutiny is requisite
To counteract conspiracy, you sought not,
By the disclosure of your mission here,
To hush suspicion ; and you did omit
Some common formulas—and kept your name
In studious secresy—till all combined
Make your good faith so doubtful, ’tis advised
That you be apprehended as a spy.


Francesca. You mock me, sir,
Uree/oire. I would not for the world !
Svick is the law —by which you must abide,
Unless you find some powerful friend in Aix
To take the full responsibility
Of all your acts, and vouch your reappearance.
Francesca. A friend in Aix ? A light breaks in upon me !
Bianca, trembling on the verge of ruin
Stand all my fortunes. ’Tis a hand unseen
That rules these slaves ; and I but pour my threats
Into th’ unprofitable air, which might
As soon bestow an answer on my hopes.
These are not my arraigners—’tis Yincentio.
My steps ho has followed, and these men suborned
To this portentous accusation.
Oregoire. Madam,
I w r ait the execution of my duty.
Francesca. What shall Ido ? Seek out Yincentio—
Entreat him to release me ? That wore worst
Of all ! [To Greyoire.\ Alas, sir, lam here a stranger,
Unknowing and unknown. Publish me not
To undeserved shame, nor force your power
On one that in this city is without
A friend whom she can trust ! [Looking q#’.] Yincentio
here !
Now' sternness be my friend.
Enter Yincentio.
Vincentio. [Aside.'] So, so ; all’s well.
[A hmdi] Thrice welcome, fair signora, to sweet Provence !
May I not kiss thy hand 1 Sweet of my soul,
Why dost thou cast upon me that cold glance 1
Wilt thou not lend thy hand for one salute,
E’en though you know my dearest joy on earth
Is such a sw'cct permission ? Who are these,
That so profusely give to thee attendance,
And brave their swords, as wdth a resolution
For thee to die or conquer? Pray, explain.
Francesca. ’Tis yours to tell what malice makes you thus
Insult and fright me by your parasites.


Shame on your manhood !
Vincentio. By my soul, you wrong mo.
What do they want with you ?
Francesca. There needs no telling.
Vincentio. \To Gregoire.] Will you, sir, have the kindness
to inform me ?
Grcgoire. The State, my lord, doth fear she is a spy,
And it appears she hath no friend can witness
And vouch her loyalty to this city’s rule.
Vincentio. Dost thou know me ?
Gregoire. Your lordship’s known o’er Provence ;
I am the humblest of your worshippers !
Vincentio. By some misfortune has this lady fall’n
In your suspicion ; —how, it matters not.
Her loyalty I am prepared to vouch,
And for her deeds to stand security.
Gregoire, Your lordship’s word would save a nation’s
honor ;
I am your slave.
Vincentio. I thank you, sir ; and for
This willing courtesy I rest your debtor.
Farewell, for the present; and, in future, let mo
Know more of you.
Gregoire. Most joyfully, my lord.
Madam, I much regret the inconvenience
Which I have put you to. It was the law,
Not my own choice impelled me to it, madam ;
And when I say, I did not make the law,
Nor could prevent the law from being made,
I trust you will not blame me, but the law.
Madam, your servant. Officers, go before.
Vincentio. Adieu, good sir.
Gregoire. My noble lord, farewell.
\_Exeunt Gerard, Jean, and Gregoire, the latter hawing
ridiculously.
Francesca. \To Bianca.] Bianca, leave us.
Bianca. Alone, dear mistress 1
Francesca. Alone, Bianca. [ Exit Bianca.
My lord, I thank you for this timely service ;
But be not by my thanks misled. Henceforth,


My lord, wo are strangers.
Vincentio. That most unwittingly I have offended,
I must perforce conclude. O lovely dear one !
Thou hast complete dominion o’er my soul,
And to the prejudiced judgment which I own,
The fact ’twould seem, that by thy breath alone
I hold existence ; —else, my unshackled spirit
Would, against a monarch so unjustly absolute,
Rebellious rise, and claim her freedom’s right !
Alas, no freeman I! for thy quick eyes
Have wrought a charm so subtle in its magic
That not a chain that e’er was forged of iron
Made slave more helpless. Here, as such, my knees
Obsequious bend, and, with all humbleness,
I crave to know my fault. \Kneelsi\
Francesca. Perfidious knave !
Vincentio. Alas, how have I earned that heavy name ?
Francesca. Art thou not treacherous 1
Vincentio. [ Starting upi\ Ido deny it !
Francesca. Thou art, as e’er was Spaniard to his foe !
Not treacherous, say’st thou 1 Didst thou not bring me
To that whose bare remembrance calls a blush
Upon my conscious cheek ; and then didst use me
With such tired scorn—the spirit that is in me
Did bid me fly thee! I did so, and all
Connexion ’twixt us sundered. But the hour
When innocence o’ershed my soul with bliss
Had passed for over: —all its priceless joys
Were gone. The lesser joyaunce, which the worldly
Still bend their strife to gain, alone could fill
The vacancy. In rank and power I saw
What might replace the sweet contented mind
Of which you had bereft me, and thenceforth
I did adventure to connect my fate
In union with the lofty. But in Venice
I could not hope success, where all might toll
My former grief. Here, sir, lam not known,
And 'spite the past, Ambition promises
That I shall mate it yet amongst the noble —
Without thy aid, Vincentio !


Vincentio. [His whole manner changed.'] Thou, signora,
Since yon so pertinaciously do cling
To the persuasion of my worthlessness,
I’ll, speak more openly. To one so learned
In the world’s ways, ’tis not a thing unknown
That those of the estate you name are cautious
Where they contract a marriage ; and your strangeness —
The State’s suspicion of your loyalty—
And more prevailing causes—would conduce
To make your work more tangled. But admitting
That you be wedded nobly as your hopes
Did ever picture—what your fortune still ?
A wealthy merchant with a world of cares —
A ’poverished soldier seeking for renown —
Or some poor troubadour, whose rapturous strains
May give his poverty the charm of heaven !
Francesca. Grant that I aimed no higher. What of this I
Vincentio. My power with the Count —my influence
Through him o’er Provence and o’er France—the honors
Which every day pour forth for my acceptance—
Arc widely known. My will can introduce thee
Where greatness reigns ; and I can promise thee,
To wed thee higher than thou e’er didst dream of,
And fix thy seat in eminence aloft,
That trembling potency shall own thy power,
And, bonding, crave for favors at thy hand !
Francesca.[Aside.] Oh, heaven, if this could bo !
Vincentio. One recompense
For my fond labors would I beg of thee.
Francesca. A recompense 1 I else had doubted most
Thy proffered aid. But speak—l listen to thee.
Vincentio. If, by my interest and my introductions,
My anxious toils and cares, I get thee wed
To the fulfilment of thy hopes, I ask,
Yet once again, renewal of the love
Was ours in Venice.
Francesca. Enough, sir—leave me !
Vincentio. Wilt thou thus forego
The brilliant honors I propose % Yet pause
Think on the loves of princes, and the envy


Of gaudy ladies, whoso augmented charms
Fall afar short of thine ; the lowly homage
Of the respected, and the abject worship
Which the poor pay to rank !
Francesca. I tell thee, sir,
Fall’n as I am, my mind can yet resent
An insult such as thou hast offered me !
My lord, our conference is closed.
Yincentio. ’Tis well —
I take my leave. [Going — slop/s.
And yet, by heaven ! it irks me.
Shall this fair brow, stamped with the glorious seal
Nature reserves for queens, bo over thus—■
Undocked by coronet 1 Shall one endowed
With beauty to enslave the heart of Man,
And with a soul which, were the world her own,
Would seek in space a vaster empery,
Waste in obscurity her brightest days,
When they should revel in the golden sun ?
Lady, you loved me once—at least, I thought so.
You scorned me even now —but let that pass.
Why would you shun your fortune 1 Ay, I read
An answer in your eye ! And yet, bethink you
Ere you condemn. Is it not possible
I sock this pledge to prove the love you doubt t
That, having lifted thee to opulence,
And wedded thee to power, I might forego
That which I would have earned, and proudly ask
Is not this love 1 Still will I not forestall
That moment by a waiver of the terms
Which I propose to thee—thy vow must be
All absolute and unconditional!
Francesca. How know I that you mean not treachery 1
Yincentio. Deeds treacherous are hidden from the view,
But truth is patent to the sight and touch.
Deceiving thee, what object can I gain 1
My terms, if granted, would not ’vantage mo,
Nor strip one feather from the eagle’s wing
To fan my crest. I will not so far wrong
Thy spirit, as to think thou fearest me —
B


Francesca. Fear, didst tliou say? At such devices shrink
Infants and slaves ! Terrors shall pale to me
Ere my proud cheek pays homage unto awe !
No, I have fix’d upon my course. The hope
Of power is now the only link that binds
My sympathies with earth ; and in despite
Of every bar wherewith contending Fate
May block my path, I’ll struggle still for greatness
Till I attain it ! I accept thy terms,
And solemnly I do embrace my peril !
[Offers her hand , ivhich he takes.
Vincentio. A bargain—l do trust thee ! Within two
moons,
While lazily the world doth onward jog,
Thou shalt outstrip thy station ! And this eve
Shall introduce thee to the noble scions
Whose hearts thy pains must win. Deck up this house
In richest splendor, and prepare a masque
For this same night ; and be’t my task to bring
Num’rous and honored guests.
Francesca. I shall not fail.
And now—farewell, my lord.
Vincentio. [Conducting her to the door, kisses her handi\
Here let me seal our friendship. [Exit Francesca.
Ha, I triumph !
Rejoice not yet—thus will I work revenge !
[Exit Vincentio.
END OF ACT I.


ACT II.
SCENE I. —The Hall of Audience in Aix.
Enter VINCENTIO BERENGER.
Vincentio. Holds yot the Council, Bertrand 1
Bertrand. Ay, my lord ;
You have been sought for, and the Count expressed
Much wonder at your absence.
Vincentio. Hath he so 1
Some letters lie upon my table ; see them
Despatch’d upon the instant. [Exit Bertrand .] They, to-
night,
With the most haughty nobles of the land,
Will crowd Francesca’s revels. I shall keep
My pledge, and lift her to the height of fortune—
But only, in the greatness of her triumph,
To hurl her to destruction ! For my medium—
Th’ unconscious instrument of my revenge—
Inspired alike by haughtiness of purpose,
And native fitness to my grand design—
I’ve fixed upon Bfirenger. Master minds
Grovel jWith the low, but make the heads
Of greatness stepping-stones to their desires.
Nor shall I feel compunction in his fall;
For in the very track of my ambition
He stands, and clouds my path. His cousin Philip—
A creature I would foist upon the Countship,
Since, being wholly mine, his power would be
My aggrandisement—to his passion I
Will minister, and bid him then attest
Francesca’s shame—her shame, and Eaymond’s—if
My malice and her beauty can effect it !
Guard well thy breast, B6renger, from the wiles
Which I shall lay to snare thee : there impends
Above thy head the wittol’s infamy !
Hoot passion from thy frame—lest the false Sibyl—


Doomed like thyself to unavailing woe—
Entrance thee with, the magic of her charms,
And lure thee to thy rain ! Soft —he comes.
[.A trumpet sounds without.
Enter the Count Beeengeb, Philip Beeengek (who
goes over to Vincentio), Delatouk, D’Oemasson,
Montbeassil, Lords, Officers, dec.
Count. Inform the Ambassador of Rousillon,
We tarry for his presence.
J>’ Ormasson. Ho is without. [Exit D’Ormasson.
Count. Welcome, Vincentio. We have missed thy
counsels.
Vincentio. Most urgently I laboured to attend,
But was detained on matter of much moment,
Whereof the nature I’ll to thee unfold
When fit occasion better serves. Till then,
I do beseech thee, pass no censure on
My unwilled absence.
Count. Our full confidence,
Both in thy judgment and thy love, hath proved
Thine all prevailing pleader. See, the herald.
Re-enter D’Oemasson with Herald.
Messire, fair health to Rousillon. Thus greeting,
We hope continuance of present friendship,
Although ’gainst an accordance to thy mission
We set our face. We do at once disclaim
Your title to the tribute you demand,
Which is alone the right of conquerors.
Still, sieur, we do desire continued peace.
Herald. Is this your final answer 1
Count. So we give it.
Herald. Yet pause, before you implicate in war
The lives of thousands. Through my voice, the Count
Of Rousillon would urge with modesty
The constant victory attending him
In his late strife with powerful Lyonois,
Whilst your array did rust for want of action.


tSay, shall I wait your re-consideration ?
Count. ’Tis needless, sir. Wo have weighed carefully
The question of your claim. You have our answer.
Herald. Then, by the strength of my authority,
I cast a blank defiance in your teeth,
And do proclaim a war, which, at convenience,
Our arms will prosecute. Behold my gage !
[Throws gauntlet.
Count. [Lifting tV.] Upon the part of Provence, I
accept it!
And bear this word to Kousillon.
We do defy his vaunted power, and set
No store upon his deeds ; —take back his insult,
Augmented with our scorn ! and in your streets
Proclaim our professed greatness, which, when loosed,
Shall tear its ragged passage through your laud,
And build our glory on your massacre ! [Exit Herald.
Delatour. By heaven, I’m glad of this. It were a peace
’Neath purchasing, when the impending power,
Soothed with rich bribes and lowly courtesies,
Wliich fear alone could yield it, keeps a truce
Loathed by its flattered pride, with full intent,
At the first pretext of a feather’s weight,
To loose the threatened thunder !
Philip. Had I choice
Of Rousillon’s best friendship, or this juncture,
This had I fixed on.
Vincentio. War, then, be our cry !
Count. And Justice be disposer of the triumph !
If falsehood dwell with me, let stern defeat
Be mine, and fortune with the enemy !
Friends, for your counsels, and the honest trust
Beposed in mo, your present meed bo thanks ;
And let disposing time more indicate
The passage to reward you. I relieve you
From more attendance now.
Let each pursue his inclinations’ bent,
While I do turn the profit of the moment
To converse with Vincentio.


Delatour. At your pleasure,
Our wills obey.
Count. I thank you, noble lords.
\To Philip, as all but the Count and Vincentio are
going out.
My gentle cousin, do not you depart.
Philip. My lord, I have received despatches from
The Court of Louis, relative to my
Late embassy. They call for prompt reply ;
Please you, forgive me.
Count. Then, farewell, Philip. [Exit Philip.
The Count and Vincentio manent.
Unbended thus from state—whose stiff-neck’d law
Holds in abeyance wishes, joys, and passions—
A man once more—let feeling now run riot,
And give my soul relief ! Alas, Vincentio
(For I may pour my sorrows in thine ear—
Thou, my dear friend, -whose strife yet ever lay
To do me good), is it not mockery
That Pomp should be the envy of the world,
Although the shadow of its gorgeous trappings
Keeps in concealment many a heart as sore
As can miscomfort make it ?
Vincentio. Wherefore thus,
My lord, hold meditation o’er the griefs
Of common greatness, while aloft you sit
Secure above their petty influence ?
Count. Say you not so. What if I smile ? Doth not
The outward show belie the heart within
More often than correctly render it 1
I have lived, Vincentio,
To scorn my power, and hold as nought the wealth
This hand may grasp ! And yet, one solid comfort
At least my state affords, may well repay
Its cares and discontents:—When Dignity
Recoils from its attendant -weariness,
’Tis a sweet thought that it has power to soothe
The woes of penury, and bid rejoice
Friendship’s desires !


Vinoentio. My lord, there is a favour
Over whose utterance I paused, but now
Venture to speak it boldly.
Count. ’Tis thine ere asked for.
Vinoentio. So from your love I argued. There is a lady—
A fair Venetian —Francesca Vasari—
Who falls less short of heaven than she excels
All earthly jointure of perfection : loarn’d
And polished, yet withal so innocent,
All thoughts impure are alien to her bosom.
I could grow eloquent upon her praise,
O’erasing every epithet and symbol
Allied unto divine—yet still must fall
Short of her beauty : which at length despatched,
I were exhausted to describe the virtues
Outparallel her loveliness. Lot me, therefore,
At once beseech you to suppose an angel,
And spare my pains.
Count. Proceed —you interest me.
Vinoentio. Her father was a noble gentleman,
And my heart’s friend ; and, as a last request,
While breath yet flutter’d in his wasted frame,
He bade me care her as he would himself
Did heaven prolong his sojourn in this world;—
I made the vow —acknowledged as he died.
To keep that vow is now my great desire,
And I would lift her to that eminence
Which she would most adorn. Intent on this,
I seek her introduction to lordly ;
The better to accomplish which desire
It is resolved to-night she gives a masque.
That I may stamp its rank and dignity
The favor I would beg is your high presence ;
Which though you grant me, my augmented love
Can nothing pay but gratitude and duty.
Count. You wrong me to parade so slight a matter.
The merits you describe would more than claim
What I award to love.
Vinoentio. Thanks —thanks, my lord.


Count. Acquaint me further, as wo move along,
Of your designs, which here I vow to forward
With best ability to your ward’s advantage.
There is no thought inherent to my nature
Can work her harm, although your glowing words
Might well, in temperaments less strictly governed,
O’errule constraint, and plant the dang’rons fire.
Now my impatience holds unrivall’d rule,
And shall till I behold her. Let the Hours
Fly swiftly !
Vincentio. You shall find I lag
Behind in praise, not overtop it !
Count. Come.
Henceforth, her welfare be my special care. \K;mwt.
SCENE II. —A brilliant Apartment in the House of Fran-
cesca—Maskers assembled —Music at intervals.
Enter PHILIP and MONTERASSIL, masked.
Monthrassil. But is slie as fair, my lord, as is reported ?
Philip. Justice to her is impossible, nor couldst thou
comprehend the description of her were it delivered.
Monthrassil. I can comprehend any description given in
a language with which I am familiar.
Philip. It may be of the flavor of a new wine, but not
of her loveliness, which is past thy comprehension, as it is
beyond all powers of description. But adhere to thy tenets
—be still an unbeliever ; anon, thou wilt not need con-
vincing. What is he yonder ?
[,Seeing Gregoire, who enters, masked.
Monibrassil. To judge by his movements, one whom
some sudden fortune has elevated to the debasement of his
judgment.
Philip. He gazes this way, as though he would address
us. Let us avoid him. \They go tip stage.
Gregoire. [ Advancing affectedly .] This is a large and
a thronging company. Yet I will not dare to think so, lest


it. appear to be to me a novelty. It is a lordly and a noble
company ; yet will I force my mind to imagine it vulgar,
that it may seem I am accustomed to the fellowship of
royalty. I will think the fete beggarly—the provision for
onr mirth, scanty —our hostess’ taste, unfruitful—and the
whole assembly basely clad—and all against the evidence of
my senses ! that it may seem I have had dignified experience.
lam an invited guest; and therein am as highly qualified as
any here. I walk with as much stiffness as the best of them ; and
howsoever Nature has made my face, the tailor deserves praise
for the making of my mask ; that, did I always wear it (as I
may my gloves), I would not desire the mending of a feature.
On one thing I am determined —this night to fall in love ;
for I have concluded that nothing more refines a man. I will
revel in the fashion, seek for acquaintances, and observe the
movements of others for my own practice.
[ He retires up the stage.
Enter the Count, Delatoue, and D’Oemasson, masked.
Delatemr. These decorations are in taste, my lord.
Count. They argue well for her who rules them. All
Is with such true prophetic care arranged,
That objects, seemingly the most opposed,
Here harmonize.
D’ Ormasson. See where Yincentio comes,
Leading our veiled hostess by the hand.
Count. Speak not, but hearken to the introduction.
Enter Yincentio, with Feancesoa (veiled), Bianca and
Attendants following.
Yincentio. Assembled friends, I have redeem'd my pledge,
And hero I do present you with your hostess.
Lady, your leave.
[Withdraws veil—all the company how to her.
The fairest dames in France,
And noblest lords of Provence, greet you, madam.
Francesca,. More warmly than I can repay. Kind friends,
You are most welcome. Pardon my full heart,
That tremulous pants upon my voice, and drowns
Expression of the gratitude which prompts it.


A daughter of Italia, I have sought
An exile sweeter than my own dear home—
Hero, where the drooping vines caress, and love.
Grown tunable, floats on the list’ning air
As breath upon the zephyr ! Let mo speak
A stranger’s thanks, and once more bid you welcome !
[Philip and certain others advance, and converse with
her in dumb show.
Count. Sweet warbler, ever, after hearing thee,
Music will pall and deaden on my sense !
Ddatour. She is the fairest I have seen.
Count. Peace, peace !
This insufficient praise more wrongs her worth
Than open scoffing. Till this hour, my vision.
Unknowing brighter things, contented gazed
On what, to this incomparable glory,
Were as the cold ambitious Rock that rears
His barren front athwart the burning brow
Of an expiring Sun !
[Advances to Francesca, Philip, dec., having
previously gone up stage.
Divinity !
Deign to enrich a stranger with thy hand,
That these my lips may drink in blessings from it,
And boast the glory of the nectared draught !
[Kisses her hand.
Vincentio. [Apart to Francesca .] It is the Count —let
him not pass you, madam.
Francesca. Alas, lam so far beneath your praise,
I blush to hear it.
Count. You wrong not only your divine transcendance,
But sully my fair judgment, which would shape
Your starry throne above the fabled sphere
Of her who, in the old mythology,
Queens all perfection ! If I not o’orstep
The bounds of lowly revTence I would crave
Of this fair world to be the satellite 1
Francesca. If to a star so dim you’ll owe subjection.


Count Tbit I mijrlit wear such bondage evermore !
[They go up stage.
Vincentio. [Aside.} He’s caught ! They stand upon the
verge of ruin,
And, lost in the bright vision of the sky,
See not the gulf that yawns beneath their feet !
Be jocund, my revenge !
Oregoire. [To Vincentio My lord, a moment’s trespass
on your liberty.
Vincentio. [A sidei\ The justice that to-day befriended me.
Oregoire. My lord, you will perceive a devoted servant if
your lordship will favor me with a glance beneath my mask,
which I will shift for the occasion.
[Removes and replaces nmsk.
Vincentio. [Affecting astonishment .] What, Oregoire !
Sir, thou art welcome ! How can Ido thy pleasure 1 Hast
thou a partner here 1
Oregoire, lam not yet provided. If your lordship—
Vincentio. Sir, thou shaft have thy choice from this array ■
Of beauty, even though the Count himself
Hath fix’d upon thy liking. Look around.
See yonder ancient dame, whose portly form
Seems emulous of the huge ribs that float
O’er Adria’s sea. She is a widow, whom
To win were to enjoy the wealth of Ind !
Wouldst thou like her 1
Oregoire. E’en to your lordship’s wish.
Vincentio. I fear you might not please her ; she abhors
A handsome man. I pri’thee, what complexion
Affects thee best 1
Oregoire. I have no choice, my lord !
Vincentio. Nay, thou lov’st some : here are of every kind !
Choose you the fresh and budding rose of Youth,
Where bloom and innocence conjoined inflame
The staled appetite ; or her whose life
Yet hovers on that pinnacle of doubt
Where terminates the Summer of our days,
And Autumn leads to Winter. Choose the Fair,
Whose auburn tresses drop their silken wealth


Over a neck whose tint beside the snow
Looks no less white ! whose blue eyes’ purity
Is soft and soarchless as the aether, and
Which shews above the warm glow of her cheek
As o’er the kindling sky of sunset shows
The calm cerulc ! Or, choose you the Brunette,
Who shoots resistless magic from the glance
Of dreamy or of bright intelligence !
Whose brow is Beauty’s throne, as o’er it How
Proud Cleopatra’s looks ; whose lips dissolve
Their corall’d fragrance through the ambient air,
Wooing the fierce and burning sense of Man,
Who fain would dwell there ever, fancying
Her form the heaven of eternity !
Wind not, I pri’thee, at cross purpose with me,
But, as we pass, inform me how I best
May please thy fancy. [They go up stage.
Count. [ Advancing with Francesca .] Come you from
Venice, lady?
Francesca. It is my birthplace, messire.
Count. ’Tis the shrine
Of all the softer impulse of the soul!
Proud kings their crescents vail before her power,
And in her palaces the Orient wealth
Lies scatter’d in profusion ; and the spoil
Of Arab-land floats in exhaustlcss perfume
Along her silv’ry waves. The wanton Breeze,
Fresh from the kiss of Ocean, o’er the cheek
Voluptuous steals. At her caress the veins
To wild pulsation swell, and languid eyes
But ope’ to sate their sight with loveliness !
For Venus, as from Cytherean spray,
Robed in the rainbow which the Day-god gave,
She sparkling sprang, chose there her special shrine,
And nations named Vcnctia Theone of Love !
[.Distant music—Guests go out gradually.
Hark to the faint sound borne upon the wind
Of melting music. How the soften’d strain
O’ercomes the grosser senses, and the swell
Flows through the melting channels of the soul


Till all is rapture ! Madam, sec, your guests,
Allured by the sweet magic, seek its temple,
Where soon begins the mazy dance. For thee
Alone they linger. Lady, by your leave.
[All go out but Vincentio and Philip.
Vincentio. See where they leave the room : —Now follow
them.
Dispose yourself amidst the gaudy crowd,
That you be not observed. Let not a movement
Be lost unto you; but, according as
I have instructed you, mark their behaviour,
And when we meet again report all furtherance.
Away, or you will miss them.
Philip. Fear me not. [ Exit Philip.
Vincentio. So, we shall gain the Count! He Lath already
Drunk from the Siren eyes of this deceiver
Draughts close akin to love, or love itself;
Which, wrought on by skill (for well I know
The weakness of his nature), soon will bring him
Unto such state of passion and desire
That, were his soul the forfeit, he must wed her.
Then, when she deems all earthly joys her own,
Will I enforce fulfilment of her pledge,
And o’er the wreck of her fall’n happiness,
Deride the anguish knowing but despair !
Sweet phantasy of Hate-triumphant—now
Thou shin’st on me, the brighter for thy gloom,
And thy malignant clasp warms round my heart !
Within I can obtain a cloak and visor,
Obscured in which I will unnoticed watch
The progress of my scheme. [Exit Vincentio.
SCENE III. —A retired part of the. Gardens attached to the
House of Francesca — Moonlight.
Enter PHILIP masked.
Philip. They come this way.
By heaven, each whisper’d word ho speaks to her


Doth like a dagger strike into my brain !
I must and will enjoy her ! How he bows
His doomM head, unconscious of the plot
Which shall involve his Countship in destruction,
And fix me in his seat ! They must not see me.
Now will I seek Vincentio. [Exit Philip.
Enter the Count and Francesca ; both with masks,
which they remove.
Francesca. The dance has wearied me.
Count. A little on
I sec an arbour ; to whose friendly rest
Let us repair.
Francesca. The air will freshen mo.
I feel revived already. See yon cloud
That stilly floats along the pallid moon.
Oh, that it bore Endymion to his love!
Count. Be thou Diana—l will be Endymion.
Then will we pass the tranquil night in love—■
In raptures vast—in vows of adoration—
And thy chaste heart shall pant in unison
With mine !
Francesca. Speak all your troubadours as thou dost %
Count. All that do feel as I.
Francesca. Messire, you shame
Our dull Italian lovers. They expect
That we shall find a language in their eyes,
And gaze on us in silence.
Count. Love is eloquent
Even in silence. On the languid cheek
Its characters are writ in signs as clear
As cloistered monk e’er penned. Its tone is breathed
In mournful cadence on the sigh that leaves
The breast reluctantly. It seems to hover
On the surrounding air. But most of all,
The eye —the eye is Passion’s orator !
Oh, look in mine. I love thee !
Francesca. [/S’aa/y.] We are strangers.
\Vincentio and Philip, both visored, appear at hack,
watching.


Count. In Love, acquaintance grows by thoughts, not
years.
Thou seem’st as I had known thee from my boyhood.
As yet, ’tis true, I am a stranger to thee ;
But know me now —Raymond Berenger—lord
Of Provence. Do not blame me, gentle madam,
That I acknowledge to the pride I feel
In such a dignity. As ’twere in Man
Ingratitude not to exult that Heaven
Has lifted him above the brute, and with
A soul and reason stamped him for His own ;
So were I all unworthy of my honors
Not to esteem them. Sweet my love ! look on me.
Wilt thou be mine 1 [He kneels.
Francesca. [Aside.] Oh, my unworthiness.
[AiomZ.] My lord, we are observed. Arise, my lord.
[ Vincentio and Philip disappear.
Count. Then bid me hope—or ever let me kneel !
Francesca. \Anxi(msly?\ Nay, Raymond —Count —arise.
Count. I press thy hand,
And, by the ecstaoy which it imparts,
I calculate what boundless bliss were mine
If I owned all thyself. My eye of fancy
Doth magnify and variate thy form,
And makes thy lovely shape combine alike
All vast and petty joys ! Embodied in thee
They seem substantial; and, possessed of thee,
All the world yields were mine ; but if without,
My fate were misery and endless grief !
Oh, wilt thou wed me, lady 1
Francesca. Alas, you know not
The thing I am !
Count. [With rapture , starting up.~\ An angel upon earth !
More brightly radiant than my wildest thoughts
Pictured the denizens of heaven ! In form,
And mental virtue, all the need could wish,
To prove to the unwilling mind of Man
That, as the earth beneath the glorious sky,
The sphere of Woman was above his own !


You tremble and grow pale.
Francesca. [Aside, with anguish.'] Great heaven, forgive
me !
Count. You are unwell—the air has chilly grown :
Lean on me, madam ; I will bear you in.
Francesca. Nay, lam better now —indeed, ’twas nothing.
See, I can smile again.
Count. Smile over thus,
And stars shall frown in vain ! [KVssfts her.] Thy kiss has
steeped me
In an Elysian cloud, and my rapt sense
Surveys the earth at distance. Ling’riug now
In this embrace, I could forget the world,
Nor feel it should it totter ’neath my feet,
And rush on Chaos!
Then, out of void, would my adventurous mind
Create another Paradise ! Alone
We’d pace the verdant fields, and speechless gaze
On cloudless skies. We’d view the far horizon,
And the blue hills which imperoeptably
Would melt to heaven. We’d shelter ’neath the trees,
And breathe the fragrant and ambrosiac air ;
And I would drain a nectar from thy lips
More sweet than drink the feigned gods ! I drown
In an ecstatic dream. ’Tis passion prompts
My mind to this imaginative flight.
Oh, let me hope that thy awakening heart
Will share with me this deep excess of joy,
That, bliss of both united, we may raise
A lasting monument of happiness ! [Exeunt,
[As they go out, enter cautiously, observing them,
Vincentio and Philip.
Vincentio. The victory is ours! You noted them.
Philip. She must be mine, Vincentio.
Vincentio. She shall bo so.
Philip. I tell thee, she has raised such passion in me,
I almost, to possess her, would abandon
Even th’ ambitious hope that I may yet
Enjoy my cousin’s state.


Vincentio. Thou shalt possess her
Without the need of such a forfeiture.
Both shall be thine. For Raymond, I but use him
As my most abject tool—the instrument
Of my revenge—which I shall writhe, and turn
To petty purposes. He is my dupe,
And strains but for the hour when thou and I
Shall reap the harvest of his industry.
When he is dead— [pauses.] —
Philip. I shall bo Count of Provence ;
And thou, my friend—
Vincentio. Thy faithful servant still I
My lord, my presence may be needed now,
To urge this matter of thy cousin’s love
As may be best: —So, for a time we part.
Meanwhile, be well assured that thy desires
Shall be remembered.
Philip. Then, good night, my lord. [Exit Philip.
Vincentio. My plan of action is defined and clear.
For thee, B6renger, whom I cannot hate,
Nor yet despise—ev’n for thy virtue—’tis
Enough I love thee not. In thy despair,
The ruin of thy honor, and thy fall,
I see my safe ascent to power beyond
All I can hope from thy prosperity—
And thou art doomed. Ambition and Revenge,
Ye smile upon me ! But the chiefer thou
That, like the Python, risest out of slime,
And reign’st in devastation and abhorrence !
Proud lady, tremble ! for thy scorn lias cut
Afresh into the wound which I had deemed
Was partly healed. Healed ?—My disgrace 1 Oh, never,
Till she lies cold before me ! When I turned
My back on thee, detested Venice—then
I swore her swift destruction ; which, ere this,
I had accomplished, could I have divined
Her place of refuge. Now she’s in my power,
And she shall learn the terror of my hate !
May never wish of mine be satisfied,
But Heaven and Man debar me of my hopes;
c


May Poverty, the curse of fools, enslave me ;
And may I live, a thing to be abhorred—
Or worse, to be despised—if I forgive
Her who contemned me, or forego my vengeance !
[Exit Vincentio.
END OF ACT 11.
ACT III.
SCENE I. —An Apartment in the Palace of the Count of
Provence.
FRANCESCA and the COUNT discovered, seated.
Count. This day, my love ! Oh, I have marked it out
As one of joy ! I have looked forth to it
As doth the hoar Crusader unto heaven,
When gleams above his throat the scimitar
Of sacrilegious Saracen. Thou art
My heaven, and, when years have rolled away,
This day, which gives thee to me, shall appear
The brightest of His works, excepting thee !
Francesca. Perchance a day of infamy and woe —
Of sorrow and despair !
Count. Wherefore this gloom 1
Dear one, dispel it ! Ido know how true
The love thou bear’st me, and 1 know thy virtue.
Yinccntio, thy guardian and my friend, —
Why dost thou shudder, love 1 Art thou not well 1
Francesca. I knew not that I shuddered. Let us speak
On other subjects. Would,st thou hoar, my lord,
A hapless history of two that wed ?
1 knew the lady well.


Count. Tell it, Francesca.
Francesca. He loved her, but she pined. Ere she had
known him,
Her innocence, alas ! had been betrayed
By heartless treachery. She thought herself
Unworthy of his love ; and silently
Her sorrows sapped the freshness of her youth.
At last, she lay upon a bed of death.
She shunned the light, fearing it might disclose
The fatal secret which despoiled her life.
Her husband watched beside her long ;—Anon,
►She raised her head ;—With a beseochful gloom—
A dark despair, with yet one ray of hope—
She gazed into his eyes, and told him of
The stain upon her honor and his own—
Asking forgiveness.
Count. He forgave her—well 1
Francesca. He was a man who would have deemed his
life
Poor recompense for honor ; and he did
What such a man might do.
Count. Pie were unworthy of the name of man,
Did he, in such extremity, insult
The spirit leaping to its God ! But no—
The hero of thy story could not do so.
Francesca. He pardoned her, and, with a smile, she died.
Count. What fate was his t
Francesca. His after-history
I cannot tell. He sailed for Palestine,
To battle in the Holy cause, —assumed
Another name, —and never more was heard of.
Count. A noble soul ? Now can I picture him,
Fronting his dauntless bosom to the Death
Which long forbears to strike ; until at length,
Pierced with the Payuim’s steel, his franchised soul
He sighs to heaven, and, with his latest breath.
Murmurs the loved one’s name !
Francesca. But what of her I
What punishment were adequate to such
A crime as hors, which did to grief betray


A trusting heart.
Count. Oh, judge not harshly of her.
’Tis difficult to sacrifice in youth
All hope of love, of joy, of happiness,
To the stern dictate of a Stoic creed.
’Tis hard to tear away the veil that hides
Our nature’s frailty ; and doubly hard,
When wooing Love flatters the Thought, and makes’t
Believe itself the paragon ’tis painted !
Pity, but do not blame her.
Francesca. Oh, my love !
[ Checking herself. ] Alas, what would Ido ? Think —think,
my lord,
Before you make me yours.
Count. Unto what end '!
Francesca. lam a stranger to you —can you tell
If I am worthy to become your bride 1
Count. What mean you, sweet 1
Francesca. Your honor, Count, is priceless:—
A trust not only dear to you, but to
Each vassal of your state. Pause, ere you plunge
In darkness with it, lest a soil should stain
Its purity.
Count. Let tremblers pause that doubt !
Here is the shrine on which I lay my hopes,
My honor, and my trust !
Francesca. Then hear mo, Count.
Even as I am, I’m thine 1 Thy hopes shall be
My hopes ; thy cares, my cares ; thy joys—
Thy feelings—and thine honor—all mine own !
In safety and in peril, I am thine !
Now, Raymond, if thou wilt, clasp to thine own
A heart, which in its dearest plenitude
Of passion loves thee ! Hear me swear—till death
I will be true to thee—though death alone,
Perchance, may keep me so !
Count. My love—my own !
Thy vow is needed not. Dearest, farewell.
Anon, I will return, and lead thee to
The Holy altar, where the solemn pledge


We shall pronounce, which shall our hearts unite
For evermore !
Francesca. My sweet, for evermore 1
Count. Till then, we part.
Francesca. Oh, must you leave me 1
Count. ’Tis
But for a time. One kiss —and now, adieu ! [Exit the Count.
Francesca. Alas ! where is my boasted strength of mind,
Which, in the sacrifice of every joy,
I thought could calmly contemplate the waste,
And glory in heroic suffering !
Has love betrayed me to this weakness ? For
I love thee, Raymond—bear me witness, heaven,
How fondly ! Should I not preserve thee, love,
From union such as mine 1 Oh, I have erred,
And on the steep precipitous decline
Of vice have trod down virtue ! Is’t for thee,
Whose less than royalty is more than royal,
To link thee to a curse ? Or, wouldst thou rise
Above the Titan, and the vulture cherish
Which knawod away thy vitals ? But he knows not
The degradation ho incurs ; and I
I cannot —cannot tell him ! Fve essayed,
But, ever as the thought came uppermost,
Some happy picture which his fancy drew
Has beat it back. [Pauses.'] My promise to Yincentio 1
But no, he will not claim it; for the Count’s
His dearest friend ; and, sooth to say, he bears
An honorable character in Court.
Yet, should he seek to force it —there, at least
I can preserve thee from dishonor, love !
My death —it is resolved !
Enter Biasoa.
Bianca ! Oh,
You come to dress me for my bridal, I
Am ready.
Bianca. You look sadly, dearest mistress.
Francesca. Sad 1 But the cloud shall leave me now
This day,


Smiles will become me better ! Come, Bianca.
I'll labor to forget all but the thought—•
The happy thought—of him whose generous love
Makes me his own. Do I look sadly now' 1
Bianca, come.
\JC.reirrit.
SCENE II. —The Palace Grounds.
Enter GREGOIRE and GERARD.
Gregoire. lam an example, Gerard, of the bounty of
Nature. Behold me as I stand, rapidly growing into Courtly
favor ; and then tax thy memory to recal the state I wasted
in so lately. Is not my advancement wonderful t Gerard,
I am a great man now.
Gerard. I ever thought so of your worship.
Gregoire. Now thou may’st be sure on’t. My noble
patron and devoted friend, Vincentio, shares with me all Ms
hopes, and I am here admitted to be a wit of the first water.
Oh, the Court is the place to draw forth hidden ability ; for,
believe it, Gerard, I knew not the extent of mine, till the
ladies of the Court, spying my true greatness, made me a
laughing-stock. The lords could no less than laugh too ; and
so I became the fashion. Gerard, how sits this cloak 1
Gerard. As if your worship was born to wear it.
Gregoire. Speak truly, Gerard—l care not for flattery.
Leans it not over the left shoulder past the restriction of
taste and fashion 1
Gerard. ’Tis so evenly set, sir, a feather would o’er-
balance it.
Gregoire. I like the frankness of thy reply. Do not I
owe thee three months’ hire 1 I’ll pay thee when ’tis six.
Nor would I keep thee so long without, but that it were
uncourtly to be punctual. I need no further thy attendance
at present. Yet one moment. ’Twere hot amiss if you
spread among your fellows that I am rising in the Court.


Gerard. Lot your worship believe it of me.
Gregoire. Notwithstanding, Ido despise their estimation.
Yet inform them who are my patrons. Tell them that the
Count himself has deigned to honor me with a passing glance,
and that I entertain high hopes of his ultimate friendship.
Gerard. I shall, sir.
Gregoire. And forget not to let them know that lam
considered a wit. That particularly, as rumours were afloat,
before this fortune, that I was held a fool. You understand
me, Gerard.
Gerard. Clearly, your worship.
Gregoire. Who comes yonder 2 I would bo alone.
[Exit Gerard.
Enter Bertrand.
Sir, whom seek you 2
Bertrand. I have packets of importance for the Count.
Gregoire, ’Tis well thou hast met me. I will gain thee
an audience. Come with me, sir. Know you what the
packet contains 2
Bertrand. That must the Count ascertain,
Gregoire. Oh, sir, lam not curious. lam intimate with
the Count, and the news shall come to me in due course.
Noted you my man, whom I bade depart at your approach 2
A miserable creature —but antique. One that fought under
me in the last Crusade, wherein I had the satisfaction of
saving his life on numberless occasions The thing is
grateful, I assure you, sir. But follow me.
[Exeunt,
SCENE III. —A Room of State in the Palace.
Francesca, kneeling before the Count ; Yincentio, Philip
Berenger, Montbrassil, Delaxour, D’Oemasson, Lords,
Ladies, Officers, ibc., discovered—Trumpet sounds as the
Scene opens.
Count. Now is the summit of my hopes attained.


Arise, my Countess ; rise, my only joy !
Press to this heart—more proud to be thy glare,
Than if, subservient all to my ambition,
The world collected owned my sceptre’s sway.
Thus, in the sight of the assembled Court,
Blessing my fate, I press thee to my breast!
Vincentio. Let the announcing trumpet sound again.
That our whole Provence at the loud peal may
With simultaneous shouts apprise the heavens.
\Trumpet sounds.
Triumph, long life, and happiness attend ye !
Delatour, Hail to our noble Count and Countess !
Omnes. Hail to our noble Count and Countess !
Count. Your voices, friends, recal me to myself;
And now I can survey, with calmer view,
The heaven is all my own ! Teach mo, Francesca,
To rate my happiness. lam of the earth,
And thou, the pure abstraction of the skies ;
And as the chaste and silv’ry orb of night
Borrows its lustre from the glorious sun,
So my cold texture feels an inward glow
’Neath thy refulgence. Sweet, tliou’rt all mine now !
For me alone thy matchless form to clasp,
And tell the gods to stint all blessings more ;
For me to taste the nectar of those lips
Which can no surfeit teach the ravished sense !
[. Kisses her.
Enter an Officer.
Officer. My lord, a messenger from the outposts.
Count. Admit him, \Exit Officer.
Enter Beetraxd.
Bertrand. I crave your pardon, my most puissant lord,
That I must check the flow of happiness
Which marks the hour, with news of cumbrous moment.
These documents will tell at large my errand.
[Kneels, and presents packet to the Count.—He
takes same, and waves his hand to Bertrand■
[E.rit Bertrand.


Count. {After examining papers."] My noble friends, we
must prepare for war.
The documents I hold are absolute,
And most peremptory. Before yon Sun,
Whoso rays now shoot their noontide splendor o’er us,
Hath kiss’d the sad hills of the parting West,
In fearful opposition shall we stand
To those whose safety lies in our destruction.
The vengeful fury of Rousillon’s hate,
Long pent up in his breast, hath now burst forth,
More deadly for confinement ; and alone
To crash his spears, to sheathe his thirsty blades,
And, from the aim of our confronting ranks,
To turn aside the arrows’ fatal track—
His vanquishmont, or ours, must make suffice.
But what should nerve us in this great encounter 1
What stimulate our valor 1 The sense
Of justice, friends ! Our rights shall, like a god,
Illume our path, and make the enemy’s camp
Appear one trophy to us !
Shall Rousillon—
Strong only in his insolence—shall he
Teach us humility, and bid us crouch
Before his arrogant pride ? Shall all our wealth
Hang glittering in his halls ; the long descent
Of glory, which our fathers have bequeathed us,
Laurel his brow ; our very lives, depend
Upon his breath ; and violated bo
Our sacred hearts and homes ? Think not I clothe
In specious words a cause that’s weak ; nor deem
That I have shrouded in too deep a gloom,
Or overdrawn, a danger yet remote.
’Tis but the op’ning of the plot that’s shown us ;
Let’s crush it while ’tis feeble ! Fresh from the arms
Of my young bride will I myself confront
This rip’ning danger.
This be our resolve—
To shake the gory goddess by the hand 1
We must forget the joys of peace and home ;
Our silken doublets we must change for steel ;


Our gloves for mailed gauntlets. The full joys
Of love and wedlock wo must set aside,
And to maintain them strive ’midst blood and death !
1)' Orrmsson. To the last breath we'll follow thee !
Omnes. All! All !
Francesca. Oh, do not go, my husband ;do not leave me !
Make not a mockery of that solemn vow
Which we exchanged, when for myself you gave
Promise to stay by, love, and cherish me.
Amongst the noble warriors of Provence,
Whose mighty deeds, concurrent, are the bonds
Which hold its fame, its greatness, and its wealth
In one proud laurel, is there not a man
Worthy in this to be your delegate i
Count. Ay, love; my warriors can take their stand
Beside the men of prowess haughty Rome
Boasts in her pride.
Francesca. Then leave thy charge to them,
And thou remain, and triumph o’er my heart.
Count. Sweet love, it may not be.
Francesca. Oh, think, my lord,
How, in your absence, will my frighted soul,
In its despair o’erleaping every bound
Of hopeful chance, which still might yield mo cheer,
View the black prospect conjured up by dread.
Count. Nay, my Francesca, it is lit thou learn
To be a soldier. I shall leave thee to
Vincentio’s charge.
Francesca. [Alarmed.'] Vincentio !
Vincentio. \_Quicklyi\ Her highness
Thinks jsowerless every guardianship but thine
To banish dread.
Francesca. [Haughtily .] Raymond Berenger’s bride
Should rise superior to all dread. My lord,
I will not urge another word to stay you :
Pursue your fame where the blind goddess points,
Nor doubt that, in your absence, I your honor
Will well uphold.
Vincentio. [Aside.] Indeed ? We’ll test that, madam.
Count. My sweetest! Each now beauty crowns the last,


As stars that shoot iu heaven !
My vassals must not find
That, in enjoyment of my own delight,
I held their good at nought. Fear not, my love —
I will return :—And when thou bind’st my brow
With laurels, the more glorious that thou gav’st them,
Exultant Joy shall, in its plenteous wealth,
Drown the remembrance of this present sorrow.
Come on, my Countess ; and rest sure of this —•
That still, amidst the bustle of the fight,
The hope of thee shall guide my arm aright !
[Trumpet.—Exeunt all hut Vincentio, Philip,
Delatour, and Monfdmissil.
Delatour. Now is Berenger’s fondest wish fulfilled.
May Heaven approve the union.
Vincentio. They are marked,
By the kind Fate that linked them, for all blessings.
Montbrasdl. [To Vinceniio.\ Come you our way, my
lord 1
Delatour. We must prepare
To greet the enemy as fitly as
We graced these nuptials.
Vincentio. Then, farewell, my lords,
And prosp’rous be your arms. One word, your highness.
[To Philip.
[Exeunt Delatour and Monthrassil.
You will attend this battle. There let Hope —
Hope of the thing you covet —set grim Deatli
Enthroned upon your falchion ; for, this night,
If thou hast strategy sufficient in thee,
Thy suit must prosper.
Philip. What is’t necessary
That I should do 1
Vincentio. This very night, my lord—
Well favored by the absence of the Count—■
I moan to take advantage of that pledge
Whereof I told thee. If thou oanst contrive
At dead of night to quit thy watch, and come
Hither again—
Her dread of me will force her to obey


All my behests ; and one—imperative—
I will impose upon her, which shall sate
Thy fondest wish.
Philip. Living, I shall not fail you.
And yet, Vincentio, one doubt remains
To mar my perfect confidence.
Vincent to. Pronounce it.
Philip. It springs alone from wonder at the calmness
With which she meets th’ embraces of her lord,
The while her mind is loaded with the weight
Of this, her pledge to thee.
Vincentio. Tiiy doubt is just.
’Tis that she thinks I will not force my claim.
Of late I’ve borne me with a saint-like air
With such effect that my fair madam deems me
As soft and harmless as she well would wish me :
And though a random fear may sometimes chase
Away the fond gratuitous thought—-the force
Of my untainted credit in the Court
Soon reinstates me in her choice opinion.
So far I have deceived her ; she shall find
To her dear cost that I can ne’er forgive !
I shewed to thee the secret spring which opens
Prom the dark vaults and hidden passages
To the Count’s chamber. Be thou there when Midnight
Hath spread her dreary wings above the earth,
And loud vibrating tones chime from the towers,
More solemn for the silence : —Then, I promise,
If I myself succeed (which do not doubt),
Thy wishes shall substantiate in acts ;
This, the dear prologue to our greater scheme —
Thy cousin’s ruin, and thy rise. Remember.
Philip. I will be punctual. Farewell, till then.
[Exit Philip.
Vincentio. Weak fool—thy lust but sharpens my revenge,
And thy ambition panders to my own.
I clutch my victim ! Vain each adjunct now
Of thy hauglit station to preserve thee from
Impending misery. From her high seat
She looks above the clouds, and all is bright ;


But thunders cradle in the air, to drown
The harmony of heaven !
To-night I will enforce my claim. Till then,
Lie dormant, my intents ! Let softest smiles
Wreathe o’er my lips ; be smooth, my brow—nor shew
The raging lire within, which soon shall burst,
Devouring her I hate !
[Exit Vincentio.
END OF ACT 111.
ACT IV.
SCENE.— The Country adjacent to Aix. — Bérenger’s Gamp.
— Time, Evening.—During the Act, the Scene gradually
darkens.
Philip, with a party of Soldiers, discovered.—As the
curtain rises, an alarum is sounded without.
Enter Delatouk.
Delatour. Ho, the reserve !
Send reinforcement to the Count.
He has cut his way into the enemy’s ranks,
And, by the side of half a-dozen men
Of kindred spirit, he confronts the doom
Of overhanging Death !
Philip. To him—despatch ! [Exeunt some Soldiers.
How goes the tide of battle 1
Delatour. Well for us.
The vengeance of a multitude resides
In brave Berenger’s arm. He casts aside
All polished breeding, and, as though his life
Had passed in hardihood, ’midst camps and war,
The flighty progress of his gory steel


Makes severance where it falls. But, while I stay,
Glory is gained without mo : —So, adieu !
[Exit Delatow.
Philip. The Count so good a soldier too ! Enriched
With every grace and virtue which can make
Man valued in the hour of peace, he proves
A warrior also ! What am I, that with
Ambitious lust of rule would seek to rise
Upon his fall 1 Am I more great than he ?
Or more admired—since in his love alike
I would supplant him 1 [Trumpet.] Ay, roll on —roll on—
Thou herald of Destruction ! Not your din
Can hush the jarring tempest of my soul,
Or drown the voice of Conscience !
[Retreat sounded without—Loud shouts.
Hark, what shouts 1
First Soldier. The cry of victory !
[Trumpet—Shouts renewed.
Enter D’Ormasson.
D’ Ortnasson. This day is made
Our own ! The Count of Kousillon, perceiving
He fought at disadvantage, has withdrawn
His troops, which now seek shelter in retirement.
From this ascent you may perceive their flight.
[Philip goes up stage, and holes off.
Philip. They wind about—they mean some stratagem.
E'Ormasson. ’Twill not avail them aught. [/S'/iowfo.] See,
where the Count,
Greeted in triumph by the general crowd,
Makes his approach. [Shouts.
Philip. Fresh from the strife he comes,
His step as firm and all-unwearied as
When first this day he drew his maiden sword,
And foremost rushed upon the enemy.
He nears us—give him way. [They come dovm stage.
Count. [Without] Keep them secure in chains, and hold
them ready
Upon our summons.


Enter the Count and Delatouk.
Count. Ho, Delatour !
Delatonr. My lord.
Count. Send one to watch upon the loftiest mount
That girds our camp, and bid him reconnoitre
The movements of the enemy. They turned
Their flying course behind th’ Avignon hills.
And, if I err not, meditate attack
Before the night be past.
Delatowr. I have already
Sentinelled watches, and in readiness
Have placed a hundred men, to guard against
Th’ immediate danger.
Count. Say, have you despatched
The fleetest courier to my bride with tidings
Of our success 1
Delatemr. I have, my lord.
Count. ’Tis well.
\To Philip.\ Cousin, I pray you, with some fifty men,
Repair unto the field where late we fought,
And bear away the wounded. Let our foes
With like concern be looked to as our friends.
\Exeunt Philip, D’ Ormasson, and Soldiers.
Oh, Delatour, ev’n in the fiercest fight
Her image fraught my soul, and hex sweet smile,
From heaven transplanted, heaven’s power assumed,
And deluged doubt in hope !
Delatour. Indeed, my lord.
Count. Amidst the havoc that surrounded me,
Her form arose ; and (even as the stars
Arc drowned beneath the universal flood
Of radiant light, whose source is in the sun),
The mournful images that thronged around
Shrunk from my sight, and she pervaded all !
Delatour. Only to make the aim of your good sword
The more unerring ; for, amongst us all,
There was not one who, in his deadliest strife,
Did work such execution.
Count. By yon heaven,
You should not say so, When the oozing sweat


Steamed from my brow, commingling with the gore
Which stained my heated visage, i’ the midst
Of that most dread, uncompromising fight
(Snatching a moment from the busy time),
I saw yourself—conspicuous over all—
Straining each nerve till almost cracked—and dealing
With every blow a death ! Give me thy hand ;
My soul’s in league with thine ; in this embrace
Behold the augury of prosp’rous fortunes.
Enter Montbrassil.
Montbrassil. My gracious lord,
A captain of Eousillon, now our prisoner,
Desires to speak with you.
Count. What would he with us ?
Montbrassil. Owing, for some indignity, deep hate
Unto the Count, his lord, he would divulge
The secrets of their camp, and promises,
On full enlargement of his captive person,
And payment to him of a hundred livres,
To place you in possession of a scheme
Which will ensure your victory.
Count. What seemed
The man that sent you ]
Montbrassil. A fierce, scowling soldier —
One marked with many a soar.
Count. His scars should blush,
Hearing his baseness. I’ll not speak with him.
[Montbrassil going.
Yet stay, Montbrassil. Dost remember thee
Of an old man, bowed with the weight of years,
Hoary and withered, who did fight against us
With reckless bravery ? You took him prisoner.
Montbrassil. We did, my lord.
Count. Let him appear before us.
A seat there, ho !
[A chair is brought in.—The Count seats himself.
I do begin to feel
The weariness of war. This man I spake of
Fought like a daemon, careless of his life—


Or rather, as though death were welcome to him,
I fain would test th’ endurance of his spirit,
And if beneath our threats he would divulge
His knowledge of th’ intents of Kousillon :
You, my lord, question him, and use whato’er
Of promise or of threat you deem advisable.
Re-enter Montbeassil, with Lorenzo Vasaei, chained
and guarded.
Count. [ Observing Vasari .]
Ay, this is he. He seems of Italy —
And yet his features are familiar to me.
Delatour. Methinks, my lord, the melancholy strength
Of his dark eye, although to manhood tempered,
Suggests a recollection of your Countess.
Perchance ’tis fancy.
Count. ’Twas the thought possessed me.
Proceed, my lord.
Delatour. [To Vasari .]
Sir, by the clemency
Of Count Berenger, thou mayst soon regain
Thy freedom, shouldst thou freely answer to
Such questions as I may to thee propose.
What is thy rank 1
Vasari. If thou canst fathom that
By use of sight and calculating thought—
Thou ’rt welcome to the knowledge.
Count. [Jside.] Bravely answered.
Delatour. The rack is not far distant.
Vasari, Let it come.
What import is’t to me 1 The greater griefs
That wring my heart leave no sense unemployed,
On which to work your tortures. Here I stand—
Defiant of your power. No pangs can shake
My fixity of purpose.
Count. I admire
The haught of his proud spirit ; and within me,
Even as he speaks, kindles a love whose strength
I cannot all account for, I dare now
Stake on the greatness of his soul my seignory,
D


Nor tremble for the issue !
\Ttises, and addresses Vasari.]
Signior, ’tis
No idle curiosity that builds
An interest in your story. There is in you
Some quality I cannot well define,
Which (though I think we met not ere to-day)
Makes you appear familiar to my sight.
If, then, you bear no motive in concealment,
I would desire to hear from you the story
Of those misfortunes which have ploughed your brow
With furrows deeper than the track of years.
Vasari. I hold no secrets but Eousillon’s. All
My griefs are traced to that prolific source —
Ingratitude !
Count. From whom ?
Vasari. Oh, spare me, Heaven—
Spare me this anguish ! Thou art witness for me,
That while I stand before thee—her accuser—
My heart bleeds pity for her ! She who wronged me
(Oh, spite of Fate ! that I survive to tell it)
Was mine own daughter.
Count. How, thy daughter ?
Vasari. Ay.
I could have bravely borne all sorrows else.
But she was dearer to me than these eyes
That mirrored her! —was dearer than the pulse
That feebly panted in this aged frame,
Replenished with the life-blood of my heart !
In her charmed presence, gloom forsook my soul: —
As withered this frail body, I consoled me
With the blest thought that she would tend me still:—
And so, I mourned not o’er decaying nature.
But, jealous of my happiness, the Fates
Doomed my declining years to disappointment.
My daughter fled mo —in mine age forsook me—
For one of Hell’s seducers ! One who set
All claims of hospitality aside,
And, whilst receiving daily favours from me,
Levelled the monument of all my hopes,


And stole at once my daughter and her virtue !
Count. Kolievo him of his shackles.
[ They unbind Vasari .]
Ah, how frail
Thy ties are, Nature ! when a daughter leaves
Her father to uncompromising age.
Sir, you are free. [Pales his hand.] And now I would
entreat
That you do pass your future life with me.
My Countess will be as a daughter to you,
And tend your aged cares ; and you shall own,
Heaven, which deprived you of your ancient darling,
Is not all harsh, but to your succour sends
A second love, more worthy than the first.
She is of Italy, as thou art, —born
In Venice.
Vasari. Venice !
Count. Perchance you knew her there—
Francesca Vasari.
Vasari. Great heaven, that name !
Count. What is’t appals thee, signior 1
Thy lips are quivering—the color that
Betokened life hath left thy cheeks—and all
Is ashy pale.
Vasari. ’Tis nothing, gracious Count.
Count. While thou say’st “nothing” thou grow’st paler
still.
What, are men wont to change the hue of health
Even upon an instant, and to stand
With eyes agape, limbs tottering, and each
Denotement of internal agony
And all for—“nothing ?”
Vasari. Heed me not —’tis past.
Count. What horrid thought is this, that takes possession
Of limbs, heart, brain, and every sense at once J
Why rushes on my mind the memory
Of my own bride, when thinking of his daughter 1
Oh, speak to me—rack me not in suspense !
A black cloud gathers round the purest sky
That ever roofed the earth; and you possess


The charmed wind which can the gloom dispel,
Yet will not use it. Leave me all—alone—
I would hold private converse with this stranger.
\_Exeunt all hut the Count and Yasari.
Signior, w’e are alone :—Oh, answer me !
Answer, as though grim Death had ta’en his stand
Beside thy pillow—stretching forth his arm,
That all the moments of thy life should be
The period of its motion ! Answer truly—
As though the angels of Reward and Punishment
Stood by, to pay thee after thy deserts !
By the deep griefs dost thou profess, I charge thee
Tell me thy name, and hers thou callest daughter!
[A pause.
Why pause you still ?
Vasari. In mercy.
Count. This is torture !
Vasari. Then, learn—thy fears have but too good foun-
dation—
Vasari is my name.
Count. Now, welcome, Horrors !
Ye crowd upon my brain—dusk images
Float on my sight—and in my ear, a voice
Howls out, “ Vasari!” Still it shrieks, “ Vasari !”
“ The lost Vasari !” No, no, no, —’tis false !
Francesca—my Francesca —my sweet love —
My own—my dearest ! Thou art purity
Itself ! And I have doubted thee, Francesca !
And wherefore 1 For thy name ! Thy name alone—
Thy name condemned thee ! Oh, devise some penance—
Some punishment—ere thou forgiv’st me, love !
A better proof, old man, than a mere name—
There are a hundred such in Italy—
Give me some surer proof—ere thou canst hope
To shake the firm conviction in my soul
Of her blest spotlessness !
Yasari. \Taking a miniature from, his breast.] Behold her
image—
Painted ere yet a woman. Canst thou find
Aught of resemblance in it to thy wife 1


Count. \AsideP\ Be bold, my heart!
\IIe takes miniature, and reluctantly turns his
gaze on it—appears overcome, and returns it
to Vasari. After a pause, bursting into a
passion of tearsij
Oh, heaven, it is my wife !
[Smls on seat, and covers his face with his hands.
Vasari. Now, by my soul, she is unworthy of
Thy least regret! In tears ? Let fiery wrath
Dry up their source ! Till now, in vain I strove
To hate her for her falsehood : —still my love
Over my judgment gained the mastery.
But now, all remnant of the soft affection
I tear from me, and shatter—ev’n as thus
I dash her image to the earth !
Count. [ Rising , as if to prevent Hold, hold !
\Wildlyi\ Oh heaven, am I that thing—that thing of scorn —
I cannot name it—and the thought is madness !
Crack, crack, my heartstrings ! And thou, mighty World,
801 l through thy centuries, by me unheeded !
Oh, life—’go late my joy—how paltry look’st thou —
How burdensome and useless—when the hopes
Embedded in the heart, and part of it,
Have ruthlessly been scattered into chaos !
Earth, rid thee of this load—this cumbrous weight—
And as thou blast’st existence into nothing,
My parting breath shall thank thee !
Vasari. Speak not thus,
But bury all remembrance of the false one.
She is unworthy of the meanest place
In thy affection or regard.
Count. Thou liest,
False father !
I tell thee, the angelic host of heaven
Contains not in its vast array of purity
A soul more spotless : —’Tis as fair a sheet
As ever left the great Creator’s hands—
Nor knows the bleached snow a shade more white !
She is a special favor to the earth—
And in her, blended by the art divine,


Are all perfections ! And slialt thou, her father,
Profane the unmatch’d gift ? Now, by my rising wrath,
I swear that, wert thou other than thou art,
The least of thy base slanders would demand
A retribution laden with thy blood :
And as thou art —I swear I cannot trust
Alone to reverence —for black Revenge
Urges my boiling blood, and my hand trembles
Upon my weapon’s hilt. Hence, tempting steel !
[Casts away sword.
Signior, thy life is safe.
\An alarum, is sounded without, followed by loud
shouts. V Ormasson, and. some soldiers, pass
over stage at hachi]
Whence this alarm ?
Re-enter D’Ormasson.
D’Ormasson, speak ; from what proceeds this tumult 1
D’ Ormasson. The enemy, my lord, hath from an ambush
Sprung, to our great surprise—that scarce we know
Our true position.
Count. ’Twas this ruse I feared. [ Goes up stage.
Ho, Delatour !
D’ Ormasson. He hath repaired already
To the defence.
Count. [ Looting off.] They’re hand to hand. D’Ormasson,
Conduct this stranger yonder to my tent,
And give him kind attendance. ’Tis my will
That he be free in all things from restraint.
Reach me my weapon —see, it lies before thee.
\jy Ormasson hands him sword. Trumpet.
Again that warlike call :—Lo, I attend it !
Father —I ne’er may see thee more : —Farewell !
[ Exeunt D’Ormasson and Vasari.
Incarnadine Slaughter ! One more devotee
Offers up homage to thee ! Bravely fought !
Oh, how their valor chides mo for delay :
But now I am among you !
\IIe is about to rush out, hut loohing off, suddenly
cheei-s himself.]


Who is here 1
My cousin—bleeding.
Philip staggers in, wounded.
Philip. Go not yet —not yet —
Thank Heaven, I have found thee !
[ Tie falls. —The Count supports him to front of stagef\
Oh, my veins,
A little longer keep the life that gushes
Thus wildly from ye !
Count. Must I leave thee now 1
Alas, my Philip !
Philip. No, no, no, —not yet —
A secret tortures me—Oh, let me pour it
Into thy bosom.
Count. I attend thee—speak.
Philip. I plotted thy destruction in the hope
To be myself—but that is nothing now.
Oh, my best lord, forgive me ere I tell thee.
Beware thy wife—beware Yincentio !
Count. My wife—Yincentio ! Thou unit’st their names
With such a dire and fatal consequence
As ’twere the gloomy index to disaster.
Speak on —I listen to thee.
Philip. She is false—
Yincentio is her paramour —
And ’twas arrang’d that, in the silent waste
Of midnight, I myself should leave this scene,
And —spare me, spare me !
Count. lam calm—speak on.
Philip. That I should —oh, I cannot speak it!
Count. Gods !
Be merciful, and slay me. Do not pause— [To Philip.
I am more attuned to hear the worst at once
Than have it thus.
Re-enter Montbeassil, hastily.
Monthrassil. Oh, haste at once, my lord,
To guide our movements. The enemy —
Count. [To Monthrassil, fiercely .] Avaunt!


Let earth rush on destruction, and the tracks
Of heaven uncoil ! Let shatter’d planets toss
Through black infinity—l cannot lend
A moment to redemption ! Hence—away !
[Exit Montbrassil.
I am all wrapt in thee.
Philip. Long ere you knew her,
Her caste 'was lost. Ambition pushed her on
To greatness : you, my lord, were made the step
To mount on, and—l’m faint ! Vincentio
Will be rewarded for his interest which
Procured your hand, with—the words choke me, and
I grow more feeble.
Count. Power invisible !
Why see me linger in my shame 1 Oh, strike
At once your final doom ! The heart that own’d
The buoyancy of fresh and verdant nature
Is crushed within me ! The impulsive soul,
That loved its idol even to distraction,
Is now as cold as is the farthest peak
That winters at the polo ! All—all I ask
Is quick relieving death !
Philip. My lord, forgive me—■
Forgive me, ere I die.
Count. [ Grasping him fiercely ,] Slave, knew you this
Before I married her ?
Philip. I did—oh, pardon !
Count. Then thou didst see me walk to my dishonor —
Saw me, and knew it—yet didst never warn me ?
Philip. I knew not what I did.
Count. Hence to perdition !
Dash down the steepest precipice to Hell,
That thou mayst sink the deeper in its tortures !
Hadst thou one spark of goodness—by its virtue
Thou wouldst have warned me, seeing me walk blindfold
To my destruction : —But, all-hellish slave !
Thou mad’st th’ infernal traffic of thy lust
Upon my madness !
Philip. Oh, I die !
Count. ’Twere better


Thou hadst incurred the all-appalling curse
Of universal Nature ! Better given
Thy soul a barter to the King of Fiends —
Than thus have met my rage ! I’ll not be baulked
In my revenge—thou shalt not die till torture
Hath made thee wish thyself amongst the damned—
So to escape the anguish I shall heap
On thy devoted head —even such anguish
As now I feel! [ Philip falls lifeless.
My brain whirls round —my sight
Grows thick—my senses leave me.
Can it be death 1 Then welcome, dissolution !
[lie faints —A pause—Loud shouts, and sound
of trumpet toithout.
Enter Provencal Soldiers, as in retreat, followed by Delatouk.
Delatour. Cowards! What, will ye thus desert me ?
Slaves !
Round to yon eminence, and hurl the rocks
Which crown its summit on the enemy,
Or all is lost. The gathering gloom of night
Will aid your enterprise. [. Exeunt soldiers .] Berenger slain !
[Advances, and raises him.
Speak to me, if thou livest !
Count. [ln his trance, ] Daemons, off!
Francesca, look on me ! Horrors of Hell,
I’ll baffle ye !
Delatour. Awake, my lord !
Count. Those incandescent waves between us surge—
Thus do I plunge into their hot embrace !
[Feebly .] Francesca !
Phantom of the air, avaunt !
I know thee, ’spite thy gloom-begetting wings.
He winds his shadowy arms around her form.
Daemon —Vincentio !
Delatour. My lord—my lord !
He foams about the mouth. Awake, my lord !
Thou dream’st: —Arouse ! The enemy gains ground.
Count. [Awaheninr/.] What voice is that! What light
dispels the gloom 1


Am lon earth ? Who art thou 1 Do I live t
I have been wand’ring to th’ Infernal river ;
And even now, a ghast procession rolls
Before me ! Horrors, hence ! Ha, who art thou,
That olasp’st me thus ? I think I know thee now—
Thou’rt Delatour.
Delatour. Arouse, my lord. Our cause
Is almost lost—
Count. Why let it go ! Our cause 1
The World’s a lie—Life’s but a babbling dream—
And Death is our awakener !
Methought my feet strayed o’er the burning sands
Where Desolation is the Universe !
Ten thousand phantoms reared their ghastly heights
In vastness undefined. Ten thousand shades
Sate still and awful : yet, within their eyes,
Hot and distended, I could read of tortures
Their forms betrayed not. Through the torrid air
A never-ending throng, of elfin brood,
Flitted in discord : and upon the ground
A myriad meagre shapes, which wanted strength
To soar, with useless wings encumbered, lay—
Uttering such baleful shrieks that I forgot
My body’s agony—all but the dread
Of hearing their wild utterance ! I fell
Distracted, and a deadly sickness chained
Me down upon the heaving base of Hell :
Forth from whose pores uprose a horrid stench,
Bathing me in pollution ! With a leap
I started up, and wildly gazed around ;
And then I saw —oh, horror ! On a peak,
Uplifted from the Acheron below, —
Trembling and giddy my Francesca stood !
Black flames fell round her, till she was enclosed
With living-fire, pregnant with hissing snakes,
Which sprang on her, and, fastening in her hair,
Wound their lithe forms around her neck, and down
Her bosom crept ! Into the boiling waves
I desperate plunged : —But while I struggled in
The seething stream, aloft in middle air,


A ponderous and mighty shadow flew
To where she tottering clung. The daemon seized
Her shrinking form, and, o’er the dread profound,
Stretched his vast wings to fly. As in the gloom
Of darkest night glows AStna, so his eyes
Blazed in that Stygian blackness. With a smile
Of mockery, he turned their glare on me ;
It was Yincentio ! I sunk dismayed
Deep in th’ unfathomable fiery gulf—
His name upon my lips—even as thy voice,
Piercing the din, awaken’d me !
Delatour. My lord,
Forget this horrid dream, and save thy troops,
Which even now succumb before the force
Of adverse power. I have but just despatched
Some of our men, in hope forlorn, to break
Their lines from overhead.
Count. [A fter a pause — astonished .]
Is danger, then,
So imminent 1 Avenging god, inspire me
With strength beyond mine own !
\Goes up stage, and looks off.]
Do you repair
By yonder track, with strength of arms sufficient,
And be your aim to drive Rousillon’s power
Back to yon station, where I will confront them.
Away at once.
[Exit Delatour. The Count sees the hody of Philip.
What, art thou dead, my cousin ?
And I have wrung thy parting agonies
To an intensor suffering ! Wrath ! ’tis thou
That quickliest transform’st the front of virtue
Into the semblance of a devil !
0 my wife—false —false !
May Heaven extend to thee as free a pardon
As Ido ! But, farewell, all softer thoughts !
Now will I rush into the heat of carnage !
There in the fight where Death himself is crowned,
1 will implant my foot ! My men fall back
Before the conquering foe. Now, madness nerve


My arm with treble fury—every passion
Concentrate now in one, and make me fit
For direst slaughter ! Soldiers, your Count is with ye !
[Rushes out-
END OF ACT IV.
ACT V.
SCENE.— Night.—A room opening on the Counts chamber.
The walls hung with arras. —A table, on which is a
lamp; chairs, &c.
As the curtain rises, the arras is drawn aside, dis-
covering a secret passage, in which is Vinoentio.
—A panel in the wainscotting acts as a door to
the passage. — Vincbntio comes through, and,
having closed the panel, cautiously advancesi\
Vincentio. I’ve quenched the feeble, solitary spark
Of pity, which yet struggled in my breast,
Degrading me to that inconstant thing
Which parleys ere it acts ; and, powerless quite
To stifle hate, or greatly to abandon
The memory of grievance unatoned,
With Virtue hesitates, while it succumbs
To dominating Evil. I had not
Deemed of myself so poorly ; but, ev’n now,
Hearing of Philip’s death, I felt a strange
And clinging influence pervade my mind,
Imparting terror all unknown before :
But it is gone. Henceforward, I must work
The projects of my brain without the aid


Of an accomplice. [ Bell tolls Twelve .] Hark ! The mid-
night bell
Discordant grates upon mine ear : —’Twas wont
With supernatural awe to visit me —
But now—’tis an untimely screech ! All’s silent—
Silent as Death !
What is’t that masters me 1
I am not used to shrink at contemplation
Of my misdeeds—but now, a chill o’erspreads me.
Hence, the effeminate warning—l am fix’d
Dor deadliest revenge !
Whence is that stir '?
Meth ought there came a dismal, hollow sound,
Like to an echo borne upon the wind,
Eeverberating in its flow, and dying
Into mysterious silence. All is hushed, —
And the dead calm seems stiller than before.
’Twas but the issue of distracted Fancy,
Which ever works ’gainst its own peace, and from
The unsubstantial elements around
Pictures the direful object of its dread.
Weak thoughts, away to more congenial bed—
Here, ye are aliens! Soft: —it is Francesca.
[ Retires.
Enter Francesca.
Francesca. [Having fastened the door through which she
had entered .] I have secured the door —I am
alone—
Protect me, Heaven !
[She kneels.—After a pause ,
Vincentio. [Discovering himself .] Lady, lam here.
Francesca. Vincentio !
Vincentio. Ay—why do you start 1
Francesca. Why com’st thou,
At this unseasonable hour, to torture me %
Vincentio. Your memory fails you : —Must I, then, recal it?
Francesca. Alas, have pity !
Vincentio. Pity 1 For what ?
For thy good fortune, which, with easy terms,


O’ersated even thy ambition 1 Pity 1
Disease and Beggary, or the slave’s condition
Who dares not own a will, but must give up
His dearest wishes to the scarce formed whim
Of a capricious master —these may claim
Compassion ; —But thou, whose fate is set
By th’ motions of the brightest star in heaven, —
Thou who hast Fortune servile at thy feet, —
Thou need’st not pity !
Francesca. Misery, alas !
Finds oft a venom’d mantle in the wealth
That vainly hides its throes. I cannot keep
My pledge.
Vincentio. Thou canst, and shalt !
Francesca. Thou wilt not dare—
Vincentio. All things on earth I’ll dare—
In heaven —or hell!
Francesca. Berenger’s power—
Vincentio. [Scornf ully .] His power !
Full soon ’twill crumble in his grasp.
Francesca. ’Tis false !
But were it so, the ruins of his greatness
Should be thy sepulchre.
Vincentio. I heed not that—
So it be thine as well.
Francesca. It cannot be
That thou art all a daemon :—For the sake
Of my loved lord—of thy devoted friend—■
Thy faithful friend—forbear !
Vincentio. What think you, madam—
Am I so imbecile—so void of wisdom—
So shallow-witted —as to be cajoled
By Woman’s fruitful fancies ? When we bargained,
Ambition was sole mistress of thy mind.
Thou didst not pause then to enquire where Virtue
Had placed her fragile bar ; thou didst not stop
To note where lay the intervening threshold
Of nominal Honor ;—So thou didst attain
Thy high-set wish, and, from th’ Olympian top
Of Fortune’s pinnacle, plucked glory forth, —


What import was the means! —This was thy mood
When in this city first we met : —Then, guided
By thy cold, worldly policy,—thou didst teach me
The sting that lies in scorn ! Forgetting then,
In more aspiring thoughts, our ancient loves, —
You trampled on my sympathies !—But, at
My proposition that I would obtain
A union for thee with the great and noble,
If, on fulfilment, thou wouldst once more grant me
Resumption of thy favor— then, flushed high
With near view of thy hopes, thou mad’st but little
Of such concession :—Now— ’tis no avail !
Francesca. O Heaven ! ’tis just that thou shouldst visit
sin
With suffering:—But, must the punishment
Extend to all that love us ? Should Man’s heart
Swell with instinctive hatred to the frail one
Who mourns, repentant, o’er her secret fault t
Let it not be, O Lord !—let it not be !
Oh, save me from this shame—preserve me from
This dread iniquity !
Vincentio. Thy prayer is vain—
The judgment of the Skies is not more fix’d
Than my revenge !
Francesca. Man —man —have mercy !
Vincentio. When thou art beyond it.
Francesca. I kneel to thee —a willing sacrifice—
Sheathe here thy sword—l will forgive and bless thee !
But spare Berenger—spare my lord’s disgrace—
And I will kiss the dust beneath thy feet!
Vincentio. Never —despair ! I sought thee first for love—
Now follow for revenge ! And for Berenger—
As he is partnered unto thy affection,
So is he to my hate. You scorned me once,
And every favor which you since have heaped
On him has been as canker to my soul—
Till lam swollen with enmity. Despair !
Each word of suffering entreaty now
Uttered by thee is but another joy
For my relentless spirit. Thus I seize thee—


I claim thy pledge ! Time flies, and, as we speak,
The moments, ne’er to be recalled, that I
Should pass within thy glowing arms, speed on !
Francesca. [Struggling .] Oh, spare me—spare me !
Vincentio. [ Holding her.\ Softly, as of yore,
I’d clasp thee—while thy husband slumbers in
His blood !
Francesca. Ah, dead !
Vincentio, What matters it 1
Francesca. [Wildlyi] Release thy hold—
Oh, wretch !
Vincentio. Rave on—l do not heed thy screams—
The walls are massive—and, with a finger dipt
In Lethe’s stream, the sorceress Sleep hath writ
Oblivion over all !
Francesca. Yet—yet—one moment —
One moment only—and I am yours !
[She releases herself from him, and takes from her bosom a
phial, which she applies to her lips, and then casts awayi\
Now take me —
But take me as a corse ! Oh, I can laugh for joy !
This means I reserved to free me from thee.
Fool, thou art overreached ! The victim whom
Thou didst anticipate now triumphs o’er thee !
The poison which divides us rushes through me :
Its seething venom fires within my veins,
And blackens every pore. I have defeated
Thy villainy and thee —I have preserved
My husband’s honor—
And now, thou’rt welcome, Death !
[The secret door opens, shewing the Count and
Vasari, who come through, and reclose panel .]
Vincentio. O’erreached by thee—
Still will I have revenge ! Though death be in
Thy very contact, I will brave its worst,
And dying, joy to think I’ve vanquished thee !
Count. Thou liest, slave !
[Rushing forward, stays Vincentio, who is about to
seize Francesca ; she, seeing her husband, utters
a scream and faints .]


Behold that wreck of man—
Villain, it is her father !
Vincentio. Heaven, Vasari!
Count. Father, behold thy daughter.
Vasari. lam urged
By Nature once again to gather her
Unto mine aged breast, and, as of old,
To kiss her tears away ;—But she is foul—
I dare not touch her—scarce dare pray for her !
Count. She lies upon the ground. Her pallid cheek
Seems colder than the moonlight. Not more pure,
And free from flaw, are alabaster rocks.
E’en thus might painters draw that spotless goddess—
The queen of Chastity. And is she foul 1
Let me not think of that! Sweet form, thou liest
Embraced with earth—unconscious of thy loveliness—
And of the struggles of our feelings here
’Gainst principle. If—if this trance were death ?
Did I say— Death ?
O dismal thought 1 Would I, if thou wert dead,
Be bound still in mine honor to resent
The shame that thou hast brought me —past the grave—
Or bear mine enmity unto that Judge
Before whom all are sinful ? I cannot argue
The question—thou liest now in helplessness—
Without an arm to raise thee —though thy father
Is by ; —I loved thee, my Francesca,
Beyond retraction ; —Let not cold ones then
Pass censure if I take thee in my arms !
[Kneels beside, and raises her.
Is this an object fit for enmity ?
Her gentle breath—sole sign of her existence—
Wafts sweetly o’er my sense ;—Her archSd brows
Betray no frown, but patient suffering Only
Sits there :—Those lips, though motionless,
Seem to beg pardon, and their silence owns
A moving eloquence. Could I bear thee enmity,
In the stern virtue of the Roman’s spirit
Would lie sepulchred feelings holier far,
Though less austere : —I cannot do’t—Francesca,
a


Thou lov’st me fondly—by this kiss I cancel
All memory of hatred !
Vincentio, Gen’rous soul—
And worthy thy disaster !
Vasari. Villain, peace !
She breathes again.
Count. Awake, Francesca —all
The past shall be forgotten—live again—-
The future yet is ours !
Francesca. Alas, where am 1 1
Count. Within thy husband’s arms—Oh, speak to me—
Give mo one word of comfort—say thou’lt live,
And make me happy.—See—behold thy father !
Francesca. My father—hide me from him !
Count. He forgives thee !
Live—live—and Mess us !
Francesca. Place me at your feet,
That I may pray for pardon as I die. —
All is in vain—l am poisoned.
Count and Vasari. Poisoned !
Francesca. Ay—
I’ve saved your honor, and I pay the price—
Accept th’ atonement, Heaven ! Oh, I die !
You love no yet ? (>h, let me search thine eyes—
You love me, and forgive me 1
\_Bhe looks anxiously into his eyes,—he kisses her.]
God, I thank thee !
\_Dies.
Vasari. \To Yincentio.\ Arch-fiend, behold thy work!
When first thine eye
Beheld my child, she was a glass that shadowed
Nothing but purity : —Behold her now—
A corse beneath her husband’s feet—whose life
Thy foulness has envenomed. Look on me ;
This grief-worn form was not the one that cherished
Thee —nestling viper ! in its breast.
Vincentio. - ’Tis wain
To waste more words—for that which is, must be ;
And our philosophy doth show most sound
When we ameliorate the griefs we cannot


Wholly erase. Berenger, listen to me :
I cannot mend the past—let us forget it;
Grant me immunity, and 1 will keep
Thy secret safe, nor let the babbling World
Know of thy shame.
Vasari. ’Tis well lie hears thee not —
Else would he sink thee with his scorn.
Count. [With sudden energy, starting upi\
False villain —
I hear thee, and defy thee ! Ho, Vasari—
[Crossing to door , ivhieh he opens.
Eepair by yonder passage—summon forth
My guards to seize this monster : —Till you come —
This body shall his barrier be to freedom.
Despatch at once.
[Exit Vasari.
Vincentio. Thy speed is all nnneeded—
Ho coward virtue harbors in my soul—•
I shall not fly—l tarry for revenge !
Thy shame 1 will pronounce before the World, —
And when thou writhest ’neath the names I’ll give thee,
I’ll triumph o’er thee, and defy thy weakness !
Count. Devil ! "Within thy taunt lies provocation
To tempt the Stoic’s ice-bound soul, and lap
His heart to flame ; and in this arm lies power
To punish thee : —Before my maddened eyes
Glares my' disgrace ; there wrongs—in number, gross: ess,
And in complexity—as thy plotting geidus
Know how to place them—lie unequalled
In damnable outrage ; —Thou, the cause of all,
Gloat’st o’er my misery, and sat’st thy soul
On thy Satanic work I How, though the legions
Of spirits that urge thee stood before thy' body—
In spite of all
Defence opposed, and vengeance threatened,
Thus would I rush o;. thee !
[They a few passes, Berenger's sword
is broken a little above the hilt. ]
Count. [Thrmoing aivay the fragment of his sword. ]
God’s will be done !


Vi'neentio. [Stabbing- him.'] This to thy heart!
Count. Oh, lam slain !
[He falls. — Re-enter Vasaei, with DELATOUErad
others. Vincentio is seized. Vasari and
Delatour support the Count. ]
My life is ebbing fast—seize yonder wretch—
Bear him away—l die !
Vincentio. I look around,
And see a vengeance for the worst that Fate
Can put upon me ! Fare thee well, Berenger—
We soon shall meet again ! Have with you, messire.
[Exit Vincentio, guarded.
Delatour. How doth your highness now ?
Count. The slave hath put
An end unto my days.—Before my eyes
Clouds gather, and my bloodless jaws grow stiff.
Who art thou I—Delatour.—How1 —Delatour. —How dost thou fare 1
Are our opponents peaceful for the night 1
Delatour. Dismayed by their great loss, and thence per-
suaded
Of the injustice of their cause, they craved
A truce and peace,—and all have turned home,
Owning a full defeat.
Count. ’Tis well—my Provence—
At least, I leave thee in security !
Where is Francesca 1 Travel round, my sight
Until thou find her ! What affects mine eyes 1
I see a form before me —it is she—
Raise me, and lead me to her.
[They hear him to the body of Francescai\
t How her hair,
In playful gambol, falls around her brow !
Closed are those eyes —and from the portal of
Those gently parted lips issues no breath !
That I might share my little store of life
With thee, and, in this parting kiss, convey it !
[Kisses her.
I die, Francesca —but in death thou’rt mine,
In purer union than on earth !
Her form augments—


See the bright wings that lift her —
How softly on her, through the smiling sky,
The myriad eyes of happy angels beam !
She beckons me to follow to that Home
Of Bliss whereto she’s gone !
I come ! —dearest, I come !
[Dies.
THE END.


CORRIGENDA.
Page 19, line 15 from foot of page. For “Grovel with the low,”
read “ Grovel not with the low.”
Page 54, line 1.1 from top of page. For “dost thou ” read “thou dost.’’
AV. 11. Williams, 'Prixteh, 23 Littlk Boluke st. East, Melbourne.
