

W
F
Priest Athlete
1'U nrjBMTiT M, i M -
A k
jH Hk
«iBlr : ;;lm
jhw
AW A
1| I '"•^•:1; : . ; k
Sir Patriot "S i : . v


M SYDNEY CAZ






Frederick Hulton-Sams,
The Fighting Parson.
Impressions of his five years' ministry
in the
Queensland Bush
recorded by some
who knew and loved him.
LONGREACH:
THEO. F. BARKER, PRINTER,
NOVEMBER, 1915


A pony ambles dowm the track
Into the sunset (glare,
But the rider with tliie firm free hand
No longer guide® him there.
And many a wandereer of the West,
With quivering Hip will tell
' hat the clean life loist a champion rare
When the Fightiing Parson fell.
Twas not done by elloquence
He swayed the mien who roam
Where precept and eexample missed
The swift, straiglht right, got home.
His was the quicker, surer way,
To win a wide reanown.
Some stood and listemed to the Word,
Some heard it Iyiing down.
So fighting, striving, ;to the end.
He wandered thrrough the land.
And for his cloth claiimed no respect
That he might ncot command.
And could a. call for mid have come.
Ere the last partting breath,
A hundred blackguarrds of the West
Had hedged himi in from death.
The pony ambles dowvn the track
Into the sunset ffair,
And empty though ttHie saddle seems
The spirit still riides there.
I' rora wall of hut antd shed looks down
The picture of a man,
And underneath thejy write the words
" He found salvaition's plan."
" WOOMERA " in the ' AUSTRALASIAN'.


mL
ji .«§
Lynn Photo, Rochhampton.
The Reverend Frederick Huiton-Sams.
Apri!, 1914,




Contributors.
Chapter I. THE PRIEST. The Right Reverend
the Lord Bishop of Rockhampton.
Chapter IT. FROM A WOMAN'S POINT OF VIEW.
Mrs. Rowan, of Talleyrand.
Chapter 111. THE BROTHER.
The Reverend C. M. E. Hicks.
Chapter IV. THE BROTHER.
The Reverend W. J. Park.
Chapter V. THE MYSTIC.
The Reverend B. H. B. Coulcher.
Chapter VI. THE BUSHMAN.
Mr. W. H. Watson, late of Currawilla.
Chapter VII. THE FRIEND.
Mr. K. J. Morrison, of Winton.
Chapter VIII. THE SPORTSMAN.
Mr. R. G. Barry more,
" Cestus " of the ' Northern Miner' Townsville.
Chapter IX. THE CITIZEN
Mr. R. L. H. Peterson, of Longreach,


jforcwiorfc.
Ihe contributors to this booik desire it to be understood
that no LIFE of Frederick Sams iis here attempted. Such an
undertaking were clearly uncalled for. But, none the less, they
have attempted to present differimg but justified views of him,
of his life and work, in Western (Queensland during the five and
a-half years he was a member of tlhe St. Andrew's Bush Brother-
hood, and they have purposely conlfined themselves to that period.
The final extract from a private better is added, not that details
already well known to many may be repeated-—however stirring
and magnificent—but because the deed seems to round off and
complete his character and his lifes-work as they were known in
Central Queensland. It was chairaeteristic, and therefore not
one nor two had prophesied some such glorious home-call for him
directly it was known that he hadt gone to the front.
Any collecting into a book of various impressions of a
man's life, recorded by different friends, entails the risk of
failure to present his character as a coherent whole. In his case
it is feared that this risk has not Ibeen avoided. But—for those
who did not know him, or only kiuew him slightly—it should be
pointed out that his character, at first sight so simple—was, in
reality elusive and baffling, especiially when fixed and definite
portrayal is desired. Possibly thiss quality of his character— if
no other will be conveyed to tho.sse who care to read this booklet.
It may be asked by some wlhy the publication has taken
place, and what the need. Abouit this the contributors are
fortunately in no doubt at all. They know, first, that there
aie numbers, far and near, who deeuiand some little record of one
whom many loved, and more honoired. And, next, they feel how
good and fitting it is that men shovuld he reminded, both in these
days of the Great War, and even imore in the days of reaction
that will follow, that Irederick Saims, with all his energy and
gifts, with all his bodily strength sand natural joy of life, did not
think it a weak or purposeless tilling,—nor was he ashamed—
to confess the faith of Christ cruicified, and manfully to fight
under Hi.s banner, against sin, thee world, and the devil, and to
continue Christ's faithful soldier auid servant unto his life's end.


CHAPTER I.
Gbe priest.
THE first time I saw Fred Sams was in May 1.908 in his
own home in Buckinghamshire. He had offered himself to
Bishop Dawes for St. Andrew's Bush Brotherhood, and Bishop
Dawes was too ill to accept his father's invitation to come and
speak in his parish about the Bush Brotherhood work, and asked
me to go instead. So I went to Emberton where Mr. G. F. Sams
is Rector and Rural Dean. I think we had a service in
preparation for the Pan-Anglican Congress in the afternoon of
Tuesday. There was a meeting of the clergy of the Rural
Deanery on Wednesday morning, and at night I was to give a
lantern lecture in the school, to tell the villagers something of
the country to which " Master Fred " was going.
On Wednesday morning at about 6 a.m. there was a cheery
boisterous noise increasing to uproar on. the ground floor of the
house. Fred had arrived. He had cycled from beyond Birming-
ham (some 70 or 80 miles I suppose). He had ridden in the
night after closing his boys' club at 1 1 p.m. There had been
pouring rain most of the night, and Fred reached home wet
through, in indescribable mess of mud, but hilarious and happy.
I suppose he had been got in to meet me, but he didn't
want to hear anything about Queensland, "time enough for
that when he got there himselfhe quite certainly didn't want
to spend his morning at a clerical meeting at which I was to
speak. He wanted to revel in his home with his mother and
sisters in the goodness and joy of it all ; lie wanted to go and
romp with the dogs and inspect all the other animals, and to
run out and look up the lads and the old people in the village.
And he did it. And just: as we went into the school for the
evening lecture he jumped on his cycle for another night's ride
back to his parish.


As I look back now 1 see it was typical. He was just the
same man then as the Mr. Sams out here who would burst in to any
house in Barcald.ine or Winton wiith cheery noise, and rouse all
the indolent to energy, and the dlreary to cheerfulness by his
infectious spirits, and his boundleas good nature, and who sought,
to avoid the professionalisms of a clerical meeting or of clerical
life.
Dear old Fred ! Have we ewer seen quite such unfailingly-
buoyant spirits elsewhere? Whom at length he arrived at Long-
reach as a new chum and stepped down out of the train, the shocked
" Head " and a former " Head " (mot myself) who were there to
meet him, thought he was " elevated " with liquor, and having
taken him to St. Andrew's Hous© and having shown him his
room, retired to discuss the problem. Bless him !
Frederick was the son of a clergyman and scholar. He was
educated at Harrow and at Trinity College, Cambridge. From
there he went to the Leeds Clergy School to prepare for holy orders,
for he was drawn to the ministry of the Church. I know none
of the secrets of his early life, noir how " the call " came to him,
but I know that he declared, as all priests of the Anglican
Church have to declare—" That liie thought in his heart that he
was truly called, according to the' will of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the order of the Church off England to. the order and
Ministry of Priesthood." He w;as ordained deacon in 1905,
priest in 1908, and served his first curacy at St. Paul's, Balsall
Heath in the Diocese of Birmingham.
I am asked to write of him ais a priest, and it is no easy-
thing to do, partly because in a Large scattered diocese like this
the Bishop has so little opportunity for noting the methods ot
ministry of his clergy in the fair distant places, and partly
because Fred Sams was unlike amy other priest I've ever seen.
He was unique, and had very little of the typical Anglican
priest about him. For with a giveat zeal for righteousness, and
a scorn of anything that was in .any way out of the straight,
with a mind that was transparently pure like the mind of a
pure woman—as a guide of souls, in the sense of a spiritual
physician he was probably foundl wanting.
One quality .most clearly conspicuous in Fred Sams was
his thorough naturalness. Attention has been called to it in
another paper, and T should be inclined to say—and I hope it is


not depreciating him to say it—that he was a minister of the
natural, rather than of the supernatural. Of all those natural
qualities which were in him in such richness, he ministered freely.
Of his cheeriness and joy, his kindness and sympathy and good
nature, of his strength, and skill and energy he would give with
out stint. There was nothing he wouldn't do for a man ; he
never considered himself in his desire to help, or cheer, or comfort
others. He was happy and joyous himself, and he wished every-
one else to be so, and he would do anything in his power to
bring it about.
But we have something else to minister, we have grace,
the supernatural, we have a mysterious Something which is
the life of God Himself Incarnate. We are ministers of Christ,
not only ministers sent by Him, but ministers of Him and of
His life of which we become receptive through His Spirit.
This superhuman thing is ministered by prayer, and by
entire negation of self in its ministry.
It is this the priest is seeking to use in all his ministry, in
all the sacramental acts, in all his teaching and preaching, and
in all his personal dealings with souls. And as he knows the
reality of it, so he feels the mystery of it, and laments the
hindrances he interposes to its free expression.
We priests, most of us perhaps, so often fail to commend
the Grace of God because it has not become natural to us to live
in the unseen Presence, and to draw on tiie unseen Source.
But It is there, we know of It, we know full well It's reality
and It's difference in quality from our natural gifts. We are,
anxious to express It and bring It into use, but we are not
natural about It, and It has no attraction as we try to minister
It. When Fred would speak of his uneasiness with the "holy "
men, to which reference has been made elsewhere, I think that
he meant just that fact. He recognised that they laid stress 011
a life not their own, and were conscious of something which
they considered vital ; but they were uncomfortable to live with,
because they were constrained or shy or self conscious, and
hadn't acquired a naturalness in their use of that grace of which
they were profoundly conscious. It is the mystery of the
" Christ who is our life," of the " Christ in you the hope of
glory."
On this truth of the priesthood 1 think that Fred dwelt


but slightly ; and when T spealfc of it as a truth of the priest-
hood, I intend to imply something which is common to all the
baptized ; but inasmuch as the ordained priests are the repre-
sentatives of the whole body oft' the baptized, they ought to be
the representative spiritual mein.
No doubt the bushman would say he would far rather have
dealings with the truly naturall man, and that such a man will
do far more good than the othesr type, and some of us, going far
in agreement with him, would llament that we are such unnatural
exponents of the supernatural. But it is the other type which
will reach with sure touch the ireally deepest things of life, the
inmost longings and aspirations, the sorrows and the sins, the
hopelessness, and the tragedies of men.
If the bushman's business is to seek only to live straight
and to refrain from doing morail wrong, he may need no more
than a helping hand, but if heiis to rise to the life he is meant for,
which is actual union with Goill, sharing His life and happiness,
then such an issue is impossible apart from the supernatural
grace of God which is the very life of God Incarnate ; then he
needs to be strengthened witlli might by God's Spirit in the
inner man, that Christ may dwell in his heart by faith.
But if the sacramental sidle of Fred Sams' religion was not
greatly developed, at the sarnie time he never attempted to
disguise his priesthood. I don'it think that anyone would ever be
oblivious to the fact that Frederick Hulton Sams was a clergy-
man even in the very boxing riing. And further, though I have
written of him as above, I hasve something to set against it.
I can never forget being told off some woman who had brought
herself to open out the burden .and sorrow of her heart to one
of the clergy, and speaking ©f it afterwards she said with
relief "I never thought I coulffl have done that to anyone except
to Mr. Sams." Quite probably he was the recipient of many-
confidences. Further, if as has been said, " The inwardness of the
priesthood is the Spirit of Sacrifice," then we know that this
spirit was in Fred Sams in full measure. He never thought of
himself in life, and, as we know now, he died in the attempt to
do something for others, crawling from cover to fetch water for
his wounded men. Two thimgs are essential in a Christian
priest:—" Devotion to his Lontfl, and love for his fellow men."
Both these Fred had. Of the reality of his love for our Lord,


1 got an insight once when he was driving me from Barcaldine
to Aramac, and we were talking of one who had lost his faith.
It appeared in the characteristic spirit of utter loyalty to the
point of sacrifice, readiness to go on a crusade, readiness to
endure to the. point of martyrdom. His love for his people 1
could see when he would take me round the part of the parish
where he was residing at the time, how unwilling he was that
anyone should he left out, and in the little hurried notes lie
would make to me as we came to a door, was a revelation of
how well he knew all his people, and how he remembered the
troubles of individuals and really felt them. He had a wonder-
ful sympathy with anyone in sorrow, and was always ready to
make allowances for their failings. Whenever he came to
Rockhampton he would go to the hospitals to see any patients
who had come from the west, and lie would try to visit eveiy
person he had ever known in the brotherhood district, who had
come to settle in Rockhampton. lam sure, too, that doing it
was a real relief to him, even though it was- always a rush and
took much out of him when he was supposed to be having the one
holiday of the year. For Synods were a weariness to him, and
retreats and quiet days were penances to be endured He never
spared himself. There are stories of his sitting up all night
witl the aged or helpless to cheer them—there are stories of
amazing acts of endurance and persistence in order to fulfil
engagements and. official duties, fie would do anything for his
boys to make them truly manly Christians. I. only heard him
preach once in this country. I heard him give a chaiming
address to children last September in his father's Church and
I can easily believe when I am told that his sermons impressed
young and old. He was always direct and outspoken, and
behind his words was his obviously sincere character.
For Fred Sams' ministry in Central Queensland 1 am
profoundly thankful. He reached and touched men to whom
the ordinary parish priest never gets near. He commended the
Church and religion to men in the far " never never," if only
because he had himself chosen the ministry as''a profession.
He attracted men, and I know that though his personality was
the means, yet the last thing he sought to do was to draw them
to himself ; it was all part of his ministry for his Master. He
visited in the name of Christ far distant stations which had


never been visited in the history of the Brotherhood. His
ministry was exercised in a district which demanded pioneer
work, and few men could have' been more adapted to do that
pioneer work with advantage to) tin; Church they served. lam
sure that the example of his Me will be used for a long time to
come to help and stimulate rmany of that large number who
knew and loved him irrCentral! Queensland.
C EMRCI'I, Bis 11 or of Bock ham ptox.


CHAPTER 11.
from a Wloman's point of UMew.
Praise me not too much
for thou s pea Ices t to the Greeks
Who know me.
Little lighting parson, whom everybody loved, what shall I
say about you, when already so much lias been written and told,
by those who knew you more intimately than I did 1
That, on a slight acquaintance only, 1 held for you always
a cordial liking and a sincere admiration, is only one more
small proof of the feeling you aroused wherever you went.
There was something so HUMAN about you ! It was this note
in your character that appealed to me most strongly. Aou did
not give me the impression that you had a more privileged
familiarity with GOD than I had—a big item this, I think, in
the summing up of a clergyman's personality,
And in this trait I believe there lay the secret of your
power in reaching men's hearts.
You had the supreme gift of imparting the meaning of
God, without in any way covering yourself in godliness.
* * ■* * * *
It is the little personal anecdotes of the man which make the
story vivid in the telling. They seem to conjure up a word
picture that no long, discoursive dissection of character can hope
to equal. 1 think I can recall one or two about you.
The first was at Talleyrand about three and a-lialf years
ago when you came to officiate at the christening of our
younger son. The ceremony was being carried out with all due
reverence, but the baby, a valiant person, persisted in giving
vent to feelings palpably outraged, in a manner that the
superstitious Irish would term "Getting rid of the devil and


good luck for sure " when he flung up one protesting hand and
landed it, in what you described afterwards as "a dirty left"
full m your face. Then the name having been duly pronounced,
you hurriedly turned and deposited the white bundle into the
arms of its attendant god-mother, and facing back to your
congregation, you gave the most unconscious, the most masculine,
and the most audible sigh of profound relief.
* * * * * * * # #
The other anecdote I remember happened at dinner. It
was shortly after you had won a medal at Charters Towers, and
your victory had provided a popular topic of conversation among
the people out in Western Queensland. Once again you were
spending a night with us at Talleyrand. I congratulated you
on your success, I said I supposed you were really very proud
of that medal of yours. You had a habit sometimes of bunching
up your shoulders and thrusting your head forward before
speaking. You did it now. Into your eyes there crept the
tenderest, the most indulgent of smiles. I think you were
looking far across the blue sea for a moment or two. " Ah, well,"
you said "It pleases my old mother you know. I always send
them home to her."
* * * * * * * *
The bravest and best. Always the bravest and best!
With what gentle amusement you would have derided the
idea, that when you died you would leave so great a monument
behind you.
Yet here it rises—out of the misery, the sadness and the
turmoil of the present day, shining like a steadfast star in an
angry sky, it towers a monument at once arresting, likely to
endure, very beautiful—the little fighting parson— < A Majestic
Memory.'
E, ROWAN.


CHAPTER 111.
Abe Brother.
It has been pointed out, with considerable reason, that
there are two points of view from which Frederick Hulton Sams
can be regarded as a Brother in the St. Andrew's Bush Brother-
hood. There is the aspect of him as a Brother among Brothers.
There is also the aspect of him as a Brother, from the point of
view of the head of the Brotherhood, from the point of view
of the " boss," as he himself might have put it. This latter
aspect will form the subject of the present chapter.
But, before anything else, it is necessary to point out the
difficulty of putting down on paper any clear idea of him and
his character. Indeed, one knows more of his nature than of
himself; less of what he thought and felt, than of what he did.
My own impression is that he was extraordinarily natural in
what he did and said, but that this naturalness was often
modified by two important qualifications, both of which need
some consideration. These qualifying factors were, first, his
English training and conservatism, and, next, his wonderful
sensitiveness and tact. That he was more NATURAL than most
of us, was apparent to all who knew him. He was, as so many
have pointed out, exactly the same in the drawing room as in
the boundary rider's hut ; in the bush hotel as in the station
homestead ; by the drover's camp tire, as beside the bed of sickness.
Again, he occasionally said things to people, in a perfectly
natural way, that very few others could haVe said without giving
offence. And, with regard to religious observances and exer-
cises, where he was himself concerned, he seemed quite fearless
in expressing his opinion—sometimes, even, almost gratuitously
aggressive, because he was so natural. W hen he said to me,
as he did one night, when we two were camped out between
Bedourie and Boulia and had first said Evensong together by


the red light of our camp fire,—« I can always worship best at
night. Gon seems nearest to mie then," he was not belittling
the Eucharist ; most certainly Hie was not decrying the experience
of those who find in ft the greatest help in life. He was simply
and naturally explaining—in one of his rare moments of
revelation—what was the case with him. lie criticised nobodv
tor his views. Perhaps he did .not try much to understand the
other point of view, hut he wan; candid and natural about his
own. So, too, none of us who. heard it, will ever forget the
inimitable, playfully agressive, way in which he blurted out one
morning at breakfast at I,is Esc®p—« Well my Lord ' I suppose
you and these other holy fellow® will be doing some knee-drill
before lunch. I've noticed ttthat the episcopal lawn wants
rolling. So I'll just put in a little solid work about then.'"
11 was natural and characteristic. He clearly believed « laborare
est orare."
And so his naturalness was; obvious to all. And yet how
often those two factors already .mentioned not merely modified
but often occluded, it. First ihe was intensely English and
COXSHRVATJVE. He hated fuss, and feared emotion. 1 have
heard him boast of never having been moved to tears since the
early days of childhood. He helld fast to all that was best in
the tradition and life-equipment of a great English public school
He often expressed his disgust ait all Radical notions, and had a
firm, if scantily informed, loyalty to the established Church of
England. And then, though MO natural and spontaneous in
action, ni thought and attitude, he was often surprisingly
stereotyped and conservative. For instance, I well remember in
the early days of on, work together we were discussing in our
Chapter meeting the advisability, of not wearing robes in the
conduct of mission services in shearing sheds. I was myself
disposed to think them a hindramce, rather than a help. It
was Frederick—to my surprise)—who showed the greatest
opposition to what Would have been a departure from the
practice of the Brotherhood. Autd his argument was simply—
•• They "—the congregations—" ttihey expect us wear our robes."
At the same time it was he who proposed—and so stronglv
advoeated at the only Conferenaie of the Australian Brother-
hoods we have yet been able to liodltl, the sending out of one or
two clergy with roving counnissioms to tackle the real problem


of all the Brotherhoods' work—the far-out hush.
Next; we all noticed his extraordinary SENSITIVENESS MFFI
TACT. There is no need to trace these further back to their
source—-his loving and gentle nature—but they deserve a little
reflection, because they were, as I have said, quite extraordinary.
To them, probably, must be ascribed the fact that most people
looked on him as quite colonised, a regular bushman. But he
never was, and never would have been, though he adapted him-
self marvellously. Boxing had no brutalising effect on him ;
his wonderful strength and the equipoise of his body did not
make him hard or callous, or forgetful of the nerves and feelings
of others. Quite the contrary. The unexpected prominence of
this tact and sensitiveness in him often obscured the main
principle of his life, —-which seemed to be natural, free, un-
trammelled, spontaneous activity. So his methods, though direct,
were never blundering ; his ministrations never forced on people.
In fact I believe, he could have done, and successfully done, much
more of the routine work of our Ministry than he did, but that
he was apprehensive of going too quickly. His sensitiveness in
many directions was most marked. He could not bear to see
anything in pain, least of all a child. He hated ants and crows
lie once told me—the former represented relcntlessness, the
tatter brutality, to hi in. And those who have seen crowds of
ants swarming over some dead or dying thing, or have watched
the sinister crow with his ominous croak, after the eyes of some
weakening sheep, will understand his feelings. He would be
quite unmanned bp the sight of a woman's tears, and actually
shrank from sick-bed, and even more from death-bed ministra-
tions. This was not because he minimised this privilege of his
pastoral office, but because he felt so much. Ido not think he
could have made a very good chaplain at the front—-judged,
that is, by the duties which are essentially a chaplain's ;
though of course his comradeship and the inspiration of his
courage and simple faith would, by themselves, have been no
small forces for dying soldiers to have come into contact with
His sensitiveness might so easily have stayed his hands and
hindered his ministrations. But this very sensitiveness it was
—this feeling for outraged womanhood, trampled childhood.
England menaced, Belgium incarnadined—that sent him hurry-
ing to the ranks of Lord Kitchener's Army, the moment he
found a chaplaincy denied him.


These two so noticeable qualities, then, made him a most
difficult man to know, and I doubt if any of us really knew the
man as he was, —and of course, still is. 1 picture to myself,
when 1 think of him, not a great man (he certainly was not
that), but a man of great heart ; not a complex character (such
as perhaps, this little book, by its different points of view, may
portray him), but a simple child-like nature, single and direct,
yet like every child's nature, flashing out in its energy and
activity, now in this direction, now in that. He was as
natural as a child ; as conservative as a child ; as sensitive as a
child ; and as thoughtful of the feelings of others. Indeed lie
had the heart of a child, and we who worked with him as
brothers knew that by the example of the CHEAT CHILD, who
was GOD HIMSELF, and by all that old England, his home, the
home of the free, even as children are free, had given him, he
had " become as a little child," and therefore, we believe, had
" entered the Kingdom of GOD " long before his call home came.
What, then, was most noticeable about Frederick Sams as
I knew him in the Brotherhood 1 There was one most noticeable
and outstanding thing—his loyalty. Of this it will be difficult,
and increasingly difficult, as I go on, to write, both because it is
very difficult to convey true impressions without slightly—or
even more than slightly, colouring them, when one deals with
details of personal relationship, and also because—if I may
record a feeling of my own—l am increasingly conscious how
profoundly thankful I ought to be, that I have had the privilege,
so entirely unmerited, of such loyalty and devotion as his.
There is no doubt about this loyalty. The other Brothers knew
of it, and must often have found it, as someone expressed it,
" quite embarrassing." For it was very difficult to get him to
express an opinion, so ready was he to fall in with what J
desired. " You just tell me to do what you want, and I'll do
it," was constantly said by him and was expressive of his regular
attitude. " Don't ask me if I'd mind doing a thing : just tell me
to do it" he said on more than one occasion. When voting had
to be resorted to in a Chapter meeting, to settle some question
or other, it was always certain which way lie would vote, and
sometimes such an action must have seemed simply perfunctory.
Perhaps, this line of his may be explained partly by his
dislike of accepting responsibility, whether of decision or of


action, and partly by his distrust of his own judgment. We,
who knew him, can picture him saying—" Oh !lam a fool at
these things ; but tell me what you want, and I'll do it." But
such explanations arc really inadequate. For what prompted
this line of action more than anything else was undoubtedly his
loyalty—-such loyalty as is marvellous to see. It springs into
being full grown, and is unconquerable. It is unquestioning
and asks not " Why ?" At first I though such indications, as I
noticed, of this great quality, were rather signs of indolence or of
mental slackness. I thought he just could not be bothered to
make up his mind, or decide between the pros and cons of some
plan or policy. But I soon altered my opinion. He offered,
me, and I helped myself lavishly, of his great and glorious
loyalty.
The word loyalty, I suppose, can hear either its earlier, or
its later, meaning. It can, by its derivation, signify mere deference
to law, to authority—mere obedience ; or it can signify all that-
further wealth cf meaning with which we generally use it—not
mere deference to law, but glad surrender of rights ; not bare
following, but willing and glad obedience. And as to which
sense of loyalty appealed to old Frederick there is no doubt,
i t is true he was by training and tradition a great believer in
authority as such. It was quite sufficient for him that the
"head" or " the boss," wished something done. It would be
done. He had a great sense of the deference due to authority,
even though lie was sometimes strong enough to take his own
line against authority. He had an ingrained, and rather timid,
respect for an office. lam sure our Bishop will not mind if I
put clown what I know is true —-that it was (quite without
reason) the office, and that only, that prevented Frederick from
making himself better known to our Bishop. The office—with
all its English associations—-prevented that breaking down of a
little reserve on Frederick's side, which I believe would have
come in latter years. "I am frightened of the Bishop "he said
to me two or three times—-but he didn't really mean that. It
was the office that got in his way. We must all have noticed,
too, that he never while in the Diocese (so far as I knew)
addressed the Bishop, except as "my lord "—which is the verv
last thing our Bishop wants, or expects. There was, then,
clearly marked, his deference to authority as such. He would


do what fie was fold, even if he secretly douhted the wisdom of the
order, or wanted to do something quits different. But 1 earn
honestly state —and it humbles me to write it—that I kno-w his.
loyalty in the Brotherhood meant much more tlian mere
obedience or bare deference. And in writing this. 1 mean
loyally to the Brothers—of which more later—as. well as to
myself.
It is right to point out, especially for English readers, how
wrong it is for anyone to imagine that the Brothers, have many
opportunities of getting to know one another. At times we
seem to be but a brotherhood in name, so few are our chances of
meeting, and so great is the amount of tedious detail and plan-
ning about the work that has to be faced, when we do meet.
But of course we are much more than just a brotherhood in
name, and, thank GOD, several true and tested friendships, that
will be life-long, have already come about between Brothers
and there will be more. But opportunities of real quiet leisurely
unburdenment a nd revealing are quite infrequent, and I. therefore
am indeed thankful for the chances 1 have had of getting to
know Frederick well—now that such chances on earth are over,
fn January 11)11 we had three weeks together; in the last
quarter of 1913 we had a long trip in the far west, and on these
trips 1 had the best opportunities of getting to know him. It
would interest some, perhaps, to have a further account of these
journeys, especially of the latter, but this is not the place for
that. lam concerned with demonstrating his loyalty as 1. try-
to give a glimpse of him as a Brother. His loyalty was perhaps
made a little more possible by the fact that we got on so well
together. We saw eye-to-eye in many things, and where we
differed, we generally appreciated each other's point of view.
The first glimpse he gave me of his view of our relationship was
when I had been in the country about a month, and we were
driving over from Winton to Muttaburra, under trying con
ditions—the summer rains, in fact. I was driving the ponies
and he was lolling back in the buggy with his feet up, and he
suddenly said —" Oh ! Kickers ! lam so thankful you are not
one of those holy men 1" I knew what he meant, and it was
something for him to say as much as that. On our longer trip
in the far west he insisted on my driving in the buggy while lie
did the " horse-tailing." I voted for an equal division of labour,


so that we might take the buggy work and horse-driving in
turns. But he wouldn't hear of it. "No ! I won't allow it.,''
he said, "You're the boss, and the boss never drives the horses ;
he always sits in the buggy." That was certainly the construc-
tion put. on the situation, as he himself related in one of his
farewell speeches, by the black " boy" near Bedourie. One
Sunday morning Frederick and I, on our way to Cluny Station,
met the manager of the station and a black " boy." They turned
back with us, as the visits of the clergy out there are too few
to sanction absence when they do occur. The manager rode
beside me as I drove along, and behind us more slowly (as one
of our horses was knocking up) rode Frederick and the black
" boy." The latter, so Frederick said, made but three remarks
in as many hours, but, as he pointed out, they were practical.
Pointing ahead to me in the buggy " That fellow the boss 5"
said the black " boy." "Yes! He the boss " replied Frederick.
An hour's silence, then came "He good boss?" and the reply,
"Yes! He good boss." Another hour and the statement was
made, " Good job he good " boss," eh?"
Later in the trip, when our buggy horses knocked up and
we had to ride, and later still, even to borrow horses, he
always took the worse or the more tired horse. It wasn't
because of kindheartedness merely, but because he thought that
such an action was due to the head. Any difference there
might be should be in the head's favour. Ho, throughout our
trips he did whatever ! wished, and nothing that I wanted done
was too small for him to do, though he did not always trouble
about details himself when alone.
Once only did I see him a little impatient, and that was
when we were both getting pretty tired and were anxious on
account of our horses. We were getting near Boulia, and he
wanted—though I did not know it—to turn off the. track at a
certain point, and get some water for his horse. He was riding
some way ahead and had inadvertently passed what was ob_
viously the land mark we had been told was the indication where
the water was to be found. T was too far behind to call to him
and did not mention it to him when I caught him up a couple
of miles further on. But a little later, when he enquired where
on earth the water could be, and I told him we had passed it
he seemed a little vexed, and said " 1 wish you had told me


before." However, he was his old self again in live minutes,
and I only record this trivial incident as being the solitary
occasion on which I saw him a little out of temper.
It was difficult to get him (out of bed in the morning and
he used to say that he wouldn't get out of bed for anyone but
the head, but if the head ordercwd him he would start getting up
at once. And it was just as difficult out in the bush as in St.
Andrew's House. Many a mourning 1 have roused him to go
after the horses in the silence ®f a bush dawn on some great
plain or beside some glimmering water hole, and lie was nearly
always loth to get up. But 1 Ibad only to say " Well ! Frederick
let me get in the horses for oneie, and you make breakfast ready "
(which latter was my duty on trihe trip) and he would spring up,
rub his eyes, and dash off after the horses. He couldn't have
me fetching in his horses, he would say. But the following
story will show better than anything else, perhaps, his loyalty
in the smallest tiling. We wewe slowly making our way north-
wards from Bedourie, and were; having a very rough time, with
little grass, bad water, and dry camps at night. We had to put
into the Georgina River for waiter, and if we did not find it in one
channel, we would have to drikve on to another until we did.
One morning, after a dry campi we had had a drive of eight or
ten miles, much of it very rough, before we got to water about
10 a.m., and we staved until ft p.m. before moving on. The
rough ground had broken sonite of the wooden springs of the
buggy, and so, before starting ioff, T lay down on the ground
beneath it and repaired them with wire and string. I took out
of my pocket a large knife, whiich 1 still have and prize very
much, because it was given to line by a boy friend before I left
England, and I laid it down 0111 the ground as I worked. When
I wriggled out from under the buggy I forgot the knife, and
harnessed and yoked up the hotrses, and made a start, without
thinking of it. About a couple; of miles further on I remem-
bered it and shouted to Frederick to stop. On reaching him I
told him and asked him to juirnp into the buggy and lend me the
horse he was riding to go back and recover it. But he would
not hear of it. He must go, amd he would go, and that was the
end of it. Of my going on aniother six miles till it began to get
dark, and then making our camip for the night on a hill-side :
of my hurriedly trying to get a little wood—which was very
scarce, and that, being green, would not burn : of my firing


little clumps of spinifex at intervals so tliat Frederick might see
where I was; of his return to camp about mid-night and of his
explanations of how he had missed his way through trying to
take a short-cut across country ; of his trying to rectify his
error, only to get in a worse plight than ever; of his decision
to strike right across country so as to come—if he could-—upon
our previous track, which he did, and discovered himself nearly-
back at the camp of the night before ; of his hurried ride to our
mid-day camp, and of his finding the knife at once, but only just
as the darkness fell, and as he and his horse saw the first of my
beacon-fires, of his steering across country by their intermittent
aid—of these things I have the most vivid recollection—because
for hours I feared that lie had had some accident, and that,
while out searching for a knife of mine carelessly left behind.
These were things, among others, over which we had promised
ourselves the luxury of long talks in the leisured future—but
they will not now be in this life.
Frederick's loyalty, springing as it did, from no merely bare
obedience, but from unreserved acquiescence and unselfishness, re-
sulted in something further that I! must be forgiven for attempting
to describe, but which was very marked, even when I was near
by to notice it. This was what I may call the offer to me of
his ADMIRATION. His loyalty led him to admire without ques-
tion and .often perhaps, without discrimination or reason. He
took such pride in his head. He loved to clean harness and
groom horses so that " the head might be turned out in style,"
as he often said. He was far more particular than I myself
about the clothes I wore. "We must show off our Head " he
would say. I shall not forget the pride (it was really that)
with which he " tootled " me down to Ilfracombe soon after I
had arrived, and introduced me to all our friends in that little
town. " L've brought the new Head to see you," he would
shout out at the doorway of each place we visited, until I begged
him to drop a , few of the references to " the head." They
seemed such absurd "swank " —as we say in the bush. But he
was perfectly sincere in his reference to my position as " primus
inter pares." Right through the long trip we took together,
though we had previously arranged to share Celebrations and
addresses equally, whenever his turn came to undertake either, and
I reminded him, he would say—" Oh ! well ! if you wish it, I


will. But you know you're the boss, and the people really
want you. It's you they expect." He was too simple and
unselfish, dear fellow, to know that my name will long have
been forgotton out in the west, while his will go 011 handed down
generation after generation, and that, because of what he was,
much more than for what he did.
Of his WORK AS A BROTHER 1 ought not to say much, as
that part of it which was, perhaps, of the greatest value—his
pioneering—-will be found referred to under the chapter headed
" The Bushman," —while of his work as a clergyman the Bishop in
the first chapter, and Mrs. Rowan in the second have spoken. But,
perhaps, I should emphasise that chief characteristic of it, his
CHEERFULNESS. It is no small thing, (as the layman, too, can
understand) in work like ours to have cheerfulness well
developed—slightly emphasised, perhaps—in the worker. If
cheerfulness be essential—as we are assured it is—in an army
or in a besieged city, for a successful ultimate issue,' —then 110
less is it essential in our army of the Church, and besieged as
we are by the powers of evil. And Frederick was always
cheerful. I remember, how, at one of the early chapter meetings
of the Brotherhood at which I presided, I suggested, amongst
other things, for our guidance as we planned the work in a
general way, that for the ensuing five years we should insist,
as a minimum, on visiting Jundah and Boulia twice a year each
and emphasised the claim—as it seemed to me—that those
places have on us. I further said that 1 thought that we ought
to " tackle " J undah at once. " Righto !" he cheerily remarked
"I am off to-morrow to Jundah. Which horses' shall I take 1"
So he would have started off as cheerily on a three hundred mile
trip with horses—those were not the days of the frequent motor
car—as he would invite a friend to have a spar with him. His
example, too, of unfailing hope and cheerfulness —almost to the
point of foolhardiness—when we two struggled on for a fort-
night in the rainy season with a pair of ponies and anything but
hopeful prophecies from our friends, will always be in my mind,
if I want an example of the amazing difference that hopefulness
can make in undertaking even the most depressing work. He
loved the west, and so perhaps he could feel cheerful when
others could not. We shall none of us forget the charming wav
in which he would scan the preferments column of the


11 Guardian," to see, as he said, whether they had made him
Archdeacon of Birdsviile, or anywhere, and used, in jest, to
refer to himself occasionally as " St. Frederick of Betoota."
How cheerfully he undertook everything that came his way we
all know. I picture him just after I first knew him, begging to
be allowed to swim across the swollen Thompson River —a
matter of five miles or so, with treacherous currents, and snakes
and scorpions to dispute every stopping place with him, and it
was only when I absolutely forbad such unnecessary risk that
he gave way. But I remember well with what cheerfulness he
helped pull the boat—-indeed he did more than his share—next
day, which was Sunday—-and how he caught the train down
to Barcaldine, and took Evensong there in place of a sick
brother, after a three hours' railway journey, as if there had
been no exhausting experiences through which he had had to go
during the previous three weeks.
And what of his VALUE AS A BROTHER among Brothers ?
It was of course great, though, possibly, not so great as might
have been thought by the outsider. Frederick was individualis-
tic and went his own way a great deal. He did not say much
about the bond that links us Brothers, though T know that he
did not overlook it. It was for the Brotherhood that he. left
Winton one Friday morning in heavy rain, and rode right
through those hundred and twenty-five long miles to Longreach
by the following Sunday night. He must have ridden all the
time, and through both nights, if, indeed, he did not walk and
lead his horse, a great deal of the way. Of course it may have
been that he came over to see me, as we had not then met, but
clearly that was not the principal reason, because he could have
come at any later time after the rain had stopped, to do that.
Besides, as he told me later, he dreaded meeting me, fearing,
perhaps, that I would prove too " holy " a man for him 1 No 1
He knew one of the Brothers—George Richardson—was leaving
for England on the Monday morning at eleven o'clock, and he
determined, despite the rain, to be in time to see him off. And
he was.
He would defend a Brother when criticised, and would
always suggest some good reason for any line of conduct adopted
by a Brother that he himself would not have taken, perhaps.
Always kind in his judgements, he was doubly so in the case of


the Brothers. He WJIS not <' l man who inji.de many deep friend-
ships. He was everybody's friend. So sometimes his enormous
popularity seemed to cause unfair claims to be made upon his
time when we had him with us. But " Frederick was a law to
himself we Jill jigreed, and his very unaccountableness made
him all the dearer. And in the matter of work he was always
anxious to do more than his share, and to be allowed to undertake
the most difficult task, if there were any difference in the
divisions of the work. He proposed (much as he had looked
forward to, and planned, his great trip in the west with me)
at the last minute almost, tint Guy Roxby should go with rue
in his place on that trip. I thought the change of plans
unwise, and said so, but 1 could not but recognise what he was
offering to give up by the suggestion. Of course poor old Guy-
left us before the trip could be started and we delayed it.
We shall never forget, either, at the time of that fatal
iliness of Guy s, how Frederick was in Jericho when we were
summoned to Aramac, and how he declared on the telephone
that he would only be perfectly miserable if he didn't join us,
though how he could do it in the time, we had no idea. Of that
awful ride of his of over fifty miles, with the friendly lengths-
man, in the steady rain, against time, on a little railroad trollev
such as he had never worked before, I often think with wonder.
He would not say much of it himself, but neither was he willing
to show us his hands, which, hard a.s they were, were in :i
frightful state after the seven hours' toil.
1 hese things, then, strike me most about him as the
Brother—his naturalness, often qualified by his conservatism
and sensitiveness : his loyalty to the Brotherhood and to myself
his inspiring cheerfulness. I feel that they all sprang from the
ruling principle of his life—his keenness—which was symbolised
and found expression in that extraordinary activity which was
the wonder, even of the athletes. This keenness was noticeable
behind the very last sermon 1. heard him preach. It was in far-off
little Boulia, and on St. Andrew's Day. '• Follow ye after ME,
and L will make you to become fishers of men" was his text.
Sams was a fisher of men. Thank GOD for his fishing.
C. M. E. HICKS.


CHAPTER IV.
cbc Brotber.
I shall not forget die first time 1 met Sams three of us
were at Longreach at St. Andrew's tide waiting for the two
It was during the evening fairly late, when there was a terrible
dfiHn the lane, and I make out what was happening,
bu- y and two ponies and the driver yelling out at the top of
h,s voTce. It was only Sams coming home from a western trip.
He came in-we were introduced, and we all spent the rest of the
night much as it was begun. The next morning he was
respondenoe, or rather adding to the piles of accumulated lottos
alreadv overflowing their natural bounds. He was, no.
lover of chaos, at all events not a stranger to it.
Frederick was never obviously a Brother. He went his own
cheerful way too much. He seemed always so irresponsible.
H. had hi. own private plana He would wdhngly cut .
public engagement in favour of a private one, 1 ie cou i •
And yet, though not obviously, he certainly was a Brother
in , real sense. Ho was never unbrotherly though often ho
failed to conform thymus —of
Ztta bos but hi d,d no, care to », so. He pretested to pro,,
it hv deeds. And so he would love to C.rr, a message, or
1de.,1 an errand in, a brother. He drsbked
,b„w, or rathor display, of emotron He theretojec»d o
strain the bond of Brotherhood m such a way. Thus
little of what unites us as brothers. But he was not unmmd
of it His attitude was rather that of a good a
~ friend. He was more the schoolboy among his pals
than a grown soldier fighting shoulder to shoulder wfth other,
whom a vast and a common cause unites for ever.
He would in a practical way assert himself as a brother in


looking-on all things as common. If he lost a collar stud be
ot , h9r br ,° therS ' r ° OmS t,H he foun(l anoth <^
He would borrow i„e„, boots, razors, anything, with the remark
U old - w ,ll no t m)nd i" And no OQe did
UlB to Picture Frederick's week-day as we knew it
Frederic! II h W ° lM at St Andrew 's House."
rederick will be allowed the bath room last-though called
long before. He will be lying i„ bed Wlth a co
ZZZZ , ™" ™ k '" si>l » d " l l—s. of
hating to be roused. "He , s a f ree man ! It's too early to get
up. . man things best at two in the morning! He is at his
worst at seven ! He will have another half hour, Whatever
happens ! 1 resently after more solicitation he jumps out and
to the'ven 17 h 6 , iT' (> PSrhaP ' fl ° P ai ' rot fastened
to the \erandah rail starts screeching, and Frederick can sleep
no more. He yells and screams back at the bird, and the quiet
clergy house becomes a home of no.se and racket. H.s 7od
fori I 7 aSSOr I. fchemS u elves and we h ear Frederick warbling
for all to hear ' Alice, where art thou?" or » I hear you calling
me, interrupted by the remark "I'm in remarkably good void
is morning; or as he shaves, "Im really looking quite
hancbome to-day!" He slips into the Church hard by, and is
a different being—quiet and devout. At breakfast he will
enunciate some Lory notions and condemn all who think
otherwise. Or unexpectedly he will demand the meaning of
some old English phrase from one of the morning Lessons.
, K ER TH R a ? 7 w 7 take hls old dog for a stroll - whiie he
n ets the Brotherhood mail from the post office. The dog is a
FfifT 7 ' M ' V6l ' y ,llseased > very dear. He was adopted
y master for two nominal reasons, but there is another
truer, one. Frederick asked to bring him home, first because he
was a dog with true Church traditions. In the little town m
which he lived he would always attend Church whenever the bell
was rung and on one occasion—a very wet Easter mornim*-
„ hiB master "™re the only worshippers at the first
sei vice. Then, too, he would eat anything and verything that
he came across, except the poisoned bait. Alas ! Togo when
once accepted at the Brotherhood house, neither ever darkened
a Church door nor, on the last day of his life, refused one
seductive bait at any rate. The real reason of his adoption was
because no one really wanted him and Frederick took pity on
his diseased old age. J


Later on Frederick will be back, having apparently in half-
an hour, heard all the news and seen everyone, including five or
six way-backers " who are all coming to tea to-morrow, so don't
forget, and be sure and give them a decent feed ; they have all
been jolly good to me." ! Then he will start on the buggy which
needs washing and preparing for the next bush trip. He will
suddenly remember, too, that his dog needs a bath, and will set
about ic with much noise and talk to the poor beast. Or he
will go and groom a pair of ponies to be used later in the day.
Then ho may sit down and make several attempts at writing
home. But this letter will not be finished, probably, until
1.a.m., and he will then " stroll down and post it on the train
when it arrives."
After lunch he will settle down for a good sleep before
tackling his visiting. This, when it is started, will consist of
dashing round from one house to another, cheering people, telling
them of their duties, seeking out likely boys for his boxing and
candidates for confirmation classes. He will come back late for
the evening meal, and miss some of Evensong. Then he will
really wake up, and prepare for boxing, for a visit to the " soft
drink " shops, for more visiting, pulling people out of bed, if
necessary, to come and talk to him, for a lcng run out into the
bush, for a quiet read. He will sit up long after others are
asleep and spend hours with the poets letting their beauty of
language and ideas sink into his mind.
Such was his simple, happy-go-lucky nature, so lovable
in its quaintness and activity. As such we shall always think
of him, and for him as such we are thankful.
WALTER .J. PARK.


"Prater ad B'ratrem."
YOUR body sleeps beneath the Flemish sod
In some rich plainland ! where the breezes wave
The poplar branches o'er your early grave.
Your soul is kept between the hands of God !
You loved to live ; and with the poet's mind
You had your joy of earth and air and sun;
Life's game you played ; you loved it cleanly won ;
Neither in wit nor mirth were you behind.
You lived to love ; your Master's call was here ;
It was for Him you boxed as well as preached ;
You won men's hearts, and God by you they reached
You helped by love their course aright to steer.
Your years with us of joy and work and prayer
Were promises of happy times to be
In our dear homeland, girt with hill and tree,
Where we could talk of all that happened here.
But England claimed you ; you had other ties
Of priesthood, home, and joy of friendships won.
You could have rested without blame from one.
But England claimed you, bade you arm and rise.
You went to die ; yet in our hearts you are,
And ever will be by our mutual love.
Your Flemish grave divides; but Christ above
Will in Communion bring you from afar.
E. H. B. COULCHER


CHAPTER V.
cbc fli>y»stic.
Those who knew Frederick casually as they met him
in the world of sport or as he visited them in the
hush or in the townships of the West, have probably
regarded him as a cheerful sunny careless soul, full of high
spirits and the joy of life -free and generous and gallant. He
was all these, but they were surface qualities only. He had a
deeper side that he did not let people see very much of; even
amongst the Brothers and their intimate life with each other,
there were flashes of it only now and then It was that side of
him that made him ready and willing to answer the call of His
Master to the priesthood of the English Church. He was a
mystic ; not a great one but the thing was there in him all the
time. I is the only word that I can think of in the English
language that describes this side of his manifold and complex
character. A mystic is one who looks on life with all its
realities and possibilities as a series of mysteries which he can
never fully understand, even if he tries. His mind is too finite
to embrace the whole of life. Nature with all her forces and
unplumbed depths was to him a mysterious fact which embraced
him round. Yet because he did not understand her, she was
with him all the more ; above all, God was the greatest of
mysteries. Neither He nor any of His works could be fully
grasped by the mind which was too powerless for the task. Yet
this limitation of the mind was no reason for disbelief. It
rather quickened the faith and the sense of awe life could
possess. The mystic knows more because he knows less. He
is cognisant of his own ignorance and therefore God and
Nature are to him more real and living. He lives with Them
rather than thinks of Them and he understands them better
by his own mental failings about them. Frederick had this
mental side to his character. He shared it with the great poets


and the great saints. To be either a poet or a saint (unfor-
ortunately the two are rarely combined together) one must be
a mystic , one must he filled with a deep sense of life's mysteries
and with wonder at the great realities of God and life and
c eat i and time and eternity. It depends on other qualities
whether a man is a great poet or a great saint -but the mystical
foundation is essential to both. Frederick was neither a' great
poet nor a great saint; his life was too short; but he had the
oundation in him from which either poet or saint could have
risen. If we study poets even of our own English
speaking race—as divergent from each other as Shakespeare
and Wordsworth, Shelley and Longfellow, in all of them we
note that they have the same experience of awe and wonder at
the great mysteries of life. It is the same with the great saints;
men and women as different from each other as St. Augustine
01 t. Francis, iSt. Theresa and Madame Guyon, have the same
messa eto us from a common experience. They cannot know
tally but they believe all the more strongly in the Great
-Idealities and live surrounded with an air of mystery that is
more helpful than a dogmatic creed.
In the case of Shakespeare, we feel that one part of
nature that he was more drawn to than any other, -for which
attraction he probably would have been able to give no sufficient
reason i\ as England, that precious stone set in the silver-sea of
which he sings. In this Frederick was one wi him. He had
an almost illogical love for England ; no other country was
equal to it or was in the same universe with it. He loved her and
regarded her as a mystery—her traditions and her history, her
towns and country lanes. Every stone and stick and blade of
grass he loved in her. He could give no intelligible reason for
us patriotism and one rather suspects that till he got to know
and understand Queensland people, and could appreciate them
or themselves, he liked them simply because they talked
English and were of the Empire. He would never have come
out had they been foreigners. This mystical element in
Frederick did not make him a Poet—but it put him on the
side of the Poets and he could and did appreciate their points
<> view. He had the temperament. After all, poetry just
seems to be a special way of expressing certain feelings about
God and Nature, and the Soul many of us feel them but can't
put them into actual words and cadences. Happy is the man


who can. He appreciated to the full the joy of nature —a sun-
set or a sunrise, the play of colour on the hills, or the cloud
shadows on a water hole he would note and speak of. The joy of
animal life —the mere fact of mere living would be understood.
He had memoried delights out here of the English nightingale
and thrush and our tuneful English birds. Even when he was
out far west on a big tour, and.took a gun with him, he often
saw the bird's point of view first and his own dinner last.
Like St. Francis, he was tenderhearted to his brother bird.
Here is a scrap of a letter written in the lonely bush—some-
where near Betoota —" I will leave you to picture the scene of
my camp. Purling creek and crescent moon and dying embers
and the weird silence of the Bush, with horse bells in the
distance. You and I must have a night out together in the far
west before I shake Australian dust from my number nines."
Or here is a quotation from one of his poems that he wrote in
answer to a vile set of verses sent him by one of the Brothers
who obviously prefers to be nameless —
"Your kidney never was, nor ever will be
Blithe as the merle or mavis ; note my simile
But I, Ido not wish to swagger
My dearest friends would never call me bragger,
Am a true poet; mine the soulful gaze
Telling of long night watches, dreamy days.
Oft in the quiet night i have perused
The moon, etc.
So he loved Nature as one of the mysteries about him that God
had made. It was to him an object of wonder and love and
attraction. All her apparent ruthlessness he tried to forget by
emphasising her beauty and her power and life. So at last
Nature took him to herself in his Flemish grave. He knows
her better where he is now, but the appreciation can hardly be
greater.
I have with me certain of his letters and poems. They
can't be printed. Their nature is of such a private kind.
Also his writing was so atrocious that it would take a life-time
to transcribe. But they show that he loved real poetry. He
read and knew the best poets. I have known him sit up till
2 a.m. reading Longfellow and then have to bo awakened for
Mattins next morning, still in his boots and clothes and with
the gas burning—-also very indignant at the suggestion that he
had not said his night prayers. Here are a few headings of his


own poems—" Lines written m vindication of my own poetry to
so and so after Swinburne." " A triolet to so and so —while
waiting to baptize the so and so's baby—for which I got 10s.
(the baby not the poems) after Lovelace," " A set of verses after
Ilerrick." Of metres and the length of lines he had full
knowledge. In the first long trip that he took alone in the far
west, he packed three books and two of them were poets. I know
that the third was theology but its leaves were still uncut
when he got back. I remember, too, after the Church Congress
so Brisbane in 1913 the Roekbampton clergy travelled back
together in one long compartment. Frederick was a fearful
nuisance. He was like a school boy out for a holiday. The pre-
sence of so many lean and portly bishops, not to say archdeacons
in their gaitered authority had had a depressing effect on him
and he longed to yell. So he yelled till I gave him a copy of
Masefield's " Dauber "to read—a new poem just out from
England that he had'nt seen. There was then no murmur
from him and you couldn't get him to speak till he had finished it.
Or again when I wrote to him in the far west and men-
tioned a friend's name, he answered by quoting the fittest of all
quotations from some poet or other whose name I don't know,
that gave an illuminating description of that friend.
Here is the last poem that he wrote for his Regimental
Magazine just before he left for Flanders in May, 1915. I have
placed it here for three reasons ; first because it was his last ;
he wrote to me just before I received the news of his death about
it and laughingly wondered "if it was up to the usual style."
Secondly because it shows how intimately he had entered into
the soldier's life and hopes and fears. This alone is one of the
marks of a poetic mind. Thirdly because of its artistic merit.
It shows such careful work in lines and scansion as well as in
the ideas and spirit that makes one want to hear him read them
out aloud as he used to do to me in the old days when he was in
Longreach.
" IN MEDIAS EES.'
The rifle-bolts are rin'gin , and the bullets come a pingin'
Amongst our sand-bags, flingin' the dust and stones abaht;
And screechin', whistlin', screamin', the eight-inch shells
are streamin',
They keep a bloke from dreamin', when 'e s " threes up "
lookin' aht.


Ho! it's merry in the trenches with the Belgies and the
Frenchies
Though the lice and bugs and stenches, they don't 'alf take
the bun,
But a dam.' sight more excitin' than cricketin' is fightin'.
And when the " Dukes" get right in, why there's bound to
be some fun.
How all you young recruities, just 'earken to your duties.
An' if you're feelin' new 'tis a thing as means no shame,
A few days' decent scrappin' soon serves to break a chap in,
And the 'Uns won't catch yer nappin' if they plays a dirty game..
A smart young soldier sees 'e keeps his bolt well oiled and greasy
It makes the cove work easy when " its ten rounds rapid fire ;
If a trench, you 'ave to gain it, and the order comes to " baynit,"
Well, charge as if you " mane " it, and the devil take the wire.
If its muddy, cold, and rainin', don't start growsin' or
complaimn',
There's naught at all to gain in a grumble, growl, or bite ;
Is a biscuit's 'andy, take it (it's deuced hard to break it),
And when you've time to make it, a cup of tea's orl right.
For the sake, of 'ome and " muvver " be sharp at taking cover
If yer puts yer " dial" over, the 'Uns 'll do yer in,
And remember you've a contrac' to get the Belgies' own back
And " Kitch " has sworn a compac' to marchyer through Berlin.
And last, not least, now mind yer, if a day should come and
find yer
With yer mates gone down be'ind yer, and others down afore,
The Cornwalls never waver, if the odds 'aint in their favour,
You mind yer own be'aviour. You're the " Dukes, boys !
Say no more.
Thus his mystic side made him a lover of poetry because he
found that it expressed some of his wonder and delight in the
world of Nature whose ways he tried to understand. Let us
think now of his mystical side in connection with his priesthood
and his religion. God was the Great Mystery to him. He was
a Fact hut a Fact that was really too great to be understood.
His working creed was " God's in His Heaven. All s right
with the World." There was no doubt about Him in Frederick's
mind. I very much think that he never had any doubts in
Religion. Modern Inter pre taton of the Bible, modern difficulties
and the need of re-explaining the old truths passed him by
utterly.
He had the mysterious certain faith of the little child—
that doesn't question because there is no need. To Frederick
Jonah was no difficulty, and he swallowed the whale as easily as


he did a particular fly on a memorable walk to Goreena. The
results of the fly swallowing were identical as the results of the
whale swallowing Jonah. Both were resurrected. But in the
case of .Jonah the whale was child's play compared with the
greater mystery of the fact of (rod. He had no great compre-
hension of learned people'o doubts. He couldn't appreciate
their agnosticism and he would have said to them "Much
learning has made you mad." On the other hand he had little
sympathy for the unlearned, unread, ignorant person who
professed to disbelieve because he or she couldn't understand.
To him those who were so placed had no right to disbelieve.
1 hey have to be humble enough to accept. As he said once to a
woman who criticised God's acts, in my hearing—"l know you
don't understand. How can you ? You haven't the mind to. I
don't understand God, but I am not such a fool as to disbelieve
in Him because 1 don't understand Him." 1 remember to-day
hearing him preach in a station drawing room on the text
" Except ye be converted and become as little children
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."
He preached himself--just what he was—a little child,
holding God by the hand, aware only of God's mysterious
greatness and love and of Nature's wonderful life. Such an
attitude strengthened his hold on the higher side of our existence
here. 1 was privileged once (for we Brothers don't often have
to listen to each other's sermons which in ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred one might be devoutly thankful for) to hear him
preach on " the Light of the World.' In the vestry afterwards
he said to me " I wish 1 could preach clever sermons—-ser-
mons that people would listen to and get help from." One's
only hope was that he never would, but that he would ccintinue
to proclaim the mystery of God as it is in Christ—of life and
death and Nature in his own childlike mystical way with his
poet's temperament; for his simple, direct, humble, mystical
attitude to God and the World was the foundation of his
happiness and would be that of others. In these days of growing*
knowledge and undigested scientific truth—when true perspective
is hard to come by all at once, it is better to have it foundation
where we can accept more than we can diagnose, where life
moves mysteriously rather than intellectually or dogmatically.
He believed because he could not understand fully and so was
happy and certain in his faith ; we believe, at least some of us,


only when we understand, and it makes for our unhappiness.
His is the better and the more certain way. It is a pity that
men are never remembered in the popular mind by their deeper
sides. It is, I suppose, because the public never know them.
Frederick will be known and remembered by his love of sport,
his strength of body and his many feats of endurance, his
simple, cheery, gallant heartfulness. Tales of him and his
wit and charity will be talked over in the smoke room, on
stations and at c'ampfires ; but will the deeper side of him be ever
mentioned, that beneath all he was on tne surface, he was the
mystic whose attitude to God was that of a simple child before
its' mysterious Father, and whose view of life was one of awe
and wonder and delight at Nature's mysteries. ?
Such was the deeper side of Frederick's character as I and
others with me who have read this chapter in proof-sheets have
seen it. It was the secret of his manhood and priesthood.
What such a side would have developed into in the years to
be if he had lived, I cannot say. It would have depended so
much on himself and his new work, but of this I am certain
that our Lord is using in Paradise this great quality of
of Brother Fred, and He is using it for the perfection of his
character, for the spreading of His Kingdom there, and
for the Glory of His Holy Name.
E. 11. BOHUN COULCHER.


CHAPTER VI,
Cbc Busbmait.
When I read in the war cables that Mr. Hulton Sams had
been killed in action, I got a great shock, for I had met him
often enough to know him well, and to know Mr. Sams meant
to love him and admire him.
Mr. Ilulton Sams came to Currawilla two or three times
while I lived there and before he was on the station an hour
everyone on the station was his friend.
1 here was not a particle of "side" in his composition
and there was nothing about his dress (when I first met him)
to make anyone think that he was a clergyman. His nose had
been well skinned a few days previously, boxing in Windorah,
and one eye was partially black, but that did not trouble him at
all. He was dressed about the same as the average stockman,
with no coat or waistcoat; his shirt sleeves were rolled up
displaying a pair of brown muscular fore-arms.
A\ hen Mr. bams first came to Currawilla, we were mustering
the cattle in the paddocks about the station and he gladly
accepted my invitation to come out with us for a few days and
see some cattle work, which I think he said, that he had never
seen before.
He took the greatest interest in all the work, and enjoyed
all the amusing things that happened during the cutting out,
and in driving the cows and calves home and then in the brand-
ing of the calves.
The branding yard at Currawilla is 24 feet square, an area
that Mr. Sams was very familiar with. When the branding
was finished Mr. Sams produced his boxing gloves and put them
on with one of my stockmen, who was more than two stone
heavier than himself and owned a good fighting Irish name.
At the end of the first round my man was completely done up,


while Mr. Sams was quite fresh and laughing in his own happy
way, with his nose freshly skinned again. In the se«ond round
my man was so tired that he was helpless. Then Mr. Sams
showed what a gentleman he was by not punishing his man,
not by showing his superiority as a boxer.
Mr. Sams boxed with his shirt off, stripped to the waist and
his muscular condition was a treat to see.
Mr. Sams then boxed with a second man who was nearer
his own weight, but number two had no earthly chance and
consequently was let off very lightly.
That night Mr. Sams married a couple at Currawilla, the
bridegroom being one of his opponents in the calf-pen of a
few hours before. Mr. Sams was dressed in the usual clergy-
man's vestments and a more courteous or a nicer gentleman than
he was, would be hard to imagine.
While helping us to muster, Mr. Sams was usually bare-
headed, and he was a keen collector of birds' eggs.
Once, when Mr. Sams was in Sydney, he acted as referee
for the boxing competitions at the Sydney University. My
brother Tom was amongst the onlookers, and as he had heard of
Mr. Sams from me, he got introduced to him and took him out
to his house at Double Bay, and then took him to see some
amateur competitions at the stadium. It was cold weather and
the first night that my brother and Mr. Sams went to the
stadium, Mr. Sams had his coat buttoned right up to his chin
and he was wearing a cap that had flaps to cover his ears, and
quite likely he was wearing a freshly skinned nose. Before they
got to their seats, an attendant stopped Mr. Sams and said
" Excuse me, but competitors don't come in here," and he
pointed to where the " pugs" usually sat. Mr. Sams thought
that was a grand joke.
I am very pleased that I knew Mr. Hulton Sams, and to think
of him will always be a pleasure to me. He died the death that
he would have chosen —on the battle field—where no doubt
plenty of his ancestors fell.
W. H. WATSON.


CHAPTER VII.
'CLbe Jfrfeirt).
Gieat regret and sorrow has been expressed everywhere in
the far west since the news' has been confirmed of the Reverend
Hulton Sams death in France—the best beloved of the Brother-
hood s priests. His glorious end does not compensate for what
we have lost in him. I can imagine how the atrocities and
horrors committed in Belgium and France affected him.
Privileged to be one of his friends, I know that rarely in
any man was there greater love for his country or one with a
keener sense of duty to it and the Empire, and can well under-
stand his eagerness to get to the front. He set a fine example
to all bis friends of military age, and many of them I am glad
to say followed his footsteps. Hundreds of men are to-day in
Gallipoli, b ranee and England discussing with regret the news
of his death and asking the unanswerable question as many have
asked here why him ? lam told he did not suffer and hope it
is true that when death came it took him full-painless and
instant. At least his high courage deserved this of Fortune—a
fitting end to a gallant life. He was wonderfully gifted and
equipped for the Brotherhood's work in the far west. His was
a singularly direct and winning nature which won the regard
and affection of every one he met, gentle and simple, with a
wonderful unselfish joyousness in life, it was impossible to be
down hearted in his company. One felt at first time of meeting
that one knew him thoroughly—and so one did—he never
changed. The far-out-backer who had not seen a parson for
many years, and had become clergy shy, became, in short space
of time, a brother to him and when the parson had to leave he was
watched out of sight by kindly lighted eyes.
The tasks given to the men of the Brotherhood are of the
hardest given to any; to, in many instances, come almost
straight out from English schools and fight their way into the


hearts of the bush lads, is one of the hardest of their tasks
The traditions and customs of the English schools are wide
apart from these of the bush lads —their outlook and point of
view have to be discovered and entered into before their con-
fidence is gained. Mr. Sams was at once successful. "His direct-
ness and earnestness in his work, his enthusiasm in every
undertaking of his people won their enduring affection and
regard. Although the customs and ways of the bush men are
widely different from those of English lads, endurance, high
courage, straight out manliness, appeal to the bush men as they
do to the English man. Their ideals (which after all are the
roots of the matter) are the same and were personified in him,
and greatly helped by his brilliant boxing, he entirely won the
hearts of all the Western athletic men and boys. lam glad to
learn a memorial is proposed, and that his memory will be
perpetuated for the younger generation. For us older people,
his memorial is in our hearts. He was a great example of the fact
that Christianity and an unbounding joy in life are not things
apart -together they made the high minded, high couraged
Christian gentleman we knew in the Revd. Hulton Sams.
K. J. MORRISON.


CHAPTER VfIL
(I be Sportsman.
Lightly built, fair of shin, with the carriage and mannerisms
of a 'Varsity man, he stepped quietly through the ropes and took
his chair in the corner while busy seconds slipped in and tied
the gloves on his small hands. He listened to their remarks
with courteous mein, but his eyes were missing nothing as they
gazed about with just a suggestion of short-sightedness. As the
referee called them together he stepped eagerly and quickly to
the centre, shook hands in the awkward two-handed manner of
the ring, heard the final injunctions of the " third man," then back
to his chair where he rested with one foot under it and the other
out, ready, all pent-up energy and tense alertness, for the bell.
"Time," called the referee, and like a flash the "Fighting
Parson " was in front of his man. Chop ! came the left, with
a downward rigid sort of a finish, a trifle short. Then in
it flashed, the right following, and Hulton Sams was in action.
It was hit, and miss, and hit and fight all the time. There was
little finesse in Sams—-he liked to be toe to toe with his man, his
only evasion being with his quick head. His aggression was his
defence. He came out of the first round pink and white with
the eagerness of a high-class terrier " called off." " Time "
again, and leaning into his work he made the pace a cracker, for
in spite of his light frame, he seemed charged with wonderful
staying powers. He staked it all in—there was no reservation
in the man. His opponent soon showed signs of distress, but
Hulton Sams never slackened. The harder he was hit, the
faster he came back into the game, and eventually the decision
went to him. Then flashing across the ring he shook hands
heartily with his disgruntled opponent, and came back all eager-
ness and excitement to thank his corner men, and slip modestly
over the ropes and out of sight.
And so this was the " Fighting Parson." A fighter he was


undoubtedly—a clean, resolute fighter, but not a clever boxer,
fast with a good solid left hand, and an indifferent right, sent in
with a fling, and often going wild. His footwork was neat and
quick, and he leant into his hitting like a tradesman. But it
was not his boxing that attracted. It was the sportsman in the
man, the abandon in his work, the elan, dash, and courage of it
all, and looking back on the many bouts in which I have seen
him, it is as a sportsman that I love to remember him. In
every way he was generous, brave, and chivalrous, Nothing
was a trouble, everything was in the game. Bad decisions,
unexpected reverses, hard knocks, were accepted in the most
charming way, not a line of his whimsical face betraying his
feelings. He was in the hands of the judges, in the chances of
the sport, and it was not for him to criticise. Yet I remember
on one occasion, when through a misinterpretation of the rules,
the referee overruled the judge's decision, and gave the fight
against " The Parson," and this was followed by a bad decision
against one of Sams' beloved Winton boys, the kindly Bush
Brother leaning over to ine and asking with much feeling
" What is the matter with your judges to-night ?" The question
was for me only, and demanded no answer, being merely an
involuntary protest at the loss of the bout to his pupil. His
own did not matter. On more than one occasion I have seen
him tried right out, and with the fight hopelessly against him,
and yet he has come back into the firing line with such unex-
pected vigor, such desperate courage, such a complete abandon-
ment of everything but the determination to win, that he carried
the house with him in a storm of appreciation. It is something
to remember, the last round of one or two of the bouts put up
by this fine little Englishman, when all in, tired, punished, and
almost hopelessly outpointed. In he came bereft of all but
indomitable courage. There was not a savage instinct in the
man, but he could not accept defeat while he had life and the
dynamo of will power.
" To force his heart, nerve, and sinew,
To serve his turn long after they were gone,
And so fight on when there was nothing in him.
Except the will which said to him " Hold on "!
And viewing his many gallant battles, his fairness, his sweet
chivalry, is it to be wondered at that we of the North and far
West Queensland loved him so? At his first appearance in
Charters Towers the Secretary of the Amateur Association, to


meet Sams' desire to get back to Win ton early, found it necessary
to put him in three bouts in one night. It was the only way,
and with many apologies and some timidity, he made the
proposal, but Sams waved the apologies aside with such a ready
acceptance of the suggestion, remarking " Oh, that's lovely,,
that's lovely" conveying the impression of acceptance of a
favor, which, after witnessing his first bout and the energy
consumed in it, was to an onlooker a favor of no unmixed joy.
This acceptance of the rigors of the game was characteristic.
It was a Spartan sport, so why complain ? Most amateurs
would have objected, and as Sams was competing in both light
and welter weight divisions, he had room for protest, but it was
being done to oblige him, so three or four bouts in an evening's
sport made no difference. He would take them on and be
delighted to do so.
Like most light weight athletes, he loved a big man, and
his delight in the physique of the late ' Major Quinn was
amusing—" My word, what a fine fellow he is ! If I only had
his size what splendid bouts I would have !" And had he lived
with what pride and grief would he have read of Quinn's deaths
and the splennid stand at Quinn's post ? He dwelt cleverly and
in the kindest and happiest way upon most of his old opponent,
in his speech when acknowledging the presents given him on
his last visit to Charters Towers—a speech which was charac-
teristic in its appreciation. He dwelt at length upon his various
contests, so humanly and with such fine recognition of his
antagonists. " Dear old Barney Saunders, a man after my own
heart.?' " The slow, hard-hitting John May, whose awful right
hand raised that egg on my cheek." " The quick O'Neil."
" The dour, solid-hitting " Dodger " Douglas " running through
the gamut of their excellence as boxers and as men. How we
cheered him and how with a voice trembling with emotion he
thanked us all, drifting into pleasantries to get a better hold on
himself. "My good friends" he said " I really feel like a
bridegroom going away with his wedding presents. You have
been so kind, so very kind." And then how proud he was of the
shield won by his boys, and with what delight he exhibited it at
every stopping place all along the line. He was so ingenuous,
so boyishly appreciative, so perfectly attuned and so gallant,
that it is not easy to write or to think of him and his brave
end without emotion.


Of his work as a clergyman I have little knowledge—but as
a sportsman he has done much, for he showed us how to play
the game, to accept reverses graciously, victories with all modesty,
to take hard knocks without ill-feeling, to live a clean, open,
healthy life, to appreciate our opponents, to be a good comrade,
and so far as it is given us, to be helpful and decent citizens.
No small accomplishment this, and then finally his death has
brought our responsibilities vividly home, and no doubt many
of our western volunteers have been influenced to do their duty
to their country and themselves, by the action of this very
gallant English gentleman.
E. G. BARRYMORE.
" CESTUS."


CHAPTER IX.
ftbe Citizen.
I suppose only the other members of the small body of
Frederick Sams' friends who have been honored by the request
to " write him up" from various view-points will appreciate
the great difficulties iu the tasks allotted. In fairness to all—•
or to myself at any rate—l must ask the reader to place himself
in this position—to imagine that he has lost a very dear and
intimate friend, and then let him endeavour to put into print
his impressions of that friend. I feel that only by approaching
this little memoir in that spirit can it be read and appreciated
at its proper value. Then again, the delightful character of
Mr. Sams to me was always elusive; simple while complex, easy
to know and arrive at terms of good fellowship with, yet
possessing a deep poetical side of which very few were privileged
to obtain a glimpse.
Mr. Sams' work as a citizen in one sense was negligible,
but in other ways who can measure the value of the tremendous
work he did ? I mean that those who would seek his name as a
member of public bodies 01* as appearing on this or that commit-
tee, or as heading deputations or convening meetings would seek
in vain. He was not "a public character" ncr did lie wish to
be. This fact I attribute in the main to an excessive modesty
and sensitiveness. He could never be brought to believe that
his power and influence were as great as they were. Perhaps
he knew 01* feared—subconsciously maybe—that if he took part
in public matters more freely, he would lose that beautiful belief
in his fellow-man which he retained to the end. No doubt the
fickleness and ingratitude of the " general public " quickly breed
in most minds a cynicism which seems almost justified by the
causeless dismissals arbitrarily imposed on many of our best
public men. Happily Mr. Sams escaped such treatment, but if


he had not I doubt if such a sweet, untarnished nature as his
would ever have harboured an unkind thought of anyone.
Again and again when a morsel of scandal or gossip was tendered
to him or something harsh spoken of another I have heard him
reply in this spirit—" Now, now, don't let us listen to such a
thing. It can't be true." Moreover he would then probably go
out of his way to call on the victim and show that on him at
least gossip and scandal—even if true—had no effect.
Yes, Frederick's Sams' work as a citizen was of the quiet
and unostentatious order but was none the less real and complete.
Perhaps the first work which occurs to my mind, although not
necessarily the most important, is that which he did in connec-
tion with the various western hospitals.
Everyone will recall the Boxing Tournament the manage-
ment of which was in the hands of the Reverends Hulton Sams,
Father Lane and Canon Hicks. This tournament was entirely
promoted by Mr. Sams and its success was undoubted. Finan-
cially, it resulted in an accession of £l2O to the Longreach
Hospital funds while its fame spread to the furthest parts of
Australia, and further afield still.
Then in whatever town he happened for the time being to
be, Mr. Sams scrupulously fulfilled his much-loved task of
hospital visitor. Men and women of all denominations received
and enjoyed his kindly and helpful attentions, and how helpful
and highly appreciated these ministrations were, may be learned
from many a bushman in lonely humpies and from hospital
matron and nurse. This constant attention to hospital work
(his visits were made weekly and sometimes more frequently)
was all the more commendable because the sight of pain and
suffering was so excessively distressful to Mr. Sains, distressful
only because of his keen sympathy and inability to relieve the
sufferer.
Nevertheless, one or two cases are recalled where he was
successful in securing actual physical relief. There is a bushman
in the Out-Back who proudly tells how Mr. Sams undoubtedly
saved his life after snakebite. Mr. Sams arrived at his camp
just at dusk after the man had been bitten by a venomous
snake. The parson knew little or nothing of the appropriate
treatment but did what seemed to him the wisest thing, kept
his patient awake by pouring coffee into him and forcing him


to walk. He persisted in this treatment during the long weary
hours of the night and the life was saved. Creditable vouchers
can also be found for the truth of an assertion that at another
time he cured by laughter a most serious case of illness. The
sick man was some twenty stone ill weight and Mr. Sams visited
him at his bedside. In his happy, dashing way Mr. Sams sat
upon the bed causing the vast mass of the sick man to quiver
and vibrate. Without waiting for protest, Mr. Sams in a most
droll fashion said—"Do you know? Mr. 1 do wish I
had your weight. What glorious bouts I could then carry
through. I would take 011 all the heavy weights and win
every time. Mind you, I wouldn't fight them. I'd simply
knock them down and sit on thein." This was too much for the
sick man's sense of humour. He burst into laughter and when
relating the incident now vows that the joke of this much-loved
" Fighting Parson" cured him.
But citizen's gratitude must ever be due to Mr. Sams for
the work he did among the young men. What could be finer or
more useful to the community than the lessons he enforced in
the hearts and minds of the boys, youths, and men of Long-
reach, Barcaldine, Winton, and all the western towns and
districts, to say nothing of the physical development and
improvement gained by them ? There must be many a man—l
am sure I could name more than a few—who in his heart must
thank God for the help his son, his brother, or he himself
obtained from association with or the example of this plucky,
honourable, gallant and good man. To have met him, to have
shaken his hand and conversed with him only once was an
experience. I cannot think that those men will ever forget him
and his influence, who worked with him or under him, or who
sparred with him or played with him.
It is with regard to his final accomplishment in the role of
a citizen that I experience the greatest difficulty in finding
adequate expressions. This final accomplishment is the crown-
ing glory of his grand and noble life—the acceptance by him
of the last privilege of the citizen—the right to fight and give
his life for his country. In any man, however unworthy, to do
that is symbolical of the highest nobility; and with Frederick
Sams his last and greatest sacrifice seems to me the most fitting
coping-stone to the edifice of his career in this life. While we


knew him he lived for others and finally he died for other§»
It should be the prayer of every citizen of "Western Queensland
that the grave at Hooge of this " Athlete, Priest, and Soldier "
will never be obliterated, either literally or in our hearts ; and
that his memory be never allowed to fade away. Every Western
Queeuslander who visits the dear Homeland in future years
should not fail to make a pilgrimage to that grave-side and draw
inspiration from contemplation of this life of one who lived and
died for his fellows. "He was killed as he crawled out from
cover to get water for his wounded men."
If Wordsworth had not died more than sixty years ago we
would say that he might well have thought of Frederick Sams
when he wrote :
" Who is the happy warrior ? Who is he
Whom every man in arms should wish to be. ?
It is the generous spirit, who, when brought
Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
Upon the plan that pleased his childish thought;
Whose high endeavours are an inward light,
That make the path before him always bright;
Who, doom'd to go in company with pain,
And fear, and bloodshed, miserable train I
Turns his necessity to glorious gain ;
Who, with a toward or untoward lot.
Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not.
Plays, in the many games of life, that one
Where what he most doth value must be won;
Whom neither shape of danger can dismay.
Nor thought of tender happiness betray ;
This is the happy Warrior; this is he
Whom every man in arms should wish to be."
HOY L. H. PETERSON


A TRIBUTE.
You were a man! In very truth a man
Who. unafraid, convention brushed aside,
A sadder message never crossed the seas
Than you had died.
And thus you made the battle-field your church,
For choir, the roar of guns and din of pain;
By valiant deeds you drove your sermon home,
And like a man, 'mid men, you played the game.
You sleep for ever 'neath a foreign sky.
Perhaps unknown the spot of your last rest,
But all about your splendid grave are growing
Great flowers of homage from the Queensland West.
E. ROWAN


HSvtract from a private letter
fcatefc 2n& Hugust, 1915.
lie died a glorious death, that of a British officer and a
gentleman—commanding a company in an important position,
and above all sticking it where many others might have failed.
The circumstances were these.
We were hauled out of our rest billets at 2 a.m. on the
30th, and had to hurry up in lighting order to where another
Brigade had been driven out of their trenches with liquid fire.
We had to go up to a part of the line where we had not
been to before and take part in a counter-attack. The counter-
attack ended at the edge of a wood called Zouvave Wood.
C Company was left with your brother in command, all other
officers being killed or wounded. We were hanging on to the
edge of this wood for all we were fit, and the Germans were
trying to shell us out of it. C Company were splendid. We
all knew they would be, for they would do anything for your
brother. All the afternoon of the 30th they were there, and all
night. That night the Germans attacked us again, bombs and
liquid lire. C Company still stuck to it, and through that
terrific shelling they never flinched, although they lost heavily.
They were there at 10 a.m., and 1 crawled to and talked to your
brother several times. He was magnificent and very cheerful.
His last words to me before he was hit were " Well, old boy,
this is a bit thick, but we'll see it through, never fear." J left
him then to go somewhere else, and 1 didn't see him again.
His Company Sergeant Major (a man called Fuller) told me
that about 10 a.m. your brother crawled away to see if he could
get any water for the men—many of whom were wounded and
very thirsty. He was hit by a piece of shell in the thigh and
side, and killed instantly—or at any rate never regained
consciousness. He can have suffered no pain, and lie died doing
a thing which makes us feel proud to have known him. lie
was a fine officer, a fine friend, and worshipped by his men.
That is all I can tell you about, him. We were relieved the
night following, and we got his body and buried it at the grave-
yard in the rear of the fighting line at Hooge.


Last night, when, sick with grief," f fell!
Asleep L saw the Master stand
And gaze in love unspeakable
On me heart-stricken and unmanned".
And in my dream I cried. " Lord Christ
Have mercy ; on Thy help I call,.
For this my son as gold was priced'
More precious in my sight than all.
Moreover as God's priest he stood—
Preached in rude camps Thy message free.
Gave of Thy Body and Thy Blood
Into rough hands held out for Thee.
Strenuous in toil, his fee was naught
But nightly rest and daily bread.
Nay, save for grace of those he taught.
He had not where to lay his head.
Like Thee in life, in death he bore
Semblance to Tbee. for lo! he died
At thrice ten years and three, was sore
Athirst aud wounded in the side.
Shall this in him be held a wrong.
That, drawn by that he could not quell.
He grasped the sword, took place among
His country's hosts and fought and fell?
Thereon the Christ His silence broke
" Be comforted; he died for men ;
Thy hope stands sure." And I awoke.
And peace possessed my soul again.
G.F.S. "The SPECTATOR"— August 14th,


— =3lEl
I B
I
Lieutenant F. Hulton-Sams, D.C.L.I.
April, 1915.




Proceeds of this Binok will be devoted
to the ■payment of tike cost of building
J end ah Anglican Chwrrch which will be
dedicated in memory of
fir reread F rede ri elk Hn Iton-Sam-s.


J




j
[
■


-:-■■' ■ ' :■!■;■ - :. : - : ■ ' ' : '0;-'.. -■■■■T':;.
■.;■:■■.■=■■ ' . ■. .■■'A- '.'■ V -■.= ■■ ,■=:•=■ '
liiii-iliiiiiiiiiilHfiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiji
Bi!!!!!i!ii!iil;»^
mmmmmammmsm
|i: :-■■■■ : / ' - . :■ :>■ : ' ■ ■■■■.."■■,- ■=■;■■'■/
,, . ... .... • . .... . . . ., . . . .... , ,. ; ,:
::i:;ii; iiiiiii;!;;*ii.;:;;;;;;;;;;i:i;!:i;|!!!;:!!ii|iiii:
.
I ; ■


■
f
■
■>
4
: ' f
■
; > C-y-x -v: , . . :... •
