

FREE, FAIR, AND PROTECTED
TRADE:
WHICH IS THE BEST
ENGLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES
AUSTRALIA?
By ARCHIBALD FORSYTH.
PRICE 6 D -
THE WRITER OF THIS PAMPHLET HAS HAD IT PRINTED AT HIS OWN COST, AND
HAS GIVEN OVER THE PROCEEDS OF SALE TO A COMMITTEE, TO BE
EXPENDED IN ASSISTING THE CAUSE.
gl?imcp:
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM DYMOCK, BOOKSELLER,
208 PITT STREET.




FREE, FAIR, AND PROTECTED
TRADE:
WHICH IS THE BEST
ENGLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES
AUSTRALIA?
By ARCHIBALD FORSYTH.
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM DYMOCK, BOOKSELLER,
208 PITT STREET.




FREE TRADE AND PROTECTION.
SUMMARY OF LECTURE.
FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE —WHICH IS THE BEST
FOR ENGLAND?
0) ii
X - 5-77
This inquiry shows'—
That England established her woollen, linen, silk, cotton, leather, and
iron manufactures by premiums, prohibitions, and import duties.
That her shipping trade was assisted by prohibitions and tonnage dues
levied on the ships of foreign nations.
That when she had established her manufactures and become an ex-
porting country, she repealed the duties on corn and other raw material;
and as protective duties had become inoperative, she repealed them in 1846.
That she now alleges protective duties did not assist her in establishing
manufactures, and will not do so for any nation under any circumstances.
That she still retains protective duties on jewellery and tobacco.
That she is now feeling the effects of European competition.
That there are now many crying out for “Fair Trade;” but as she
can only offer to exchange manufactured goods for raw produce, this will
not be accepted as an equivalent by other nations.
That her free trade policy produces great wealth, but forces it into
useless channels while many are starving.
That she has a good remedy for her present distress by removing the
taxes from industry and placing them on land, successions, and incomes.
FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE : WHICH IS THE BEST
FOR NEW SOUTH WALES?
This inquiry shows, —
That New South Wales exported £11,479,000 and imported £16,054,000
in 1884.
That the balance of imports over exports, after payment of interest on
loans and investments to foreign nations, was £5,821,000.
That the difference is accounted for by the loans contracted.
That our present prosperity is due to the expenditure of loans and
funds arising from land treated as ordinary revenue.
That great danger exists in borrowing beyond our requirements.


That it is not in our power, or advisable, to stimulate exports.
That productions for home consumption can be stimulated, and the
benefits distributed over the general community, by the profits flowing from
productive labour without cost to the country, demonstrated.
That the employers and employes of stimulated industries do not reap
more benefit than the general community.
That the interests of producers and consumers are identical, and cannot
be separated.
That lowering the rate of wages would widen the field of employment,
but would lower rents, profits, and interest.
That labor has to be purchased with maintenance, and sold for wages,
exactly as any kind of goods.
That wages are at present above the rate that will allow full employment
for all willing to work under present laws.
That protection would maintain the present rate of wages, and employ
a portion of those now out of employment.
That the great spontaneous wealth of grass can only reach the greater
mass of the people in the shape of increased wages as compared with Europe.
That State or free immigration is a violation of the rights of labor
and of the doctrines of free trade.
That the benefits to be expected from a protective policy are increased
employment and profits from a greater quantity.
That an increase in wages will neutralize protective duties.
That the trade rule of a minimum rate of wages favors the superior
workman at the expense of the inferior, and tends to limit production by
raising wages above the rate at which production can be undertaken by
the employers.
That a review of the tariffs of the world shows that protection is the
rule, and free trade the exception.
That assertions that free trade is the best for all countries can only be
accounted for as a mental craze.
That preference for free trade or protection is often a question of
sentiment.
That the comparisons drawn between England and America, France
and Canada, and between New South Wales and Victoria, by free traders, are
illogical in their reasons and deductions ; and when the facts are correctly
applied to the circumstances, they prove the opposite to that intended.
That New Zealand, Queensland, and South Australia, while they
depend on the export of raw produce, must, like all other nations carrying on
a similar trade, remain poor.
That New South Wales should avoid depending on raw produce, by
establishing self-sustaining industries through import duties.
That distributers’ interests are greater in distributing colonial produc-
tions than imported goods.
That external commerce is fostered and assisted at the expense of manu-
facturers.
That the importation of goods from Europe, New Zealand, and Victoria
is being allowed to damage existing industries, and will cut off many in detail
if allowed to continue.


That this excessive importation can be stopped by the imposition of
duties not exceeding the profit on productive labour.
That there are many difficulties to surmount before a protective policy
can he carried.
That when we can secure a majority in the Assembly there will he no
lack of leaders to carry it into effect.
FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE: WHICH IS THE BEST
FOR AUSTRALIA?
This inquiry shows, —
That we have a range of climate that should enable us to produce most of
the necessaries of life.
That the different colonies have set up harriers that interfere with the
exchange of products.
That our present attempt at federation must fail, and that federation
should be based on a Customs Union over the colonies.
That we cannot expect all the colonies will agree to a general tariff.
That open competition with England cannot be sustained either here or
in Victoria.
That we cannot sustain open competition with Victoria, but have no
reason to decline fair competition.
That, until we have a protective tariff, Victoria will not agree to
reciprocal trade.
That protection will work better in a large than in a small country or
population.
That reciprocal trade can be carried on without a uniform tariff.
That it should include all produce and articles manufactured in each
colony, whether made of imported or home materials.
That each colony should agree to exchange all the goods in an enumerated
list with each other, and admit all goods not enumerated on payment of their
respective duties.
That, as a difficulty might arise with sugar, the duties on foreign sugar
could be altered to form a fair equivalent.
That we can make no arrangement for reciprocal trade until we have
carried a protective tariff.




Jfm fefrc unit |Drotrxtion.
FREE. FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE: WHICH IS THE
BEST FOR ENGLAND, AUSTRALIA, OR NEW
SOUTH WALES ?
In all articles and discussions on the relative merits of Free, Fair,
or Protected Trade, the advocates of the former insist that Free
Trade is as true and unvarying in its applicability to all countries
as gravity or any other of Nature’s laws. For proof, they point
to England’s progress during the last forty years. Statistics of
all kinds are selected and marshalled in such order and disorder
as are best calculated to prove this without any intelligent
attempt to apply them to this country. They insist that the
relative wealth and prosperity of every country must be measured
solely by the relative amount of their respective imports and
exports. To assist, or endeavour to assist, the development of
colonial industries by the amount or direction of import duties
is “Protection and as Protection is at variance with the prin-
ciples of “Free Trade,” it must be wrong. That the production
and export of pastoral and mining products are, and should,
remain our chief industries, and should not be charged with any
portion of the cost incurred in the permanent settlement of the
country ; that all countries carrying out Free Trade are blindly
following a protective policy through gross ignorance of economic
laws and their own interests : these and many other absurd
allegations belong to the A B C of Free Trade advocacy. If
they intend to hold the fort, they will have to find better and
more modern arms for the future than they have relied on in
the past. They do not tell us that less than fifty years ago
England sang a very different song; that when she had reached
a secure and prominent position in manufacturing industry, she
kicked away the ladder by which she reached that position,


when it no longer helped her on to a higher. It is now asserted
that the means she employed was not the cause of her success;
that it has not helped other nations, nor can in any way
assist us to attain a similar position in manufacturing industry.
We beg to join issue with Free Trade advocates on these
statements, and will endeavour in the following paper to prove
that the permanent establishment of manufacturing industries in
England up to 1840 was primarily due to her protective policy;
that the same policy has had a similar effect in other countries,
and will, if properly applied, have the same effect on this colony.
WHETHER IS FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE
THE BEST POLICY FOR ENGLAND ?
The nature of the arguments and the way they are applied
make it necessary to briefly trace the development of manufac-
tures in England, but it will not be necessary to go farther back
than the middle of the seventeenth century. In examining the
state of England from 1650, we find that manufacturing
industries had made very little progress, four-fifths of the popula-
tion being engaged in pastoral and agricultural pursuits. Three-
fourths of the manufactured goods were imported from Italy,
France, Belgium, Germany, and Sweden, and a large portion
were subject to import duties. From 1650 to 1690, these duties
were extended over a larger number of articles and increased in
amount. Taking the principal staples, we find that the woollen
industry gained a footing of some stability in 1350. At this
date Edward 111. brought over a large number of Flemish
operatives, and protected their industry by prohibiting the
wearing of foreign-made cloth and the export of wool, and
subsequently, by the imposition of heavy import duties. By
the beginning of the eighteenth century, such progress had been
made that woollen goods were exported to the value of three
millions annually, and by the beginning of the nineteenth
century the exports had rose to the value of seven millions.
During the whole of this period, and up to 1846, the trade was
heavily protected. In the latter part of the eighteenth and the
early part of the nineteenth century, this industry, and, in fact,
all the textile manufactures, received a great stimulus from
improvements made, or rather inventions discovered and brought
into use, in the machinery for carding, spinning, and weaving,


and, further, by the application of steam power to these machines.
The Cotton industry was begun early in the seventeenth century,
but it made little progress until 1767, when the inventions of
Hargreaves. Arkwright, and Compton, coupled with the
application of steam power, so cheapened production that
England became the principal seat of the manufacture, and in
1846, the year in which the import duties on cotton goods was
repealed, the exports had reached twenty-five millions in value
annually. The manufacture of Silk may be said to have only
been established as a complete manufacture in England in 1720 ;
for, although the weaving of silk had been carried on in England
to a limited extent for two centuries previously, it was not till
this date that all the operations of manufacture were carried out
in England. Silk throwing, or twisting raw silk into yarn, was
introduced at this period by a Mr. Lombe ; and, in addition to
heavy protective duties, the Government gave him £14,000.
The duties were taken off in 1846. Linen, like the other textile
tissues, was in its early stages supported by prohibition on
importations, and subsequently by bounties and export and im-
port duties, and the latter was continued till 1846 The trade
received a great impetus from the lowering of the duties
imposed by France and other countries, and likewise by the
application of steam power to improved machines. The Leather.
industry, although it had the benefit of import duties, was for a
greater number of years subject to heavy excise duties that nearly
counterbalanced the import duties. These excise duties were
abolished in 1830, and import duties in 1842 and 1846. This
industry owes less to protective measures for its establishment
than any other. The Paper manufacture may be said to he more
indebted to protection for its establishment as a permanent
industry than any other. The duties varied as to time and
extent, and ranged from 10 to 200 percent, up to 1836. Import
duties were continued up to 1861, and the magnitude of the
imports may be judged by the fact that the duties collected for
the last year amounted to £1,350,000. The production of Iron
in England was very small up to 1740. Two-thirds of it was
imported. Smelting with coal commenced at this date. The manu-
facture was protected by import duties, and made rapid progress.
In 1845 the import duties were taken off. Its production and
manufacture into machinery, ships, bridges, rails, and thousands
of other articles, make the iron industry equal in value and
importance to any of the other staple industries. The Herring
Fishery, up to 1815, was almost in the hands of the Dutch.
Large bounties and tonnage rates had been given by the English
Government before this date, but from several causes they were
not very successful. At this date the bounties were increased,
and reached as much as 300 per cent, on the value, and the
herring fishing became an important industry, and in 1830>


had become so firmly established that the removal of the bounties
did not affect the enterprise. The navigation laws, which had
for their object protection to the shipping interest, were in force
from 1651 till 1850. The laws varied very much, and imposed
tonnage dues, prohibited the exportation from, or importation
into England of goods in foreign vessels, subjected goods brought
in foreign vessels to increased duties, and to still further
increase if brought from certain countries. By 1820 the shipping
of England had increased beyond the trade she could command.
Other nations had retaliated with similar laws, and the protective
measure became inoperative. New trade was required, and. in
order to secure it, reciprocal trade was offered to America in
1815, and was afterwards extended to Germany, Prussia, Sweden,
and Norway. But this only extended to certain classes of goods,
others being excluded. But the laws against all nations that
did not reciprocate were continued up to 1850, and may still be
put in force by an Order in Council against the ships of any
nation. Import duties were levied up to 1846 on glass,
porcelainware, musical instruments, carriages, furniture, cordage,
firearms, wearing apparel, and on almost every kind of
manufactured article, numbering in all over nine hundred. Raw
material of various kinds were likewise subject to import duties
up to this date. In this list was corn, which, more than any of
the others, had no protective effect; on the contrary, it pressed
as a severe burden or tax on all manufacturing industries.
From this brief review of the initiation and progress of English
industries from the middle of the seventeenth century to 1846, it is
seen that all the staple industries were initiated either by bounties,
import duties, prohibitions, tonnage dues, or premiums, and in
some cases by several of these combined. All the means used
cannot be defended on the grounds of justice or expedience, but
that they effected the obj ects they had in view cannot be denied
by any candid person acquainted with the facts.
By 1840, all the manufacturing industries had become well
established. They supplied the home consumption and left a large
surplus for export. In this state of affairs the import duties had
become inoperative. Duties were still levied on a large part of
the raw material imported, so that the effect of the duties, on the
whole, was more against manufacturers than in their favour.
This state of affairs was aggravated by the import duties levied on
corn, which may be considered the prime raw material of labour.
The duties levied on other kinds of raw material went into the
revenue of the country, in which all had an interest; but the import
duties levied on corn was a charge upon labour that went mainly into
the pockets of the landed proprietors. In Scotland and the
north-eastern portion of England, many of the farmers held their
farms under lease, and these would, no doubt, derive some
benefit, during the currency of their leases, from the increased


duties imposed in 1815, and which were, no doubt, participated in
to a small extent by their workmen, and through them to
the general public ; but as the leases fell in, the benefit conferred
by the duty went in the shape of increased rent into the pockets
of the landed proprietors. Various estimates have been made of
the burden laid on the labour employed in manufactures. The
medium of these estimates may be taken as approximately correct
at three million seven hundred thousand pounds, per annum.
The import duties levied on the raw materials of manufacture
may be set down at seven and a quarter millions, making, say,
£11,000,000 resting on the export trade of manufactured goods.
Under this state of things it was only to be expected that a
desire to reform the tariff should become general, and from
this date strenuous efforts were made to have it altered
to suit an export trade. The agitation continued for four years,
and in 1846 the corn laws were repealed, and the duties on all
raw material lessened or abolished As the protective duties on
manufactuctured goods had become inoperative, the greater
portion of them were taken off, showing that, while Protection in
its various forms is suited for advancing production up to the
point of home consumption, it is powerless beyond this point; and
that any nation, to become large exporters of manufactured goods,
can best promote that object by freeing all raw material from
import duties and all manufactures from excise duties, and
collecting the necessary revenue from other sources.
There has lately been heard in England a cry for fair trade
with other nations ; but England’s manufacturing interest is
now too large to gain anything from reciprocal trade with
adjoining nations. The late commercial treaties with France
and other nations had mainly for their object the removal
of discriminating duties which France and England had
imposed on each other’s trade, and so far from being
reciprocal, as many believe, were a clear declaration of
trade neutrality. This spirit of trade neutrality in England
is further shown by the constitutions granted to the Australian
colonies, prohibiting the several colonies from levying discrimin-
ating duties on the goods of different nations. That England is
now feeling the effects of established manufacturing industries,
combined with cheap labour in Belgium, Germany, and France, is
beyond doubt, and that this competition will become keener in
the future is certaiu. Although some beneficial arrangements
for exchange in a few articles might be made on fair trade lines
with different countries, the solution of competition in England
with other manufacturing nations is not to be found at present in
the adoption of fair trade. The only equivalent that England
could offer other nations is to admit their raw material free. Other
nations know that England’s dependence on foreign raw material
compels her to do so now, and they are not likely to recognise this


as an equivalent for admitting English manufactured goods.
England has a much better remedy, and one that is beginning to
be advocated and must be carried out, unless the alternative of a
large reduction of the population is accepted as a better solution.
So far as existing discussions show, this latter solution is not
likely to be accepted. In this state of affairs, England will have
to prepare to meet future increasing competition by abolishing
all import and excise duties (spirits and tobacco excepted)
resting on productive labour, and raise the necessary revenue
from Land Succession and Income taxes. By this means pro-
ductive labour would be freed from the great burden it has to bear
at present, and the great accumulated wealth that has been made
to flow into useless reservoirs through unjust laws be made to assist
industry in the production of wealth directed to its legitimate
use —the sustenance and support of all.
This inquiry, so far, shows that Free Trade is preferable
to either fair or protected trade for her present circumstances; but
it will not be out of place here to refer to two marked exceptions
in England’s general Free Trade policy, which clearly show
that, while recognising and using the benefits of Free Trade, its
acceptance has not altogether extinguished her common sense
and ability to recognise certain industries open to Protection, and
to apply it in defiance of the alleged truth that Free Trade is
applicable and best for all nations under all conditions and
circumstances. The two exceptions are tobacco and jewellery.
The latter is still protected by import duties of 17s. per ounce or,
say, 22 per cent. Tobacco unmanufactured is subject to an import
duty varying from 3s. to 3s. lOd. per lb. ; manufactured is
subject to duties varying from ss. 6d. ; on cigars, to 4s. 4d ; on
some kinds of tobacco, to 4s. lOd. on cavendish and negro-head,
leaving a clear protective duty, after cost of manufacture, of
about sd. per lb., or 10 per cent. The industry is a large one,
and the profits on the manufacture more than cover the protective
duty.
The warm feeling of Australia for England and her
people would prompt us to give English goods the preference;
but such a preference would be a mere “drop in the bucket” towards
assisting English manufacturers, and would at the same time
prevent us from establishing manufactures here, unless we were
prepared to wait until rents, profits, interest, and wages were
reduced to such a level as would enable us to compete with
English goods; and even then competition could not ensue
unless we were prepared to encourage the development of manu-
factures by some system of Protection during their initiatory
stages So we must rest content to let England meet her present
position of depression and threatened rivalry in the future by
applying the grand remedy we have pointed out when she
deems it expedient.


FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE : WHICH IS THE
BEST POLICY FOE NEW SOUTH WALES?
The next inquiry is, whether Free, Fair, or Protected Trade
is best suited for Australia; but it will be more convenient to
direct the inquiry first to New South Wales. In order to be in
a position to fully inquire into this question, and to estimate the
probable effects of a change in the tariff, it is necessary to
analyse the imports and exports to ascertain what commodities we
produce above our consumption, and what we have to import to
make up the deficiency in others. By the Customs returns for
last year we imported to the value of £22,827,000, and
exported to the value of £18,251,000; but in this state
these returns are useless for this inquiry, exports being
partly made up from imports, and the imports include a large
amount of the exports. We have therefore classified them under
six heads: Pastoral, Mineral, Agricultural, Manufacturing,
Monetary, and Miscellaneous. The list of goods placed under
the head of Manufacturing are made up of such goods as could be
made here under a moderate import duty of 15 per cent. As
woollen cloth and slops are not stated separately, but are included
in drapery, we have estimated woollen cloth and slops of all
kinds at one-fourth of the whole, both as to imports and exports ;
and, as many articles entered under the head of Hardware could
well be made here, we have estimated such articles to amount to
one-fifth of the whole, both as to imports and exports.
This list of our imports and exports show that we exported
last year £9,756,000 of pastoral produce of all kinds akove
what we imported, and that we exported £1,723,000 of mining
produce over and above our imports of minerals. Of agricultural
produce we imported £1,715,000 more than we exported. Of
gold and coin we imported £723,000 more than we exported.
Of the articles enumerated under the head of Manufactures, we
imported £5,797,000 more than we exported; and of the goods
in the miscellaneous list, we imported £7,819,000 more than we
exported; so that we exported £11,479,000 of mining and
pastoral produce, and nothing else; and we imported all other
kinds of goods to the value of £16,054,000, being a total of
imports over exports of £4,575,000. There have been many
wild theories put forward at different times to explain this
seeming anomaly—as, for instance, that any country importing
in excess of her imports must become poorer every year. This
view of the case is now nearly exploded. The real explanation
is, that a country exporting, say, ten millions at the value placed
upon the goods by the various owners, will be based upon the
net amount they expect them to realise in the country to which
they are sent. When they arrive, say, in England, they are valued
as an import, with the addition of freight, insurance, and other


charges, which will bring them up to, say, eleven millions. If the
goods realise on sale less than the exporters’ value, this will tend to
equalise the difference ; if they realise more, the difference will
be increased. When goods are shipped in return (and it makes
no difference whether the goods are shipped from tlxesame place
or by any other persons unconnected with the original exporter,
as both are questions of exchange) they will amount to the value
realised b}' the goods; and if there has been a sudden rise,
this will, in some cases, amount to 10 per cent.; in such a case
the exported goods would amount to say eleven millions; when
they arrive here they would be - entered with freight, insurance,
and other charges, with expected profit added, which would
bring them up to twelve millions, showing that the goods that
left the colony, valued at ten millions, came back as an import of
twelve millions. This is the general reason how exports are, as
a rule, below imports; but there are many exceptional circum-
stances operating at different times in different countries, and
these exceptional circumstances form an important element in the
difference between our exports and imports last year. It has
been shown that the exports xvere £4,576,000 less than the
imports. This difference has to be accounted for outside ordinary
operations. Our public debt at the end of 1883 amounted to
£21,632,000; and estimating tfiat £1,632,000 was held by
residents here, the interest on twenty millions would amount
to £885,000. There is likewise a large amount of English
capital invested here in mines, pastoral stations, banking,
insurance, and real property, which cannot be set down at less
than six millions, nor the interest at less than 6 per cent.,
which will amount to £360,000, making together £1,245,000,
which has to be paid out of the exports, reducing their value to
£10.227,000, making the difference between the exports and
imports £5,821,000. This excessive difference is accounted for
bx the loans we have contracted. At the end of 1883 we
borrowed £3,000,000, and in September we borrowed a further
sum of £5,500,000, making together £8,500,000 ; but, as the
whole of this could not come under exchange during the year, it
is fair to assume that about £4,000,000 of this came into exchange,
and was used towards payment of our imports, so that when the
imports and exports are divested of the existing exceptional
circumstances, the value of our imports exceeds that of the
exports by £1,821.000, which, afterpayment of freight, insurance,
and other charges on the goods imported, will amount to, say,
£900,000, leaving £921,000 as profit on our export and import
trade. On this estimate we used £4,000,000 of our loans to
square up our imports through the operations of exchange only,
as we have used most of the loans in reproductive works. But
an important fact connected with this is, that after allowing for
the £723,000 of coin imported, and the value of railway plant,


amounting to £408,000. we have still a sum of £2,869,000,
which, in the absence of loans, we must have either done without
in our imports, or found the value in some exportable commodity,
had we not borrowed the amount.
The advocates for a change in our tariff, so as to stimulate
industrial progress, are met by arguments based on our apparent
prosperity. Now, there is no doubt that, notwithstanding the
great losses su tained by the pastoral interest during last year
by the drought, we have, on the whole, been prosperous; but,
beyond a doubt, the chief element in this prosperity is the
expendi'ure of the large loans we have contracted for public
works. In 1883 and 1884 we borrowed £11,500,000; we cannot
state the exact amount expended during these two years, but
will set it down at £9,000,000. The Customs entries give the
value of raifway plant imported at £690,000 ; this will leave for
expenditure here £8,310,000. This expenditure will leave a profit
to the country of at least 20 percent., made up as follows :—On a
moderate estimate the contractors for such works will make a
profit of 4 per cent., which will amount to £332,400. The goods
and plant which they have to purchase from importers, and which
we estima e at £550,000, will not be purchased at a less profit than
5 per cent., amounting to £27,500 ; the balance (amounting to
£7,427,600) will be expended by the contractors in salaries to
assistants, legal expenses, and wages. These various classes
will be able to save at least two shillings in the pound ;
that is after paying for the cost of maintenance. They will have
10 per cent, profit on their services and labour. This will amount
to £742,760, leaving £6,684,840 for maintenance. This will be
expended principally with store and shop-keepers, and the
remainder paid to professional men and tradesmen, who will have
a profit of not less than 10 per cent., amounting to £668,484,
making in all £1,771,144, or a fraction under 20 per cent. It
may be urged that the profit is calculated too high ; if intoxicating
drinks are not included in the maintenance, it is too low ; but,
assuming that £200,000 of the profit is spent in intoxicating
drinks, one-half of which is profit to the publican, we have still
the sum of £1,671,144 saved out of this borrowed money.
This large profit derived from the expenditure of loans has,
without doubt, contributed largely to our present prosperity, and
so far as the present is concerned, it would have had the same
effect had it been all expended in leveling the hill at the quarantine
ground and depositing the materials in the ocean ; so that the
profit tnade on the expenditure of loans is independent of
whether it is ill or well spent. With the exception of the Hay and
Mudgee lines and some others of less importance, the loans
appear to have been spent on reproductive works. No doubt,
we have run ahead of present requirements, and great care
should be exercised in sanctioning new lines, or even carrying


out all already sanctioned, for it must be borne in mind
that prosperity from such a source is no index of the wisdom
of borrowing largely for the sake of the prosperity its expenditure
secures. If this is not conceded, we have only to double or treble
our loans to double or treble our profits, until we are brought up
with a crash through expenditure in advance of requirements.
No thinking man can avoid recognising our danger at the
present time. The Government have gone in for borrowing
largely, and they are supported by the members in the Assembly,
who are again backed up by a large portion of their constituents
in favour of public works for their own district. On the other
hand, care must be taken not to run into the other extreme, as a
sudden stoppage in borrowing would be most disastrous in its
effect on all classes. Another cause of our present apparent
prosperity is to be found in the large sales of public lands.
The funds arising from their sale are treated as public revenue,
instead of being expended entirely on public works for the
improvement of the country. But for these two sources, the
prosperity we are now vaunting would be non-existent, and we
would have been forced ere this to adopt a different policy.
We will now go into the main question of this inquiry, as to
whether it is the best policy to buy what we require in a foreign
country if it can be imported at a less price than if made in the
country. But, before entering into the necessary demonstration
on the main question, we will briefly illustrate it by a familiar
argument, often used, say a steam engine. The engine can be
imported for, say, £ 1,000, but cannot be purchased in the country
for less than £1,150 —an advance of 15 per cent. Free traders
assert that it would be best to import it, as we would thereby
save £l5O. Protectionists, up to a couple of years back,
answered that, by making it in the country, we had the engine
and money as well. This can no longer be used as a good
argument, as it is evident that, although the money did not leave
the country, the cost of the materials and the goods consumed by
the workmen had to be paid for, and the goods were equal to
their money value. The case really stands thus : —Contractor’s
profit at 7 per cent, £BO 10s.; imported materials, £SOO ; profit
* f merchant at 7 per cent., £35 ; wages of labour, £569 10s.;
profit over cost of maintenance at 10 percent, £56 18s.; balance
of £512 12s. spent on maintenance at 10 per cent., £sl ; in all,
£223 Bs. secured to the country by the payment of £l5O. But
as the country, through the importer of the engine, should make
a profit of 5 per cent., amounting to £SO, this would bring the
advantage of making the engine in the country down to £23 Bs.
A free trader may reply that, although the engine cost less made
in the country, the protection given may, or did, withdraw the
capital and labour from more profitable employment, as individuals
are the best judges of the branches of industry affording a


profit. This is no part of the question. We have proved the
whole of what we undertook, hut the argument we have advanced
on behalf of Eree Trade will be fully answered in the main
inquiry to follow.
The real testing question with regard to Protection is : Can
existing industries be increased and new ones initiated by the
imposition of import duties on agricultural and manufacturing
products ; and how high can these duties range without saddling
the country with a loss ; and can such duties be imposed without
violating the golden rule of the greatest good for the greatest
number? for it must be borne in mind that the most just and
beneficial laws that have been or can be made do not confer
equal benefits on all classes of the community; but, on the
contrary, many new laws—especially relating to trade and
taxation—often inflict some amount of injustice on a few, in order
to benefit the many. The classification of imports and exports
show that we exported pastoral and raining produce to the value
of £ 11.479,000. As the price of this produce is regulated by the
rates ruling in Europe, and as pastoral production is limited by
the extent of land which must become less as permanent settle-
ment takes place, it is manifest that it cannot be increased by an
import duty. It could, no doubt, be increased by a bounty on
exportation; but the reasons on which bounties rested are no
longer recognised, nor could they be justified on any grounds as
applicable to mining and pastoral produce at the present time.
There might be exceptional circumstances in a given country
where they could be justly applied. Let us suppose some settled
country with established industries and superabundant labour,
possessed of a soil and climate that will not allow the production
of sufficient exportable commodities to pay for necessary goods
that cannot be produced in the country, and that such country
has land adapted to the production, we will say. of wool; but the
cost of production and export to a market leaves no profit—let us
say a loss of 5 per cent. Under such circumstances, no export could
take place, but a bounty of 10 per cent, on exportation would
stimulate production by giving the producer a profit of 5 per
cent., while the profits on the productive labour it brought into
action would repay the bounty and leave a profit of 5 per cent,
to the country.
When these circumstances arise here, similar treatment to that
suggested might be judiciously applied ; but the great spon-
taneous wealth which we possess in our pastures, and natural
wealth in our mineral deposits would not justify the expenditure
of general funds for their increase. We have more promising
industries to stimulate in agriculture and manufactures, and their
stimulation would benefit a larger number than if applied to
mining or pastoral industries. On the contrary, such natural
wealth is justly chargeable with a share of any incidental


expenses that may he incurred in settling the country, and
in establishing industries for supplying the country with most
of its necessaries. So far, this obligation has been recognised
and enforced by the imposition of rents, licenses, and taxes on
stock, while the miners have to contribute by either rents,
licenses, or royalties ; so that, if any incidental expenses fall on
them through the stimulation proposed to be given to agriculture
and manufactures, it is no more than they are entitled to bear.
The advancement of the country cannot be limited to pastoral
occupation, nor can it be allowed to stand in the way of, or bar,
permanent settlement. The land is destined for settlement, and
one acre of cultivated land will produce as much as twenty acres
•of pasturage. To allow this settlement to go on, and the colony
to progress in population, stimulation is required; and we hold
that it can be applied to agriculture and manufactures only, as
neither our exports nor the goods in the miscellaneous list are
within our power to stimulate at present. This miscellaneous
list, together with coin, amount to £8,542,000 ; it includes sugar,
tobacco, spirits, wine, beer, jewellery, three-fourths of the
drapery, four-fifths of the hardware, and all other goods not
included under either of the other heads. With the exception
of sugar and kerosene, already protected, they are not suitable
for production here except at a rate of duty that would leave the
•country with a loss ; but the larger portion of them could be justly
•charged with a duty to replace the duty on such goods as may be
made here, and now imported, or to increase the revenue if
necessary. This reduces the inquiry as to agricultural produce
and manufactured articles as enumerated, amounting together
to £7,512,000. These goods are of different kinds as to the
degree of manufacture —say, raw manufactured, manufactured,
and special manufactured —and are marked in the enumerated
list A, B, C, respectively. They may be estimated at one-third
of the whole each. If 10 per cent, is placed on A, 13 per
cent, on B, and 16 per cent, on C, this will be equivalent to
13 per cent, on the whole; but it is not necessary that a new
tariff should impose ad valorem duties on more than about one-
sixth of the several kinds of goods enumerated ; all the others
■could be specific. There may be a difference of opinion as to the
proportion that a 13 per cent duty would enable us to produce
in the colony by a given time ; but, in any case, it will not affect
the truth of the demonstration now to be given to show that we
can impose a duty averaging 13 per cent,, and have the whole of
it returned by the profits flowing from productive labour. We
will estimate the amount of goods that this stimulus is likely to
produce at one-half of the entire list, being £3,256,000, The
producers or emploj'ers, for profit and interest on capital, would
make not less than 5 per cent., which would amount to £162,800,
We estimate that materials would have to be imported,


•amounting to one-fifth, of the whole, which, would come to
£651,200 ; on this the importers would realise a profit of not less
than 5 per cent. ; this would come to £32,560. The balance of
£2,442,000 would be paid away by the employers among their
employes and others as salaries, wages, legal expenses; and out of
this sum they could save, over and above the cost of maintenance,
7% per cent., or Is. 6d. in the pound, expending 18s. 6d. on
maintenance. This saving or profit on labour would amount to
£183,000, leaving a balance of £2,258,850 to be expended amongst
all classes of the community, but principally amongst the distri-
butors keeping retail shops ; out of this sum shopkeepers and
others to whom it is paid would make a profit of not less than 10
percent , amounting to £225,885. Under such a stimulus, we are
fully warranted in believing that a reduction would be made in the
■number of men out of employment. This is very difficult to
estimate, but we will endeavour to keep under the probable
number, as the truth of the demonstration in no way depends
•on the number that are estimated to be put in employment.
Taking the number of working men and women engaged in
non-domestic employment at 180,000, and that three in every
hundred are out of employment at any one time, this will give
■5,400 in all in the whole of the colony, which is certainly under
the number. If we estimate that one-third of these will
.find employment, they will number 1,800 at 255. per
week on an average; and say they work 42 weeks in the year,
this will amount to £94,500. which must be taken as all gain to
ithe country, as they would have otherwise been idle. This
-aggregate profit amounts to £698,745.
As the duty of 13 per cent, would raise the price of the whole
•of the goods on which it was placed to an equal amount, and we
will add 1 per cent, more to anticipate an argument that is likely
to be advanced —that the duty will raise the price over and above
the amount of duty—this will.make it 14 per cent., which on the
whole of the goods will amount to £911,680; but, as we have
■only taken credit for the profit of making one-half of the goods,
the other half will pay the duty, which will go into the revenue,
and will have the same effect as if paid for tea or any other kind
of goods on which a duty is placed solely for revenue purposes.
It may be said that the profits are counted too high. We think, if
intoxicating drinks are not included in the cost of maintenance,
it is too low. However, as we said before, we prefer to be below
.rather than above the correct amount; we will, therefore, assume
that £IOO,OOO is spent in intoxicating drinks by the workmen
•out of their wages profits; but, as the sale of intoxicating drinks
afford a profit of 40 per cent., this will be reduced to £60,000
wasted, which we will deduct, as well as the 14 percent, duty
on the goods. These will amount together to £515,840, leaving
.£174,055 as a profit to the country, distributed amongst all


classes of the community. The profits shown in this demonstra-
tion may be taken exception to on the ground that we have not
the necessary workmen in the colony to produce commodities to
the value of £3,256,000 over present production in one year
hut, in any ease, the truth of the demonstration is not affected
by the value of the goods that may be made imder this stimulus.
If only one half of the quantity should be made, the propor-
tionate profit would remain the same, while this proportion
would in all probability reduce the number of the unemployed
to a greater extent than we have ventured to estimate; and it is
certain that we must find some employment for a portion of the
men now engaged in public works, as we cannot continue the
expenditure of borrowed money at the present rate ; and over
and above this there is the annual increase in population to assist
in this production.
The question now arises,—Has this alteration in the tariff
produced the greatest good for the greatest number ? To what
proportion of the population has these profits of £174,055
reached ? We have seen that it is distributed amongst employers,
importers, and workmen, and by them paid away to doctors,
lawyers, teachers, and other professions ; amongst shopkeepers
of every kind, including butchers, bakers, barbers, tailors, shoe-
makers, dressmakers, watchmakers, cabinetmakers, stationers,
candlemakers, soapboilers,—in fact, amongst all classes of the-
community with a few exceptions; but notwithstanding this wide
distribution of the benefits of productive labour, argiiments are
often used against protective duties, to the effect that its benefits,
are conferred exclusively on the manufacturers, producers, and
their employes engaged in protected industries. It is shown
in the above demonstration that out of the entire profits made,
the employers get £162,800; the importers, £32,560 ; the work-
men, £183.150; but £60,000 of this is supposed to be wasted in
intoxicating drink, and £40,000 given in profit to the publican.
The retailers and classes above enumerated get £225,885, and
the workmen who were out of employment get £113,400, but not
as profit above maintenance, as we have assumed that it will
take 25-. per week to keep them; but the retailers and
others will have the profit on their expenditure, which we
have not claimed as a credit in the demonstration.
The profit of 10 per cent., estimated to be made by the retailers
and others supplying the workmen, is rather below than above
the mark ; but, when the large number of small shops are taken
into consideration, and due allowance made for the maintenance
of the owners, the profit of 10 per cent, will not be all gain, as a
portion, at least, of their maintenance is justly chargeable against
the assumed increase in business; for, although a large portion
of such business may be fairly assumed to fall to existing shops,
an assumption that the number will be increased is equally


warranted. AVe will, therefore, allow one-half of the profit to
to he charged against this maintenance, amounting to £112,942.
This will reduce the net gain to £69,963 over and above the
increase in price of the goods, while affording employment and
maintenance to, at least, 30,000 persons and their families. So
that, without reference to the proportion of goods likely to he
made here through this proposed stimulation, the demonstration
shows that the proposed stimulation would cost the country 14
per cent., and would return a little over 16 per cent., exclusive of
the 1 per cent, allowed for a rise of price above the duty, and
40 per cent, profit on intoxicating liquors, which is not taken
into account in the above calculation.
We, however, do not assert that its beneficial effects will reach
everyone. Civil servants, annuitants, and others with fixed
incomes, will derive no direct benefit, but they will receive some
indirect advantages through the extra employment afforded to their
families. The employes in mining and pastoral industries will
not be benefited ; so far as the prices of the protected goods will
increase the cost of the material they use, and the tendency of
wages to be raised by increase of the cost of maintenance, it is
against them ; but it must be borne in mind that the amount of
goods to be affected by such duty are not one-half of those not
affected. But if the whole of the pastoral and mining employers,
Civil servants, and other persons with fixed incomes, are all added
together, they will not amount to one-tenth of the population ;
and as regards pastoral and mining emploj'-ers, they have the whole
natural wealth of the country in their possession, at rates that will
enable them to bear their share of this extra taxation. If their
employes cannot get arise of wages proportionate to the increase
in the cost of necessaries, they will suffer more than all the
others put together ; but, even if it is so, the miners are fully alive
to the general welfare of the country, and look forward to the
benefits that their families will derive from increased employ-
ment. Should particular industries receive more benefit than
others from such stimulus, competition soon claims a share, and
such industry is reduced to the same measure of profit as others.
There are exceptions to this general rule, as, for instance, when
some special industry has to be carried out by expensive plants
of machinery, and only capable of supporting a limited number
of such establishments in such country, the owners may be able
to secure profits in excess of the general rate ruling in the
country, and retain this for some time ; but this does not often
occur, and cannot well arise if the tariff is carefully and honestly
framed. It is further said, and used as an argument, that
while protection may benefit the producer, it is at the expense
of the consumer. The argument, when first heard and before it
has been considered, appears to have a ring of truth ahout it;
but, on consideration, we find it impossible to separate the interests


of consumers from that of the producers, except as regards a very
small portion of the community. They consist of two sections, the
first embracing Civil servants, judges, annuitants, and others with
fixed incomes; the second embraces thieves, gamblers, prostitutes,
loafers and all others who do nothing towards assisting in the
various services necessary for the demands of a civilized commu-
nity. All the remainder, say nineteen-twentieths, are engaged in
their various professions and occupations, all working in their
particular line either in the direct production of all the necessaries
of life, or assisting them by keeping order, looking after their
health and property, making tools, implements, and machinery,
carrying the produce to market, keeping a stock for those who
want to purchase, studying easier methods of performing neces-
sary operations, are all producers and consumers alike ; nor can
their interests be separated. The part they take in production,
no matter in what capacity, occupies a much larger share of their
time and attention than is bestowed on what they consume. All
know that if, by labour or service, they can produce goods or
money, the consuming portion is easy, and gives them little trouble.
But there is no doubt the two sections before mentioned are
more interested in the consumption than in the production of
goods. The first performs useful functions, and, no doubt, assist
production, but they have no interest in it beyond that of pur-
chase. The second section of non-producers have no interest in
its cost of production, only in its sale or purchase. It is a very
convenient phrase, but, in the way it is used, without meaning—
that a lawyer may desire to have bread cheapened, but he has no
desire to cheapen law; while the baker holds contrary opinions.
The grocer prays for a fall in boots ; the bootmaker desires a fall
in sugar, tea, and cheese. The bootmaker is a boot consumer, but,
he is more interested in the cost of production than consumption.
All producers are more interested as producers than as consumers.
It is only the non-producers, as above stated, that are more
interested as consumers than as producers.
Another argument often used against Protection, or rather
against any necessity for imposing duties with that object in
view, is used often in this form : That the only obstacle to the
extension of manufacturing and agricultural production lies in
the rate of wages ; that if the workmen in these industries were
to reduce their wages, all kinds of industries would be extended.
This argument is, no doubt, correct as far as it goes : that if
wages were lowered, the field of employment would be extended.
But it does not go far enough There are other elements which
enter into the cost of production besides wages. Rents, cost
of maintenance, profits and interest, are all active elements in the
cost of production. The reduction of wages is treated by many
as if the physical strength which supports labour cost its owner
nothing; as if the whole of the wages were a clear profit to the


earner, and it would be a general advantage to any community
that labour should be sold at a low rate. But it must be borne
in mind that the labour sold for wages has to be purchased
just as surely as any kind of goods. It has to be maintained
by the purchase of food, clothing, medicine, aud house
accommodation, and should afford some amusement and provision
for old age and education of a family. If a great reduction is
permanently made in wages, the cost of sustaining it must be
reduced also, and such reduction will extend to and affect every
class in the community. We have estimated the profit that
the rates of labour should afford at 7£ per cent, on the average
• —a rate evidently not too high when we consider the population
of the colony in connection with its area and great spontaneous
wealth of grass —and that a share of this can only reach the
mass of the population in the shape of increased wages as
compared with those ruling in Europe. In many tropical
countries, the natural or spontaneous wealth is so great that a
few hours’ labour per day is sufficient to produce all the
necessaries of subsistence ; and were the spontaneous wealth of
this colony equitably distributed by wise and just laws amongst
the inhabitants, it would fully sustain the present rate of wages,
and keep everyone willing to work in full employment. That it
fails in this latter particular is easily traceable to the existence of
one very unjust law and the neglect to carry out several good and
promising measures bearing on the question of wages. We
therefore hold that, although the rates of wages ruling here are
higher than affords full employment, they are not higher than
the circumstances of the country should warrant under good and
wise laws. The unjust luav above referred to is that of free or
assisted immigration. The policy of importing labour from
Europe with public funds is more particularly advocated by free
traders, without recognising the direct violation of their own
doctrines. Such a policy cannot be defended under the rule
of the greatest good for the greatest number. On the contrary,
it is based on principles that sets the above rule at defiance. It
takes the funds of the many and uses them for the benefit of the few.
No doubt, an increasing population operates beneficially in any
new country having land open for settlement and other channels
of industry requiring labour. The working man or seller of labour
can derive no benefit while he is a seller. When he becomes a
purchaser, he will share in the benefit, but not till then. The
injustice of this policy is attempted to be explained away on the
ground that the unoccupied lands of the colony belong to the
British nation at large, and that the nation has a claim to
participate in its benefits in the shape of funds to transport those
of the population too poor to pay their passages out to the
colony. We admit their claim and right to come and settle
here, and we are willing to admit them freely into this young


and flourishing partnership, but deny any claim they have to
share in the wealth we have created by our labour here. The
riches and benefits of new countries are open to all willing to go
and reap them. Ihose who refuse to go can have no just claim
on the result of the labour of their more industrious brethren.
It is further supported on the ground of its alleged general benefits,
one of which is that the cost of the passage is more than covered
by the taxes paid in two years. But this argument is manifestly
wrong, for, as a matter of fact, the amount of taxes per head has
•continued to increase more rapidly than the increase in the
population ; whereas, if the argument be good, the taxes would
have become less per head. If we had a large national debt like
England, immigration would extend it over a greater number ;
but as the greater portion of our national debt is invested in
reproductive works, it does not exist as a debt against the public.
The policy is an unjust one, and cannot be defended, except
as to female immigration, for the equalization of the sexes, which
has now adjusted itself, and calls for no expenditure But, on
what principle of justice can the sellers of labour be called upon
to contribute towards a fund to be expended in importing labour
to compete with the only thing they have for sale is beyond
proof. As a sample of Free Trade argument, I will briefly refer
to a pamphlet lately published, entitled Free Trade and
Wages , in which the writer uses the old stereotyped texts from
English works bearing on England, but never once refers to the
two questions standing out in such bold relief in any inquiry
into Free Trade and wages. Immigration at the public expense
is a direct violation of Free Trade principles, and its action on
labour is a violation of labour’s rights. Yet this inquiry is
silent on both points. It is like the play of Hamlet with the
parts of Hamlet and the Queen of Denmark left out. If
immigration at the public expense can be shown to be expedient
for the general good, the injustice of making all contribute to
the funds for carrying it out would be much less under a
Protective policy than a Free Trade one, for the obvious reason
that some provision would thereby be made for providing
employment. The question of free immigration cannot be fully
discussed here ; but when Free Trade advocates sanction
such a direct violation of their own doctrines—doctrines which
they declare are applicable to all countries under all
circumstances—they must expect to be reminded of their
inconsistency. The benefits which we expect to derive from
import duties are largely dependent on the question of wages.
This benefit we expect to derive more from an increase in
employment and production than in an increase in the rate of
wages. If efforts are made, and prove successful, to raise the
rate of wages to a point that will not afford payable work so as
to offer employment to all, the benefit will fall short of what we


expect. The question is a large one, and cannot be fully gone
into in this paper, but we will endeavour to do so briefly. The
“minimum rate of wages,” as fixed by trades unions for
sustaining or increasing the rates of wages more or less in
conformity with supply and demand, is the principal factor relied
on to maintain a fair rate. It has often occurred, and will
again, especially in great centres of manufacturing industry,
that, when a great demand arises for manufactured goods of some
particular kind, a great rise takes place in the price, and
manufacturers make large profits ; but the operatives are unable
to share in this prosperity, except by combining and forcing a
rise by a strike. That workmen have a perfect right to strike,
no sensible man can deny. The main question is—under what
state of circumstances is a strike to raise wages, or one to resist
■a reduction,'advisable in the interests of the workmen? The
proper index, and the only one to be relied on, as to whether
labour is being properly rewarded in the ruling rate of wages,
is to be found in the number of unemployed men. If the demand
is fully up to or over the supply, so that everyone willing and
•able to work can find employment, a rise may be justly claimed
and enforced by a strike. But if there are a great number out
•of employment, the rate of wages is as high, or probably higher,
than the circumstances of the case will afford under existing
laws. The rates of wages may, at different times, be below the
cost of subsistence, and they have been so in England in several
industries at different times. But strikes can in no way benefit
the workmen in cases of this kind. A remedy has to be found
in reforming the economic laws, regulating the imposition of
taxes, and distributing subsistence amongst all.
The minimum rate of wages which Trade Societies have
considered necessary as a safeguard against reductions under the
standard rate is, no doubt, adopted as the best means within
their reach; but, on close examination, the particular mode in
which it is brought to bear on the object acts injuriously in two
ways. It is unjust to all workmen below the average in physical
strength and mechanical ability, as the rule will not allow
employers to engage such men under the existing minimum
rate; they will give the employment in preference to the
workmen up to or above the average, so that when full employ-
ment is scarce, the scarcity falls mostly on the inferior workman.
We believe that the latter areas strong supporters of the rule as the
former through an erroneous estimate of its effect. Again, when
trade is declining through the price of manufactured goods not
being able to afford employment to all, the inferior workmen are
first paid off, and the average and superior workmen continued
in employment, who, being in a majority, and not feeling the
effects, are not inclined to lower their wages, as it were, for the
benefit of those out of work ; and in this state of trade the


aggregate earnings are often reduced below what they would be
if wages were lower. In fact, they are never more, and often,
less, than if a voluntary reduction of wages were accepted.
These evil effects could be got over by the adoption of an average
rate of wages for particular trades, giving the employers and the
employes liberty to arrange to pay or receive wages as much
above and below this average rate as each were satisfied to agree
to, subject to a proviso that might form part of the rule, that the
wages, on the whole, must come up to the average rate. By this
mode, each individual workman would have a certain range
within which he could please himself, whether to accept employ-
ment or not. That some trade rule is required to maintain a
fair rate of wages, and to prevent unscrupulous employers
stealing a march on other employers in the same line, and on their
workmen as well, cannot be denied ; but great care should be
exercised that such rule does not decrease the aggregate earnings,
by raising wages to a point at which employment cannot be
found for all, or nearly all, willing and able to work. If this is
not observed, the benefits to be expected in the shape of increased
employment and production under the stimulus of import duties
will not be realised. In fact, a rise of one shilling and sixpence
per day would nearly neutralise an import duty of 15 per cent. ;;
and one of two shillings would do so entirely in most colonial
industries, as it would absorb all the profit of production, leaving
nothing for the employers, who, under such circumstances, would
not undertake any work
We have seen that England, during the establishment of her
manufacturing industries, and long after, in fact, until she had
become a large exporter, had her trade protected ; but, when the
protection was no longer operative, a great agitation was started
to have the duties repealed, which was done in 1846. England
has since that date continued to use the same arguments, and
insists in applying them to a different set of circumstances, to try
and persuade other nations from following the same course she
adopted to establish manufactures, but rather to follow her
example since 1846. How far this advice has been followed is
revealed by a report published by order of the House of Commons
in 1881. This report gives the rates of import duties levied in
the twelve principal European nations, and in Egypt, Morocco,
Persia, Brazil, Argentine Confederation, United States, and all
the British colonies. We cannot give these duties in detail, but.
we will briefly give some index of their number and extent.
To begin with, France has heavy duties on nearly all her
manufactured goods; they are mostly specific, about one-sixth
being ad valorem, and range from 6 to 70 per cent. All the
textile manufactures are heavily taxed. Iron, which is the
lowest, ranges from 16s. to £8 per ton ; machinery from £2 10s.
to £lO per ton. The duties will average all round 20 per cent..


Russia has not imposed duties on so many articles as France,
but they are heavier, and will average 35 per cent. Iron,
unmanufactured, is £5 per ton ; manufactured, £4O per ton. All
the principal articles of import are subject to duty, except certain
classes of machinery, which are admitted free. Germany has a
much more moderate tariff than Russia; the duties will average
about 16 per cent. Unmanufactured iron is admitted at 255. per
ton; manufactured, at £4 per ton ; paper, 8 to 20 per cent. All
tissues are subject to heavy duties, ranging from 10 to 20 per cent.
Holland. —The duties are partly specific and partly ad valorem ,
ranging from 5 to 15 per cent., and would average about
7 per cent. Belgium has higher duties than Holland.
Iron and steel is admitted free (as it is not imported);,
manufactured iron and machinery, 10 per cent.; the average
duties will amount to about 12 per cent. Denmark imposes
a duty on most manufactured articles; all tissues are heavily
taxed; iron unmanufactured is admitted free; manufactured
ranges from £3 10s. to £7O per ton ; they will average about
20 per cent, Sweden. —About one-fourth of the imports are
free ; the remainder subject to duties, most of which are specific.
They range from 5 to 20 per cent., and will average about 10
per cent. Norway. —All the duties are specific, one-fourth of the
imports being free; they will average 7 percent. Austria. —The
duties are mostly specific, and are imposed on nearly all imports ;
they range from 5 to 20 per cent., and will average about 12 per
cent. Italy. —Nearly every article is subject to duty; they
range from sto 35 per cent., and will average about 18 per cent.
Iron ranges from free to £l4 per ton, according to the degree of
manufacture. Spain has heavy duties on nearly all imports;
they are mostly specific, and range from 6to 85 per cent.; they
will average about 30 per cent. Portugal admits about one-tenth
of her imports free ; the duties on the remainder are mostly
specific, and will average about 23 per cent. Switzerland has
a very moderate tariff. The duties are spread over nearly every
article, but will not average more than 6 per cent. Greece
admits agricultural machinery and some other kinds free, but
has a stiff tariff that will average 18 per cent. Roumania admits
machinery free, and prohibits a few articles, and levies a
moderate duty on the remainder, which will average about
8 per cent. Turkey admits some articles free and prohibits
others ; the duties are both specific and ad valorem, and are
levied on almost all imports, and will average 7£ per cent.
United States. —The duties are partly specific and partly
ad valorem ; they range from 10 to 70 per cent., and will average
35 per cent. Yarns, 35 per cent ; cotton tissues, 35 per cent.
woollen tissues, 35 to 42 per cent.; linen, 35 to 40 per cent. ;,
silk, 60 per cent. ; iron, unmanufactured, £5 ss. per ton
manufactured, 10 to 50 per cent. ; machinery, 45 per cent.


•cordage, £ll to £l6 per ton ; carriages, 35 percent.; leather, 15
to 50 per cent.; paper, 30 per cent. The tariff imposes a duty on
nearly every import, and will average 35 per cent. Canada. —
The duties are nearly all ad valorem , and range from 15 to 35 per
•cent, for Canada proper, and from to 15 per cent, in the
provinces. In Canada proper, pig iron is admitted at 8s 4d. per
ton ; other iron, from 10 to 17 per cent. ; leather, 10 to 20 per
•cent. ; boots and harness, 25 per cent. ; carriages, 30 per cent.;
firearms, 20 per cent. ; paper, 15 to 20 per cent.; machinery, 25
per cent. ; agricultural implements and tools, 30 per cent.;
cotton, linen, silk, and woollen tissues range from 20 to 40 per
■cent. ; wearing apparel, 30 per cent. ; cutlery, 20 per cent. All the
duties will average 25 per cent, and only a few articles are admitted
free. Cape of Good Hope. —Most all the leading articles, as well
as provisions, are subject to duties, mostly ad valorem at 10 per cent.
Anchors, chains, pig and hoop iron, and agricultural implements,
are admitted free ; the duties will average 10 per cent. Natal
admits tissues of cotton, linen, jute, agricultural implements, pig
and hoop iron, and a few other articles free. Nearly all other
articles, including provisions, are subject to a duty of 6 per cent.
ad valorem, or specific to an equal amount. Fiji admits one half
of her imports free; the balance is subject to duties, mostly ad
valorem, ranging from 5 to 20 per cent., and will average about
12 per cent. Jamaica admits only a very few articles free; there
are a few specific duties, but they are mostly ad valorem at 12£
per cent., which they will average all around. Java, Persia,
and Tunis have tariffs which impose duties that will average
7 per cent. Cuba. —The duties range from 10 to 250 per cent.,
and will average about 30 per cent. ; they include all staple
manufactures of every kind Brazil admits some agricultural
implements and railway material free: All other goods are
subject to ad valorem duties ranging from 7£ to 60 per cent., and
will average 35 per cent, all around. Argentine Confederation
imposes ad valorem duties on almost every kind of goods, ranging
from 5 to 40 per cent., and will average at least 25 per cent, all
around. It will not be necessary to refer here to the tariffs of
the Australian colonies and New Zealand, as readers are, no
doubt, in possession of more full information than space will
permit us to give here.
It is evident from the above sketch of the tariffs of the world
that England’s Free Trade doctrines have not been success-
ful in convincing other nations that the steps she took for esta-
blishing her manufactures are not still the best for all nations
who are not content to remain producers and exporters of raw
material. That England should advocate Free Trade doctrines
may be expected, and we cannot blame English free traders
for endeavoring to convince other nations that it is likewise
their best policy ; but for Free Trade advocates here to take up


the position that all the rest of the world are mad, because they
will not follow their advice, goes a long way beyond the modest
juryman who only condemned ten men for not taking his view
of the case. When the question of Protection crops up in con-
versation, the effect on many is something astonishing. Men
perfectly sane and reasonable on all other questions are insanely
intolerant and unreasonable on this. Men can agree, or agree
to differ, on most other questions; but Free Trade doctrines are
held to be beyond question or examination. There must be some
cause or causes for this, and we believe the cause is to be found
in the fact that the instruction given in boyhood, before the mind
is capable of reasoning out the why and wherefor, takes such a
firm hold on their belief, that it remains fixed and immovable,
like religious beliefs or dogmas. Again: in cases of intense
application 'and excitement, during the agitation of some im-
portant question, the budding minds of young men just begin-
ning to exercise their mental faculties often get unhinged on the
question under discussion, and a kind of mental dislocation takes
place, in which the opinions so formed get so firmly fixed on the
mind, that no subsequent examination will be entertained. Such
opinions are defended by assertions which they neglect or refuse
to reason out to their ultimate conclusions. This is the only
rational explanation why so many men who accepted Free Trade
doctrines in their youth as applicable to England cannot logically
examine their applicability to this colony. There is likewise to
be found amongst the free traders in this colony a large number
of men too indolent to examine the question for themselves, and
others incapable of such an examination, who are forced to take
shelter under the .ZEgis of Free Trade doctrines. We do not
contend for a moment that many intelligent and thoughtful men
are not to be found on both sides of the question. Free Trade is
in operation here, and minds of a conservative turn are, as a rule,
opposed to changes. The question is largely one of sympathy
and sentiment. Free Trade in this colony tends to the concentra-
tion of wealth in the hands of a few—that is. the merchants
and graziers. Protection would distribute wealth over a larger
number, and this will explain the preference given to one oyer
the other by sensible men not directly interested. Protectionists
here cannot be charged with any kind cf mental craze like the-
one referred to above, from which a number of Free Traders are
suffering, but it cannot be denied that many protectionists make
wild statements, both as to facts and inferences on various
aspects of the question, that has helped to prevent its acceptance
by many. These wild statements are, as a rule, published by tho
Free Trade journals, and the facts corrected and the fallacies
exposed ; but a great improvement has taken place lately in
the quality of the arguments used by protectionists, and it is to-
be hoped that advocates will temper their zeal, and carefully


ascertain facts, and consider well their bearings on the question
before making them public.
In order to prove that Free Trade is more conducive to prosperity
than Protection, comparisons are drawn between England and the
United States and Canada, few of which are correctly stated or
logically applied. It is contended that, as the imports and exports of
the former exceed in value those of the latter, England is the most
prosperous of the three. Now, to apply this as a test for deter-
mining such a question is the height of absurdity. England is,
on the whole, a manufacturing country, and is carrying out a
Free Trade policy to increase, as far as possible, her imports and
exports, the amount of which is, no doubt, an important index of
her prosperity. The United States and Canada, on the contrary,
are carrying out a policy with the view of establishing manu-
factures for supplying as far as possible their own wants ; so
that, instead of a decrease in their imports and exports, or a less
amount per head as compared with England, being a sign of
diminished production, it is the reverse. It shows that the policy
is succeeding in attaining the object for which it was adopted.
England has in all probability acquired wealth at as rapid a rate,
in proportion to her population, as the United States ; but when
the uses to which that wealth is applied in both countries are
taken into account, America has far outstripped England in the
utilisation of wealth. It is, no doubt, true that some of the
channels of distribution have been congested since America adopted
a protective policy, and during these depressions the operatives
have suffered greatly for want of employment, and a small
number of men have been able to engross an immense amount of
wealth, to the detriment of the mass; but, notwithstanding this
diversion, the population, as a rule, lived in comfort. They have
paid off an immense debt, have built many thousands of miles of
railway, expensive iron bridges, waterworks, constructed roads,
enlarged cities, and built new ones, and made improvements all
over the country; and although for this purpose they had to
borrow foreign money, at the present time they have nearly as
much invested in foreign countries as foreign countries have in
the States; so that all this may be said to have taken place
during the last thirty years from the products of industry.
Could this have been accomplished if the policy of Protection
acts as injuriously, or half as injuriously, as Free Trade advo-
cates allege ? They say that America has done all this in spite
of Protection, and that it has directed one half the productive
power of America from agricultural pursiiits, the most profitable,
to manufacturing, the least profitable. Now, let any sensible
educated man ask himself —What would have been the condition
of America at the present time if they had relied for their
supplies of manufactured goods from Europe, and devoted their
whole labour power to the production and export of raw produce ?


The productive power of America at the present time, solely-
directed to agricultural products, would supply—and more than
supply—all the markets of the world in such produce; and if this
had taken place, what would he the price of such produce —
what would be the condition of the country ? Where would the
swarms of wealthy tourists be ? Where would that large wealthy
and educated class so numerous in the Atlantic States be ? Where
would the leisured class that now devote themselves to literary
and scientific pursuits be ? The only reasonable answer is—
Scattered over the Western States, raising produce to be exported
to Europe in payment for manufactured goods. What would the
population have amounted to ? What would the rates of wages,
interest, and profits have been ? Let everyone answer this
question for themselves, and, while considering the answer,
remember the state of Canada up to 1860, before she adopted a
Protective policy. It may be contended that, without Protection,
America could have gone into manufacturing industries. Perhaps
so ; but a reduction of wages must have taken place nearly to the
level of those ruling in England. Without Protection, America
must have been a much smaller and poorer nation, and depend-
ing so largely on Europe as to place her in a very dependent
position, while under her present policy her annual increase of
wealth is more than double that of England.
During this period the channels of English industry have
likewise ceased to flow at different times, inflicting great suffering
on the working classes. But the great difference in this respect
between the two countries is, that want of employment, or only
partial employment, with insufficient food for 20 per cent, of the
working class in England, has become chronic for the last eighteen
years—so much so that no notice is taken of it. It is only when
stagnation has increased the number and intensified the distress
that it becomes known. We do not charge this entirely to
England’s Free Trade policy, but to other causes; but, most
undoubtedly, Free Trade, by finding markets over the world, has
increased the population beyond the proper limits of prudence. It
is now dependent for such a large proportion of its food and
material for manufacture on foreign countries that it is liable to
great vicissitudes. During the American war the failure of a
supply of cotton caused great loss and suffering. The money loss
alone was estimated at sixty-five to seventy millions. But,
notwithstanding expensive wars and other drawbacks, England
has accumulated an immense amount of wealth. But we cannot
shut our eyes to the fact that, so far as it is useful to minister to
the wants of the population generally, three-fourths of it might
as well be at the bottom of the Atlantic. And this misdirection
is largely chargeable to Free Trade uncontrolled by j ust laws of
distribution. It has brought into existence an immense army of
agents, brokers, and commission agents. It has increased the


cost of distribution by the great expense now incurred in finding
markets and pushing sales. The whole aspect of English trade
forces us to the conclusion that, although Free Trade is the best
policy for England, it forces her into such a dependent position
that should serve as a warning to all young nations to avoid
such a policy. France has been, and is still, following out a
Protectionist policy ; and if anyone is desirous of ascertaining
which is the best of the two policies, so far as they can be
ascertained by observation and investigation of the state of
England as compared with France, he would have overwhelming
evidence that the latter is acquiring wealth at a greater rate than
the former, and is applying it in a more useful way. No doubt,
the French have a grand country to support them ; yet, when w©
consider the gigantic wars that the nation has been engaged
in. the payment of the indemnity to Germany, and the progress
made in all branches of industry, trade, and internal commerce,
and the general well being of the mass of her people, it clearly
shows that Protection can have been no barrier to her general
prosperity.
Comparisons are frequently instituted between Yictoria and
New South Wales as to their relative wealth and prosperity, and
it is endeavoured to measure their relative prosperity by the
amount of their imports and exports. The same objection applies
to this mode of estimation as applied to England and America.
When the exports and imports of both colonies were published,
a shout of triumph emanated from the Free Trade journals here
that those of New South Wales exceeded those of Yictoria. This
inability to apply the facts logically to the circumstances show
to what extent our journalists are acquainted with financial
questions. Had the Yictorian imports and exports continued in
excess of ours, or had increased in amount, they might have
pointed to the fact as proof that the Protective policy of Yictoria
had failed in its object—that is, to increase the amount of home
production; but, being less, it surely showed that the policy was suc-
ceeding. If the amount of imports and exports can be applied to
gauge the relative prosperity of the various Australian colonies,
Western Australia must be held to occupy the premier position, as
they import and export more per head than any other colony.
But we know to the contrary, and likewise that no country’s
prosperity can be measured by such a gauge. Again, it is
endeavoured to be shown that our rate of increase in population,
is due to our Free Trade policy as compared with Yictoria, with
no more intelligent application of the facts than in the former
case. In Victoria, which only has an area of about two-sevenths
of New South Wales, the greater portion of the land has already
become settled, or private property blocked from settlement,
while we have still a large area of public land unsettled; and
although a large portion is, like Victoria, blocked from settlement,


we have more than double the quantity of land open for
settlement; and while Victoria relies on the attractions of the
country to draw population, we continue to spend a large sum of
money annually in importing it. Again, we have been spendirg
a larger amount of borrowed money on public works that have
had a considerable influence in attracting population to the
colony, and the circulation of this borrowed money has caused
such a great inflation in values that our apparent prosperity is
greater than the reality. In any case the statistics commented
on by the Free Trade journals and their correspondents will
not intelligently fit in to prove what they desire, but, on the
contrary, to prove the opposite —that the Protective policy of
Victoria is gradually effecting its object. If a careful estimate
is made of the relative wealth and prosperity of the two colonies,
with the aid of the public statistics bearing on the question, and
with personal knowledge of both countries, there is no doubt
that Victoria has acquired a greater amount of realised wealth
than New South Wales, and that such wealth is more equally
distributed. There is a far greater number of middle class men
in easy circumstances in Melbourne than in Sydney, and the
difference is more marked in the country districts than in the
two capitals. New South Wales has the advantage in extent
of natural and spontaneous wealth; Victoria has the advan-
tage of a larger amount of machinery and organised labour
to aid production; and, although she has imposed duties
on some articles now produced in the country above the
profits of productive labour, and placed duties on others
without attaining the desired end, these latter duties have
no worse effect than if placed on any other goods for revenue
purposes. That there are duties on a few kinds of goods in
excess of requirements, and that their effect is to largely
neutralise the protection given by the duties on other goods, is
certain ; but that her Protective policy on the whole has been
beneficial is equally beyond doubt. What would be the probable
state of Victoria had she continued on a Free Trade policy up
to the present time ? Could she have sustained a population
equal to her present one, and maintained the present rate of
wages, profits, and interest? No; she would have been
compelled to reduce wages, profits, interest, and salaries, to
maintain her present population, or be content to allow a large
portion of it to find homes in other colonies, and by that means
share her natural wealth amongst a smaller number, to prevent
an all-round fall in values. And this must have taken place
when the yield of gold was so suddenly reduced, had she not
resorted to a Protective policy. Graziers and merchants would
have made large fortunes, for it cannot be denied that, so far as
their interests are concerned. Free Trade is the best. No doubt,
merchants employ a few confidential men, and give them good


salaries; but this is confined to a small number. All the
remainder, together with the employes of the graziers, would be
comparatively poor men ; and, although distributors would share
in the profits made from raising and exporting raw produce, the
numbers would be small as compared with the present.
Suburban villas would, no doubt, be scattered over Toorak, St.
Kilda, and Brighton, but they would be few and far between as
compared with those to be seen at present in the suburbs of
Melbourne; but the difference would be still more marked in
the number of dwellings less pretentious than the villas and
good and substantial houses which distributors and manufacturers
have erected in and around Melbourne for their accommodation.
But for the Protective policy of Victoria, history would have
repeated itself there as everywhere else, that all communities
depending on the production and export of raw material, in
ancient as well as modern times, offer fortunes to a few and
impose hard toil and poverty on the many.
New Zealand borrowed and spent largely on public works in
excess of requirements some ten years back when she had a very
limited home market. She took steps to increase its extent, but,
judging by the result, did not go far enough, as the interest of her
large debt has still to be borne by pastoral and agricultural
industries. A large portion of her produce has to seek a market
in Europe. Costing over 30 per cent, in freight, the net price
realised places her in a very inferior position to Canada or the
United States as exporters of grain and meat. She is too far
from a market for such produce, and will see the necessity of
taking the necessary steps to have a market created for her food,,
instead of sending her food to such a distant market.
South Australia and Queensland are both in a similar position,
with regard to agricultural and meat production. They have,,
no doubt, large areas of pasturage that will for a long time-
furnish them with funds from the wool export to purchase what
they require, but cannot produce; and it will be to their interest
to assist the production of all kinds of agricultural products and
manufactured goods that can be produced in their respective-
colonies on a moderate duty not greater than the profits on
productive labour. They have both gone further in passing
measures with that object in view than New South Wales.
Both countries, being newer, and having a greater proportion,
of natural wealth in proportion to population to operate upon,,
those measures have up to now produced little effect.
New South Wales at the present time must be considered as.
a new country in the first stages of settlement, with but few
appliances and little organisation for the production of the-
various necessaries of life, depending on the export of pastoral
and mineral products for the means of payment of the
imported goods. That this dependent position on other


countries is a bad one, no reflective and well-informed man
having' the welfare of the country at heart can deny ; nor can he-
deny the claim that the community has on his services to procure
the adoption of a colonial policy calculated to increase our
independence in this particular. The list of imports and exports,
when divested of the repetitions and intermixture of imports-
with exports and vice versa , show that we exported goods to the
value of £11,479,000, and imported to the value of £16,054,000-
—a difference of £4,575.000 ; and after payment of the
present interest, which is increasing rapidly, to foreign nations,
the balance of £10,234,000, with the addition of freight and
charges, must return to us in the shape of manufactured goods.
We have put the case in this way so as to anticipate and answer
the strongest case that can be stated in favour of a Free Trade
policy, as it shows that, even if a Protective policy were in
operation, the value of our exports, after deducting the interest
we owe to foreign nations, must be accepted in the shape of
manufactured goods. But, as our imports reached over sixteen
millions last year—that is, nearly six millions more than the
amount owed to us for exports —we have here a large field open
to colonial production under the stimulus of Protective duties.
It may be contended that this large import was caused by the
goods required for those engaged in the construction of public
works, and, but for this expenditure of borrowed money, would
not have been necessary. Well, this contention, so far as it
goes, is, no doubt, correct; but it does not alter the position of
the case in the slightest, as a similar amount of labour to that
employed in public works could be directed by a protective policy
into manufactures, or, at all events, a large proportion of it; for
this labour, so directed, would require goods for its support as well
as if engaged in public works, and their labour would produce'such
goods here instead of importing them. The only difference between
stimulating industry by the expenditure of borrowed money or
protective duties is that in the former case the stimulation costs-
nothing during the period of expenditure, and if the money is
wisely expended in reproductive works, nothing afterwards, and.
the whole of the profits made are retained in the country. In the
latter, the stimulation will cost the country the whole of the
increased price of the goods which it has caused to be made
here, and we will assume that the increase is equal to the duty,
and one per cent, additional for a few years, until competition
comes into full play ; but the cost of this stimulation will be
more than repaid to the community by the profit made by the
employers, by the importers of goods required, by the saving in
wages and salaries over and above maintenance, by the profits
made by retailers of the goods required by workmen, and by the-
employment given to workmen that would otherwise have been,
idle. The aggregate of these profits will amount to 16 percent.


as already shown, so that stimulation up to or nearly equal to
this may be safely applied to colonial production.
Against thispolioy we have all kinds of objections urged by those
-engaged in the export and import trade. That it is to their interest
that the present policy should continue, and even he extended,
is beyond doubt; but its benefits cease there. The interests
•of the great army of distributors does not depend on selling im-
ported goods more than colonial-made goods, butthe other way. Ten
thousand pounds worth of imported goods involve distribution
to that amount only, but ten thousand pounds worth of colonial-
made goods require almost an equal amount of goods distributed
for the support of the workmen engaged in their production,
and then the distribution of the ten thousand pounds worth as
well. As an answer to this view of the case, it may he contended
that the same distribution of goods would be required for the
support of the workmen that produced the exported goods that
went to pay for the imported—making the distribution equal in
both cases; hut this contention is based on a supposition that we
have the same power to stimulate an increase in the exports as
in home production. This inquiry has already shown that we
have not power to stimulate our exports, and that we can not
-only stimulate home production, but do so, and increase our
profits. Importers object to such stimulation really because
it tends to diminish their trade, but pretend that they do so on
the ground that it is assisting one class at the expense of another.
Now, we will be able to show that they do receive assistance at
“the expense of the manufacturing classes ; and not only raise no
objection, but ask for more. External commerce is fostered and
assisted in many ways at the expense of manufacturing industries.
By referring to the railway rates charged for different classes of
goods, it will be seen that coals, ores, hoofs, horns, bones, and
wool are charged at lower rates of freight than merchandise,
which means manufactured goods. The rate for wool is at per
bale, which will, when the bulky nature of it is taken into account,
be equivalent to three-and-a-quarter hundredweight per bale. At
this weight, the carriage from Hay will amount to 635. per ton for
454 miles; but, as the comparative rates are given for distances
of 150 miles, we will take wool at that distance, which is 7s. 9d.
per bale of 3 cwt. 1 qr., or 40s. per ton. The average rate
for iron is 50s; ironmongery, 845.; carpentry, 845.; leather, 495.;
millinery, 1095.; measurement goods (80 cubic feet), 495.; paper,
245. : furniture, 109 s. ; machinery, 84s ; lead, 61s. ; hardware,
845.; kerosene oil, 495. ; agricultural machinery, 84s. ; averaging
71s. per ton for 150 miles, as against wool charged 40s. for the
same distance. If the same goods are contrasted with wool, each
at 377 miles, they show —wool, 63s , and the above articles. 1555.
Hides, horns, hoofs, bones, ores, and coals, are charged 12s. 6d.
per ton for 150 miles, as against the articles above stated at 71s.


for the same distance. This protection and stimulation given to-
export industries, at the expense of manufacturing, is given to
the graziers and merchants; yet they have the audacity to accuse
all others that advocate protective stimulation to the industries
with which they are connected, as ‘‘ ignorant, selfish, 'political
schemers .” But there are other ways in which our present policy
is made to play into the hands of the importers. The railway
from Junee to B[ay was made in the interests of the graziers and
importers. It is now being carried on at a loss of £58,000, partly
through making a line where it was not required, and partly
by charging too low rates, with the object of securing the trade
that otherwise, it is presumed, would go to Melbourne. When
the charges on the Hay line are contrasted with the rates ruling in
districts outside this competition, they show wool 635. per ton
from Hay. Other places for the same distance, 120 s. per ton.
Merchandise to Hay, 110 s., and by the truck, 675. per ton, as
against other places for the same distance, 1965. per ton. The
loss at which the line is being wrought will, no doubt, be reduced
by the profit made out of a portion of the freight carried over
the main line ; but this can be but small on goods carried 454
miles at 635. and 675. per ton respectively. The whole earnings
of the Hay line only amounted to £53,000 for 1883. If we
allowed a proportionate profit to that made on the whole traffic,
it would only amount to about £20,000; but the low rates at
which goods are carried to and from Hay, or other stations on
the line, cannot afford a profit (if any) of more than £IO,OOO,
leaving a loss of £48,000. The merchants and graziers see
nothing wrong in this, as it secures trade that would otherwise go
to Melbourne. This may. or may not, be a wise policy; but
surely, if it can be justified in the interests of trade and cnmnieice,
justification would be stronger in the interests of manufacturing
production. All this protection and assistance to increase external
commerce they take from the public without acknowledgment,
and ask that similar advantages be extended to other tiacks of
country. They have been successful in getting the line made to
Bourke in the interests of commerce; and, although it must be
wrought at a loss for some years, it will, no doubt, eventually
pay if fair rates are charged. They are now pulling the wires to
get lines made in several places that cannot pay. One of these—
from Orange to Wilcannia —cannot be wrought under an annual
loss of £140,000 for the next twenty years. The subsidies to
mail and telegraph lines are all supported, with the object of
assisting external commerce ; and the absurd doctrine that a
country’s welfare and prosperity depends on the amount of its
exports and imports is being constantly proclaimed and dinned
into one’s ears by every means within their reach.
It may be urged that this distinction between produce and
merchandise is maintained in other countries. A distinction may


“be necessary, but the great difference in rates is unjust. That it
is not made between pastoral and agricultural produce is only
fair, but that it is made between these two and manufactured
products is extreme injustice, and cannot be justly defended.
As already pointed out, the large expenditure on public works
bus stimulated industry to a great extent, but it has, in a great
measure, been confined to unskilled labour and those supplying
them with necessaries. It has caused little improvement amongst
those engaged in manufactures, who find outside competition
getting keener every year since 1881. At this time general
depression in trade commenced in England, which has compelled
manufacturers there to push sales in every available market;
.and, as the duties on goods are lighter in New South Wales than
any other country, we have had more than our share, and more
than we can stand, unless we are prepared to have the few
industries we now possess cut off in detail. We are not in
possession of reliable information as to what industries, or to
what extent they have been reduced or prevented from expanding
with the increase of population, but the Chamber of Manufactures,
lately established, are about taking steps to procure such informa-
tion. We, however, know that carriage, cabinet, boot, harness,
and agricultural implement makers, tweed manufacturers, rope
manufacturers, glass works, clothing manufacturers, engineering
works, and other branches of iron workers have either been
reduced, or prevented from expanding with the increase of
population. The importations from Europe are not confined to
the orders of established houses; a large portion of them are
goods of inferior quality and speculative ventures, that have to
be sold at what they will bring—injuring both the manufacturer
and legitimate trader here, without benefiting the general
public —for, although the colony gets the benefit, the consumers
■do not, as the difference between the price of such goods and
the ruling price here is swallowed up in most cases by an army
of dealers which this state of things has created.
The competition from Victoria, although confined to fewer
articles, is even more severe and destructive than that from
Europe and America. The manufactures of Victoria, in some
lines of business, solicit orders for goods under cost price to keep
clear of surplus stock. In other lines the encouragement given
by the protective policy gives them an opportunity to go into
their business with all proper machinery and appliances, which,
under organisation and careful management, enable them to
produce goods, and sell them here at a small profit, the price
being at a rate under the cost of production here. There are
other industries that are as far advanced here as in Victoria, and
can produce goods at as low a rate, but are unable to realise at a
profit that will return bank interest on the money invested, from
the fact that the same industries in Victoria are selling the bulk


of their turn-out at a fair profit, and are willing and eager to sell
the surplus at cost price, if they can do no better. This might
be stopped if manufacturers here could send goods into Victoria
at the same rate of duty as Victorian goods are admitted into
Sydney, but this is prevented by the heavy duties imposed on
importations into Victoria. The agricultural producers are in a
similar state ; the importations from Victoria and New Zealand
supply one-third of the demand, and dominate the price of the
remainder. The only remedy for the present evils pressing on
agriculturists and manufacturers alike is by imposing import
duties that must not exceed the profits on productive labour, to
stimulate production here. Increased taxation is inevitable.
During the last three years we have spent the surplus revenue
that we had accumulated, amounting to over two millions. We
will now have to provide revenue from taxation to meet the
interest on our increased loans, to make up the loss in pastoral
rents occasioned by the new Land Act, and to repay the money
we have expended in excess of our income during the year
(a large portion of which has been wasted in extravagant and
unnecessary expenditure). These obligations will amount
together to £1,200,000, if not more. From what sources is the
revenue to meet this to be derived ? Will increased duties be
imposed on tea, sugar, and tobacco, or on manufactured goods
suitable for part production here ? Will pastoral rents, property,
and incomes be called upon to provide the whole or part of the
requisite funds ? Will excise duties be placed on colonial wines,
beer, sugar, and tobacco ? The employers and producers in these
industries are at the present time resting in a state of false
security that will be suddenly dispelled should the present
Government be enabled to retain office after the ensuing election.
This is, no doubt, improbable; but their inevitable successors,
although they may not attempt to burden colonial production
with excise duties, will, if they have the power, throw the greater
portion of increased taxation on to industry in another form, by
imposing duties on all kinds of imported goods that cannot be
produced here, and the balance from an income tax. Increased
taxation is objectionable from any source, and will have to be
endured; but it is our duty to place it where it will be least felt
as a burden. This will be best attained by placing it on such
manufactured goods as can be partly produced here, as the profits
on the portion made here will partly repay the duty on the
imported portion. To get the benefit of Protection, farmers
will have to submit to pay higher prices—for a time, at least—
for their implements, clothing, and other necessaries, and those
engaged in manufactures will have to submit to an increase in
the cost of most articles of food and necessaries; and both
agriculturists, manufacturers, and workmen will have to rely, not
so much on an increased price, as on a small profit, or a greater


quantity. The increase of manufactures will create an increasing
demand for the goods of the farmer and gardener, while the
extension of farming will extend the market of the manufacturer
and employment for workmen, and so build up a settled country
with all the accompaniments of civilization.
The evils of gluts and over-production, so disastrous to the
great mass of people in large manufacturing centres, is in a
great measure due to the gambling spirit engendered by Free
Trade, and infused into the present generation; and we are now —
in the latter part of the nineteenth century, with all our boasted
civilisation, with valuable machinery, operated by steam, which
mechanical skill, aided by science, has brought to bear on the
production of the greater portion of the necessaries of life—in the
deplorable condition that the channels of distribution get gorged
and stagnated, and refuse to convey the necessaries of life to
starving thousands. There are other laws operating along with
Free Trade in producing this deplorable state of things, but
Free Trade is the most active. The great bulk of goods exported
from England to this and other counti’ies are increased in cost to
the consumers at least sixty per cent, beyond the cost of manu-
facture by the enormous expenses incurred in forcing sales. If
we wish to avoid this state of things, we must adopt a policy that
will stimulate production up to the point of home supply, of all
articles that can be produced here without any loss or charge on the
community. A protective policy will assist us thus far, but no
further. Here we must rest content with raising the most
suitable goods for export to pay for what we require, but cannot
produce.
For the reasons given in the above inquiry, we hold that
protected trade is the best suited for New South Wales ; but the
mere fact of holding such an opinion, and convincing others that
it is a correct one, can be of no practical utility unless we are
prepared to take the necessary steps to have them carried into
practice. The first thing necessary for this purpose is an
individual resolve to sacrifice some time and even money to
procure their adoption. Without some such spur to action,
nothing can be done. All great measures of reform require,
and, if successful, have been supported and carried out in a
patriotic spirit of this kind. If this spirit is absent in the
present generation, we must defer the accomplishment of carrying
such a measure until a more patriotic generation takes up the
question. We cannot conceal from ourselves that great obstacles
exist against such a policy as we desire. When the protective
policy of Victoria was adopted, the circumstances were more
favorable than exist here at present. The question had been
well considered and privately discussed long before active
measures were taken to have it carried. The proprietors of the
Age newspaper were in favour of such a policy, and advocated its


adoption ; and its columns were at all times open to full discus-
sion on both sides of the question. Several prominent politicians,
some of them actively engaged in commercial pursuits, who had
occupied ministerial positions, believed in the policy of Protection.
During the height of the agitation, one of these (Mr. Francis)
was called upon to form an Administration, which he succeeded
in doing, on protective lines, and a protective policy was carried,
We have none of these favorable circumstances operating in our
favour. Careful consideration of the question privately has not
to any useful extent preceded public advocacy. None of the
leading journals believe in, or advocate, a protective policy ; but
some of them, on the contrary, exhibit the greatest hostility, not
only against the policy, but against all its advocates, by excluding
from their columns the best articles and admitting the worst —by
suppressing the greater and best portion of the speeches and
lectures given on the question —and by imputations of ignorance
and selfishness against the greater number of its advocates.
Surely, one would think, if their convictions were as strong
against the wisdom of a protective policy as their writings
profess, they should be only too glad to publish the best statements
on the question, so as to be able to point out their errors. We
are in an equally disadvantageous position as regards prominent
politicians. They are all free traders —with one or two excep-
tions —and only differ in degree. Some of them are, no doubt,
fair traders in reality, without being aware of it, and would
shrink from carrying it into practice for fear it should be imputed
to protective views. We have nothing to expect from this class
■of politicians, and must not rely on, or accept, their assistance.
If fair trade, or reciprocal trade through the colonies, would cure
the evils we wish to get rid of, their services might be of some
use; but, as nothing short of protective duties on foreign goods
will cure the evil, their services can do us no good, and might do
us a great deal of harm. Nearly all the remainder of those who
have held ministerial positions, or others who might be expected
to do so from their past political actions, have held their opinion
too long, and are too old to change front. Many of them have
been attacked by the mental craze or dislocation already referred
to; and, while most of them refuse to entertain a fresh exami-
nation of the merits of Free Trade and Protection, the mental
•craze under which others are suffering prevents them from
examining it on rational grounds. It requires a greater
amount of logical inquiry, and greater strength of character,
to avow a change of opinion on such a question, than we
can give our prominent politicians credit for possessing. As a
Sir Robert Peel does not make his appearance often, or in many
countries, those that have public men of that stamp are fortunate
in not having progress barred, as it often is, by men with fixed
jdeas—formed often in youth, and incapable of change—getting


into power, and, for a time, blocking tbe wheels of progress ; but
either the one or the other are beyond the control of any country.
We must solace ourselves with the facts to be learned from the
history of the past —that great and important questions bring up
men adequate to the occasion.
It is now our duty, as electors, to send in representatives of
our own opinions; and, in order to be in a position to do so, it is
necessary to choose men in favour of payment of members. The
merchants and graziers are opposed to this on two grounds :
they can be properly represented without payment, and payment
would enable the great mass of people to be properly represented,
which they do not desire. To be fairly represented, a moderate
payment must be made to those accepting parliamentary duties,
sufficient to prevent them sustaining any loss. All the arguments
ever advanced against payment of members are founded on
prejudices acquired during youth in England, where non-payment
exists. Payment of members through the civilised world is the
rule; non-payment the exception —carried out by England and
some of her colonies. When a majority of the Assembly are in
favour of a protective policy, there will be no lack of leaders to
carry it into effect. To obtain this end, it is the duty of everyone
who believes in a protective policy to use their utmost endeavours
to have a Parliament in favour of such a policy elected, for a
protective policy can be carried in no other way, which, we hold,
is the best policy for New South Wales.
WHETHER IS FREE, FAIR, OR PROTECTED TRADE
THE BEST POLICY FOR AUSTRALIA ?
When we look at the map of Australia in coloured divisions
representing distinct communities, and remember the fact that the
various colonies have been all settled by the same nation, all
speaking the same language, and having similar institutions and
laws, with intimate business and social relations, and frequently
intermixing with each other, with a range of climate equal to-
that of America, that should enable us to produce most of the
necessaries of life, and that, notwithstanding all this, these
accidental divisions or colonies have set up barriers against
interchanging their productions with each other in the shape of
fines or penalties to be paid through their respective Custom
Houses; that this division of petty states will be continued for
any length of time cannot be entertained for a moment, and in
response to this feeling there is now a movement to bring about
federation. But there is no doubt the present measure begins at the-


■wrong end, and will not hasten, but delay, its accomplishment.
It sets up a statue of Australian federation, and sustains it by
suspension from above, instead of support from below. The
chains will be sure to snap, and the statue fall to the ground
before long. It is to be hoped that when another attempt is
made it will be placed on the pedestal of a broad Customs Union
stretching over all the Australian colonies. At the present time
each colony has a distinct tariff of its own, with little resemblance
to others, all more or less framed with the view of establishing
manufacturing industries (with the exception of New South
Wales) by protective duties, to enable Australians to compete
with the cheap and under-paid labour of Europe. But the rate
of these duties and the number of articles vary very much, so
much so .that there is no probability of the several coloniee
agreeing on a general tariff. It has been shown in the former
inquiry that the competition from Victoria, although confined to
fewer articles, is more destructive to some industries here than
the competition with European goods; and as self-preservation
is the first law of nature, we require Protection against Victoria
as much as against Europe, and if ever intercolonial Eree Trade
is to become established, it can only be brought about in this way.
While Victoria can send most of her goods here free of duty,
she is too keen-sighted in her own interests to consent to receive
goods from New South Wales on similar terms. But, if we
place an import duty on agricultural produce and manufactured
goods at as high a rate as the profits of productive labour will
afford, she will soon come to terms. Victoria has now made
such rapid progress in manufacturing industries that in many
lines she can nearly sustain competition with England ; but,
although she exports lai’gely to most of the adjoining colonies,
and gets quit of the surplus stock, some at cost price and the
remainder at a small profit, open competition with European
goods would destroy most of her manufactures, so that her
interest lies in being protected against European goods with
intercolonial Eree Trade over all the colonies. She has, no
doubt, had the start of us, and might gain some advantage over
us for a couple of years ; but when it is borne in mind that her
wages, profits, and interest are on a level with the rates ruling
here, and that we have an advantage in a supply of cheap coals,
there is no good reason why we should decline the battle of open
competition. If she beats us in one industry, we are likely tO'
beat her in another. And it should be borne in mind that the
advantages of Protection are more equally distributed amongst
the mass of the people when it embraces a large population than
when confined to a small one, for the reason that competition is
keener, and a large country or population affords openings for
the manufacture of articles that could not be undertaken if the
sale and supply were confined to a small one.


It may be contended that intercolonial Free Trade could not
take place unless the duties on such articles were alike in each
colony. There might he many difficulties in arranging the full
details of such a scheme. But they do not seem to be
insurmountable if care and consideration are bestowed on the
basis of the scheme and the regulations. The first point to
determine is—Should it be confined to the produce and
manufactures of each colony, or should it include articles
manufactured in the colony from imported raw material, or
should it be extended to all goods whether made in the colony
or imported ? The first would include so few manufactured
articles that it would scarcely be worth the trouble of carrying
it out. There are very few articles made in the colonies that do
not contain some portion of imported goods, so that consideration
rests between the two latter. If the second mode is to be
adopted, the articles to be exchanged would have to be
enumerated, and some difficulties might arise in distinguishing
the imported from the colonial-made articles or produce; but
this might be got over by employing the necessary Custom House
experts. All imported goods and others not included in the
-enumerated list could be admitted on the respective duties of
each colony. The fairness and beneficial working of Fair Trade
would depend on the articles and goods placed in the enumerated
list. But such enumerated list need not contain the same articles
for both colonies. All the colonies produce or manufacture some
kind of goods in excess of requirements. They likewise all require
some portion of the excess of some of the colonies; so that all
are mutually interested in exchanging with each other. They are
not all equally interested from a monetary point of view, but a
careful adjustment of the import duties on foreign sugar would
make them so. If the enumerated list of goods to come under
intercolonial Free Trade consisted of the following goods in
addition to ordinary manufactured articles, would all the colonies
be willing to accept it: —Agricultural produce, sugar, colonial
wine, live stock, maize, wheat, jam, candles, soap, leather, coals,
tweeds, woollen cloth, hay, cordage, glass, and stoneware. It is
desirable that all the colonies should accept the same list, but not
absolutely necessary, as a particular colony might be unwilling
to admit duty free some particular kind of goods from a
particular colony or from any colony. If the same kind of goods
were admitted free from certain colonies, and had to pay
■duty from others, care woidd have to be taken that such goods
were not sent from the excluded colony through the included
ones, and so evado the duty. This difficulty might be met by
only allowing free importation from the original producing
colony. But there is no doubt the matter would be simplified
and made easy if a general list were accepted by all the colonies.
The only article likely to cause any difficulty is sugar, and each


colony could place such, duty on it as would be accepted by the
producing colony as a fair equivalent; or all the colonies could
agree to charge the same duty, say, four pounds per ton on
foreign sugar, which would he a very fair equivalent between
all the colonies. The limits of this paper will not admit of going-
fuller into the question at present; but, as we will not be in a
position to even propose any kind of intercolonial Free Trade
until we are in possession of a key to open the ports of the other
colonies, more especially that of Victoria, for our goods, the
question must stand over for the present. That key is an import
duty ranging from 10 to 20 per cent., according to the nature of
the goods, on such articles as this duty will enable us to produce
here. This duty will return back to the community the increased
cost of the protected goods from the profits of productive labour,
and a considerable sum over and above. When we have secured
this position, and not before, Fair Trade will be the best policy
for Australia.
The above inquiry shows that England and all other nations
were indebted to Protection for establishing their manufacturing
industries, and that communities maintaining a high rate of
wages, interest, and profits, can establish manufactures without
lowering these rates. The protective policy of Europe is not
maintained from this cause, as their rates of wages, interest,,
and profits are below the rates ruling in England. The early
application of machinery and steam power gave England such a
start in manufactures that has enabled her to dispense with
Protection, and from 1815 to 1870 this start has enabled her to-
realise an immense amount of wealth. Continental nations have
continued Protection to secure the profits arising from employ-
ment of machinery and steam power in manufacturing pro-
duction ; and, although they are still behind England, they have
now got machinery and steam in active operation, enabling them
to secure a share of the profits on manufactured goods that was.
before secured by England; and since 1870 their command of
cheaper labor, combined with machinery, has enabled them to
claim a share of the goods required by non-manufacturing
nations. This share is rapidly increasing, and is determined by
the amount of machinery and steam power employed. England
may prolong the contest for the possession of foreign markets by
freeing labour from all burdens of taxation, and by this means
bring her wages nearer to the rates of her rivals ; but a resort to
these measures will but prolong the contest. It can only be
ended by each nation being satisfied with the profits made out of
articles for home consumption, and share of that required by
new countries in course of settlement, and communities too poor
to establish factories of their own. When things have reached
this stage in Europe, and not before, a general necessity for
reciprocal or fair trade will force itself into adoption, thereby


■enabling each nation to carry on such manufactures as are
specially adapted for any particular country. That new coun-
tries can establish manufacturing industries and maintain them
under a high rate of wages, interest, and profit, is proved by
what has been done in the United States and Canada; and the
proofs will bo repeated in Australia and New Zealand in less
than ten years. It is the advantage of virgin soil for cultivation,
with large areas of natural grass and rich stores of minerals, that
■enables new countries, with the aid of Protection, to establish
manufactures while maintaining a high rate of wages. If this
development is neglected until this natural wealth is reduced
through increased population to the general level of other com-
munities, such neglect will inflict a long and hard struggle to
-attain the object that, taken at an earlier period, would have
been easy of accomplishment.
The absurd and foolish doctrine that the relative wealth of
different countries can be measured by their respective imports
and exports is only equalled by the equally absurd doctrine of
the “ balance of trade”—long since exploded. The relative
wealth and prosperity of different countries can only be gauged
from reliable statistics carefully considered. If there is any one
branch of statistics that can be taken as a reliable guide to the
relative wealth and productive power of any two nations, it is to
be found in the steam power that each employs in proportion to
their population. In 1878 England had steam engines amount-
ing to 3,828 millions horse-power; United States, 3,153 millions
horse-power; Germany, 1,442 millions horse-power; France,
1,591 millions horse-power. At the same date, England’s annual
income was 1,120 millions; America, 1,449 millions; France,
.930 millions; Germany, 702 millions. America’s annual accu-
mulation of wealth in 1878 was 165 millions; France, 75 mil-
lions ; England, 65 millions; Germany, 40 millions. These
statistics show that steam, operating on railways, ships, and
machinery, is a greater and more active element in the pro-
duction of wealth than population; and the nation that can
.secure and keep in employment the greatest number, whether by
Free Trade or Protection, in proportion to population, is the
greatest producer.
We cannot close this paper without referring to the stimulation
given to the production of sugar in France and Germany. It
has, no doubt, cost both Governments a large sum of money;
but the profits of manufacture and the improvement and profit
•of the growers of the beetroot, has up to the present time repaid
the expenditure two-fold, and put them in possession of an
established industry that makes them independent of foreign
sugar. No doubt, the stimulation encouraged production up to
a point that cannot be maintained noAv that the export bounties
-are taken off; but the industry will soon balance itself by pro


ducing a less quantity at an increased price. To appreciate its
beneficial effects, it must be borne in mind that from 30 to 40 per
cent, of the beetroot grown has not displaced other crops; so that
to this extent it is nearly all gain to the grower. When this
stimulation induced large imports of loaf and other refined sugar
into England, the English Government inertly looked on, stupefied
by doses of the medicine of the “Manchester school,” and
allowed the capital, plant, and employment of those in the sugar
trade to be ruthlessly sacrificed and destroyed, when the imposi-
tion of an import duty equal to the export bounty would have
saved them. Now, Readers, a similar course is being pursued
here; the only difference is that the monetary injury is less, and
being spread over a greater number of articles, it is not made so
manifest, and is not apparent to those stupefied with Manchester
medicine. Our only remedy lies in replacing them with men
that refuse to take such drugs.
In conclusion, we earnestly call on all—especially natives of
the soil—whether favouring a free, fair, or protective policy, to
use every means within their reach to ascertain the merits of these
respective policies from the records of the past, as well as the
present state of other countries ; and, in doing so, remember that
the sympathies of the daily press is manifested in the interests of
the importers and graziers; and that, although their public
advocates of Free Trade do not understand the laws regulating
the production and proper distribution of wealth, their preten-
sions to knowledge on the question is very high, and has been
allowed to overshadow the opinions of better men than them-
selves ; and, so far as their knowledge extends, it has up to the
present been used to distort facts and draw false inferences in
favour of their theory; and as regards the majority of professed
free traders generally, nine-tenths of them know nothing about
the question. Except the ordinary ABC Free Trade arguments
in general use, their opinions are a matter of educational accident,
over which they have had no control; and many of them have
neither the inclination to inquire, nor the moral courage to avow
a change of opinion. But we have a large number of persons
neither Free Traders nor Protectionists, with whom the responsi-
bility of our future policy rests. I appeal to them to read up and
study this question, as our national and individual well-being,
both morally and physically, depends on a correct solution.
fOn the following page will be found a Tabular Statement of Imports
and Exports.)


►3 I 1& i S- ■§ "§■§ |
I I £ I 00 o O O g
w I Lf' | g* sg-e
fc I C®HHM gO
sI 1 s ’ " s 5 I II l*a I
1 SSSSS JUS l| SJ II 111 §86.1111 | If 8 5
s aS S § t-. ® « *rH* 131 «nt- 23 a
»-* »o . | co os LrU" L. rH r 4
IKKfqpq WOO O o 1 | i ft §§ gill I I *
02 r?, s H Jef th I ® S 3
o ■ : • • • I • • ■ -"S • »h ® Ntooot- |£r g
X •:::: :::i0‘0; MB- o.eog 2 1 1; £
O m ' ' I-, 7i s t- JH sno t- w I<s o
O g< -- 5 1 efrH-ieoa | gj J
0 "2 :: : : : S’g.u . :i3 :
rvj Z ... - «-J • • M
Ph £ vlv-S o O’g ■§
£ slrg p ■aesi !
P : a,g&i W ; M Irß-SB §
| Ml&lllll =1 8 11 %si |"|| s
B i|l|P|| I =“= a |l| fill 1
pH Ph Pn Ph S g
1" "' I ” i
_fi I 5
P* jrH UO rfj CO rH CO CO OJ CD Ogsgsig O C* eg TH oOJ Jg CO O*gO*rHOCO Ol CO (M O O
* i U* •' C *_~l i- i
• CS A
OJCOIO I O
% CO TH HH(N rH CO CO tH iC CO ,d
M | 10
s
CD -S
Q
O :::::::::• no ::::::::::::: I ::::: S ::: : : : §
O Pa o
O „ _ -S 73 Sal 5
0 ;6C::'Sg2;::::: :S : :W : S : ; ; -:: : : .3
1 i ■■■ -i i'i■l'i'4 is ■ ■ ■ ■ 1 1
P O , O O c 3 cj , c 3 ? o
g I'll ::: : g : g !:: : Ji , s : j| : S|l : s| :::: | 1
2 -g J J 'S J £ ® » J‘S ’S Si - SP' O§g§iS s a -a -g |
P ►: !|J ilM(llilUfi|Ultil !|8 i 1 n I J
5 111 |l|RS*|«|*iil<*&|l i|s||l| « I I
Pi-J -g
__ g [s g~ s
◄ t- t- I t- g «
W 05 Lh . | rH |
6 2§S2SB?Si 2 fc S I
tH W 05 CO rH b- HHH 40 05
W r-i 05 rn af
g
.• rH 0 050 N CO (NSWNOIHHJNOHOCOCO 2? -3
& O H r}( X 1 CC CO rH 10 rHrt<(MCOrH»O<X)O TfiOCHIO £■
>5 y—( 00 rH Tj< t> <N 10 t> rH (M lO T* tH rH (N H H 5
M rJ oa rH a
::;8 : : ; : :: : ; . : |
, '.'.'i'.'.'.'. A]/. 4:: I| f
R : : :ts : : : : : : : P ‘ Ob? 3
a M qq H 91 *
| . ; Slle s : I i| I
e il'sSl 8 5 :: 'a 3i I
<J 5 p,W = a a a=3 g § S'3 g
*• ss|m lliiimJlii.i §s
Ijjlasgg jijg °i




