

FREE TRADE
EVEEY AGE:
A HIBTORK 'AL, PHILOSOPHICAL, AND STATISTICAL
REVIEW OF THE SUBJECT
C. CECIL,
Author of “ Swindling 'by Machiner //.’
“ BY A SORT OF DYNAMIC LAW IMPORTATION CAUSES EXPORTATION, JUST AS A
VACUUM IN PHYSICS IS FILLED UP BY THE AIR, OR THE OTHER NEAREST FLUID.’’
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY;
,). FERGUSON, 426 GEORGE STREET, AND 3 MARKET
W BUILDINGS. V,^
1867.
——
• ■■ -™—


a nvK'RTTSTi’.ivrß'Nrra-
„ Iris and
~ Esk N.S.W. Volunteer Rifles.
~ Salamander.
His Honor the Chief Justice and Lady Stephen.
Sir 0. Nicholson, Bart. The Hon. the President
~ D. and Lady Cooper Members of Council
~ W. and Lady Manning j The Hon. the Speaker &
~ H. W. and Lady Parker ! Members of Assembly"
Their Honors the Judges, the Heads of the Clerical, Legal,
and Medical Profession, and the
First Families of the Colony.
EB,
:llery
~ Herald
jinen of
Rifles
[LEERY


FREE TRADE
EYEEY AGE:
A HISTORICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, AND STATISTICAL
REVIEW OF THE SUBJECT
C . CE C I li,
Author of “ Swindling hg Machinery .”
HY A SORT OF DYNAMIC LAW IMPORTATION CAUSES EXPORTATION, JUST AS
VACUUM IN PHYSICS IS FILLED UP BY THE AIR, OR THE OTHER NEAREST FLUID.”
McCulloch.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY;
J. FERGUSON, 426 GEORGE STREET, AND 3 MARKET
BUILDINGS.
■ 1867.


r. uux<iriirtuUAme.|
STEAM MACHINE PRINTER,
PITT-STREF.T, SYDNEY.


h iiss/r %ot(.o
* %. T
FREE TRADE
IN EVERY AGE.
Chapter I.—THE DAWN OF COMMERCE.
The very worst time to settle a question of national moment
is when the passions of a people are aroused, and the
feelings of public men keenly excited by the subject. The
calm serenity of mind which a sharp intellectual investiga-
tion of any topic exacts, can hardly exist in the midst of
turbulence and talk. It would be just as judicious—quite
as much in season —to preach the gospel of sound sanitary
reform to a community suffering from some appalling
epidemic, as to deliver dogmas of political truth to those
who are engaged in the more exciting and engrossing work
of abusing one another. While the public mind is seething
in a ferment of agitation, there is little chance for so quiet
a monitor as the Press to command attention or moderate
controversy. It is nevertheless through the Press that truth
now-a-days must be mainly delivered. The orator, with his
tricks of rhetoric, may dazzle and deceive the ignorant, but
he cannot destroy the force of that logic which is presented
to a man’s eyes in intelligible language and matter-of-fact
criticism. This is the great duty of the Press in our age ;
and every man who is not a mere windbag, and who does
not love like a Melville —the Chaffanbrass of the Racecourse
—to hear his own voice better than any other sound in
the world, will prefer to print and publish his opinions, and


the reasons on which he grounds them, rather than deliver
them from a gin-case to a mob of idlers in the open air, or
in the long-room of a political pot-house. The Press has,
therefore, become the great modern medium for rational
discussion. Through it men can fearlessly put forth dis-
agreeable truths and utter unpleasant predictions without
fear of being bonneted or cudgelled. It is true that its
prophecies may be received like those of Cassandra, and
its sound teachings be for a time misunderstood or wilfully
misrepresented; but they work amongst men silently and
forcibly. Truth in the end must prevail.
The writer of the present essay can with equal honesty and
earnestness —or rather with an honest earnestness—assure
his readers that he is personally free from the bias of passion
which divides the body politic of this community at the
present time. He can further confidently assert that, with a
clear mind and an unruffled judgment, he applies himself to
the consideration of one of the greatest public questions of
the day. He is in some sense like those travellers who,
high up the sides of the Peak of Teneriffe, have observed
storms sweeping along the plains and valleys beneath
them, without feeling any of their violence themselves. The
writer —by his habits —by his every day pursuits —by his
predilections—is lifted above the gusts of party feeling,
and can, therefore, give expression to his convictions with
thorough impartiality, moderation, and a sacred and
sovereign regard for truth.
The question of Free Trade and Protection has now for
some considerable time past been discussed amongst us with
great ability, but with a superfluous display of temper, by
persons on both sides. The considerations involved in the
of so momentous a matter, particularly as that
' adjustment embraces both Taxation and Eevenue, are
_ qu-eCiSely of that subtle character which mere talk—mere
pubHti agitation —will never definitely determine. To under-


tand all the bearings of the subject in dispute, to lay it,
with all its complicated interests, like a map or chart
before the thinking portion of the community, one must
earnestly try to evoke a calm consideration of some prin-
ciples, which will help to make the whole matter clear.
More mere talk than is pleasing to delicate ears has been
expended on this exacerbating theme of Free Trade and
Protection. It will, therefore, be a relief to go to the bottom
of the question, and satisfy ourselves how the great
commercial cities of the world, both in ancient and modern
times, grew into existence, opulence, splendour, prosperity.
What were the causes, and which was the chief one —at a
time when navigation depended on star-gazing by night
and coasting by day—which led to the establishment of
such mercantile capitals as Tyre and Sidon, as Carthage
and Alexandria, as Athens and Pome, as Phodes and
Marseilles, as Yenice and Genoa, as Amsterdam and
Rotterdam, as London ? Surely no one will shrink from
finding out the true and only answer to this question,
particularly as we now here in Australia are in an analogous
situation to the peoples of the ancient states —that is to say
—in our infancy as a nation ? That answer is obvious —it is
founded on a development of the eternal laws of nature.
Tyre and Sidon grew from a collection of miserable huts, by
the timely discovery of this simple truth:
That thebe webe people in other parts of the world
WHO, IF THEY COULD REACH THE TYRIANS AND SIDONIANS,
WOULD GLADLY RECEIVE COMMODITIES PRODUCED OR MANU-
FACTURED BY THEM, GIVING THEM OTHERS OF EQUIVALENT
VALUE INSTEAD, OR PAYING A PRICE FOR THEM.
It was this plain truth that led to the establishment of
ancient commerce, which in turn led to the development of
ancient civilisation. Restriction on commerce just when
society was being formed—when the patriarchal age had
become too tame for expanding humanity—would have been


regarded as a kind of profanity —an outrage on that natural
and naturally developed impulse to give and take in exchange ,
which animated all men above the class of savages (and even
those who were savages to someextent) in the infancy of society.
When the ancient Phoenicians traded, some thousands of
years ago, with the tin and lead miners of Britain, the
ancient Britons (although they would not like strangers to
settle in their country) were only too glad to get the rich
things of the East in exchange for their lead and tin. The
primitive simplicity of those islanders (to say nothing of
their traditional scantiness of costume) must have ren-
dered Phoenician robes rare luxuries, and the “Ars Sidonia”
deemed an invention of the Spirits of Air and Fire. It
never occurred to those British chiefs to make people who
came to the Cassiterides pay toll or duty—not even the
import duty of a bundle of “ purple and fine linen.” They
looked upon those who brought them treasures of value
and art from afar as real benefactors, although they gave
tin and bronze for the commodities thus supplied. And
this spirit animated all those engaged in commerce in the old
times ; so that, long before the Christian era, the merchant-
men of the world had surrounded the Mediteranean Sea
with a girdle of magnificent cities; had peopled the Isles of
Greece; had formed colonies in distant Asia, which in a
short time became kingdoms; had made the gens togata —the
Roman race —the masters of the world. We confidently
maintain that commerce, in the ante-christian ages of the
world, was based on a principle founded in truth and justice,
and that that principle was essentially what is now called Free
Trade in its highest—which is also its most ideal—significa-
tion. In those far-off times not only was every port open to the
trireme, but when every trireme was looked upon at every
port as, to use a classical phrase, a gift of the Gods. The
principle laid down by Cicero in the sublime expression,
Nec erit alia lex Romce, alia Athenis (there shall not be one


law at Eome, another at Athens,) and which has since
become a canon in all the commercial codes of civilised
nations, applied equally to that primitive desire for mutual
mercantile intercourse, or inter-trading (eommeatus), which
prevailed amongst all the great peoples of antiquity-
Whether the principles of Free Trade, which originated
and expanded the great cities of the ancient world,
will in all cases apply to modern modes of thought
and to the circumstances of modern nations, we shall
hereafter examine. For the present, and for argument’s
sake, we will assume it. Let us, therefore, first of all, follow
out the one simple point of enquiry, namely: the origin and
growth of a few of the great mercantile cities themselves. The
train of reflections which this perusal is likely to excite will,
we sincerely hope, lead the reader to our conclusion.
“ From the remotest antiquity,” we quote from McCulloch’s
Commercial Dictionary, “a considerable trade seems to have
been carried on between the eastern and western worlds.
The spices, drugs, precious stones, and other valuable
products of Arabia and India have always been higher
esteemed in Europe, and have been exchanged for the gold
and silver, the tin, wines, &c., of the latter. At the first
dawn of authentic history, we find Phoenicia the principal
centre of this commerce. Its inhabitants are designated in
the early sacred writings by the name of Canaanites, a term
which, in the language of the East, means merchants. The
products of Arabia, India, Persia, &c., were originally
conveyed to her by companies of travelling merchants, or
caravans, which seem to have been constituted in the
same way, and to have performed exactly the same
part in the commerce of the East in the days of
Jacob, as they do at present. [Gen. xxxvii, 25, &c.]
At a later period, however, in the reigns of David and
Solomon, the Phoenicians having formed an alliance with the
Hebrews, acquired the ports of Elath and Eziongeber at


the N. E. extremity of the Tied Sea, there they fitted out
their fleets which traded with the ports on that sea; and
probably with those of Southern Arabia, the west coast of
India and Ethiopia. The ships are said to have visited
Ophir ; and a great deal of erudition has been expended in
attempting to determine the exact situation of that emporium
or country. We agree, however, with Hekkex in thinking
that was not the name of any particular place, but that it
was a sort of general designation given to the coasts of
Arabia, India, and Africa bordering on the Indian Ocean ;
somewhat in the same loose way as we now use the terms
East and West Indies. CSee the chapter on the Navigation and
Commerce of the Phoenicians, in the translation of Ileeren's work.)
But of all the colonies founded by Tyre, Carthage has been
by far the most celebrated. It was at first only a simple
factory, but was materially increased by the arrival of a
large body of colonists, forced by dissentions at home, to
leave their native land, about 883 years n.c. Imbued
with the enterprising mercantile spirit of their ancestors,
the Carthaginians rose, in no very long period, to the
highest eminence as a naval and commercial state. The
settlements founded by the Phoenicians in Africa, Spain,
Sicily, &c., gradually fell into their hands, and after the
destruction of Tyre by Alexander the Great, Carthage
engrossed a large share of the commerce of which it had
previously been the centre. The history, commerce, and
institutions of Carthago, and the misfortunes by which she
was overwhelmed, have, however, been already noticed.
* * * * *■ * And we shall duly, therefore,
observe, that that commerce, instead of being, as some shallow
theorists have imagined, the cause of her decline, teas the real
source of her power and greatness, the means by which she
was enabled to wage a lengthened, doubtful, and desperate
contest with Pome herself for the empire of the world.
The commerce and navigation of Tyre probably obtained


their maximum from 650 to 560 years before Christ. At
that period the Tyrians were the factors and merchants of
the civilized world, and they enjoyed an undisputed pre-
eminence in maritime affairs. The prophet Ezekiel
(Chapter xxxvii.) has described, in magnificent terms, the
glory of Tyre, and has enumerated several of the most
valuable productions found in her markets, and the
countries whence they were brought. The fir-trees of Senir
(Hermon), the cedars of Lebanon, the oaks of Bashan (the
country to the east of Callilee), the ivory of the Indies, the
fine linen of Egypt, and the purple and hyacinth of the
Isles of Elishah (Peloponnesus), are specified among the
articles used for her ships. The inhabitants of Sidon, iEnon
(Aradus), Gebel (Byblos), served her as mariners and
carpenters. Gold, silver, lead, tin, iron, &c. —vessels of
brass, calves, horses, mules, sheep, and goats —jewels,
precious stones, and coral—wheat, balm, oil, honey, spices,
and gums—wine, wool, and silk —are mentioned as being
brought to Tyre by sea, or to its market by land, from
Syria, Arabia, Damascus, Greece, Tarshish, and other
places, the exact site of which it is difficult to determine.”
The information given to us in this remarkable passage,
will fairly indicate to the reader, how unrestricted commerce
created the principal cities of the Ancient world. These
cities created and consolidated kingdoms. This fact must
never be lost sight of, that cities were the beginning of
kingdoms. That the commerce which effected the settlement
and partial civilization of the world was not only free but
fostered—that it had immunities conferred on it, we have
the positive testimony of Herodotus, Strabo, and other
writers of antiquity. Indeed, as before urged, the arrival
of a trader, in those far off times, was looked upon as a
special favor from heaven, and regarded with a kind of
reverence. The freedom of the world’s ports in ancient
times is remarkable in contrast with later restrictions.


That freedom, however, it was which first brought the
nations of the earth together, and drew from human ingenuity
and genius the exercise of those powers which naturally
oontributed to the happiness and prosperity of mankind.
Chapter lI.—COMMERCE IN THE MIDDLE AGES,
COMMONLY CALLED THE DARK AGES.
We have now made it evident on the unimpeachable tes-
timony of fact and history, both in remarkable concurrence,
that all the great maritime cities of antiquity sprung from
insignificant beginnings—many of them from mere fishing
villages—and grew to the dignity of “ queens of the
ocean ” from the natural action of free intercourse —
from adhesion to the promptings of that human instinct
which brings men together in trade, as in other relations
of life. If we prosecute the inquiry in the same spirit of
candour, we shall find the operation of similiar principles
revivify the world a second time, and see new cities and
flourishing states rise up before us, brought into existence
by precisely the same causes —or the operation of the same
moral laws—which placed a diadem of glory on the brows
of Tyre, Sidon, Carthage, Alexandria, Rhodes, and Rome.
The most superficial reader of history will hardly need
to be informed that the great Roman Empire, after it had*
like a political Briareus, embraced the whole world within
its numerous arms, burst through the excess of its great-
ness, power, and rapacity. It was, shortly after the age
•of the Constantines, over-run by barbarian hordes, who
poured the viols of a fearful retribution on the devoted head
of the mistress of nations. During this period of anarchy
and bloodshed, all civilizing elements began to lose their
force—polite languages declined into barbarous jargons—
municipal institutions fell into disuse—religion yielded to the
pressure of disastrous circumstances—and commerce, bond of
blessing among the nations—declined, died out. The Roman


Empire fell to pieces, after Roman oppression had destroyed
trade. Rome in rending Carthage, prepared the dagger for her
own throat. She perished more miserably than her victims.
But man was not doomed to remain for ever the slave of
his passions. The tendency to progress is implanted by
nature. There is even in the hardened hearts of barbarian
hordes a “sweet small voice” which whispers “excelsior!”
to the intellect, and stimulates men to undertake and
accomplish great things. Thus, out of the confusion,
violence, and sorrows which the downfall of the Roman
Empire caused, east and west, a new order of things arose ;
states and kingdoms were formed; cities of great wealth
and dazzling beauty were founded ; and the first principles of
of civilliberty—ofhumanrights—were fairly developed. And
what mighty renovator of dead empires brought this order
out of Chaos ? What a second time civilised the world ?
We answer fearlessly—triumphantly —Commerce —free
Commerce —protected Commerce—for it was Commerce that
first won Protection ; Commerce still holds indefeasible and
enduring claims to Protection!
It would be useless to press this argument in extenso on
the reader’s attention. A mere glance at the origin,
development, and greatness of a few of the Mediaeval cities
of Europe will enable him to form a sufficiently compre-
hensive idea of this second consideration.
We find in the biographies of two of the greatest
monarchs of the Middle Age, Charlemagne and Alfred the
Great, how thoroughly they recognised commerce as the
regenerator of society. In a well-written life of the former,
by the late Mr. James, we have that remarkable sentiment
of his (Charlemagne), that arms may create an empire,
bxit by commerce alone can a dynasty be established.
Charlemagne made his dominions the high road of trade,
and not only gave protection to traders, but heaped honors
on those who had been signally successful in business,


■whether they were natives of his own dominions or
foreigners. The greatness of Mediaeval France is due to his
recognition of the creative power of Free Trade. Well
what does history tell us of our English Alfred ? Here is
Hume’s summary of this great king’s character—as a
promoter of trade and commerce. “He [Alfred] invited
from all quarters industrious foreigners to repeople
his country, which had been desolated by the ravages
of the Danes. He introduced and encouraged
manufactures, and no inventor or improver of any
ingenious art did he suffer to go unrewarded.
He prompted men of activity to betake themselves to navi-
gation,—to push commerce into the most remote countries,
and to acquire riches by propogating industry among their
fellow citizens. He set apart a seventh portion of his own
revenue for maintaining a number of workmen, whom he
constantly employed in rebuilding the ruined cities, castles,
palaces, and monasteries. Hence, both living and dead, Alfred
was regarded by foreigners no less than by his own subjects,
as the greatest prince after Charlemagne that had appeared
in Europe during several ages, and as one of the wisest
and best that had ever adorned the annals of any nation.”—
—[Students’ Hume, p. 46.] And what does history tell us
of his grandson, the liberal and enlightened Athelstan?
Here is Hume’s testimony: “He passed many good laws,
which for the most part were really new enactments, and
not, like many of those preceding kings, mere repetitions
from older customs or codes. Among them was the
remarkable one, that a merchant who had made three long
voyages on his own account should be admitted to the rank
of a thane or gentleman. This shows that commerce was
now more honored and encouraged than it had formerly
been, and implies at the same time that some of the English
cities had reached a considerable pitch of prosperity and
importance.”—[Students’ Hume, p. 47.] And how came


the greatness of other European mediaeval cities about?
The answer (and there can only be one) to this question,
will prove what Eree Trade did for the world even
during the midnight of the Middle Ages. Marseilles, in
France, was sacked by the Saracens in the tenth century,
and was subsequently fortified and governed by the Counts
of Provence. Under their administration, she opened trade
with the Levant. She opened her port to vessels of all
nations, and actually gave bounties to those which brought
in ivory and spices (vide Juliany, JSssai sur le Commerce de
Marseilles). She was during the middle ages the rival of
Genoa and Venice, on which cities we shall now offer a few
remarks.
Genoa is the legitimate offspring of commerce. Even in
her present humiliation, she shows traces of Genoa the
Proud. During the middle ages her port was entirely
free—indeed, competition was so keen between herself and
Venice, that anything approaching restriction would have
been fatal to her prosperity. She commanded the greater
portion of the trade of the Mediterranean and a large share
of that of the Black Sea. During the whole period of her
greatness she maintained that commercial freedom which
first drew her from a degraded maritime hamlet to become
the leading commercial city of Europe for three centuries.
The career of Venice will more aptly illustrate our
argument. Founded in the twelfth century, on—as one
may say—the bosom of the Adriatic, she soon sprang into
greatness. The character of her trade and commerce is
thus described by Mr. M’Culloch:—“The Venetian ships
of the largest class,” he informs us, “were called galeasses,
and were fitted up for the double purpose of war and
commerce. Some of them carried 50 pieces of cannon, and
crews of 600 men. These vessels were sometimes also called
argosers or argosies. They had early an intercourse with
England ; and argosies used to be common in our ports. In


1325, Edward 11. entered into a commercial treaty with
Venice, in which fall liberty is given to them for 10 years,
to sell their merchandise in England, and to return home in
safety, without being made answerable, as was the practice
in those days, for the crimes or debts of other strangers.
( Anderson’s Ghron. Deduction, Anno 1325.) Sir William
Monson mentions, that the last argosie that sailed from
Venice for England was lost with a rich cargo and many
passengers, on the coast of the Isle of Wight, 1587. In
the begining of the 15th century, the annual value of the
goods exported from Venice by sea, exclusive of those
exported to the states adjoining her provinces in Lombardy,
was estimated, by contemporary writers, at 10,000,000
ducats ; the profits of the out and home voyage, including
freight, being estimated at 4,000,000 ducats. At the period
inquestion, the Venetian shipping consisted of 3,000, vessels
of from 10 3 to 200 tons burthen, carrying 17,000 sailors;
300 ships with 8,000 sailors; and 45 galleys of various sizes,
kept afloat by the republic for the protection of her trade,
&c., having 11,000 men on board. In the dock-yard, many
labourers were employed. The trade of Syria and Egypt
seems to have been conducted principally by ready money ;
for 500,000 ducats are said to have been annually exported
to these countries; 100,000 were sent to England. (Daru
tome ii., p. 189., &c.) The vessels of Venice visited every
port of the Mediterranean, and every coast of Europe ; and
her maritime commerce was, probably, not much inferior to
that of all Christendom. So late as 1518, five Venetian
galeasses arrived at Antwerp, laden with spices, drugs,
silks, &c., for the fair at that city.”
Need we refer to the almost miraculous growth of
Amsterdam, and the reclamation of Holland? A commercial
nation is raised by industry and Free Trade on the bosom
of a swamp ! Need we add another fact ?
Before coming to the more philosophic section of our


subject, we have only to glance through the pages of
English history, to discover that the nation’s greatness was
exactly commensurate with the freedom of her trade. In
the bulwark of English liberty—the Magna Charta—we
find that alien merchants were [invited to trade, and that
while resident in England, they should be free from all
“scutage,” “aid,” and “tax.” Edward 111., who
may be looked upon as the father of Free Trade
(in its political sense) in England, invited the mer-
chant wares of the world to English ports, and sent large
fleets with special charters to trade with the Baltic as well
as in the Mediterranean. (See Student’s Hume, p. 189.)
He actually incurred the jealousy of his own subjects, the
London and Bristol weavers in particular, because he intro-
duced, with the gracious concession of special privileges,
numbers of superior artisans —’Weavers —from Flanders and
France. The wisdom of this policy was perfected under
the Tudors, and, although Henry YIII. and Elizabeth “did
fret their trading subjects” with some tyrannical exactions —
called benevolences —it was rserved for the Stuarts to
thoroughly cripple English commerce by restrictions, which
brought in the end a terrible retribution. Both James I.
and Charles 1., by their unconstitutional use of “monopolies,”
first brought the English merchant service to a degraded
condition. From monopoly, Protection—ill-starred daughter
of a cruel mother—first sprung into existence.
Chapter lII.—TUDOE DESPOTISM AND STUART
ERRORS.
It would be an interesting enquiry, and one that would
amply repay the student of history, to follow the fortunes
of the Royal Tudors and Stuarts, and see how far their
policy in reference to commerce affected themselves and
their subjects. Space will not permit us to do so now; but
we have the less cause to regret our narrow limits, as the


popular interpretation of this section of our national history
requires no additional argument or illustration to prove
that it is well-founded. Tyrannical oppression of trade—
particularly in the shape of benevolences and other despotic
exactions on their “ good citizens of London,” cramped the
enterprise of Englishmen, so thoughtful!}' - energised by
the Great Third Edward. A single sentence tells the story
of the Stuarts : they were ever consistent in making mistakes.
Ship-money worked that terrible power which drove Charles
Ist to the block —and ship-money was as much apolitical
dogma with Charles 11. and James 1., as if it had never
been a mistake. Under the iron energy and intense fore-
thought of Cromwell, it is true, the Commerce of England
received such an impulse that subsequent tyranny could
not prevent its expansion. It spread in spite of ignorance
and bigotry in hereditary traditions. But, then,
there was political blindness and bigotry elsewhere.
The hideous fanaticism which kindled the flame of religious
wars —what a grim paradox to call wars religious?—forced
bigot kings to get money when they could and where. The
merchant was the readiest victim. Even then the
cry was respectable —“the tax was easy of collection!”
But the lurid passions of the rest of Europe gave a chance
to England. She w r as not quite so oppressed as her
neighbours, and so she did a little business with the Indies
East and West, and with her American colonies. Besides the
slave-trade brought her money. All these authenticatedfacts
of history show the fearful struggle which the national mind
and the national energy had to make against a system of poli-
tical economy which would erect a wall of bronze around every
petty state, and guard it with a pack of salamanders if they
could be got cheap, in order to w r ard off commercial
intercourse. What a glorious time for protection! Never
mind the demoralisation of the people—the oppression of
honest industry—the developement of the slave-trade —


the domination of the landed aristocracy—all Europe
was protected and all Europe was reeking with blood;
treaties were violated; pirates were on the high seas ;
highwaymen were on the roads; assassins in the chief
towns ; crime seething all over Europe. And thus it went
on through the reigns of the Georges, with the bright
episode of the American war of Independence on the one
hand, and the lurid episode of the French revolution on the
other. Never was there before an era of greater pro-
tection —never was the world before in a state of deeper
degradation. But a tax on tea was the last feather that
broke down New England loyalty; M. Necker’s capitation
scheme crushed royalty and religion for years in France.
And this is the lesson we learn from protection in full play—
from taxation of foreign commodities. What time it took to
break through the dense cloud of ignorance which a stupid
despotic policy had thrown over Europe, is known to every
reader. What a struggle—how great, how grand—to repeal
the corn-laws! What anxious years passed over the nation
before even a Peel could be enlightened and a Bright and
Cobden command the attention of the great intellects not
only of their own but of other countries.
Before concluding this part of our subject, it would hardly
be complete without giving some historical view of the origin
in England of Protection, as indicating the views of a political
party in the state—the substance of the evil had existed for
centuries before. There is no language of ours that will
impress the subject so deeply on the reader’s mind, as a
few pages from Mr. Washington Wilks’ “ Half Century.”
Writing of events at the close of the war in 1815, he tells
us the whole story. It runs as follows :
“ Some excuse for the indifference of the English people to the
political fate of their continental brethren is to he found in the
severity of their own “ transition from war to peace ” —a phrase
invented hy Lord Castlereagh, at once to account for and solace their


sufferings. The universal rejoicings over the return of peace had not
subsided, when the hitter discovery began to be made, that peace did
not necessarily bring with it the blessings of plenty and cheapness—
or, what was more singular and melancholy, that to a large, and the
most powerful, class of the community, plenty and cheapness were the
very reverse of blessings. So early as 1813, the sight of a bountiful
harvest excited apprehensions, in the agricultural mind, for the main-
tenance of the prices to which the agricultural interest had fully-
accustomed itself; and the nearer prospect of open markets raised that
apprehension to determined self-defence. A select committee of the
House of Commons reported, that while the export duty of Is. per
quarter, imposed on wheat by the corn-law of 1670, might with safety
be rescinded, the prohibitory duty on importation, which was fixed by
the same law at 80s. a quarter, should be carried up to 105 s. 2d. per
quarter. It was subsequently agreed, that wheat at 84s. should
be admitted on the payment of 2s. 6d. per quarter. There were
numerous petitions against this proposed perpetuation of war
prices—the populace had gazed and shouted at the illuminated
devices of a large loaf and a full pot of beer; and their disappoint-
ment was ready to vent itself in violence—so the positive enact-
ment of the measure was permitted to stand over till the session
of 1815. The landlords, urged on by their excited tenants, would
then put up with no procrastination. Shiploads of French corn and
fruit, of Dutch butter and cheese, with herds of cattle and flocks of
poultry, were at hand, waiting only till English wheat, now at 605.,
should rise to 665., and realise that mysterious danger, open ports.
The invasion of food was met as would have been an armed insurrec-
tion, or any emergency that called for repressive promptitude. The
sliding-scale corn-law of 1815—fixing 80s. as the lowest point at
which importation could take place—was hurriedly carried by' large
majorities, with little discussion, in the face of earnest petitions from
the commercial and manufacturing towns, and, literally', with the
Houses surrounded by soldiery.
“ It would be unjust to represent these proceedings as the result of
unmixed selfishness on the one side, or of foresight on the
other. While the agricultural party had plausible reasons for alarm,
and the substantial justice of their demands was conceded by the
leaders of the economists; merchants and manufacturers were as
tenaciou sof protection on their own behalf as hostile to its increase
on that of the agriculturists; it was only a little band of wealthy
landowners and eminent statesmen who protested against sacrificing


the interests of all classes, and of futurity, to the exigency of a class
and of an hour. If the plutocracy of London and Lancashire were
dissatisfied at all with Castlereagh’s pacification, it was because he had
exacted from the continental powers no commercial treaties in favour of
importations from England; they would almost have armed their
working people had our ports been as open in 1814 to French silk as
to French corn. Huskisson was not then the favourite of Liverpool,
or his free-trade notions were not- developed. Mercantile men were
but beginning to learn that trade between nations must always be
substantially, what it is with individuals in its primary stage, namely,
barter; that the exports of a country cannot be long paid for in cash,
nor must greatly exceed its imports. Their resistance to the law of
18 lo rested on the narrow basis of a supposed hostility between their
interest and the agricultural; and the dim perception that high prices
of food involve high cost of production, either as wages or poor-rates.
Their champion, Mr. Brougham, was one of those who consented to
the law as “politic, or, at the least as a palliative ; as the means of
carrying the country through difficulties of temporary pressure.” Sir
Henry Parnell “ had always avowed himself the friend of free-trade; ”
but war prices constituted English corn an exception to the general
principle. Mr. Huskisson was, as required by his stricter profession
of political philosophy, more exact in his exposition of the “ whole of
our commercial and economical system as one of artificial expedients;”
so long as our commerce and manufactures were encouraged and forced
by protection, by bounties and restraints, he saw no reason why com
should form an exception to the general system. Mr. Horner and his
knot of “ convertible ” economists, bent on keeping the government
to the letter of its bond, to resume cash payments with the cessation
of war, conceded the demand of the agriculturists for protection from
the fall of prices that must inevitably follow ; and the country party
it was understood, would support them in return—landlords being
eager to receive their rents in a currency that would pass without
depreciation in the continental cities, to which there was a rush of
pleasure-seekers. The agriculturists got their protection at once—the
economists had to wait for the realisation of their crochet till 1819.
Mr. Baring (afterwards Lord Ashburton) was one of the few who
contended that “ steady prices were never produced by restriction ”
that bread would be high or low, according as there was a good or
bad harvest—and that as the whole of England was to any particular
county in this particular, so was the whole of Europe to England.
Grey, Grenville, and Wellesley, Buckingham, Carlisle, Devonshire,


and Spencer, placed upon the journals of the Upper House a protest,
which, embodying sentiments now familiar and ever undisputed,
should he quoted as a singular instance of sagacity and foresight,
as the courageous and disinterested expression of unpopular truths,
since verified by bitter experience : —“ We cannot persuade ourselves
that this law will ever contribute to produce plenty, cheapness, or
steadiness of price. So long as it operates at all, its effects must he
the opposite of these. Monopoly is the parent of scarcity, of dearness,
and of uncertainty. To cut off any of the sources of supply can only
tend to lessen its abundance ; to close against ourselves the cheapest
market for any commodity, must enhance the price at which we
purchase it; and to confine the consumer of corn to the produce of his
own country, is to refuse to ourselves the benefit of that provision
which Providence itself has made for equalising to man the variations
of season and of climate.”
The prophetic wisdom of these admirable sentences was to receive
almost instant proof. Not a year had elapsed before Mr. Western, the
spokesman of the agricultural interest, again appeared at the table of
the House, to demand farther increase of protection, and the remission
of peculiar burdens—to demand protection even from itself. That the
landed interest was still in distress, might have been gathered from
the omission of its name in the Prince Regent’s speech, which was
bold enough to describe other interests as prosperous —but it was now
in distress from the redundant supply “Created chiefly by the produce
of our own agriculture.” Prom this there could be no protection but
at the direct expense of the rest of the community. It was demanded,
therefore, that so much of the act of 1815 be repealed as permitted the
warehousing of foreign corn (even precautions against scarcity were
now regarded with jealousy!), and that the government advance loans
of money to such individuals as were inclined to buy up our native
produce! These audacious proposals were received with respectful
attention even by those who were as independent of the landed interest
as any could be, while other interests were almost unrepresented in
Parliament. That they were not carried, was simply owing to the
diversion created by Ministers in surrendering the property and malt
taxes —the most obnoxious of the war taxes, and the most obviously
burthensome to those who derived revenue or subsistence from the soil.’ ’
It would be an unnecessary extension of our argument
to dwell on the corn law agitation and its glorious finale.
Hut the reader is well acquainted with that most remark-


able of all moral revolutions. Nor have we seen the end
of that great beginning. The Inter-national Treaty between
France and England is only a developement and an il-
lustration of it—an indication too of what we may yet
expect to see. Its success has astonished the whole civilised
world.
Chapter IV.—PHILOSOPHIC PRINCIPLES OF
FREE TRADE.
Whoever has devoted an adequate share of atten-
tion to the works of Adam Smith, McCulloch,
Bentham, Ricardo, the Mills (Father and Son),
and the teaching of Cobden, and Bright, cannot fail
to recognize the true principles of political economy. It is
the dabblers only—the men of local views and local
interests who are, of all others, the most ignorant of the
conclusiveness of Free Trade arguments. Perhaps they
will understand the argumentum ad hominem with which we
shall close this essay. For the benefit of others, we shall
content ourselves with reproducing ten Free Trade
principles, and which may with some propriety be called
THE FREE TRADE DECALOGUE.
1. Foreign commodities are always paid for by British
commodities, therefore the purchase of foreign com-
modities encourages British industry and trade as
much as the purchase of British commodities.
2. Buy in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest.
3. Protection destroys external trade, while all protected
manufactures are sickly.
4. Increase of exports and imports are the index of
national prosperity.
5. Free importation is the source of plenty, plenty the
foster-mother of arts and science. Protection is a dry-
nurse and cause of scarcity.


6. It is a crime to interfere with a man’s management of
his own property, it is a despotism to check the circu-
lation of a nation’s capital.
7. It is a crime to tax a nation for the benefit of a
producing class. Take care of the consumer and
the producer will take care of himself, in other words
do not sacrifice the many for the few.
8. Individuals know their own interests, and may and
should be left to take care of them in their own way, for
the interests of individuals, and the interests of the
public, which is but an aggregation of individuals,
coincide.
9. Labour should be left free to flow in its natural channel.
10. The value of everything should be settled by uni-
versal competiton.
Now these principles have been demonstrated by the
philosophic writers whom we have before mentioned, and
have been admirably expounded and enforced by a great
French thinker, M. Frederick Bastiat, to Avhose work, which
can be had in English for Is., we refer the reader.
We cannot, however, omit a couple of short extracts
from a great thinker and popular teacher, who has thus con-
densed his conclusions on the subject:—
“ Whatever communities import, they pay for by exports.
This can be shewn by analysis in any class of national
transactions. If we pay for the goods we import by bills
of exchange, these bills represent goods exported, other-
wise they would not be paid. If we pay for goods in
bullion, it is the same thing ; gold does not grow in this
country; and every sovereign we send abroad to pay for
goods has been got as the price of goods exported, unless
it has been brought by one of our own people from
the gold districts, and then it is virtually a produce of
British industry. It is, in fact, a sort of dynamic law that


importation causes exportation, just as the vacuum in phy-
sics filled up by the air, or the other nearest fluid.”
‘ ‘ But it (Free Trade) has in reality been established as
the result of a double experience—the one being the failure
of all deviations from it, the other the practical success of
the principle during the short period in which it has been
permitted to regulate the commerce of this country.” —
McCulloch.
We hope hereafter to discuss separately each principle
embodied in our Decalogue of Political Economy.
Chapter Y.—RESULTS OF QUASI PEOTECTION IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
After this rapid, reliable, and we hope conclusive review of
Free Trade in every age, we come to that topic which first
induced us to write : namely, the effects which have followed
our “ colonial experience ” of a semi-protective policy (0/
course , Mr. Eagar, for the sake of raising revenue.’’)
Short as the time is since our Seer of Finance first intro -
duced ad valorem duties, see the results; and first of all a few
strong facts, and then the moral effects of his mode of
raising revenue.
The Inter-colonial Trade Nearly Ruined.
1. Before the introduction of the Eagar mode of tax-
ation, the Australasian Steam Navigation Company
was in a flourishing condition. It was a popular
centre of investment. Its * shares, not long ago worth £3l,
have since declined to £9los their present value. Sixorseven
of their splendid steamershave beenlaid upatPyrmont. The
last half-year showed a decrease of £31,000, in receipts
for freight, as compared with the corresponding half of’66 ;
because it is during the present year we are feeling the
• £2O paid up.


full effects of the ad-valorem duties. But from the very
day the obnoxious tax was legalised, a decline became per-
ceptible, and the downward tendency inevitable. The
A. S. N. Company’s fine vessels now arrive from
week to week with barely a quarter of their carry-
ing capacity used, and the little they are doing,
is being done at something less than half the rates
which obtain in the coast trade of Great Britain. Who
will dare say that the whole community does not suffer
from this lamentable fact! The company’s capital is being
frittered away—its property is daily diminishing in value
•—many of its former servants (intellegent artizans, sea-
faring men, and labourers) have been thrown out of
employment—their families impoverished, nay, some of
them ruined. Do not the shop-keepers and tradespeople
feel this ? Talk of bad times I Have we not here a
self-evident proof of the Great Evil of the times.
2, The case of the Panama and New Zealand and Austra-
lian Royal Mail Company will not furnish us with much more
cheering statistics. Since the establishment of ad valorem
and package duties, the money received for freight is not
a fourth of the amount regularly received before the imposi-
tion of these duties. The A. S. N. Co. is not alone in
misfortune—the easy descent downwards can be traced in
unmistakeable characters in the Panama Company’s
ledgers.
3. The Intercolonial trade in sailing vessels is only a
ghost of what it was a few years ago. On instituting
enquiries amongst the ship-owners and the mercantile
houses of the city, we find that more than thirty of these
vessels, carrying on an average 200 tons each ou tof this
port and making six voyages in the year, are off the trade.
They have disappeared. Those that have been lost are not
replaced. Some have been sold for the China trade
—some for India—some for other ports. We are only


concerned with the fact that they have left port Jackson!
They brought on an average some thirty-six thousand tons
of goods into Sydney and took some thirty-six thousand
tons out, and employed, about two hundred and fifty sea-
faring men, most of them having families, besides casual
employes, and they have all gone —all vanished or melted
down in Mr. Geoffrey Eagar’s financial ad-valorem pot.
4. How fare the merchantmen of the city ? Messrs. P.
N. Eussell and Co., whose skill and industry have
deservedly obtained a European reputation, used to employ
regularly some 500 men daily. They have since the impo-
sition of ad valorem and package duties been at times
obliged to reduce their establishment to something very
much less. What has become of the dismissed men and their
families ? Do visions of men and women in want of bread
ever haunt you in your sleep, Financier Eagar ?
5. Mr. John Outhbert, the well-known ship-builder, has
had to reduce his establishment to a fourth of the number
employed during the ant e-ad valorem era.
6. Messrs. Healey and Harper, who have built a floating-
dock and established a ship-yard at a cost of something
like £lO,OOO, usually employed 120 men before the reign
of Geoffrey I. They now employ one individual to look
after their premises, and if ennuye to bite his nails—for he
has nothing else to do —and of course he does it.
It is not necessary to refer to other princely employers
of labour. There is not a house in Sydney that cannot
supply similar statistics. What is the consequence ?
There is no employment for men, skilled or unskilled, to
be had in Sydney. Many who are employed are not half
occupied, but are kept on, through the kindly feeling of
employers, at reduced salaries or wages.
But the want of employment occasioned by Mr. Eagar’s
ready mode of raising revenue is not, bad as it is, the worst
evil that it will, if allowed to continue, produce. It will


deteriorate the value of city property to an extent which
can hardly be conceived, and will scarcely be believed in till
it happen, unless we take the power of doing mischief out of
the hands of Gladstone’s Australian umbra. Let us glance at
a few of those “investments” which proved to the world we
had amongst us some of those energetic men who ‘ ‘ builded
up the fatherland in greatness.” Foremost, and facile
princeps, there is Mr. T. S. Mort, whose “investment” at
Waterview Bay, now being carried on by Mr. Macarthur —
and who has personally a large interest in the matter —
amounts already to about £150,000. The reader who doubts
this had better inspect the place, see its plant, machinery,
and appliances, sufficient to give employment to fifteen
hundred men daily. If in our insane submission to the
dictates of an obsolete fiscal policy the trade of the
colony should dwindle away for the next three or
four years in proportion as it has done for the last
one, what will be the value of this property ? How many
men will be employed there ? Where will be the reward
of the two capitalist’s intelligence, energy, and splendid in-
vestment ? When you dream of “savings,” Mr. Eagar,
do you ever see visions of our wealthy men’s losses? Does
it ever occur to you that if there are no consumers, or
comparatively few, your ad valorem pickings and scrapings,
like all cheese-paring, would be worthless indeed? But
we are reasoning with the public, and not reviling Mr.
Eagar.
The Australasian Steam Navigation Company’s property,
which has, I believe, cost nearly £700,000, will be parallel
in prosperity or adversity with Mr. Mort’s. So will Messrs.
P. N. Eussell and Co’s., who have, by their skill and
industry, reared a magnificent workshop at a cost of some-
thing like £lOO,OOO. And as for city property in houses,
warehouses, stores, and shops, that has already begun to
put forth the mouldy signs of decay.


Chapter YL—FEEE POETS.
In contrast to this exhibition of decadence on the commerce
of Sydney, let us group together a few facts—for we cannot
afford space to expand even the obvious argument which
may be deduced from them—which will prove what Free
Trade, notwithstanding adverse geographical and other
circumstances, has done for a British colony in a few years.
If the Protectionists wish to be enlightened, they had better
take the following memoranda as hints, and persue the
subject through an exhaustive investigation. Verb. Sat. Sap*
1. In the year of our Lord 1842, the island of Hongkong
was ceded to the English; it was thereupon formed into
a British Colony, and its commerce established on the
broadest principles of Free Trade. Like the mercantile
settlements of Ancient Carthage and Greece, the enterprise
and industry of the world were invited —free from all
restriction and repression—to this spot, and it has now
become the chief centre of commerce between China and
the principal trading nations of Europe and America
Although in this flourishing colony there is not a Custom
House, still a revenue in excess of the expenditure is
realised by the sale of land, and by slight direct taxation.
It is now thickly populated by Europeans and Chinese, and
labour commands more than double the rate of remuneration
which it meets with in any of the contiguous commercial
settlements. The colony is now in a most flourishing
condition, and its properity is on the increase.
2. In striking contrast with this gratifying state of
things is the Portuguese settlement of Macao, distant about
80 miles from Canton, and only 35 from Hongkong.
Macao, although favourably situated for business, and
possessing an agreeable and salubrious climate, is sunk in
the deepest poverty and degradation. Land and houses
are of no value there, and the grass is literally growing in
its streets. It creates great surprise among the inhabitanta


if three or four ships are seen, at the same time, in its
extensive harbour. Its commerce is almost worthless,
while the average daily tonnage in Hongkong is about
200,000 tons, facts which can be established to the satis-
faction of the most sceptical by an examination of the Trade
Reports for the years ’63-’66, Reports which can be seen in
several mercantile offices in Sydney. The striking differ-
ence between these two settlements obviously arises
—indeed no one cognizant of the facts doubts it—from
Macao being a protected and Hongkong a free port. At
Macao there used to be heavy exactions levied, in the shape
of Customs’ duties and harbour dues; and although latterly
the Macaonese have followed the example of Hongkong,
still the trade having been once diverted, through a narrow
and selfish policy, there is no chance now of its being
brought back again. The consequence is that Hongkong
flourishes while Macao droops, as the inhabitants of the
latter have at last to their cost begun to understand.
When a ship arrives at Hongkong its cargo is landed
without restriction or examination, and the return cargo
got without delay. The consequence is, there is now no
resisting the progress of that colony nor the increase of its
trade.
3. The truth of these assertions may be easily sub-
stantiated, by making enquiries amongst any of the masters
of vessels engaged in the Chinese trade, who may happen to
be just now in Sydney Or the question may be put in a
less suspicious manner than by direct enquiry. Ask any
owner of a ship at what rate he will deliver goods to China,
and he mil at once offer to have them conveyed to Hong-
kong at nearly one half the price which he would take to
transmit them to any other port in China. The reason is
obvious: that port is free , consequently ships make it a port
of call, because there is no difficulty to get charters there.
Ships are always in good demand. Would not a similar


state of prosperity be a gratifying fact to us in Sydney
just now?
4. Saigon in Cochin China used to do a large business
(chiefly in rice) with China, but since the French occupation
of the place—the French having established heavy duties —■
this trade has changed its current, and flows into the Gulf
of Siam—a far greater distance from China—where it finds
a free port.
The inference from this statement of facts is obvious.
Extended trade—progressive civilization—social happiness
—increase of population—good wages —and other beneficial
results—may be noted in all the free trade ports of the
Chinese waters; while misery, vice, and poverty are
huddled together in those mismanaged ports, where
commerce is oppressed. What occurs in the Chinese, has
its counterpart in other parts of the world.
These cogent argumenfa ad hominem —arguments derived
from our actual experience—require no corroboration; but
it would, for other reasons, be unpardonable to pass over
a document which has lately been published, and which
more incisively cuts at the root of the Protection fallacy
than anything else we have seen. It is the Poport of the
Sub-Committee of the Chamber of Commerce, authorised
to pronounce opinion on this very question, and its
cumulative facts and obvious conclusions cannot fail to
interest and impress the reader. Here it is :
“In considering the question of the action of ad valorem duties on
the trade of New South Wales, this committee has directed its atten-
tion mainly to the statistical information furnished by the Government
for the years 1865-66. The statistics for 1866 not being yet published,
the information used in this report cannot he regarded as strictly
official until laid before Parliament; but by the consent of the Col-
lector of Customs, reference to the manuscript has been allowed. It
will be seen that any arguments based upon the figures quoted, can
hardly be looked upon as conclusive, in proving all the disadvantages
of duties ad valorem ; hut the committee is certainly of opinion that
the experience of persons connected with mercantile pursuits will be
in favour of the assumption that no improvement of a lasting character


•can be expected so long as those dutie continue, while it is equally
certain that the tendency has been, from within a few months of the
imposition of those duties, to divert trade from its ordinary channels,
to build up the prosperity of other places possessing inferior natural
position and advantages, and the taking from New South Wales a
prestige belonging to the colony as being first established, and having
o-iven off from her own inherent vitality the material from which other
settlements have been formed. Your committee does not pretend to
arrogate legislative functions; they feel that the people, by their
representatives, must tax the community ; and that in the wisdom of
the legislative body must remain for good or ill the right to declare
the principles upon which the taxation of the colony shall depend.
Yet it is believed that a respectful review of the condition of trade
will be received and carefully considered whenever the general prin-
ciples of taxation in their relation to the interests of the colony shall
be debated. Apart from other considerations, the frequent alterations
made in the Customs tariff are highly objectionable, and have always
been attended by a disorganisation of trade, tending to destroy that
confidence which should, in the opinion of the committee, be fostered
in the operations of shippers, giving instability to a market so far re-
moved from the great centres of commerce, and inspiring those who
would willingly trade with us with a feeling of doubt as to the possi-
bility of their ventures being subjected to taxation, imposed at uncer-
tain periods, and possibly closing the market against them, or so
materially acting to their prejudice as to make them hesitate to have
dealings with our port. The collection of package duties commenced
on the°2sth May, 1865, and the ad valorem duties on the 21st Decem-
ber in the same year. The total value of imports for the year 1860 was
£9,928,925; for the year 1866, £8,867,071. The Registrar-General,
in his report for the year 1866, reported the value of goods from
Victoria as close upon two millions, gold included, which was returned
as value, £1,054,408. The value of goods imported from Victoria for
1866 gives total £1,399,511, gold included, to value of £928,279 ; the
difference in the value, therefore, stands (deducting gold in both in-
stances), thus : Imports, merchandise—£94s,s92 for 1865, against
£471,232 for 1866 ; a decrease for the latter-named year of £474,362.
The report gives the imports from Queensland as over a million for
1865, against £614,983 for 1866, gold for 1865 being valued £85,887,
and for 1866 £127,296, leaving the imports in the first named year at
£914,113, against £487,687 for 1866,
The Customs revenue collected for the present year to the 31st
August, amounted to £491,432, of which £71,672 was collected by ad
valorem duties. Under favourable circumstances it may be assumed
that the Customs revenue for the year wall reach £737,000, against
£765 500 for 1866. The ad valorem collections to 31st August of this
year, amount to £71,672 ; and, taking as in the case of the revenue
gross, an average of the first eight months, the amount will probably
reach £107,508, against £156,350 for 1866. It is believed that these
calculations are based upon the most favourable view, and that it will
be found that the [decrease will be much greater than these figures
appear to disclose.


“ The whole amount o ad valorem duty collected during the vear
1866 was £156,350, giving an equivalent declared value of £3,127,000,
leaving the difference in value upon the whole imports of the colony,
viz., £5,740,071, to represent goods not charged with duties ad valo-
rem. For the present year, taking the figures given in another part
of this statement, the ad valorem duties being estimated at £107,508,
upon a value of declaration of £2,150,160, represent a decrease in the
import value of £976,840 against the previous year.
“ The tendency of the ad valorem .system is to paralyse industry
and prevent the growth, of manufactures. Workshops, on a scale
hitherto unknown in this colony, are springing up ; and it is known
that any kind of work requiring expensive and complicated machinery
can be performed. Yet, the machinery used is subject to taxation, and
almost all the material. Iron shipbuilding is discouraged by the duty
on imported iron, tools, &c. An instance in illustration will explain
the disadvantages of this mode of taxation in their effects upon the
mechanic and artisan.
“ A few weeks since, in a sister colony, an iron-frame steamship was
imported, which it was intended to sot up ; hut in consequence of the
tariff restrictions, communication was made with New South Wales
to ascertain it the work could be performed in Sydney. The Govern-
ment of New South Wales upon being moved in the matter, consented
to the ship being built nominally ‘ in bond,’ thus saving the ad valo-
rem ; but the package duty of one shilling for every three cwt. of iron
used was insisted upon. Subsequently, the Government of Victoria
consented to build the vessel ‘in bond.’ If we had not been hampered
with a duty of five per cent., there would have been no question about
the matter, and the vessel would have been constructed in the work-
shops of New South Wales. With these restrictions it will be clear
to every person that no definite principle is contained in ad valorem
duties as levied in the colony. When it is known that a vessel may
be imported fully equipped, and sold in the harbour of Port Jackson
without paying one shilling of Customs taxes, but in the case of a
vessel built in the colony, the iron, paint, ironmongery, and every
article to the tools, of workmen, are subject to a duty of five per cent.
“ Again, in the case of vessels, new, or requiring repairs, every sheet
of metal, the felt, nails, &c., pays five per cent, duty to the revenue.
Vessels arriving here for repairs, finding the price of materials in-
creased, have left the port; pitch, oakum, felt, and such materials
used in this port for the repairs of ships, being subject to this tax. The
printer and newspaper proprietors are charged duty for their type,
ink, paper, &c., while imported books and newspapers are admitted
without tax.
“ Ad valorem duties are especially unequal, when it is considered
that the principal articles of consumption are taxed by weight ox-
measure,’and in some instances to the extent of three times their cost,
while articles charged at value are admitted at five per cent.
“ It is recommended by your Committee that the foregoing be em-
bodied in a memorial to the Legislative Assembly.’ ’
A petition, embodying a resume of these facts, and setting forth the
Chamber of Commerce’s reasons for asking Parliamentary relief, was


subsequently prepared, and duly presented in the Assembly, where it
ultimately reached the final goal of nearly all petitions—the waste
paper press. It is, nevertheless, worthy of perusal: —
“To the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.
“ The Petition of the undersigned Merchants, and others, engaged in
commercial pursuits.
“Humbly sheweth, —That your petitioners deem the present an
opportune moment to draw the attention of your honorable House to
a review of the entire system of taxation of New South Wales, more
particularly with reference to the ad valorem duties.
“That in January, 1866, the Chamber of Commerce of this city
presented a petition to the Legislative Council, against the imposition
of these duties, pointing out that they would prove ruinous to the
trade and commerce of the port of Sydney.
“That your petitioners have had the opportunity of watching the
working of the Act, and believe that all the disadvantages anticipated
have’been realised, and respectfully draw the attention of your honor-
able House to the great falling off in the intercolonial trade, which, in
the opinion of your petitioners, is entirely due to the action of ad
valorem duties.
“ That it is proposed to your honorable House to render more strin-
gent the law that imposes ad valorem duties, the tendency of which
to increase immorality was acknowledged in the Financial Statement
of the Colonial Treasurer; but your petitioners respectfully submit,
that while such a course of action will increase the number of offences
in our penal code, and largely augment commercial demoralisation, it
will be totally inadequate to the end in view; for the principle of ad
valorem duties is to offer a premium to the dishonest trader—legisla-
tion in other countries having invariably proved ineffectual to guard
against fraud in the revenue under a similar impost.
" “ That your petitioners observe that all enlightened modem legisla-
tion is opposed to the increase of Customs duties, and believe that the
public credit would be more effectually sustained, and the taxation of
the colony be placed/upon a more equitable basis, if resort were had to
direct taxation.
“ That your petitioners therefore humbly intreat your honorable
House to repeal the Act imposing ad valorem duties, and to devise a
more equitable mode of raisihg revenue.
“ And your petitioners will ever pray.
“Sydney, 2oth September, 1867.”
Chapter YII. — OTHER BANEFUL EFFECTS OF
QUASI PROTECTION.
We now come to the darkest chapter in the story of our
late experiments in political economy. Not only has a
semi-protective policy crippled speculation—diminished
trade —thrown men out of employment —sent ships away
from our port —and damaged out credit; but it has


■demoralised a large portion of the trading community. it
has offered a premium for false declarations and many of
those “ ingenious devices ” to which we called attention in
“ Swindling by Machinery.” What chance can the honest
trader —the man who would lose every shilling he has in
the world sooner than solemnly attest that to be true whicli
he knows to be false —'against the dishonest one, who
is ready to swear anything so long as he can do so with a
moral certainty of escaping the penal consequences of his
perjury ? Is not the Collector of Customs perfectly well
aware of the fact that “the declarations” made at the
Custom House do not represent much more than one-third
of the amount —certainly not one-half—which they ought
to represent ? But what can he do ? There is that piece
of Legislative patchwork called the Ad Valorem Duties
Act to guide him, and there is Mr. Geoffrey Eagar watching
him with keen eyes, and there are all the surroundings of
a bad system to puzzle him. He cannot protect the honest
trader. No ! that individual must submit to the sacrifice,
or belie his conscience. He must declare that his package
of goods is worth £IOOO, while Muggs and Company will
get a more valuable package “passed” as worth £SOO.
It would not be difficult to cite a hundred cases in illustra-
tion of this melancholy fact; but a few will suffice, and it
may be as well to observe, that the writer has had access
to the Import Warrants at the Custom House, from which
he has gathered the curious information he is about to lay
before the reader.
1. In reference to all goods subject to ad valorem duties,
he found on investigation that, taking half-a-dozen cargoes,
the value of the goods as “ declared ” to here, and on which
the duty r ,was paid, was less by several thousand pounds
sterling than their value at the ports of shipment. A curious
instance may be given. On a certain day not long ago a
very large shipment of kerosene oil was declared upon as


worth Is. Bd. per gallon, and on the same day Mr. Walter
Kenny makes a declaration for similar oil at 3s. per gallon,
which is at first refused acceptance because the oil was said
to be worth 3s. per gallon at the port of shipment,
Melbourne, and the Collector of Customs insisted on 10
per cent, being added to the Melbourne price. Now
look at the position Mr. Kenny is placed in. He
has first of all to pay nearly twice as much duty per
gallon on this oil as the unnamed importer who paid
only at the rate of Is. Bd. per gallon, and yet he has to
compete with that individual in our market. How can
fair competition, the very soul of business, exist under
such circumstances ?
2. The greatest number of fraudulent transactions in
reference to this matter occur in the drapery trade. It is
perfectly startling to a man who is acquainted with the
real market value of this class of goods, to note the cool-
headed but brazen-faced impudence, with which some
persons make their declarations. As an instance, the
writer saw a shipment of goods which cost in London £247,
passed here on the declared value of £4O. He also noticed
eight cases of woollen goods, imported by a very respectable
house , and the value declared thereon was £ll5. On the very
same day, Messrs. Farmer, Painter, and Pope, who
are honorably notable to the whole trade for making
declarations of the exact value, passed an entry for four
cases of the same kind of goods, imported in the same ship,
and declared their value at £412.
Now anybody who knows anything of the value of
woollen goods must be perfectly well aware that the average
value of each case, such as are imported by woollen
drapers, is from £9O to £l2O. Now let us pause to
ask how can Messrs. Farmer, Painter, and Pope fairly
compete with others in similar business while they pay
four times the duty on half the amount of goods which the


aforesaid others pay ? Is it not very easy for the “ others’
to undersell them ? We do not wonder at the wonderment
which such firms as M‘Arthur and Co. of York-street give
expression to, when they see some of the extraordinary and
extravagantly unscrupulous entries which others in their
line of business pass daily at the Custom House. Here is
a statistical statement which (no one can deny) affects them.
Within a certain time they passed entries at the Custom
House for 1020 packages, declared their value at £47,795,
and paid duty accordingly. Two other houses in the same
line of business within the same time, passed entries for
similar goods:—One (Z. Z. & Co.), for 817 packages,
declared value £19,982; the second (X. X. and Co.), for
465 packages, declared value £12,690. The average
payments actually made to the Treasury on each package
in these three instances would stand thus:
McArthur & Co. £46 17s. Id.
Z. Z. & Co. £24 9s. 2d.
X. X. & Co. £27 2s. 4d.
Now a very simple rule of arithmetic enables us to find
out that McArthur & Co. will have paid, within the specified
time, about £llOO ad valorem duty more {ceteris paribus)
than their cleverer neighbours in business. Surely these
simple facts teach a plain lesson, or enforce an obvious
truth—namely, that the ad valorem duties are demoralising
a portion of the mercantile community. It is in
fact quite true that Mr. Eagar’s economic nostrum has most
seriously dosed a few respectable houses. The dishonest
have “made good strokes of business” out of it. The
truth is—whatever money has been raised by the ad
valorem duties has been got from the few respectable firms
who will not declare falsely!
But we have said enough. If the reader has followed us
carefully through our reflections, and if he has pursued


our arguments to their just conclusions, he cannot fail to
recognise
That it was unfettered Commerce which built and peopled
the great cities of the world in ancient and modern
times ;
That it was free and unfettered Commerce which developed
the olden Mediceval, and Modern civilization ;
That it was free amd unrestricted commerce that first bound
man to man —nation to nation—in a word the whole
world in a vast chain of beautiful human relations ;
That it is parracidal wickedness for any Government now-
a-days to fall back on the narrow, exploded, selfish
theory of “ robbing the many to protect the few
That no Government should be allowed to hold office whose
members are so behind the rest of the world in intelli-
gence, as not to be able to raise revenue without destroy-
ing the sources of national wealth.
We need not add another word to this summary ot con-
clusions deducihle from our reflections, beyond relieving
the tedium of the argument with the following glowing and
glorious lines of Cowper, who in the rapt ecstacy of poetic
vision, saw truth more clearly than our seers of finance in their
dreary studies. Are not the following thoughts as true as
they are beautiful, and as beautiful as they are harmoni-
ously expressed!
“ The band of Commerce was designed
To associate all the branches of mankind ;
And, if a hountless plenty he the robe,
Trade is the golden girdle of the globe.
Wise to promote ■whatever end the means,
God opens fruitful Nature’s various scenes:
Each climate needs what other climes produce,
And offers something to the general use ;
No land hut listens to the common call,
And in return receives supply from all.
This general intercourse, and mutual aid,
Cheers what were else a universal shade—
Calls nature from her wy-mantled den,
And softens human rock-work into men.


“ Art thrives most
Where Commerce has enriched the busy coast;
He catches all improvements in his flight,
Spreads foreign wonders in his country’s sight,
Imports what others have invented well,
And stirs his own to match them, or excel.
’Tis thus, reciprocating each with each,
Alternately the nations learn and teach ;
While Providence enjoins to every soul
A union with the vast terraqueous whole.
Haven spreads the canvas, gallantly unfurled,
To furnish and accommodate a world,
To give the pole the produce of the sun,
And knit the social climates into one.
Soft airs and gentle heavings of the wave
Impel the fleet, whose errand is to saVe —
To succour wasted regions, and replace
The smile of opulence in sorrow’s face !”




ADVERTISEMENTS.
TATTERSALL’S HOTEL,
PITT-STREET, SYDNEY.
W. J. O'BiUEI
RETURNS sincere thanks to the Sportsmen of the
Colonies for their many favors, and has much
pleasure in informing them that his Hotel is now conducted
under his personal inspection with anxious consideration
for the comfort and convenience of his Patrons.
The accommodation afforded by TATTERS ALL’S has
long left all rivals behind ; —no Hotel in the Colonies is so
perfect in every department—the cuisine stands unrivalled
—cleanliness and attention are the great inducements for
gentlemen not residing in Sydney to make Tattersall’s their
temporary home —and the fact of its being the established
head quarters of Racing, Cricket, Aquatics, and Pedes-
trianism, adapts it peculiarly for the residence of Sports-
men during the Metropolitan Race Meeting.
Through a long series of years the advertiser has made
the wants of the sporting community his especial study, and
hoping that he has given satisfaction, he asks with con-
fidence for a renewal of the support he has so long received.
THE LIBRARY receives continual and important addi-
tions of new sporting Works, Racing Calendars, Stud Book,
and Herd Book, from 1766 to the present date.
THE LATEST INFORMATION on all Sporting matters
is always to be found posted in the Long Room.
TELEGRAMS of the latest betting are received daily
from Melbourne, and in short, there is not an establishment
in Australia where the Sportsmen can find all he requires to
see or know so readily as at
TATTERSALL’S HOTEL,
J. W. O’BREEN.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
IN PREPARATION
For publication in December, (uniform with this pamphlet)*
THE COLONIAL BANKS:
An Inquiry into their Past History, their Present
Critical Position, and Future Prospects.
By C. CECIL.
Also,
DM (Minniniqttiou
Between Australia and Europe:
Its History and Probable Future Expansion, with a
Critical Inquiry into the best Routes and th e best
Company to perform the service.
Also,
The Australian Mormon ;
POLLY HOPKINS, and others, a Tale of Mercantile,
Clerical, and Social Life in Sydney.
Owing to the quantity this story (founded on fact)
makes, it will be published in weekly numbers.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
EXTENSIVE ALTERATIONS & ADDITIONS
TO THE INTERIOR OF THE
MARKET CLOTH HALL,
PRACTICAL TAILORING ESTABLISHMENT,
484 George-street, opposite the Fruit Markets.
BEGS to announce that, in consequence of the above alterations,
he is enabled to oiler for selection the largest and most
magnificent
STOCK OF WOOLLENS
in the colony.
The trade and public can bo supplied with cut lengths, or by the
piece, at Wholesale Prices.
Opposite George-street Market stands
A famous shop, with many hands ;
With varied stock, select and good,
Attraction cannot be withstood.
For mourning suits or splendid tweed,
Look at the price ! the figures read.
No workmanship or finer stuff
In Sydney, though he scorns to puff.
His patrons everywhere can tell
For fit and fashion none excel.
He asks one favour —“ Give a call.”
At J. Turner’s “ Market Cloth Hall.”
Turner’s Tweed Trousers, to measure, well shrunk, 15s.
Black Cloth Trousers, to measure, 20s.
Tweed Suits to Measure, well shrunk, £2 10s.
Black Cloth Suits, well made, fit unrivalled, to order, from £3 10s.
Riding Pants and Trousers, cut on an improved style, affording full
power of stride, with perfect ease in the sadde.
Every garment well made, well shrunk, and a perfect fit guaranteed
LIVERIES, ROBES, LADIES’ RIDING HABITS, &c., &c.
NOTE THE ADDRESS:—
J. TEENER’S Market Cloth Hall is at
484 GEORGE STREET,
Opposite the Fruit Markets,
Not the Hajmarket.


advertisements.
LONDON AND LANCASHIRE
& Juft Jnspanq d^flinpraes
Fire Capital,
£1,000,000,
Life Capital,
£lOO,OOO,
With, power to increase.
With power to increase.
Cljtef ©fficcfi.
HOME:
LONDON.— CORNER OF LEADENHALL STREET,
LIVERPOOL.—BROWN’S BUILDINGS, EXCHANGE.
MANCHESTER.— 24a PRINCESS STREET.
Colonial.
NEW SOUTH WALES AGENCY:
SYDNEY. 96 NEW PITT STREET.
SYDNEY BOARD:
THE HONORABLE A. McARTHUR, M.L.C. Messrs. A-
McArthur $ Co. GEORGE ALFRED LLOYD, Esa. Messrs. Geo •
A. Lloyd # Co. GEORGE WIGRAM ALLEN, Esq. Messrs. Allen,
Bowden, $ Allen. JOHN FRAZER, Esa. Messrs. John Frazer $ Co.
A. H. C. MACAFEE, Esq. Messrs. A. McArthur Co.
BANKERS.— THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
SURVEYOR.— GEORGE ALLEN MANSFIELD, Esq,
MEDICAL OFFICER —PHILIP SYDNEY JONES,
Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S,
AGENT FOR N. S. WALES.-WILLIAM HENRY
MACKENZIE, Junk.
Fire and Life Insurances (with the advantages peculiar to
these Companies) granted in all parts of the Colony.
Fike Proposals can be completed immediately at current rates.
Losses paid in Sydney.
BRANCHES and AGENCIES of the Companies
are established in VICTORIA, QUEENSLAND, SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, AUCKLAND, CHRIST-
CHURCH, CANTERBURY, OTAGO.


ADVERTISEMENTS,
SYDNEY
Insurance tfonpn 5.
FOE FIRE INSURANCE.
CAPITAL £250,000.
WITH UNLIMITED LIABILITY OF SHAREHOLDERS.
j&jmtors:
JOHN BREWSTER, Esq., Chairman,
JAMES R FAIRFAX, Esq., Deputy-Chairman,
THOMAS C. BREILLAT, Esq.,
RICHARD JONES, Esq.,
J. F. JOSEPHSON, Esq., M.L.A.,
M. E. MURRIN, Esq.
Surbegor:
JAMES HUME, Esq.
Insurances Effected on a Liberal
Scale of Rates.
ALEXAKDEE THOMSON,
Secretary.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SYDNEY
H»i» IteiMiw Sii|W|.
UNLIMITED LIABILITY.
Capital
£ioo,ooo.
iimtors:
EICHAED JONES, Esq., Chairman.
AETHUE HILL COATES MACAEEE, Esq.
HENEY MOET, Esq.
Ji^nte:
London —Messrs. E. and F. TOOTH and MOET, 155
Fenchurch-street.
Brisbane— Messrs. J. and G. HAEEIS.
Newcastle— Captain CHAELES EOBEETSON,
Auckland— Mr. THOMAS H. MABIN.
Uterine Jtomgor:
CAPTAIN JAMES MALCOLM.
N.B.—Time risks on ships, with particular average
taken, subject to special arrangement.
Policies on merchandise to Europe granted in triplicate,
payable in London in case of loss, if required.
A Table of the Eates of Premium can he obtained at the
Company’s Office, Lyons’-buildings, George-street.
SAMUEL H. SMYTH, Manager.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
PARRAMATTA
Strain ftabiption
COMPANY.
Steam to Parramatta, Hunter’s
Hill, Cockatoo, Gladesville, Hyde,
Pennant Hills, Newington, Subiaco,
&c.
The Favourite Steamers EMU, ADELAIDE,
PELICAN, and CYGNET, or YSABEL,
daily,
From PATENT SLIP WHARF, off King
Street:—
To PARRAMATTA—6, 9, 11, 1,3, and 5.
To RYDE—6, 9, 11, 1,3, 5, and 6 p.m.
From PARRAMATTA—6-50, 8-50, 11 a.m.;
1,3, and 5 p.m.
From RYDE —7-40, 8-30, 9-30, 11-40, 1-40,
3-40, and 5-40.
Calling at all Intermediate Wharves,
FARES AT THE USUAL LOW RATES-


ADVERTISEMENTS.
T 3 3
p-- 0
CO
o cu
- P
6
® ” t>>
CO
~ « Ss o
M o _a
fc £a s
a
lT ° '*i.
w °
<D ,—i
3 'eg
.a .a
s ■**
◄ •s
C. BENT,
►s £
§ i
s. CD
. o
?s a
g
hj
s-3 O
!» O ><
® o
jj
«g - M
cd Q ra
$$ W
O
P-* p- nn
s
2.*!
& g
tJ'g
CD O
i®
460 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
(One Boor from Market Street,) and
384 GEORGE STREET,
NEXT POST OEFICB,
Where every article in the trade can be procured at
strictly Moderate prices.
Every variety of Cut Tobaccos packed in tin foil of
suitable for Country use, each packet warranted to
weigh 4 ozs. nett.
BEST BRANDS OF TOBACCO AND CIGARS IN BOND OR DUTY PAID.
Country Orders with, a Remittance of
Reference Executed.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Gr. H. SMITH,
316 GEOEGE-STEEET, SYDNEY,
Three Doors South of Hunter-street.
Is Manufacturing every description of
HATS AND CAPS,
and receiving Monthly Shipments of
ENGLISH AND FRENCH GOODS,
all of which he offers at EEDUCED PEICES, Wholesale
and Eetail.
Country Orders Promptly Executed.
M. M‘MAHON,
BRUSH & COMB MANUFACTURER
IMPORTER OF
Cricketing Goods, Archery, Croquet, and other sports and
games ; First-Class Perfumery, Toys, and general
Fancy Goods; Portmanteaus, and
Travelling Bags, &c., &c.
410 GEORGE STREET,
NEXT CITY BANE,
SYDNEY.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
r c/\n
STATIONER,.
IMPORTER OF
EVERY DEPARTMENT OP LITERATURE.
OP EVERY DESCRIPTION
EXECDIED ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE,
AT REASONABLE PRICES.
JOHN FERGUSON,
SUcount Stooli JUanufactnrcr
BRITISH & FOREIGN BOOKS
BOOKBINDING & PRINTING


W. HOLT, CARRIAGE MANUFACTURER,
Eespectfully solicits an inspection of his Extensive and Unrivalled Carriage Bazaar and Buggy Depot, 267 & 266 Castlereagh-st.
An Illustrated Descriptive Carriage Catalogue can be had gratis on application.




ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHEAP STATIONERY
GOOD Cream Laid NOTE PAPER, Five Quires for
Is. Envelopes to Match, Is. per 100.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
BEST French Linear NOTE PAPER, assorted colours,
Is. 6d. per Box of Five Quires. Envelopes to
Match, Is. 6d. per 100 in box.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
WALKDEN’S Best BLACK INK, Is. per dozen
bottles. Good MAGNUM BONUM PENS from
Od. per Box.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
GUM FOR OFFICE USE, Is. per Bottle, with
Brush.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
PORTRAIT ALBUMS, to hold 24 Portraits, Is. 6d.
each.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
A LARGE and Well Selected Stock of MERCANTILE
and FANCY STATIONERY Very Cheap.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
Bibles, prayer books, and church ser-
vices, at Reduced Prices.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.
LADIES’ and GENTLEMEN’S VISITING CARDS
Engraved and Printed.
H. COLE, 106 King-street.


Australian Mutual Provident Society.
MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE
WITHOUT PERSONAL LIABILITY.
PRINCIPAL OFFICE-NEW PITT-STREET, SYDNEY.
| Persons effecting policies with this society have the
GUARANTEE AFFORDED BY AN ACCUMULATED AND INVESTED
FUND AMOUNTING TO
£400,000,
i and AN ANNUAL REVENUE FROM ALL SOURCES EXCEEDING
£150,000.
The Society being constituted on the principle of
MUTUAL ASSURANCE
AND WITHOUT SHAREHOLDERS,
i No encroachment upon its Surplus Accumulations
is needed for the payment of DIVIDENDS ,
; as in the case ofa PROPRIE TAR YOFFhCE ,
i but on the contrary
THE WHOLE PROFITS
belong exclusively to the MEMBERS , and are
divided rateably among them at intervals of
FIVE YEARS.
BONUS PERIOD.
; POLICIES issued before 28th February, 1868,
will be entitled to participate in Profits at the
declaration of FEBRUARY, 1869.
Forms of proposal and every information may be obtained on
application to
ALEXANDER J. RALSTON, Secretary.
