

wmmm wiix
DETE EMINISM.
AN ESSAY ON THE SUBJECT
“PHILALETHES.”
WITH A
IE 3 lE£ IE IEJ 1 A O IE
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, P.L.S.,E.
Price One Shilling.
l)obart :
FEINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE MACQUARIE STREET.
1893.




FREE WIFE
DETERMINISM.
AN ESSAY ON THE SUBJECT
“PHILALETHES.”
WITH A
PREFACE
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S..E.
JPrice One Shilling.
Hobart:
PRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE MACQUARIE STREET.
1893.




j^REFACE.
The following paper was read by one of my friends at the last meeting
of a private Literary Club, the members of which were unanimous in
their expression of opinion that the subject had been dealt with in a
masterly manner.
I have asked the author to permit me to publish his admirable Essay
for more reasons than one.
In the first place, the subject dealt with bears upon problems which
have to do with Education and Legislation ; in the second place, it
seems to me that a proper understanding of the facts set forth will give
a truer idea of the relationship in which the units of Society stand
towards each other regarding the all-important question of responsibility
than has yet been gained by the many who have given but a superficial
consideration to the subject; all of which questions are of some importance
to the general community.
Let the question of Free Will or Determinism be introduced at any
ordinary meeting of half-a-dozen persons, and, at first blush, five at
least out of the six will claim to have absolute freedom of choice, in so
far as their actions are concerned, at all times, and with regard to all
things. They have never dreamt of raising the question whether there
may not at all times be some influence preceding the action of will, and
causing it to act, as it does act, under any given circumstances.
Now a moment’s consideration must serve to show that no intelligent
man acts in matters_ having the colour of a moral or rational character
without some motive to action. Motive , then, precedes action in
such cases. This much being conceded, the question still remains
—admitting that motive causes the will to act, is not the will still
free to make deliberate choice of the direction in which it will act
under any given circumstances ? And this question may be un-
hesitatingly answered in the affirmative. But then follows the still
more important questions : What is it that decides the choice ? Why
is one course selected out of two possible courses of action that may be
presented to the mind 1 There must be something that determines the
choice. That something is to be found in the motive to action : the
strongest motive—that is, the motive that decides which course of action
shall be taken—really settling the matter. Under such circumstances,
and it would be difficult to think of any other circumstances in rational
life —the Will or “ faculty for effort ” necessarily acts along the line of
least resistance.
It would be a bare assumption to suppose that the Will makes choice
of the motives that cause it to act at all ; yet this must be the false
position accepted by the individual who undertakes to show that he is
not only free to choose but free in the choice of what he shall choose !
To put the truth of the matter in another way. No one will deny
that the individual has the power to act as he likes. Nay, we may go
further, and admit than an individual’s freedom to act as he likes —
within limits —is proved by the fact that he acts at all. But what
makes him prefer one course to another ? And this question may be
followed by the still more pregnant one : — Could he act in opposition to
the liking or bias constituting in his case the most powerful motive to
action in any given instance 1 A reasonable attempt to answer this last
question will serve to convince any intelligent thinker, that although
the individual may be free to act as he likes, he may yet be free to
choose only one course of action ; in other words, he is free only to
act along the line of least resistance. It is not open to him to choose what
his choice shall be.
To those who may be inclined to urge that in spite of such reasoning
consciousness assures us that we are free, I would respectfully submit
that all that consciousness really does assure us of is this—that'we ar a free
to act as we like ; but a moment’s consideration will serve to show that


this affords no solution of the problem why we like to act in any
particular way.
That some practical good may be looked for from the intelligent dis-
cussion of this question, may, I think, be gathered from the following
considerations: —
All the argument in the world will not alter facts. But discussion
may alter the attitude of tbe mind in relation thereto ; and the attitude
of the mind in relation to facts may have a very important bearing
upon human conduct.
The importance of a right understanding, for example, of the question
under discussion must necessarily have a great deal to do with the
value we shall attach to education and legislation ; for if the aim and
purpose of education be not to determine the future conduct of the child —
in a word, if its purpose be not to create a tendency or bias to right
action, to what end do we put forth effort to train the infant mind at all ?
And if it be not the object of criminal legislation to give an additional
motive to the ill-disposed to refrain from prejudicial courses of action
to what end or purpose do we legislate at all 1
There is one objection to the acceptance of the doctrine of Determinism
that is so often urged and insisted upon that I cannot refrain from
referring to it, namely, that Determinism destroys Responsibility. Those
who advance this plausible argument lose sight of the fact that Society
is just as much under the law of Determinism as the individual is, and
that for its protection Society is compelled (acting along the line of least
resistance) at all times to take the only course it can see to he the best
course for its preservation. The individual is, therefore, at all times
held responsible by, and so is made responsible to, Society for his actions.
All that Society troubles itself about is the actual condition of the
individual, not the circumstances that may have led up to that condi-
tion, at any given time. Society does not ask whether the individual
is free as regards his choice of the motives that cause him to act. but
simply whether he is governed by inclinations that cause him to act in
a manner calculated to prejudice the welfare of the general community.
His conduct is measured by the standard morality of Society for the time
being, and according to its conformity, or otherwise, to that standard
he is dealt with.
A recognition however, of the fact that the will of the offender is
undoubtedly under the influence of motives that determine his actions
will certainly lead us to take more correct views of his conduct and will
give us more just ideas regarding the treatment that should be meted
out to him. Room is no longer left for the element of revenge
in the consideration of his case. It is at once seen that, if the
offender is to be dealt with in a manner conducive to the best
interests of society, justice demands that he shall also be dealt
with in a spirit that recognises the fact that he is a human being,
having claims upon our sympathies ; a human being whose character
has been moulded by an unfavorable environment, and whose actions
are, therefore, out of harmony with the conditions upon which the
stability, and even the possibility of social life must ever depend.
That there is much room for amendment and improvement in the views
generally held, both with regard to education and the treatment of the
criminal classes, goes without saying ; and if the consideration of the
truths set forth in the following pages gives rise to a fuller understanding
of these all-important questions my object in publishing my friend’s
essay, for general circulation will be fully attained.
Finally, it may be urged that the doctrine of Determinism affords the
only logical ground for faith in a
“ Far-off Divine event,
To which the whole creation moves.”
Tasmanian Public Library , ALFRED J. TAYLOR.
April , 1893,


FREE WILL AND DETERMINISM,
(By PHILALETHES.)
- ooC>O <: Coc '■ 1
Tills is an old question—a long-standing dispute. If not as
old as Iranian thought, it is at least as old as human philosophy ;
and it cannot, therefore, be expected that I shall be able to contri-
bute any new element to the discussion of such a well-worn subject.
I can but deal with the stock-in-trade of the controversy, which bv
this time has become the common property of all instructed minds.
Moreover, the question is one that is regarded as among the most
difficult in the whole range of philosophy; and doubtless Hume
was justified in describing it as “ the most contentious question of
metaphysics, the most contentious science.” Milton, it will be
remembered, makes the metaphysically inclined among the fallen
angels to have
“reasoned high
Of providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate,
Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute.”
And so hopeless does he appear of the whole question, that he re-
ports even these celestial intelligences to have
“ Found no end, in wandering mazes lost.”
Nevertheless, old and difficult though the problem be, it must be
freshly encountered by every independent mind that desires to hold
its beliefs on some tenure more valid than mere tradition, even
though that tradition be an intellectual one. It may, therefore,
prove of some slight interest to you, if I be allowed to indicate the
lines of thought—to me they are all converging lines —along which
my mind has travelled in reaching its own conclusion on this
subject.
I.— Statement of the Question.
It is indispensable to any useful discussion that we should have
clear views as to what is really the question at issue. Further, as
a pre-requisite to any full statement of the question itself, it
might perhaps seem a very reasonable demand that we should
frame proper and exact definitions of the leading terms employed in
the discussion, such as will, cause, motive, freedom, responsibility.
With such a demand it would be easy enough to comply —that is
to say, we could easily give our own definitions. But the moment
we had completed our explanations, in all probability we should be
met with the charge that we had begged the whole question in the
definitions themselves. Thus, for example, taking the etymology
of the word, were we to define motive as “ that which moves the
will,” then it might be said actum est —the question is settled.
If motives move the will there can be no freedom. Again,
take the word will itself; what is to be understood by
that ? Dr. Martineau, for instance, uses the term will in


the sense of “ that which determines an alternative,” and this
is clearly equivalent to saying that will is the power to make
a choice, Jonathan Edwards, the classic writer on this subject,
gives the word the same meaning, and in this he is followed by
many other philosophers. But Ido not think that such a defini-
tion receives the support of the general usage of language. The
distinctive mark of will is effort; to do a thing “ with a will,” is to
do it with might and main, either of body or mind. Choice, surely,
lies behind the operation of will, and cannot be taken as any part
of the process of willing. For my own part, I much prefer the
definition given by an American writer of some note, Mr. E. Gr.
Hazard, who says : “ Will is the power or faculty of the mind
for effort.” But now, were we to insist upon this definition, we
might be met by some such criticism as the following—it is, in fact,
the argument of Dr. Croll throughout his Philosophy of Evolution —
If will be taken to mean a force of some sort, the very phrase
“ freedom of the will ” ought to be looked upon as sheer nonsense.
For the exertion of a force and the determination of a force are
totally and absolutely different things, and it is simply inconceiv-
able that any force can determine itself. Every force in the
cognisable universe is determined. There is, therefore, no problem
to be solved, and the question of human freedom need never have
been raised. In order, then, to avoid the charge of begging the
question and virtually foreclosing debate by our definitions, it will
be best, I thinly, to take the terms of the discussion at first in the
senses in which they are popularly used, allowing clearer and more
exact meanings to emerge, if possible, in the course of the argu-
ment— and, in fact, as a part of the argument itself.
The question after all resolves itself into the ultimate one of
whether we are free in our choices. This I take to be the real ques-
tion. For no one doubts that within limits we are free to cany
out our choices. We do, in fact, every day of our lives —within
limits again, of course—do what we choose. If from any causes,
external or internal, we are unable to carry out our own choices, or
if we are compelled instead to execute other people’s choices, then
on any theory —libertarian or necessarian—we are not free. But,
granted that we can do as we like, the real question remains—can
we like as we like ? or, in other words, are we absolutely free to
choose our choices P To this question the determinist answers
“ No,” and that is the answer which I shall try to sustain in this
paper.
ll.— Will and Motive.
The position of the determinist, as all know, is that will follows
the strongest motive; and it is obvious that the proposition
will serve its purpose whatever definition of will we adopt
—-whether that of choice or energy. The language of some
determinists certainly lends colour —possibly that of Bain does—
to the idea that in enunciating this proposition they intend to
represent it as the conclusion of a process of deductive reasoning.
If so, it is surely a very palpable piece of circular reasoning, and
really amounts to saying that the will is determined by the
strongest motive, because the motive that determines it is the,


strongest; or, as Dr. Martineau puts it, it amounts to “ the useless
tautology that the prevailing motive prevails.” But Ido not think
any determinist really means to convey the idea that the proposi-
tion is reached by any process of deductive reasoning at all. By
a process of induction lie may arrive at it; and that, I contend, is
just the truth of the matter. For, as Bain says, our only test of
the strength of motive is that it prevails. Now, that such a test is
universally employed in all our practical judgments of human
conduct, no one can deny. When a man, for instance, chooses A
rather than B, you say that A has a greater attraction for him;
and it does not matter what content of meaning you put into the
word “ attraction ” —whether it be hedonistic, utilitarian, or ideal —
you mean to say that the attraction A determines the man’s con-
duct. This, in fact, is the only rational explanation you can give of
his conduct: interrogate him, and you find it is the only rational
explanation he can give of it himself. Indeed, a man would hardly
feel flattered, if you professed to believe that his conduct was not
swayed and determined by motives. If, then, our only test of the
relative strength of motives is that one of them issues in action—
and if, after applying this test, we invariably say “ this motive was
stronger than that ” —surely such a fact must imply a prior belief
that the will does obey the strongest motive. How has this belief
been reached P By induction, I answer; by an induction, that is
to say, of the facts of consciousness. lam conscious—if lam
conscious of anything at all—that my will follows what to me is
the strongest motive ; and when I interrogate the consciousness of
other men, I find that it yields me the same answer. Therefore
the application of the test referred to is not based on any circular
reasoning or on any joetitio principii; but on a belief reached by
independent evidence, namely, the direct evidence of introspection,
supported by the testimony of others.
It is necessary, I think, at this point to fix and explain the proper
meaning of the word motive, at all events, as the determinist uses
it. Although most instructed people hardly need to have pointed
out to them that the use of the word motive, as applied to human
conduct, is metaphorical, yet there can be no doubt that much con-
fusion of thought is caused by the conscious or unconscious use of
the word in its literal dynamic sense. Naturally, the man of strong
mind and active will resents being told that his actions are strictly
determined by motives, if by motive he thinks you mean something
acting upon his mind in some such way as the impact of the cue
acts upon the billiard ball, lying inert and passive on the baize.
But that is not how the determinist thinks of motive. For him
a motive is not something merely objective, acting upon us like a
force from without. Motive has a double aspect—external and
internal-objective and subjective. An external solicitation to any
line of action can be no motive at all, till it has taken its strength,
its complexion, and its meaning from the prepossesions, dispositions,
and tendencies of the individual mind; and especially from the
condition of the mind at the actual time of making a choice or
willing an action. There is truth, therefore, in the libertarian’s
assertion, that the mind itself determines what strength a motive
shall have, that is to say, if we take motive in its restricted, objective


aspect. But, if motive be taken in the full sense here assigned
to it, either the libertarian’s assertion is the merest tautology, or
else it implies another mind behind the phenomenal mind, and,
perhaps, minds behind minds in a retreating series ad infinitum.
To this point, however, it will be necessary and convenient to return
later on. ,
Against the determinist position that will follows the strongest
motive, a philosopher, whom I would attempt to criticise with the
greatest deference, and much misgiving, urges the incommensura-
bility of motives. Says Dr. Martineau: “If this proposition ”
•—namely, that among conflicting motives the strongest must pre-
vail—“ is to have any meaning, and be susceptible of verification,
there must be some common measure of motives, enabling
us to set them on a graduated scale of strength, and say
‘this is Vweaker than that, and here is the weakest of all.’”
Again, he asks, “ How am I to balance the attractions of
a festive evening among friends in health against those of the same
hours given to a friend in dejection and sorrow ?” and so on with
similar questions, instancing various heterogeneous attractions.
Well, I would venture to say in reply, if you want a quantitative
commensurability it is impossible to supply the common measure
that is demanded. But, I would ask, does not the demand itself
imply that the conceptions of physical dynamics are being im-
properly applied in a domain where they are inappropriate, if not
absolutely unthinkable ? There is no harm in using the terms of
physics to express the phenomena of mind so long as we remember
that the language we are employing is secondary and metaphorical.
But, though we may use terms that are actually metaphors, those
terms may all the same express facts that are real, and relations
that are true. We know what we mean, and we are expressing
real facts of our mental life when we say, for instance, that we have
a stronger motive for doing a just action than for doing a mean
action, or for staying at home to help nurse a sick mother, than for
going out on a pleasure excursion ; nor have we any reasonable
ground for feeling seriously embarrassed because we must confess
our inability to state the difference of the rival attractions in foot-
pounds or horse-power, after the manner of physical science.
Neither, I think, can any weight be allowed to another of Dr.
Martineau’s objections—that after a deliberative suspense, caused
by the solicitations of competing motives, has been ended by an
act of volition, it is impossible for any man to make out a list of
these competing motives on a scale of graduated strength. It may
be true that, as a matter of fact, we are not always conscious of
arranging the motives we have rejected on a scale of this kind—we
may not even have done so during the process of making a choice.
Indeed, the claims of some of the motives may have been so con-
spicuously weak that they had only to come into view to be dis-
missed at once, like candidates in an election who are simply “ out
of the running,” or, to use another simile, like candidates in an
examination who, for some glaring weakness in the first paper
tested, fail to get the rest of their work estimated or their marks
recorded. But the fact that we are not in the habit of consciously
drawing up an inventory of rejected motives in the order of their


relative strength, does not prove the impossibility of doing so.
No donbt it is impossible for the acting subject to make out a list
of this kind that would have objective truth—that is, which would
he valid for other men. But I think, if called upon, the agent
could do so for himself. Suppose the question put to anyone:
“ If, out of the motives A, B, C, D, the motive C, which you say
did actually determine you, had been absent, which of the rejected
motives would have swayed your action?” it is surely not unreason-
able to think that consciousness, assuming the mind to remain in
the same sta'e, or to be able to recall the same state, as it was in
at the moment of volition, would unhesitatingly point out the
motive A, B, or D that would have carried the day. Even as to
the actual practice of the mind in assessing the relative strength of
motives, it must be admitted that it is no uncommon thing to hear
a man say, “ So many courses of conduct were open to me—A, B,
C, D, etc. I chose A ; hut if A had not been open to choice, I
should have chosen I); if not D, then B;” and so on through
the list.
At all events, no mind of ordinarily clear vision can fail to see
that the determinist has the best of the case in dealing with the
question of motive : the very existence of the word in common
speech with an undeniably casual meaning is some witness to the
truth of his view. Even the libertarian cannot ignore the influence
of motives on the will, but he has certainly a most unsatisfactory
way of treating them. Sometimes, indeed, he uses language which
seems to inqfly that the mind, the will, or the man—call the source
of volition what you like —has the purely arbitrary power of deter-
mining which motive shall be strongest. On such a view of the
case it is impossible to see what part motives really play, or why
they need come into view at all. They can be nothing but psycho-
logical dummies, and it is a small matter whether they be admitted
or not. Sometimes, again, the advocate of free will states his case
as to motives in this manner: —“ The will is, indeed, not determined
by motives, but it is conditioned by motives.” This, however, can
only be regarded as a distinction without a difference. Eor the
conditions of an event are its causes. A condition is that
without which an event could not have happened as it did,
or, perhaps, could not have happened at all. If the presence
or the absence of a given circumstance makes no difference at all,
and the event could have happened all the same without it, then that
circumstance is not one of the conditions. We do, indeed, in a
loose popular way, or perhaps for convenience, distinguish between
the conditions and the cause of an event—meaning by cause the
antecedent agent by which the effect is mainly brought about
but, rigorously interpreted, all the conditions of an event are its
co-operating causes. To say, therefore, that voluntary actions are
conditioned by motives, is but another way of saying th at they
are caused by motives; a©d, if so, the will is not 'free. Even if
you say that voluntary action is not wholly conditioned by motives,
but that the will itself has some independent self-determining
power, the motives being only subsidiary, still you surrender the
free-will position. For if motives have any determining power at
all, the will is not altogether free : the action must have been


different without the influence of motives from what it is with the
influence of motives.
lll.— Will and Causation.
The next point to he dwelt upon is that determinism is another
way of saying that the reign of Jaw admits of no exception.
Causality is believed to rule throughout the universe. In human
thought and science province after province has yielded to its
sovereignty, and the idea of chance has been eliminated. Chance
now is simply another word for our ignorance of the conditions that
determine events. No one believes in chance to the extent of
thinking that events can happen without a cause, or that, given
the conditions, the events could be other than they are. Now,
what the conception of chance used to be in regard to the physical
world, the conception of free-will is in regard to the mental or
moral world. The doctrine of free-will means this—or it means
nothing at all—that no matter what the conditions, internal or
external, under which volition takes place, the volition might
have been different. In opposition to such a doctrine, we may
point Jo the fact—a fact which cannot be disputed—that in all the
practical affairs of life, the rigorous causal connection of event with
antecedent, of acts with motives, is universally admitted, if not
explicitly, at all events, tacitly. We perform" our actions, and
base our calculations, on the forecast of events in the mental and
moral world, with as much confidence as we do on the forecast of
events in the physical world. Indeed, it is often more easy to
predict human conduct, than it is to predict occurrences in "the
realm of physical nature. It is much safer, for example, to foretell
that the man we know to be hot-tempered will be provoked to
anger by certain incitements, than it is to foretell to-morrow’s
weather, much less next week’s weather. Does a man’s forecast of
human conduct prove deceptive, he *never turns round on the
doctrine of causation, and accuses it of misleading him. He con-
cludes that his knowledge of conditions is imperfect : he did not
know the character fully, or foresee all the motives and influences
that would tell upon the will. One thing at least is certain : what-
ever belief we may profess to hold about the freedom of our own
actions, we invariably interpret other men’s actions on the assump-
tion that they are determined, and that there is a strictly causal
connection between motive and volition. Even when we feel
unable to predict conduct, that is to reason forwards from the data
of character and motives to the quaesita of actions, we, nevertheless,
always feel ourselves justified in reversing the process, and we have
no hesitation in reasoning backwards from the date of actions to the
quaesita of motive and character. The libertarian, however, who
does this is guilty of the grossest inconsistency and self-contradic-
tion. What business has he with inferences and predictions at
all P and when, on hearing that someone has acted in such and
such a manner, he exclaims, as he often does, “ Ah, just what I
expected ! ” is he not uttering a sheer impertinence ? On the free-
will theory, what right have we to expect one thing rather than
another ?


My contention then, briefly, is that the free-will theory sets aside
the axiom of causality, and really implies that events may happen
without a cause. It is true the libertarian repudiates this con-
struction, and sets up what he calls self-determination as a suffi-
cient cause. But now, to test the matter, let us take an illustrative
example (borrowed from Dr. Croll). Two lines of action are open
to me, A and B. I choose A. The determinist says—and I agree
with him—all the conditions being exactly what they are, if I
choose at all, I must choose A. “No ! ” says the libertarian, “no
matter what the conditions are—no matter what’ your internal
states, no matter what the external solicitations—you were free
to choose B.” Now is not this plainly equivalent to saying that an
event may happen without a cause ? Ex hypothesi, there is no assign-
able cause or reason why, the conditions remaining the same, I should
change from Ato B. And yet lam told that I can change from A
to Bif . Yes, if what ? If the conditions had been different,
that is to say, if you contradict the hypothesis. Be it noted,
most carefully, that the change from A to B is as much an event
as A and B themselves, and this change is the thing that wants
accounting for ; it needs a cause. The truth is that an act of pure,
absolute choice, without some determining cause, is simply im-
possible, inconceivable. Unless men feel the force of causes that
naturally determine their actions, they will invent artificial causes ;
they will “toss up,” and let “ head or tail ” decide.
IY.— Will and Consciousness.
The apparently strong point of the libertarian’s case is his con-
fident appeal to consciousness. He declares that consciousness
proclaims the freedom of the will; he adds, that in the last resort
all our knowledge is guaranteed by the reports of consciousness;
and he warns us, that once we begin to call in question the verdicts
of consciousness we abandon the only sure anchor-age of knowledge,
and are in danger of being soon stranded in universal scepticism.
Very much might be said on this part of the subject, but really to
little profit. It must not, therefore, be supposed that I “ fight shy ”
of this point if I dismiss it with one or two brief remarks. In the
first place, it may be observed that many competent thinkers con-
sider that the libertarian’s very positive assertion goes altogether
beyond the record of consciousness. Says Mr. Fisk : “ Conscious-
ness, which is so confidently appealed to as establishing by its in-
fallible verdict the doctrine of free-will, in fact says nothing about
the matter. That volitions are uncaused, is a proposition alto-
gether too indirect for consciousness to sit in judgment upon, and
it can neither be proved nor disproved by simple introspection. . . .
Consciousness tells us only that we will.” (Cosmic Philosophy, ii.,
p. 182), Mr. Bain observes : “It is a great stretch of asseveration to
call the construction of an enormous theory an act of consciousness,
so simple that we cannot make a slip in performing it” (quotedby
Fisk, 1.c.) Well, I may be accused of temerity in going beyond
Mr. Fisk’s very modest agnosticism on this point; but, as will
have already appeared, it is part of my argument that, fairly inter-
preted, the verdict of consciousness is the direct opposite of what


the libertarian declares it to be. I have ventured to argue in a
former section of this paper that what consciousness really does
assure us of is, that we will in obedience to the strongest motive, or,
in other words, that our wills are determined. This interpretation
of the facts of consciousness may be correct, or it may be mistaken;
but, anyhow, the libertarian’s case is altogether out of court,
because the very premises of his argument are either doubted or
denied.
Y.—Will and Responsibility.
But the favourite argument of the libertarian, and the one he
deems conclusive against the most formidable array of opposing
considerations, is that freedom is the logical corollary of responsi-
bility. If we cannot help acting as we do (he argues) it is
as absurd and unreasonable to hold us responsible for our actions as
it would be to hold the rain responsible for falling on the earth, or
the wave for breaking on the shore. How, there is a great deal of
apparent strength in this way of putting the case; accountability
does seem to pre-suppose freedom. And yet we might ask, does it
nob seem very strange that the man whose actions are freest—l
mean the lunatic—the man whose will does not appear capable of
being acted upon by motives, whose conduct is lawless, capricious,
not to be depended upon, unaccountable, incalculable, unpredictable,
is the very man whom we exempt from responsibility, and from
liability to punishment ? Waiving this point, however, we may re-
mark that responsibility has a double meaning, first, as viewed by
the agent himself, and, secondly, as viewed by society or the agent’s
fellows. How, in regard to the latter kind of responsibility, there
cannot be the least doubt that it means punishment of some sort,
from the infliction of torture, death, or imprisonment down to the
mere expression of disgust or disapprobation. In other words,
when we say that we hold a man responsible for his actions, we
simply mean that we hold him liable to punishment in some form
or other. Well, remove the liability to punishment in this wide
sense, and would there remain any subjective responsibility, I mean
would fhe agent himself feel that he was responsible ? Ton say,
perhaps, that the man feels answerable to his conscience as a Divine
authority within. But that kind of responsibility comes to the
same thing as the other; it is the fear of the Divine displeasure in.
some shape, from the flames of hell to the mere discomfort of a
troubled mind. How, the point I want to bring out is this : That
the determini at has a definite and reasonable meaning to give the
term responsibility, although he may eliminate from that meaning all
reference to the illusion of freedom. At all events, under both schemes
—freewill and determinist —whatever meaning responsibility may
have, it can have no use except as a motive to action or abstention
from action; and viewed in this light, the determinist can give
a better account of responsibility and of its raison d'etre ,
than the believer in free-will can do. Bor on the determinist
theory the influence of responsibility is prospective, and, therefore,
serviceable: with the libertarian its function can only be retrospec-
tive, and, therefore, useless (that is to say, on strictly libertarian
grounds). According to the free-will doctrine, along with the


consciousness of responsibility, there must of logical necessity be
the consciousness of absolute freedom to act or not to act, *But
there can be no consciousness of freedom until the agent has willed
the act, and then, and not till then, the sense of responsibility
arises. Looking back upon the volition, the agent on the free-will
theory knows that the volition was free, and then it is that he
realises his responsibility. If you say, “ Well, but this sense of
accountability may become a powerful motive, influencing the agent
when next he is in the circumstances that suggest or prompt a
similar volition,” the determinist immediately replies that you are
surrendering the free-will doctrine. For if the sense of responsi-
bility which followed upon a former volition becomes so vividly
re-presented to the mind as to deter from the same volition in
future, if, in short, responsibility becomes a determining motive,
then the will cannot be free.
But, indeed, to use a tu quoque argument, if the determinist is
confronted with a difficulty in explaining the sense of responsibility,
and reconciling it with necessity of volition, surely the libertarian
is confronted with a similar difficulty in tenfold force. For, accord-
ing to the determini st’s account, our volitions are the products of
our motives and the expressions of our characters, and it is motive
and character that are the objects of ethical judgment; but, accord-
ing to the libertarian, our volitions are not caused, they are not
determined, they are not the necessary expressions of character,
they are not the necessary resultants of forces within and without.
They are the absolute fiats of a mysterious, incognisable entity
called “ the Will,” who sits enthroned in unconditioned sovereignty,
supreme above phenomenal character and phenomenal motive; who
can alter the pleadings; silence the clamant voices of reason,
of emotion, of conscience; and, mero arbitrio, decree the deter-
minate out of the indeterminate. How this transcendental
autocrat can be held responsible it is difficult to see, for,
obviously, he cannot be reached; and ten thousand times more
difficult is it to see how the phenomenal Ego—the Ego manifested
in life and character—can be justly called to account for the
actions of such a lord paramount. Again, if our volitions
are determined by some unconditioned entity called the will, this
entity either has a character of some sort, or it has not. If it be
utterly characterless, how can its acts have any moral complexion at
all P If it have a character of some sort, surely its acts must be in
conformity with that character, in other words, be determined
thereby; and then even its volitions are not free. This is the
dilemma in which the libertarian’s case stands, and I fail to see any
way out of it. The determinist, on the other hand, is perfectly con-
sistent when he sees, in the sense of responsibility, a potent in-
fluence in determining the will to action, whether that sense be
realised a priori or a posteriori; whether it be trancendental or
empirical. Even should he fail to explain satisfactorily the co-exist-
ence of responsibility with philosophical necessity, he is not debarred
from falling back upon the refuge of the intellectually destitute,
namely, the confession of ignorance, and saying that the fact is an
unsolved and unsolvable mystery. This is the position taken by
at least one thorough-going determinist, Dr. Croll, whose words I


may be allowed to quote. Let it be understood, however, that the
view here offered is presented, not as my own, but simply as reason-
ably tenable, in case it should be urged against the determinist that,
after all his explanations, he has still on hand a residuum of the in-
explicable. For be it remembered that it is philosophically allow-
able to hold by irreconcilable antinomies of thought, provided they
can be shown to inhere in the very constitution of the mind itself.
What is not permissible is to hold by a psychological theory, and at
the same time, in practice, to flatly contradict both the theory and
all its implications. Says Dr. Croll: “ The states which determine
our choice are not directly under the control of the will, and cannot
be altered directly by an act of choice. These states are determined
by prior states, of which we have no consciousness. Now, if these
states are but links in the great chain of causation, stretching back
indefinitely into a past eternity, then those actions which we regard
as free, are in reality predetermined. Here we come to the un-
solvable difficulty—a difficulty which it seems impossible to remove.
How, in this case, can responsibility be made to harmonise
with the great law of causation ? The only answer I can
give is that I cannot tell. It is to me an unsolvable mystery.
One thing I am certain of, and it is that the doctrine of
universal causation does not, in the least degree, weaken my con-
viction that I ought to do right, or lessen my feelings of remorse
when I actually do wrong.” (The Philosophical Basis of Evolu-
tion, p. 183^).
YI. —Will and Attention.
It needs not, I trust, be said that, having myself abandoned the
free-will doctrine with extreme reluctance, I have not knowingly
overlooked the arguments of its supporters. I have used my
utmost diligence in acquainting myself with what has been said on
that side of the question ; but the result, to my mind, has been
very disappointing. Dr. Martineau, for instance, devotes some
hundred subtly-reasoned pages of his great work, entitled A Study
of Religion, to the discussion of this subject, but his treatment is
entirely polemical. He has, indeed, in my humble judgment,
refuted some bad metaphysics, exposed some untenable psychology,
and detected some fallacious reasoning on the part of many
determinist writers ; but that he has sensibly shaken the force of
the cumulative argument for determinism, I altogether fail to see.
When the supporters of free-will leave off their polemics, and try
to become positive and constructive, the only argument of any
apparent strength they can adduce is one which is much insisted
upon by Dr. W. B. Carpenter and Professor Calderwood, and is to
the following effect. The whole secret of the mind’s freedom, they
tell us, lies in the one word attention. The mind has the faculty of
concentrating its whole attention on any given idea or impulse that
comes within its view, and, by so doing, it is able to give a pre-
ponderating influence to any one spring of action to the exclusion
of all others. And, therefore (these writers go on to argue),
although it be true that volition follows the strongest motive, yet
it is the independent action of the mind through the exercise of
attention that gives the strength and pre-eminence to that


particular motive. This is the whole gist, so far as I can grasp it,
of the only positive argument offered in support of free-will. Now,
I have no doubt that the principle here laid down expresses a
psychological truth of great importance and utility in self-disci-
pline, and of very far-reaching practical consequences. A homely
illustration of this truth is the well-known fact that brooding over
a trouble always aggravates and intensifies it. But a moment’s
consideration, I think, will show that the principle here stated
does not, in the least, help the case for free-will; in fact, it leaves
the real question untouched. For, after all, is it not obvious that,
before the attention can be fixed upon any motive, there must be
something to determine the mind in one direction rather than
another; the motive to be dwelt upon has to be chosen. Something
must decide the mind to give its attention here rather than there,
no matter what that something may be —whether the attraction of
greater pleasure, or the prospect of greater advantage, or the sense
of greater obligation. In the absence of anything whatever to
determine the mind, there is no reason why it should give its atten-
tion to this rather than that; its action becomes simply capricious,
and, while it ceases to be determined, it also ceases to be rational.
VII. — Practical Consequences.
My paper has already run on to what I fear is a wearisome
length, but no treatment of this subject can pretend to anything
like completeness without some attempt to compare the practical con-
sequences of the opposing doctrines I may, therefore, be per-
mitted a very few words on one or two points of practical concernment,
with the object of showing that determinist Wisdom is justified of
her children. According to the libertarian doctrine, there is no
reasonable ground for the expression of disapprobation, or the
infliction of punishment for a given act unless it be granted that
the agent is free to do or to forbear. The advocate of free-will
tells us that it is just as unreasonable to express disapprobation at
an act which is determined, as it would be to reprimand an apple
for falling to the ground under the force of gravity; or, to vary
the statement, that the determinist has no more right to feel resent-
ment at voluntary acts than at involuntary acts. If our ethical
volitions are not free, says the libertarian, no one has any more
justification for feeling and expressing disgust or disapproval at
them than he has to blame a man for being afflicted with a hunch-
back or a squint. Now, in this kind of reasoning the libertarian
overlooks a very simple distinction which just makes all the differ-
ence. No amount of reprobation on your part could possibly alter
my hunchback or my squint, and, therefore, your disapproval* would
be both useless and unjustifiable. If, on the other hand, I labour
under a moral deformity which the strong expression of your disap-
proval has a tendency to correct, then not only are you justified in
expressing your disapprobation in the strongest manner possible,
but, moreover, the dictates of duty, and the promptings of benevo-
lence alike will force you to do so. The same may be said of punish-
ment. If the libertarian says to the determinist, “It is not right
to punish a man for doing what, on your theory, he cannot help


doing.” “ Yes, it is right,” unanswerably rejoins the determinist,
“if the punishment is the only thing that will make the man help
doing it in future, or if the threat of punishment will make him
help doing it at all ” Surely it is on this principle that we pro-
ceed in the moral discipline of children. Does the libertarian,
then, ascribe free-will to them, or only to adults ? If he allows
free-will to children, his efforts to determine their conduct are
unwarrantable, and ought to be futile; if he denies free-will to
children, he is guilty of the inconsistency of thinking that he can
best prepare them for the exercise of freedom when they shall
have reached their libertarian majority, by giving them a bias, and
reducing their moral action to automatism. In short, the account
which the determinist gives of the common procedure of mankind
in the matter of discipline and punishment is perfectly rational and
self-consistent. On the contrary, the libertarian stands convicted of
absurdity and sell-contradiction in regard to the prevailing moral,
social, and penal discipline which, equally with the determinist, he
sanctions and administers. For, on the free-will theory, when
a man has committed an action which society condemns as wrong,
and for which it inflicts some punishment, the man is supposed to
have acted with perfect freedom; it is the freedom which explains
the responsibility and justifies the punishment. Very good. But
now let me ask is the punishment in this case beneficial, or is it
useless ? If it is supposed to be useless, then it must be merely
■vindictive, and the libertarian may try to justify it if he likes ; but
he had better not make the attempt. For, however much the
element of vengeance may have influenced the infliction of punish-
ment in the past, that element is being gradually eliminated from
all civilised penal procedure, and no enlightened, not to say humane,
person, I take it, would advocate punishment on grounds of ven-
geance alone. If, on the other hand, the punishment is supposed to
be beneficial—that is .if it is supposed to have any deterrent,
corrective, or reformatory effect —that effect can only be produced
by putting the offender’s will under constraint and coercion,
and, by this means, depriving him of what is declared to be
the noblest characteristic, and most glorious prerogative of human
nature —freedom of the will. Thus the free-will doctrine inevitably
commits logical suicide the moment it encounters the facts of life
and the workings of society.
To sum up in a few words. I have endeavoured to show that the
free-will doctrine is discredited, and the determinist doctrine is de-
monstrated—by the appeal to consciousness, by the most assured
facts of psychology, by the teachings of experience, by the axioms
of science, by the postulates of ethics, and by the assumptions
of sociology. The principle of determinism is the basis of edu-
cation, the rationale of discipline, the justification of law, the
bond of society, the guarantee of character, the ground of effort,
and the hope of the world.
FRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE.


TAf
kisuo
ffl7£+
/Vc^lXj


PAMPHLETS
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S.,E.
(Librarian Tasmanian Public Library).
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;
Reasons Why the Death Penalty should be Abolished, with Sugges
tions for an Efficient Substitute.
ADDITIONAL NOTES ON CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
OVERPRESSURE IN EDUCATION:
An Inevitable Consequence of Payment by Results.
FREE EDUCATION:
A Word in Favour of the System,
ADVICE GRATIS;
Being Friendly Hints to Parents Touching the Training and Education
of their Children.
THE HOPE SET BEFORE US.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION
VERSUS AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENCE.
FACTS AND FIGURES RELATING TO VACCINATION
(Illustrating Errors of the Anti-Vaccinationists).
TRADE UNIONISM AS A FACTOR IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION.
NOTES ON THE COCO-DE-MER
(Double Cocoanut of the Seychelles Islands).
NOTES ON THE VALUE OF LABOUR IN THE PRO-
DUCTION OF WEALTH.
THE STUDY OF MOSSES.
A CHAT ABOUT THE ABORIGINES OF TASMANIA.
Etc., Etc., Etc.
