

FREE TRADE:
A
LECTURE
BY THE
REV. J. S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D.,
OF
GOWRIE, SINGLETON;
DELIVERED IN THE
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, SINGLETON,
ON THE
13th APRIL, 1883.
SINGLETON:
“ARGUS” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
JOHN STREET.
1882.




[?]A., LL.D.
rji i
deliver, at o‘ve,
and Tran, designates ex-
change. T-_ie are, as to the instru-
ments used in it, various kinds of
exchange. When commodities of one
kind are given for commodities of
another kind, as when a pair of shoes is
given for a hat, or when commodities, of
the same kind but of a different quality,
are given for each other, as when cloth
of one quality is given for cloth of
another quality, exchange is called
barter, and so on. But as to the object
in view in exchanging there is only one
kind of exchange, viz., the gratifying of
a ruling desire. Whatever gratifies a
ruling desire is called a commodity.
John Stuart Mill defines a commodity :
“ Whatever is capable of gratifying a
desire.” I venture to hazard the
opinion that in this definition the pro-
found and judicious political economist
in question has failed to do justice to bis
admirably keen powers of perception and
discernment, lur it seeems evident that
if our desire to possess what another
has, be not stronger than our desire to
retain what we contemplate giving in
exchange for it, there neither would be,
nor could be, any exchange.
Exchange is the result, not of desire
simply, but of ruling desire.
By “ trade” then I intend exchange
of whatever gratifies a ruling desire.
(1.) Should trade be restricted or
regulated at all, or loft to the spon-
taneous promptings of the heart ?
(2.) If it should be restricted and
regulated, what are the principles by
which restriction and regulation should
be guided ? Under what laws should
exchanges be made ?
As to the first question : Should
trade be restricted or regulated at all ?
It should be restricted and regulated.
Trade implies society, and society in-
volves a certain obligation on the part
...uaily to consult in
. f nace for the good of its
xuembers in their collective capacity.
“ No man liveth unto himself,” “ The
good ot the people is the highest law,”
are maxims which have their foundations
deeper than mere dogmatic conviction—
deeper than mere confidence in the
externized convictions of the most
experienced, the most wise, the most
benevolent constitutional jurisprudents.
Inasmuch as men are disposed to live
unto themselves, and to seek their own
good, real or supposed, even at the
expense of their fellow men, the restric-
tion and regulation of trade, which con-
stitutes a large portion of the business
of society, and powerfully affects its
interests—trade, in terms of the maxim :
“ Self-defence is the first law of nature,”
ought to be restricted and regulated.
(2.) By wbat principles should trade
be restricted and regulated ? Under
what laws should trade be permitted ?
Trade, involving as it does moral
action and moral responsibility, should
be permitted only under the guidance of
those moral principles which apply to
our actions as moral beings, and those
moral considerations which apply to us
as members of society, and which, based
upon reasonable assurance from experi-
ence, observation, or reliable testimony,
seem best fitted to secure the good of
society.
These considerations, I believe, cover
the case of customs, licenses, patents,
etc., to which therefore it may not bn
needful further to advert, except perhaps
incidentally.
The right of restricting and regulating
trade as above indicated is admitted on
all hands.
1. It may be as well at this early
stage of the enquiry to define what is
meant by “ wealth.”
Mr. J. S. Mill defies wealth to be :
« All useful or agreeable things which
possess exchangeable value, except those


■obtainable in the quantity desired with-
out labor or sacifice, as air, water, &c.”
By useful and agreeable things are
intended chiefly, if not exclusively,
material things. I believe this definition
of wealth to be too narrow. It is a
definition proper to a condition of things
in which the sensuous is predominant —
a condition in which man “ of the earth,
earthy,” regards material things as his
chief or only good. It is a definition
proper to men of the baser soifc —of a
comparatively low intellectual and moral
type. We have reached a stage of
intellectual and moral development in
which mental perception is clearer, and
the power of correctly judging, greater,
and in which the religious and the moral
element is better understood, both in
itself and in its relation to things, and
in which its importance and value, both
absolute and relative, are recognised.
The most enlightened political econo-
mists of the present day, among whom
are the great Mr. Mill himself, Mr.
M‘Culloch, and Mons. Say, of the conti-
nent, seem disposed to adopt this view.
Indeed, it is matter of wonderment that
it has not been wholly and heartily
adopted before. If we make the quality
of being exchangeable our test, and
admit the exceptions, we shall find that
very many things besides material
things are wealth, and within the terms
of the definition given. The strength of
a laborer’s arm and limb, for instance,
possesses an exchangeable value. For
the exercise of it be can obtain wages,
either in money or in kind. The skill
of the artisan and of the musician, and
of all those who are engaged in making
existence more tolerable, comfortable,
or pleasant, has an exchangeable value.
For the exercise of it they can obtain
remuneration, either in money or in
kind. A man’s religious principles and
moral character have an exchangeable
value—a purchasing power. The appre-
ciation of his principles and character
enhances the value of his services in
many spheres of human activity, and
may be the sole reason of his being per-
mitted to act a part in these spheres.
True, neither the strength of the
laborer, nor the skill of the artizan or
musician, or the religious principles or
moral character of the virtuous, are
actually and formally exchanged, but
their products are, and these, without the
strength, skill, principles, or practice,
could not exist. Only by a metaphysical
refinement can these things be excluded
from the category of things possessing
an exchangeable value —a purchasing
power, and metaphysical refinement will
not conduce to the elucidation, illustra-
tion, or advancement of a science emi-
nently practical. By wealth, then, I
mean whatever either itself possesses, or
by its exercise acquires, a purchasing
power by gratifying Christian desire. I
say Christian desire, because we profess
to be a Christian people.
By such a people such power to pur-
chase the gratification of such desire
ought to be recognised, and such a power
only. Whatever possesses snch pow.er,
and only whatever possesses it, can by
such a people be regarded as wealth, for
on their principles the throne is estab-
lished by righteousness, and by righteous-
ness only. With wisdom, i.e ., virtue
(the French regard the terms as synony-
mous), is durable riches. Righteousness
exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach
to any people.
2. Protectionism is arbitrary in its
principles and in its exactions. A needs
a bushel of corn. B, who lives on
D’s land close by, can supply it for 65.;
C, who lives on somebody else’s land at
a distance can supply it of the same
quality for ss. A would naturally deal
with C ; but D, who has the power to
enforce his will, says to C, “ you must
pay me Is. to be permitted to sell to A.
If A purchase from you he must pay
65.” Why does I) enforce the impost ?
Not because it was of any consideration
to him, for protective duties are not
levied for the purposes of revenue. Not
because C’s corn is inferior to B’s, for
we suppose it to be of the same quality.
Not because of any assistance ren-
dered by D to C, for we suppose that he
has rendered none, but simply because


C lives on his land and B does not. D’s
exaction may not injure B, for A may
buy from him, and pay 6s. Indeed, the
interposition of D has left him no choice
as to price, whether he buy from B or
C. But D’s exaction injures A to the
extent of Is., for it causes him to pay
6s. instead of ss. Who is benefitted ?
C. At whose expense ? At the
expense of A.
The benefit of one is secured at the
expense of another. Where is the
general advantage which every Govern-
ment is bound to consult? But in
actual practice the benefit of one is, by
Protectionism, purchased at the expense,
not of another, but of many. Why
does D impose a duty of Is. on C’s
corn, and not 6d., or 25., or any other
amount ? If D has a right to impose a
duty, he must, with the right, have also
a rule whereby to be guided in his
imposition, for every right implies a
rule, and a rule founded on some fixed
and definable principle of moral rectitude.
Otherwise might is right. The only
rule by which D is guided, or professes
to be guided, is one which has its foun-
dation in a desire to further B’s interest,
although A directly, and certainly C
indirectly, may suffer. Why D’s pre-
ference for B ? The fact that B farms
his land, and that C farms the land of
someone else —a motive utterly selfish
and narrow, and therefore wholly inde-
fensible on principles of enlightened
policy, and especially on Christian prin-
ciples.
For “ A’’ substitute “ consumers,”
the great body of the people ; for “ C”
substitute the people of California, or
other foreign corn-growing country ; for
“ D” substitute the Government of a
country —and we have Protectionism in
principle and in practice illustrated, and
its irrational, arbitrary, and injurious
character exemplified. We see that it
has neither a proper rule to guide it, nor
a satisfactory reason to justify it.
Indeed, on the same ground that a
Government imposes Is. a bushel on
imported corn, it might impose a duty
E o large as to be absolutely prohibitory,
and this Governments have occasionally
done. What might be the result ?
Extreme privation and suffering in the
case of consumers, or absolute depriva-
tion, famine, starvation, rnin.
(3.) Protectionism indirectly hinders
national wealth by creating and multi-
plying incitements to vice and crime.
It creates new oaths and affirmations,
and multiplies occasions for the taking
of those already in use. When pecu-
niary gain is in question men will lie,
and perjure themselves, and cheat to
secure it. Nay, they will resort to vio-
lence and even to murder itself, and the
incitement to falsehood, fraud, and
murder will be just in proportton to the
amount of pecuniary gain involved, that
is, the amount in this case saved by
evasion of the payment of duty. It has
been ascertained that when the gain on
contraband goods reaches 30 per cent.,
men will risk their life and liberty to
secure it. How much falsehood, and
fraud, and crime do not the records of
the Customs chronicle, of which a con-
siderable proportion is due to attempts,
successful or otherwise, to evade pro-
tective duties. The imposition of these
duties demoralizes the people, and con-
verts many of them into “ professional
law-breakers.” Our Government, whose
chief function is to exalt righteousness,
and cause vice, as ashamed, to hide her
head, is the cause of inducing and
encouraging it. They put a stumbling
block before the blind. When offenders
are discovered they are subjected to trial
and punishment, involving a serious
misapplication and waste of national
wealth. How many innocent persons
are, on suspicion, harassed and subjected
to inconvenience, degradation, and loss ?
Those engaged in contraband trade
being immoral and vicious, become mere
consumers and destroyers. Nay, they
often become traitors to their country.
They come to regard her as their
natural and implacable foe. During the
time of foreign war, there is no doubt
that her interests have been by them
betrayed to the enemy.
In England in 1829, under Protec-


tionism, the number of convicted crimi-
nals was 8655. With a largely increased
population and increased efficiency of
policp, the number of convicted criminals
was only 5850 last year. In 1846-47,
when the duty on spirits was 20s. per
gallon, no fewer than 12,000 persons
convicted of and punished for smuggling,
and drunkenness very greatly increased.
(4.) Protectionism is a tax on
industry. On the unselfish principle,
which I have throughout assumed as
that by which our domestic and foreign
trade should he regulated, it is for the
interest of every one country that every
other country should produce as much
wealth as possible. The surplus of one
will supply the deficiency of another, and
all will be benefited. One of the
essential conditions of producing not
only enough for one’s own individual
use and to spare, is a remunerative
market for the surplus. Few will pro-
duce mojrf than what is necessary to
supply his own immediate individual
necessity, from the mere desire of
hoarding.
The more remunerative the market
the stronger the stimulus to produce.
Now Protectionism directly reduces the
amount of remuneration in a foreign
market at the least by the amount of
the duty imposed, or it may close the
market altogether against the foreign
produce, and thus greatly relax efforts
and lessen the amount produced, and
that, too, in the very locality, condition,
and circumstances in which labour would
naturally and necessarily be most pro-
ductive and most remunerative to the
labourer himself and most beneficial to
others.
(5.) Protectionism indirectly hinders
the development of the national mind
and the national resources.
A is fitted for the production of
wine, but not for the production of corn.
But the inhabitants of A grow corn, and
persist in growing it, in the face of all
her natural disadvantages. She cannot
afford to sell it for less than 10s. per
bushel. B is fitted for the production
of corn, but not for that of wine. B can
supply A with corn at 6s. per bushel.
Would it not be wise and beneficial for
A to confine herself to the production of
wine, and get her corn from B, giving
her wine in exchange? Would it not
be wise and beneficial for B to confine
herself to the production of corn, and
take her wine from A ?
Would not the advantage of both A
and B be thus secured ? But A will
persist in growing corn, and B, wine.
In order to enable them to do so, they
must each impose a restrictive duty on
the produce of the other. A must
impose a duty of 4s. per bushel on the
corn with which B supplies her, and B
must impose, on every gallon of wine
with which A supplies her, an amount
of duty sufficient to prevent competition
by A’s wine with the home-made article.
The protective duty enables and en-
courages both A and B to persist under
the greatest disadvantages, and in the
very face of nature in their compara-
tively profitless course. Let the pro-
tective duty be done away by both. A
would find that she could not compete
with B in producing corn, and B would
find that she could not compete with A
in producing wine. A would confine
herself to the growth of wine, and B
would confine herself to the growth of
corn. Both A and B would be working
with nature, and therefore to advantage.
A would produce more wine, B more
corn. Both products would be cheapened,
and therefore more largely consumed.
Both A and B would have a larger share
of the products of each, and the national
wealth of both would be increased —in-
creased directly by increase of production,
and indirectly by the doing away with
a body of collectors of revenue who are
but unproductive consumers.
All this may be well and aptly illus-
trated from the history of this colony.
Our soil and climate are generally very
different from those of the mother
country. Yet of this all important fact
our colonists generally are disposed to
make little account. With the same
persistence of idea that induces them to
retain their English style of dress,


living, and building, under whatever
diversity of climate or circumstances
they may be placed, they seek to attach
themselves to the same pursuits, and to
raise the same products, here as in
England. Corn is a staple production
of England, therefore it must be the
staple production here. Of course the
early attempts at the growth of corn were
tentative. Experience proved what
might have been anticipated, that our
soil and climate are not generally suit-
able for its growth—that it cannot
become one of our staple productions.
Yet the attempt to grow it everywhere
is persisted in, and seldom except with
disappointment and loes. South Aus-
tralia seems to be suited to the growth
of corn. From South Australia it can
be obtained more cheaply than we can
grow it. Hence in this particular pro-
duct our farmers are undersold. They
complain, and demand that a duty on
imported corn be imposed sufficient in
amount to enable their corn to be sold
at a profit? Why should the aid of
the Government be invoked ? Why
should a protective duty be imposed on
imported corn?
The effect of the imposition is directly
to increase the price, not only of the corn
imported, but of that produced here, and
consequently to restrict its use, and
cause widespread hardship. The great
mass of the people are made to suffer
for the benefit, real or supposed, of a
few. What right has the Government
to interfere on behalf of farmers or any
other class of the community, especially
when it involves injury to others ?
It is a maxim of our constitution that
the “ sovereign cannot confer a favour on
one subject which occasions injury and
loss to others.” If our farmers cannot
compete in the growth of corn with the
people of South Australia, the fact may
be accounted for in many ways. Perhaps
even in the localities favourable for its
growth, our farmers are not so skilful as
those of South Australia, or perhaps
they have less effective agircultural
implements, or perhaps they are less
industrious or less frugal and thrifty.
If so, then our farmers should seek to
improve in knowledge, etc. But, as is
the fact, our farmers, who are in every
respect equal to those of South Aus-
tralia, fail in competition simply because
nature is against them. If so, then why
should they continue to waste their
strength and resources in attempting a
practical impossibility ? Our soil and
climate are suited for the growth of
wine, tobacco, olive oil, and many other
products of the South of Europe. Why
not apply themselves to the growth of
these most profitable articles of com-
merce, and secure the adequate and just
reward of their labour and skill. Even
with a protective duty corn can never be
grown profitably here. Nature forbids
it. Even without a protective duty
wine, tobacco, olive oil, etc., may be
grown profitably. Nature designs it.
But, it may be asked, must we not have
farmers ? Are not a bold yeomanry a
country’s pride ? It is only by accident
that we have farmers. If our early
settlers had been from Italy, or France,
or Germany, they would have betaken
themselves to vinegrowing, and if the
early English colonists had been better
informed, they would have done the same.
We should have had vignerons instead
of farmers. Why may not vignerona,
and tobacco and oil growers be
a bold yeomanry as well as the
growers of corn ? Why should not
they be the pride of their country ?
They are so elsewhere, and there is
nothing here to deteriorate them but
the contrary.
But what of the farmers presently ex-
isting? The transition from the giving
of corn to the growing of any other pro-
duct of the earth is easy, and the result
to their interests it is hardly possible to
overestimate.
Our industrious and brave-hearted
German colonists tried in many cases to
grow corn and failed. Like wise men
they betook themselves to the growth
of tobacco, in which we rejoice to know
they have generally been signally su
cessful.
They did not invoke Government


interference on their behalf. They did
better and more nobly. They solicited
nature in some other form of her mani-
festations, and she responded nobly to a
noble appeal.
But ought not every country to pro-
duce corn sufficient for the supply of its
own wants, so that she may in time of
war for instanco be independent of
foreign supply ? Nature, it appears,
has rendered this in some cases impos-
sible. In no case is war ever likely to
be so general as to shut the ports of any
one country against those of every other.
Such a condition of things, even if it
were possible, the selfishness of man
and the hope of gain would speedily do
away with, and render starvation by
blockade impossible
(6.) Protectionism involves an error
in theory, and a great evil in practice.
Take corn for illustration. A needs
100,000 for home consumption. It can
be produced by herself, and sold for ss.
per bushel. Her home supply falls
short of this quantity by 100 bushels.-
B can supply this quantity at ss. per
bushel, and is willing to do so. But A
imposes a duty of Is. per bushel on this
quantity, making the price of B's corn
6s. per bushel, or £5 additional on the
whole. A apparently suffers by her
deficit to the extent of only £s—no very
great hardship. But the loss of £5 by
no means represents the whole of A’s
loss. The moment that the duty of Is.
is laid upon the imported corn, the price
of all the home-grown is raised to 6s.
per bushel, i.e., the 99,000 bushels of
home-grown are obtainable only at 6s.
per bushel, or at an increased cost of
£4995, which must be paid by the con-
sumers.
Then it is supposed that the duty is
paid by the importer. So it was at one
time, in the first instance, but it was
always finally paid by the consumer.
Now, under the “ Warehousing Act,”
the importer may store dutiable goods
till he can sell them, and pay for them
only when a market has been secured.
In both cases he is repaid by the con-
sumer.
If the sale be direct from the importer
to the consumer the latter gets it at
the importer’s price, plus the amount of
duty. But it generally happens that
before it reaeh the consumer it has
passed through the bands, not only of
the importer with its price increased by
the amount of duty, but also through
the hands of several dealers, each of
whom must have his profit upon the
last transaction in the stage of trans-
ference, till the consumer has to pay not
only the cost of growing and importing
it, including the duty, but interest upon
the duty and upon each increment of
cost. The result of this is, increased
price of corn and consequent scarcity,
involving hardship and suffering upon
the consumers, that is, the great body
of the people. So that for a small
revenue much suffering is incurred, and
the fundamental principle. Solus populi
supremo lex is violated for a good
scarcely appreciable if at all existent.
1. Free-trade is in accordance with
the economy of things.
The Creator has made nothing in
vain. Everything is designed to sub-
serve some end. Not only the elements
and properties common, but also the
elements and properties peculiar,
whether in the physical, intellectual, or
moral world. This we infer from the
character of the Creator who, being
infinite in wisdom, could not possibly
act without a purpose, and this, from
the largest induction yet made, we infer
from actual investigation and observa-
tion. The end contemplated by the
Creator must be a wise and benevolent
one, because He is infinitely wise and
infinitely benevolent. Observation and
experience illustrate the inference.
Neither has the Creator in any de-
partment of the universe made every-
thing absolutely independent. A
principle of dependency everywhen and
everywhere prevails. In the natural
world—mechanically, in gravitation—
chemically, in affinity. In the intel-
lectual world, in the product of thought
as it final result. In the moral world,
in the association of the affections. In


the practical world in the union of
effort. This indicates on the part of
the Creator the contemplation of
universal products to be realized by the
operation of universal factors each pro-
duct (in accordance with his character)
to be finally perfect after its kind, in-
volving the necessity of combination and
fusion of the elements peculiar and
proper to each factor.
We see everywhere proofs of such a
design, and a tendency to improvement
and amelioration as the result of its
development.
Solids are attracted to each other and
towards the centre of the earth, and we
have stability the fundamental necessity
of structural strength and solidity.
Oxygen and Hydrogen combine and form
water. Thought combines with thought,
constituting knowledge, and wisdom
knowledge applied.
The affections unite, and we have the
emotional nature of the individual and
the more complex social organizations.
The English language is the richer
because of the numerous an diversified
elements that enter into its composition.
Our laws are the more complete because
of their admixture. Our race is physi-
cally the better for the foreign strains it
includes. The process of combination
and fusion, so far as it has gone, has
evidently resulted beneficially. All that
we observe favours the conclusion, that
the further it is carried the more
favourably it will result. The benefit
of combination and fusion has all along
been recognized by all the Western
nations— the highest in the scale of civiliz-
ation. It has been especially recognized
by England, which, to a greater or less
extent, has given it the stamp of national
approval. England has, from time im-
memorial, had what may generally be
styled a common law. Such have been
the benefits resulting from this recogni-
tion that England has become more
decided and active in her recognition.
She has now a common system of
primary education. Religious sects a
combining from day to day to form a
a common national religion.
Political rights and privileges, with
one or two exceptions and these already
doomed, are conceded in common to men
of all nationalities, creeds, and conditions.
We everywhere hear of a common plat-
form on which to meet to discuss matter
of common interest, ’civil and religious.
We have trades unions, local and
national. Federation for our Australian
colonies is ardently desired and strenu-
ously sought and awaits only occasion
for its accomplishment.
We have new and improved roads,
railways, bridges, ships, steamers,
tunnels, to facilitate intercourse, and
telegraphs and telephones to facilitate
converse. We hold fairs and Exhibitions,
national and international, to bring our
own people together, and to induce
foreigners to visit us and become
familiar with us. Even the Chinese
and Japanese, who for ages maintained
most rigid exclusiveners and isolation,
are beginning to see that there is no-
thing in vain, and that the bands of
mutual dependency are not to be
persistently broken, nor its cords to be
for ever cast aside.
Free trade is in accordance with the
progession of thought, and en rapport
with the spirit of the age. It
facilitates combination and fusion, lc
tends to gather up the fragments
scattered and going to waste, and to
utilize them in the formation of a whole,
heterogeneous in its element, but
homogenous in its entirety—useless
or injurious in their isolation, but useful
and beneficial in combination and fusion.
It suffers nothing to be lost, and makes
the most of everything.
(8.) Free-trade is in accordance with
the will of the Creator. It is the will of
the Creator that man should be perfect
in his condition and in his physical,
intellectual, and moral nature. The
Creator, a perfect Being, cannot possibly
contemplate anything short of perfection
in any of his creatures, still less in man
the crowning glory of bis work, made in
his image after his likeness.
We do no not find man anywhere per-
fect in his condition, or with the means


of becoming so within his own immediate
habitat. Civilization always comes
from without. What is the condition of
the Esquimaux, walled in by thick ribbed
ice and almost totally isolated from the
rest of mankind ? Does not their con-
dition admit of amelioration ? Is it not
in the design of the Creator that it should
be ameliorated ?
What is the condition of even the
Chinese and the Japanese, with a very
large share of natural advantages within
their respective territories ? Can we
say of even them that they are rich, and
increased in goods, and have need of
nothing ? Does even their condition
touch perfection ? Even they need
something from without. No nation
confined to its own resources can attains
perfection of condition. Every such
nation must come far short of it. By
condition, I mean the condition befitting
man, as actually or potentially the
highest type of civilized Christian man,
and as such the enlightened Christian
political economist contemplates him.
The Creator has arranged that all the
instrumentalities necessary to the per-
fection of man’s condition shall not be
found within the limits of any one
region or clime. He has provided some
here, some there.
Corn, the staff of life, and precursor
of civilization, grows only within certain
parallels of latitude. Wool, cotton,
etc., necessary to man’s comfort, can be
produced in some countries and not in
others. Iron and coal, the great civi-
lizers, are found in one country an 1 not
in another, and so of all the other vege-
table or mineral productions which con-
stitute the great factors in perfecting
man’s condition.
But whilst the Creator has thus
localized the instrumentalities in ques-
tion, He has provided for their distribu-
tion. He has connected the various
regions of the earth by ocean, seas, lakes,
rivers. He has put it into man’s heart
to build ships, and to navigate them,
and to avail himself of wind and steam
for their propulsion. He has put it into
man’s heart to construct roads, canals,
railways, bridges, and tunnels, and other
means of communication. He has made
use of man’s selfishness, and love of
gain, to avail himself to the utmost of
these facilities, thus bringing good out
of the operation of an evil principle, and
so ordering it that the intensest desire
of living to oneself becomes the moßt
powerful stimulant to his living for
others.
As to man’s physical nature. As to
the human physique, no individual of
our race has ever furnished an ideal, not
even an ideal satisfying the demands of
our present imperfect conceptions and
rude tastes.
Neither the Hercules, nor the Apollo,
nor the Venus of Grecian sculpture, had
its original in any one man or woman.
A head was copied from one, an arm
from another, and a limb from another,
and expression from another. Byron,
it is true, speaks of an “ Irish lady to
whose bust justice was never done,
although she was a frequent model for
the statuary.” But even in this very
exceptional case it was only the bust
that failed of justice at the statuary’s
hand. We find in all nations a national
imperfection in the physique. It is b y
a fusion of the different races that
physical defects are corrected and physi-
cal beauties developed. All stock-
breeders are aware of the necessity of
fusing the breeds in order to obtain the
finest symmetry of form.
Physically the inhabitants of the
mother country are far superior to the
Kussians, who live under the samo
paralells of latitude. Why ? Doubtless
because the former are a mixed race, and
the latter more or less pure. In what
race are to be found physically such
“strength, delicacy, and staying power ? ’
The highest physical ideal of man will
be realized only when all the races of
the earth shall have been fused. Then
and then only will man be physically
perfect and the human form be indeed
divine.
As to our intellectual nature. It can
be developed and perfected only by
intercourse with our fellow men. “It


is from a contact with other minds,
more active and soaring, that intellect
receives its chief impulse.” “As iron
sbarpeneth iron so a man sharpeneth the
countenance of his friend.” No matter
how excellent our natural parts may be,
our intellectual faculties can never be
developed and perfected without inter-
course with other minds, either by con-
versation or by books, or by both. This
has been practically acknowledged. The
ancient sages travelled into other and
distant lands to study their philosophy.
In Germany, apprentices, after they have
served their term of apprenticeship and
before they are permitted to Btart busi-
ness on their own account, are required
to spend a certain time in travelling
abroad, to acquire a knowledge of the
mode in which their several arts are
practised by others. In our own country
the best workmen are generally those
who have travelled most. The inhabi-
tants of seaports and centres of foreign
trade are generally more intelligent than
the inhabitauts of inland and secluded
towns.
Commercial nations are generally
more intelligent than those isolated.
In isolation, while the inherent natural
intellectual powers may attain some
measure of development they will be
stunted, arrested and petrified in their
growth, as in the case of the Chinese,
who are no higher in intellectual attain-
ments to-day than they were three
thousand years ago.
What man may become intellectually
•we see illustrated in the case of Socrates,
and Plato his pupil, and Newton, and
others for the enumeration of whose
names time would fail.
As to our moral nature. Like our
intellectual our moral nature can be
developed and perfected only by inter-
course with our fellow men. Indeed,
morality in its most comprehensive
sense necessarily implies society, for how
can we in insolation discharge our duties
to our fellow men. The greatest of all
moralists did not pray that His disciples
might be taken out of the world. The
more numerous and the more varied our
points of contact with our fellow men,
the more varied our experience, the
better. As to our knowledge of
religions principles, the wider the field
of our speculation the more varied the
aspects under which they are presented ;
and the more diverse the circumstances
in which they are illustrated, the more
conducive to an intelligent, an accurate,
a just, and an affectionate apprehension
of the true.
As to our moral practice. If our
religious principles be right our moral
practices will not be likely to be wrong.
If the tree be good the fruit will bo good
also. Out of the good treasure of our
heart we will necessarily bring forth
good things. All the great moralists
of antiquity travelled into foreign
countries to learn their moral and
religious philosophy. Even Moses was
learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and we are not sure that it was
not serviceable to him in founding and
consolidating the civil and ecclesiastical
polity of the Israelites. Some who are
disposed to admit the desirability of
intercourse in repect of our physical and
intellectual, deny it with respect to our
religious and moral interests. They
strenuously oppose the introduction of
the professors of certain creeds, on the
ground that they will deteriorate our
religious principles and our moral
character. All creeds have an end to
serve, as long as they are suffered to
exist, for there is nothing in vain. The
professors of all creeds have a mission.
The professors of Christanity even are
not perpect. Weighed in the balance
of their own creed they are often found
wanting, and though the beam has been
often shamelessly kicked in the world’s
forum, and the sword thrown in to effect
an equipoise, or compel confession of it,
it oscillates far from the horizontal.
The immorality of some so called
Christian towns has so shocked the
religious sensibilities of pagans from the
East, in which Christians maintain ex-
pensive missions for the conversion of
the people, that they seriously proposed
ot send missionaries for their conversion.


When we see ourselves as others see us
we shall be constrained to acknowledge
that we may profit by the illustration of
Faith, Hope, and Charity afforded by
those who, in designating the object and
«nds of worship, have not adopted our
nomenclature, and who entertain no
fears for the safety of their property so
long as they are sure that there is not a
Christian within ten miles.
Evil communication, it is true, corrupt
good manners, but when the question of
■exclusion presents itself, we must decide
from what quarter the evil communica-
tions are likely to come. We send a
single missionary, or a mere handful of
missionaries, into heathen lands without
any fear of the few being corrupted by
the many. Why should we object to
admit the heathen lest the many should
be corrupted by the few ? We need be
under no apprehension. The fittest in
morals and religion will survive. We
desire only the fittest to survive.
Have we nothing to profit by the
reverence of the Slav, the sobriety of the
Turk, the patient endurance of the
Hindoo, the persevering industry of the
Chinese, the home love of the Teuton ?
May we not profit in every important
particular by intercourse with our fellow-
men of every nation, kindred, and
tongue, and people, and creed ? Our
moral nature is capable of unlimited
improvement. We are in a peculiar
sense the sons of God, and therefore
partakers of the Divine nature. We see
to what extent it may be cultivated, to
what excellence it may attain in the
character of Jesus Christ, the perfect
man.
Even if we restrict the term “ wealth”
to the designation of material commo-
dities, intercourse with our fellow-men
—physical intellectual, and moral im-
provement—would necessarily indirectly
promote our national wealth, for as a
people improve physically, intellectually,
and morally, they will produce in larger
quantity of better quality, and they will
make the best use of their accumulations.
Thus, Free-trade in the material pro-
duct of the earth, and in the intellectual,
religious, and moral elements, tends to
improve man as to his condition,
physique, and as to his intellectual and
moral interest and thus to fulfil the will
of the Creator, as inferred a fortiori
from His character and His works ot
creation and providence, and proved a
'posteriori from its results.
9. Free-trade indirectly promotes
national wealth, by favoring equality of
laws and freedom of constitution.
Where the laws are not equal, and
the constitution not free, human effort,
and human thought and aspiration, are
checked and paralyzed, if not totally
extinguished. The history of Russia
and Turkey furnishes convincing and
sad proof of the fact. It is only where
the right of exercising the mind, and of
giving externization to its conceptions,
is formally and practically recognized,
that the mind will be exercised and its
conceptions externized. It is only
where the right to acquire and possess
in peace is formally and practically
recognized, that property will be sjught
and accumulated. Just to the extent
to which a nation’s laws are equal and
its constitution free will it, can it, in -
crease in wealth. The laws of England
are equal and her constitution free,
save in respect of foreign trade, and we
may add the Mutiny Act and the Riot
Act. With respect to the first
particular, and the last two acts, our
laws and constitution are little less
arbitrary than those of Russia or Turkey.
Free-trade to a great extent obviates
the evil in respect of our law and consti-
tution, so far as they respect foreign
trade, and tends very materially to
lessen the evils of the Mutiny Act and
the Riot Act, the operation of which
smuggling very often invokes, and thus
Free-trade tends indirectly to promote
national wealth.
10. Free-trade indirectly promotes
national wealth by preventing waste.
Protectionism as has been observed
induces smuggling, and smuggling
necessarily involves waste.
Immense quantities of contraband
good, of every description, and of great


value, are every year deteriorated in
quality and value in the coarse of con-
veyance. Immense quantities of such
goods are yearly wholly destroyed to
avoid capture. This involves a direct
loss to the country whence they came,
and an indirect loss to the country for
which they are intended.
By Free-trade this deterioration and
loss are prevented, and the national wealth
increased, for a penny saved is a penny
won.
(11.) Free-trade indirectly promotes
national wealth by diminishing the
number of mere consumers.
In order to national wealth every one
must produce more than he consumes.
The surplus of a nation’s produce only
is national wealth. The country which
produces only sufficient for the day is a
pour country, and contingencies may
render it miserable. Everyone who
produces nothing, or who consumes more
than he produces, is a source of
national poverty. A certain proportion
of such persons will bring any country
to poverty, misery, ruin, and extinction.
Those employed in collecting pro-
tective duties produce nothing. They
are only consumers. The maintaining
of them tends to national poverty. How
numerous are they in the mother
country and in the colonies!
In the former they number about
180,000, or 1-I94th of the population.
In the latter I do not reckon the pro-
portion of the army and navy employed
in protecting the customs. How
large is the amount of nationa
wealth unprofitably consumed by them.l
Free-trade does away with these and
therefore indirectly but effectually
promotes national wealth.
12. Free-trade indirectly promotes
the national wealth by devoloping talent,
and stimulating discovery and invention.
The more highly cultivated our mental
powers the better able are we to investi-
gate and ascertain the nature and pro-
perties of things, and the better able to
deal advantageously with them, and
therefore able the better to make the
most of them. We discover in things
properties of whose existence we would
not dream, and we are enabled to utilize
things utterly useless. Tar, at one time
supposed to be applicable to only one or
two purposes, is now, by improvement
of chemical science, found to contain
many properties capable of being turned
to account in many of the arts. Tar
producing countries are richer now in
respect of natural products than they
formerly were, by the increased value of
tar. This increase of wealth is due to
the increase of knowledge.
The increased yield of the soil by the
application of the principles of agri-
cultural chemistry may be cited, with
innumerable other instances, and illustra-
tions. In the department of mechanical
science, the improvement of old machines
and the invention of new ones, in which
the present century has been so fruitful,
have tended vastly to facilitate opera-
tions in all the mechanical arts to save
material and to multiply a cheaper pro-
duct, and therefore to extend their
use. Take, for example, the improve-
ments and inventions in the department
of agricultural implements. Now,
talent, especially for practical purposes
is most fully and effectually developed
by the contact of mind with mind, and
by comparison of the products of one
mind with those of another ; and dis-
covery and invention are most effectually
stimulated by a consideration of all
that is already known, and by the spirit
of emulation, and ambition, and hope
which such consideration is calculated
to awaken. Free-trade induces inter-
course of man with man, and facilitates
it, and it makes every country more ex-
tensively and intimately acquainted
with the products of every other. This
increased intercourse excites emulation,
and ambition, and hope, and their
opportunity of more extensive and inti-
mate acquaintance with foreign products
suggests still further enterprise in dis-
covery and invention, and lights the
way to its success.
13. Free-trade indirectly promotes
national wealth.
Suppose a country, A, bo circum-


stanced in respect of soil and climate as
to be incapable, without the most
strenuous and continuous labour of the
whole population, of raising corn suffi-
cient for home supply. Suppose that
A, like China and Japan in former
times, refused to deal with foreigners ;
it can not be said to possess national
wealth. Its inhabitants would have
only sufficient for the day. Suppose A
well adapted for growing the vine, and
that the inhabitants set apart for the
purpose one half of the area formerly
used for producing corn. Suppose the
market value of the whole corn originally
grown was £IOO. Of course the value
of the half would be £SO. Suppose the
market value of the wine made was
£IOO it is plain that, as represented by
money, A’s products would be increased
in value by £SO, which would consti-
tute national wealth.
But the production of the wine would
involve a deficit of one-half the quantity
of corn necessary for home consump-
tion.
This deficit would have to be made
good from without.
Suppose another country, B, so well
adapted for the growth of corn as to be
capable o< producing enough to supply
the homo demand and A’s deficiency,
but not i well adapted for the growth
of the vine ns A. A wants corn, B wants
wine. A looks to B for the corn, and
B looks to A for the wine. They agree
to exchange without any artificial
restriction. The corn grown in B,
under more favourable circumstances,
would be cheaper than that grown in A.
Therefore, for less than £SO A could
supply her deficiency from B ; B, on the
other hand, being able to obtain her
wine for less than she could produce it,
would gain by the interchange. Both
A and B would be benefited. But
suppose v should impose a duty upon
B’s imported corn, so as to increase the
cost of the quantity imported by £lO.
A would apparently gain to the extent
of this amount. Bat suppose B in self-
defence uposed a duty upon A’s im-
ported wine, so as to increase its cost
by £10; B would apparently gain £lO
by the impost. But the gain in either
case is only apparent, not real. Both
would gain a loss.
While A gets £lO more for her wine
she pays £lO more for her corn, and
while B gets £lO more for her corn she
pays £lO more for her wine, and in
both cases these imports would have to
be collected, and collection involves ex-
penditure—expenditure upon unproduc-
tive labor.
Suppose that A found that B wanted
£SOO worth of wine instead of £SO
worth, while her own demand for B’s
cora was not increased, the duty remain-
ing the same in proportion. A would
apparently gain £IOO, less the £lO
duty to B, or £9O, whilst the expense
of collecting would not be materially if
at all increased. Putting aside all
moral considerations, A would not profit
in the end. There are at work natural
causes—universal, sleepless, vigilant,
energetic, potent—which interfere with
and finally adjust and balance the
phenomena of social economics. So long
as A needed only £SO worth of B’s
corn A would have the advantage and
no longer.
But population always increases with
the increase of national wealth. With
the increase of A’s wealth her population
would increase, and with the inciease of
her population the demand for B’s corn.
This increased demand for B’s corn
would involve an increased amount of
duty paid to B, until finally the balance
of advantage would be with her. So
from time to time advantage would
oscillate sometimes in favour of A, some-
times in favour of B, but permanently
resting with neither. Action would be
followed by reaction, in the mercantile
and social, as well as in the physical,
world. In the end neither would be the
gainer. Both would be losers.
(14.) Free-trade indirectly promotes
national wealth by promoting peace.
The amount of wealth wasted and
destroyed in war is not to be estimated.
The record of war is a record of waste
and destruction. Free-trade tends to


do away with many causes of war.
“ The abolition of the restrictive system
in commerce is, in fact, the abolition of
the sorest exasperations and jealousies
which have taken place among the states
of the civilized world. There is, there-
fore, a very high philanthropic interest
involved in the maintenance of Free-
trade,” and an interest which powerfully
affects national wealth. It is when a
nation is at peace that science and art
flourish, and national wealth accumu-
lates.
(15.) Free-trade directly promotes
national wealth.
Gladstone and Bright have very
strikingly and conclusively proved
this in the case of England. Up
to the year 1840 Protectionism was
in fall force. For a few years after-
wards it was interfered with to some
extent. In 1846 Free-trade principles
triumphed. Since that date the material
wealth of England has steadily and
rapidly increased. In 1848 the value of
her exports was £51,000,000. In 1880
it was £123,000,000. Of course during
the long period of 32 years the popula-
tion of a country must increase under
ordinary conditions, and with the
increase of population probably her
exports would increase. During the 32
years in question the population did
increase by about one-third, but her
exports increased two and a half times
in value, or seven and a half
times as fast as the population. But it
may be supposed that the increase in
the value of our exports represents only
an increase of wealth to capitalists. It
represents an increase of wealth to all
classes of society. To what data can we
appeal with greater confidence than to
the increase of wages, the increase of
savings, increase of the income-tax, and
increase in the business of Life Assur-
ance Societies ?
With respect to wages, agricultural
labourers who, 32 years ago, earned only
Bs. a week, now earn 14s. Factory
hands, of whom there are upwards of
4,000,000 in England, have had their
wages raised in the various departments
from Bs. to 13s. and 145., from 7s. 6d»
to 155., from ss. 6d. to 95., from 17s, 6d.
to 355. Meantime the hours of labour
have been shortened from 11 to 10 hours
a day, so that the increase is virtually
l-6th more, so that those who were
formerly getting Bs. virtually get 15s.
2d. or 15s. 4d ; those who got ss. 6d.,
now get 10s, 6d.; those who got 17s.
6d., get 375. lid.
There was to the credit of depositors
in the Savings’ Banks, 32 years ago,
£24,500,000, now there is £75,000,000,
or about three times the amount, and
the number of depositors has increased.
The income-tax is a tax levied on all
incomes over £lOO a year. Thirty years
ago the sources of this revenue was
£251,000,000. In 1880 it was
£542,000,000, or more than double,
whilst the number of persons liable to
this tax has increased, The value of
the trade of England, with 35,000,000
of a population, under a Free-trade
policy is £612,000,000, or as much as
that of the trade of France and the
United States, with a united population
of 90,000,000, and peculiar advantages,
and double that of Russia and Holland,
with a population of 81,150,256.
In all the neutral markets of the world
England, under a Free-trade policy, has
beaten the United States under protec-
tion, and has increased her carrying
trade by sea in a greater ratio than any
of these great maritime powers. For-
merly the United States had four-fifths
of the carrying trade and England the
other one-fifth, or scarcely that. Now,
England does four-fifths of the carrying
and the United States scarcely the
remaining one-fifth. lam not prepared
with figures, but I believe that New
South Wales, under Free-trade policy,
is more prosperous than Victoria under
protectionism. To what an extent has
the business of Life Assurance offices
increased ! The reports of their increase
in the amount of capital and the num-
ber of members would surpass belief
were they not supported by facts and
figures, which place their truth beyond
controversy.


And in all that constitutes wealth in
the widest and truest sense of the term
—in all that goes to enrich the mind,
refine the heart, and ennoble our nature
—in ail that goes to gratify the desires
of a purer and higher life—the aspira-
tions of a people who are beginning to
awake to the conviction that there is
something more precious than gold, yea,
much fine gold, or all that it can
symbolize, wide and expressive though
its symbolism is, and who are beginning
to realize that the highest type of a
nation, like the highest type of the
individual man, may scatter and yet in-
crease, and in the end lose all but what
she gives away.
16. The constitution of England
binds her to Free-trade policy.
The constitution of England is based
on three foundations : 1. The law of
nature. 2. The law of nations. The
Roman jurists recognized the law of
nations as the law of nature, not because
they were deficient in power of intel-
lectual discernment and discrimination—
%\,jthesq, K they possessed in a very
erpinentj degree;—bpt because they sup-
3!i&out some
reason, tlifti laws adopted by the;
common consent of mankind must, so
far ;as human sagacity could perceive,
human approval endorse them, be
laws of nature—the lex which in-
dicated the naturae vis. English jurists,
studying the subject under a clearer light,
greater op less advantage,
discriminate between the two, and assign
tq-jjepch, if not an independent, at the
least a separate, sphere and function.
The law of nature, as understood by
English jurists, is the law, or system
°filaw, by which the natural world is
governed, whether ascertained or fol-
lowed by mankind or not. The law of
nations is the law, or system of law, by
which mankind regulate, .their inter-
course with each other in their national
capacity, or international law—that law
to which alone nations in their
separate, independent, and indefeasible
sovereignty, agree to conform in their
intercourse with each other. This may
be the law of nature or it may not.
Applying the maxim, the voice of the
people is the voice of God, the Roman
jurists regarded them as identical.
Applying the maxim, to err is human,
English jurists do not regard them as
identical simply because the common
consent of mankind pronounces them
so—if in any case, indeed, such consent
may be said to exist, or, if it exist, can
be ascertained. But this by the way,
But the main fonndation of the English
constitution is the Revealed Will of
God, as contained in the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testaments.
“The law of the divine will, as taught
in revelation, is supreme, except in
matters of indifference, insomuch that,
if any human law allow or enjoin us to
commit a breach of this law, we are
bound to transgress the human law.”
(Blackstone.) The Revealed Will of
God, as contained in the Old Testament
Scriptures, is in letter undoubtedly
selfish, and therefore narrow and ex-
clusive, but in spirit it is unselfish and
therefore broad and comprehensive, for
while as to its scope it contemplates,
immediately and proximately, only the
JpWSrrrra, merely fractional proportion of
race—it comtemplates,
mediately, and remotely, all mankind.
Bni.,Fbatave.r may be said of the Old
Testament Scriptures we know that they ,
dealt only with a rudimentary and 1
preparatory state of things characterised
mainly by type and shadow. The
antitype, the substance, are made known
in, ,the New Testament. This we are'
told in the New Testament, and this we
may infer from the well ascertained and
universally, admitted laws of developed
ment. The New Testament is to us
practically the Revealed Will of God.
It; ,ig the main foundation on which
English jurists declare the constitution
of England to rest. That foundation as
Englishmen we are bound formally to
recognize. Upon that foundation as
Englishmen we are bound formally to
buils, our national and international
policy, ji International comity cannot t
prevail in England where its observance


would violate the law of God. In
accordance with the recognized rules of
interpretation we are bound to regard
both the letter and the spirit of the New
Testament. What is its spirit ? By
universal consent it is admitted to be a
spirit of pure and universal benevolence,
or, to use a term more consonant to the
feelings and more grateful to the ears of
Englishmen—a spirit of good will.
To what extent organized and
formulated Christianity may have ex-
ternized and illustrated this spirit it is
not my bnsiness at the present time to
enquire. Christianity is still Christianity,
to what extent soever it may have been
misconceived, misrepresented, perverted
or abused, and Christianity is good will.
The policy of England then ought to be
a policy of good will—of universal good
will—a policy contemplating the good
of the whole human race, and seeking
to secure it as earnestly, as strenuously,
as its seeks to secure her own good.
Every Englishman has a right to
expect and demand that England’s
policy be a policy of universal goodwill.
The statesman who follows any other
policy is a traitor to the Constitution.
It was said of the Constitution of
England, by a very distinguished
foreigh jurist, that it was the only con-
stitution by which the rights of foreign
merchants were recognised and secured.
It might be said, as matter of infinitely
higher laudation, that it is the only
constitution which contemptates the
good of universal man. That the con-
stitution of England is founded on the
principle of goodwill is the most glorious
fact of its character. The fact that it is
founded in goodwill—the most com-
prehensive, the most noble the most
powerful principle—the universal, the
divine, the omnipotent principle, which
is unrestricted by time and space, which
is of the Creator, and whose triumphs
every phenomenon of creation and
providence in the heaven above and in
the earth beneath proclaims—the fact
indicates the position which she should
takes up with respect to the nations of
the world—her responsibility with
respect to them and the grandeur of her
destiny—a destiny guaranteed by her
adoption of the principle of goodwill
more securely than by the wealth of the
Indies, and the fleets and armies of the
world. What is a policy of goodwill ?
It is a policy which seeks to do good as
opportunity offers. To whom ? To all—
to the evil and the unthankful—not
only to friends but to foes. It is a policy
which dictates and constrains the liberal
and cheerful sharing with all our
brethren of mankind the blessings we
enjoy. It is only by Free-trade that
this policy can be truly and effectually
carried out.
Objection 1. —With respect to the
exportation of corn, at all events, one
very eminent political economist argues
that since its exportation involves the
exportation of the soil it ought to be
subjected to export duty. In answer to
this argument it may be observed :
(1) The exportation of the soil of a
country is not peculiar to the exporta-
tion of corn. It is exported with every
material commodity—cotton, sugar, tea,
fruit, timber, stock, men, etc. They all
come o :t of the earth, are all formed of
the dust of the ground, and they all
subsist, mainly at the least, on the sub-
stance of the earth. It not the soil, the
substratum of the earth is exported with
every export of coal, and stone, and
iron, in ore or manufactured ; so that for
the same reason that a duty be imposed
on exported corn a duty should be imposed
on all exported material commodities,
and on some of the latter even a heavier
duty. But ( 2) may not the loss,
whether of the soil or substratum, of a
country sustained by exportation, be
balanced by the gain of soil, etc., by the
importation of material commodities.
Does not this fact point, not to Protec-
tionism, but to Free-trade, which tends
to increase importation ?
Objection 2.—Free-trade interferes
with the remunerative employment of a
country.
This objection has been answered in
principle indirectly, but it is to appear-
ance so reasonable and important an


objection that it may deserve separate,
direct, and formal consideration. A
number of young people are growing up
in a town, for whom it is desirable that
remunerative employment should be pro-
vided. The town is surrounded by
fruitful orchards. Why should not a
manufactory for preserving and exporting
it be established ? Calculations of pro-
bable cost of plant and working are
made. It is found that it could not be
sold for less than Is. per lb. Foreigners
can sell it in the town for 10d., so that
this new venture, good in itself and
laudable in its object, must be aban-
doned, unless Government impose a
duty of not less than 2d. on every lb. of
the imported commodity. Why not
impose such duty, and so protect and
advance home interests ?
What has been said under another
head applies here. in order to the
establishment of the manufactory in
question ihe price of every lb. of im-
ported preserve would be increased by
2d. Suppose 1000 lbs. of preserve im-
ported yearly and 100 lbs. made at the
manufactory, in order that the 100 lbs.
might have a chance of sale, consumers
must pay one-fifth more for the whole
1100 lbs. Bug with an increase of one-
fifth in price there would probably be a
a falling off in demand to the extent of
one-fifth. Which commodity would
this falling ofl effect ? Finally that
which is inferior. Now suppose the
home-made was inferior, it would remain
unsold. The manufactory would not
prosper. It could not be maintained.
But suppose the two products were
equal in quality, there would still be one-
fifth of the whole foreign and home-made
unsold, and probably the loss would fall
upon each in equal proportions. But
the moment surplus stock begins to
accumulate, its price begins to fall, until
at last it may be difficult if not impos-
sible to dispose of it. The foreign and
home manufactures must lower their
prices. But in terms of the supposition
the home made article could not be sold
under Is. The manufactory therefore
must close. After a short and fitful
competition involving much loss, pro-
bably greater on the part of the newly-
established manufactory, things would
revert to their former condition. In the
meantime consumers had suffered, and
capital that might have been expended
in some sound and permanently bene-
ficial way had been lost. The spirit of
enterprise is checked, hopes are blighted,
and the evil sought to be remedied
continues in an aggravated form. Em-
ployment for a people can never be safely
and successfully sought to be provided
under the operations of protectionism.
A new industry can be established with
reasonable prospects of success and per-
manency, only when all the elements of
success are peculiar to those who con-
template its establishment, such as in-
herent superiority in skill and manage-
ment, inherent superiority in position
and possession of the means and ap-
pliances. Wherever an industry has to
be protected its utility is questionable,
its existence precarious. Let no such
venture be trusted.
Objection 3. —Free-trade hinders
centralization.
Those who urge this objection hold
that centralization of population is
beneficial. In France the population is
centralized. Paris contains a very large
proportion of the population of that
country, inasmuch that so far as the
effective energy and destiny of tbe
country are concerned Paris is said to be
France. All enlightened political
economists and statesmen regard this
as a great evil. In this colony there is
a teudency to centralization of the
population in Sydney. This tendency
is viewed by many whose opinion on the
subject is worthy of attention, with grave
apprehension and even alarm. All
history seems to shew that centralization
may result in most serious natural evils,
and those who make the objection under
consideration ought to be plain and
explicit as to the meaning attached by
them to the term. Failing to do this they
expose their views to misconception, and
put their opponents in a position to use
a very effective argument against them.


Agricultural and especially pastoral
pursuits tend to disperse population ;
manufactures to concentrate them. It
is difficult to perceive how Protectionism,
however stringent, could have the effect
of centralizing an agricultural and espe-
cially a pastoral population. It is only
a manufacturing population that Pro-
tectionism could affect in this direction.
First, suppose a population wholly en-
gaged in agricultural or pastoral pur-
suits. It is wanted to create a manu-
facturing and centralized class. Will
Protectionism do this ? Suppose a very
heavy prohibitory duty imposed on all
imported manufactures, such as articles
of clothing, etc. Would the operation
of this imposition withdraw a certain
number of the population from farming
and grazing, and induce them to apply
their labour and skill to the manufacture
of articles of clothing, etc. ? I cannot
conceive how Protectionism either would
or could have this effect. In the case
supposed, there would be no competition
with foreign producers. The population
in question would be very much in the
condition and of the mind of the ancient
Suevi, who desired nothing to be im-
ported. Like the inhabitants of modern
Norway and Sweden, each would be his
own tanner, shoemaker, and tailor ; and
however superior the articles of foreign
manufacture, it is very likely that they
would be content with the home-made,
which cost little or nothing. It would
seem that in the case of such a people the
way to create a taste for foreign goods,
and induce a demand for them, and a
desire to produce them, would he
to admit the foreign article as largely
and cheaply as possible, so that they
might become aware of its superiority,
and, gradually appreciating its excel-
lence, be led to use it instead of the
home-made article, and induced in
process of time to attempt the manu-
facture of it themselves. But this would
be to apply, not the principle of
Protectionism, but of Free-trade.
A taste for the foreign product having
been induced, would Protectionism tend
to increase the quantity and improve the
quality of the home manufacture ? The
question has already been in a general
way settled in the negative. As to in-
creased production. Necessity is the
mother of action, as well as of invention.
Men generally are not provident. Suf-
ficient for the day is with most men
sufficient for their satisfaction. When
this is secured motives are enfeebled and
effort relaxed.
Protectionism by increasing price
would minister to the love of ease, for it
would enable the home-producer to
secure subsistence by a correspondingly
small effort, so that the quantity pro-
duced would be diminished, not in-
creased. As to quality, necessity is the
mother of invention, and invention in-
duces improvement. It sets a man’s
wits to work and compels him to exercise
ingenuity and skill. But Protectionism
by raising the price of the superior im-
ported article would put it beyond the
reach of consumers generally who would
have to content themselves with the
inferior home production.
History bears ample and convincing
testimony to the fact that in England,
while the duty on silk fabrics was high,
almost prohibitory, the producers of
them were workmen that needed to be
ashamed both of their idleness and
unskilfulness. By improving an article
and reducing its cost, demand for it may
be increased, and it is only by increased
demand that the number of producers
can be increased. I say not only in-
crease of quantity but improvement of
quality, for improvement of quality is
indirectly tantamount to increase of
quantity in many cases, and improve-
ment in quality is necessary to satisfy
the improving tastes of consumers, and
the demands of a market more and more
exacting.
Admitting centralization of population
under any modification to be beneficial,
how does, how can Protectionism promote
it, except abnormally, fitfully, and
temporarily. On the other hand it has
been shown that Free-trade does this
normally, uniformly, and permanently,
and therefore beneficially.


Exception. —There is, as Mill observes,
probably only one case in which
Protectionism may be advantageous—
the case of a new and important in-
dustry, to test its adaptability to
untried conditions which afford prima
facie evidence of probable final success.
For instance, the soil and climate of
the northern part of this colony seem
adapted to the growth of sugar. Indeed
sugar has to some extent been produced
there. Till the experminent has been
fairly tried perhaps a small protective
duty on the imported article to enable
those who risk capital in the attempt to
compete with the foreign grower might
be imposed, but no longer. But I
object to the doctrine of exceptions.
There is in reality no exception to any
law. That which seems an exception
comes under the operation of some law
not discovered or not understood by us.
I believe that every case should be dealt
with as furnishing an illustration of and
not an exception to law.
Finally. After a long period of
incertitude and drowsiness, England has
awakened to a sense of her duty, obli-
gation, and responsibility in this matter.
It is only by being true to a policy of
good-will, of which Free-trade is one
exponent, that she can realize the
destiny which wise and good men believe
to be in store for her, and that she can
reach and continue to occupy the pinnacle
of greatness to which she is fast ascend-
ing, and from which nothing but unfaith-
fulness to the fundamental principle of
her constitution can ever thrust her
down.


