



FREE EDUCATION:
A REJOINDER.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE TASMANIAN MAIL.
Sir, — I shall feel obliged if you will allow
me space to refer as briefly as possible to the
criticisms which have appeared in your
editorial columns upon the paper on “ Free
Education ’ which I published in The Tas-
manian Mail on the 12th September last.
1. I deny that in order to justify the
adoption of a free system of education in
Tasmania it is incumbent upon me to show
“ that the great majority of the people of
this colony are too poor to be able to pay for
their children’s education. ” I maintain that
to justify the introduction of the system
here, it is sufficient for me to show that it
has advantages over the mixed system now
in force. This I have done in the article
above referred to, and I have supported my
position by an appeal to experience of the
working of the free system in America. You
have attempted to shake this position and
the value of the experience I appealed to by
the accounts of immorality in connection
with the public schools of America, which
are recorded in your issue of September 26.
Beferring to the superintendent, who is
the executive head of the system of super-
vision in each State, Mr. Adams, secretary
to the National Education League, London,
in his work on the “Free schools of America, ”
writes While their reports are marked
throughout by the strongest feeling of
patriotism, and of attachment to the Ameri-
can school idea, they never attempt to slur
over the blemishes or defects of the system.
Every detail of organisation is subjected to
a microscopic examination, and every rotten
place is discovered and exposed. The evi-
dences of partial weakness and failure which
are seized upon with such avidity by the
enemies of the ‘ free common school ’ in Eng-
land are precisely those which the State
superintendents have been the first to indi-
cate, not as proofs of general inefficiency,
but as imperfections of detail which de-
mand a remedy.” In dealing with the
charge that moral discipline is lax in the
public schools of America, Mr. Adams says
“It would be strange if, under a system
which embraces all classes, some children
were not found whose moral training had
been neglected, but that, as a class, the
pupils of the public schools are less moral
than others, has never been substantiated.
. . . . In the course of a long and ex-
tensive reading of authorities on American
education, there is only one instance in
which I have found the accusation admitted,
that the public schools are less moral than
the private schools The balance
of testimony is quite the other way.”
The secretary of the Connecticut Board of
Education says : “ It is the testimony of one
of the most eminent educators of our State
that public schools are better, as well as far
cheaper, than private schools. I believe the
morals of children are better guarded in
public than in private schools. From wide
observation as to the influence of the two
systems on the morals of pupils, I advocate
the training of the children of all classes
together in the public school.
Mr. Edward Shippen, formerly President of
the School Board of Philadelphia, writes : —“I
candidly tell you that in placing my children
at school I would infinitely prefer placing
them in public schools than private schools,
and, in doing so, I would thus consult the
better their moral, spiritual, and scholastic
welfare. ”
At a meeting of the National Teachers’
Association the Hon. F. A. Sawyer, United
States Senator, said: “ I claim that in general
our public schools are not second as agencies
of moral influence to any other in use out-
side of the family and the church. ”
The Bishop of Manches jer, after his visit
to the United States some few years back,
testified: “The intellectual tone of the
schools is high ; the moral tone, though per-
haps a little too self-conscious, is not un-
healthy.”
The awful tales of immorality which you
have quoted tell, not against any particular
system of education, but against any system
which leads to the congregating together of
large numbers of children, the moral educa-
tion of a great many of whom has been neg-
lected.
2. In order to show the “absurdity” of
my arguments in favor of free education you
urge that you need only “extend the ap-
plication of the principle a little further,”
and by way of illustrating this assertion you
go on to say that in order to avoid pauper-
ising people who are too poor to be able to
pay for the proper leeding and clothing of
their children, they should be assisted by


the State, and we must “ordain that the
feeding and clothing of all the children in
the colony shall be made a charge upon the
public funds.'’ Other stock arguments in
the same line are urged, in answer to all of
which I cannot do better than quote the
words of a leading article on “ Free Educa-
tion in Australia and in England,” which
appeared in the Federal Australian for Sept.
26: “First then,” says the writer, “we
have the old threadbare argument brushed
up again, that inasmuch as the taxpayer
pays for the education dispensed by the
State, it is better in every way that the
taxation should fall directly rather than in-
directly on his pocket. The payment of
the fee in cash, it is alleged, brings home to
the payer, as nothing else can, the fact that
it is he wlio pays for the schooling of his
child. It induces him to take a direct in-
terest in the matter. . . And his sense
of parental responsibility is quickened by its
being brought more closely home to him.
. . . . It is further argued that if educa-
tion be made free for the sake of the poor,
the richer classes will meanly take advan-
tage of the benefit; that if elementary educa-
tion be given gratuitously, the higher educa-
tion will also be demanded on the same
terms ; that the line cannot be drawn at
the three R’s ; that a free system must be
free throughout, from the gutter to the
University; that the demand of ‘free
education for the people ' is a very danger-
ous political cry ; that if education be
supplied free to the masses, they will insist
upon having free bread, beef, and amuse-
ments. . . . Now in all this there is an
obvious. . . . special pleading which is
really beneath the serious consideration of
any one who is directly cognisant of the
working and the results of a free system of
State education.”
Speaking upon the subject of free educa-
tion at Hull recently, Mr. Chamberlain
said: “ I think the time has come when
education ought to be free. (Loud cheers).
I have always held that the exacting fees
in our primary schools is unjust, is uneco-
nomical, and is prejudicial to the best in-
terests of education. It is a system which
has been long ago abolished in the United
States. Itlias recently disappeared in France.
It does not exist in the majority of the
continental countries—in the majority of
the self-governing colouies of the British
Empire.” After referring to the stock argu-
ments against free education already men-
tioned, Mr. Chamberlain concluded by say-
ing : “ I hope that one of the first acts of the
new Parliament will be to see that this
anomaly shall cease, and that education
suited to the capacities of every child, which
is the only and indispensable instrument for
any improvement and progress in life, shall
be conferred free upon all, for the benefit
of all, and at the cost of all.”
It is a significant fact that at a recent
meeting of the London School Board a
motion in favour of free education was only
rejected by a majority of 19 to 18 votes.
With regard to your remark that a host of
truant inspectors have to be employed to
enforce the provisions of the Education Act
in Victoria, I would urge that it is self-
evident that a much larger number of such
officers would be required to enforce attend-
ance under a mixed system such as ours,
inasmuch as parents would have a direct
and pecuniary interest in keeping their
children away from school.
As to the working of the free system in
Victoria, I am content to let the Federal
Australian speak. “Here, in Victoria,”
says the writer above quoted, “ we have had
nearly 14 years’ experience, and we are able
to testify that there is not the least degree
of practical validity in the objections just
stated. Every one of them in succession
has been proved utterly fallacious. Grant-
ing even that some defects still inhere in
our admirable and excellent system ; allow-
ing that Sir Archibald Michie makes good
his contention about the failure of the com-
pulsory clause and the religious difficulty ;
no rational man amongst us will yet assert
that the system is a manifest failure, or that
it is taken a mean advantage of by the
richer classes, or that its being gratuitous
has deadened the sense of parental responsi-
bility in the popular mind, or that the
masses are now demanding free food and
amusement in addition to free education, or
that the higher education has of necessity
been made gratuitous also. Without going
the length of affirming that the parallel of
social and political circumstances between
the colony and the Mother Country is in all
respects complete, we may take the liberty
of warning our Liberal friends at home that
if they are in search of arguments against a
free system of State education, they had
better not turn their eyes towards the
Southern colonies.”
I now leave this question to the judgment
of public opinion, and thank you for the
space you afforded me to express my views
upon it.
Alfred J. Taylor.
