

Free Trade
Liberal Associations,
THEIR TRUE PROVINCE.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT
The Glebe, Sydney, on August is™, iss9.
Hon. BRUCE SMITH, M.P
Minister for Public Works for Hew South Wales.
lU..W
7y'r. . ~ 1 cT' :r r*"OTSJJ?JCTCD
Hi SiDUI irflilUM t-lli
I *U gft
. *•




n<mf
Free Trade
Liberal Associations,
THEIR TRUE PROVINCE,
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT
The Glebe, Sydney, on August io™, issd.
Hon. BRUCE SMITH, M.P.
Minister for Public Works for New South Wales.


JAS. MILLKK & Co., General Printers,
117 Clarence Street,


M355? /F I
7-7 -
LIBERAL ASSOCIATIONS : THEIR TRUE
PROVINCE.
Within the last few months, steps have been taken, through"
•out New South Wales, to establish associations for the discussion
•of Liberal principles, and for the furtherance of a true Liberal
policy. I deem it not inopportune, under the circumstances, to
invite you, my constituents, to join me in an investigation of the
. history and philosophy of Liberalism as a political creed, in order
that we may the more accurately comprehend the true province of
■those associations to which the term has been.attached, and thus,
.in the future, be enabled to direct our political efforts in a clearer
• and more distinctly defined channel for the public good.
The determination to couple with the subject of Free Trade,
from which the associations formerly took their name, the much
•broader one of Liberalism, of which Free Trade is only one head,
is, I think, an undeniably wise course; inasmuch as the subject of
Free Trade, alone, is not sufficiently comprehensive to enlist, for
any length of time, and for purposes of sustained intellectual
•attention, any large number of the class of persons sought to be
reached and influenced by the work of those associations.
Every rational citizen, now-a-days, claims to be a Liberal in
politics ; but the term is so little understood by the bulk of those
who use it, and apply it most readily to themselves, that we find
many persons adopting it as a political party-title, who yet are
every day transgressing, in both their action and advocacy, some
of its most elementary and vital principles.
To properly investigate the origin of this term, and to trace
tthe growth of the principles which it connotes, from the earliest
historic times in our national history, is a work of some import-
ance ; and I have therefore determined, with your permission, to
•devote the whole of this evening’s lecture to the task.


I shall, in the first place, endeavour to establish the truth of"
my assertion that the term is not clearly understood by many
who are loudest in proclaiming their adherence to its principles
and I shall follow that endeavour by another, to show that even
in Great Britain and the colonies, many of the most prominent
politicians have either failed to grasp its true historical meaning,
or purposely ignored the principles of the school of thought which
it designates, whenever they found themselves confronted with
some popular cry, which they had not the courage to deprecate
or rebuke. It must, I think, be generally admitted by everyone,
that a political party-title which is to stand the wear and tear of
practical politics, as a badge by which men shall quickly indicate
to one another their political faith, should, before all things,
signify, with some degree of clearness, the certain fixed princi-
ples, however general they may be, by which those who embrace
that faith intend to be guided in pronouncing judgment upon any
public question.
Unless this be so, political party-titles are useless. If we
are not to understand by the application of such a term to any
person, that he professes such and such principles, and sees ob-
jection to others of another political school, then such terms
serve no useful purpose ; for their chief use is that men may be
quickly classified without the necessity for enumerating all the
principles which are understood to be implied.
If, for instance, anyone announced himself as a republican,
and we afterwards learned that he was in favor of the mainten-
ance of the institution of royalty, we should be somewhat surprised ;
since the term republican is used for the purpose of shortly signify-
ing a person who believes in the people possessing sole legislative
power, in law as well as in fact. In such a case, we should at
once realize the absurdity of the application of the term; and we
should probably advise such a person to find out clearly what he
really did believe, and to re-classify himself accordingly. Again,
if anyone were to announce himself as a freetrader, we should
infer that he was favorable to unrestricted interchange of com-
modities between different countries ; but if he subsequently in-
formed us that he believed in a moderate import duty “ in order
to encourage native industry ” we should immediately conclude,
that he did not understand the meaning of the term.


Unless, therefore, we clearly understand what these terms
mean : what are the general principles which they are intended
to connote, we deceive all to whom we so announce ourselves, by
professing to believe in principles which we do not really approve ;
and we deceive ourselves, also, by imagining we are in harmony
with others, who possibly entertain quite different views to our
•own.
The world is greatly regulated now-a-days, as far as politics
are concerned, by these party badges; and there is a great
danger in the too ready acceptance of a man as a political leader,
wh'le such terms are understood in such various and contradic-
tory ways.
Lord Selbourne wrote, in 1887, in the Contemporary Review,
concerning Great Britain, the following words :
“ The time has come when, if this country is to be preserved
from serious perils, honest men must enquire, not what any one
with whom they are invited to co-operate may call himself, but
what he is, and what the political objects are for which he would
use the power if he had it.”
The term Liberalism is one of the most philosophical of our
•political party titles ; in fact the most philosophical of all. Its
real meaning can only be clearly understood by a careful reading
■of our mother country’s history; and it can only be fully apprec-
iated by an equally careful study of human nature in the lives of
individual men and women, and of sociology, in the origin, evolu-
tion, and disintegration of bygone communities. Man, in different
countries, and even in different generations of the same country,
uses different terms to signify the same principles. In studying
the history of a people, we lose sight from time to time of certain
words and phrases which have been in popular use for the pur-
pose of conveying certain ideas; but the records are sufficiently
perfect to enable us to trace principles through many ages.
The term “ Liberalism ” has been in use only about half a
•century ; but the principles underlying it may be clearly traced to
the very earliest times in the history of our race.
Let me first show in what different and in some cases con-
tradictory senses the term is used by many prominent politicians,
from whom, of all others, we might fairly expect clearness and
■consistency in its use. I shall afterwards endeavour to shew its


true historical meaning, and subsequently offer a philosophical;
basis for that interpretation.
Let me instance in the first place the frequent practice of
coupling the two words “Liberal” and “Protectionist” as ap-
plicable to one and the same person. In the colony of Victoria,
where the term “ Liberal ” is in most common use, this is an
every day occurrence. The Protectionist party in that colony
call themselves the Liberal Party ; while in this colony the latter
term has been more correctly adopted by the Free Trade party.
Now a reference to the history of the Corn Laws repeal,
which was the last and greatest victory for Free Trade principles
in Great Britain, will show that on that occasion, over which
Cobden became famous, out of the 210 Liberals who voted, 202
voted for Free Trade, while 8 only voted to preserve the old pro-
tective policy. The writer of a history of the Radical party in
Parliament says, concerning this struggle, that “In all the divi-
sions upon the repeal of the Corn Laws, the Government had the
aid of nearly the whole of the Liberals, the opposition being almost
entirely Tory and he says, elsewhere, that “It was in Free
Trade alone that Palmerston was a Liberal.”
If, therefore, the action of the Liberal party in Great Britain
is to be a guide in the matter, —and we take the term from that
source, —then protection is just about as irreconcilable with a
Liberal policy, as the royal prerogative is with a system of re-
publicanism.
I might quote many instances, drawn from the different
colonies, to show that the true meaning of this term is a matter
which gives little, concern to the ordinary run of politicians,
though meanwhile, as far as Victoria is concerned, general
elections have been allowed to turn on it.
The term has so far not been much used in New South
Wales, but for that very reason it is more than likely that much
haziness exists as to its real meaning, and as to the great
principles which underlie it. Of late years, it has been used in
Great Britain in the most extraordinarily contradictory manner,
in many cases apparently with no very honest political purpose.
Being a good and popular name, and carrying with it many
memories and traditions of which the British people are justly


proud, it has in too many cases been used as a cloak to cover
political proposals of a really harmful nature.
Legislation of the most unmistakeably socialistic character
lias already been placed upon the Statute Book of Great Britain
by means of its being termed Liberal legislation; and generally
the term has of late been gradually perverted in England to a use
which it was never intended originally to serve.
As a fact, the whole complexion of English politics has,
within the last few years, undergone a complete change. Tory
politics are of the past, and no one even ventures to champion
them; the Tory has become a moderate Conservative, the
Conservative has become a Liberal, and the Liberal party has
turned its attention to measures for the most part of an
unmistakeably Radical or Socialist character.
Few people, for instance, would venture to question the la'te
John Bright’s consistency as a Liberal in politics; yet I find the
following, written in a modern publication of some importance.
The writer says ;
“ Most of the measures which Mr. Bright advocated have
been passed, and Mr. Bright has become a Conservative to all
intents and purposes.”
Mr. Goschen, one of the most sound, sterling, and consistent
statesmen of this century, has undergone much criticism, for his
adherence to the original and genuine principles of Liberalism.
A prominent Victorian newspaper said of him some time ago :
“ He is in the front rank of English Liberals, and has proved
himself a sterling administrator. He has always been of a
scholarly temperament, a man thoroughly conversant with first
principles, and indisposed to sacrifice abstract right to expediency.
Yet” (confesses this journal) “he might count almost any where on
uplifting the Liberal vote, and on getting the solid vote oj the Con-
servatives.”
Hear, too, what one of Mr. Goschen’s own party (Mr. Joseph
Chamberlain) said of him ; “ Although he (Mr. Goschen) sits
behind us, he is very far behind, and I think that under a sys-
tem of scientific classification he is rather to be described as a
Moderate Conservative than as a Liberal.” As a fact Mr. Cham-
berlain himself has done more by his influence to pervert the term
Liberalism to socialist ends, than any other member of his party.-


The English press has of late frequently commented upon
the uncertainty of signification of this and other political party
titles ; and it is now quite evident that the meanings of this and
the other terms are fast changing, and being perverted to denote
principles which were never contemplated either in their ety-
mology or by their originators.
The “ Times,” not long since, wrote as follows: “ Our
actual party names have become useless and even ridiculous. It
is absurd to speak of a Liberal, when no man can tell whether it
means Mr. Gladstone or Sir Henry .Tames. It is absurd to speak
of a Radical when the word may denote either a man like Mr.
Chamberlain or aman like Mr. Morley. It is ridiculous to maintain
a distinction between Moderate Liberals and Moderate Conserva-
tives, which no man can define or grasp, and which breaks down
every test that can be applied by the practical politics of the
day.”
Here is an extract from a speech of Mr. Chamberlain which
makes “confusion worse confounded”—“The old Tory party,”
he says, “ with its historic traditions has disappeared. It
has repudiated its name and it has become Conservative
The Conservatives, in turn, have been seeking for
another designation; and sometimes they come before you as
Constitutionalists, and then they break out in a new place as
Liberal Conservatives.”
Mr. Chamberlain, again, speaking of Lord Randolph
Churchill, says : —“ The Whigs are left in the lurch, and the
Tories have come over bodily to the Radical camp, and are
carrying out the policy which we have been vainly endeavouring
to promote for the last five years. He (Lord Randolph Churchill)
was a Tory Democrat in opposition, and he is a Tory Democrat in
office.”
Now, I should like to ask my hearers, which of them can make
head or tail of this medley of terms, or which of them could
possibly say what, if any, principles are involved in their applica-
tion. In 1885, during the English general election of that year, a
small book was published entitled “ Why am I a Liberal 1 ” and
it is chiefly interesting as showing how great a diversity of
opinion existed even among what were termed “ reputed Liberals”
as to the principles which underlay that political policy.


The book is in fact a collection of definitions of Liberalism by
-56 prominent members of the party. I can only quote a few of
the shorter and more important ones. It will, I think, be after-
wards seen that the contradictions which they involve are all the
result of disregard for the history of the term itself, and for the
principles which it was originally intended to indicate.
Mr, Gladstone said, “ The principle of Liberalism is trust
in the people, qualified by prudence, while Conservatism is mis-
trust of the people, qualified by fear.”
Now I take the liberty of saying that this definition is use-
less as a guide ; for it makes use of, and depends upon, words of
such uncertain signification as “ trust,” “ prudence,” and “ fear,”
to none of which, probably, any two minds attach exactly the
same meaning.
Lord Rosebery, in the same volume, says : “I am a Liberal,
because I wish to be associated with the best men in the best
work.” This so-called definition looks to me like a complete beg-
ging of the question. If the best men all gravitate to Liberal-
ism, as Lord Rosebery understands it, there must surely be
some good reason for their doing so, and that reason is the
definition wanting.
Mr. Chamberlain’s attempt at a solution is, to me, equally
vague and inconclusive. He says ; “ Progress is the law of the
world, and Liberalism is the expression of this law in politics.’’
This still leaves unanswered the questions :—What is progress ?
What is retrogression 1
There is one answer in the volume referred to, of an entirely
different order, by Mr. Arch—that working-man representative,
who is so differently regarded by members of his class. “lam a
Liberal,” he says, “ because it was by men like Richard Cobden,
John Bright, and other true Liberals that I, as a working man,
am able to obtain a cheap loaf to feed my family wit!).”
Now, I think I have here cleaily shown that this term
“ Liberal,” as indicating the person, and the term “ Liberalism,”
as indicating the policy, are very differently understood, both
in Great Britain and in the colonies; and it is impossible to
arrive at any clear definition of principles from the popular
application of the terms, as used in contemporary politics.


The truth is, the proper meaning of the term can, as I have-
said, only be ascertained and appreciated by a study of history,
and of man’s nature as illustrated by that history.
I have, at the beginning of my lecture, invited you to join
me in a historical and philosophical investigation, in order that
we may discover what were the principles which the word was
originally intended to, and did for many years, signify.
Let us then first direct our attention to the historical side of
the matter. Men have ever differed in opinion especially in matters
sucli as politics, which have involved their personal interest ; and
they have been ever prone to group themselves into parties, when
their differences of opinion have taken place over matters of
public concern. In every such case, the necessity for a party
badge lias made itself felt; and we may fairly infer that if we only
knew the detailed history of our fellow men in the. past, they
would be found to have adopted, on all such occasions, some party
title on the one side and on the other, which crystalized (so to
•speak) the principles they were respectively contending for.
Now, as long as man has existed under those conditions
which we term social, that is under circumstances which involve
joint action in matters of common interest, he has always found
it necessary or advisable to constitute one, or certain of his
fellows, superior over the rest. In more primitive times, that
recognised superior has been a chief; and, in more advanced
forms of society, he has been dignified with the appellation of
“ King,” “Emperor,” or “ President,” or some other title of alike
character.
In order to constitute that superiority, it has always been
necessary, either to voluntarily invest the chosen individual with
additional powers and privileges over his fellows, or to submit to
his assumption of them ; and the undue exercise of this addi-
tional power by the superior on the one hand, and the attempted
resistance of the group on the other, as between the governing
power and the governed, will, on investigation, be found to con-
stitute the key-note in all the struggles, great or small, the
accounts of which go to make up what we term history.
Love of power is one of the infirmities of human nature
and it falls to the lot of very few persons to be so constituted, as
to be able to resist the temptation to tyrannise over those who


are for any lengthened period completely subordinated to them..
From this tendency, on the one hand: the abuse of power,
on the part of those who govern ; and from the corresponding
tendency, on the other hand, to resist that abuse, on the part of
those who are governed, have arisen all those human struggles
which constitute the backbone of political history; and it is upon
this feature of our subject that I must ask you to dwell, in order
to clearly understand the growth and development of “ Liberal ”
principles.
I must of necessity place a limit upon my historical investi-
gations ; and I shall be content to fix that limit at the Norman
Conquest in the eleventh century, in the endeavour to illustrate the
principles for which I am contending.
It would be difficult to define, with any degree of nicety, the-
social condition of the people, immediately prior to the Norman
Conquest. The “ ups and downs ” which the English race under-
went, in the centuries which preceded that great epoch, were
numerous and far reaching ; so much so, that a perusal of the
somewhat meagre history which we possess concerning that
period, would almost load one to suppose that man’s principal
mission on earth was that of physical warfare with his fellows.
In order to understand the settled and progressive condition
of the English people under Harold—the last English monarch
prior to William the Conqueror —I resort to Green’s History.
That writer says : “ In the internal government of England l.e
followed out his father’s policy while avoiding its excesses,
Peace was preserved, justice administered, and the realm increased
in icealth and prosperity ” Mark now the effect of the acces-
sion to power of the new monarch.
The history of England, after the Conquest, begins in a con-
dition of society under'which the king was a veritable despot;
and his nobles or co-conquerors had, vested in them, privileges of
the most comprehensive nature ; a condition of society, in fact, in
which, (to use the words of Macaulay) “ a cruel penal code,
cruelly enforced, guarded the privileges, and even the sports of
the alien tyrants.” It can be readily understood that, under the
circumstances of the Norman Conquest, the Conqueror himself,
and his nobles, should refuse to recognise any prior laws, which,
if observed, might have the effect of restraining their power over


th ' people. If there were any such laws in existence, which, as
it were, covered the people from previous kingly abuses, they
were all now rendered nugatory and practically a dead letter.
The king ascended the conquered throne as an absolute ruler.
Subsequent events show that he claimed, and (by virtue of the
numerical and physical force of his followers) exercised the power
to tax, imprison, and govern, when and how he pleased, the sub-
jects of his newly vanquished realm.
England, as a community, may be said to have started a
new period of history under the Plantagenets ; with absolutely
none of their original liberty preserved to them. They were,
as a matter of fact, in a state of bondage, inasmuch as the king
could do just as he pleased with them and their possessions ;
while the nobles enjoyed almost equal powers with the king him-
self. So soon as each subject was by that means placed at the
mercy of the king, by reason of the royal usurpation of popular
freedom, each and every decree, action, and determination, by
which the monarch signified the limitation of that freedom, in-
volved the erection of an “ artificial restriction,” which it thence-
forth became one of the functions of Liberalism to remove as
soon as an opportunity offered.
Note also, what Green, the historian, says on the social con-
dition of the English people after the conquest: “ The desperate
and universal resistance of his English subjects forced William
to hold oy the sword what the sword had won, and an army,
strong enough to crush at any moment a national revolt, was
necessary for the preservation of his throne. Such an army
could only be maintained by a vast confiscation of the soil. A
whole army was by this means camped upon the soil, and the
king’s summons could at any moment gather 60,000 knights to"
the royal standard.”
Macaulay says : “ The battle of Hastings and the events
which followed it, gave up the whole population of England to
the tyranny of the Norman race. The subjugation of a nation
by a nation has seldom, even in Asia, been more complete.”
Hume says : “It would be difficult to find in all history
a revolution more destructive or attended with a more complete
subjection of the ancient inhabitants.”


From these suggestive passages, the social condition of the-
English people can be better imagined than described. It is-
evident that the highest men in the kingdom were at the
monarch’s beck and call; and it is a matter of simple inference
that all the working people were mere serfs.
This period offers a good starting point for a study of the
growth of Liberal principles. Compare for a moment the con-
dition of the humblest person in England, then and now ; then
a mere animal, degraded to the condition of absolute slavery, not
having even the right to his own life ; now, a free, independent,
self-governing mar ; possessing rights in the eyes of the law, equal
to those enjoyed by the greatest noble in the kingdom ; subject
only to the laws which he himself helps to make or maintain ; and
not liable to be punished, except after a fair trial by his equals.
The history of this magnificent process of social evolution
from the one condition to the other is the history of Liberalism.
William the Conqueror died, and William Rufus followed
him to the grave in 1100. No doubt by this time things had
become more settled. Henry 1., as soon as he came to the throne,
being conscious of his doubtful rights, made promises of a milder
government, and, to use Edmund Burke’s words, “ undertook
that the people should enjoy their liberties and the distinction oj
English and Norman he heard no more.”
Here we see, already beginning to work its influence at the
very threshold of Norman government, that spirit of individual
freedom : of human equality, of which Englishmen are so
justly proud ; and which has won for us so many of our most
cherished liberties.
The charter of Henry 1., (as it has been called ) which that
monarch, thus, was forced to concede, was really a summary of
popular concessions from the governing power; and it has been
made much of by all the most important historians. Edmund
Burke says ; —“ He gave to the whole kingdom a charter of
liberties, which was the first of the kind, and laid the foundation
of those successive charters which at last completed the freedom
of the subject.” Green says : “It was the first limitation which
has been imposed on the despotism established by the conquest
and elsewhere the same writer says : ‘‘ It marked the new relation,
which was then brought about between the people and their king.”


I desire you to note the one principle of freedom, liberty,
-equality—what you like to call it—running all through these
quotations.
In the succeeding reign of John, all the unreasonable and
irritating demands, which had been made by his predecessors,
were greatly intensified, and accompanied by further acts of
tyranny; but the spirit of freedom which had been already
fostered was not to be easily suppressed. Mark the effect of this
re-attempted tyranny, so opposite to that intended by him who
exercised it.
Burke tells us that “ our best securities for freedom
have been obtained from princes who were either warlike, or
prodigal, or both ;” and De Tocqueville, one of the most profound
students of popular government, says : “ Liberty is generally
established in the midst of agitation; it is perfected by civil
discord.” De Lolme also, who was one of the first foreigners
to make a close study of our British Constitution, says: “It
was the excessive power of the king which made England free,
because it was this very excess which gave rise to the spirit of
union and of co-resistance.”
Every one is familiar with the circumstances leading up to
the granting of the Magna Charta by John. That monarch
hesitated and prevaricated to an extraordinary degree, in order
to avoid the great concessions which the signing of the charter
involved ; and it was cnly when he saw, staring him in the face,
the alternative of losing his throne, that he affixed his signature
to that famous historical document, which, in the words of
Hume, “ secured very important liberties and privileges to every
order of men in the kingdom, to the clergy, to the barons and to
the people.”
The word “ liberty ” is the key note to this remarkable com-
pact between monarch and subjects; and that word appears in
almost every clause of the document.
The preamble says : “We have granted these liberties fol-
lowing and, speaking of the church, it says : “ she shall have
.all her whole rights and liberties inviolable.” Further it states:
we have granted also to all freemen these liberties under-
written.’


The 29th chapter is the most important of all, and its word-
ing will at once explain the spirit of the great Liberal movement
of which the charter itself is the veritable Bible.
“No freeman,” it says, “shall be taken or imprisoned, or be
deprived of his freehold, cr liberties, or free customs, or be out-
lawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor will we pass
upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his peers,
or by the law of the land. To no man will we sell, to no man
deny, to no man delay justice or right.”
The iSOth chapter of the charter is remarkable in this
respect, that it was the first protest which history affords of the
right of the individual to trade with his fellows without hin-
drance or restriction. It provides that all merchants shall pass
in and out of England by land or by water for purposes of buy-
ing and selling, without tolls or extortions of any kind.
Few people are aware of this early protest on behalf of an
unrestricted commerce.
The whole text of the charter breathes the same spirit of
Liberalism ; and no one can peruse its clauses or chapters as they
are called, without noting the prominence of one great principle,
viz., that the sovereign was simply conceding to his subjects ad-
ditional individual liberty to do as they chose with their own
property, and to exercise, in what direction they chose, the per-
sonal freedom which the law should, and was thereby undertak-
ing to secure to every human being, subject only to equal freedom
in others. '
Guizot, the French historian, says of Magna Charta, that
it was “ the origin of free institutions in England.” Hume says :
“ The barbarous license of the kings, and perhaps of the nobles,
was thenceforth somewhat more restrained ; men acquired some
more security for their properties and their liberties.” Hallam
characterises it as the “ great charter of liberties " and “ the
keystone of English liberty.” “ Its beauty consists ”he says,
“ in an equal distribution of civil rights to all classes.” Else-
where, the same great constitutional authority speaks of the 29th
chapter, as containing clauses which “protect the personal liberty
and property of all free men.” Edmund Burke says: “It dis-
armed the crown of its unlimited prerogative, and laid the
foundation of English liberty.”


I have purposely collected these quotations from so many
historial authorities in order to lay before you independent testi-
mony regarding the fundamental principles for which I am con-
tendin';.
The subject of the next struggle of importance which took
place between the monarch and the people is that which is known
as the “ Petition of Right.” An examination of its circumstances
will show that the same principle of individual liberty inspired
every movement which led up to its adoption as a part of our con-
stitution. Charles 1., unmindful of what had preceded him
in the history of the English people, endeavoured to reassume
the prerogatives which had been so distinctly curtailed in the
cases of his predecessors. The attempt to levy taxes, without
the consent of the people, through parliament, was practically
an endeavour to interfere with the liberty of the individual in the
disposal of his own property. In the debate in the Commons,
Sir Francis Seymour said : —“ He is not a good subject—he is
a slave—who will allow his goods to be taken from him, against
his will and liberty, against the laws of the kingdom.”
Sir Robert Phillips, one of the members of the Commons,
delivered a speech which is full of the true Liberal spirit. Speak-
ing of the past struggles for liberty, he said ; “ O unwise fore-
fathers ! to be so curious in providing for the quiet possession
of our lands, and the liberties of parliament, and at the same
time, to neglect our personal liberty. If this be law,” he added,
“ why do we talk of liberties ?” Everybody knows how the struggle
ended. The king was forced to concede the terms demanded.
He bound himself never again to impose taxes, or in any way de-
mand money, by law or otherwise, except by consent of parliament,
and never again to commit any of his subjects to prison or other-
wise deprive them of their personal liberty except in due course
of law.
In 1679, another important step was made in the limitation
of kingly power, and the extension of our civil liberties. I refer
to the Habeas Corpus Act, which was, in effect, a re-enactment
of the old liberties which had been secured by Magna Charta,
but which had been, subsequently, frequently ignored. The pro-
vince of this historical measure is well summarised by Hume,
who says: “ The great charter had laid the foundation of their


liberty ; the petition of riglrt iiad renewed and extended it; but
•some provisions were still wanting to render it complete and
■prevent all evasion or delay from ministers and judges.”
Time will not admit of my going into detail over the
’numerous other events in our national history, each of which
forms a step as it were in the growth and development of our
[British freedom. The revolution of 1688 secured to the people
the liberty to choose their own king. The struggle for, and acquire-
ment of independence, by the Anglo-American colonists, who had
migrated from the old to the new world, once for all laid down
the principle that, so soon as an offshoot of tiie mother country
became self-supporting, the members of it should become entitled
to self-government; that is to say, should be freed from the
'restrictions which a distant government involved, and from the
principle of taxation without representation.
The oppressive state of the law which led to the great in-
form known as ■“Catholic Emancipation,” was unworthy of
modern times, to which its repeal was delayed. It is indeed
scarcely credible that, in the nineteenth century, in which we are
now living, there should have been, in the parliament of Great
Britain, a large body of men, so dead to the principles of common
justice and liberty, from which they themselves had derived so
many blessings, that they should be found willing to continue so
Jong the exclusion from parliament, and from other even more
primitive liberties, a large portion of their fellow-countrymen,
for no other reason than that of a difference in religious creed.
Yet so it was ; and thus it was reserved to our own century to
remove, from some millions of our fellow men, a restriction which
would have been more in keeping with what are termed “ the
dark ages.”
The Reform Bill of 18.12 simply equalised parliamentary
.representation, by a more equitable distribution of the seats, and
the bestowal of a more extended franchise. In tiie words of Mr.
Justin McCarthy, it “ broke down the monopoly which the
aristocracy and landed classes had enjoyed, and admitted the
middle classes to a share of the law-making power.”
The abolition of slavery in 1833, extended the application
of the principle of individual liberty to alien races.


The repeal of the Com Laws was, in fact, the abolition of a
state of tilings, by which every man, woman, and child in the
kingdom, who consumed bread, or any other article of which grain
was the primary ingredient, was compelled to contribute to the-
artificial maintenance of the agricultural industry of Great
Britain. Such a restriction upon the subject was an interference
with the liberty of the citizen to “ buy in the cheapest market. ,r
The repeal of those laws set the people free in that direction.
The Jewish Disabilities Act of 1859 recognised, in Jews,
equal liberties with Christians to a seat and a voice in parlia-
ment; and the Trades Union Act of 1871 established the liberty
of workmen to combine, as capitalists had always been allowed to-
do, for purposes of mutual benefit.
The Ballot Act, in the same way, gave every subject the
liberty to vote as he chose. Inasmuch as many persons, by
reason of intimidation being brought to bear upon them, were
frequently compelled to vote contrary to their judgment or con-
viction, it was necessary to prevent any undue pressure
being brought to bear, by giving each elector the right of voting
in secret, by ballot, if he thought fit.
Throughout all these important events there is evident one
principle—-the conferring of equal liberties on all men, by the
removal of class restrictions, which have been established and
recognised, at a time in our history, when the mass of the people
had little or no voice in the conduct of public affairs.
Thus, it will be seen, that from the Conquest downwards,
freedom has been sought for, and won, by a gradual but sure
process of wresting, first from the sovereign, and afterwards from
the aristocratic and moneyed classes, the unequal power which
they, respectively, had arrogated to themselves, when they had
might upon their side. As each successive stage of progress
has been reached, the people have acquired a further share in
the deliberations of that body, by which all “ rights ” and
“ opportunities ” are regulated. Thus, there lias at last been
reached, a condition of society, under which (with some few
exceptions) all men may be said to enjoy the “ equal oppor-
tunities ” for which, and for which alone, true Liberalism contends.
So much then for the historical aspect of the question. Let
us now turn to the philosophical side, and ascertain upon what


abstract principles the victorious party in all these important-
struggles based their contentions.
Bolingbroke has said that history is “ Philosophy teaching by
example ” ; and if this be so, “ the true use of history,” as he
terms it, is that by an investigation of its records, certain broad
sociological principles may be laid down for the guidance of those
who come after us,
It is a trite saying that history repeats itself; but we do
not all fully realise its truth. Most persons of well disciplined
mind, and with the faculty for generalization, are agreed that
human nature has not altered much, if at all, since the earliest
times of which we have any record ; that given a certain number
of persons under certain circumstances in the present day, their
conduct will be very similar to that which would have resulted
under similar circumstances a thousand years ago. The greater
knowledge which we possess nowadays is one of those circum-
stances, and might disturb the parallel' where knowledge is a
factor; but in most great national movements, where human
nature itself is the principal factor, the result could be predicted
with tolerable accuracy, by what I might term an historically
all-wise person.
If this proposition of a stereotyped human nature be ad-
mitted, then history, if truthfully written, is nothing more or
less than a panorama of great sociological experiments, from
a careful study and interpretation of which we can deduce
numerous broad general principles for future guidance. These
principles are what I should term the philosophy of history. A
knowledge of such principles is essential in every one who pro-
fesses to govern or take part in governing his fellow men ; and a
man who possesses this knowledge in an eminent degree, and
whose opinions are influenced, and political actions dictated by
it, is a statesman.
A proper exercise of this knowledge, in supervising the
growth of a nation, will secure the harmonious development of
its many naturally conflicting elements; a want of that know-
ledge in its rulers, or a disregard by the people of the recom-
mendation of its wisest rulers, will frequently lead to a clash of
interests, civil strife, civil war, in gravest cases national disrup-
tion. Now, I venture to assert that a careful study of the his-


tory of the English people, and of the great social upheavals
which they have undergone, will prove that neither a monarch
nor an aristocracy can continue for any length of time to exceed
those limits to the governing power, which the people have them-
selves laid down.
In the case of the English people, with whom I am especially
dealing, every such struggle has ended in a nearer approach to
that social condition of things which the people desire. From
the state of society which existed immediately after the Conquest,
down to the present day, there has been going on a gradual but
sure wresting, bit by bit, from the monarch, and afterwards from
the privileged classes, of the legal rights which gave them those
privileges; and in every case the effect has to remove
restrictions, and confer greater freedom on the masses of the
people, until at last we have readied a condition of tilings, in
which the highest position in the state is open to the humblest
cf its citizens; in which' the most haughty noble in the land has
no greater rights in the eye of the law than the meanest and the
most retiring of its commoners ; in which, in short, the race or
life has been thrown open to all comers, and the prizes are to be
won by any one who is able to prove his personal fitness for that
prize, whatever may be its nature. This happy state of things
has been reached by the persistent demand for more and more
liberty for the people ; and that really is the fundamental
principle of the Liberal policy. A quotation I have before me
from Macaulay is peculiarly apropos of this conclusion.
“ The history of England,” he says, “is the history of a
government constantly giving way, sometimes peaceably, some-
times after a violent struggle, but constantly giving way before a
nation which has been constantly advancing.”
I shall endeavour now to show that the policy of Liberalism, if
properly understood, is established on considerations of an un-
deniably philosophical character, and that it is based upon the
experience of our fellow men obtained after centuries of st rife which
have gone before us.
Herbert Spencer, (our modern Aristotle) in his treatise on
Education, has asked the question, What knowledge is of' most
worth 2 and he has subsequently classified the leading kinds of
I mman activity, with a view of showing the order of importance,


to man, of the kinds of knowledge essential to man’s happiness-
The classification is as follows.
1. Those activities which directly minister to self-preserva-
tion.
2. Those activities, which, by securing the necessities of
life, indirectly minister to self-preservation.
3. Those activities, which have for their end, the rearing and
discipline of offspring.
4. Those activities which are involved in the maintenance of
proper social and political relations.
5. Those miscellaneous activities which fill up the leisure
part of life, devoted to the gratification of the tastes and feelings.
This is, as I have said, a classification of the leading kinds
of activity in which men engage ; and those activities, as they
are called, are arranged in thp order of their importance. It is
in fact a summary of man’s requirements; and I venture the
opinion that, upon close examination, the different heads will be
found to embrace almost every human desire, as well as to mar
shal those desires in the correct order of their importance to man
himself.
If I were asked to further define those different classes of
activity, in more particular terms, I should do so thus :
1. Those activities which are necessary to ensure health
and bodily safety, e.g., acts of locomotion to avoid physical danger,
and to preserve bodily health; acts of self defence, to avoid
personal injury; acts of preparation to obviate impending danger.
2. Those activities which are necessary to obtain food,
clothing, shelter, and other physical wants.
3. Those activities which are necessary to ensure the mental
and moral training, the health and bodily safety, as well as to
secure the means of satisfying the bodily and mental wants of
our offspring, e.g., food, clothing, shelter, schooling, medical aid,
itc.
4. Those activities, of different kinds, which are essential to
the fulfilment of one’s duties as a citizen, e'g., the free expression
of one’s religious and political opinions, and the exercise of one’s
civil and political rights, the right to enjoy unmolested the fruits
of one’s labour.


5. Those activities which are necessary (according to one’s
nature and disposition) in order to secure the full enjoyment of
life, apart from the satisfaction of our more bodily wants, cjj.,
occupations in the various fields of art, literature, science, politics,
and physical recreation.
Now, I propose to deal with these one by one, and to
show how essential it is that man should possess the maximum
amount of personal liberty (subject only to the right of his
neighbours to a similar privilege,) in order that he may obtain
for himself, and those dependent upon him, the largest possible
amount of human happiness,—using the latter term in its broadest
and most philosophic sense. I shall at the same time indicate the
extent to which the Legislature has in past times hampered and
interfered with individual effort in its endeavours to affect this
purpose. Subsequently I shall show how, after centuries of
abortive effort to regulate and school men into a sort of military
equality, and disciplined uniformity, legislators have been forced
into a practical confession of their complete failure : that confes-
sion taking the form of a comprehensive repeal of the thousand
and one restrictions which had so hopelessly failed to effect their
intended purpose. The spirit which has inspired that long list
of repeals—that long process of freeing the individual from the
network of restrictions with which he was surrounded, is the
spirit of Liberalism in politics, for which 1 am contending.
In speaking of those activities which directly minister to our
self-preservation, Mr. Spencer evidently intends to refer to the
continuous efforts which man has to make in order to avoid de-
struction from the numerous artificial and natural causes which
surround him at every turn.
In the first place, it is to be observed, that without success in
this particular effort, all others are futile; for if a man be not
able to effect self-preservation, it is useless to have regard to
another’s wants, such as the obtaining of food, or the care of
offspring; the fulfilment of the duties of citizenship, or the
pleasures of recreation.
It is obvious, too, that in order to preserve oneself bodily,
one must enjoy a large amount of bodily freedom. So obvious in
fact is this, that under the most slavish forms of government
the world has ever seen, that necessity has never been questioned
or the right denied.


The necessity for bodily locomotion need not be insisted
upon—it is self-evident.
Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his book “ Man versus the State ”
•says : —“ Animal life involves waste ; waste must be met by re-
pair ; repair implies nutrition. Again nutrition presupposes
•obtainment of food ; food cannot be got without powers of pre-
hension, and usually of locomotion ; and that the-e powers may
.achieve their ends, there must be free lorn to move a- out.”
I need not enumerate here, the numerous historical instances,
in which the right of self-preservation has been denied to man in
the most unmistakeable way, by actually taking his life : and that
too often unjustly. The right to live, so long as one does not bring
oneself within those generally recognised provisions of the law,
by which we fairlyforfeit that right, is now generally acknowledged.
And Magna Charta, to which I have already referred, secured to
every man the right to be tried by a jury of his countrymen,
before his life should ever be interfered with.
One of the most important rights which we claim as directly
contributing to our self-preservation is, I suppose, that of satis-
fying hunger; and I presume it is one of those activities which
one can tairly indulge in, with least interference from one’s
neighbour, provided one confines oneself to eating that which
belongs to oneself. Ido not suppose that the mere abstract right
to eat has ever been challenged by rulers, but history does afford
many examples of the most ridiculous interference with the num-
ber and nature of meals which certain citizens could enjoy. For
instance, in 1-363, an act was passed enjoining certain ploughmen
.and farm servants generally not to drink excessively ; and, by
the same act, domestic servants were restricted to one meal a
day, of flesh or fish, and were to rest satisfied, at other meals,
“ with milk, butter, cheese and other such victuals.” By another
act of the same reign, no one was allowed, either for dinner or
supper, “ above three dishes in each course, and not above two
courses.” Further, it was especially enjoined, that <- soused ”
meat, whatever that may mean, was to count as one of these
•dishes.”
The question of dress too comes under this category of
•activities by which one’s preservation is directly secured. There
are many instances of legislative interference with that particular


activity. By an act of Edward 111, farm servants were prohibited'
from wearing any cloth “ except blanket and russet wool of
twelvepence and no man under a hundred a year- was allowedl
to wear gold, silver, or silk in his clothes. An act of Edward)
IV., fined people for wearing any gown or mantle, not according
to what was prescribed. The ridiculous extremes to which this,
passion for parliamentary interference were carried', is. shown in
the fact that the material in which people should' be buried was
prescribed ; and the character even of the buttons and button
holes which were allowed, was clearly defined by the legislature-
All of these short-sighted restrictions are now removed,,
either by means of Liberal legislation, or by being universally
ignored, as the spirit of Liberalism became more widely
recognised.
The second head of this classification affords much more-
ground for enquiry, namely, those activities which, by securing
the necessaries of life, indirectly minister to self-preservation..
This includes the acquisition of food, clothing, shelter, and
the means whereby to resist the encroachments of disease.
Now the kinds of liberty which would be required in a
primitive community, in order to secure these ends, would be-
very different to those requisite in our modern life. In the-
former, it would include the liberty to hunt, where and when one
liked, in order to obtain food and skins; and it would include
the liberty to exercise one’s own judgment, and adopt one’s own
ideas of securing that food and clothing in the greatest quantity,
and with the least exertion.
It will be readily admitted, that in such a case, the more
liberty a man enjoyed, the greater would be his chances of success
in the chase, and therefore the greater his chances of satis-
fying those wants, and thus, indirectly, ministering to his own
self-preservation. We are not, however, living in a primitive-
age, and need not therefore consider that feature in detail.
But, let us look at this second head of human wants, as-
illustrated by modern society ; and we shall see how much more
necessary it is, that each individual should possess the maximum,
amount of personal liberty. When we reflect, that in a country
like England, population is so dense that there is only enough


land to give one acre and a quarter to every person in the kingdom,,
it is obvious that life cannot be sustained by the chase.
In our own day, no man can solve what has been termed the-
“ bread and butter question,” without becoming a specialist of
some kind. Even in the production of the simplest article of
our daily food—bread—many and various occupations are in-
volved. One class of men mine for the iron out of which agri-
cultural machinery is made; another class mine for the coal
with which that iron is smelted; a third class obtain the wood
which is to be combined with that iron in various agricultural
implements; a fourth is engaged in navigating the vessels which
bring the timber to the iron ; a fifth class make the machinery,
being divided again into numbers of sub-classes ; then we have
the farmer who cultivates the soil, and the miller who grinds the
corn when grown ; next the baker who makes the bread, and the
carter who brings it to our door.
Now, out of thousands of occupations of which these are
only a few, every man has, at some time or other, to choose one ;
and, unless he be otherwise favoured, his existence will depend
upon his acquiring, and subsequently exercising, the knowledge of
his particular calling. Food, clothing, and shelter can, too,
only be obtained in these days of undivided labour, by purchase ;
and every individual citizen who would continue to exist, must
perforce obtain the wherewithal to obtain it. We are thus,
all of us, driven to adopt an occupation, which of itself, perhaps, is
useless, but which constitutes a contribution towards an elaborate
and complex system of production.
If we choose to become the employee of another, we have
first to learn that business, and afterwards find some other person
who is prepared to engage us. Any human interference then,
which hindered us in these endeavours, would involve a curtail"
ment of our individual liberty, and consequently be contrary to
true Liberal principles.
This takes me to a definition of Liberalism which was once
laid down by a working-man candidate now in the House of
Commons. “ The object of Liberalism,” (said Mr. Broadhurst) “ is.
to remove all obstacles of human origin which prevent all having,
equal opportunities.”


Concerning this tirst want—the freedom to choose one’s own
■occupation, and to find an outlet for one’s knowledge or skill
when obtained, it will be readily conceded that any human
obstacles to the achievement of such desires are anti-Liberal.
Now, few people are aware that up to as late a time as
1795, less than a century ago, an English tradesman was
prevented, by the law, from travelling out of his own parish in
search of employment. Here was a distinct limitation to
individual liberty—-a clear breach of Liberalism. That policy
was therefore charged with its repeal.
In the reign of Henry VIII., everyone was prohibited from
making cloth, unless they had served an apprenticeship of seven
years. Like all such interferences, this attempt to stimulate
industry by Act of Parliament failed. The statute was repealed
in Mary’s reign, and the reason given by Hume, the
was that the statute had occasioned the decay of the woollen
manufacture, and ruined several towns.
No one would contend, now-a-days, that a man should not be
allowed to work, how, when, and where he likes, so long as he
can find another willing to purchase his services on such terms •
but it was left to the policy of Liberalism to liberate or set men
free from the unjustifiable restrictions which prevented him from
doing so. Until lately he could not do so without committing a
breach of the law.
Further, in the reign of Edward 111., there was an attempt
to reduce the price cf labour by statute. A reaper, in the first week
of August, was not allowed to take more than 2d. per day (near 6d
of our present money); and in the second, not more than one-
third higher. A master carpenter was limited through the whole
year to 3d. a day ; a common carpenter (as they were then
called) to 2d. a day, money of that age. Hume, the historian,
characterizes this attempt as an “ impracticable scheme ” as
well he might ; for it was a direct interference with the
undoubted right of every individual to do the best he could for
himself, with what belonged to him, viz., his own labour.
The wages of workmen of all kinds were fixed, with the
most minute detail, in the third and sixth years of Henry VIII-
In 1362, after a violent storm, when much damage was done to
property, a royal order was issued to the effect that the price of


roofing material, as also tilers wages should not be increased. In
the 16th century, a man was compelled to work at statute prices ;
and if he refused, he was branded “ V ” for vagabond, and re-
duced to slavery for two years. In 1768, an act was passed,
compelling tailors to work from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m., with an interval
of one hour only ; and as late as 1795 magistrates possessed the
power of fixing the rate of wages according to the rise or fall of
bread. The most daring interference with the liberty to work where
one thinks proper is to be found in the fact that down to the year
1779, little over a century ago, the Scotch miners were com-
pelled to remain in the pits at their masters’ pleasure ; and
they were actually sold as part of their capital invested in the
work.
Now, if one man has a right to sell his labour, how, when,
and where he can dispose of it to the best advantage : availing
himself from time to time of the rise or fall of the market and
of the law of supply and demand, it must be equally clear that
another man, who has some other commodity to sell, has a similar
right. For instance, if A have an article to sell, and B desire
to buy it, surely A and B should not be restricted in the matter
of the time or place at which they negotiate the sale ; nor even
in the question of the price, provided the business is quite
voluntary, and no other person’s liberty is being inter-
fered with. This has not always been acknowledged—nor,
indeed, is it in our own day in some places. In the reign
of Henry 111. a statute was passed, with the confessed object
of regulating the prices. The attempt failed ; and Hume, the
historian, says: “Yet did the prices often rise much higher
than any taken notice of by the statute.”
In the reign of Edward, shopkeepers had the prices of
articles dictated to them ; and in the reign of Henry VII., the
makers of archery bows were prohibited from charging more
Ihan a fixed price of “ six and fourpence of modern money.” This
was done with the object of promoting archery ; but Hume says,
rather humourously : “ The only effect of the regulation must be
■either that the people would be supplied with bad bows or none at
all.” In the same reign the sellers of woollen cloth caps and hats
had the prices dictated to them. Of this Hume says, characteristi-


cally : “ It is evident tliat tliese matters ought to be left free,,
and be entrusted to the common sense of business and commerce.”
In the reign of Edward 111., an act was passed to “ keep
down,” as it was termed, the prices of herrings. Mr. -Herbert
Spencer, who uses it as an illustration, informs us that it was.
soon repealed, because it raised the price of herrings.
These illustrations are instructive in many ways ; lor be-
sides showing the ridiculous extent to which individual liberty
was interfered with, they show how contrary are the results of
such legislation to those anticipated.
In 1313, for instance, an Act of Parliament prescribed the-
prices of nearly all goods ; but, as Mr. Herbert Spencer says, “ it
was hastily repealed, after it had caused an entire disappearance-
of various foods from the market.” The effect was a simple one.
The interference with the prices prevented those who had dealt
in those particular articles from making any profit, and they
naturally ceased to deal in those articles, the incentive of profit
being removed.
These numerous instances will show how systematic have
been the attempts to interfere with personal freedom, in matters
which did not concern anybody but the person interfered with.
They are all taken from history; and they should, if they do not,
convey to us a lesson in political philosophy. The instances I
have given include attempts to dictate where a man should sell
his labour or his goods ; when he should sell them ; and for what
amount he should sell them. Liberalism would free him from
such restrictions ; because each of such restrictions is an infringe-
ment of our individual liberty, not made to prevent a correspond-
ing infringement of the liberty of others.
In England, all these ridiculous restrictions have, as I have
said, either been swept out of the statute book, or else ceased to-
be seriously regarded, except as specimens of legal archieology.
In either case, the spirit which has been at work is the spirit of
Liberalism, which keeps in view the one vital principle of
individual freedom. Mr. Gladstone may well have said, as he-
did in his well-known Nineteenth Century article on “ Locksley
Hall and the Jubilee,” “In the sphere of the State the business
of the last half century has been in the main a process of setting.


free the individual man, that he may work out his vocation
•without wanton hindrance, as his Maker will have him do.”
Now, one would suppose that all that kind of dark-ages legisla-
tion had passed away : but it is not so. In the colony of Victoria,
;at the present day, there exists an Act of Parliament by which
many classes of shopkeepers are compelled to close their places of
"business at a certain hour; that is to say, if A, being a shop-
keeper, wishes to deal with B, who may desire to buy a
•coat, A and B are prohibited from doing business after a certain
hour. It may be that B has been too busy all day over his own
work, and desires to make the purchase in the evening; but
nevertheless the Legislature prohibits him. It has been
•contended that, otherwise, shop assistants would be overworked ;
but to that it has been answered that he need not do so as he is
living in a free country, and can do otherwise if he choose.
This argument has been of no avail and, therefore, we are
afforded in our sister colony an example- of legislation not far
removed in principle from the edict which required all lights to
be put out when the Curfew Bell tolled; The policy of true
Liberalism would not tolerate such legislation ; it is Toryism of
a most distinct character.
Some idea as to the amount of success-which has followed
this Quixotic piece of law-making can be obtained from the
following utterance of the President of the Shopkeepers’ Union :
“We have learned at a terrible cost,” he says, “ what it is to
endure the plague of over legislation ; and we also know, more
than ever, the necessity of uniting, with one common object, viz.,
the repeal of the most atrocious and disastrous law against trade
that ever disgraced the Statute-book of Victoria.” The principal
so-called “Liberal” organ which advocated this law, has confessed
that “ none of the three great classes of people whom theearly-
closin" clause was intended to benefit is satisfied with, what has
O
been done to ensure early closing as prescribed by law.”
Now, the application of all these illustrations to the category
of activities which indirectly conduce to one’s self-preservation is,
I think, sufficiently clear; but I should like to make it mi-
ni istakeable.
Every man must have food, clothing, and shelter in order to
live—that is admitted—and where he is in a community in which


the principle of the division of labour operates, he must, in the-
ordinary course of events, first sell his own labour or goods and
obtain those various wants by means of the money which he has-
so obtained. Now the amount of those things which he can
obtain is regulated by the amount of money which he has.
acquired by his own labour or goods; and it follows,
that the more liberty he has in the disposal of his labour or
goods, the more easily will he be able to satisfy his wants.
If the legislature in any way restricts him in selling his
labour, where, when, and how he chooses, he is deprived of the
chance of making the best use of them. Liberalism abhors such
restrictions, and says : “ Let the individual be free, so long as
he does not interfere with others in the possession of like privi-
leges.’’
If the soundness of what I have advanced be admitted, viz.,
that every man has a perfect right to obtain from his fellow
citizen the best possible exchange for his labour or goods, it
follows that every citizen should also be allowed to make the best
possible use of his money; that is, he should not be interfered
with in exchanging that money (his own property) for goods sucli
as he may want, and which will contribute indirectly to his
self-preservation, e.g., food, clothing and shelter. Now, if
a man has this liberty admitted, he will, undoubtedly,
exchange his money with that person who will give him, for it,
the largest quantity of goods of the kind he requires. In other
words, he would have the right to buy where he can do so moat
cheaply. Jf one man in Sydney offer to sell another certain
articles, and a third man, in England, offer to sell a larger quan-
tity for the same price, the buyer should have the right to pur-
chase from the English dealer. Liberalism would secure this to
him ; and it was by that policy, as I have shown, that the Corn
Laws, which imposed a duty upon corn, were abolished.
If a duty be put upon an imported article it is a deliberate
infringement of the same right which you allow to the workman
in getting the best price for his labour. If the workman sell his
labour to a person outside the colony, you would allow him to
bring in Ins wages without interference. If the purchaser of
goods buy outside the colony, he should have equal freedom to
bring in the goods without interference.


There is another view which may be taken of this question.,
A duty is in the nature of a penalty imposed upon the consumer-
of an imported article ; and the imposing of that penalty .is an
infringement of one of the first duties of Government, viz., the-
duty to protect the property of its citizens. Man is subject
to many disadvantages, such as famine, sickness, injury,,
the elements ; and it often must become necessary to provide
a surplus supply of food in order that no suffering may
result; to have in readiness a suitable habitation to meet the
demands of a rigorous climate, and to have at hand a means of
alleviating pain, or curing bodily ailments.
Now it is essential to the stability and progress of a com-
munity, that famine, disease, and the elements, so far as they are-
injurious, should, as far as possible, be obviated where, other-
wise, it would mean that community’s destruction or injury.
Those ends can only be reached by accumulation; and that
accumulation can only be induced by the good results which it
guarantees being secured to those, who have either exercised the-
additional effort, or undergone the present deprivation, in order
to possess the margin over immediate requirements. That security
is nothing more than a recognition of, and insisting upon the-
liberty to do as one likes with what is legally one’s own. Unless
that liberty is secured to a man; it were useless to expect that he
would again undergo self denial in order to accumulate ; and, in.
such case, men would fall back into the old dangers of want, and)
in fact revert to a primitive state.
It would be difficult to know where to begin in an enumera-
tion of the breaches of this apparently fundamental principle of
Liberalism. The policy of Protection affords a striking
example. It is infringement of the principle of security
to property. It involves the infliction of a penalty on
every citizen who chooses to purchase an article made
outside his own country; and it is an inroad made upon
that citizen’s property, not as a contribution towards the-
fund for guarding the community from internal or external
harm, which is a proper ground for taxation, but merely for the
purpose of enabling certain jellow citizens to obtain Jor their
manufactures a larger price than their quality would otherwise’
demand in competition with the outside world .


The accumulation of the results of human industry is th»
-very basis of allcivilisation and progress. Buckle, in his History
■of Civilisation, lias clearly pointed out that without accumulated
wealth there can be no leisure, and that without leisure there can
be no art, literature, science,—nothing in fact that goes to make
life refined and cultivated and in fact worth living. Security for
property is, therefore, one of the fundamental principles of
Liberalism, as properly understood.
Jeremy Bentham in his work on the Principles of Legislation
writes as follows, —“ Law does not say to mm, labour and I
will reward you, but it says, labour and I will assure to you the
enjoyment of the fruits of your labour; that natural and sufficient
recompense which without me you cannot preserve ; I will insure
it by arresting the hand which may seek to ravish it from you.”
And again he says, “ As regards property security consists in
■receiving no check, no shock, no derangement to the expecta-
tion, founded on the laws, of enjoying such and such a portion of
food.”
Now regarding, the fourth class of activities, viz., those which
ihave, for their end, the rearing and discipline of children, many
of the previous observations apply ; for the obtainment of food,
clothing and shelter for one’s offspring raises the same question
of personal freedom in disposing to the best advantage of one’s
own possessions, be they in the shape of physical strength, manual
labour, artisan skill, professional knowledge, or goods of an ex-
changeable value, or money itself. In each case the owner has a
perfect right to make the best bargain he can ; and in the case of
him who has the money, he has the same right to exchange it,
when, where, how, and with whom he chooses, and for the best
obtainable value, as has he, who has labour to sell, to exchange
it when, where, how, and with whom he chooses, and for the
largest amount of wages.
Liberalism allows all this; it makes every man a free
agent ; an independent, self-helping, self-supporting factor in the
great social organism. It tolerates no coercion, no interference,
no trespassing upon any person’s freedom ■ f action, except so far as
to restrain each from a trespass on the freedom of his neighbours.
There are other activities under this head of rearing and
disciplining offspring, into which I need not enter at length.


Every parent, for instance, has the right to train his child in that
creed, to that occupation, in whatever place, and under whatever
circumstances he desires, so long as he does not, in his turn, tres-
pass upon the admitted liberties of the child itself. I need not,
I think, here refer to the good work Liberalism has done in the
past, in putting an end to the inhuman practice of distorting
the minds and bodies of young children; in making old men and
women of them before their time, in order to increase the gains
of their greedy parents. Liberalism, therefore, again operates in
allowing this maximum liberty to the parent, subject only to the
like liberty in others, that is to say the children who cannot pro-
tect themselves.
Let me now pass to the fourth head of this category of
human activities, and ascertain how the policy of Liberalism will
operate. Webster defines a Liberal as “ one who advocates
greater freedom from restraint especially in political institutions.”
That is perhaps the most sacred of our liberties which
enables us to enjoy, without interference of any kind, or by any
body, whatever religious opinions we think proper to entertain.
It is, however, a blessing of comparatively late acquirement; and
we have to thank the spirit of Liberalism for its possession.
Nowadays, it seems difficult to understand how the right could
ever have been denied by reasonable men; yet such was the case
up to the year 1829, when the great struggle for Catholic
Emancipation was concluded, and up to the year 1859, when the
Jewish disabilities were once for all removed. It is now difficult
to realise, that, only about a century ago, no Roman Catholic
could take real estate by descent or purchase; that a conveyance
to a Roman Catholic was void; that a Protestant who turned
Roman Catholic was guilty of high treason; that a Roman
Catholic father was, under penalty of £SOO, debarred from being-
guardian to Roman Catholic children; that a Roman Catholic
was prohibited from marrying a Protestant; and that the priest
who celebrated such a ceremony was guilty of felony ; that
Roman Catholics were prevented from becoming barristers, from
teaching in schools, from saying or hearing mass, from holding
office, civil or military, from sitting in Parliament, or voting at
an election. It is equally difficult to realise that, until 1859, a
member of the Jewish persuation could not sit in Parliament.


Edmund Burke was very emphatic in his denunciation of the
“ popery laws” as they were frequently called; and his language will
show under what principle he agitated for their repeal. “ A
liberty, he said, made up of penalties! A liberty made up of
incapacities ; a liberty made up of exclusions and prescriptions
continued for ages —of four-fifths perhaps of the inhabitants of
all ranks and fortunes. In what does such liberty differ from
the descriptions of the most shocking kinds of servitude T
Sir Erskine May says, speaking at a later period of this,
notable repeal: “It was supported by eminent English states-
men, and by the Liberal judgment of an enlightened party in
Parliament and in the country.” The claim of the Jews to be
admitted to a political equality with the adherents of other
creeds was, according to Mr. Justin McCarthy, resisted almost
exclusively by the Tories.
The Reform Bill of 1832 involved the same principles,
namely a removal of restrictions, which prevented all men enjoy-
ing an equal right to a voice in the election of Parliamentary
representatives. Macaulay has said of it: “I call it, and the
nation calls it, and our posterity will call it, the second Bill of
Eights ; this great charter of the liberties of England.”
Now, it will be sufficiently evident, from what I have said,
that the exercise of the franchise, and the liberty to enter Parlia-
ment if elected, irrespective altogether of nationality or creed, are
among those human activities which conduce to good citizenship ■
and it is, I think, sufficiently evident that the repeals of the Acts
which imposed these restrictions were unmistakeable instances of
Liberalism.
A consideration of the innumerable forms of activity which
come under the fifth category, in enabling human beings to enjoy
life by the satisfaction of certain desires, is suggestive of great
scope. I must endeavour to confine myself to the main
principles, “ The maximum right of the individual to please
himself, subject to the minimum right of the community to
control him.” That I take from the English Times as a
definition.
Man has other wants besides the mere bodily ones. With
leisure and the opportunities for reflection such as are, or can be
enjoyed by every man in our present civilisation, there come


desires, even yearnings, for far higher satisfactions. According
to the constitution of our minds, or the nature of the early
training which we have undergone, we find ourselves inclining in
the direction of certain occupations, accomplishments, or amuse-
ments. One discovers and finds pleasure in cultivating a faculty
for painting, another for literature, a third for music. One is
led by the bent of his mind into the mazes of philosophy and
abstract speculation, another finds pleasure in mechanics, while a
third is drawn to the study of nature, either in the direction of
astronomy, geology, or, may be, natural history. Many are
content to concentrate their attention wholly upon the happiness
and improvement of their fellow beings, while others prefer to
leave the busy haunts of men and lead the life of a recluse in
some occupation of a more primitive character.
Fortunately, in our own day, there are few if any restrictions
upon our personal liberty in this direction. If we happen to
possess either artistic, scientific, political, literary, dramatic or
other tastes, there is nothing but the want of leisure necessary to
their pursuit to prevent us from exercising them to our
heart’s content. This, however, has not always been so.
From our school books we may learn the history of Galileo’s
attempt to promulgate certain scientific truths, which were
distasteful to the scholastic philosophy of his time. He was
charged with heresy, and punished by the Inquisition for
announcing his belief in the Copernican system ; and he was even
compelled, on two occasions, to abjure the system in order to save
his life. Thus we see that liberty of scientific enquiry was
subjected to a distinct restriction, which in our own day is scarcely
credible.
Again, in the domain of literature and public speech we see
now a much greater, if not altogether unlimited latitude.
The expressions of opinion of Horne Tooke on political, and
of Tom Paine on political and religious subjects, both of
which led to public prosecution in the last century, would pass in
our own day without comment. The writings of Ingersoll and
Bradlaugh, in matters theological, and the speeches of Dilke and
Labouchere in matters political, would in past times, have led to
the Tower. The promulgation of Darwinian doctrines would, in
tiiose times, have led to treatment similar to that accorded to


Galileo. Mark too, the unrestricted liberty of thought and action
enjoyed by everyone in the present time, in the matter of church
attendance, and compare it with the constraint of a century back.
The truth is that Liberalism has in these directions done
much good work. In all such matters each citizen is fortunately
now-a-days left to his individual proclivities, as he ought to be.
Joseph Cowen, one of England’s greatest orators, has well,
said, —“ Every human being has a quality peculiar to himself, that
distinguishes him from every other human being that has been,
that is, or will be. Those distinctive qualities constitute his
character, and his life. To develop these attributes—moral,
intellectual, and physical—is his mission. To accomplish this
mission, he requires freedom, without which there can be no re-
sponsibility, and equality, without which, liberty is a deception.”
I have I think now shown, as I undertook to do, that true
Liberalism, whether considered from its historical or philosophical
standpoint, has for its key note the liberty of the individual.
We are then brought to this broad general conclusion, that
in whatever channel of activity man may be engaged, whether in
obtaining the necessaries of life, or in following the inclinations
of his mind in moments of leisure, individual liberty is indispensa-
ble to the full and complete development of his nature. Let us
now enquire whether this doctrine requires any, and, if so, what
qualifications.
In the evolution of society, a time would assuredly come,
when interests of individuals would clash ; and when an unquali-
fied liberty in one person would lead to the detriment of another
person. Circumstances of this character suggest a limitation of
some kind, lest the liberty of one individual should involve the
destruction or at least the injury of another. The interests of
that other would have to be taken into consideration, and a
compromise would have to take place, if it were desired that those
persons should dwell together peacefully. It would be considered
just to have equal regard to the wants of both ; and the only
equitable basis for such a compromise would be that each man
should have the right to do as he liked, limited only ly
the just rights of other persons. Except to give others
equal liberty, there would be no object gained in entering
upon any restrictions or limitations; and therefore it may be laid


down as an effect of Liberalism, that it secures to every citizen
the maximum liberty for himself, subject only to the like liberty
being enjoyed by others.
The word Liberty, in its primary signification, means “ free-
dom to do as one wishes ; freedom from restraint.” That is, in
fact, the condition of primitive man before such a thing as “ law’
is known. It is, in truth, the condition of the animal world
subject, as in the case of primitive man, to one limitation only,
viz., physical capability.
It requires no explanation to show that this is not the
meaning which attaches to the word in the sense in which it is
being here advocated. Under such conditions society would be
impossible—would become anarchical. We have already seen
that one of the indispensable conditions of the happiness and
progress of humanity, when raised above the level of the
savage, is “ security,” whether of the person, or of what is termed
“ property.” This security is not compatible with such an
extended and unqualified liberty. To be able to “do as one
wished” —to be “ free from restraint”—would mean to be allowed
to injure or destroy others whose existence or presence was
objectionable. It would mean one man being allowed to take
the property of another, merely because he enjoys superior
physique. It would, as I have said, mean anarchy, and, if not
mutual destruction, certainly mutual injury, social disorganisa-
tion, and human stagnation.
It is evident, then, that the kind or extent of liberty, which
is calculated to encourage industry and the accumulation of the
necessities and luxuries of'life, and which is essential to the
mental and moral development of a people, is not that which is
signified by th» word in its primary meaning. We must look for
the true signification in the same source, but subject to certain
important limitations. Liberty in the sense in which I understand
it, and in which I take it to be used by those writers from whom
I have quoted, means “ the freedom to do as one wishes; freedom
from restraint —subject to the same or equalfreedom in ourfellows,”
or, to use the words of Mr. Herbert Spencer, “the liberty of each,
limited only by the like liberty of all.”
This limitation would have the effect of restraining one
citizen from injuring another; from trespassing upon his property;


from appropriating his goods ; for that other’s liberties would
include the' right to personal security, and the right to enjoy his
own property, whether in the shape of land or goods.
Sir George Comewall Lewis, in his valuable treatise on
“ Political Terms ” says, “ Persons who speak of liberty in general,
of the blessings of liberty, of the cause of liberty, may be under-
stood to use the word to denote an immunity or exemption from
certain restrictions, which they consider as pernicious to society.”
Sir James Mackintosh says that liberty is “ security against
wrong,” and Blackstonedefines it thus : “Political or civil liberty
is no more than natural liberty, so far restrained by human
laws, and no further, as is necessary and expedient for the general
advantage of the public.” This definition, however, leaves, unex-
plained, the extent to which it is “ necessary and expedient ” to re-
strain “natural liberty ” by human laws, for “the general advantage
of the general public.” It is sufficiently clear, however, from it, and
the preceding observations, that the liberty which men originally
possessed should be lessened only so far as to secure equal liberty
to all.
This, then, is the conclusion at which one arrives by what I
conceive to be a scientific investigation of the conditions of man’s
progress and development—that in order to obtain for a
community the largest aggregate amount of happiness, each
member should have secured to him the most absolute freedom or
liberty, subject only to such limitations as are necessary in order
to secure equal fieedom or liberty to all other members. And
this, I contend, is the true principle of “ Liberalism,” whether
tested by the light of sociological science or by the political,
history of our race.
Having, then, progressed so far with my chain of reasoning*
and in order that I may not be supposed to claim originality in
my theories (a charge which, if sustained in connection with a
subject so time-worn as that with which I am dealing, would be
almost inevitably fatal to its acknowledgment or reception), let
me shew how identical in every respect are the conclusions at
which I thus arrive with those deduced by certain authorities
already famous in the “ Liberal” cause. “ Liberal principles,”
says Mr. Joseph Cowen, “ what are they 1 The first is equality.
Ido not mean equality of social condition. That can never be


realised. One man owns his clothes, another owns a county. If
they were equal to-day they would be unequal to-morrow. I
mean equality of opportunity—a clear and equal course and
victory to the wisest and the best. That is practicable,” he
adds, and then he continues, “ I would remove all artificial.
impediments and restraints that make the path of progress
tedious and painful. Liberty,” he says, “is the second Liberal
principle. By liberty I mean much more than liberty of
locomotion or liberty to buy in the cheapest or sell in the dearest
market. I mean liberty of thought, speech, and development.
Physical liberty constitutes us free agents; intellectual liberty
gives us the power of acting up to our sense of right and wrong ;
religious liberty enables us to make the decisions of our
consciences our rule of conduct; and civil liberty gives us the
unchecked opportunity of growth. The idea running through
these definitions is that of self-sovereignty. If our volitions do
not originate with ourselves we have not personal freedom; if
our convictions are controlled by our prejudices, and our
consciences controlled by our passions, we have neither mental
nor moral freedom ; if we have to practice or pay for modes of
worship, imposed by others, we have not religious freedom ; and
if any power assert the right to inflict upon us laws or taxes
without our leave, we have not civil freedom.”
Elsewhere the same authority says, “Without physical
liberty a man is a machine ; without moral liberty he is the
victim of his appetite ; without mental liberty he is a slave ; and
without political liberty he is a serf.” No politician of our time
has touched so frequently and so trenchantly upon this
important question ; and no one has, outside literature, told the
masses such home-truths with regard to the modern tendency to
ignore these principles.
Mark now the definition of Liberalism which has been given
by Mr. Henry Broadhurst, and which has, already, more than
once, been touched upon. It is, perhaps the most concise and
scientific which has yet been offered, with relation’ to modern
tendencies ; and, coming as it does, from one who owes his present
position in the political world to the freedom of our institutions,
which has resulted from the Liberalism of past days, it acquires
all the more value and force. Every word of this definition is


worth placing in letters of gold over the portals of our legislature.
“ I am a Liberal ” he says, “ because the true, full, and free
application of Liberal principles is best calculated to promote the
highest order of manhood. It teaches self-reliance, and gives the
best opportunities to the people to promote their individual, as
well as their united and best permanent interest. Liberalism
does not seek to make all men equal; nothing can do that. But
its object is to remove all obstacles erected by men, which prevent
all having equal opportunities. This, in its turn, promotes in-
dustry, and makes the realisation of reasonably ambitious hopes
possible to the poorest man amongst us.”
To the same effect is a definition by Mr. Burt, equally
entitled, from the nature of his political career, to speak with
authority upon the beneficial effects of civil freedom. “ Liberalism,”
lie says, is “the doctrine, not of equality of wealth and position,
but the doctrine of equality of all before the law—of equality of
opportunity.”
Here, again, is the same leading principle, pithily expressed
by the editor of a prominent Liberal journal, enjoying one of the
largest circulations in England, “ I desire,” says that authority,
“ the triumph of the Liberal cause, which means progress, the
growth of freedom, and the advancement of the general good.’’
Yet another of those who are interrogated upon this important
subject, and whose answers are contained in the volume, to which
I have before referred : —“ Liberal principles develope responsi-
bility ; responsibility educates and humanises, and the fully
educated man is the most serviceable member of the social
organisation.”
The same subject hasbeendealt with from another and totally
different quarter, but nevertheless with great clearness and force.
The late Rev. F. W. Robertson, of Brighton, (England),
whose versatility enabled him to throw considerable light on
every subject he touched, gave a body of working men the follow-
ing good advice, —“ Democracy,” he said, “if it means anything,
means government by the people. Now, let us not endeavour to
make it ridiculous. I suppose that a sensible democrat does not
mean that all individual men are equal in intelligence and worth.
He does not mean that the bushman, or the Australian aboriginal,
is equal to the Englishman. But he means this—that the


original stuff of which all men are made is equal; there is no
reason why the Hottentot and the Australian may not be culti-
vated, so that, in the lapse of centuries, they may be equal to
Englishmen. I suppose,” he adds, “ that the democrat would say
that there is no reason why the son of a cobbler should not, by
education, become fit to become prime minister of the land, or
take his place on a bench of judges; and I suppose that all free
institutions mean this. I suppose they are meant to assert, —
Let the people be educated ; let there be a fair field and no
favour; let every man have a fair chance, and then the happiest
condition of a nation would be that when every man had been
educated, morally and intellectually, to his very highest capacity,
there should, then, be selected, out of men so trained, a govern-
ment of the wisest and the best.”
Here then we have a code of doctrine—a programme in fact
for our Liberal Associations to which no reasonable person can
offer objection. It depends for its experience upon the history
of our race, and it stands firm upon a basis of reason and
philosophy.
Liberalism has a due regard, first, for human nature in the
abstract: a factor which we cannot alter, and with which we must
carefully reckon in all our political calculations. Secondly, it en-
courages individual man, inasmuch as it offers an incentive to self-
help, and discountenances all forms of compulsory aid, calculated
to perpetuate the unfittest at the expense of the fittest.
Let me now make one or two observations concerning the
application of Liberal principles to the affairs of our colony. In
many respects the condition of things towards which a Liberal
policy is always approximating has been already reached ; and the
principal function left for the Liberal school is to carefully watcli
that condition of things, and, if possible, prevent any interference
by a class of people who are ever eager for something new, and
who do not wait to consider that any change may prove to be
for the worse instead of the better; that it' may, in fact, be a
rejorm but not an improvement. As has been well said by Mr.
Broadhurst, “ Liberalism does not seek to make all men equal,
nothing can do that; but to obtain for all men equal oppor-
tunities by removing all obstacles of human origin.” Now, in
the matter of the franchise, that end has been already reached in


■this colony, and every man, however poor, has an equal voice
with the wealthiest man in the community, no matter what the
question may be.
Take again the matter of commerce in which we of New
South Wales are with a few exceptions practically free. Under
the existing order of things every citizen is at liberty to expend
his own means, when, and where he pleases ; and he is equally
free to dispose of his productions wherever he can obtain the best
price for them.
I have already spoken of the freedom of every citizen to dis-
pose of, as he thinks best, his own lawfully acquired property, so
long as he admits in others a similar right. A departure from
the principle of the freedom of commercial exchange, and a return
to a system of protection, involves a compulsory payment by every
person who buys an imported article. To impose this penalty for
■such an act would be, and, wherever it is practised, is, a deliberate
and distinct departure from Liberal principles. There must be
freedom to sell, and freedom to buy ; and the right of property
must on no account be threatened. Directly any such attempt is
made, there is a distinct departure from that ideal of “ equal
opportunities.” And there is an equally distinct breach of the
first duty of a state—to afford security to property.
Another subject is that of religious freedom which we enjoy
to our heart’s content. That condition of things also must be
watched over, together with a great many more rights of a like
character, to the enjoyment of which we have become so accus-
tomed, that we are sometimes altogether forgetful of the centuries
■of struggle which were required on the part of our ancestors in
order to win them.
In our own colony, at the present time, the only portion of
the Liberal citadel which is being threatened is that of our com-
mercial freedom ; and in order that there may be no chance of
success on the part of the enemy, we must concentrate our
forces, at all hazards, upon that particular quarter.
In the minds of those who are endeavouring to attack this
branch of our cherished liberties, there seems to be altogether
wanting a knowledge of the history of the struggle by which it
was won ; and there seems also to be widely entertained, among


the same school, a belief that the restrictive system which they
are advocating is both novel and desirable.
A study of history would show them that the victory for
that freedom of commerce was won after centuries of interference
with trade ; after centuries of experiment, all of which ended in
failure; and after centuries of vain attempts to secure commercial
prosperity by act of Parliament. The philosophy which demon-
strates this great fact can only be learned, as Bolingbroke says,
by a proper study of history.
Experience has shown, and will again show, if the experi-
ment be again attempted, that legislative restriction can do
nothing more than transfer or destroy trade : will in fact deprive
it of the soundness and genuineness which result from the
healthy breeze of unchecked competition.
Coddling never produced a sound healthy body ; over
stabling and over grooming never produced strong healthy stock;
and you may depend upon it that a commercial system which is
hedged round with checks and restrictions to protect it from
the wholesome buffeting with outside competitors, will never be-
come anything but a poor weak sickly thing.
History offers endless proof of the soundness of this con-
clusion. As Buckle has said, “It would be easy to show how
legislators, in every attempt they have made to protect some
particular interests and uphold some particular principles have
not only failed, but have brought about results diametrically
opposite to those which they proposed. We have seen that these
laws which were intended to favor industry have only injured it.’’
In conclusion, let me ask you, who value your civil and
religious liberties, not to forget the long, and arduous, and even
bloody struggles by which those liberties had to be won. Let me
ask you, in the language of the battlefield, to stand to your guns ;
to lose no opportunity, to spare no effort to preserve those our
cherished liberties; and, let me ask you, who are inclined to be
attracted with the invitation to try fresh experiments with old
fashioned and exploded proposals, to think well before you take
the step. It is quite possible that you may give up, in one day r
what our forefathers were centuries in winning for us.


J Afp
BlUuto
r - —] —7 O
--1 b 1 i 6
3 1508 01846076 1
