

FREE EDUCATION AND THE CHURCHES.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
MR. ALFRED J. TAYLOR,
At the UNITARIAN CHURCH, FREEMASONS’ HALL,
MURRAY STREET, HOBART,
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 9th, 1900.
During the past few weeks the question of
free education has given rise to much con-
troversy in Parliament, in the Press, and in
the Pulpit. It effects other questions of
large public importance relating to education.
It is, therefore, something more than a poli-
tical question, fcr education has to do with
the evolution of right conduct —the all-im-
portant thing in life.
It is when men come to discuss the
methods by which right conduct may be
attained that they find room for difference of
opinion ; and controversy is then wholesome
in its effects if conducted upon fair lines,
and with the object, not of winning victory,
but oi ascertaining t,-u h.
As far, however, as the duty of the State
is concerned in the matter of public educa-
tion, there should be little room for diversity
of opinion. All experience has gone to show
that ignorance is the parent of superstition,
vice, and crime. With the object of supply-
ing an antidote to ignorance, all civilized
countries of the world now consider it a first
duty to make provision for the education of
the.young. The nature of the education
given varies somewhat in different countries,
but in all cases State Education has neces-
sarily been limited in its character. As a
rule what is known as “ Religious ’’instruct-
ion has been left in the hands of parents and
the churches to which the children may
belong, and the State has only interfered
with the liberty of the father and child to
the extent of insisting that the latter shall
be furnished with something of the know-
ledge likely to be useful to it in secular life,
and to afford some guarantee against its
lapsing into the poverty and crime that are
born of ignorance. I think it is wisdom on
the part of a State to strictly adhere to this
line of action. I would not have it under-
stood, however, that I am of opinion that the
education of a child can be made complete
without some sort of religious training. On
the contrary I hold that without such train-
ing the education of a child is only half
completed, and that to refrain from impart-
ing it is to starve and dwarf the highest
and beet potentialities of a child’s nature. I
am only dealing with the fact that for many
reasons (chiefly religious difficulties) that I
need not stop to enumerate now, and that
you are all familiar with, it has become
practically impossible for a State to include
religious instruction in its system of public
education, and that it therefore acts wisely
in leaving to other agencies than the public
school the impartation of religious know-
ledge.
The comparative worth of different kinds
of knowledge does not concern us just now,
as we are to consider only the system of
education at present in vogue in this colony
and certain suggestions for its improvement
that have given rise to the controversy that
you are acquainted with.
Under our present system, you are aware,
education is compulsory, but it can hardly
be said to be secular. It is not even pre-
tended that it is free.
Recognising the invidious position in which
teachers, many parents, and free scholars
are alike placed under this hybrid system,
the local House of Assembly has expressed
itself in favour of free education for the
colony. This session the newly-elected
Parliament has gone a step further, for it
has not only affirmed the principle, but it has
instructed the Government to make the
necessary provision for free education. It is
upon this instruction that controversy has
arisen, and it is my intention to consider
now some of the objections that have been
made to the action that Parliament has
taken.
It is urged by those who are opposed to
the alteration suggested— (1) That it is
not the duty of the State to provide free
education, Those who take up this position
lose sight of the fact that free education
should be the logical sequence of compulsory
education. When the State makes educa-
tion compulsory—insists upon a child being
sent to school and punishes the parent for
non-compliance with its mandate, it assumes


parental conti
it overrides th
father, and taxes upon irseii tne responsi-
bility which the father fails to discharge.
Having done so mach, it is surely illogical
upon the face of it for a State to throw
obstacles in the way of the application of a
principle it has decided to act upon. Yet
this is exactly what the State does when it
makes education compulsory without making
it free; for it cannot be denied that the
enforcement of fees offers serious obstacles
to the application of compulsory attendance;
and it goes without saying that the abo-
lition of fees would reduce the necessity of
compulsion to a minimum. Unless education
is made free as well as compulsory, the State
actually does that for which it punishes the
parent; it places a stumbling-block in the
way of the child’s education.
it is the duty of the State to do that
which is most likely to benefit its units ; and
wherever it has been tried experience has
shown the great advantages of free education
over a mixed system such as ours. At the
outset it may be very safely asserted that
the parent who values education is not likely
to value it less if it is free; while the
parent who undervalues education is not
likely to think more of it if he is taxed to
support it. It will be the object of the
latter to evade the law if possible, and to
connive at the frequent absence of his child
from school. Fees, in fact, may be regarded
in one sense as a tax upon attendance.
In the second place, it is objected that free
education destroys the sense of responsibility
in the parent, and causes him to take less
interest in the education of his children. I
have already partly answered this objection ;
but fortunately we are in a position to bring
to bear upm it the results of experience.
Take America for example. When Bishop
Fraser visited the United States some years
ago rate-bills for the support of education
were in vogue in New York, Connecticut,
New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Michigan;
but in the year 1871 these rate-bills were
abolished throughout the Union and the
schools made wholly free. As a consequence,
there was soon a much larger attendance at
the schools. Within three years of 1867
(when rate-bills were abolished in New
York) the increased attendance for that State
alone reached close upon 65 000; and this
increase, it should be remarked, was not due
to increase of population; for while the
report for 1871 showed that the average
attendance in the rural districts was nearly
17 per cent, greater than in any year
of the rate-bill system, the in3rease in
school population was less than one and a
half per cent. The report of 1873 says :
“ The statistics for the year are distin-
guished by the unprecedented aggregate and
average attendance at the schools, which
is year by several
ismodic increase,
out ib me pruuuci oi an uninterrupted
growth that has characterised the returns
each year since the free school system was
inaugurated.” In 1874 the report says :
“ The free school system, inaugurated in
1867, has been so successfully vindicated by
its results that it may be deemed secure.
Under its operation the aggregate yearly
attendance of pupils at the public schools
has increased nearly 82,0)0, and the average
daily attendance nearly 89,000,” The Com-
missioner of Schools for Rhode Island said
of the City of Providence :—“ The effect
has been in the highest degree satisfactory,
. . . The number of children in schools has
largely increased, and the percentage of
those who do not attend school largely
diminished.” Similar testimony is given by
the Few Jersey Board of Education and also
the Michigan report. In the year 1870 the
Connecticut report says :—“ Tne free school
law has accomplished more than its friends
promised; the test of experience is de-
cisive; the actual results of the first year’s
trial 3hew that nearly six thousand children
were kept from school by the rate-bills.”
The following year again showed a further
increase of 5744. The increase in attend-
ance in the year previous to the adoption of
free schools as sho'wn by the report was only
432. ‘‘ If there is one question,” says Mr.
Francis Adams, in his excellent work on
‘ The Free School System of the United
States,’ “ upon which the citizens of the
United States are practically unanimous, it is
in support of free schools. The gauge of
public interest in the system is the burden
of taxation which the people are willing to
bear for its maintenance.” The figures I
have quoted indicate the improved attend-
ance during years immediately following
upon the introduction of the free school
system; but if other proof were required of the
increased interest manifested in the schools
by parents upon the introduction of free edu-
cation in America, ib is to be found in school
records of visits of school officers, parents,
and others. These records show a great
increase in the number of visits made to
the schools, and the united testimony of
teachers and school officers has affirmed
the quickened sympathy and zeal of
parents. Then again ib is ’contended (3)
that the free system would foster a spirit of
pauperism in parent and child. Those who
advance this objection lose sight of the
fact that a privilege conferred is not neces
sarily a “ charity ” because it is made
“free.” In sending their children to public
schools under the “free” system, parents
are not necessarily or really in anyway
stooping to accept charity.” In the first
place they contribute towards the revenue,
out of which such schools are maintained ;




and public education under any system
means and can only mean educa f ion of the
people by the people for the people —in
•other words, education by the public for
the public good. In the second place it is
the “mixed” system and not the “free”
system that lies open to the charge of
pauperising the people. Under the former
class distinctions are induced, and those
who pay fees look down upon others who
cannot pay, and regard them as the charity
boys and girls of the schools. We need
not go from home to prove that it is so.
For many years I lived in a country dis-
trict where one of the public school
teachers had to depend largely upon fees
or their equivalents for his living. It
being impossible to find the fees in many
instances the children brought vegetables
and fowls and eggs and butter in lieu
thereof. These children were taunted by
those who could afford to pay as the
“paupers” of the school, and ill feeling
was eagenderel between the teacher and
the parents, who were too impoverished to
pay fees. At meetings of our Local Board
of Advice we have frequently to authorise
the admission of children of poor parents
who cannot pay as “free scholars,” and I
never do so without feeling indignant that
I have to take, part in conferring as
charity that which should be regarded as a
a right. If we require further evidence
that this is one of the evils of the “ mixed ”
and not of the “ free ” system, we have only
to look once more to America, where —to
quote the words of Mr. Francis Adams—
“ It has been abundantly proved that the
custom of demanding school fees, and re-
mitting them in special cases does ro-
duce a sense of degredation.” A former
superintendent of New York State said,
“‘Among other obstacles to be encountered
is the reluctance of many parents to parti -
eipa f e in the benefits afforded by exemp-
tions, owing to the manner in which this
‘ bounty.’ as they call it, is bestowed.
They will not send their children to the
schools to he reproached for their poverty,
and assailed with taunts that they are
educated at the expense of their more
fortunate neighbours.” Evidence of this
kind might be supplied to any extent, but,
as I have already said, we need not go from
home for proof of the humiliations that
have to be endu ed by parents, teachers,
and children under our present “ mixed ”
system of making provision for the upkeep
of public education. Nearly twenty years
ago Mr. Chamberlain declared at Hull his
conviction that the time had come when
education ought to be free. “ 1 have al-
ways held,” he said, “that the exacting
fees, in our primary schools is unjust, is
uneconomical, and is prejudicial to the best
interests of’education. It is a system that
has been long abolished in the United
States; it has recently disappeared in
France; it does not exist in the majority
of the self-govening colonies of the British
Empire.” The time has come when the
evils attending the “ mixed ” system should
no longer be perpetuated in Tasmania. It
is bad in principle. It is degrading and
demoralising in its application and after
effects. To assert, as it has been asserted,
that to grant the concession of free educa-
tion is to convert every state school into a
“ charity school” indicates such a marvel-
lous want of power to understand the
question at issue that one can only
marvel that such statements have been
permitted to find their way into
print. It would be waste of time and
breath to treat such assertions seriously.
Equally unworthy of notice is the charge
that those who favor free education are
conspiring to wipe out private schools.
That many so-called private schools would,
under a system of free education, be ex-
tinguished is probable; but the change
would only be likely to affect the far too
many refuges for ignorance that are adver-
tise! as schools of learning for the young.
But there is a much weightier objection
than such flimsy arguments as these that
has yet to be considered as bearing upon
any proposal for the introduction of free
education. The objecti n has been raised
by our Roman Catholic brethren, and it is
to the effect that the introduction of f< ee
education would largely increase the
burden they already bear in having to
support schools to which they cannot con-
scientiously send their children. I have
endeavoured to understand the “ consci-
entious objection ” referred to, and as one
who wishes to deal fairly with all men, in
all things, I am bound to admit s that there
is a great deal in it. I have already 7
alluded to the fact that our system of
education cannot be regarded as secular.
Instruction in sacred history is a part of
the ordinary school work, and is given
usually etween 9 and 9.30 each day, and
generally by the head teacher. The
subject matter consists of outlines of Old
and New Testament history. Now in giving
these lessons it is almost impossible for the
teacher to avoid reading into them the
interpretation he has been used to from his
childhood. If he acts conscientiously
he cannot avoid doing so—and teachers
themselves admit the fact. As all children
are present during these lessons, the
Roman Catholics natura'ly object to those
of their Church being influenced by in-
terpretations of Scripture history that they
cannot approve. The incidents relating to
Mary, the mother of Jesus, form part of


New Testament history. Now, without the
slightest intention of doing anything
irreverent or hurtful to the feelings of
anyone, a Protestant teacher can hardly be
expected to deal with these incidents as a
Eoman Catholic would have them dealt
with in the education of his chi'dren. It
is no answer to these oljectioDs to say
that the lessons referred to are not intended
as “ religious ” instruction ; for the par-
ticular manner in which lessons from the
Bible are dea't with must necessarily
influence the religious emotions of a child’s
mind. Let it be maintained on the other
hand that such incidents as those apper-
taining to the M other of Jesus are dealt with
in a manner strictly “secular,” and ground
is again given for offence to the Eoman
Catholic, who naturally objects to that
which he regards as sacred being treated
in such a manner in the impartation of
knowledge to his children. These objec-
tions have ripened, as you know, into a
determination on the part of Eoman
Catholics to have schoo s of their own ;
and, as the State has so far, and very wisely
I think, refused to have anything to do
with proposals for denominational educa-
tion, they have for sometime past been
building and maintaining schools of their
own. They claim that in this way they
save to the State an expenditure of at least
,£IO,OOO per annum, and that this sum
should be refunded to them out of the
State coffers, if they are expected to con-
tribute through the general revenue for the
maintenance of State education generally.
The recognition of such a claim as this
would be tantamount to the introduction
of denominational education—than which
no greater curse cou’d fall upon any com-
munity. There is one way, and only one
way, out of the difficulty, and that is to
make public education secular as well as
free and compulsory, and to leave the
religious education of children to those
whose proper duty and function it is to
impart such inst'uction. There is ample
time for this outside the time set apart for
the instruction that will fit children for
their secular work in life. The regulations
under which “religious instruction” may
be given by visiting clergymen under
certain conditions, might also be abolished
with advantage to all parties concerned.
Such visits and the separation of the
children while religious instruction
is being imparted can only tend to accentuate
denominational differences and bigotry, and
leave a condition of confusion in the minds
of the children that may lead, in after years,
to infidelity and contempt on their part for
all religions. We are told that in Victoria
the Protestant bodies have agreed upon a set
of religious lessons that may be included in
the public education of that colony. Apart,
however, from the fact that Eoman Catholics
have net fallen in with this scheme, and that
no State has any moral right to recognise at
the expense of others any particular form of
religion in its system of public education, I
prediet for the attempt to apply this agree-
ment a miserable and ghastly failtre.
Once make our system of public education
compulsory, seeulai, and free, and all claims
for denominational support from the State
fall to the ground as reasonless. A few may
gird at such a system as being “ Godless ” in
its character, but it is for such objectors to
prove that five to six hours a day devoted to
the acquisition of secular knowledge deprives
the child of opportunity for receiving the
religious instruction it requires for the com-
plete unfolding of its highest nature.
What the churches have to consider if they
would conserve the best interests of the
rising generation is how best to cultivate in
the child’s nature all that helps to develop the
perfect man, and so the best citizen. Eecog-
nising that under its constitution of equality
and freedom the part performed by the State
in the education of the child must necessarily
be of a limited character they must awaken
to a sense of the responsibility resting upon
them as religious bodies to do all that they
consider necessary for the right unfolding of
the child’s moral and spiritual character.
They must leave to the State its proper
function as teacher of those branches of
knowledge that have to do with its secular
welfare and interests ; and they must combine
to help the State to make its system of
public education in this direction as perfect
as possible.
Nothing can come of a rancorous discus-
sion of the question now at issue. The
question is one of more than passing interest,
and it requires to have brought to bear upon
it the wisdom of those who fight—not for
denominational predominance—but for an
end that shall be in the best interests of the
rising generation, and that shall be based
upon the laws of equity, righteousness, and
truth. It is in this spirit that I have
endeavoured to deal with the subject this
evening.
“ Tasmanian News,” Print, Hobart.
