

HANDBOOKS PREPARED UNDER THE DIRECTION OP THE
HISTORICAL SECTION OF THE FOREIGN OFFICE.—No. 145
FRENCH
POSSESSIONS
IN
OCEANIA
145
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY H. M. STATIONERY OFFICE.
1920




HANDBOOKS PREPARED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE
HISTORICAL SECTION OF THE FOREIGN OFFICE.—No. 145
J.H.L.WfI-nsRHOuiE
FRENCH
POSSESSIONS
IN
OCEANIA
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY H. M. STATIONERY OFFICE.
1920


EDITORIAL NOTE
In the spring of 1917 the Foreign Office, in connexion
with the preparation which they were making for the work
of the Peace Conference, established a special section whose
duty it should be to provide the British Delegates to the
Peace Conference with information in the most convenient
form —geographical, economic, historical, social, religious, and
political —respecting the different countries, districts, islands,
&c., with which they might have to deal. In addition,
volumes were prepared on certain general subjects, mostly
of an historical nature, concerning which it appeared that a
special study would be useful.
The historical information was compiled by trained writers
on historical subjects, who (in most cases) gave their services
without any remuneration. For the geographical sections
valuable assistance was given by the Intelligence Division
(Naval Staff) of the Admiralty ; and for the economic sections,
by the War Trade Intelligence Department, which had been
established by the Foreign Office. Of the maps accompanying
the series, some were prepared by the above-mentioned depart-
ment of the Admiralty, but the bulk of them were the work
of the Geographical Section of the General Staff (Military
Intelligence Division) of the War Office.
Now that the Conference has nearly completed its task,
the Foreign Office, in response to numerous inquiries and
requests, has decided to issue the books for public use,
believing that they will be useful to students of history,
politics, economics, and foreign affairs, to publicists generally
and to business men and travellers. It is hardly necessary
to say that some of the subjects dealt with in the series have
not in fact come under discussion at the Peace Conference ;
but, as the books treating of them contain valuable informa-
tion, it has been thought advisable to include them.


It must be understood that, although the series of volumes
was prepared under the authority, and is now issued with
the sanction, of the Foreign Office, that Office is not to be
regarded as guaranteeing the accuracy of every statement
which they contain or as identifying itself with all the opinions
expressed in the several volumes ; the books were not prepared
in the Foreign Office itself, but are in the nature of information
provided for the Foreign Office and the British Delegation.
The books are now published, with a few exceptions,
substantially as they were issued for the use of the Delegates.
No attempt has been made to bring them up to date, for, in
the first place, such a process would have entailed a great
loss of time and a prohibitive expense; and, in the second,
the political and other conditions of a great part of Europe
and of the Nearer and Middle East are still unsettled and in
such a state of flux that any attempt to describe them would
have been incorrect or misleading. The books are therefore
to be taken as describing, in general, ante-bellum conditions,
though in a few cases, where it seemed specially desirable,
the account has been brought down to a later date.
G. W. PROTHERO
General Editor and formerly
Director of the Historical Section,
January 1920.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAUE
I. GEOGRAPHY PHYSICAL AND POLITICAL 1
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
New Caledonia
(1) Position ....... 2
(2) Surface, Coasts, and Rivers
Surface ....... 2
Coasts ....... 3
Rivers . . . . . . . 4
(3) Climate ....... 4
(4) Sanitary Conditions ..... 4
(5) Race and Language ..... 5
(6) Population ....... 5
Loyalty Islands . . . . ... . 6
Hoorn (Futuna) and Wallis Islands ... 7
Glipperton 151 an d....... 8
FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
(1) Race and Language ..... 9
(2) Population ....... 9
Society Islands
(1) Position ... . . . . .10
(2) Surface and Coasts
Surface ....... 10
Coasts ....... 11
(3) Climate . . . . . . .11
(4) Sanitary Conditions . . . . .11
(5) Population . . . . . . .11
Tubuai Islands ....... 12
Tuamotu Archipelago . . . . . .13
Gambier (or Mangareva) Islands .... 14
Marquesas Islands ....-■ 15
Wt. 19519/242. 1000. 9/20. O.U.P.
French *1
OceaniaJ


PAGE
II & 111. POLITICAL HISTORY AND SOCIAL AND
POLITICAL CONDITIONS
Chronological Summary . . . .17
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
11. Political History
(1) Discovery and Annexation . . . .17
(2) Economic Progress . . . . .18
111. Social and Political Conditions
(1) Religious ....... 19
(2) Political . . . ... . .19
(3) Educational ...... 20
General Observations ..... 20
FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
11. Political History
(1) Extent ..... .21
(2) Early History ..... .21
(3) French Intervention .... 22
(4) The Pritchard Case ..... 23
(5) The Leeward Group ..... 24
111. Social and Political Conditions . . 25
IV. ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
Introductory Note ..... 27
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
New Caledonia
(A) Means op Communication
(1) Roads . . . . . . .28
(2) Rivers ....... 28
(3) Railways ...... 28
(4) Telegraph and Telephone ... 29
(5) Ports ....... 29
(6) Shipping ...... 30
(7) Cable and Wireless Communication . . 31
TABLE OF CONTENTS [»o.i«


PAGE
(B) Industry
(1) Labour . . . .• .31
(2) Agriculture
{a) Products of Commercial Value . 31
Coffee ...... 31
Copra . . . . . 32
C0tt0n...... 32
Other Vegetable Products . . 32
Cattle 33
Guano ...... 33
(b) Cultivation and Irrigation . . 33
(c) Forestry ..... 33
(d) Land Tenure ..... 34
(3) Fisheries . . . . . .34
(4) Minerals ...... 34
Chromium ..... 35
Coal 35
Cobalt ...... 36
Copper and other Minerals ... 36
(5) Manufactures ..... 36
(6) Power ....... 36
(C) Commerce
(1) Organizations to promote Trade and Com-
merce ...... 37
(2) Exports and Imports .... 37
(3) Customs and Tariffs . . . .38
(D) Finance
(1) Public Finance ..... 39
(2) Currency and Banking .... 39
Loyalty Islands
(A) Means op Communication
(1) Roads ....... 39
(2) Anchorages ...... 40
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 40
Hoorn ( Futuna) and Wallis Islands
(A) Means op Communication .... 40
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 41
Glipperton Island . . . . . .41
gSSSSJ TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE
FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
Society Islands
(A) Means oe Communication
(1) Roads ....... 42
(2) Ports ....... 42
Papeete ...... 42
Port Phaeton ..... 43
Bora Bora ..... 43
(3) Shipping Lines ..... 43
(4) Wireless Communication ... 44
(B) Industry
(1) Labour ...... 44
(2) Agriculture
{a) Products of Commercial Value . . 45
(6) Forestry ..... 46
(c) Land Tenure ..... 46
(C) Commerce
(1) Organizations to promote Trade and Com-
merce ...... 46
(2) Exports and Imports .... 46
(3) Customs and Tariffs .... 47
(D) Finance
(1) Public Finance ..... 47
(2) Currency and Banking .... 48
(3) Influence of Foreign Capital ... 48
Tubuai Islands
(A) Means of Communication
Ports ....... 49
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 50
Tuamotu Archipelago
(A) Means of Communication
(1) Ports ....... 51
Toau ...... 51
Fakarava ...... 51
Makemo ...... 51
Makatea ...... 52
(2) Shipping Lines ..... 52
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 52
TABLE OF CONTENTS [wo.i45


PAGE
Gambier (or Mangareva) Islands
(A) Means of Communication
(1) Roads ....... 54
(2) Ports ....... 54
(3) Shipping Lines ..... 54
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 55
Marquesas Islands
(A) Means of Communication
(1) Roads ....... 55
(2) Ports ....... 55
(3) Shipping Lines . . . . .56
(B) Agriculture and Natural Resources . 56
General Remarks . . . . . . .57
APPENDIX
New Caledonia
Table. 1. Return of Shipping at Ports (1913) . 60
„ 2. Return of Exports, 1908, 1913, 1914 . 61
~ 3. Countries of Destination of Exports,
1908, 1913, 1914 .... 61
„ 4. Return of Imports, 1908, 1913, 1914 . 62
„ 5. Countries of Origin of Imports, 1908,
1913, 1914 . . . . . 63
French Settlements in Oceania
Table A. Return of Shipping at Papeete and
Makatea, 1913 .... 63
„ B. Return of Exports, 1908, 1913, 1914 . 64
„ C. Countries of Destination of Exports,
1908, 1913, 1914 .... 64
„ D. Return of Imports, 1908, 1913, 1914 . 65
„ E. Countries of Origin of Imports, 1908,
1913, 1914 65
AUTHORITIES . ' 66
Maps ’ . . . . . • . .67
Oceania] TABLE OF CONTENTS


I. GEOGRAPHY PHYSICAL AND
POLITICAL
The French island possessions in the Pacific, with
their approximate land areas in square miles, are as
follows ;
New Caledonia and Dependencies :
New Caledonia and Huon Islands .... 6,274
Isle of Pines . . . . . . . 60
Chesterfield Islands ...... 3
Loyalty Islands ....... 800
Hoorn Islands (Futuna) ..... 61
Wallis (Uea) Island ... . . . . 37
Clipperton Island 1 ...... 2
7,237
French Settlements in Oceania : 2
Society Islands ....... 452
Tubuai (or Austral) Islands, including Rapa and
Maretiri 3 ....... 67
Tuamotu Archipelago ...... 330
Gambier Islands (Mangareva) . . . . 11
Marquesas Islands . . . . , .491
1,351
Total 8,588
The areas of several of the scattered archipelagos
are uncertain, since many surveys are incomplete.
Most of the French islands are confined to two areas,
the one comprising New Caledonia and its dependencies
in the south-west Pacific, between 17° and 23° south
latitude and 158° and 168° east longitude (excluding a
few reefs and rocks farther east) ; the other, in the
central Pacific, between 8° and 28° south latitude and
1 Clipperton Island is also claimed by Mexico.
2 Etablissements Jrangais de VOceania.
3 Rapa and Maretiri are in The Admiralty Pilot and the French
Annaire treated apart from the Tubuai or Austral Group.
B
French ~j
Ocean laj


131° and 155° west longitude. A few islands of the New
Hebrides group lie in the north-east of the former area.
The French islands outside these areas are the Hoorn
and Wallis Islands, north-east of Fiji, and the isolated
Clipperton Island in the eastern Pacific, 670 miles from
the coast of Mexico.
The New Hebrides,* and the Banks and Torres Islands,
north of New Caledonia, are under the joint control of
Britain and France. They are treated in New Hebrides,
No. 147 of this series.
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
NEW CALEDONIA
(1) POSITION
New Caledonia, with the smaller islands surrounding
it, lies in the south-western Pacific between about lati-
tudes 18° and 23° south and between longitudes 163°
and 168° east. It is 900 miles from Australia and
nearly 1,000 miles from New Zealand. The term New
Caledonia is here regarded as including the Isle of
Pines, 40 miles from the southern end of the principal
island, the Huon group, lying about 100 miles to the
north-west, and the Chesterfield Islands, a small isolated
group to the west, in about south latitude 19° and
158° 30' east longitude. Other dependencies of New
Caledonia are considered separately.
(2) SURFACE, COASTS, AND RIVERS
Surface
New Caledonia, which has a length of 250 miles and
an average breadth of 30 miles, consists of a confused
mass of mountain ranges, cut by many ravines. The
highest peaks are Mount Panie, 5,413 ft., in the north,
and Mount Humboldt, 5,361 ft., in the south. The
2
GEOGRAPHY [*<>. i4 6


island may be roughly divided into three fairly equal
parts.
The north is very rugged, and slopes steeply to the
unbroken east coast. On the west there is a fringe of
plains indented in places by deep bays. The middle of
the island is of lower elevation, with a gentle, rolling
landscape ; the west-coast plains continue, and there
are many indentations on both west and east coasts.
The southern end is characterized by narrow ridges and
steep-sided but not precipitous valleys. The narrow
western plains are practically the only level areas in
this part. The west coast is strongly indented, but
the east coast is fairly smooth.
In the whole island there are no real plains except
that on the west coast, which varies in width from 5 to
20 miles; and only here is the soil at all fertile.
The Isle of Pines (really two islands divided by a
narrow creek) is of coral formation, and rises gently to
a plateau in the interior, at a mean level of 350 ft.
The Huon, Surprise, and other islands in the north,
and the Chesterfield group, are small coral islands only
a few feet above sea-level.
Coasts
A reef encloses practically the whole of New Cale-
donia, On the east coast it is a characteristic barrier
reef, one to eight miles from the shore, enclosing a
navigable channel along almost the entire length of the
island. On the west coast the reef is much broader.
There are numerous passages through it, particularly
on the east; these generally occur opposite the mouths
of rivers, and as a rule are as deep as the channel in
the lagoon.
The coast-line is much indented on the west and less
so on the east. There are several long inlets of the sea,
those which are not obstructed by coral reefs forming
b 2
3
SSSffiJ NEW CALEDONIA


good harbours. Landing within the shelter of the reef
is generally easy. Anchorages within the barrier reef
are numerous; but the best harbours, only a few of
which are used, are at the northern and southern ends
of the island.
Rivers
There are many short rivers, some of which on the
east coast descend to the sea in a series of cataracts.
Those on the west are less rapid, and several form
alluvial plains at their mouths. The numerous rivers
afford abundant water even in the dry season.
(3) CLIMATE
The climate is temperate. Summer, which lasts from
December to February, has a mean temperature of
79° F. (26° C.), and winter, from June to August, has
a mean temperature of 69° F. (20-5° C.). The absolute
maximum is 86° F. (30° C.), and the absolute minimum
about 62° F. (16-6° C.).
The prevailing winds are the trades, which blow
strongly from the east-south-east. In winter, especially
on the west coast, they are sometimes interrupted by
west and south-west winds and frequent calms.
Severe cyclones occur in the summer months.
Speaking generally, the rainy season is from January
to March and the dry season from September to
November. The east and south coasts are the wettest,
and the west coast the driest. The average annual rain-
fall is 73 in. (1-8 m. ), and the average number of rainy
days is 142. Nevertheless, drought is often serious.
(4) SANITARY CONDITIONS
The climate on the whole is healthy, and the island
is free from malaria and dysentery. The natives, how-
ever, suffer largely from consumption, leprosy, fram-
boesia (yaws), and plague, and there is a certain
4
GEOGRAPHY [»o.i4*


amount of elephantiasis. 1 Leprosy is making some
headway among the white population, as isolation is
not strictly enforced. On the Isle of Pines, where the
natives have instituted their own leper station, the
disease is nearly extinct.
(5) RACE AND LANGUAGE
The natives are Melanesians, closely related to the
natives of the New Hebrides, Solomon Islands, and
Loyalty Islands. The Hawaiian term kanaka (Fr.
canaque) applied to them by the Europeans means
‘ man ’, and has no racial significance. On the east
coast and in the Isle of Pines are many traces of
Polynesian admixture. The lingua franca between the
natives and the French is Mche-de-mer English, with
the addition of many French words.
The New Caledonians are superior in vigour and
industry to most other Pacific Islanders.
(6) POPULATION
The native population is confined chiefly to the west
of the island and the river valleys. At present the
natives are mainly restricted to limited reserves, and
their numbers are steadily falling. In the census of
1911 the total native population of New Caledonia
and its dependencies (excluding the Loyalty Islands)
was 19,398, including about 600 on the Isle of Pines
and a small but unspecified number on the Hoorn
and Wallis Islands.
The Europeans in 1911 numbered 17,451, a total
which included about 400 French troops and about
1,100 convicts in confinement. Most of the Europeans
are French.
The importation of convicts ceased in 1898, and in
1 Framboesia is known to the nations as lona.
5
SSSSJ NEW CALEDONIA


1914 there were only 300 at the chief penitentiary on
the island near Numea (Noumea, formerly Port de
France), and a few thousand ticket-of-leave men
( liberes ). The remainder of the Europeans, about
13,000, are settlers, miners, and traders, of whom over
11,000 were born in France or in New Caledonia, and
there are numerous half-castes, against whom there is
said to be little prejudice.
In addition to the natives there were, in 1911, 1,400
Japanese ; many Tonkinese exiles and about 350 free
Tonkinese; Chinese domestic servants and field-
labourers ; about 1,200 Javanese ; Arab exiles from
Algeria ; and people from the New Hebrides, Loyalties,
and Solomons.
The Huon Islands have a population of a few New
Hebrideans ; the Chesterfield Islands have no perma-
nent inhabitants.
The French population is mainly spread along the
coasts, in or near a number of small towns, most of
which were founded near river mouths. The chief
town, Numea, the capital of the island and its depen-
dencies, is a commercial and distributing centre and
has an extensive harbour. In 1911 the population
was composed of 5,207 free whites, 1,245 convicts, 396
French troops, and 2,000 natives and Asiatics, a total
of 8,848. Houailou, with a population of about 2,600,
is the second town and the chief agricultural centre.
La Foa (pop. 1,301), near the west coast, is the only
inland town. Several other settlements have each a
population of over a thousand, and depend principally
on mining for their importance.
LOYALTY ISLANDS
The Loyalty Islands lie parallel to New Caledonia
at a distance of about 70 miles. They extend from
Walpole Island in 22° 38' south latitude, 168° 55' east
6
GEOGRAPHY [no. !«


longitude, to the Beaupre Islands in 20° 23' south lati-
tude, 166° 9' east longitude. The chief islands are Mare,
Tiga, Lifu or Chabrol, and Uea. 1 The islands are less
adequately surveyed than any other group in the
Pacific, but their total land area is estimated at about
800 square miles. All the islands are more or less
elevated coral reefs.
The climate is of the same type as that of New Cale-
donia, but owing to the low elevation the rainfall is
deficient. Water is obtained from wells, and is often
brackish and generally scarce. There is not much
disease among the natives, and Europeans find the
climate healthy.
The .natives are Melanesians, belonging to several
tribes, each island having a separate dialect. They
at one time had the reputation of being savage, in-
tractable cannibals, but are now said to be a very fine
people and the most civilized of all Melanesians.
The natives number about 10,000, and the white
population in 1911 numbered 156. The population is
probably decreasing, but there are no figures to prove
this. • All the islands are inhabited except Walpole
Island and one or two small islets.
There are several large villages on most of the islands.
Shepeneke (Chepenehe), on Sandal Bay in Lifu, is the
capital, and has a population of several thousands.
HOORN AND WALLIS ISLANDS
These small islands lie west of Samoa and north-east
of Fiji, and consist of two small groups about 120
miles apart.
The Hoorn Islands, comprising Futuna and Alofa
(about a mile apart), lie some 150 miles north-east of
1 In French Uvea or Ouvea. The same name is given by the
natives to Wallis Island.
7
SSSU LOYALTY ISLANDS


Vanua LevU (Fiji). Futuna, 8 miles long by 5 miles
broad, rises to a height of 2,500 ft. The reefs off the
island are not continuous. Alofa is 6 miles long by
3 miles broad, and rises to a height of 1,200 ft.
Wallis Island, or Uea (Fr. Uvea), is 300 miles west
of Samoa, and is an elevated volcanic plateau rising
to a height of about 470 ft. A barrier reef encloses it
and a number of smaller islands.
The climate is healthy and the water-supply fair.
The prevailing winds are the trades blowing between
east-south-east and north-north-east; but in the early
part of the year they are often interrupted by north-
westerly and northerly winds accompanied by rain
and squalls. The islands lie within the hurricane area
of the western Pacific.
The natives are Polynesians, and closely resemble
the Tahitians, being idle .but pleasant in manner.
The only Europeans are a few traders, the French
Resident, and the Roman Catholic missionaries, who
dominate these islands. In 1913 there were several
Chinese planters.
The population is included with that of New Cale-
donia. The chief village is Matautu (Wallis Island).
GLIPPERTON ISLAND
Clipperton Island lies remote from all other Pacific
Islands in 10° 17' north latitude and 109° 13' west
longitude, and 670 miles south-west of the Mexican
port of Acapulco. It is a low atoll 2to 3 miles in
diameter, enclosing a single rock 82 feet high.
The climate is warm and equable. The rainfall is
said to be plentiful, and provides the only water-supply.
Prom December to May is the dry season.
The island is now uninhabited, but there are a few
huts and store-sheds, and an abandoned lighthouse.
8
GEOGRAPHY [n 0 .i«


FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
(1) RACE AND LANGUAGE
The natives are all Polynesians, a race which is
better developed both physically and mentally than
the Melanesian race of the south-western Pacific. The
Polynesians are peaceful in habits and generally, but
not always, friendly towards Europeans.
The Polynesian language has many dialects, differing
considerably from one another. The Tahitian dialect
is probably more widespread than the others, and is
understood in the Tubuai Islands and Rapa. A form
of heche-de-mer English, including a certain number
of French words, is used in some places as a lingua
fyanca. The French language is not widely spoken.
(2) POPULATION
Natives. —The total population of the French Settle-
ments in 1911 was 31,477, compared with 30,974
in 1907, These figures conceal the serious decrease
among the native population, which is, however, not
so great as has sometimes been represented. The
apparent increase in 1911 over 1907 is mainly accounted
for by the introduction of Japanese labourers to work
the phosphate deposits in Makatea, and by an influx
of Chinese in many islands.
Europeans and Asiatics. —The number of Europeans
and coloured immigrants (included in the above total)
in 1911 was 2,656 French, 103 Cermans, 237 Americans,
484 British, 975 Chinese, 346 Japanese, 280 natives of
other Pacific Islands, 53 Portuguese; and a few
individuals of Austrian, Belgian, Chilean, Dutch,
Spanish, Italian, Scandinavian, and Swiss nationality,
with some Annamites. The Chinese population seems
to have increased considerably since the census of
1911.


SOCIETY ISLANDS
(1) POSITOIN
The Society Islands form a small but important
group, the most westerly of the French Settlements,
extending from 15° 48' to 17° 53' south latitude and
from 148° 5' to 154° 43' west longitude. The islands
number 14, divisible into two groups, the Windward
(eastern) and the Leeward (western). The principal
islands in the Windward group are Tahiti, the largest
island in the Settlements, which has an area of 402
square miles, Moorea (Aimeo), Mehetia (Maitea), Tubuai
Manu, and Tetiaroa. The Leeward group includes
Raiatea, Tahaa, Huahine, Bora Bora, Motu Iti (Tubai),
Maur\ia (Maupiti), Mopihaa (erroneously Mopelia),
Fenua Ura or Scilly, and Bellingshausen or Motu One.
(2) SURFACE AND COASTS
Surface
Most of'the islands rise to a height of several thousand
feet. The highest peak is Orohena (7,321 ft.), on Tahiti.
A Tew of the smaller islands, including Tetiaroa, Motu
Iti, Mopihaa, Fenua Ura, and Bellingshausen, are low-
lying coral islands, for the most part encircling lagoons.
Around the coasts are narrow, low-lying plains, from
which many valleys open into the interior. Inland
routes are seldom practicable, owing to steep gradients,
but on Tahiti the low isthmus of Taravao, lj miles
across, which cuts the island into two unequal parts,
affords an easy route from sea to sea.
The alluvial soil of the coastal plains and valleys
is extraordinarily fertile, while the coral islands and
the reef-islets that fringe the larger islands are also
cultivated to some extent. There are no minerals.
10
GEOGRAPHY [no. !4 6


All the islands which rise to any height have a good
water-supply from many streams; but the small coral
islands have to depend on rain-water or wells.
Coasts
All the islands, except Mehetia, are fringed with coral
reefs, which are generally wide and continuous, except
for a few passages affording access to the lagoon within.
Landing on the seaward side of the reefs is seldom
possible on account of the heavy surf, but it is generally
easy within the lagoon.
(3) CLIMATE
The climate is very equable throughout the year,
with a mean temperature of about 79° F. (26° C.).
In July and August, the coolest months, the lowest
recorded temperature at Papeete is 60° F. (15-5° C.),
and in February and March, the warmest months, the
highest recorded temperature is 94° F. (35° C.).
The south-east trade-wind blows from April to
December, and from January to March west winds
often occur. The total rainfall is about 60 to 70 in.
(1-5 to 1-75 m.) at Papeete, and four-fifths of this fall
between November or December and March.
(4) SANITAEY CONDITIONS
The climate is healthy, and during the dry season
very pleasant. The natives, however, suffer much
from tuberculosis and elephantiasis. Leprosy is not
common.
11
(5) POPULATION
gSgL] SOCIETY ISLANDS


remainder being chiefly French, with a few British and
Americans, and about 400 Chinese. Moorea in 1911
had a population of 1,616, of whom 1,571 were natives.
The population of the Leeward group was 6,689, of
whom about 300 were Europeans and 810 Chinese. In
this group the native population is increasing—a
unique phenomenon in the Settlements.
The population is scattered round the coasts, and
there are numerous villages. Papeete, the capital of
the Settlements, had in 1911 a population of 4,099,
of whom 1,102 were natives, 2,135 French, 269 British,
117 Americans, 49 Germans, and 392 Chinese. Uturoa,
on the island of Raiatea, is the largest settlement in,
and administrative centre of, the Leeward group.
TUBUAI ISLANDS
The Tubuai or Austral Islands lie south of the Society
Islands. They consist of seven scattered islands or
groups of islets between 21° 45' and 28° south latitude
and 143° 30' and 155° west longitude. The principal
islands from west to east are Maria or Hull, Rimatara,
Rurutu, Tubuai, Raivavae, and, 300 miles to the
south-east, Rapa (Rapa-Iti) and Maretiri or Bass
Islands. The total land area is said to be 67 square
miles, of which Rapa occupies 16 square miles, but
some authorities give a total area of nearly double
this figure.
All the islands, except Rimatara and the low Maria
Islands, are rugged and mountainous, rising to a height
of 1,300 to 1,400 ft., with the exception of Rapa,
which reaches an altitude of 2,077 ft. Rapa has a long
inlet from the east which opens into the heart of the
island. There is little low ground on any of the large
islands, except a narrow strip along the coast.
12
GEOGRAPHY [n«. i«


The soil on the volcanic islands is fertile, and the
water-supply is sufficient without being abundant.
All the large islands except Rapa are surrounded with
barrier reefs. Landing is always possible within the
lagoons, but in very few cases are the channels in the
reefs suitable for any but small craft.
The climate is mild and temperate, and the seasons
are well marked. On Rapa the temperature seldom
rises above 76° F. (25° 0.) in summer or falls below
58° F. (14-5° C.) in winter. The islands lie at about the
southern limit of the south-east trades, which blow from
November to March among the northern islands. In
winter, from May to September, west winds with much
rain prevail, especially at Rapa. The climate is healthy
both for Europeans and natives.
The total native population of the whole group in
1911 was about 2,500, of whom 879 were on Rurutu,
542 on Tubuai, 429 on Raivavae, 413 on Rimatara, and
182 on Rapa. The European population in 1911 was
67, including 9 French, 13 British, and 33 Portuguese.
TUAMOTU ARCHIPELAGO
The Tuamotu or Low Archipelago, known formerly
as the Paumotu Archipelago, includes about 80 small
islands between latitudes 14° and 25° south and
between longitudes 149° and 125° west. The principal
islands, Fakarava, Anaa, Kaukura, Rahiroa ( Rangiroa),
and Makatea, are in the north-west of the archipelago,
not far from the Society Islands.
All the islands are of coral formation, and, with two
or three exceptions, are low-lying atolls surrounding
lagoons varying in width from a few hundred yards to
42 miles (e. g. Rahiroa). Makatea has no barrier reef,
but is an island of elevated coral and phosphatic rock
rising to a plateau 230 ft. above sea-level, with a slight
central depression.
13
oSS&] TUBUAI AND TUAMOTU ISLANDS


The soil of the islands is seldom deep, and is as
a rule very limited in extent. The water-supply is
generally poor ; there are no streams, and wells are
scarce, with an uncertain flow.
The climate is hot and dry, but the mean temperature
is lower than in the Society Islands. The south-east
trades prevail, but they are unsteady. The conditions
are healthy to both natives and Europeans.
The population of the islands in the Tuamotu
administration in 1911 was 4,581, including 60 French,
27 British, and 8 Germans, and that of the Tuamotus
in the Gambier administration about 900 (see below).
Makatea has a population of 866, of whom 345 were
Japanese labourers on the phosphate works, 51 French,
and 26 Chinese. There are one or two small villages
on each of the larger atolls, of which Rotoava on
Fakarava is the administrative capital of the Tuamotu
Archipelago.
GAMBIER ISLANDS (OR MANGAREVA)
The Gambier Islands lie at the south-eastern end
of the Tuamotu Archipelago. The group consists of
four principal and several smaller islands enclosed in
a barrier reef nearly 40 miles in circumference, and
a small isolated atoll called Temoe or Crescent Island.
Several islands of the Tuamotu Archipelago are some-
times improperly included in the Gambier group.
The principal islands, unlike those of the Tuamotu
Archipelago, are lofty. Mangareva, the largest, rises
to a height of 1,325 ft., and there is little low-lying
ground. The numerous small coral islands are low-
lying but of small value. The soil of the volcanic
islands is very fertile. Spring water is scanty and
difficult of access even on the larger islands.
14
GEOGRAPHY


The climate may be compared with that of the south
of France. There is a hot season from September to
March, when the temperature varies from 75° to 80° F,
(23-5° to 26-5° C.), and a cool season from April to
August, with a temperature ranging from 72° to 76° F.
(22-2° to 25° C.). The south-east trade-winds begin
about the end of March ; from September they decrease
in strength, and by December die away altogether.
Rain falls in all months ; but the largest amount in the
last four months of the year. In one year the total
rainfall recorded at Rikitea was 107 in. (2-7 m.).
The population of the Gambier administration in.
1911 was 1,512, mostly on Mangareva, including 15
French and a very few other white men. This total
includes the population of 23 islands of the Tua-
motu Archipelago which are within the Gambier
administration.
The Marquesas Islands lie north of the Tuamotu
Archipelago, between latitudes 7° 50' and 10° 35'
south and longitudes 138° 25' and 140° 50' west.
They comprise eleven islands arranged in two groups.
The chief islands in the south-west group are
Hivaoa or Dominica, Tahuata or Santa Christina, and
Fatuhiva or Magdalena, and in the north-west group
Nukahiva or Marchand, Uahuka or Washington,
and Uapu or Adams. The total land area of the
Marquesas is 491 square miles, of which Nukahiva and
Hivaoa, the two largest islands, occupy respectively
186 and 154 square miles.
With the exception of the small, low coral islands in
the extreme north, the Marquesas are lofty volcanic
islands rising to several thousand feet. In general,
from the central mountain narrow ridges separated
15
MARQUESAS ISLANDS
S.1 GAMBIER & MARQUESAS ISLANDS


by wide valleys run down to the sea. The steep
mountain slopes make travel very arduous, and
practically all communication is by sea. There are
numerous streams affording an excellent water-supply,
and the soil on all the large islands is very fertile.
The climate is warm and humid, the mean tem-
perature ranging a few degrees above or below 82° F,
(27-7° C.) throughout the year. From April to October
the trade-wind between east and south-south-east
prevails; from October to, April the wind is generally
between east and north-north-east. May, June, and
July are the wettest months, rainfall then sometimes
being extraordinarily heavy. The remaining months
are much drier. The climate is healthy for both
Europeans and natives, although the latter suffer
much from leprosy, tuberculosis and other introduced
diseases.
The native population, which is steadily decreasing,
numbered 3,116 in 1911. During the last 40 years
the decrease has been about 3,000.' The European
population in 1911 included 108 French, 21 Americans,
and 17 Germans, but no British. Hivaoa is the
most populous island; but all the islands except
the barren rocks are inhabited. The only settlements
of importance are Hakapehi in Nukahiva, the former
administrative centre, with a population of about 350,
and several villages on Hivaoa, one of which, Atuona,
is now the capital of the islands.
1 The figures above quoted for the population of the French
Settlements must be considerably modified by the mortality caused
by influenza in 1918-19, when the deaths among Polynesians alone
in the Society Islands and Makatea amounted to 3,000 —or 22 per
cent, of all the natives of French Oceania, apart from New Caledonia
and its dependencies. (L’Oceanie franfaise, Jan.-Avril, 1919, p. 24.)
16
GEOGRAPHY [»o.i«


II & III. POLITICAL HISTORY AND
SOCIAL & POLITICAL CONDITIONS
CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY
1595 Spanish discovery of the Marquesas.
1616 Dutch discovery of the Hoorn Islands.
1767 British discovery of the Society (Tahiti) and Low Islands.
1768 British discovery of Wallis Island.
1774 British discovery of New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines.
1791 French discovery of the Huon Islands.
1797 London missionaries arrive in Tahiti.
1800-3 British discovery of the Loyalty Islands.
1827 French expedition surveys the Loyalty Islands.
1842 French Protectorate of Society Islands (Tahiti), the
Windward group, and the Marquesas.
1847 The Leeward group of the Society Islands declared
independent by an agreement between the British
and French Governments.
1853 French annexation of New Caledonia and neighbouring
islands.
1864 French convicts first sent to New Caledonia. Loyalty
Islands annexed.
1880 Tahiti proclaimed a French colony.
1887 Agreement about the Leeward group of islands cancelled.
French protection extended over the whole of the
Society Islands.
1898 New Caledonia ceases to be a penal station.
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
II. POLITICAL HISTORY
(1) Discovery and Annexation
New Caledonia was discovered in 1774 by Captairi
Cook. In 1792 it was visited by a French expedi-
tion under d’Entrecasteaux. The first recorded visit
to the Loyalty Islands was that of Captain Butler.
c
French 1
Oceaniaj


either in 1800 in H.M.S. Walpole, or in 1803 in
H.M.S. Britannia —it is not certain which. In 1827
a more systematic survey of the Loyalty Islands
(which had escaped the notice of Cook) was made by
Dumont d’Urville. Soon afterwards Roman Catholic
missions were set on foot, which were maintained,
though without much success, till the annexation of New
Caledonia by France in 1853. It is curious to note that
Dr. Lang of Sydney had proposed to the Frankfort
Parliament in 1848 that a German colony should be
started on this island. It would seem that the French
in 1853 narrowly anticipated a British occupation. 1
According to the Moniteur of February 14, 1854, the
motiv.e for annexation was ‘ to assure to France in the
Pacific the position demanded by its naval interests,
military and commercial, and to afford the opportunity
of putting in force the Government’s views with regard
to the treatment of criminals ’. The Loyalty Islands
were not formally annexed till 1864, the annexation
being met with indignant protests by the British
missionaries stationed there.
In addition to the Loyalty Islands, the following are
dependencies of New Caledonia : the Isle of Pines,
annexed at the same time as the main island ; Wallis
Island ; the Huon Islands ; the Chesterfield Islands ;
and the Hoorn Islands.
(2) Economic Progress
Convicts were first sent to New Caledonia in 1864:
There seems to be a general agreement that its
progress was retarded by the system of transporta-
tion which at first prevailed. Of the three classes
dealt with—political offenders, recidivists, and ordinary
criminals —the first, with all their interests centred
on France, showed themselves useless for the develop-
1 L’Archipel de la Nouvelle-Caledonie, par A. Bernard, p. 326.
18
HISTORY (NEW CALEDONIA) [mo.ua


ment of the country; the second had advanced
too far on the road to ruin for redemption to
be possible; while the unwise treatment of the last
prevented their achieving those preparatory works
which might have hastened the progress of an infant
colony. 1 The system was discontinued in 1898; and
from this date the penal element in the population
began to diminish.
No doubt the evil associations connected with the
transportation system and the unfortunate results of its
working have reacted unfavourably upon the develop-
ment of New Caledonia. On the other hand, it must
be remembered that the French are not an emigrating
race, and that New Caledonia holds out few inducements
to the ordinary emigrant. The native population,
which is of a low or primitive type, has steadily
decreased. But there is also (according to Mr. Compton)
an immigrant population of a higher type.
III. SOCIAL AND POLITIAL CONDITIONS
(1) Religious
Most of the natives are Christian, with the exception
of those of New Caledonia, who remain mostly pagan in
spite of the efforts of the missionaries. Protestants pre-
ponderate in Tahiti and Roman Catholics elsewhere.
(2) Political
The administration of New Caledonia and its
dependencies is in the hands of a governor, assisted
by a Privy Council; there is an elected General Council
which deals with local expenditure ; and at the capital
1 See on this point ‘ European Influence in the Pacific, 1513-1914
by Sir Everard im Thurn, K.C.M.G. (Geographical Journal, April
1915, p. 317), and ‘ New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines ’, by
R. H. Compton (Geographical Journal, February 1917, p. 96).
C 2
19
Oceania] ECONOMIC PROGRESS


(Numea), a town of 1,000 inhabitants, there is a
Municipal Council. There are similar Councils or
Municipal Commissions at some other centres.
(3) Educational
Primary education is given in public and private
schools, the latter aided from municipal funds.
General Observations
Schemes of assisted emigration have not, in the past,
been attended with success; and it would seem that
before the late war New Caledonia was, at best, in a sta-
tionary position. Nevertheless, there is a strong belief
in its future among Frenchmen interested in colonial
questions. The last British consular report upon the
colony, for the year 1914, speaks of a marked improve-
ment in its economic conditions, and anticipates that,
‘ when the present phase has passed, the prosperity
existing before the opening of hostilities m&j reassert
itself, for it rested apparently on a solid and lasting
basis 5 1
1 No. 5533, Annual Series, Diplomatic and Consular Reports,
December 1915, p. 5. This report has a map of the colony. But
Mr. Compton writes (Geographical Journal, February 1917, p. 96j ;
‘ The period of maximum number of convicts was also the period
of the maximum prosperity of the French population. . . . The result
of the stoppage of transportation has been to create commercial
depression ; and the prosperity of the colony has been on the down-
grade since 1894.’
20
HISTORY (NEW CALEDONIA) [■».!«


FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
II. POLITICAL HISTOBY
(1) Extent
The French Settlements in Oceania are the oldest
French possessions in the Pacific. They consist of the
Windward group of the Society Islands, of which the
chief island is Tahiti, in which is the small town of
Papeete, the centre of government for French Oceania ;
the Leeward group of the Society Islands; the
Marquesas Islands ; the Tuamotu or Low Islands and
the Gambier group; and the Tubuai or Austral Islands
with the island of Rapa-Iti.
(2) Early History
The first discovery was that of one of the Mar-
quesas, visited by the Spaniard Mendana in 1595, and
rediscovered by Captain Cook in 1774. Tahiti was
first discovered and visited in June-July 1767, by an
Englishman, Captain Wallis, in H.M.S. Dolphin. It
was named by him King George the Third’s Island.
In the next year, 1768, it was visited by the Frenchman
Bougainville, and in 1769 by Cook, A Spanish vessel
appeared on the scene in 1772 ; 1 and among slightly
later visitors should be mentioned Captain Bligh, who
was at Tahiti in 1788, and whose ship, the Bounty, after
the mutiny, was brought back by the mutineers to
Tahiti in 1789, and went on thence to Pitcairn Island.
In 1797 the first English missionaries to the Pacific
landed at Tahiti; they had been sent out by the
(London) Missionary Society. Tahiti thus became the
1 In regard to this and subsequent Spanish visits reference should
be’ made to The Quest and Occupation of Tahiti by Emissaries of
Spain during the Y ears 1772-6, edited for the Hakluyt Society by
B. G. Corney. 3 vols. 1913-19,
21
French i
Oceania]


earliest centre of Protestant mission work in the Pacific,
and acquired a strong Protestant and British connexion.
In 1825 the Queen of Tahiti asked for permission to use
the British flag, and expressed the hope ‘ that you will
never abandon us, but regard us, with kindness for
ever h 1 Canning’s reply, in 1827, was that the customs
of Europe forbade compliance with the request to be
allowed to use the British flag, but that the King
‘ will be happy to afford to yourself and to your dominions all
such protection as His Majesty can grant to a friendly Power
at so remote a distance from his own Kingdoms ’.
(3) French Intervention
In November 1836 the British consul, Pritchard,
reported that ‘ at present there are several French-
men who are determined to land and reside on this
island [Tahiti] as Roman Catholic missionaries ’; and
he asked for guidance, inasmuch as a Tahitian law
provided that no passengers should be landed from a
ship without the special permission of the Government.
The Queen of Tahiti herself wrote at the same time:
‘ The Roman Catholic missionaries are obstinately bent on
coming to reside at Tahiti, saying that they are sanctioned in
the step by the British Government. ... It is by no means
agreeable to us to receive these Roman Catholic missionaries.’
Palmerston’s answer, sent in 1837, was in effect to
decline British intervention. At the end of August
1838 the French frigate la Venus arrived at Tahiti and
Captain Dupetit-Thouars demanded reparation for the
treatment of the French missionaries, with the result
that, on September 4, 1838, a Convention was signed
conceding, in matters of trade and residence, most-
1 See Parliamentary Paper, Correspondence relating to the Pro-
ceedings of the French at Tahiti, 1825-43 ; and Annual Register for
1842, pp. 337-341.
22
HISTORY (OTHER SETTLEMENTS) [»o.i«


favoured-nation treatment to Frenchmen of all de-
nominations.
This was followed in November 1838 by an appeal for
British protection, a Tahitian law being passed at the
same time to bid the Tahitians ‘ stand united under
that Gospel which the missionaries from Britain have
propagated ever since the year 1797 Palmerston,
however, in September 1839, declined to enter into anj
specific engagement involving defensive obligations,
though he coupled his refusal with an assurance of
readiness to attend to any representations made and to
give the protection of good offices. The sequel was
that in September 1842 a French frigate again appeared
on the scene ; the French admiral in the Pacific again
complained of maltreatment of French subjects ; and
the Queen was forced, on September 9, formally to
accept a French Protectorate.
In 1842 the Marquesas Islands also came under
French control, prior to the establishment of the
French Protectorate of Tahiti; and the importance
which the French Government attached to their new
acquisitions is shown in the statement of the Minister
of Marine in the French Chamber, published in the
Parliamentary Paper of 1843 already quoted ; it is
also given in the Annual Register for 1842.
(4) The Pritchard Case
The British consul at Tahiti, for some years prior
to French intervention, had been George Pritchard,
who had originally come out as a missionary and
had acquired the full confidence of Queen Pomare.
He was still consul when the events referred to
above took place, but was in England in 1842,
placing before the British Government the case
of the Tahitian Queen and her subjects. He landed
again at Tahiti on February 25, 1843. According to
23
S2SSSJ FRENCH & ENGLISH; PRITCHARD


his own account, he found the Queen ‘ driven from
her proper residence by the continual threats made by
the French to fire upon her and had her brought
home in a British ship-of-war. The French charged
him with endeavouring by all possible means to
undermine their authority ; and eventually, a native
rising having taken place in March 1844, he was seized
and imprisoned, being subsequently released on con-
dition that he left the Society Islands for good.
His attitude towards the French had not been in
keeping with the policy of Sir Robert Peel’s Govern-
ment, which had decided on not intervening beyond
friendly representations to the French Government, so
long as the Protestant missionaries were granted equal
treatment; and in September 1843 a dispatch had
been written to Pritchard (which would not have
reached him till months later) plainly disapproving his
course of action and strictly enjoining abstention from
any opposition to the French. He was described in the
House of Lords by the Foreign Minister, Lord Aberdeen,
in the debate on the Queen’s Speech for 1845, as having
exceeded his duty without instructions and without
authority. However, his treatment by the French made
the situation between Great Britain and France for the
moment very serious, a settlement being eventually
found in an apology from the French Government and
the payment of an indemnity to Pritchard himself. 1
(5) The Leeward Group
French relations with the Tahitians remaining
unsatisfactory, a Declaration was signed June 19,
1847, by the British and French Governments, acknow-
1 See three Parliamentary Papers of 1843, 1844, and 1845 ;
Annual Register for 1844, pp. 260-1 ; for 1845, pp. 6-9, &c.:
Dictionary of National Biography, s.v. G. Pritchard ; Sir R. Peel,
edited by C. S. Parker, vol. iii, p. 394.
24
HISTORY [wo. 145


ledging the independence of .the Leeward Group
of the Society Islands, the object being to provide
a refuge for Tahitians wishing to emigrate beyond the
reach of French control. 1 This engagement was even-
tually cancelled by a Convention of November 16, 1887,
which also related to the New Hebrides, the British
/ • 7
Government having already, since 1880, consented to
a provisional French Protectorate over one of these
islands—the island of Raiatea. 2 In 1880 Tahiti had
been proclaimed a French colony, on the abdication of
the son of the former Queen Pomare. 3
The other islands have little or no history, the most
interesting incident, perhaps, being the attempt of the
captain of an American privateer in the war of 1812—
Captain David Porter in the Essex —to found an
American Station in the Marquesas Islands. 4
III. SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CONDITIONS
The French Establishments in Oceania are adminis-
tered by a Governor, with an Administrative Council
consisting of three other high officials, the Mayor of
Papeete, and the Presidents of the Chambers of Com-
merce and Agriculture.
Commerce long remained stationary in Tahiti; but
from 1908 onwards it increased rapidly, mainly owing
to the rise in the price of vanilla and copra. The
1 See Parliamentary Paper of 1847, •' Papers relating to Tahiti and
to the Leeward or Society Islands in the Pacific ’. The name of the
whole group is now the Society Islands, these being divided into two
sub-groups, the Windward and the Leeward.
2 See Parliamentary Paper, Prance, No. 1 (1888), Cd 5256.
February 1888.
3 The authority for this is the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
- 4 ‘European Influence in the Pacific, 1513-1914.’ An Address
by Sir Everard im Thurn, K.C.M.G., C.B. Geographical Journal for
April, 1915.
25
SSSSy THE LEEWARD GROUP


greater portion of the exports go to the United
States, and Great Britain takes rather more than
France. The United States and Australasia furnish
the bulk of the imports.
There are six primary schools in the islands, and
the same number of Mission schools.
26
HISTORY [»o. i«


IV. ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
Introductory Note
The French Pacific Islands lie on important trade
routes. The routes from Sydney to Vancouver and
from Sydney to San Francisco both pass, as a rule,
by the southern end of New Caledonia. The French
Settlements are almost midway between Australia
and the Panama Canal, and afford good ports of
call and coaling stations in the south-eastern Pacific.
The route from Panama to Sydney passes within a
few miles of the harbours of Rapa and Mangareva
in the Gambier Islands. A deviation to Papeete in
Tahiti, one of the Society Islands, would lengthen
the route by about 120 miles, but would yield
compensating advantages. Papeete, which is the
capital of the Settlements, is situated on the largest
and most populous island, and has commercial
interests of its own, which neither Rapa nor Mangareva
could have, except to a trifling extent. It is also
a better port than Rapa, which could be improved
only at considerable cost, and even then would not
be so satisfactory. Moreover, it would be possible
to bring coal to Papeete more cheaply than to Rapa.
On the other hand, this route would entail the risk of
navigation among the low islands of the Tuamotu
group, unless a further deviation were made north-
west of them, while better weather would be ex-
perienced between Rapa and Sydney. East and west
of the Settlements lie British islands which offer no
facilities for coaling stations. Clipperton Island, an
outlying French possession, lies about 200 miles north
French ~j
OceaniaJ


of the route between Panama and Singapore, and
almost on the direct route between Panama and
Honolulu, but there is no access to its lagoon.
NEW CALEDONIA AND DEPENDENCIES
NEW CALEDONIA
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
(1) Roads
There are several excellent roads, suitable for motor
traffic, and also some of an inferior description. There
is a motor service between Numea and Bourail (125
miles). Northwards from Bourail on the west coast,
and along the whole of the east coast, the usual mode
of transport is on horseback.
(2) Rivers
The rivers are short and unimportant. The Diahot
is navigable by boats for 20 miles, but no others for
more than 4 or 5 miles.
(3) Railways
There is a narrow-gauge, single-track railway be-
tween Numea and Paita (about 20 miles). An exten-
sion to Bourail is contemplated, which would make
a total length of 125 miles. The railway was projected
in 1896, but the first loan raised in 1901 was only
sufficient to allow of its construction as far as Dumbea
(about 10J miles). This section has been open since
190$, and, in spite of the fact that it cost more than
was necessary (about £14,000 per mile) and hardly
reached the richer regions of the island, it has nearly
covered the expense of construction. The utility of
this railway has often been questioned, owing to the
small size of the island, and the possibilities of coastal
28
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [no.i«


communication. The latter, however, is often rendered
impossible by rough weather ; moreover, the mining
and agricultural centres are sometimes as much as
20 kilometres inland. In some cases small lines were
constructed by private enterprise to bring the produce
to the coast, but a line running parallel to the coast
was necessary in order to bring to Numea the produce
of the west, and such a line could be constructed only
by the colony.
(4) Telegraph and Telephone
There are several telegraph and telephone stations
on the island.
(5) Ports
The island has an excellent harbour at Numea,
with naval and commercial coaling stations. It is
easy of access, perfectly sheltered, and available for
the largest ships. Leading lights mark the fairway.
There are over 2,000 ft. of quayage, with 25 ft. of
water alongside. There are coal-sheds belonging to the
Government on Non Island, capable of storing 20,000
tons, but they are seldom full. There is a wharf at
this coaling station. A stock of about 2,000 tons of
coal is usually kept by private firms.
There are several other good harbours. In Prony
Bay, at the south end of the island, there is good
holding ground, but the water is too deep for con-
venient anchorage except in Sebart Cove. Tanle Bay,
on the north-west, contains the best sheltered harbour on
the whole of the west .coast. Ohope Bay, immediately
to the north of Tanle Bay, and Hareourt Bay at the
north end of the island, are also good. On the east
coast, Kanala Bay is probably the safest and most
commodious anchorage. Several of the harbours
besides Numea have leading lights and loading facili-
ties ; others which are much frequented are little
29
teSJ NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


more than open roadsteads, for example, Thio, Paagou-
mene, and Teoradie.
The Isle of Pines has a restricted anchorage for small
vessels in Kuto Bay.
(6) Shipping
A steam vessel, under the French flag, runs monthly
from Numea to the Loyalty Islands and the New
Hebrides. There is also a monthly service to the Isle
of Pines, and a fortnightly service along the coast.
Most of these services are provided by the Union
Commerciale de Navigation Caledonienne. The mails
are carried by the vessels of the Messageries Maritimes,
which are subsidized at the rate of £15,000 a year by
the French Government; and by an Australian company
when a freight from Sydney is procurable. The French
mail steamers are independent of freight, and arrive
regularly. As in the case of other Pacific islands, the
shipping facilities were considerably developed in the
years just before the outbreak of war. Previously
they had been quite insufficient.
By a presidential decree of October 1913, the coastal
trade of New Caledonia is reserved to vessels under the
French flag. Foreign vessels, however, may be autho-
rized to proceed to any place on the coast other than
Numea, but must pay a due of 1 fr. 50 c. per ton of
the registered tonnage. Vessels which confine them-
selves to embarking products of New Caledonia pay
at the rate of 1 fr. 50 c. per ton of merchandise loaded.
This regulation refers only to foreign vessels coming
from abroad ; locally-owned craft engaged in the
coasting or inland trade must he under the French flag.
The rule holds even in the case of pleasure boats,
steam launches, &c.
A return of the shipping entered and cleared at the
New Caledonian ports during 1913 will be found in
Table 1 of the Appendix (p. 60).
30
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [no.i4»


(7) Gable and Wireless Communication
There is a wireless station at Numea; and a sub-
marine cable connects Gomen Bay, New Caledonia,
with Harvey Bay, Queensland.
(B) INDUSTRY
(1) LABOUR
The main difficulty in the development of New
Caledonia and other French settlements in the Pacific
is the scarcity of labour. The native population
appears to be steadily decreasing. Moreover, the
natives are lazy and capricious, and do not, as a general
rule, make good workmen or cultivators. New Cale-
donians, however, are said to be superior to most
Pacific Islanders in this respect.
Attempts have been made to introduce foreign labour,
and in 1911 there were Japanese in the, island working
as miners, trochus collectors (see p. 34), servants, and
agricultural labourers; also Chinese, acting as domestic
servants and field labourers. Latterly a good many
Chinese of a not very desirable kind have emigrated
to the island and taken up trade as small dealers and
shopkeepers. The efforts of France to induce emigra-
tion to New Caledonia have met with only partial
success.
(2) AGEICULTURE
(a) Products of Commercial Value
Although there seems to be no doubt that all the
ordinary tropical products could be successfully grown
in New Caledonia, the colony is so small and the labour
difficulty so serious that it is unlikely that there will
ever be a considerable export trade in agricultural
produce, with the possible exception of copra.
Coffee plantations are increasing, especially in the
31
oSSSik] NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


north, but the crop is liable to damage by occasional
cyclones and by the pest Hemileia vastatrix, which has
latterly caused a considerable decrease in the export.
Prospects are, however, more hopeful,, as varieties of
coffee have been introduced which are said to be
immune from this plague.'
Copra.- —The export of copra is set down in the
returns for 1913 as 3,165 tons, value £76,092, but
from this total must be deducted 240 tons from the
New Hebrides, The demand for copra, especially
for alimentary purposes, is steadily increasing. The
market price was well maintained before the war,
and is now likely to rise. It is a matter for regret that
the development of this profitable industry, like others
in the island, is considerably hampered by the difficulty
experienced in obtaining labour.
Cotton-growing was established in the island in
1908, and rapidly increased in importance. As there
are no frosts, the plant thrives and is productive for
many years. The cotton is of excellent quality and
yields abundantly, the price fetched being 50 per cent,
higher than good moderate American. In 1913 the
value of the cotton exported was £15,000, but the fall
in price which took place in August 1914 put an end
for the time being to the export, the planters preferring
to hold their stocks. One-third of the export came
from the New Hebrides.
Other Vegetable Products. —Maize produces two crops
a year. There is little ground suitable for rice, and its
cultivation is diminishing. Tobacco has been tried,
but has not given satisfactory results. The rubber
industry almost disappeared from the island at one
time, but prospects have since somewhat improved.
Successful experiments have been made with vanilla
and pine-apples. The natives also cultivate sweet-
potatoes, yams, manioc, bananas, plantains, and taro.
32
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [»o.i«


Cattle. —lt is estimated that there are over 100,000
cattle and about 500,000 sheep in the island. Meat-
preserving establishments have been started at Numea
and Waco, and preserved meat to the value of £24,000
was exported in 1913.
Guano is found on the Huon Islands and the Chester-
field Islands. On the latter there are said to be
135,000 tons.
(b) Cultivation and Irrigation
The natives cultivate carefully, and have consider-
able skill in irrigation, but the decrease in population
has resulted in the abandonment of much arable land.
The colonists, on the other hand, employ no methods
of irrigation or manuring, and in consequence the soil
is soon exhausted and gives poor results. Torrential
rains and devastating floods with long periods of
drought also make agriculture difficult. It is estimated
that the total cultivable area is about 1,500 square
miles. An equal amount is suitable only for pasturage,
while about 750 square miles are covered with forests.
(c) Forestry
The coasts are low and bordered by thick tropical
forests, with mangrove swamps in places. The forests
also extend inland along the river valleys, but away
from the rivers there is grass-land, which becomes
parched in summer. The more exposed hill-sides are
covered with open savanna, with many low-growing
bushes. At a high elevation among the mountains
there are dense tropical forests, containing palm-trees,
tree-ferns, hard woods, and coniferous trees. Among
the forest trees of value are the kauri, which provides
building timber, rosewood and sandalwood, both of
which have been nearly exhausted, ironwood, ebony,
and other hard timbers. Bread-fruit, citron, banana,
n
33
SSSy NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


and other fruit-trees, both native and introduced, do
well.
In its timber New Caledonia has a natural resource
of which scarcely sufficient use has been made. It
possesses enough wood to supply its own needs for
building, cabinet-making, &c., and it might even be
able to establish a lucrative export trade. Before
the war nearly all the timber used on the island was
brought from Australia or the United States. In 1914,
however, the Societe Forestiere had begun the exploita-
tion of its forest concessions in the Plaine des Lacs.
These forests are especially rich in trees yielding
essences.
The forest resources of the dependent islands are
negligible.
( d ) Land Tenure
The Government appear to have no settled policy as
regards land tenure, and it is probable that the acquisi-
tion of a clear title to land is attended by the same
difficulties as those which occur in the case of Tahiti
(see. below, p. 46). The policy, however, of confining
the natives to reservations is gaining ground, though
it is very unpopular among them.
(3) FISHERIES
Fish abound in the lagoon. There are no pearl
fisheries; but the trochus, a conical nacreous shell, is
found. Excessive collecting has exhausted the supply
except in water too deep for diving, but the industry
might be restored to its former importance by a careful
restocking of the beds and supervision of the fisheries.
Beche-de-mer is collected on the reefs. On the Huon
and Chesterfield Islands there are many turtles.
(4) MINERALS
The most important ores in the island are those of
nickel, chromium, and cobalt. There is also a good deal
34
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [*o.i*5


of iron ore, but for want of good coal it has not been
exploited, and much of it is low-grade.
The total of nickel ore cannot be estimated, as much
of the country is inadequately explored, but new
deposits are continually being found and worked as
others become exhausted, and there is as yet no
shortage. A large proportion of the poorer nickel ore
is treated locally in furnaces which have recently been
established on the island. Only the richer grades of
ore are now sent abroad. The amount of metal in the
so-called matte 1 is normally about 60 per cent.
The export of nickel, though an important item in
the resources of the island, represents but a small
proportion of the world’s output, the greater part of
which is produced in Canada. The total yield from
New Caledonia in 1913 was 10,933 tons of nickel, while
in the same year the Canadian matte contained 24,838
tons of nickel. The value of New Caledonian nickel is
greatly influenced by the market price of the Canadian
production.
Chromium occurs as chromite, and a large proportion
of the world’s production comes from New Caledonia,
where the mineral was first discovered in 1894. The
richest mine now being worked is the Tiebaghi, which
yields per month about 4,000 tons of ore, carrying up
to 67 per cent, of chromium. The value of the chromium
exported in 1913 was £73,000. Figures showing the
countries of destination of the exports of chromium
and nickel will be found in Table 3 of the Appendix.
Coal has been found in the island, but not as yet
in paying quantities or of good quality. There is con-
siderable difference of opinion as to the prospects of
finding better deposits. It would be to the advantage
of the island if coal could be mined, as at present
1 A product obtained in smelting sulphide ores of certain metals,
e. g. copper, lead, and nickel. It is crude metal combined with more
or less sulphur and requires to be further purified.
D 2
35
gssaj NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


furnaces have to depend entirely on imported coal,
which is naturally expensive.
Cobalt is found, and used to be mined, but, owing
to the discovery of argentiferous cobalt ore in Canada,
the New Caledonian industry has been killed and the
mines closed.
Copper occurs principally in the Diahot valley in the
north; gold along the north-east coast; antimony at
Makety near Kanala, and manganese near Gomen and
Bourail. All have been mined, but the quantities
obtained have been too small to be profitable.
(5) MANUFACTURES
The principal industry of the colony is in connexion
with the smelting of nickel and other ores. The Societe
des Hants Fourneaux de Noumea, which commenced
operations in 1910, possesses eight furnaces capable
of producing 300 tons per month. The mattes
obtained from the ore treated contain from 40 to 46
per cent, of nickel. The Societe Le Nickel has built
at Thio a furnace of a capacity of 100 tons, and in
1913 a second and larger one was in course of con-
struction. The Mines du Nord also have extensive
smelting works at Thio and Pam.
The Societe Le Nickel has factories at Havre and in
Scotland. The mineral produced by the Societe des
Hauts Fourneaux de Noumea is sent to its factory at
Antwerp, and that produced by the Societe du Mont
Do and the firm of De Bechade was, before the war,
sent to Krupp’s factory at Essen.
(6) POWER
There are hydro-electric works in connexion with
the smelting industry at Pao and Yate; at Yate the
works were in course of construction in 1914. The
water-power in the streams must be considerable, and
most of it is available throughout the year.
36
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [no. 145


(C) COMMERCE
(1) Organizations to promote Trade and Commerce
There is a Chamber of Commerce and Agriculture
at Numea. The Syndicat Agricole de la Nouvelle
Caledonie represents the interests of the planters, and
there is an agricultural bank, the Credit Agricole de la
Nouvelle Caledonie.
(2) Exports and Imports
The value of the imports for 1913 was £708,316,
and of the exports £633,636. The figures for 1905
were £442,816 and £429,060 respectively.
Between 1905 and 1909 foreign trade decreased,
but in 1910 a rapid upward movement began.
Although the war inevitably exerted a retarding influ-
ence on imports and exports, the total value of foreign
trade in 1914 amounted to £1,271,500 (32,073,000 fr.).
A comparison of the statistics for the first six months
of 1914 with those for the corresponding period of
1913 show an increase of £138,700 (3,500,000 fr.). At
present, however, the import figures are abnormally
swollen by the importation of mining machinery.
Of the exports in 1913, France took goods to the
value of £256,350 (6,465,866 fr.). Next in order as
customers came Belgium, Great Britain, the United
States, Holland, Germany, and New Zealand. The
only export to New Zealand was guano from the Huon
Islands, which was exported by the Austral Guano
Company, Limited, of Auckland.
Of the imports in 1913, goods to the value of £340,500
(8,587,325 fr.) came from France, but this sum did not
represent so large an increase over the previous year’s
total as that attained by foreign goods; for transport
from France, notwithstanding favourable tariff arrange-
ments, is slow and costly. Of the foreign countries,
37
SS&] NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


Australia, as might be expected, sent the highest
proportion of goods, the value in 1913 being £181,250
(4,571,525 fr.) ; next in order came Great Britain and
Germany.
As to the imports of New Caledonia, it was stated in
a Report of the Chamber of Commerce of Numea that
‘ Because of its distance from the mother-country and the
high cost of freight, because of its geographical position which
places the colony within three days’ steaming from the Aus-
tralian continent, an abundant producer of all the commodities
of temperate climates, and because of the considerable resources
of the great Australian cities, New Caledonia is rapidly coming
to supply herself in Australia with everything required, at low
prices and with credit facilities which are denied her by the
French trade. And, no matter what new economic barriers
may be erected, New Caledonia, even so, will be obliged to a very
great extent to supply herself from Australia.’ 1
Further details as to foreign trade are given in
Tables 2-5 of the Appendix.
(3) Customs and Tariffs
The French system of Customs duties (Tarif Metro-
politan!) provides for a ‘ general ’ tariff and a ‘ mini-
mum ’ or ‘ preferential ’ tariff. By virtue of commercial
treaties or special legislative provisions, certain coun-
tries, which extend to French goods their minimum
tariffs, enjoy the minimum or preferential tariff in
respect of all items subjected to the French tariff.
Great Britain is, and Australia is not, included among
the countries thus favourably treated. In relation,
however, to certain especially exempted articles, the
tariff for which is modified by decrees, the general and
minimum rates of the metropolitan tariff do not apply.
This system prevails in New Caledonia. French
goods are admitted free, except for 'an octroi charge
to which all goods imported into the French Pacific
1 The Colonial Tariff Policy of France, by A. Girault, 1916, p. 191.
38
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [ho.i«


possessions are subject. Normally this duty is 5 per
cent, on the value of the imports.
The tariff is extremely complicated. With regard
to certain goods it has been stated that it is impossible
to say what the duty will be until a sample has been
inspected.
(D) FINANCE
(1) Public Finance
The local budget for 1915, including receipts and
expenditure, amounted to £172,350 (4,337,000 fr.).
(2) CurreTncy and Banking
The currency in use is the French 5 fr. piece with its
subdivisions ; gold is rare.
At Numea there is a branch of the Banque de ITndo-
Chine which is privileged to issue notes current in the
colony. Local bank rates in 1914 were Bto 10 per cent,
and private discount rates from sto 6 per cent. Money
orders, payable in Paris at 1J per cent., can he obtained
at the Treasury at Numea. Before the war these
orders were accepted by merchants in European cities
at their face value. Post office orders are issued between
Australia and New Caledonia.
A certain amount of banking business is carried on,
and banking facilities are given by local merchants.
LOYALTY ISLANDS
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
(1) Roads
Throughout the islands there is a network of good
cart-roads. These are maintained by the natives, who
are compelled to furnish the necessary labour.
39
SS] NEW CALEDONIA; LOYALTY ISLANDS


(2) Anchorages
The coasts in most places are steep, but there are
several bays, at the head of which are sandy beaches,
affording safe landing, except during onshore winds.
No island is circled by a continuous reef. The best
anchorage is in Sandal Bay, on Lifu, but it is obstructed
in places by coral reefs. There are said to be several
entrances to Uea lagoon, navigable by large ships;
but they are not well charted.
(B) AGEICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
Vegetation on the islands consists mainly of coco-nut
palms near the coast and a few scattered pines in the
interior. The soil is thin, and drains rapidly. The
natives cultivate a small quantity of yams, bananas, &(#,
for their own use.
Cotton is said to grow well, but there is little ground
available for its cultivation.
Coco-nuts are the main article of commerce and
their production constitutes the chief occupation of
the natives. Sandalwood used to be the chief product,
but is now said to be on the point of exhaustion.
The returns of exports are included in those of New
Caledonia (see Appendix), no accurate figures being
available for the Loyalty Islands alone.
HOORN AND WALLIS ISLANDS
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
Hoorn Islands. —There are no ports on either Futuna
or Alofa; but each has a fairly good anchorage sheltered
from the prevailing wind.
Both provisions and water are plentiful.
Wallis ( Uea) Island. —The only channel through the
40
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [»o.i«


reef, except for small boats, is at Honikulu on the
south. There are two or three indifferent anchorages.
Pigs, poultry, yams, and bananas are obtainable,
but water is very scarce.
In 1913 there was a monthly shipping service to Fiji,
and a ship of 2,000 tons from Sydney called four times
in the year.
(B) AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
Labour is, as usual in the Pacific Islands, scarce and
unsatisfactory. It has been frequently suggested that
Korean or Japanese labour should be introduced.
The islands are capable of considerable agricultural
development; at present the chief exports are copra,
Mdie-de-mer, and pearl shells. There are coco-nut
plantations on some of the islands. It is possible
that other industries, such as coffee and cocoa-growing
and rubber-planting, could be carried on, but, as else-
where in the Pacific, the inhabitants do not take kindly
to new forms of cultivation. No separate returns of
the imports and exports of the islands are available.
CLIPPERTON ISLAND
There is no entrance to the lagoon. The only
possible anchorage is on the north-east side of the
island, in 20 to 45 fathoms, and is unsafe owing to
the frequent occurrence of northerly squalls. Landing
at any other part is generally impossible on account
of the surf; and the pier, 141 yds. long, on the south-
west, is said to be useless for this reason.
The atoll lies about 200 miles north of the great
circle track from Panama to Singapore, and has been
suggested as a possible coaling station. The only
means of constructing a safe harbour, owing to the deep
41
53SSJ LOYALTY, HOORN, AND WALLIS


water surrounding the atoll, would be to construct a
passage into the lagoon. Some of the reefs inside the
lagoon would need to be cleared away. The depth
of the lagoon varies from a foot to 55 fathoms.
Guano deposits exist on the island. It has no other
resources.
FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
SOCIETY ISLANDS
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
(1) Roads
An excellent road, known as the Broom Road,
extends all round the island of Tahiti, save for fifteen
miles at the eastern en'd, where the cliffs are impassable.
There is also telephonic communication.
(2) Ports
All the islands have anchorages within the lagoons,
though in many cases, on account of the tortuous
nature of the channel, they are accessible only for small
vessels. The best harbours are at Papeete and Port
Phaeton on Tahiti. There are also good harbours
suitable for large vessels at Huahine, Moorea, Raiatea,
Tahaa, and Bora Bora.
Papeete. —This is the chief port and best harbour on
the island of Tahiti. It is enclosed between the shore
and the barrier reef; through the latter there is a
narrow channel, which, by dredging, has been deepened
to allow vessels drawing 30 ft. to pass. The harbour
affords anchorage in from 10 to 15 fathoms over a
space of about a mile in length and half a mile in
breadth, with good holding ground. There are several
quays which offer accommodation to vessels of large
size. The total wharfage available is 2,567 ft., with
42
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [»o.i«


from 16 to 21 ft. of water alongside, while 25 ft. away
from the wharf the depth is 28 ft. A wharf 650 ft.
long and with 31 ft. of water alongside is projected.
There is a coal hulk in the harbour and a coaling depot
is to he built near the proposed wharf. There is a repair
slip, which can take vessels of 500 tons.
Papeete is the most easterly of the good ports in the
Pacific islands, and is bound to be of great importance
if trade develops on the routes between Panama and
Australia and New Zealand. The French are fully
alive to this, and for some years had been discussing
the improvement of the harbour and the establishment
of a large coal depot, but though surveys and reports
had been made, nothing more had actually been done
up to the end of 1914.
Port Phaeton. —Port Phaeton is situated on the
south of the isthmus of Taravao, which divides the
island of Tahiti into two unequal parts. This natural
port has an area of about 2 square miles, with a depth
of from 30 to 100 ft., but is encumbered with coral
patches. The principal entrance channel is about
130 ft. wide and 60 ft. deep
Bora Bora. —On the west of this island there is
a magnificent roadstead, nearly 2 miles in length and
averaging one mile in width. This harbour, though
little used as yet, is probably superior to Papeete, and
has been considered as a possible trans-oceanic port
of call. It has an easy entrance with 5J fathoms of
water; and there is good commodious anchorage in
14 to 17 fathoms, well sheltered on the north side by
rising land.
(3) Shipping Lines
The Union Steamship Company of New Zealand
maintains a four-weekly service between Wellington
and San Francisco, calling at Rarotonga and Tahiti.
It receives a subsidy from the French local Government
43
5SSJ SOCIETY ISLANDS


for carrying the Society Islands’ mails, and the
steamers are under a contract to remain at least
24 hours in port at Papeete, during each voyage. The
same company also runs a steamer from Auckland every
month to Papeete and back, calling at the principal
Leeward Islands, and usually at one or more of the
Hervey and Cook Islands as well.
Before the war the Compagnie navale de I’Oceanic
dispatched a vessel once a quarter from Antwerp,
calling at Dunkerque and Bordeaux, with cargo for
Numea and Tahiti; and it seems likely that this
service may be resumed via the Panama canal. The
New Zealand Shipping Company also maintains a
monthly service from Plymouth to New Zealand via
Panama, whose vessels sometimes call at Tahiti.
The Compagnie Navale de I’Oceanie has estab-
lished since 1913 a regular service for inter-insular
trade, in which there are also engaged a varying number
of small craft. All vessels engaged in this trade must
sail under the French flag. Communications between
the islands are yearly improving.
The shipping facilities, both inter-insular and ex-
ternal, have much improved during recent years. A
return of the shipping at Papeete and Makatea in 1913
will be found in Table A of the Appendix, p. 63.
(4) Wireless Communication
There is a wireless telegraph station at Papeete, able
to communicate with Samoa and Hawaii.
(B) INDUSTRY
(I) LABOUR
The islands suffer most seriously from a deficiency
of labour. The whole colony, which could easily
support some 200,000 inhabitants, has to-day barely
27,000, including Europeans, Americans, Chinese, and
44
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [»o.i«


natives. The lack of labour is seriously handicapping
industry, and the islands have probably almost reached
the limit of production possible with the labour at
present obtainable. Moreover, labour is not merely
scarce, but also expensive. Probably the only solution
of the problem lies in the importation of labour; this
has been attempted on some of the islands, but never
on a large scale. The immigration of Chinese during
recent years has improved the prospect of the labour
market. The effect of their arrival is, however,
diminished by the fact that they engage chiefly in
petty trade, thus leaving the supply of agricultural
labour practically unaltered. In the western (Leeward)
group of islands labour is rather more plentiful and
somewhat better in quality than on Tahiti.
(2) AGRICULTURE
(a) Products of Commercial Value
The mountain-sides and coastal plains are covered
with forests, except where cleared for cultivation.
Among the important native products are the coco-
nut, bamboo, bread-fruit, sugar-cane, ape, and taro.
These are cultivated, as well as cotton, coffee, tobacco,
vanilla, the orange, lime, mango, and other fruit-trees.
Manioc and maize grow well. It is calculated that on
Tahiti and Moorea only 1 to 2 per cent, of the total
cultivable area is under crops, in spite of the fertility
of the soil. '
At present copra and vanilla are the most important
articles of export. Manilla suffered a depreciation in
the European markets at one time owing to poorness
of quality caused by premature gathering and bad
airing, but since the institution of a strict official
control its quality has much improved.
The copra industry is the main source of wealth in
Tahiti. The coco-nut palm yields in from six to ten
45
o£SSik] SOCIETY ISLANDS


years after its planting. It is probable that the islands
have reached their maximum output of copra under
the existing conditions of labour.
Cotton is grown, but the plants have been allowed
to go on bearing unduly long. The Societe Cotonniere
Pran9aise has established itself on Tahiti, and a ginnery
has been erected on Raiatea. The shortage of labour
has, however, seriously affected the industry.
There are large quantities of fowls and wild ducks
on Tahiti. Horses of a small but useful breed are
numerous. There are few horned cattle, but sheep and
goats are plentiful.
(c) Forestry
It does not appear that the forest resources of Tahiti,
other than coco-nut palms, have been much exploited.
(c) Land Tenure
Genuine titles to land are at present very difficult to
obtain, and any one buying a plantation or property
on Tahiti is likely to find himself involved in litigation.
Further, the natives are much opposed to selling or
leasing land, even land which they do not cultivate. To
meet this difficulty there has been some talk of the
imposition of a land-tax which will compel the owner
either to cultivate, lease, or sell his land. If the labour
and land questions can be settled, there is probably a
very fair opening for planters and companies in Tahiti.
(C) COMMERCE
(1) Organizations to 'promote Trade and Commerce
There are Chambers of Commerce and Agriculture at
Papeete.
(2) Exports and Imports
The exports in 1913 were of a value of £462,180
(11,554,507 fr.) ; 51 per cent, went to the United
46
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [no. i4 6


States, whose share in the trade of the islands is
yearly increasing. The imports in 1913 were of
a value of £361,219 (9,030,474 fr.) ; 47 per cent,
came from the United States. The figures include
the trade for the Tuamotu, Gambier, Marquesas, and
Makatea Islands. Trade shows a considerable increase.
The value of the exports to the United States in 1913
was £231,907 (5,797,689 fr.). Next in order as buyers
came France and her colonies, £63,156 (1,578,908 fr.),
Great Britain, £61,817 (1,545,442 fr.), New Zealand,
£10,316 (257,906 fr.), and Germany, £2,321 (58,047 fr.).
Exports of mother-of-pearl, fungus, and cotton were
decreasing in 1913 ; those of other products increasing.
The value of the imports from the United States
in 1913 was £171,218 (4,280,455 fr.). Next in order
came New Zealand and Australia, £74,821 (1,870,538 fr.),
France, £58,897 (1,472,434 fr.), Great Britain, Germany,
and the French colonies.
Imports from all countries are increasing, more
especially timber, benzine, and food-stuffs from the
United States, and woven stuffs from Great Britain.
(3) Customs and Tariffs
In the case of Tahiti and its dependencies the Tarif
Metropolitain does not apply, but special rates have
been fixed for foreign merchandise. These rates are
high, and are further increased by an octroi de mer
ranging from Bto 15 per ceht. The average duty on
imported foreign articles is about 31 per cent.
(D) FINANCE
(1) Public Finance.
Receipts and expenditure for 1912 amounted to
£145,082 and £127,631 respectively. The figures for
1908 were £80,861 and £80,832. More than half the
revenue of the colony is derived from the customs
47
a] SOCIETY ISLANDS


and octroi de mer, four-fifths of which goes to the
administration, and the remainder to the municipality.
The value of the imports, and therefore the financial
position of the colony, depends on the market obtained
for the produce of the islands, as any increase in pros-
perity is always reflected in an increase of imports.
Owing to the uncertainty produced by this situation,
the administration wishes to form a reserve fund.
At the end of May 1913, there was a reserve of
£43,530, and it was expected that at the end of May
1914 there would be an additional sum of £31,700.
(2) Currency and Banking
There is a branch of the Banque de ITndo-Chine
at Tahiti; there is also a Caisse Agricole or Agricultural
Credit Bank, which was founded as far hack as 1863.
The currency is French'; the notes of the Banque
de ITndo-Chine are also used.
(3) Influence of Foreign Capital
At the beginning of the war there were two important
British firms and one or two others. These houses
transacted 25 per cent, of the import and export
trade, and their vested interests are greater than those
of any other nationality in these waters.
Before the war there were three German firms
which did 17 per cent, of the trade.
Notwithstanding the fact that the United States
do so large a proportion of the trade of Tahiti, there
is no American firm in the islands.
A large proportion of the vanilla export trade is in
the hands of Chinese. They are to be found in every
little village on Tahiti, and do a large business in
distributing certain fines of imports.
48
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [no. wo


TUBUAI ISLANDS
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
Ports
Each of the Tubuai or Austral Islands has one or
more so-called ports, but there are only two good
harbours, Raiurua in the island of Raivavae, and Ahurei
Bay in Rapa Island, the remainder being only partially
sheltered anchorages,
Raiurua. —Raiurua is at the western end.of Raivavae.
It is a large and deep bay, affording excellent anchorage
in any wind. Owing to difficulties of navigation it is
not used by sailing-vessels, but steam vessels of any
size can enter or leave with safety. There is a stone
wharf with two fathoms of water alongside.
Ahurei. —This is the best harbour in the Tubuai
Islands. The entrance to the bay is narrow and
intricate, though for the most part deep. The
difficulty could be overcome by the removal of some
of the reefs, but more serious drawbacks are the pre-
valent onshore winds to which the entrance is exposed,
and the erratic squalls which blow down from the hills.
The anchorage is well sheltered though rather deep—
-10 to 29 fathoms. The.holding ground is not very
good, being a thin layer of mud over coral, but the
anchorage is so well protected that there is little
danger of dragging. The bay is open to the eastward,
whence the prevailing winds blow, but the reef and
islands prevent the sea from entering, and the surface
of the bay is always smooth. The bay is half a mile
wide and 2\ miles long. Fogs are of fairly frequent
occurrence over and in the immediate vicinity of the
island. Supplies (goats, pigs, fruit, and vegetables)
may be obtained at the villages, and there is a waterfall
near Area village from the foot of which good water is
obtainable.
E
49
French “|
Oceaniaj


For a long time these islands depended for com-
munications upon the irregular visits of commercial
steamers, which took place chiefly during the pearl
fishery season. In 1914, however, a service between
the French islands of the Pacific was instituted, through
which the islands are visited twice a year.
(B) AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
All the larger islands are thickly wooded, except near
their summits. Some sandalwood is found. Bananas,
oranges, and yams are grown and do well, while manioc,
arrowroot, and sugar-cane are grown in small quan-
tities. The principal product of the islands is taro,
the fermented root of which is exported to the Tuamotu
Islands. Coco-nuts do not flourish. There is little
land available for agriculture and no scope for large
plantations. Live stock, both wild and domesticated,
is plentiful.
Conditions on the island of Rapa are much the same
as on the other islands. Its importance lies in its
possible adaptation as a coaling depot for trans-
oceanic steamers. A deposit of coal, of unknown
extent, has been found on the north side at an elevation
of 650 ft. No serious attempt has been made to work
it, though the surface coal has been tried and gave fair
results when used in a French dispatch boat. A report
from a French source states that the deposit, which is
said to be lignite of a reasonably good quality, would
be adequate for industrial purposes, but valueless as
steam coal for marine engines.
50
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [»o.i«


TUAMOTU ARCHIPELAGO
(A) MEANS OP COMMUNICATION
(1) Ports
The seaward sides of the atolls in the Tuamotu or
Low Archipelago are generally steep-to and afford no
anchorage, while landing is impossible on account
of the surf. Many of the lagoons have no entrance;
others have only a boat passage. There are several
good anchorages within the open lagoons, the best being
in Fakarava, Toau, and Makemo. Others not quite
so good are in Rahiroa (the largest atoll of the group),
Raroia, Kauehi, Tahanea, and Tikehau.
Toau. —There are two channels into the lagoon, one
of which is safe for vessels drawing 25 ft., while the other
is suitable only for small vessels. The anchorage is
reported to be good and the lagoon to be comparatively
free from coral heads.
Fakarava. —Three channels lead into the lagoon, which
is roughly rectangular, 32 miles in length by 10 miles in
width. The best channel is the North Pass, which has
a minimum depth of 6 fathoms, and is wide and clear
of dangers. The South Pass is also deep enough for
large vessels, but is somewhat intricate; it could,
however, be improved by buoys and beacons. The
anchorage has good holding ground in 7 to 14 fathoms,
and there is a pier for landing. Winds from the south-
south-east to the west-south-west through south tend
to raise an unpleasant sea, but there is little danger
of dragging. Supplies are not plentiful, but a few pigs
and fowls may be obtained, and fairly good water may
be got in small quantities by digging.
Makemo. —There are two entrances into the lagoon,
that nearest the eastern end being available for large
vessels, as it is deep and clear of dangers. The lagoon
is fairly free, from coral heads and shoals, and there is
E 2
51
Trench 1
•Oceania]


good anchorage in 7 to 8 fathoms off a mole at Puheva
village. Pigs, fowls, and good water are obtainable.
Many of the fish in the lagoons are poisonous.
These islands are very dangerous to shipping, as
they are low-lying and difficult to see ; further, as they
are surrounded by deep water, if is not possible for
ships to tell by sounding when they are approaching
them, or to anchor if they are threatened with being
driven ashore.
•
Makatea. —This island has no anchorage. Vessels
moor to buoys in deep water off the jetty belonging
to the Compagnie Fran§aise des Phosphates de
FOceanie.
(2) Shipping Lines
The service between the French islands of the Pacific,
instituted in 1914, provides for visits to certain of
the islands once every month.
(B) AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
The chief resources of the islands are copra and
mother-of-pearl. There is little cultivation except of
a few fruits for native use.
Pearls and pearl-oysters are found in some of the
lagoons; they are of a quality not inferior to those found
in Ceylon. It seems probable that the oyster fishing
is imperfectly supervised; if the lagoons were properly
cultivated and restocked and the fisheries carried on
by the best methods and effectively controlled, the
export of mother-of-pearl could be very largely
increased.
The value of the export of mother-of-pearl for 1912
was £32,000. The export of copra in 1912 amounted
to 1,588 tons. This figure represents only about one-
third of the total production of the islands, a large
52
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [wo.i«


amount having been destroyed by rats. Normally,
one-tbird of the produce is used by the inhabitants.
The exports are steadily increasing. In 1914 the
export of copra amounted to 3,279 tons, and of mother-
of-pearl to 282 tons. The corresponding figures for
1916 were 4,533 and 687.
Phosphate is found at Makatea. The deposits are
of considerable importance, though relatively small
compared with those believed to exist on other islands
in the Pacific, for example Nauru (formerly German,
now British) and Ocean Island (British). 1 Nauru
alone is estimated to contain 300 million tons of
phosphate, as against 10 million tons on Makatea.
Too much weight should not be attached to estimates
of this kind, but the deposits are undoubtedly among
the most important assets of the French islands in the
Pacific.
The phosphate on Makatea is, like all that found in
the Pacific islands, of first-rate quality and, notwith-
standing the heavy freight charges, it is able to compete
in Europe with American phosphates. It has been
exploited since 1906 by the Compagnie Franyaise des
Phosphates de I’Oceanie, which has undertaken its
development with energy and some success. Mining
is easy, but loading conditions are difficult, owing to
the steep nature of the coast and the want of anchorage.
A pier 330 yds. long has been constructed ; a hauling
apparatus has been erected, as the cliffs are steep and
inaccessible ; and several miles of light railway have
been built. In 1913 the exports of phosphates from
Makatea are stated to have been of the value of
£65,000 (82,000 tons), more than double the figures
for 1912.
1 See ‘ The Phosphatic Wealth of Nauru ’ in the British Australian
(London), for Dec, 4, 1919.
53
5SS&] TUAMOTU ARCHIPELAGO


GAMBIER ISLANDS (OR MANGAREVA)
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
(1) Roads
The principal inhabited centres are linked together
by mule paths, which are comparatively good, but
lack of labour prevents their being properly main-
tained.
(2) Ports
There are three entrances into the lagoon. The
best seems to be the south-east passage which has
a minimum depth of 5J fathoms. The only well-
sheltered anchorage within the lagoon is Port Rikitea,
the capital, situated on the eastern side of the island
of Mangareva. It is now accessible only by vessels
drawing not more than 12 ft. It has, however, been
suggested that by clearing a part of the lagoon of coral
heads a good anchorage for large ships might be formed,
but the surveys made up to the present cannot be
trusted.
The Gambier Islands lie very nearly midway
between Wellington (New Zealand) and Panama, and,
if a harbour could be made, would be valuable as a
coaling station and port of call.
Water is obtainable, but the supply is indifferent.
(3) Shipping Lines
For many years the Gambier Islands were visited
only at irregular intervals by small commercial steamers,
chiefly during the pearl-fishery season, but in 1914 a
service was instituted between the French possessions
in the Pacific, by means of which the islands were
regularly visited twice a year.
54
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS


(B) AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
Oranges, coco-nuts, and other tropical fruits are
grown.
Goats and fowls are kept; fish are plentiful. The
principal occupations of the natives are pearl-shell
gathering and fishing. The value of the pearl-shell
fisheries is estimated at between £lO,OOO and £15,000
per annum.
The cultivation of coffee is said to be gradually
increasing, want of labour being the main difficulty in
its production. Vanilla could be grown, but its produc-
tion has never been undertaken. Cotton used to be
cultivated, but has now been abandoned.
The exports are ip eluded in the figures given for the
Society Islands.
MARQUESAS ISLANDS
(A) MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
(1) Roads
Roads are very much needed, there being only mule
paths, which are often in bad condition.
(2) Ports
Anchorages are numerous, hut few of them are well
sheltered from the ocean swell. There is, however,
scarcely an island without at least one anchorage that
will serve under any given conditions of wind and sea.
On Hivaoa the harbours of Puamau, Hanaiapa,
Hanamenu, and Taahuku are fairly good, but the best
harbours are on Nukahiva, where Comptroller Bay,
Taioa, and Taiohae or Anna Maria Bay are all safe.
There is also a good harbour at Shavay Bay in Uahuka.
Artificial harbour construction would be costly owing
55
Oceania] GAMBIER & MARQUESAS ISLANDS


to the absence of sheltering reefs and the strength of
the swell.
Pigs and fowls are obtainable on most of the islands,
but it is frequently difficult to obtain fresh water
except on Tauata.
Taioa. —There is a land-locked harbour here suitable
for fair-sized vessels. One or two large vessels could
enter, but the space with more than 7 fathoms of water
is limited.
Taiohae. —This is a safe and comfortable harbour
for all classes of vessels. About one square mile of its
area is available for large ships. A bigger wharf is
required. There are leading lights and a pier.
Shavay Bay. —This bay is protected to seaward by
islets, and has good anchorage for any vessels in 10 to
15 fathoms with good holding ground.
(3) Shipping Lines
A motor schooner sails about eight times a year
between certain of the Marquesas Islands and Tahiti.
(B) AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES
Cotton, sugar-cane, cassava, coffee, oranges, and
-other fruits are cultivated, besides coco-nuts and
taro. Cotton used to be exported in fair quantities,
but the export has now nearly ceased. The sole product
of commercial importance at present is copra, of which
about 1,500 tons are produced yearly. In 1914 1,200
tons, and in 1915 1,930 tons, of copra were received
in Tahiti from the islands. Guavas grow wild.
Cattle, both wild and domesticated, are abundant in
some of the islands.
The amount of cultivable land in proportion to the
area of the islands is large, but little utilized.
56
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [■«.!«


On most of the islands are gaseous mineral springs
of an alkaline nature, and there is a sulphur spring at
Tarna Bay in Hivaoa ; otherwise there are no minerals.
The exports are included in the figures for the Society
Islands.
GENERAL REMARKS
With the exception of those islands which are of
special economic importance owing to their mineral
deposits, that is to say New Caledonia and Makatea,
the prospects of all the French possessions in the
Pacific are affected by the same main considerations.
All the islands are alike in suffering from shortage
of labour and insecurity of land tenure. The unsatis-
factory results obtained from convict labour, the un-
suitability of the natives for regular work, and the
failure to devise a successful system for the introduction
of labour from outside have hitherto been the chief
obstacles to the industrial progress of these colonies.
At the same time a further hindrance is caused by the
adverse effect of the lack of a settled land policy on the
immigration of settlers and the investment of capital.
The solution of these two problems is essential to the
development of the islands.
Partly as a result of the labour conditions, copra is
the main product in all the islands, with the exception
of New Caledonia and Makatea. The growing demand
for coco-nut oil as an ingredient in margarine is likely
for some time to keep open a market for this product.
Recently the local price of copra has rarely fallen
below £2O per ton, a rate which admits of a satisfactory
margin of profit. Central Africa with its enormous
resources of oil-seeds of various kinds threatens to
prove a serious competitor in the supply of European
requirements. On the other hand, the removal of the
restrictions that have hampered the development of
57
oc r “&] GENERAL REMARKS


the margarine and, soap industries in Australia would
result in a great increase in the Australian demand
for copra. Since Lever Brothers established mills
near Sydney, and sailing vessels were superseded by
steamers, the export of copra from these islands to
Australia has increased.
Other products of importance are to be found in the
various islands, as, for example, coffee in New Cale-
donia, vanilla in the Society Islands ; but the develop-
ment of these as of all other industries is dependent
on the provision of an adequate supply of labour.
In the islands distinguished from the rest by the
possession of minerals, there has been considerable
economic development during the past few years. In
New Caledonia, the increase in prosperity dates from
the year 1910, in which ended the last of the periods
of financial depression which have marked the colony
hitherto. These crises have been attributed to fluctua-
tions in the exploitation of the minerals of the colony,
and the recent establishment of smelting works at
Pao and Yate is the best provision against their
recurrence. On the other hand, the dependence of
the nickel industry on the much more considerable
industry of Canada introduces an element of un-
certainty into the prospects of the colony.
M. Girault is of opinion that the subjecting of New
Caledonia to the provisions of the National Customs
Tariff has been the main cause of the slow development
of the colony, and expects great results from the
proposed measure to remove New Caledonia from the
list of ‘ assimilated ’ colonies. 1
Another factor in the development of the islands is
the possibility, to which reference has been made,
that the trade routes between the American and
Australian continents might be deflected to touch
1 The Colonial Tariff Policy of France, 1916.
58
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS [so.145


certain of the ports. This has already taken place to
some extent, regular calls being made at Tahiti by
steamers of the Union Steamship Company of New
Zealand, once a month each way, and occasional calls
by those of the New Zealand Shipping Company using
the Panama Canal to and from England. It may be
hoped that improved communications will lead to an
increased interest in the colonies and to the removal
of the obstacles that hinder their progress.
59
SSSSJ GENERAL REMARKS


Table 1
Return of Shipping at Nwmea and other Ports in New Caledonia
Nationality.
in 1913 1
Entered.
With cargo.
In ballast.
Vessels. Tonnage.
Vessels.
Tannage.
French
33 81,099
3
6,366
British
1 2,216
8
24,020
Norwegian
— —
8
14,833
German
1
3,718
United States
1 525
—
—
Japanese
— —
r
1,897
Total
35 83,840
21
50,834
Nationality.
With
Cleared.
cargo.
In ballast.
Vessels.
Tonnage.
Vessels.
Tonnage.
French
32
85,743
—
—
British
6
18,886
2
5,066
Norwegian
6
11,842
—■
—
German
1
3,718
—
—
United States
—
1
525
Japanese
—■
1
1,897
Total
45
120,189
4
7,488
APPENDIX
NEW CALEDONIA
Note. —S.S. Pacifique fMessageries Maritimes) and S.S. St. Louis
(Union Commerciale de Navigation Caledonienne), which make
regular four-weekly trips to Sydney, are not included in this list.
1 British Consular Report for the year 1913 on the Trade of New Caledonia.
[No. 145


Table 2
Return of Exports, 1908, 1913, 1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
■Francs.
Francs.
Beche-de-mer
45,662
23,749
22,582
Coffee
609,364
1,478,774
864,968
Copra
432,926
1,902,312
1,438,949
Cotton and cotton seed
1,100
415,231
614,364
Essences .
76,579
19,290
14,922
Guano
104,000
84,000
120,000
Hides, skins, raw wool, bones, and hoofs 242,185
460,926
467,640
Lard
26,024
61,526
53,100
Maize
37,423
35,652
35,429
Minerals
3,625,56^7
Nickel matte
—
3,753,791
Nickel ore
. 4,200,939
2,858,635
2,824,020
Chrome ore .
. 2,091,626
1,829,102
2,707,184
Cobalt matte
—
43.236
Cobalt ore
390,329
—
80,960
Pearl shells
162,038
931,757
558,108
Preserved meat
423,596
609,623
869,790
Rubber
90,111
14,647
1,588
Sandalwood
124,529
86,251
63,865
Wines, spirits, &c.
136,553
188,506
186,441
Miscellaneous .
915,863
1,084,633
875,894
Total
. 10,110,847
15,838,405
15,468,607
Table 3
Countries of Destination of Exports, 1908, 1913, 1914. 1
»
(a) Minerals.
1908.
Francs.
1913.
Francs.
1914.
Francs.
Australia .
. Nickel ore
15
2,894
Chrome ore
147,298
—
19
Cobalt ore
82,102
—
—
Belgium
. Nickel ore
489,103
849.282
550,386
Nickel matte
—
2,121,174
1,657,851
Chrome ore
6,706
—
416,823
France
. Nickel ore
1,253,827
426,797
700,794
Nickel matte
—
732,617
—
Chrome ore
10,912
92,068
223,683
Cobalt ore
156,082
—
Germany .
. Nickel ore
430,635
374,005
306,178
Chrome ore
347,472
Holland
Nickel ore
206,451
66,597
—
Chrome ore
605,372
474,876
350,254
United Kingdom
. Nickel ore
1,820,923
1,141,939
1,263,768
Nickel matte
—
900,000
1,754,138
Chrome ore
714,250
542,598
424,810
Cobalt ore
152,145
—
80,960
Cobalt matte
—
43,236
United States
. Nickel matte
—
—
213,578
Chrome ore
607,088
719,560
944,123
Total .
.
6,682,894
8,441,528
9,280,967
1 Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies Francoises.
1 Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies Francoises.
61
TRADE OF NEW CALEDONIA


(6) Other goods.
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Australia .
Copra
130,352
172,427
107,067
Hides
214,705
443,843
445,489
Miscellaneous
429,083
215,585
161,125
France
. Coffee
608,069
1,474,635
861,720
French Colonies .
. Copra
294,174
1,730,085
1,331,882
Mother-of-pearl
shell
160,806
927,740
548,647
Preserved meat
389,462
583,002
768,294
Miscellaneous
239,100
713,063
913,811
New Hebrides
. Metal goods
64,965
60,323
90,257
Rice
73,572
113,281
75,013
Textiles
87,372
133,363
64,450
Wines, spirits, & o.
100,698
136,217
121,546
Miscellaneous
370,855
456,672
341,348
New Zealand
Guano
—
84,000
120,000
Other countries and
ships’ provisions
Miscellaneous
264,740
152,641
236,991
Total .
. 3,427,963
7,396,877
6,187,640
Grand Total
. 10,110,847
15,838,405
16,468,607
Table
4
Return of Imports, 1908, 1913,
1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Boots and shoes .
195,534
328,358
274,782
Cheese and lard .
180,536
290,831
168,659
Coal
216,189
984,929
1,479,200
Coffee ....
—
500,473
465,028
Copra ....
—
146,854
478,950
Flour ....
984,835
943,071
959,311
Iron :
Manufactured articles
770,525
2,211,844
1,408,446
Rails ....
125
111,885
41,284
Galvanized iron
111,910
242,797
44,893
Maize and rice .
466,519
567,885
546,927
Paper ....
95,069
113,289
112,518
Petroleum ....
159,914
293,231
244,754
Potatoes . , . * .
■
170,292
164,943
Preserved meat .
48,663
70,242
51,104
Sugar ....
242,097
406,948
408,574
Textiles (including manufactured goods)
1,262,929
2,284,778
1,844,934
Tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes
335,110
445,076
381,243
Wine ....
. ,
1,053,900
1,683,192
1,522,557
Wood ....
. e
73,541
, 222,894
389,669
Miscellaneous
•
3,110,034
5,689,047
5,616,658
Total .
.
9,307,429
17,707,916
16,604,434
1 Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies Francoises.
62
APPENDIX [no. 145


Table 5
Countries of Origin of Imports, 1908, 1913, 1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Australia
. Flour
984,835
942,969
959,234
Metal goods
212,453
344,619
421,796
Textiles
129,697
311,914
260,368
Miscellaneous
1,938,846
2,972,023
3,131,011
Belgium
. Coal
(see note 2)
281,969
466,789
Miscellaneous
—
307,673
403,038
Prance .
. Metal goods
515,376
871,463
586,698
Textiles
999,700
1,715,181
1,414,172
Wines, spirits,
&c.
1,279,928
2,047,141
1,794,045
Miscellaneous
2,400,595
3,953,540
3,323,481
French Colonies
Rice
299,531
301,738
—
Miscellaneous
2,146
16,162
63,667
French bonded
warehouses
. Miscellaneous
(see note 2)
848,997
621,907
Germany
• 99
7,027
104,727
—
Japan .
, ,,
(see note 2)
61,254
202,432
New Hebrides
. Coffee
12,582
497,539
462,851
Copra
41,266
146,854
444,807
Cotton
—
467,971
546,552
Miscellaneous
124,364
147,604
293,456
New Zealand .
. Miscellaneous
—
49,868
100,146
United Kingdom
. Coal
—
377,698
449,158
Metal goods
17,058
535,409
12,424
Miscellaneous
149,505
206,897
55,500
United States.
. Miscellaneous
3,677
118,330
222,642
Other countries
• 99
188,843 2
78,376
368,260
Grand total
9,307,429
17,707,916
16,604,434
Table A
(1) Return of Shipping at Papeete
and Makatea, 1913. 1
Vessels.
Tonnage.
Papeete.
Entered
. 69
219,619
Cleared
. 62
210,476
Makatea.
Entered
. 17
40,016'
Cleared
. 19
43,493
Total . 167
513,604
1 Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies Fran$aises.
2 This figure includes- such imports as there were from French bonded
warehouses, Belgium, New Zealand, and Japan.
FRENCH SETTLEMENTS IN OCEANIA
1 British Consular Report on the Trade and Commerce of the Society
Islands in 1913.
63
oSISSik] NEW CALEDONIA, ETC.


(2) Nationality of Shipping entered and deared
Vessels.
at Papeete and Makatea, 1913.
Tonnage.
France.
. 27
81,090
Japan .
5
15,393
Norway
■
—
United Kingdom .
. 100
400,309
United States
. 35
16,812
(3) Return of Inter-insular Trade, 1913. 1
Vessels. Tonnage.
Entered
. 246
10,026
Cleared
. 255
10,146
Total
. 501
20,172
Table B
Return of Exports, 1908,
1913, 1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Beche-de-mer.
37,115
2,388
588
Bees-wax
7,459
8,990
3,621
Coco-nuts
81,153
123,223
113,058
Copra .
. 1,276,312
4,419,964
' 3,523,635
Cotton .
30,436
46,104
28,673
Fungus .
28,641
11,326
895
Mother-of-pearl
795,618
987,740
721,184
Oranges
41,578
59,420
85,584
Phosphates .
—
1,641,134
1,458,495
Vanilla .
693,644
4,032,507
2,413,648
Miscellaneous.
153,372
221,711
168,571
Total
. 3,145,328
11,554,507
8,517,952
Table C
Countries of Destination of Exports, 1908, 1913, 1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Australia and New
Zealand
Copra
41,635
119,629
116,497
Miscellaneous
167,075
138,277
264,495
France .
Copra
—
933,154
1,175,505
Vanilla
64,972
514,835
342,343
Miscellaneous
76,934
130,919
272,825
Germany.
Miscellaneous
55,948
58,047
7,792
United Kingdom
Copra
20,342
606,669
15,508
Mother-of-pearl
721,596
838,463
435,021
Vanilla
19,216
98,226
17,940
Miscellaneous
3,022
2,084
26,032
United States .
Copra
959,764
2,225,183
2,216,175
Vanilla
547,756
3,339,804
1,889,479
Miscellaneous
97,256
232,702
228,617
Other countries
Miscellaneous
369,812
2,316,515
1,509,723
Total .
3,145,328
11,554,507
8,517,952
Statistiques du Commerce des Coloni es Francoises.
1 British Consular Report on the Trade and Commerce of the Society
Islands in 1913.
1 Statistiqnes du Commerce des Colonies Francises.
64
APPENDIX [no. 145


Table D
Return of Imports, 1908, 1913, 1914.*
Benzine .
1908.
Francs.
40,828
1913.
Francs.
167,544
1914.
Francs.
147,516
Biscuits .
79,126
152,247
158,849
Boots and shoes
54,596
186,323
151,502
Butter (salted).
82,935
191,747
163,373
Cattle
31,432
98,058
134,469
Coal
43,210
228,403
92,672
Condensed milk
25,893
83,010
112,379
Pish
107,883
283,193
191,820
Flour
397,499
660,450
627,741
Metal goods
310,769
831,974
697,913
Metals
76,230
183,721
194,682
Planks .
97,550
273,150
212,673
Preserved meat
144,445
420,523
405,368
Rice
•85,393
246,341
212,515
Soap
88,090
158,988
141,402
Sugar
25,424
177,960
180,788
Textiles .
863,952
1,408,430
1,355,649
Timber .
87,146
314,931
202,167
Wines, spirits, &c.
116,714
355,147
319,642
Miscellaneous .
. 1,108,748
2,608,334
2,723,909
Total
. 3,867,863
9,030,474
8,427,029
Table E
Countries of Origin of Imports, 1008, 1913, 1914. 1
1908.
1913.
1914.
Francs.
Francs.
Francs.
Australia and New
Zealand.
Butter
80,179
191,311
163,214
Preserved meat
136,841
412,130
368,727
Sugar
3,759
130,137
128,359
Miscellaneous
553,103
1,136,960
1,114,363
France
Metal goods
37,358
182,090
108,792
Textiles
199,575
382,158
452,093
Wines, spirits,
&c.
92,848
226,468
196,358
Miscellaneous
284,987
681,718
661,616
French Colonies (New
Caledonia)
Miscellaneous
—
82,808
41,262
Germany .
Metal goods
6,824
101,334
23,585
Miscellaneous
68,975
130,196
187,289
United Kingdom
Textiles
319,218
364,312
377,920
Miscellaneous
114,933
236,936
252,859
United States .
Fish
87,818
223,973
148,586
Flour
396,220
600,374
627,351
Metal goods
174,624
424,751
459,652
Textiles
239,336
540,798
381,965
Miscellaneous
865,434
2,490,559
2,318,360
Other countries .
Miscellaneous
205,831
491,371
414,669
Total .
3,867,863
9,030,474
8,427,029
Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies Fran$aises.
F
1 Statistiqwes dw Commerce des Colonies Frangaises.
65
Oceania] TRADE OF THE SETTLEMENTS


AUTHORITIES
Historical
In addition to the books and reports to which reference has
been made above, a list of authorities will be found in the
Statesman’s Year Booh for 1917, p. 898. See also :
Barre, La Nouvelle Caledonieet les etablissements d’Oceanic.
Paris, 1916.
Compton, R. H., ‘New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines’
Geographical Journal, February 1917. London.
Deschanbl, Paul , La Politique frangaise en Oceanic. Paris,
1884
Les Interets frangais dans I’Ocean Pacifique. Paris, 1888.
Macgregor, Sir Wtlltam, The Settlement of the Pacific
(Scottish Geographical Magazine, vol. xxxiv, May 1918).
Edinburgh.
Im Thurn, Sir Evbrard, K.C.M.G., ‘ European Influence in
the Pacific’, Geographical Journal, April 1915. London.
Thomson, Basil, ‘Lost Explorers of the Pacific’, Geographical
Journal, July 1914. London.
Petite Encyclopedic Goloniale. Les Colonies franfjaises.
Economic
Annuaire colonial. Paris, 1915. .
Annuaire des Etablissements frangais de VOceanic. Papeete,
1914.
Diplomatic and Consular Reports, Annual Series. Trade of
New Caledonia, 1909, 1911, 1912, 1913, and 1914; Trade
and Commerce of the Society Islands, 1909-12.
Elschner, C. Gorallogene Phosphat-Inseln Austral Oceaniens
und Ihre Produkte. Liibeck, 1913.
Nauzieres, R. Les ‘ Perles ’ du Pacifique. In the Bulletin
de la Societe Langue-docienne de Geographic. Tome xlii„
Quatrieme trimestre. Montpellier, 1919.
L’Oceanie Frangaise, July 1911-July 1914.
Quin’s Metal Handbook. London, 1914, &c.
Societe de Geographic commerciale du Havre, xxx. 1912.
66
[No. 145


Statistiques du Commerce des Colonies frangaises, 1908 (tome v),
1913 (tome ii), 1914 (tome ii). Paris, 1909, 1915, 1916.
Le Tour du Monde. Journal des Voyages et des Voyageurs.
N. S. 17. Paris, 1911.
Maps
The French Possessions in the Pacific are shown on Stanford’s
Map of the Pacific Islands (London Atlas Series), on Mercator’s
projection, 23 inches by 18 inches.
The Naval Staff Intelligence Division have issued a map of
New Caledonia, on the scale of 1 : 1,500,000, and Tahiti, on
the scale of 1 : 750,000 (Ordnance Survey, January 1919),
in connexion witk this series.
67
gS£] AUTHORITIES


LONDON;
PUBLISHED BY H. M. STATIONERY OFFICE.
To be purchased through any Bookseller, or directly from
H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses
Imperial House, Kingsway, London, W.C. 2, and
28 Abingdon Street, London, S.W. 1; ,
37 Peter Street, Manchester ;
1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
28 Forth Street, Edinburgh ;
or from E. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116 Grafton Street, Dublin.
1920.
Price 1/6 net.
