

FRESH WATER Angling




THE M.S.D.
FIRST FOR SPORT!
and
first for all
FISHING
TACKLE
as well as for
all SPORTING
and ATHLETIC
equipment.
FISHING ENTHUSIASTS
know that the M.S.D. specialises in the
supply of Fishing Tackle... rods, lines,
hooks, etc. See the M.S.D. first.
EifiMELBOURNE
SPORTS DEPOT
55 ELIZABETH STREET, MELB. MU 7244.




Fresh
Water
Angling
1937
(COPYRIGHT)
Written by
JACK RYAN




I would not like to die before passing on to
the younger generation my knowledge of fresh
water angling.” —Jack Ryan.
“ Indeed, my friend, you will find angling to
be like the virtue of humility, which has a
calmness of spirit, and a world of other bless-
ings attending upon it.” —Izaak Walton.
JACK RYAN.


PREFACE
Angling is a very enjoyable pastime for old and
young. Having been a keen angler for half a century
I still love the sport, and continue learning something
new every year. In this book I am relating some of
my experiences, which will prove exceedingly helpful
to you, dear reader, in the fruition of a desire to
become a successful angler. I have longed, year after
year, for the opening day of the fishing season, to
get out into the open spaces with my rod, after the
trout. So let us imagine all the pleasant things our
art embraces. The breath of spring is in the air; the
morning is beautiful and soft, with a slight haze over
the water; songs of birds vibrating in nature’s glori-
ous panorama; the murmuring of the stream and the
beauty of the flowers that fringe its banks; the for-
getfulness of all the world and its worries; the im-
partation of a sweet sense of content and thankful-
ness. Is it any wonder, then, amid all the sylvan
loveliness, that I have devoted my lifetime to this
branch of sport, I want you to participate in the
felicities to become an angler—and I hope, a success-
ful one—even if you do not get the fish you will enjoy
the outing in the enchanting environment of the
streams and the bushlands as I have done since boy-
hood.
JACK RYAN.


Fresh Water A ngling
HOW AND WHERE TO FISH SUCCESSFULLY
Most of my fishing was for trout, and I found the
trout such a fine, sporting fish, that I intend to deal
fully about their haunts and habits in the succeeding
chapters.
One of the best streams for trout fishing was the
Deep Creek. This watercourse rises in the mountains
beyond Lancefield, and flows near the townships of
Romsey, Darraweit Guim, Beveridge, Wildwood and
Keilor. At Sunshine it is known as the Saltwater
River. About the year 1901, it was at its best, and
trout up to 6 and 7 lb. were plentiful. Deep Creek
is not a fast-flowing stream, rather a series of well-
shaded, calm pools.
The most successful bait I found for the trout in
this stream was the fresh-water shrimp. As most
of the pools contained plenty of weeds, shrimps could
be got in abundance with a fine-mesh net, by simply
drawing the net through them.
The trout did not take the spinner very well in
this stream, as they appeared to keep to the deep water
in the pools, or among the weeds, foraging for the
shrimps. My method of fishing it, was to select a
deep part of the pool, always near some overhanging
bushes, if possible. I would always fish close to the
bank, using the shrimp as bait, and no sinker. I
would cast in, and let the bait sink slowly to the bot-
tom ; then pull it up slowly, and keep on repeating
this sink-and-draw motion of the bait. Sooner or
later a trout would find it. I noticed that the trout
in this stream appeared to feed under the bushes
along the banks during the hot days.
Sometimes, about the middle of summer, the trout
would not move about much if the water got to a
high temperature. I found the best chance then to
get a good catch was to fish during the night. I did


not, however, take keenly to night fishing. To me
it appeared to lose its charm, when I could not see
the fish; therefore, I did not get that thrill experienced
in daylight fishing. I found that more trout could be
caught after dark, but there is not much pleasure in
it.
I remember one year, at Deep Creek, a swarm of
locusts came on the trees, and towards the cool of
the evening they kept falling on the water. It was
an interesting sight to see the trout rising and taking
the locusts off the surface of the water. It only meant
putting one on the hook, and casting to a rising fish,
and the bait was taken at once. In a couple of hours
I filled my basket with trout from 2 to 4 lb. The
locusts do not come every year, but if the angler has
the good luck to be on this stream when a swarm of
locusts appears, he will get all the sport he wants, if
he uses them for bait.
At the bottom reaches of this stream, where the
tidal waters joined the fresh—at that time called Bray-
brook, or Solomon’s Ford, but now known as Sun-
shine—l used to catch some fine brown trout on the
spinner. I found the blue phantom spinner the best,
and the next best, the quill phantom. The most fav-
ourable time to fish this place was at high tide, as
the trout would drop back to the salt water at low tide.
Nearly all the trout here were large ones, from 4
to 10 lb. They showed very few spots, and their scales
were a bright silver colour. Sometimes I would get
one of those as far up as Keilor, and on one occasion
there I captured one which had a sea-louse on it, which
proved that it lived for some time in the salt water.
They were great fighters when hooked. On one
occasion I secured a goodly specimen on the blue
phantom, and on its first leap out of the water it brought
its tail round and hit the phantom, and tore one of the
triangles of the phantom out of its mouth. When he
hit the water again, I found I had him hooked by the
tail. The side triangle on the phantom was well em-
bedded where he struck it with his tail. Then what a


time I had. If you ever have such an experience you
will know how strong a fish is when hooked by the
tail. Well, it taught me a lesson. I found that their
method of getting rid of the hook was to leap above
the surface of the water and bring the tail round to
knock the hook out of the mouth.
Ever since then, directly a trout leaves the water I
give him slack line, until he falls back, then I tighten
up on him again. This is one of the joys of trout
fishing. You need to be always on the alert, and
ready for every leap of the trout. Success can only
be gained by experience. After a fight of about twenty
minutes, which seemed an hour to me, I landed the
fish referred to, and it turned the scale at 6 lb.
Another good bait to use in Deep Creek is the
mudeye or larva of the dragon-fly. A supply for bait
can be got in the weeds among the shrimp, but when
the stream was very low in summer time, I obtained
the best black ones from the crevices of submerged
logs and under stones near the water’s edge.
Of late years the tench has been liberated in this
stream. I will deal with this species in another chap-
ter. About the same time, rainbow trout were lib-
erated here, but they have not been a success in this
stream, as it is rarely any are caught. In the year
1901 I liberated 1000 rainbow yearlings in Deep
Creek, at Beveridge, but I have neither seen nor heard
of any of them being caught there afterwards. Un-
doubtedly, this fish seems to favour the fast-flowing
rivers, where they appear to do well whenever intro-
duced to these waters.
Deep Creek also contains some fine blackfish. I
found the best time to fish for them was during the
Summer months, after a thunder storm, or whenever
the water became muddy after rain.
(See notes on blackfish in another chapter.)
The Gisborne Creek, Riddell’s Creek, Emu Creek
and Jackson’s Creek are all tributaries of the Deep
Creek, or Saltwater River, and can be fished in much


the same way as the Deep Creek. The haunts and
habits of the trout are much the same in all these
creeks.
THE RIVER YARRA
This river rises in the Baw Baw Mountains, near
Wood’s Point, and is stocked with all our fresh-water
fish. The upper reaches did not contain trout until
about twenty years ago, when I had the pleasure of
liberating 2000 yearling rainbow trout at a spot called
Alderman’s Creek, about 3 miles up stream from Mc-
Veigh’s, or about 23 miles above Warburton* The
water here seemed to suit them, as a few years later
some fine rainbow trout, up to 6 lb. in weight, were
taken about the junction of Walsh’s Creek, also at
McMahon’s Creek, about 10 miles down the river from
McVeigh’s.
The upper reaches of the Yarra near the Baw Baw
Mountains are noted for big blackfish up to 4 lb. The
river here is well sheltered in virgin forest, and
there is plenty of cover, so favourable to blackfish.
Lower down the river, in the more open country,
blackfish are plentiful, but small. For many years
the Fisheries Department has stocked this river at
Warburton with trout, and at the present time it is
good fishing water for both the brown and rainbow
trout.
Below Warburton, Healesville, and Yarra Glen some
fine Murray cod and Macquarie perch are taken.
These fish were liberated in the Yarra about 70 years
ago, but it is only of late years that they have started
to multiply, and they appear to be now well estab-
lished, also the English perch. In fact, all pools in
this stretch of the Yarra have the perch. They al-
ways seem to be striving to get up the tributaries of
the river, and I have caught them in the upper waters
of the Chum Creek in the mountains, at least 10 miles
up from the Yarra.
A small native perch, called the pigmy perch, is
very plentiful in this river, and they are a very good


bait for catching English perch. In flood times, when
the river overflows, they get out into the lagoons and
small tributaries that flow into the river. They are
very handsome fish, resembling the English perch, but
do not grow to a large size. I have never seen them
more than 2 inches long. They are a good fish to
keep in a small aquarium.
THE GOULBURN RIVER
This river rises on the eastern side of the Great
Dividing Range, and contains most of our native fish,
with the exception of blackfish, eels and Gippsland
perch. At the head waters —or rather, at the junc-
tion of the Big River, above Eildon Weir—is one of
the best places for trout fishing, both brown and rain-
bow. A boat may be hired at Eildon Weir, but it is
better to go up by motor-boat, as the journey is about
10 miles up, to get to the best fishing waters. I al-
ways prefer to fish below the Eildon Weir, as the
trout there are nearly all large fish, and good accom-
modation can be had close to the weir.
The best baits at the opening of the season (in
September) are worms, wattle grubs, and yabbies; and
the best artificial spinners are the brown Devon and
quill phantom. On the eastern side of the basin, be-
low the weir, the water flows fairly fast, and it is
necessary to use a sinker, and cast well out. Have
the hook about a foot above the sinker.
The best class of sinker to use is to get a foot of
ordinary fencing wire, and double it up like the bows
of a bullock-yoke. It will then be about 6 inches
long. Tie a piece of very weak line on to the bow
of the wire, then on to your main line. If you get
snagged, the fine line will break, and you will lose
your wire, but that is better than losing a silk line.
I find that the wire sinker very rarely gets caught on
the bottom, and I always use it in preference to the
round lead ones.
From the weir down stream for half a mile is the
best water for spinning—from the eastern bank; but


I find, at the opening of the season, it is best to fish
the basin below the spillway, as trout are more num-
erous there. When you get tired of spinning, just
put on a worm, cast well out, rest your rod on a forked
stick, and wait for a run. I have seen more trout
taken on the worm by fishing this style, than on any
other bait. Of course, if you can get some white
wattle grubs, and use them for bait, you will get the
big fish.
For many miles below the weir the trout fishing in
the Goulburn is good; and they run to a large size.
Several good cod and Macquarie perch have been
taken at the spillway, but it is not a safe place to fish,
on account of the steep cliff above, from which, at any
time, loose boulders may become dislodged, to the
imminent danger of anyone below. About fifty yards
below the spillway, on the western bank, one would
be quite safe, and would find some nice backwater for
trout fishing. The trout here take the artificial fly
well during the months of December, January and
February. The best fly is the silver doctor or coach-
man, also the red tag.
I will now deal with the haunts and habits of the
trout, and the various baits to use at different times
of the year.


THE TROUT
Although the trout was first acclimatised in our
streams over 70 years ago, it is only during the last
few years that the majority of anglers have really suc-
ceeded to the joy of trout fishing with its triumphs
of success, and its disappointments of failure.
I will endeavour to explain to you the haunts and
habits of this fish. By haunts I mean a rock, stump,
root of a tree, or submerged logs, where the trout
lie, not necessarily when not on the feed, but as posts
of observation into which they may retire, and watch
for any food that may be brought near them. These
haunts are generally chosen with a great regard to
the condition of the stream, and the force of water
coming down, for in September, October, and some-
times in November they are to be found in the rip-
ples at the inlet or outlet of a pool, or in the shallow
holes where the stream rushes amongst boulders. In
December, January and February, owing to the water
getting too warm, the trout forsake these positions,
and are generally to be found amongst the roots of
trees or shady spots in a pool.
The trout makes for the deepest part of the pool
during the hottest months of the summer, and often
this extends through March and April. The other
four months of the year are not of much interest to
the angler. In May I often see trout feeding. At
the end of May spawning commences. In June and
July most trout spawn, and, if the water is clear,
they can be seen on the gravel beds, the numbers
decreasing during August, and this completes the circle
of the year.
HABITS OF THE TROUT.—The habits of trout
are far more varied than one would imagine. Under
this heading, I will treat the different forms of food
preferred by trout during the year, the reasons why
such food is acceptable, and I will also remark upon


the climatic influences on the fish. At the beginning
of the season it is very seldom I have seen the trout
rising, the streams then being generally discoloured,
and the fish depend for their food on minnows and
worms brought down by the flood waters. The wea-
ther is too cold for any insect life to be hatched, so
there is nothing on the surface of the water to tempt
a fish to rise, and it is for this reason that the fish are
to be found at the inlet or outlet of pools looking for
food.
During September particularly, the fish are very
hungry, probably trying to regain their strength after
the arduous exertions of reproduction. In October
and November the conditions are much the same, but
towards the end of the latter month the warm weather
brings a swarm of small insects, and the fish can be
seen feeding on those that fall on the water. The
grasshopper generally puts in an appearance in Dec-
ember, and stays until about the middle of April. This
is probably the time when trout have the least exer-
tion in procuring food, as numbers of these insects
can be seen at any time on the surface of the water.
During any of these months, should a freshet occur in
the stream, trout will often work up to the ripples
at the entrance to the pool, and remain there while the
flood lasts. In ordinary dry seasons trout feed all over
the pool, particularly towards evening. I have seen
them rising from end to end of the pool, and repeat-
ing this performance several times. I have also noticed
that they generally start feeding under a bush over-
hanging the water, probably picking up the insects
that have fallen off it. On calm dull days the fish rise
well, at least I have found it so, but it is generally in
the middle of the pools. The general habits of the
trout are the same at all seasons of the year. It is
only through the rise or fall of a stream that they
appear to change. Trout are bold and timid. They
will force their way up stream into such shallow places
that it is only by an effort that they can extricate
themselves, and return to deeper water when startled;


yet, in a few moments the fright is forgotten, and the
fish will again strive to reach the desired position.
The majority of anglers while walking along a trout
stream would not observe the number of fish in a
pool, even if they were on the feed, as the trout would
probably discern them some distance away if the water
were clear, and would remain quiet, watching the
angler, probably speculating on the reason of his pre-
sence at that particular time. The eyes of the trout
being protuberant, and above the thickest portion of
the head, enable the fish to quickly notice any object
above them, more particularly when that object is in
motion, and thrown into relief against the sky. Every
angler knows that trout are continually on the watch
for food, and that most of this food is secured either
on the surface or a few feet below it, so it seems that
while a trout is feeding, and most likely to fall a vic-
tim to the wiles of the angler, he is also more likely to
observe the angler before the lure can be offered him.
CLIMATIC CONDITIONS. The state of the
weather has a great influence on trout. I notice most
trout rising on calm, dull days. They rise well in the
morning, more especially after a moonlight night,
even if it is going to be a hot day. I generally notice
them commence to move about mid-day, more par-
ticularly in the shaded pools. lam speaking at present
of the middle and end of the season. Towards even-
ing, when the shadows begin to fall on the open pools,
the trout rise freely. This is the time when the clouds
of insects appear, and the trout make most of the
opportunity. I prefer a warm dull day for trout fish-
ing, but the water must not be too hot or the sun very
bright, as, under these conditions, the trout do not
move about very much.
Trout seem very sensitive to changes of tempera-
ture. They appear to know when the summer is com-
ing, as they mostly all make out of the shallows to


the deep pools, and remain there during the summer
months, and if the water is of a very high tempera-
ture during the middle of the day, I have often got
some good trout fishing on the bottom of the deepest
pools, using the fresh-water shrimp or earthworm as
bait.
Some people, unaccustomed to fish, are under the
impression that talking frightens them. Sometimes,
when sport is bad, some language used is calculated
to do this, but although fish are not without the sense
of hearing, they do not appear to be startled by ordin-
ary conversation.
FLY FISHING
Of course, speaking of fly fishing, it would be con-
sidered unsportsmanlike if fly fishing were not given
the first place on some streams and reservoirs. Where
the artificial fly is used, it is allowed to sink under the
water. This is called “ Wet fly fishing,” whilst on
other waters the principal method is casting the fly
so as it will float on the surface of the water. This
is called “ Dry fly fishing.” The majority of fly fisher-
man are in the habit of looking down on the natural
bait fisher for trout with something nearly akin to
contempt, although these said humble natural bait
fishers are as true sportsmen, and deserving of every
sympathy, as the most severe purist in fly fishing.
The first thing to study in regard to fly fishing is
to know the flies which will be necessary for the par-
ticular time of year, or the particular fly on the water
it is intended to fish. Owing to the enormous quan-
tity of artificial flies on the market, I find it difficult
to say which is the best, but have done well on those
I mention in reservoir fishing, and the fly fisher will
notice what natural flies are on the water he is fishing.


and imitate it as nearly as possible. The different
modes of casting the fly will be discovered better by
the angler after he has had experience in the ordinary
casting.
FLIES.—It will be noticed that a wet fly is mounted
differently to the dry fly, the former having its wings
upright. They are best purchased on eyed hooks,
and are tied on to the gut with a jam knot.
TO TIE THE JAM KNOT.—The fly being held
with the left hand in the position here shown, push
two or three inches of the gut line through the eye
JAM KNOT ATTACHMENT.
(A) in the direction of the hook-bend; let go the fly,
and with the end (B) make a slip knot (C) round
the line (D). (This is the point represented in the
cut.) Do not draw the slip knot quite tight, but leave
it a little open, as figured—just open enough to pass
comfortably over the metal eye of the hook. Now
hold the fly again in the left hand, and pull on the
“ main line ” with the right, until, with the assistance,
if necessary, of the thumb and finger, the slip knot
passes over the eye; when, on further tightening the
line, the jam knot forms itself. Fig. 2 shows the
jam knot tied.
“ To become a good angler requires address, skill,
nicety of touch, and, above all, practice. Experience


alone can make the youthful angler proficient in the
highest branch of the angler’s art. He has to capture
the swiftest of fish with the finest and frailest of
material, in the clearest of crystal streams. Other
sports may be more exciting than artificial fly fishing,
but there are none which require more adroitness,
more intelligence, a quicker eye, or a lighter hand.
While the brain must be quick to apprehend, and the
senses most delicate, the body must be robust, the
limbs active, and the eye watchful.” In fly fishing,
either a single-handed or a two-handed rod is used,
but the beginner should start with a 9 ft. single-
handed rod, and at the start use only one fly, adding
others, when wet fly fishing, after he has had some
little practice. The other flies attached to the gut cast
are called droppers. The gut of the dropper fly should
be about 3-| inches in length. If two flies are used,
the dropper should be yards from the tail fly, but
when three flies are used they should be put at inter-
vals of about a yard. The young angler should recol-
lect that trout lie with their heads up stream, so that
it is best when fishing a stretch of water to start at
the lower end and cast upwards, raising the rod slightly
as the fly comes down stream.
The actual art of throwing the fly is to be learnt
by practising on a lawn, either without a fly at the
end of the gut or with one, and endeavour to cast
it into a certain spot, the whole line between the fly
and the rod top being straight. When practising with
a fly on the line in a garden be careful of bushes
behind! If residing near a river or lake it is much
better to practise on the water, as one then sees the
actual effect of the cast, the gut keeps moist and thus
works better than when casting on land. It is best
not to use too much line when making the throw, until
one can cast a short length comfortably. The fly
should touch the water first, as any disturbance of
the surface by the line falling upon it has the effect,
in clear water, of scaring fish. “ Make the ordinary
cast by the action of the wrist and forearm, and propel


it out in front of you, so that when it is extended
to the full length the fly will be two or three feet above
the surface of the water, on which it should fall by its
own weight. In repeating the cast, raise the point of
the rod slowly, so that the line shall describe the shape
of a horse’s hind shoe behind you. When the fly is at
the extreme length of the line bring it forward again,
at first slowly, but increasing the speed as it comes
forward, and as it passes you withdraw the force so
that it may fall gently at the required spot. If the
fly is returned too quickly from the rear it will as-
suredly be snapped oil. Keep casting in this way until
you can throw a tolerable length, say twelve or four-
teen yards, always striving more for accuracy and
delicacy than length. Length is, of course, desirable,
but an accurate delicate cast at a dozen yards is better
in actual fishing than twenty blundering casts at 25
yards.
“ It will be understood that when the angler is mak-
ing his cast the line is considerably above the level of
his head. In throwing the line forward do not be in
too great a hurry, for if the fly is sent forward with
a jerk the line is likely to double back and form a loop
on the water, the fly itself not reaching its destina-
tion. When fishing with a dry fly the line can be waved
a few times in the air, which will have the effect of
flipping the water off the fly, so that when it falls on
the water again, although it will be damp, it will not
be so heavy and will again float.” Very often when
the fish are not feeding, the angler thinks that it is
the fault of the flies, and consequently keeps changing
and changing until he has tried every fly in his book.
Now, had he waited until the fish began to rise, he
would have found the flies that he had on at first, if
they were the right ones, quite good enough.
For wet fly fishing I find it a good plan to put a
split shot on the head of the fly, and after casting up
stream work it the same as you would the natural in-
sects.


Always endeavour, as much as you can, to have the
wind on your back, and always be sure to stand as
far off the bank as your length will allow when you
throw to the contrary side. When the wind will not
permit you to do so, and you are constrained to angle
on the side you occupy, you must then stand on the
very brink of the river, and cast your fly to the utmost
length of your rod, and line up or down the river as
the wind serves.
SPINNING FOR TROUT
The rod should be about 9 feet long, light, but
not too springy, and to consist of three joints, with the
middle joint on the stiff side; the reel either wood,
brass or ebonite, and large enough to hold at least 60
yards of line. The line must be prepared silk. They
do not kink like the hemp lines, and are not so hard on
the rod rings. The spinner, for preference, should be
a quill or phantom, from 1-j inches to 2 inches long,
I find the best, with a gut trace attached to it, and
at least two swivels. A larger spinner can be used if
the water is discoloured or thick.
When you have everything in readiness to start
operations in the stream you intend to fish, cast your
spinner as far out as possible over the water, and draw
it towards you at a brisk pace. For instance, if you
are working up stream, start at the tail end of a pool
and work all the water up to the ripple, at the head
of it, and if there is sufficient water flowing down,
work every bit of it right through to the next pool,
and so on, up the stream.
I know many anglers who only fish in the ripples
with the spinner, and pass over the quiet water in
the deep pools without trying them. It is in those
quiet, deep pools where the best fish lie, and I have
killed more trout in such places than in the ripples.


Again, I have seen anglers spin a ripple until they get
to a spot where they thought the water was running
too fast for a trout to live in, and would miss that
fast water and go on to the next ripple. Here they are
at fault again. I have taken fish with a spinner on
a ledge of rock half way up a fast running waterfall,
from a space only about a foot wide; so with the
spinner it is necessary to work all those spots in a fast
flowing stream. Of course, the faster the water the
faster you will have to pull your spinner through it.
This also applies to shallow streams, to prevent your
spinner fouling the bottom. Around large boulders
and submerged logs in a stream, are all good spots
to search with your spinner, also both deep and shallow
pools.
During the early spring very large fish are taken
on the spinner, in water only six inches deep, but they
do not frequent those spots during the hot summer,
and it would be as well then for the angler to pay
more attention to the deep water, taking care to let
his spinner sink some distance before pulling it through
the water, as the trout keep to the bottom of the
deep pools during the summer months. Keep as far
away as possible from the water that you are spinning
over, and learn to make long casts; owing to the trout
being a very timid fish, you must keep out of sight
as much as possible to be successful.
Very often, when using the spinners in water that
is heavily fished, such as a reservoir, I have had the
fish come at the spinner, but not take it. The best
thing to do under the circumstances then, is to give up
spinning, and use whatever natural bait is about at
that particular time of the year. On many occasions
fishing on the embankment, or the deep-water side of
reservoirs, I have got some good baskets of trout on
mudeyes, crickets, or black beetles, when several ang-
lers were spinning the same water without getting a
fish. The reason of this was that the water was
worked with the spinner from day to day, and most
of the trout at some time or other had been pricked


with the hook, and became what I call “ educated to the
spinner.”
At the Eildon Weir, on the Goulburn River, the
trout feed on a small native minnow called smelt.
These are much smaller than any artificial minnow
made, and sold in the tackle shops. A good imitation
one can be made thus: —Get a dried eel skin, cut out
a piece from the belly of the skin, about inches long
and £ inch wide, tapered slightly towards the tail.
Wrap a thin piece of sheet lead around a knitting
needle, and sew your eel skin over this. Use a No. 5
single-gut hook on this minnow, threaded through the
hole in the lead, after removing the knitting needle,
and bend the minnow slightly at the tail, to cause it
to spin.
The common earth worm, as a bait for trout, is
one of the best for the early spring, and should the
water be discoloured or muddy I would use it in pre-
ference to any other bait. Some anglers will look
upon you as a poacher if they see you fishing for trout
with worm, but there is as much skill in using it as
any other bait, and I see no reason why it should be
condemned. It is said the small, underweight trout
take the worm and are destroyed, but I have caught
and returned to the water underweight trout on a
dozen different kinds of bait, so why condemn the
worm alone?
The best worms to use are the dark red ones, which
can be got on the banks of most of our streams, un-
der cow dung, or in other moist places; they are about
three or four inches long. To place them on the
hook insert the hook about one inch from the head,
cover half your hook with it, then put another on
the same way, just leaving the barb exposed. They
will live a considerable time on the hook if baited
this way, and appear more natural. I will now de-
scribe how to use the bait. For up stream worm
fishing, throw out as far as possible and let it sink
slowly, then pull it very slowly towards you; repeat
this performance all over the stream, both ripples


and calm deep water. Of course, it is necessary when
fishing in a fast rapid up stream to move your rod
about the same pace as the water, so as not to get too
much slack on your line. If you see it move away,
strike with sufficient force to drive the hook home in
your fish. Sometimes your hook will foul the bottom,
and the force of water when fishing a rapid will
tighten your line; you are undecided then, whether to
strike or not. Give a very gentle pull; if a trout has
it he will move away; but if caught on the bottom it
will remain motionless; you must then try and free
your hook without disturbing the water above you.
On your way up stream or down stream, which-
ever way you are working, should you come to a large
pool, it is as well to stay there an hour or so; and
if possible, select a place with a sandy bottom. Cast
well out, and let your bait lie quietly on the bottom,
keeping your rod motionless after casting. You will
often get more trout this way than when moving all
the time, and more especially so if the stream is
muddy; this method also applies to perch, blackfish
and eel fishing.
You should keep fresh, lively worms on your hook
when bottom fishing, and use no lead on your cast,
as the worm will always sink to the bottom. Keep
a sharp eye on your line, and strike your fish on the
first run, or it will carry the worm some distance in
its mouth, and when it feels the line tighten, eject
the bait. Some anglers use a second hook, attached to
the loop on the cast where the line is knotted to it; it
answers all right on a clear sandy bottom, but I can-
not recommend it in a stream that abounds in snags
and submerged logs. Another objection I have to the
second hook is when the trout picks up one bait the
other drags, and he ejects the bait before you can
strike him.
Sometimes it is necessary to use a sinker when fish-
ing a reservoir to enable you to get your bait out to
the deep water. In that case, use a running sinker;


that is, a half-ounce bullet with a hole through the
centre. Cast out as far as possible, rest your rod on
a forked stick, and strike your fish as soon as he
moves off with the bait. It is a good plan, when
fishing this way, to pull a yard of line off your reel,
and leave it lay in a coil near your reel. This allows
you more time to pick up your rod before the fish
feels a tight line, and ejects the bait. Fish on a sandy
or muddy bottom if possible.
TROUT FISHING WITH FRESH-WATER
SHRIMP
The shrimp can be got with a fine-mesh net, in
most of our streams, among the weeds and on the sides
of submerged logs. The best way to carry them is
in a small wooden box, half full of sawdust; but if
they are plentiful in the stream that you are fishing,
and you are not going to travel far, it is just as well
to leave them in your net with some damp weeds, and
place the bottom of the net in the water whenever
you get the opportunity. To bait the hook, you insert
the point of the hook under the tail of the shrimp
and bring it out at the neck; it will take about three
shrimps to cover the hook. Sometimes you will get
on to a run of large shrimp, then two will make a
nice bait, and a trout will take a small bait like this
more readily than if you had a bunch of shrimp on
your hook. The trout is so cunning that you must
offer him the bait in as natural a way as possible, or
you will have him repeatedly refuse to take it.
When fishing with the shrimp you must learn to
throw your line with the underhand cast, the shrimps
being so tender that they will not stand the overhand
cast you use when working the spinner. As a rule,
when fishing with the shrimp you don’t require to


do any long casting. Go quietly along the banks, and
fish all the water within easy reach by casting out
and letting your bait sink to the bottom; then pull
it up very slowly. A bait of shrimp will last no time
on a hook if you pull it fast through the water. You
can go all over a pool this way; or on a hot summer’s
day select what you think is the deepest part of the
pool, and fish on or near the bottom. Trout, in the
summer months, frequent the deepest water, and lie
there during the heat of the day. They start to move
about in the evenings into the shallow portions of
the pools. Should you see a trout rise in a certain
part of a pool, it is advisable to get within casting
distance of that spot and wait for him.
Always carry a few pieces of cork with you, about
the size of an ounce bullet with a slit cut in each piece.
Attach one of these pieces to your gut cast if fishing
shallow water, or to your line if fishing deep water,
and throw out near the spot where you saw the fish
rise. Regulate the cork so that it will keep your bait
about a foot off the bottom. Sit down and keep quiet,
and sooner or later the trout will come back to this
spot. Keep a sharp eye on the cork, and the moment
you see it go under, strike your fish.
You will often notice a weed growing in the streams
with a long flax-like leaf that lies flat on the surface
of the water. The shrimp appear to like this weed,
and if you draw your shrimp net through it you are
almost certain to get a supply. The trout feeds about
those weeds, and a very good plan is to cast your
bait over them, then draw your line and a portion of
your cast over the weed, and let a coil or two of
slack ,line lie on the top, with the bait hanging down
a couple of feet. The weed thus acts as a fldat, and the
cork can be dispensed with. The moment you see
the slack line disappearing off the surface of the weed
you strike your fish. Never let a trout go too far be-
fore striking, or he will eject the bait.
Trout will take the shrimp bait during the hot, sum-
mer months, off the bottom, the same as worm fish-


ing. If you fish in the deep water, select the deepest
part of the pool. Cast out your shrimp bait, using a
running sinker, and fish the same way as in worm
fishing. This also applies to English perch fishing, as
I find they also frequent the deep pools in the hot
summer months.
TROUT FISHING WITH THE GRASSHOPPER
AND OTHER INSECTS
The rod, reel and line should be as light as possible,
although I use the same rod for all kinds of natural
bait fishing. But fishing with the grasshopper is so
much like artificial fly fishing, where you have to keep
on repeatedly casting, that a light, well-balanced rod
is necessary. The grasshopper generally puts in an
appearance about November, but it is not until Dec-
ember that they are fairly numerous on the various
streams. Then is the time to use them as a bait. If
you are walking along the banks of a trout stream,
and see the grasshopper on the surface of the water,
you are almost certain to see trout rising at them.
It is advisable to get a supply for bait. The best way
I find to catch them is to walk along the bank of the
stream, and when they hop into the water, draw your
shrimp net along the surface of the water, and get
as many in it as possible; then sink the net for a
moment. After giving them a ducking this way, it
will stop them from hopping for some time. They
can be picked out of the net and placed in a small,
well-ventilated bag.
I select the grasshoppers without wings for trout
fishing, and I find them the best, as they sink more
readily, and the trout appear to take them better un-
derneath than on the surface. The winged variety
will not sink without the aid of a light sinker, and I


have found, from experience, that any lead on the
cast, no matter how light, is against your chance of
hooking a trout when he takes the bait. Therefore,
discard the lead altogether if possible. Having got a
supply of grasshoppers, place two or three on the hook
as you would the shrimp, taking care to leave the point
and barb of the hook exposed. The reason I leave
the point exposed is because the body of the grass-
hopper is somewhat tough, and by pushing the point
right through the body it is free to enter the mouth
of the trout when you strike. Should you see a trout
rise at the grasshoppers on the surface of the water,
get within casting distance, then wait until he rises
again, and you will know which way he is feeding,
whether up or down the pool. Then cast your bait
five or six feet in front of the fish, or wherever you
saw him rise last, and let it sink slowly. The main
object is to keep behind your trout, and cast your bait
in front of him.
A trout will often feed along the whole length of a
pool, then turn and feed back again. I often see a
trout feeding towards me some considerable distance
away. I don’t rush up and meet him, but keep low
and quiet until the fish is opposite, or past me, then
I cast the bait in front of him. Stalking a trout in
this manner is one of the great arts of trout fishing,
and can only be mastered thoroughly by experience.
You can often see the fish when he is not rising. You
must then try and get your bait in front of him with-
out being observed. In the season, when the grass-
hoppers are plentiful on the water, you will often
see no trout rising, but if you use them in the deep
water, in the same manner as I described for shrimp,
you will often he successful, as it is only at intervals
they come to the surface to feed. I find a No. 3 or
4 hook, with a sneck bend, the best size for grass-
hoppers. Several other beetles and insects are good
baits during the summer months. Keep a sharp look-
out on the stream you are fishing, and whatever in-


sects you see plentiful on the water, you will do the
right thing if you use that insect for a bait.
One of the best day’s trout fishing I have had when
using the mudeye for bait was at Tourrourrong Re-
servoir, in company with His Excellency the Governor,
Sir Reginald Talbot, when we landed 14 trout weigh-
ing 30 lb. Another good bait for trout is the small
black tree locust, using them on the surface of the
water as you would the artificial fly. For many years,
in company with the late Sir George Jenkins, C.M.G.,
we have got some very large trout on this bait, when
fishing the upper waters of the Deep Creek.
For the benefit of those who do not know the mud-
eye, I may mention that it is the larvae of the dragon
fly, which can be got in most of our lagoons and water-
holes by drawing a small mesh landing-net through the
weeds. The mudeye will live a considerable time out
of the water if kept in a tin with some wet weeds or
grass. During the hot summer months, when the
rivers get very low, a supply of mudeyes can be got
in the cracks of submerged logs lying in the shallow
waters. First pull the log out of the water, and ex-
amine all cracks and holes in it. The mudeyes you
get from these logs are very dark, and a good bait.
TROUT FISHING IN RESERVOIRS
In most reservoirs the water is shallow on one side
and deep on the other, and the bait used for reservoir
fishing depends on the season of the year. During
September, October and November, the artificial baits
such as the quill phantom and the small devon are
good when the water is rough. When the water is
calm, worms and small yabbies are good baits in the
shallows. As the season advances, and the weather
gets warmer, small insects and flies appear on the sur-
face of the water, and towards evening the trout feed


on these. The insects are too small to put on a hook,
so the artificial fly can be used. Among the many
artificial flies I find the black gnat is very good, also
the black drake. As a general rule, dark-coloured flies
are the most successful. The trout appear to take
the artificial fly better in the reservoirs of Victoria
than in the rivers or streams.
Early morning and evening is the best time for fish-
ing in reservoirs, and the angler should fish the shal-
lows until the sun is well up. During the hot wea-
ther the trout leave the shallows for deep water about
two hours after sunrise. When fishing the shallows,
the angler will often see trout feeding in not more
than six inches of water; if using natural bait he
should cast his bait well out in front of the fish, and let
the bait lie on the bottom until the trout is about a
foot from it, then the bait should be pulled about six
inches along the bottom with a quick movement, and
the trout will usually seize the bait at once. When
you drive your hook home in the trout, and you have
him in shallow water, anything up to two pounds in
weight can be landed without using the net or gaff, by
simply keeping a very tight line on the fish, and when
he keeps rolling over in his struggles to escape, you
can gradually work him out on to dry land; but of
course this can only be done where you have a gradual
sloping bank, and you hook your fish in water not
more than about six inches deep.
Another good plan when fishing a reservoir is to
select a spot where the water is about three feet deep.
You can see the bottom plainly at that depth, and also
any trout that is feeding within casting distance. Sit
down and keep from moving about the bank, and the
trout will often come within a few feet of you. Then
you have a good opportunity to catch him. I fish the
deep water the same as I described in my article on
shrimp fishing, and find it very successful. I also use
the spinner in the deep water. Very often a certain
trout will not take the spinner or natural baits, yet the


next trout will take either, so it is advisable to give the
bait a good trial before changing it.
For night fishing in reservoirs, the best bait I find
is the black cockroach or cricket. Select a warm moon-
light night, and sit dowm quietly on the bank where
the water is fairly deep, and keep casting out, after the
bait has sunk a few feet draw towards you very slowly,
and cast again.
Of late years, when fishing reservoirs during the
hot summer months, I found it was only a waste of
time, and a lot of exertion, to keep walking around
the shallow stretches. The fish are lying quiet during
the heat of the day, in the deepest water —too far
out to cast a line without the aid of a sinker. But if
you know the water, and all the deepest spots, it is
better to sit down quietly, put on a running sinker about
half an ounce in weight, above the loop in your cast,
bait with a couple of lively worms, or small yabbies,
and cast out to the deepest water. Then rest your
rod on a forked stick, with a yard of slacked line
pulled off your reel, and leave it there until you get a
bite, or decide to try another spot.
If you are fishing with minnows or live bait, a good
plan is to have a small cork with a cut half way through
it for your line to fix into. You can then slide your
float up or down, to any depth you desire to fish. Have
a very light sinker on your cast, about 1 foot above
your hook, and fish off the bottom. This is also a
good way to fish with the Stewart tackle, using worm
for bait.


NIGHT FISHING FOR TROUT
Of late years, I have caught more trout at night
than during the day. I prefer a reservoir, and, as all
reservoirs have embankments, I find them the best
place at night. Moreover, to get the big fish it is
necessary to fish after dark, and I will now describe
how to go about it.
Select your spot in daylight, and see that it is free
from snags, etc. Any part of the embankment should
do, as long as the water you are going to fish is not
less than three or four feet deep. Get to your spot
before dark, and make a comfortable seat, and stop
there. Bait with a mudeye, black cricket, or cock-
roach, with a split shot pinched on to the shank of
the hook, just enough to sink the bait. Do not have
much line off your reel, about ten feet is sufficient;
that is, about the length of your rod. Cast out and
hold your rod motionless for about a minute; then
raise the point of the rod, and draw very slowly to-
wards you until you think it is near the hank. Then
cast out again, and keep repeating this method.
Do not stand up, or move about much. The trout
have a habit of feeding along the full length of the
embankment, and sooner or later they will find your
bait. But you must always keep it moving. I prefer
a moonlight night if possible, on account of being able
to get them in the landing net much better than on a
dark night. I have found, however, it makes no differ-
ence how dark the night is, the trout can see the bait,
and I have got some good baskets when I could not
see to bait my hook. It is at night that the big trout
feed the best, especially those that have been hooked
and lost on some previous occasion, and they are very
scared of taking a bait in the day time. I have got
some big trout also at night fishing with the worm as
bait, pulling it slowly along the surface of the water.


THE ENGLISH PERCH
The style most adopted for perch fishing is with
the float and minnow, but I find it too slow if the water
to be fished over is anyway large. My method is to
get a fair-sized minnow, and, after killing it, I place
a long piece of lead down into the gullet of the min-
now, then enter the hook at the top of its head, and
out at the throat. I then cast out as far as possible,
and, when it sinks to the bottom, I pull it towards me
with a series of quick jerks. By adopting this style of
fishing without the float, you can search all the water
very quickly, and, once you strike a perch, as a rule
you will get more in the same spot. I have been very
successful with this style of fishing, where the bottom
of the pools were snaggy, and I could not use the
sinker.
As a rule, where I get open water like a reservoir,
and the bottom free from snags, I use a running sinker
with a No. 2 or 3 hook, attached to the end of the line,
on about four inches of gut. I bait this with worm.
About two feet from the worm hook, and above the
running sinker, I use two droppers of artificial flies.
The red Palmer I find the best. I cast out as far as
possible; then pull it slowly along the bottom towards
me. Should a perch take the worm, strike the hook
home, let him play about a minute, and he will work
the artificial flies in such a manner that they will be
taken readily by others in the shoal. I have often got
three perch on the one cast, but this style of fishing
can only be done where you have a very clear bottom
and free from weeds, snags, etc. Should you not have
the artificial flies, you can use the worm on the drop-
pers above the sinker, but they do not stand the long
casting so well if you are fishing a reservoir, and want
to get out some distance.
When fishing creeks or pools that are not too wide
I use no sinker, and you are more certain of hooking
your fish without it, and less liable to get snagged.


Another good bait for perch, during summer months,
in creeks and streams, is the fresh-water shrimp; also
the larva of the dragon fly, better known as the mud-
eye, and small yabbies. I noticed, when using the
yabbie for bait, that the small perch would not take it,
and what perch I got on the yabbie have all been fish
from half a pound upwards.
During the summer months, when fishing for perch,
select the deepest water, and cast out your bait, and
let it sink slowly to the bottom, keeping as much out
of sight as possible from the water’s edge. After
your bait has reached the bottom, draw it towards you
about six inches, then stop for a minute, and draw
again, and keep on repeating this until you have it
close to the bank. Then draw up very slowly and cast
out again in another spot. Mostly all fish are on the
bottom in the deepest part of the pool during the hot
weather, and I have got some very large trout and
perch in this manner, when I did not see a sign of a
fish moving about. When you see a shoal of perch
moving about after the small minnows, it is advisable
then to use the artificial spinning baits, either devons
or phantoms. Cast out to where you see the fish rise,
and pull towards you at a fairly brisk pace, and you
are almost certain to get them to take it.
Much has been said as to the best spinning bait to
use, but I have got perch on them all. It does not
matter what colour it it as long as it spins well. It is
a good plan, when your phantom gets torn, or the
triangles become broken, to take off the silk body and
replace it with one made of eelskin. Before sewing on
the eelskin body attach a good, strong triangle hook
with stout gut to the head of the phantom, and have it
about one and a half inches long. Then build the
body of the phantom up around the gut with narrow
strips of rubber or other packing; then sew on the
eelskin and bind it to the head of the phantom. I have
been very successful with the eelskin phantoms, and
find them last much longer than ones made of silk.
With the devon bait I find the smaller they are the


better the perch take them, and I also find that they
take the spinner better if the side triangles are re-
moved.
Fishing with the float is still practised by many ang-
lers when perch fishing. I never use it for any class
of fishing, because it is not needed. When you throw
out with a float it scares the fish, and when a fish takes
the bait, the float helps to pull it out of his mouth
again. The angler who gets used to watching his line,
instead of a float, for indications of a bite, will never
use it, so my advice to the young angler is to discard
it altogether. The hooks I use for perch fishing are
either the “ sneck bend ” or “ model perfect,” No. 2
or 3, but the cheaper class of hook (the flatted end
Kirby) is also very good, and I use those where the
bottom is very snaggy. Being softer and finer wire
than the others, they give way when snagged, and you
don’t break your line, although they are strong enough
to hold a good fish. It is a great mistake to use
very stout hooks or extra strong gut. It is far better
to use fine gut and hooks. Then when you do get
snagged the loss of a hook is better than a few yards
of a silk line.
Since writing my first book I have discovered an-
other good bait for the perch, viz., the pigmy perch.
These are small native fish, resembling the English
perch, and they are very plentiful in the Yarra and
its tributaries. They can be used as a live bait by
placing the hook through the back fin, or they can be
used when dead by placing the hook through both lips
of the mouth, and pulling slowly through the water.


THE BLACKFISH
The habits of this fish vary a great deal in the
nature of the stream that you are fishing. For in-
stance, we will take the Deep Creek, from Keilor to
Romsey, where the pools are wide and there is not
much shade over the water in the way of timber, etc.
You will find the fish very shy, and it is no use to try
and catch them during the day time should the water
be clear. They do not come out from their haunts
to feed until dark, except when the water is muddy.
Then is the best time to fish, as they move about all
day in the muddy water. I find that the best time they
bite well is after a heavy thunderstorm, or when the
water is coming down discoloured after heavy rains,
but not too high. During a flood they do not bite
well, nor after a flood, when the river is going down
to its normal level, but should you be lucky enough
to be on this stream when the muddy water is com-
ing down, and fish the pools shortly after they get
muddy, you will find the blackfish then properly on
the feed.
As a rule, when the water is clear in the Deep
Creek, it is no use wasting your time trying to catch
the blackfish during the day time, or even at night.
They appear to feed only for a short time, just at
dusk, and again at dawn. They then appear to go
in shoals. I have noticed that where I could get one,
I could catch more. I have fished this stream since
boyhood, at all hours of the day and night, and tried
all sorts of baits, but the only time I have done well
was when a freshet was coming down after rain, or
when the pools were discoloured after a thunderstorm
during the summer months; and the best bait then to
use is the common earthworm.
Now, if you will take the small streams that flow
into the Yarra in the vicinity of Warburton or Heales-
ville, most of them are shaded and narrow, and a
few fish can be got during the day time by fishing in


all the dark, deep spots, and between logs, stumps,
etc., where you find the water deep. Some of these
small streams flow very fast, and I have got some fine
blackfish in the shallow ripples when the water is a
bit muddy, and also after dark in the clear water.
I will now describe how I fish for the blackfish.
When the water is open, the pools large, and the water
muddy, I select a spot, if possible, where there is a
backwash or a sandy bottom. I use a gut cast about
two feet long, with a No. 3 hook on the end of it,
baited with worm. I cast out and let the bait rest on
the bottom of the pool, using no lead whatever on
tht line, as a worm will always sink, and the moment
I see the line tighten I strike. Now, in using the
above tackle for blackfish it will also act for all other
fish which the pool contains, and you are often re-
warded with a good basket of mixed fish from the
one pool. When the water is clear, and you fish
during the night, it is advisable to know the depths of
the pools, and select a few good spots before dark.
I notice that at night time, and also when the water
is muddy, the blackfish like the shallow water, so if
you select a pool that contains plenty of logs or large
boulders it is a good place for night fishing, but, in-
stead of letting your bait rest on the bottom, keep
drawing it up to the surface, letting it sink very slowly,
then draw up slowly again, and keep on repeating
this in the one spot where the water is at least about
three feet deep, and if the fish are about this style
is very deadly. One of the best baits I find for this
class of fishing is the fresh water shrimp, and I have
secured several trout after dark in this manner, when
they would not take in the day time, and have also
caught the blackfish with the shrimp in the same way
as fast as i could bait, although other anglers have
been fishing on the bottom with worm alongside of
me, and have done no good. On one or two occasions
I was fishing a pool at night, about six feet deep.
On drawing my line to the surface, slowly, I did not
get a pull until my bait nearly reached the top of the


water, and was rewarded with a good catch, so I
think it advisable at night time to only use one rod,
and to keep your bait slowly on the move.
Some of the fast flowing mountain streams cannot
be fished properly without using a sinker, as the
stream carries the bait along too near the surface;
but when I am fishing these streams I tie a sinker
about half an ounce in weight on to the bottom of the
line, and place a hook, with about four inches of gut
attached to it, about six inches above the sinker. I
bait with worm, and fish all the fast shallow water
at the head of the pools by casting out and letting
the sinker rest on the bottom, and keep a tight line
from the tip of the rod to the sinker. I notice in
those small mountain streams, if the water is a little
muddy, or a freshet is coming down, some of the best
blackfish are to be got in the fast shallow water, and
also at night when the water is clear.
It is necessary to have a light for night fishing, to
bait your hooks, but do not let it flash on the water
you are fishing. Turn the dark side of your lantern
or lamp towards the water, and keep it as far back
from the water as possible. Hold the rod in your
hand and fish in the dark. The light scares the fish,
and when you do not use the float you don’t want the
light on the water. Learn to fish in the dark by the
feel of your rod, and after a little practice you will
be able to tell when you have the slightest pull, and
keep from moving about. Also take notice not to
have the moon shining behind you and throwing your
shadow on the water you are fishing. Keep your
face to the sun and moon if possible, for all fresh
water fishing, as nothing scares the fish more than a
moving object.
The best all-round bait for the blackfish is the com-
mon earthworm. I have got them with wattle grubs,
yabbies, the tail of boiled crayfish, crickets, and all
kinds of beetles and fresh water shrimp. I have al-
ways got good fish on the cricket at night, when the
water is clear, during the summer months, and when


they are to be got use them as bait; also the mudeye,
which is always a deadly bait for trout, perch, or
blackfish in clear water. The mudeye are very plenti-
ful in the swamps and lagoons about December, and
can be got by dragging your landing net through the
weeds or along the bottom of the pools, and as they
are one of the most killing baits in clear water for
trout, perch or blackfish, I strongly recommend you
to use them when they are to be got. There are seve-
ral varieties of them, but the long dark or green ones
are the best. Some of them are black and about one
and a half inches long; others are the shape of a
spider with long legs. They are all a good killing
bait.
When the rivers and creeks are very low during the
middle of summer, a supply of mudeyes can be got
from under and in the cracks of old submerged logs.
These are very black in colour, but one of the best
killing baits for trout in very clear water.
THE FRESH-WATER GIPPSLAND PERCH
In writing of this fish, I cannot speak too highly
of its qualities, both as a sporting and edible fish. I
cannot understand why there should be a doubt as to
whether the fresh-water perch and sea perch are dis-
tinct species. I have caught the sea perch at Eagle
Point at Bairnsdale, freshly run from the sea, with
sea lice all over them, and the following day have
caught fresh-water perch five miles up stream. When
there is heavy rain in the upper reaches, and a freshet
comes down, all the sea perch clear out to sea, while
the fresh-water perch still remain. I have, of course,
caught the sea perch in fresh water, hut they go there
to get rid of the sea lice.
The fresh-water perch dies with its mouth closed,
and the sea-perch with the mouth open.


The best way to fish for the fresh-water perch is
with the fly. A rod 9to 10 feet, light, a light moose-
head or silk line, four feet of gut. Best flies: black
wings with white body; silver doctor, Jock Scott, and
butcher.
A boat, of course, is necessary—one man to row
and the other, standing in the stern, to fish.
Cast your fly well under the shady willows or
wattles, or alongside submerged trees or logs. Allow
the fly to sink about a foot, then bring away with
short, sharp jerks. The moment you feel the fish,
strike. The man at the oars should then give a good
strong pull, taking the boat to the centre of the river,
where the fish can be played without danger of snag-
ging.
After fishing a few yards of snags, with the fly
sunk to a foot deep, go over the same water and allow
the fly to sink about three feet before moving. I have
known them to refuse to take it unless sunk about
five feet.
A very favourite way of taking these fish is to run
the boat (with as little noise as possible) alongside
a sunken wattle, gum or willow. With a seven-foot
stout rod, a light sinker, and a I/O hook with one
large, or two small horsestingers attached, and three
foot gut bottom, fish about six feet deep; then gradu-
ally go deeper, feeling your way for snags. Strike
at the first pull, and hang on. This applies also to
black-cricket, mudeyes or shrimp.
Another way I have found very deadly is to an-
chor the boat about six to eight yards away from snag
(up stream). Use no sinker, a three to four foot gut
cast, a single large shrimp, cricket or mudeye. Cast
a yard or two from snag, and allow to sink beneath
snag.
If bank fishing, always look for backwashes. Use
a piece of cork about the size of the little fingernail,
blackened with a match; three-foot gut cast. Split
the cork and run on to gut just where it joins the
line, which, when the cork floats, leaves cricket, mud-


eye or horsestinger, three feet below surface. Keep
well out of sight, cast well out, and let stream carry
your cork where it will. Strike immediately cork dis-
appears. No sinker is required, as mudeye and cricket
sink readily, and, after becoming a little soaked, the
horsestinger will do the same.
It seems a great pity that this magnificent fish, a
native of our rivers, is being allowed to die out while
such useless fish as English perch, carp, tench and
roach are propagated.
CARP AND TENCH
The style of fishing for both these fish is the same,
as their habits are the same, and they are to be found
in the same class of water. Carp are shy fish, and
require much patience and caution to capture, conse-
quently they are fish that will prove disappointing to
the beginner. In very hot weather they often swim
close to the surface of the water, and can be seen by
the angler as they move in between the weeds which
they brush on one side, thus causing a ripple. The
angler should note these spots, and fish them, being
very careful in all his movements.
Early morning and late evening are the best times
to fish for them. The best baits are good lively worms,
ordinary white paste, half-boiled new potatoes, gentles,
and wasp grubs which have have been covered with
honey. A good plan, if you are handy to a pool that
contains carp, is to ground bait it for a day or two
before fishing it, then use for bait the same as you
used for ground baiting.
Small new potatoes are put on to the hook (which
should be a small triangle) by using a baiting needle,
but the triangle is pulled well through. Float fish-
ing or ledgering can be adopted, choosing clear bot-
toms near lily roots and weeds. Some anglers, know-


ing how cautious the carp is, sometimes succeed in
catching him by throwing small pieces of bread on the
surface of the water. When all is quiet the carp will
come up and suck the bread. The angler puts a dry
piece of bread, the size of a walnut, on to his
hook, casts it out to where the fish was feeding, and
awaits results. There being no weight of any kind
to carry out the bait to the centre of the pond, some
method has to be devised for getting it there. One
angler I know gets his bread out to a desired spot by
using a float, with a lead immediately under it. This
is thrown well out, and then the float is drawn on to
the top of a lily leaf, or in between weeds. The bread
floated on or just below the surface of the water, the
lead not sinking it, as the latter was quite close to
the float. The disturbance of the water by this method
would naturally frighten the carp for an hour or two,
so that the angler had to wait until they returned to
their usual spot. The bread was put on dry because
it then held more firmly to the hook, and it became
soft enough after it had been in the water a little
time.
Another method is cross lining, but this requires two
anglers to work it. A fine piece of cotton is tied about
a yard above the bait, one angler walks round to the
other side of the pond with a reel of cotton, paying it
out as he goes. When opposite to where they intend
to fish, the cotton is wound up, and that draws the
bait into the centre of the pond, the other angler having
paid out the line off the winch. When the bait is in
position, a gentle strain is made on the cotton, whilst
the angler holds tight on to the line. This breaks the
former, and the bait is ready for a fish to take it.
The carp will easily crush up a parboiled potato
once he gets it well down. Although carp have very
small mouths for their size, the most successful carp
fisher I know uses a very large bait, larger than a
pigeon’s egg, and I have taken my best carp with a
bait of this size. There is something in such a bait
that a fish can see, and a preliminary taste is given


before the hook or triangle is boldly sucked in. Carp
are such suckers that nothing suspicious in the shape
of a hook will cause them to leave the bait alone, and
after a morsel or two is swallowed the remainder is
taken with a gulp, and the hook goes home. The
ground-baiting should be done overnight if possible.
The majority of anglers, whose time is limited to
only a few hours’ fishing, prefer to walk along a
stream, and pick out the most likely spots for the
tench and carp. Select the spots where there are
plenty of weeds, and fish in among them. It is not
necessary that the water be deep, as the fish mostly
frequent the shallow water. Small, lively worms are
then the best bait. Give the carp or tench plenty of
time to take the bait. They have a habit of sucking
the bait for some time before swallowing it, but when
you see your line move off and tighten, strike at once.
They do not bite well during the winter.
The best months to fish for carp or tench are Jan-
uary, February and March.
THE ROACH
The best class of rod to use is a light trout rod, a
light silk line, and fine gut. Roach can be got on
the bottom by using float tackle, or they can be caught
by using a fly on the surface; but, as they are not
free risers, the latter plan is seldom adopted. In
ordinary waters a light float and very fine tackle is
essential to success. A long straight thin float is
generally used, which carries a light sinker; but in
heavy, fast water, a heavier sinker will have to be
used.
Care must be taken that the hook sinks close to
the bottom of the river, and for the purpose of as-
certaining- the depth of the water the plummet is
brought into use. When the plummet has been placed


on the hook and dropped into the water, the angler
should hold line tight and then move his float either
up or down until the float cap just touches the top
of the water. He will then be sure that he is fishing
at the right depth.
Another method is: Cast well out, and let the cur-
rent take the float down stream. By this style of fish-
ing you can search a lot of water quickly by paying
the line off the reel as the float travels down.
The further the float is away from the angler the
quicker he must strike after detecting a bite. As
soon as a fish is hooked raise the rod and keep a tight
line on him, unless you can feel that he is very strong,
in which case it will be necessary to hold him lightly
or even pay out a little line. One can usually wind
up small roach immediately after the fish is hooked,
and it is best to get it into the punt or on to the bank
as soon as possible; though the angler must not hurry
a large roach. The object of getting a fish out of the
water quickly is in order that it shall not scare other
fish. In the summer roach feed best from four to
nine in the morning and four in the afternoon until
dark. In the winter they feed best from ten in the
morning until four in the afternoon, though there
is always a possibility of catching them earlier and
later.
If the fish are on the feed, and your tackle is rightly
adjusted, you will have a bite very soon after you
begin to fish. Strike the moment you see the float
affected, letting the movement be made with the hand
only, from the wrist, not from the arm, turning the
point of your rod upwards. Don’t wait until you
think the fish has swallowed the bait, because as soon
as he finds it is attached to something he will blow
it out of his mouth, unless he is very hungry, which
is not often the case; and remembering that your
float cannot be affected by him unless he has your
bait between his lips.
Do not forget, also, that the largest fish generally
bite in the most cautious manner. As soon as you


have hooked a fish, little or big, keep a tight line on
him, your rod being raised directly over him. If he
be large and pull well, don’t be afraid of him, for
if you keep your rod over him he must pull tremend-
ously to break you, though your tackle be of such a
delicate order. Keep your rod over him until he is
quite still, and, if you do not use a landing net, lift
him out of the water as gently as you possibly can,
with the rod in your right hand, letting him hang his
whole weight. Then very cautiously swing him to
your left hand, and as cautiously get him within your
grasp, and hold him so fast he shall not stir, while
you take the hook out of his mouth. Always keep
your seat while you are killing and landing your fish,
unless it be on any critical occasion, for rising up sud-
denly, and moving about your swim, if the water be
clear, will drive all the fish clean out of it, and you
may have to wait no little time before they come back
again.
As the roach has a small mouth, I find the best
size hooks to use are from No. 7 to 9. The baits are:
Shrimps, worms and gentles. Paste is another good
bait; make it from the crumbs of a loaf of bread about
two days old, by squeezing it in a piece of rag, and
making it up into a paste same as for carp fishing.
I have caught some fine roach below Dight’s Falls,
on the river Yarra, with the worm as bait. That was
in 1904. I have not fished it of late years, but there
is no reason why this fish should not be there still.
Roach take any kind of small flies well, also gentles.
Use the finest of gut, and small hooks, and fish off
the bottom of the quiet pools, without a sinker. Do
not give the fish much time when it takes the bait, but
strike at once.


EELS
These are found in all our streams south of the
Dividing Range, and are fished for generally with
strong, coarse tackle. For the eel has to be treated
rather roughly, and when one is hooked you must hold
on to him with a tight line, or he will take you to
the nearest snag in the river, and free himself. They
do not feed much in the winter, and night time dur-
ing the summer months is the best time to catch them.
They are very keen on the smell, and a good place to
fish is where the stream is flowing in at the head of
a pool. Always use fresh bait. Any kind of live bait
is good, such as minnows; but, when they are not to
be obtained, a piece of rabbit’s flesh, or liver, cut into
cubes about half an inch square I find one of the best
baits. With this bait you want to give them a little
time when you feel a bite before you strike, then
strike hard.
Use a coarse line with an ordinary No. 4 eyed hook
tied on to the end of it; a short, stout rod, but no
float or sinker. Cast out, and let your bait lie on the
bottom, holding the rod in your hand. Do not have
your light shining on the water, better to fish in the
dark. If the water is muddy, after a thunderstorm
during the daytime, they often bite well.
Other good baits are large, tough worms, wood
grubs, or the entrails of rabbits or birds, but all classes
of bait must be fresh. The eels are very difficult to
get into a landing net. It is better to fish for them
off a sandbank or any convenient spot where you can
effect a landing, without lifting it out on your rod, by
drawing it out gradually along the bottom.


MINNOWS
The minnow is one of our pretty little native fishi
They are one of the best baits to use for perch, and
will take a small piece of worm freely, baited on the
smallest hook you can buy. I usually use a fine gut
cast about a yard long, with three hooks about a foot
apart, and no sinker. Cast out, and keep your cast
near the surface, pulling it slowly towards you. Min-
nows usually go in shoals, and it does not take long
to get a supply for bait. They are in mostly all our
streams, and are one of the best fish for small boys
to practise on, to get their first lesson on angling.
It has often give me pleasure to fix up a rod and
tackle for small boys to catch these fish. The boys
would spend hours at them, and I was well rewarded
for my trouble to see the smile of satisfaction on their
little faces when they landed a few. Many of these
boys now, who are grown up to be good, successful
anglers, never forget the first lesson I gave them on
these small fish. So my advice to dad is, if he has
a small boy, to take him along and give him a lesson
in minnow fishing; when he grows older he can go
in for larger fish, as he must learn how to handle his
rod first.
Another small native fish, called the pigmy perch,
very plentiful in the Yarra, is a good bait for the
English perch. These can be got in the weeds along
the water’s edge by using a landing-net. They
are also plentiful in the lagoons near the river, and
are a good bait for the big Yarra trout, using them as
live bait.


THE GOULBURN AND MURRAY FISHES
The Goulburn and Murray fresh-water fish may
be classified into five distinct species, viz., Murray cod,
Macquarie perch, golden perch, silver perch (or
Grunter), and the pibre or bony bream.
I have seen two distinct species of Murray cod.
The first, a long trout-shaped fish of a light colour, is
known as the trout cod; the other, a short, stocky fish
with a decidedly bluish tint, is spoken of by anglers at
Nagambie as the blue cod. The latter is a much
stronger and better sporting fish than the trout cod.
Until a few years ago the cod was looked upon as
purely a bottom feeder. By this I mean it always
kept to the bottom when on the feed, and until the
spoon bait and other spinners were used, it was fished
for in this belief. As one is not always able to secure
a boat for spinning with the aeroplane spinner or
spoon bait, there is still good sport to be had bottom
fishing. I mean by this, to cast well out, and fish on
the bottom, using a wire sinker and either one or two
hooks.
The cod is a very voracious feeder, and takes almost
anything in the shape of bait, including worms, yab-
bies, mussels, grubs (the large, white wood grubs are
the most killing bait), also fresh-water shrimp and
tadpoles. The latter bait is one of the best I have
used at the Goulburn Weir for the Macquarie perch.
The cod at Goullburn Weir seem to like the fast
water as it drops from the weir, and this is the best
place to fish. Use a fairly heavy sinker, and cast
well up into the boil, where the water drops from the
top. At this particular spot it is one mass of fresh-
water shrimps, all along the wall, and even up on the
stone steps. Here the shrimp is the best bait to use
for all the Goulburn fishes.
On several occasions when fishing this water, I
hove got some good cod at the run-out or tail of this
pool, but have always been more successful under the


fast water, where it drops from the weir above, both
for cod and Macquarie perch.
Sometimes, when the river is rising, after heavy
rains, the Macquarie perch can be seen close to the
bank in shoals. It is then you need a variety of bait,
such as shrimps, worms and tadpoles, as they are
peculiar feeders, one day taking a certain bait well,
and the next not looking at it. So it is advisable to
change your bait frequently until you find out what
they are taking best.
I have got some good cod on the spinner in the
basin, or calm water, at the run-out of this pool. The
banks, both sides, are pitched with stones, and you
have a clear bank behind you for clean casting from
the bank.
If you are not fortunate enough to own a casting
reel, your best plan is to pull about twenty yards of
line off your reel, and lay it in a clear place on the
bank, in one large coil about two feet in diameter.
Then, before standing up to cast, pull off an extra
yard of line from your reel, and lay this away from
the main coil. The object of this is when you raise
your rod to cast out, you do not disturb the main coil,
and it runs out through the rings of the rod without
tangling.
To cast well out, draw your spinner to within a
couple of feet from the top of your rod, holding the
line in your left hand. Bring the rod sideways be-
hind you, and swing out quickly, without jerking,
and always aim high, say thirty feet above where you
want your spinner to fall on the water. As soon as it
hits the water, pull the line through the rings of your
rod as quickly as possible. Have the finger and thumb
of the left hand loose on the line where you are hold-
ing the rod, and as you pull the line through as far
as you can, grip the line with finger and thumb of the
left hand, and take a fresh grip with your right hand
on the line where you are holding it with your left
hand, and pull the line again through the rings of the


rod. Keep on repeating this until your spinner is
close in to the bank you cast from.
With a little practice, you can coil your line on the
bank as you pull your spinner in, and it is then ready
to cast out again. The main thing is, when once your
spinner hits the water, to keep it spinning at the same
pace all the time. Do not let it sink too far, or you
will get snagged, then it’s good-bye to your spinner.
They are usually mounted on very large hooks, and
it is very difficult to free them once they catch on to
the snags or rocks.
Most of the cod I have caught at this weir have
been taken on shrimp, close up to the bottom step of
the wall. The fish seem to keep close to the wall
after the shrimps.
The bottom of this basin is very rough and stony,
and, unless you use the wire sinker and only one
hook, you get snagged very often. I use only one
hook, about a foot above the wire sinker, when fishing
any part of this river, and I do not lose many gut
bottoms.
I had another remarkable experience at the Goul-
burn Weir at the opening of the cod season in 1931.
I was fishing for Macquarie perch with very fine
tackle, and a small hook, using the tadpoles as bait. I
had only a light split shot for a sinker, just weight
enough to keep the bait under the water. I was fish-
ing the deep, calm water, close to the bank, about
twenty yards below the stone steps of the weir, and,
letting my bait sink about two feet under the water,
I got several good Macquarie perch. Then, without
any warning, a big cod took the bait, and broke my
fine cast. Instead of putting on a stronger cast, I tied
on another small hook, and after catching a few more
perch, another cod took my bait and broke the cast
again. I then put on a stouter cast, using the tadpole
for bait, and was rewarded by getting two cod shortly
afterwards, in the same place.
That was at 4 p.m. in the afternoon, just when the
water was shaded from the sun by the weir above me.


This goes to prove that the cod, like the trout, will
take a bait near the surface of the water. The por-
tion of the weir where I was fishing was ten feet
deep, yet I was only fishing at a depth of from two
to three feet, with only a split shot for a sinker.
I found it a good plan, during the middle of the
day, to fish the weir for Macquarie perch, by using
one hook, baited with worms, tadpoles, or shrimps,
using only one split shot, or a small piece of lead on
the cast, about nine inches above the bait, just enough
to sink it. Cast out, let it sink slowly, and pull it up
very slowly. I found that the Macquarie perch take
a slow-moving bait better than if it is lying on the
bottom.
TROLLING FOR MURRAY COD
I will now take you to Lake Nagambie, or, as it is
called, the backwaters above the weir. A boat is re-
quired, with not more than two in it, or three at the
most; one to pull the boat and the others to use the
spinners, one trolling behind the boat, and the other
casting the spinner. The spinner most used is the
aeroplane, No. 2 size. The boat is pulled very slowly,
the spinner trolling behind, with about thirty feet of
line out from the point of the rod.
It is best to keep out of the deep channel when
spinning. A good place is just along the sides of the
channel, or old river bed. I find the best time is a
couple of hours in the evening, until dark. Very often
your spinner gets a lot of weeds on it, as there are
several places in the lake where the weeds are thick.
It is a good plan to pull up your spinner at intervals,
to see that it is free of weeds.
Only the strongest lines should be used for this
class of fishing.


When a cod takes the spinner, it is advisable to
hold on, and give him no line from the reel, or he
will snag you. The best fish lie among these snags
and submerged trees. They come out and take the
spinner, and then turn to get back among the snags
or their hiding-place. It is for you to stop him from
getting back again. So hold on tight as soon as you
hook him, and when, as you get him a bit quiet or
played out, use the gaff and lift him into the boat.
Some anglers do not troll at all, but keep casting
out the spinner, and drawing it to them in like manner
as spinning for trout. Always cast up against the
dead trees and submerged logs. This lake is heavily
timbered, and it is close to these trees and logs where
the best fish lie, so it is advisable to search around them
all with your spinner.
Sometimes a cod will take the spinner, and not get
hooked. Get your boatman to approach again the
spot where you rose your fish, only from a different
angle, and cast over the same spot again. Very often
you will get him on the next cast. It is only when
you get out in the lake a few hundred yards from the
shore that you can see the old course of the river,
which is free from dead trees, and about two chains
wide.
Here the water is very deep—up to forty feet—and
all along the old river-bed in the deep water is a good
place to fish with the worm for red fins and Mac-
quarie perch. Very often a few good tench are got
in this deep water, also cod fishing on the bottom, from
the boat. A good plan is to have one rod baited for
cod, with yabbie or large white wood grubs, but
be sure your tackle is strong when fishing for cod, and
using these baits, and never leave the rod out of
your hand, because a cod, when he takes the bait,
will pull your rod in with his first run, unless you fas-
ten it to the boat.
If you decide to fish in the old river bed (or chan-
nel, as some anglers call it), keep a look-out on the
gum trees for nails that have been driven into them


in past years by boatmen, to tie up their boats. All
these spots are good places to fish, because, when a
boatman finds a good spot in the channel, he generally
brings some big nails along with him on his next
visit, and drives them into the tree to tie his boat to.
There are miles of this water to fish, and it is always
advisable to try fresh places every time you go out.
In this lake there are miles of channel that have not
been fished. I mean by channel, the course of the
old river before the weir was built, and it is wise to
try it out, say, every 200 yards or so until you get on
to a shoal of fish.
Some spots have a sandy bottom, and these are the
best places to fish. There are such likely spots at
every sharp bend in the channel, and they all should
be tried as you go along in the boat. When you get
on to a place where the fish are biting, stay there
while the sport lasts.
At the opening of the cod season, on December 1,
the majority of anglers fish below the weir, neglecting
the waters above. There is no doubt it is the best
place for about a month or six weeks after the season
opens. After that the fish get scarce, and it is better
then to fish the lake above the weir from a boat.
I have found that the best way to fish for Macquarie
perch in the lake is ledgering, that is, to have your
hook tied on to about a foot of gut. Before attaching
your gut hook to the line, place a running sinker on
your line. A running sinker is a bullet with a hole
in the centre. You thread your line through the hole,
then fasten your line to the gut hook. The knot on
your line prevents the sinker from slipping down on to
the hook.
It is not necessary to use a heavy sinker—the lighter
the better, say a half-ounce or less, because there is
no current in the channel, and all that is required is
enough weight to carry the bait to the bottom. You
are thus less liable to get snagged. I sometimes vary
this by using a small float, and fishing off the bottom.
This is the best method for catching tench and red-


fins, and very often the Macquarie perch, as they do
not always feed on the bottom. It also answers the
same purpose for trout fishing, and I have seen some
very fine trout rising in this lake.
The way to rig up this tackle is to have a No. 4
hook, “ old size,” with one foot of gut attached to it.
At the loop where the line is attached, but above the
loop, pinch on to one line a split shot, or a small, flat
thin piece of lead, about the same weight as one shot.
For a float, use half of a small cork from a medicine
bottle. Put a cut in the cork half-way through, place
the line in the cut, and the cork can be drawn up or
down on the line to any required depth. It is best
to tie a piece of cotton around the cork at right angles
to the cut, so as to avoid losing the cork when striking
the fish. It is wise to get the depth of the hole you
are fishing before regulating the cork to the required
depth of the fishing. Fish about two feet off the
bottom.
To find the depth of the hole, take a flat, thin piece
ef lead, about a half-ounce in weight, a half inch wide,
and two inches long; double this over, and pinch it
on to your line at the place where the line is attached
to the gut hook, and the same place as you have at-
tached the split shot. Now everything is ready to
try the depth of the hole you intend to fish. For a
start, have your cork three or four feet up your line,
and cast out. If the hole is deeper than where you
placed the cork, the heavy sinker will pull it under.
Keep rising your cork by sliding it up the line until
the sinker is on the bottom, and your cork floats. Then
pull up, and take the heavy sinker off the line, and
slide the cork down about two feet, and fish about that
depth from the bottom of the hole. I find this a very
quick method of ascertaining the depth of any hole.
The heavy piece of flat lead can be attached to the
line very quickly, without undoing any of your tackle.
So it is necessary to always carry a piece of flat lead,
about as thick as a sixpence. This is easily cut with a
knife to any required weight.


I may mention here that I have found this method
of fishing with the small cork very good for trout fish-
ing in the backwaters of Eildon Weir. After ascer-
taining the depth, fish about two feet off the bottom,
using for bait worms, wattle grubs, small yabbies,
maggots, mudeyes, shrimps or smelt. If you can get
someone who has done a lot of fishing at Lake
Nagambie, from the boat, to take you out, and fish the
best places, you are almost sure of getting good sport.
Very often, when trolling with the spinner, you will
find a thick weed bed. It is here you are likely to get
some good tench fishing, if you tie up the boat to a
tree, and fish just on the edge of the weeds. This is
also a good spot for redfins.
I will now take you for a day’s fishing in the Goul-
burn River, below the weir. After leaving the weir,
working down stream for about 200 yards, the water
is fast and shallow. This should not be passed over at
the opening of the cod season, in December, as good
places to fish for Macquarie perch are the quiet eddies
and backwaters close to the bank. I have got some
fine fish here, in very shallow water, especially with
a good flow of water coming down. But later on,
when the weather gets warmer, and the river low, it
is no good, as the fish get to the deeper water, and
your best plan is to go further down the river and fish
the deep holes.
If you can find a sandbank on the edge of a deep
hole, give such a place a good trial. Mostly all this
river is very snaggy, and it is always an advantage
to use one hook only, about a foot above the wire
sinker. Always be sure to tie your wire sinker on to
the main line with a fine piece of string, much weaker
than your main fishing line. Should your sinker catch
on the bottom, the weak string will break, and an-
other wire sinker can be tied on. This saves your
silk line. It is very annoying if you get snagged when
not using this class of sinker, and have to pull and
break a good line, perhaps the only line you have with
you. Sometimes the hook will get fast on a log or


rocks, so be careful to use gut on your hooks a bit
weaker than your silk line.
If the weather is hot, and the water of high tempera-
ture in the river, your best plan is to find the deepest
holes you can, and fish on the bottom, as all fish get
to these places, and stay there during the hot months
of the year. After you have fished the river a few
times, you will get to know where all the deep holes
are, and you can then get over more water in a day’s
fishing.
As a rule, all fast water is shallow, and all eddies
and backwaters are the deepest. It is in these eddies
and backwaters where the fish feed on worms, etc.,
carried down with the stream, and washed out into the
backwaters. Shortly after sundown the fish leave the
deep holes and feed in the shallows during the night.
This applies to all fresh-water fish. Always bear in
mind to keep from moving about or walking close to
the water’s edge, thus scaring the fish. They can
observe you at night equally as well as in the daytime.
It is therefore advisable to select a spot to fish before
dark, and remain there.
If I am fishing a reservoir or a big pool for trout
at night, I select the most likely spot, and sit down,
fishing without a sinker. I cast out, and hold my rod
motionless. At the end of a minute or two I draw
the line in slowly by gradually lifting the point of the
rod until it is straight up in a line with my shoulder.
Then cast out again, and keep repeating this. Always
keep your bait moving, but very slowly.
It is unnecessary to cast out a long distance at night;
ten or fifteen feet from your rod top is sufficient, as
the fish then come close in to the banks to feed. I
have landed some good cod at night by fishing the
Goulburn River in the same way as I have already
described for trout fishing in reservoirs.
One of the best day’s fishing I had was at the Goul-
burn Weir. I made that my starting point, and walked
down the channel supplying the Waranga Basin. About
a mile down this channel you come to what is known


as the backwater—a wide stretch of water flowing off
the main channel. The point where the water breaks
away from the main channel is a good place for cod
fishing, and some very large redfins are also taken.
Further down the channel for another mile you come
to the Willows. A bridge crosses the channel near
the Willows, and here also the water leaves the chan-
nel, and forms a lake on both sides of the main road.
This is also a good place to fish, especially for redfins.
Returning to fish the Goulburn River, the bridge
over the main channel is re-crossed, and the river
reached after five minutes’ walk. You can then fish
the river back to the weir. This will occupy a whole
day, but a good variety of casting places and fish are
encountered during the round trip of about four miles.
Along this stretch of water there are some fine sand-
banks for Macquarie perch and golden perch. I have
always succeeded on this stretch of water, getting more
pleasure than fishing all day in the one spot at the
weir.
The eastern channel, supplying Shepparton with
water, also provides good fishing. This channel is
crossed on the back road, leading to the weir. What I
like about the channel is that it has a clean bottom, is
free from snags, and a very easy place to fish.
Now, a few words about bait. As worms are very
hard to get at the weir, I would advise you to take a
good supply with you, as worms are the best all-round
bait.
Shrimps are plentiful at the weir, but hard to get
lower down the river. A good plan is to have a long-
handled fine-mesh landing net, and after dark, drag it
along the rocks at the weir, and under the stone steps,
where the water flows over the weir. If there is not
much water coming over the weir the bait may be ob-
tained plentifully on the stone steps in shallow water
during the daytime. I have often secured a supply
of shrimps here without a net, by picking them up
with my hands, as hundreds of them are to be seen in
the shallow water.


Another plan to obtain shrimps is to tie a skinned
rabbit or some other piece of meat on the inside of a
kerosene-tin. Have the tin well perforated, and tie the
meat on to the bottom of the tin, and sink it along-
side a big log or among weeds. Leave the tin in the
water all night. Have a rope attached to the tin in
order that the can may be pulled up at intervals, when-
ever a supply of bait is wanted.
Yabbies are obtainable from several waterholes
handy. I find the quickest way to get them is to have
a piece of thread or string about six feet long, and
tie a piece of meat on to the end of it. Have a peg
about a foot long, and stick it into the bank at the
water’s edge; then throw out your bait. You will re-
quire about six of these lines to keep you busy. When
you see the line tighten, have your landing net handy,
and pull very gently on the line until it is brought
near the surface. Then whip your net smartly behind
the yabbie, and lift him out. Sometimes you will get
two or three at a time. Throw the bait in again, and
attend to the other lines. If the yabbies are plentiful
you will be kept busy. Have a wet sugar bag, and
place the yabbies in it as you catch them. If you keep
the bag wet, and in the shade, the yabbies will keep
alive for a long time.
In most of the lagoons and water-holes you can get
a supply of tadpoles with your landing net, by draw-
ing it smartly through the weeds or along the edge of
the banks. I have found these one of the best baits
to use on the Goulburn, both for cod and the Mac-
quarie perch. If you can get them, by all means use
them for bait. They are a very soft bait, and hard to
keep on the hook. I find the best way to secure them
to the hook is to place the hook in the thickest part
of the tail—that would be about the middle of the
tadpole—and leave the barb of the hook exposed after
placing the hook right through the tail. Of course,
the tadpoles that have the legs formed are the toughest
and best to use, but they cannot always be got. One
placed on the hook is sufficient, and a more natural


bait for the fish. It does not matter if a lot of your
hook is showing, which will be the case when baiting
with tadpoles. Do not bait with two or three tadpoles
to try and cover your hook. A bare hook does not
scare the fish.
Bardies or wood grubs are the best killing bait for
cod, but I have never induced the Macquarie perch to
take them. If you only want to catch cod, it is best
to use this bait. Never lay your rod down on the
bank, out of your hand, whilst having this bait in the
water, as the cod takes it with such a rush that he
will pull your rod in.
On one occasion, when fishing the Goulburn Weir,
during the Christmas holidays, using worm for bait, I
could not get a bite. There were several other anglers
at the same place, but no fish catching. About 5
o’clock in the afternoon some anglers arrived from
Seymour. One of them had a tin of bardies. He
baited his hook, and cast out into a deep hole under the
stone steps of the weir, and in less than three min-
utes he had a 10 lb. cod. Every time he cast out into
the same spot he would get another. In a very short
time he had six cod, from 10 lb. down to 3 lb. None
of the other anglers had this bait, so they had to look
on. This goes to prove that the cod in the heat of
the day get to the deepest holes.
At the opening of the trout season at Eildon Weir,
on September 1, 1932, I spent four days at this place,
and had some splendid sport on the first day. Several
days before the opening day, there was a big fall of
snow on the mountains. Then it rained heavily, and
brought the cold snow waters down the river, which
gradually got very muddy. After two days the fish
went off their feed, but when the water first started
to come down discoloured, the fish bit freely at the
worm and mountain yabbie. Not only at the weir,
but lower down stream, towards Thornton, several
good bags of trout were obtained up to 8 lb., by ang-
lers fishing in the backwaters and shallow sandbanks.


I selected a place to fish where there was a deep hole
in the backwaters. It seemed that all the trout got
to this spot on account of feed, and to get away
from the faster waters in the middle of the river, which
was now rising and flowing fast. I used the worm
for bait, and got fifteen trout in the one place. I
fished this same spot next day. The river had risen
a lot during the night, and came down very muddy.
I could not get a bite there, although fishing for two
hours. I tried the shallow channel, near the steps,
going up to the top of the embankment, and got some
nice trout, including a 5 lb. rainbow.
It is always advisable when fishing here to try out all
the calm, shallow water when muddy. I used up all my
yabbies on the first day, and when I cleaned my trout
I found that all the best fish had been feeding on yab-
bies. I could not obtain a fresh supply of yabbies
here, but as I continued to get a few fish on the worm,
I was satisfied.
About Christmas time the Bogong moth makes its
appearance at this place, and they are on the water
in millions. This is the time for the best trout fish-
ing, as the moth is a deadly bait, especially in the
lake above the weir. The trout are rising at them
in hundreds all day long, and if you use them as a
bait you will have wonderful sport, providing you can
get out in a boat. A few trout may be got from the
bank, but as a rule they are too far out to reach.
The best side to fish is the western, where the Dela-
tite River comes in. I do not think this place can be
beaten in Victoria for trout fishing, either above or
below the weir.
Anyone in search of trout, and a quiet holiday, could
not do better than spend it at the Eildon Weir. The
trout are in good condition here, and good fighters.
Fish up to 7 and 8 lb., both brown and rainbow, are
plentiful.


OBSERVATIONS OF FISH DURING A FLOOD
On several occasions I have fished the River Yarra
when it has been in flood, and at least fifteen feet
above summer level. I have known anglers who would
not think of fishing the river when it rises over the
banks, but I can assure my readers that some good
fish can be got if you select the right places.
If you know the river, and have fished it during
the summer months, you will observe where the sand-
banks are, or a shelving grassy slope. If you can
reach such a spot during a high flood, you are likely
to get a good catch of trout and perch by using the
worm for bait. The fish seek the quiet waters dur-
ing a flood.
I had a good catch of trout and perch one day, when
the river was almost overflowing its banks, having
selected a spot where there were calm backwaters. At
low water it was a clean sloping bank of short green
grass, down to the water’s edge. I find that the fish
feed at these places when the river is in flood. I would
have selected a sandbank, but could not reach one.
However, I had to select the best place under flood
conditions, and I fished on this grassy slope. I got
five trout and six perch for the afternoon’s fishing.
The largest trout was 3 lb. and the largest perch 2 lb.
I used only one hook, and a very light running
sinker. I threaded my line through the hole in the
sinker, then tied my hook with about a foot of gut, to
the end of the line. The sinker lying on the bottom
allowed the fish to pull the line along when it took the
bait.
Trout are very suspicious; if they feel a tight line
they will drop the bait at once, and will not take it
again. The running sinker—a bullet with a hole
through the centre —is best, both for trout and perch.
During the summer, when the river is at its normal
level, I point out the grassy slopes to my brother


anglers, and show them where I have had some good
catches during flood time. They are high and dry
now.
I notice when the river is falling the fish desert these
spots, and keep more to the deeper water or sand-
banks. I also notice that the trout take the small
frogs during flood time, but it is better to use two or
three lively worms on your hook when the water
is muddy.
When I examined the contents of the stomachs of
the fish I caught during flood time, I found they con-
tained frogs, yabbies and worms, but mostly worms.
It is not much use doing a lot of walking when fish-
ing a river during a flood. If you can find a suitable
spot, cast your line, rest your rod on a forked stick,
and stay there, unless you know of a better spot on
the river to try. Any likely-looking backwater is
worth trying when the river is in flood. As the flood
water recedes, in a day or two, the fish do not move
about much, and you may fish for hours without a
bite, unless you can find a shelving sandbank in a
deep hole to fish from. Fish get so much food during
a flood that it is some days before they come on the
feed again, when the water has got clearer.
A good bait to use for all fish on a sandbank is the
fresh-water shrimp. Place about three on your hook,
and pinch a split shot on the end of the line, at the
loop where you tie on the gut cast. Cast out gently,
about five or six yards from the bank, and rest your
rod on a forked stick. Let your bait lie on the bottom.
Be careful in casting with the shrimp. You will
flick them off your hook if you put too much force
into your swing. It is always advisable when shrimp
is the bait, to use the underhand cast, that is, to
swing your rod sideways instead of over your head.
There is more skill in casting out the fresh-water
shrimp without breaking it than casting the artificial fly.
If you cannot get shrimp, use small lively worms, and
fish the sand-banks the same way always.


Bear in mind, when fishing clear, calm water, that
if you dispense with the sinker, it is more satisfactory.
There are many streams in the State with plenty of
sand-banks, and the clearer the water is the deeper you
will have to fish. I found it a good plan, when the
river is low and clear, to fish the paternoster style,
viz., to have about three feet of a gut bottom. On
the end of it, attach a piece of lead about an ounce in
weight, tied on with a weak piece of line about eighteen
inches above the lead. Tie a gut hook to the bot-
tom, with about four inches of finer gut, and at the
top loop of the bottom attach a second hook, with the
same length of gut.
Bait your hooks with live bait, if you can get it—
either minnows or pigmy perch, or worm on your
bottom hook and shrimp on the top hook. Cast out
into the deep water, and fish with a tight line if you
are resting your rod on a forked stick. I prefer to
walk along the river, and to cast out into all likely-
looking deep water, keeping my bait slowly on the
move.
Never pull your line up too quickly. Just pull it
up slowly, until you can see the bottom bait. Then
let the sinker carry it down again. Search all the
likely-looking places this way. I have found this prac-
tice very effective for trout and redfins.
If you are using live bait, hook them through the
skin in the middle of the back, leaving the barb and
remainder of the hook exposed. Be careful not to
put the hook through the backbone of the minnow, or
it will soon die.
When you are shifting from one hole to another,
place the minnows you have on the hooks in the can
with your other live bait, to keep them alive until you
try another spot. You need not take them off the
hook; put your cast and sinker in the can to carry
it from place to place where you want to fish.
If you see a trout rising or chasing minnows among
the weeds, or close to the bank, use only one hook,


and no sinker. Get to the spot where you saw the
fish, keeping out of sight as much as possible, and
fish with a short line. Sit down quietly, and keep
working your bait up and down very slowly from the
point of your rod. Sooner or later the trout will
come back to the same spot. Do not take your eyes
off your line when fishing this style, and strike the
moment you see your line move off, before the trout
feels a tight line. I have noticed that, no matter what
bait you are using, if you do not happen to have the
rod in your hand when a trout takes the bait and
feels a tight line, he will drop the bait at once, and
will not come at it again.
Of course, during the day it is necessary to have
a rest, to boil the billy or have lunch, and if you are
fishing for trout, your best plan is to put a running
sinker on your line, cast out, and rest your rod on a
forked stick. Then pull about six feet of line off your
reel, and coil it up on the ground near the bottom
runner on your rod. This gives you time when you
see your line moving off, to pick up your rod and
strike before the fish feels a tight line.
When the water gets low and clear it is a good plan
to use a smaller hook (size 5), mounted on a fine gut
cast about two feet long. Pinch a split shot on your
cast, about nine inches above your hook, just enough
to sink it slowly and keep it off the bottom, by pulling
it up and letting it sink slowly; keep your bait on the
move. Place only one mudeye or two fresh-water
shrimps on your hook. I have proved this a very suc-
cessful method for catching trout where the water
has been heavily fished. You must sit down at a fav-
ourable spot and desist from moving about. The best
time for this style of fishing is in the evening, and
after dark.
I have described, in preceding chapters, other
methods of catching trout, but wish to impress on the
reader that he will get more trout fishing this style
than by any other method. Never take your eyes


off your line. Strike the moment you see your line
moving off, or before the fish feels a tight line. I mean
by this that you are fishing with a slack line, and
must strike the fish before you feel him on the rod.
In a great many cases, if a fish takes you unawares,
and feels or pulls on your rod, it will eject the bait,
and will not take it again. I have found this to apply
to trout especially, and also perch
VALUABLE HINTS
Some pools contain a large trout that has been
hooked and lost a few times, and becomes very shy,
and will not take any bait during the day time. Get
a large black cockroach on your hook, with a split
shot pinched on the gut as near the eye of the hook
as possible to sink it. Get to the spot where the trout
feeds as soon as it is dark. Sit down and keep work-
ing the bait up and down in the one spot without lift-
ing it out of the water as slowly as possible and near
the bank.
I have often beaten a few old stagers this way, and
as a rule they take it well. This method is also good
at night, using the fresh water shrimp as bait for
either trout or blackfish.
In Reservoir fishing for trout or perch, when bait-
ing with worm or yabbie, select a spot with a clear
bottom, use a running sinker about half an ounce in
weight. Then have about six inches of gut on your
line with hook attached. Use a free running line, and
cast out as far as possible. Then give your line a
smart pull and stop a moment. Then pull again about
a foot at a time, and keep on repeating this until your
bait is near the bank. Then cast out in another spot.
I have proved this one of the most deadly methods
I have tried when fishing for trout or perch. My


reason for using the short gut cast is this: When you
are dragging the bait on the bottom, the sinker stirs
up the mud and attracts the fish. Then you want your
bait near the sinker. If you use a long cast, your bait
being too far away from the sinker which first at-
tracted the fish, he does not see it. Keep lively worms
on your hook at all times, and if the fish are about
you will get them. When the worms are dead re-
place them with live ones.
If at any time in clear water when you see a fish
very close to you when you are sitting quietly on
the bank, do not move, if possible, until the fish swims
off slowly some distance away. Then approach and
cast out from behind the fish if possible. To at-
tempt to stand up or move your arm when a fish is
so close to you will scare it, more so if the water is
shallow.
When fishing any style I have mentioned in the
day time, and your line tightens, hold your rod mo-
tionless at once. If a fish has the bait you will notice
your line move off. Then strike at once. If there is
no movement of the line then don’t pull, as you are
snagged, and your best plan is to slacken your line,
walk a little to one side, and give a smart upward
jerk with your rod.
To make a plummet for finding the depth of water
you want to fish, get a bit of sheet lead, and roll it
around a cork with a bit of looped wire through the
centre of cork. Hammer it flat. To try the depth
of a pool, put your hook through the looped wire and
stick in cork at bottom.
When night fishing, and you are letting your bait
sink to the bottom, and drawing it up very slowly,
should you feel a stop, strike at once.
When fishing clear water and you see a trout come
at your bait, and won’t take it, give your line a smart
upward jerk about a foot, and often the trout will
turn and seize the bait at once. Then strike the
moment he closes on it.


Should you know of a pool that contains big trout,
and you see him come at your bait and won’t take it,
take off the bait he has refused and use some of the
other baits I have mentioned. Sit down quietly and
keep working your bait up and down slowly in the
deep water, or where you saw him last, and sooner or
later he will come around the same place again. If
you fail to get him to take after trying several baits,
and see him refuse them all, go back at night, using
the cockroach or shrimp for bait, working it in the
same manner, and you will often be successful.
When lighting the fire to boil the billy, get as near
the water’s edge, and on a sandbank if possible, and
see that the fire is out before leaving. Never light a
fire alongside a log.
In your rambles along the country streams you will
often come to an orchard, which will block your pro-
gress. Go to the owner, give him your name and
address, and tell him you would like to fish on his
property for a few hours. In nine cases out of ten
he will grant you permission, but do not abuse the
privilege by taking any fruit. Remember you may
want to come again, and those orchards are generally
good places to fish, and I have found with my experi-
ence, by not abusing the privilege, I was always wel-
come on a future occasion, and did well.
When baiting the hook with all natural baits and
insects, force the point and barb of the hook right
through them, and leave the point exposed. Some
beetles are very hard, and if the hook is not forced
through them when baiting, you will miss a lot of
fish when you strike.


THE LINE
The best line to use for all classes of fishing is a
prepared silk. I find one of 50 yards quite long
enough, and with care it will last a couple of seasons.
There are times when you want to do some spinning
or casting out long distances with the running sinker
that can only be accomplished with the silk line. I
have tried the cheaper quality of twisted hemp lines,
and found them to kink so much that I discarded them
altogether. The plaited hemp lines are better, but are
not always reliable, so it is advisable to always have
a good line of prepared silk as fine and as strong as
possible, and this can then be used for all styles of
fishing.
I have mentioned another very good line, which is
the gut line. In appearance it is very much like silk-
worm gut. and after it is used a few times it is very
good for long distance casting, and the price is only
half that of the silk line. One of those gut lines
makes up splendid bottoms for perch or blackfishing,
and no angler’s kit should be without one. They are
very strong, and in many ways take the place of the
silkworm gut for tying on hooks or making up casts,
etc., as a knot can be tied on them without soaking in
water. This is an advantage, and no matter how they
coil up, if you pull on them with a steady strain, after
uncoiling from the reel, they will keep straight and
free from kinks.
A very good dressing for a line is a mixture of
green enamel and vaseline; it “gives a lovely flexible
surface to the line, and whereas the line is well sat-
urated, one greasing is sufficient for a long day’s work.
The greasing is very easily done by saturating a piece
of thick flannel some three inches square with vase-
line, rubbing the vaseline well into the flannel; then
take a little enamel on the finger tip, place the flannel
on a flat, clean surface, and rub the enamel into the


grease. Stretch the line loosely between two trees,
taking care it does not touch the ground, rub the flannel
along the line backwards and forwards, dressing the
line three or four times before using, and letting it
soak up all the mixture it will take without undue
clogging.”
The best silk line I have used was the “ Kingfisher.”
HOOKS
I like the “ Model Perfect ” the best, and next to
that the “ Sneck Bend.” I find I do not lose many
fish when using the first-named on account of its
shape and keen point., and I find them the best hook
to use when worm fishing. I always use them for
trout fishing, no matter what bait I am using, but
being costly I resort to the flatted end “ Kirby ” when
amongst the snags and rocks after the blackfish, and
reserve my stock of “ Model Perfect ” hooks to use
in places where I know the bottom is free from snags,
etc. The sizes I use are Nos. 2 and 3 for worm fish-
ing, and 4 and 5 for shrimp and other insects, but for
the blackfish I always use a No. 2 hook.
I have often changed my opinion about hooks for
this reason. One day I would miss several fish on a
certain hook, yet the next time I used it, it would
not miss at all. I have had this experience with all
classes of hooks, but less so with the “ Model Per-
fect,” and my advice is, if you have them in stock, use
no other. What I like about the “ Model Perfect ”
is its keen point. No matter what insect you are us-
ing for bait you must always have the point of the
hook exposed, and owing to this class of hook having
a fine long point, it has greater penetration when you
strike a fish. When replacing the triangle hooks of
Devons or phantoms I find none better than the
“ Sneck Bend.” I have tried all sorts, but I find them


the best. I find it more satisfactory to tie my own
hooks on to the gut after soaking it; with the other
class, called gut hooks. I have had the gut pull out
as they are bound on, and are not satisfactory.
I have tried another make of hook called the ball-
eyed hook, which has recently been manufactured,
it resembles the “ Model Perfect,” and I have used
it, and can recommend it as one of the best. It is ad-
visable always to use hooks that are not too large.
I have got cod up to 20 lb. on a No. 4 trout hook.
SINKERS
The best sinker to use is made thus: Get some No.
8 fencing wire, and cut it into 1 foot lengths. Then
double it round like the bows of a hairpin, and attach
to your line with a small piece of string that is much
weaker than your main fishing-line. If you get snagged,
this will break easily, and save your good line. I find
this class of sinker the best for all class of fishing when
the bottom is snaggy or stony.
BAITS, AND HOW TO CARRY THEM
WORMS keep best carried in a canvas bag, with
a mixture of moist earth and grass.
SHRIMPS can be carried during the hot days in
the bottom of your landing net, amongst damp weed,
or in a wooden box containing sawdust.
YABBIES. if placed in a box with a good supply
of green grass, will keep for days.
MUDEYES are best kept the same as yabbies.


CRICKETS are best kept in a tin well perforated
with holes amongst a mixture of dry rotten wood and
grass. They will eat a hole through a bag or wooden
box, and escape.
COCKROACHES that you get in the bush in or
under rotten logs, should be kept in a perforated tin,
with a supply of dry rotten wood or bark, and will
live this way for weeks.
BLACK HARD BEETLES of all sorts can be
carried in the same manner, but never put these large
black beetles in the same tin with Cockroaches, or
they will eat them. Keep the hard Beetles in a sep-
arate tin.
GRASSHOPPERS are best carried in a bag made
of gauze netting, with a running string, and fastened
to your vest, where it is handy whilst fishing.
MINNOWS can be carried the same as shrimp,
and during the hot weather, if soaked all night in
strong brine, and then carried in sawdust, they will
keep a long time, and are good for perch fishing or
to take with you on a journey where minnows are hard
to get. Perch will take them, salt or fresh.
When collecting the cockroaches, it is advisable to
have a fairly large tin at home to keep your supply
in, as they, will keep for weeks, and you can take a
supply from your stock each day you go fishing. It
is a good plan also to have a box sunk in the ground
at home to keep your worms, and after each day’s
fishing, what you have left over replace in the box
at home. It is best to keep a wet bag on top of the
earth in the box during the hot weather.
Bardies, or wood grubs, keep best in sawdust, packed
in a large tin. If it is necessary to keep them for a
few months in a tin, it is advisable to pack them in
sawdust obtained from some bush sawmill cutting
green timber. I have kept them alive for as long as
three months, packed in green sawdust from the mess-
mate or mountain ash trees. Do not pack them in a
wooden box, as they would eat their way out of it and
escape.


LOCATION OF THE FISH
Appended are particulars concerning the most
favourable fishing-grounds in Victoria
SOUTH-WESTERN AND WESTERN DISTRICT.
TOWNSHIP OR DISTRICT—STREAM OR OTHER WATER —DISTANCE
FROM RAILWAY STATION—FISH OBTAINABLE, AND REMARKS.
LORNE—Erskine River, St. George's River, Cumberland River—l 4 miles
from Dean Marsh —Good fishing in St. George’s River between
bridge and Phantom Falls.
APOLLO BAY, 17 miles from Beech Forest, 26 miles from Forrest—
Barrum River—2o miles from Beech Forest, 29 miles from For-
rest—Best spot at Paradise, 3 miles from Apollo Bay.
BEECH FOREST—Aire River —Slackfish and trout.
CAMPERDOWN —Lake Builen, Merri River —Close by town—Rainbow
trout. Trout grow to a large size in this lake.
PANMURE—Black's River —Good fishing from Panmure to Hopkins
River.
WARRNAMBOOL—Merri River—Within 2 miles of City to Grassmere.
Particularly good at Woodford, 6 miles from Warrnambooi—
Good fishing. The Merri contains some very large trout, and
the upper Hopkins is also stocked with these fish. In the lower
waters, good bream fishing may be secured, particularly in the
spring months.
WARRNAMBOOL—Hopkins River —Up stream to Black’s Reserve—Bream.
WARRNAMBOOL—Cudgee Creek—Easy of access—Well-stocked.
PORTLAND—At township—An old established fishing centre, where good
sea fishing can be obtained. Splendid pier fishing.
NELSON, via Mt. Gambier—Glenelg River —24 miles from Mt. Gambier
—Bream, Gippsland perch and mulloway. Hotel and boarding
houses provide accommodation right on the river.
GRAMPIANS AND DISTRICT—Fyans Creek and Stony Creek—2o miles
from Stawell—Fish up to 6 lb. being taken. Best spots from
Picnic Ground for about a mile or more up stream near “ Myrtle-
bank ” in about an S-mile stretch of water.
GRAMPIANS AND DISTRICT—Lake Lonsdale—Stawell—Good perch
fishing.
HORSHAM—Wartook Reservoir and Mackenzie Creek—3l miles from
Horsham—Brown and rainbow trout. These waters are in the
Grampians, and parties desiring to fish them would have to be
prepared to camp out. They may be reached by a fair road in
good weather, from Horsham.
HORSHAM—Pine Lake—Near Horsham—Fair supply large brown trout.
NEWLYN—NewIyn Reservoir and Birch’s Creek—l mile from Newlyn—
Brown and rainbow trout. A good road enables anglers to visit
these waters. Accommodation available at Newlyn, or Ballarat
may be made headquarters. Caretaker at Reservoir charges 1/-
per day, or 5/- per season.
BALLARAT—Lake Wendouree—ln City—Trout, English perch and tench.
BALLARAT—Moorabool River and Bolwarrah Reservoir—2 miles from
Lethbridge—'Trout. These waters are served by good roads, and
are easily reached from Ballarat.
LINTON—Emu Creek—6 miles from Linton —Fishing good


LlNTON—Reservoir—ln township.
SKIPTON —Emu Creek —At township—Stocked each year by the Skipton
Anglers’ Club.
RALLAM —Pyke’s Creek Reservoir—3 miles from Ballan —Good trout
fishing.
BALLAN—Werribee River —At township—Trout fishing.
BANNOCKBURN —Barwon River—-4 miles from Bannockburn —Good fish-
ing from Murgheboiuc up as far as Inverleigh. Best spots: Rus-
sell's Bridge, 1£ miles; Batesford, S miles; She Oaks, 8 miles.
’NVF.RLEIGH —Barwon and Leigh Rivers.
fTEFEDITH —-Moorabool River —2 miles from Inverleigh—Best spots: Slate
quarries, 3 miles; Morrisons, miles; She Oaks, 8 miles.
MIDLAND DISTRICT.
towns]in* oh district —stream or other water —distance
FROM RAILWAY STATION —FISH OBTAINABLE, AND REMARKS.
WARRANDYTE Yarra River 10 miles from Heidelberg Macquarie
perch, Murray cod and blackfish, also redfins.
MERNDA —Plenty River—Best spots from \ to \\ miles from station—
Good fishing.
LAUNCHING PLACE—Yarra River—Close to station—Brown trout and
Murray cod and blackfish. Best fishing for trout obtainable when
using natural bait, in the early part of season. Later on in the
summer, when the water is clear and low, fly fishing should be
successful for trout.
WARBURTON—Yarra River—Both above and below township—Brown
trout and blackfish. The Yarra can be fished for many miles above
Warburton, and is easily accessible by road along the Valley. The
tributaries of the main stream are also good for fishing.
WALSH’S CREEK —Yarra River and tributaries —20 miles from Warbur-
ton —Brown and rainbow trout. There is a good hotel available
here, and this place is largely frequented by anglers.
YARRA GLEN —Yarra River—Close to station —Brown trout, Mac-
quarie perch, Murray cod and blackfish.
HEALESVILLE—Badger Creek—From Healesvilie 4 miles—Trout and
blackfish.
HEALESVILLE —Watts River —In township—Trout and blackfish.
MARYSVILLE —Taggerty River—22 miles from Healesvilie—Brown trout,
and a few rainbows in the upper waters. This water is fished
fairly heavily, especially after Christmas. There are plenty of
trout here, but they do not run to a very large size. Plenty of
accommodation available locally in close proximity to the stream.
A good road follows the stream right along to Buxton.
MARYSVILLE—Big River—4o miles from Healesvilie—Rainbow trout.
This locality can only be visited from Marysville, and anglers
should take tents and equipment for camping out. Good fishing
is got here, many of the fish running to a large size. The road
is passable by motors for a considerable distance, but not right
through to the fishing grounds.
BUXTON—Taggerty and Acheron Rivers—3o miles from Healesvilie—
Brown trout, Murray cod and other Murray fish. A good hotel is
available close to the streams, and good roads quite close to the
various waters make them easily fishable. The Acheron holds
much bigger fish than the Taggerty. Below Buxton the Acheron is
not wadeable to any extent.
GRANlTE—Gouiburn River—Close by—Murray cod and other, Murray
fishes. This is a favourite site for camping parties at holiday
times.
YEA —Murrindindi River—lo miles from Yea—Excellent fishing.


YEA—Yea River —12 miles from Yea —Good fishing from Glenmore sta-
tion back to Toolangi, trout up to 7 lb. having been taken.
ALEXANDRA—The Goulburn and Acheron Rivers —Murray cod, golden
perch and Macquarie perch.
THORNTON —Goulburn River, Rubicon River, and Snobs Creek —7 miles
from Alexandra and upwards—Cod and other Murray fishes in
the Goulburn, and brown and rainbow trout in the Rubicon and
Snobs Creek. The Rubicon provides the best trout fishing. There
is an hotel and boarding house accommodation at Thornton, but
these waters can easily be fished from Alexandra, as there is a
good road all the way. In Snobs Creek the trout are fairly plenti-
ful, but inclined to be small. The Sugarloaf Weir can be visited
from Thornton, and above the weir good fishing is obtainable.
MANSFIELD —Howqua and Jamieson Rivers and the Delatite River —
Best fishing from 20 to 30 miles —In the lower reaches the Murray
fishes give good sport, and higher up there is good trout fishing.
Good roads from Mansfield make all these streams available. There
is good hotel accommodation at Jamieson, and the upper reaches
of the Delatite River are also fished from local hotels and board-
ing houses.
!.'E'RR:J!G —Delatite River—l 2 miles from Mansfield —Best fishing be-
tween Hearn’s Bridge and Buller Creek, a distance of about 15
miles.
MERRIJIG—Howqua River—l 4 miles from Mansfield—Best fishing to-
wards head of river.
JAMlESON—Jamieson River—22 miles from Mansfield—Fishing within
easy reach of township.
JAMIESON to KNOCKWOOD—GouIburn River—22-45 miles from Mans-
field—Good fishing.
DAYLESFORD—Kangaroo Creek, Hepburn Reservoir, and Loddon River—
Ail within 10 miles —Brown and rainbow trout. Daylesford should
be made the headquarters, and the various streams are easily
visited, as good roads are available.
LYONVILLE—BuIIarto Reservoir—About 4 miles from BuMarto—Brown
trout, fairly well stocked, and plenty of English perch and tench.
ROMSEY and LANCEFIELD—Deep Creek—Best spots: Sheehan’s Cross-
ing, 3 miles; Daly's Bridge, 2 miles; Daly’s Crossing, 3 miles—
Trout and blackfish. The stream is easily reached from either of
these stations. (The Bolinda Creek and Riddell's Creek, also in
this district, contain a number of trout.)
KYNETON—Campaspe and Coliban Rivers and local reservoirs—Within
a few miles—-Brown trout. All the waters easily fished from Kyne-
ton.
NORTH-EASTERN DISTRICT.
TOWNSHIP OR D ISTRICT—STREAM OR OTHER WATER —DISTANCE
FROM RAILWAY STATION —FISH OBTAINABLE, AND REMARKS.
WHITFIELD—King River—At township, and upstream for 10 to 20
miles —Rainbow and brown trout. Particularly good in the spring
and early summer months. The upper reaches, which can only
be visited by parties who are prepared to camp out, give good
rainbow trout fishing.
EDl—King River—At township—-3000 brown trout released in 1921,
and about another 2000 since, from Edi up to about S miles
beyond Whitfield.
STRATHBOGIE—Seven Creeks—ls miles from Euroa —Well stocked with
brown and rainbow trout. Banks of stream fairly clear. Fish up
to 6| lb. taken.
STRATHBOGIE—Seven Creeks (Gooram Falls) —14 miles from Euroa—
-5 miles of splendid fishing water.


STRATHBOGIE—Hughes Creek—2o miles from Euroa —Stretch of some
miles of water teeming with trout; banks of stream fairly clear.
WAHRING—--The Goulburn Weir—3 miles—Murray fish. Parties may
camp out or stop at the local hotel. This water is good for
angling, particularly after the opening of the season on Ist
December.
ECHUCA—Murray, near Stewart’s Bridge-—9 miles—All sorts of Murray
fish.
BRIGHT —The Ovens and Buckland Rivers—Upstream from township—
Brown and rainbow trout in the higher reaches; Murray cod in
the lower. Both streams are easily reached by good roads, but
anglers must make Bright their headquarters. The Buckland has
provided splendid fishing in past times, and is now being re-
stocked. There is no accommodation, however, in'this Valley,
which is served by a fairly good road, suitable for motors.
BRIGHT—Ovens River (Harrietville) —16 miles from Bright—Brown
and rainbow trout. Accommodation available.
BRIGHT—Dargo River—3l miles from Bright—Good fishing.
TAWONGA —Kiewa River —20 miles from Bright—Rainbow trout. This
is one of our finest trout streams, particularly for the fly fisher-
man. The district is easily reached by motor car from Bright, and
a hotel and several boarding-houses provide good accommodation.
Excellent fishing is obtainable here, particularly after Christmas,
and fish of a large size are frequently taken. The stream is well
stocked.
MT. BUFFALO NATIONAL PARK—<Lake Catani—l6 miles from Pore-
punkah (11 miles from The Chalet)—Well stocked with trout,
which are fairly difficult to catch, owing to the good feed and
clearness of the water. When weather conditions are right, how-
ever, good hauls are frequently made by expert anglers. Fly
fishing particularly proves successful.
TATONG, IS miles from BENALLA—Holland’s Branch—s miles from
Tatong—Good fishing at spot known as Fern Hills.
BENALLA —Holland’s Branch and Ryan’s Creek—s to 20 miles from
Benalla—Good trout fishing.
ESKDALE (26 miles from TALLANGATTA)—Mitta Mitta River —Creek
runs past hotel door—Good trout.
ESKDAlE—Little Snowy Creek—Good fishing right up to Mt. Elmo,
10 miles—Good trout.
MITTA MITTA (38 miles from TALLANGATTA—Mitta Mitta River-
Flows past hotel door —Trout.
MITTA MlTTA—Lightning Creek—ls miles from Mitta Mitta—Good
fishing.
MITTA MlTTA—Callaghan’s Creek—7 miles from Mitta Mitta—*Good
fishing.
MITTA MlTTA—Scrubby Creek—2 miles from Mitta Mitta—Good fishing-
MITTA MITTA—Snowy Creek—Junctions with main stream at town—
Good fishing.
LIGHTNING CREEK (53 miles from TALLANGATTA)—Lightning Creek
and Snowy Creek—Hotel at junction of Lightning and Snowy
Creeks—Both well and favourably known trout streams.
CUDGEWA—NarieI Creek—2o miles from Cudgewa—Excellent fishing,
mostly rainbow trout.
CUDGEWA—ThowgIa Creek—r 22 miles from Cudgewa—Excellent fishing,
mostly rainbow trout.
CUDGEWA—Murray River—2s miles from Cudgewa—Excellent fishing,
mostly rainbow trout.
KHANCOBAN (rail to TALLANGATTA or CUDGEWA) —Swampy River
(N.S.W. side) —50 miles from Tallangatta, 1\ miles from Cudgewa
—Excellent fishing, mostly rainbow trout.


GIPPSLAND DISTRICT.
TOWNSHIP OR DISTRICT—STREAM OR OTHER WATER —DISTANCE
FROM RAILWAY STATION —FISH OBTAINABLE, AND REMARKS.
TOORADIN —Westernport—2 miles—Schnapper, whiting, flathead and pike.
Bream fishing also good in the spring months. Accommodation
available. Boats and boatmen may be hired to take parties out
on to the fishing grounds.
LANG LANG—Lang Lang River and Yallock Creek—9 miles from Lang
Lang—-Best spot: Ross Bridge. Both streams have been stocked
for several years. Trout and blackfish.
DROUIN—Lang Lang River and Yallock Creek—9 miles from Drouin —
Best spot: Athlone Bridge.
COWES—-6 miles from Stony Point—Schnapper, whiting, flathead and
pike, particularly from October to April.
SAN REMO—I9 miles from Stony Point.
LOCH—Bass River —Close handy—Blackfish. This stream provides anglers
with some of the best blackfish fishing to be got within reasonable
distance of Melbourne.
INVERLOCH—Anderson’s Inlet—9 miles from Wonthaggi—A place easily
reached by a good road from Wonthaggi, and where good ac-
commodation is provided locally. Good whiting fishing, particularly
in the summer months.
PORT ALBERT —At township—A favourite fishing centre for many re-
sidents of South Gippsland, who get large catches of schnapper
here, particularly in the summer months. The use of a boat, how-
ever, is necessary to get out on to the fishing grounds.
YARRAM—AIbert River —10 miles from Yarram —Good fishing 3n main
stream and tributaries, Little Albert and Jeffrey’s Creek. Albert
River admirably suited for fly fishing. It can be waded for miles,
and can also be fished from the banks.
YARRAM—<Tarra River —112 miles from Yarram—First-class fishing in
the upper reaches. This stream is also suitable for fly fishing.
YARRAM —Max Creek—S miles from Yarram —Splendid little trout stream.
YARRAM —Creig’s Creek —9 miles from Yarram—Good sport well up
stream. Not much in its lower reaches.
NOOJEE—Loch, Toorongo and Latrobe Rivers—Near station—Brown
trout and blackfish. Boarding-house and good hotel accommoda-
tion in close proximity to the three streams.
TRAFALGAR—'Latrobe River and tributaries—About 4 or 5 miles—
Brown trout and blackfish.
MOE—Latrobe River and tributaries—About 5 miles—Brown trout and
blackfish.
WALHALLA—'Thomson River —Upstream from station—Brown trout and
blackfish. This is a fine stream well stocked, and has provided
excellent sport, many large fish being taken.
MORWELL—MorweII River —17 miles from Morwell—Brown trout and
blackfish in the smaller streams. Gippsland perch in the Latrobe.
The tributaries of the Latrobe are well stocked with trout, and
good sport can almost be guaranteed.
MORWELL—Billy’s Creek —9i miles from Morwell.
MORWELL—MiddIe Creek—l 2 miles from Morwell.
MORWELL—Latrobe River and tributaries.
YINNAR—Middle Creek—s miles from Yinnar—Good fishing.
BOOLARRA—MorweII River —5 miles from Boolarra—Good fishing.
NORTH MIRBOO—The Little Tarwin River—Within 4 or 5 miles —
Brown trout and blackfish. This is a stream not often fished, but
contains a nice lot of fish.


TRARALGON—Latrobe and Tyers Rivers; Flynn’s, Merriman’s and Traral-
gon Creeks —From 2 to 12 miles —Trout, blackfish and Gippsland
perch. The Traralgon Creek, the best of these waters for trout, is
easily reached from Traralgon, as a good road follows the creek
for about 15 miles of its length. This stream is easily fished, and
is well stocked. A boarding-house is available on the creek, about
12 miles from Traralgon.
GLENMAGGlE—Macallister River—7 miles from Heyfield—Brown trout
and blackfish. A good road follows the Macallister for many miles-
Accommodation available at Glenmaggie, but higher up anglers
would have to camp out.
STRATFORD—Wonnangatta River —60 miles from Stratford—Good fish-
ing. Ideal trout stream.
DARGO—Dargo River—so miles from Stratford—Brown and rainbow
trout. A good hotel provides accommodation close to the stream,
which is a fine one for trout fishing.
BAIRNSDALE—MitcheII River—Close handy—Famous bream stream.
Upper reaches Gippsland perch.
SWANREACH (via Bairnsdale) —Tambo River—9 miles from Bairnsdale—
Excellent bream fishing, especially from June to October.
LAKES ENTRANCE—2S miles from Bairnsdale, 70 miles from Sale—
A well-known holiday resort, where good fishing can frequently
be secured, especially if local boatmen can be obtained to take
one out. Schnapper, bream, luderlck and whiting are all obtain-
able here.
BUCHAN —Buchan River—lS miles from Nowa Nowa—Trout fishing.
MARLO—Gnowy River—lo miles from Orbost—Bream, particularly from
July to December, and excellent for perch during the summer.
Spinning for salmon is also a favourite sport. A good hotel avail-
able right at the mouth of the river. Bait is sometimes difficult
to procure here, and, if possible, should be brought or arranged
for by the angler.
MALLACOOTA—IOO miles from Orbost—Good bream fishing, In the spring
months especially, and schnapper later on in the summer. Bait
is a difficult matter here, and the supply should be arranged for.
SWIFT’S CREEK—Tambo River—47 miles from Bruthen—Excellent fish-
ing early in season.
CQEUNGRA—Victoria River—B2 miles from Bruthen, 14 miles from
Omeo—Excellent fishing throughout season.
OMEO (67 miles from Bruthen) —Mitta Mitta River—l 2 miles from Omeo
on Old Glen Wills Road—Good trout fishing throughout the season.
OMEO—Cobungra River, Bundarrah River, Big River—lB miles from
Omeo on New Glen Wills Road—With headquarters at the Ang-
lers’ Rest Hotel on the banks of the Cobungra, excellent fishing
is to be had in these three streams.
OMEO—Dargo River —20 to 35 miles from Omeo—Good fishing.
OMEO—Gibbo Creek—3o to 35 miles from Omeo—See Benambra. Good
trout.
OMEO—Middle Creek—3s miles from Omeo—Great number of small trout.
OMEO—Livingstone Creek—From Omeo township to 10 miles up stream—
Fair number of small trout.
BENAMBRA (15 miles from Omeo) —iMarass Creek —SI miles from
Bruthen—Good fishing early in season.
BENAMBRA (81 miles from Bruthen, 15 miles from Omeo) —Gibbo
Creek—l 6 miles from Benambra—Guide necessary to reach the
streams.




THE FISH YOU CATCH
M.S.D. FIRST FOR FISHING TACKLE
MELBOURNE
SPORTS DEPOT
55 ELIZABETH STREET, MELB. MU 7244.
