

’.'4 '^
■ M> Mf WB ' i
T, I o NS
SYLVIA TIARKS




GET I*
JT /4 ->Ss£y Jp’ >flr >4 '
">\ >/ * W/ / fj fflkJmP?
'**<' / '
% % ' ''^'a


r


'' . y y
I
fi ,V D ■ t\ ■&?'■ ,7s.f^» ;
* i | p jjggjFW
i k k b ' '
| >P i
y /
V /V /
/
i. \ \ : x!
V.i
iTHaa&Q
j - '*# >v%^S!
«SS. V
,a*t32
I'
I
m




V ■ !• 5
/ I / - I
/ f ; S
j.' - 'v v t ■ •< •^.'•v.
f x '’V*jT‘ C % h
-N-—• t
V ' ’ \ ‘ -. 4b¥f <-" r^*/ ' «..
, - «- ••: ~V H.7«sKft „■
y „n §>y, >u^/
'• Mt * V' -v#, \ } s\ss^ : *' '"
RIA
- / • *£B&
AND THE
SEA
wire
WRIT T E N
BY V R O N
BAS S E R
ILLUSTRATED
BY SYLVIA
“MARKS


FRIA AND THE SEA WITCH
OLD MICHAEL and his daughter, Fria, were fisherfolk. They
lived on a wild and lonely coast in the north, where the
cold and stormy winds blew almost every day.
It was a good life in the brief summer, when the sun was
warm and the sea was blue, but in the long, cold winter, when
sky and sea alike were grey
and angry, summer days
seemed like the memory of
a story they had read in
some old book.
They were very poor,
and many a time, when the
big storms prevented them
from taking out their boat,
old Michael and Fria went
hungry.
To be hungry is bad;
to be hungry and cold is very
bad. When old Michael saw
Fria wrapped in her thin
shawl he used to think, “If
only I could give her one
really warm cloak!” but if
he spoke of what was in his
mind, Fria would say with
her sunny smile, “Now,
father, there are other things
we need more than fine
clothes for me. The nets are
wearing out and one of these
days we shall need a new
boat.” This was only too
true, and it made poor
Michael sadder than ever to
v be reminded of it
Freea
2


C I 7344
When she walked in her shabby clothes amongst the village
girls in their warm blue and scarlet cloaks, he saw how much
prettier she was than any of them with her blue eyes and shining,
golden hair.
He would say to himself, “It is not fair to keep her here in
this lonely village. Such a lovely young girl should live in a town
where there are lights, music and dancing. These things belong
to youth.” But he knew Fria would never go away and leave
him. Indeed, he knew no other way of earning a living except
by fishing, for he had been born in the little village and had lived
there all his life.
There was another person who would have been lonely if
Fria had gone away and that was Stephen. Some day he hoped he
would make enough money to marry Fria and to build a cosy
house for her, sheltered from the rough cold wind. He did not
know when this would be, for, at present, he was as poor as they
poorer, in fact, for he did not even own the boat in which he
went fishing.
Stephen had never spoken to Fria of his hopes and his
dreams but he sometimes felt from the gentle tones of her voice
when she spoke to him that she knew and understood what was
in his heart.
QNE day when old Michael was out alone in his boat he heard
his name called. At first he thought it was the wind he had
heard, or the cry of the white gulls wheeling overhead. Presently,
he heard it again. This time he was sure it was his own name. He
looked around and there, with one white arm resting on the side
of the boat, was a woman of the sea. She had a strange and lovely
face with stormy sea-green eyes while long black hair streamed
over her shoulders. Round her neck were strings of coral and,
twined in her dark hair, were strands of gleaming pearls. The
face and arms were all he could see clearly, the rest of her being
submerged, but he thought he could see the shimmer of a fishy
tail through the moving water.


“Who are you?” he asked. “How do you know my name?”
“I have known you since you were a little boy and I knew
your father before you. I am called the Sea Witch and I have
always lived here at the bottom of the sea. I have often seen you
and your daughter, Fria, out fishing. Many a time I have held the
winds back to let your boat get safely home.’’
Ever since he was a small boy Michael had heard tales of the
Sea Witch but none of the fisherfolk he knew had ever seen her.
“Why are you unhappy, Michael?”
“Times are bad, Sea Witch. My daughter and I often go
hungry. When the icy winds blow from the north Fria has no
warm cloak to wrap about her.”
“I have seen your Fria. She is a good girl and a lovely one.
I would like to help you both.”
“In what way can you help us, Sea Witch?”
‘ Come to this same spot to-morrow morning an hour before
sunrise. Bring your nets but do not haul in till the sun is up.
Good-bye, now, and mind you do not speak of our meeting to
anyone.”
Without even rippling the surface, she disappeared beneath
the water and left Michael sitting in his boat, wondering if he had
been asleep. “Whether I dreamt it or not,” thought he, “it can
do no harm to come here in the morning.”
When he reached home he was so cheerful that Fria could
not help wondering at it. Fisherfolk do not waste words, however,
so she just smiled and said nothing, but presently she was singing
as she went about her household tasks. “If only we could always
be happy like this,” she thought.
EXT morning while it was still dark, Michael and Stephen
took out the boat. They let down the nets and waited quietly
as one by one, the dark veils of the night were lifted. Michael kept


1 a I
bodies stmgglmg
" SVi-v ■' A TiAtj H l —
his eyes fixed on the eastern sky till it flushed gold, then red, and
when the crimson rim of the sun appeared over the sea, they
began to haul in.
What was this weight in the '
net? Was it only sea-weed? Could p ~


He and Stephen sang and laughed for joy as, ever so care-
fully, they rowed the heavily laden boat back to the shore.
Never before had the little village seen such a catch, and
people raced down to the beach to watch the fish being taken
from the nets and packed in boxes, ready to be sent to the market
in the town.
“The money from this catch will pay our debts and keep us
in food for a month.” Michael cried to Fria. But he spoke no
word to anyone of the Sea Witch or what she had said.
The next morning, at the same time, he and Stephen went
out again. Again they waited till the red dawn streaked the sky
before they pulled in the nets. This time, alas! they were empty.
Michael was bitterly disappointed. He sighed deeply as the
castles he had been building in the air tumbled into the sea.
Perhaps the fish had been on the move and they had just
struck a lucky catch. Perhaps he Had been dreaming that
morning after all.
JHE third morning he went out alone. Again he was turning
back empty-handed when he caught sight of the Sea Witch.
This time she was resting on a reef of rocks that rose up out of the
sea. As he came near she beckoned to him.
Don t be sad, Michael, that you have gone home twice
with empty nets. I am your friend and I wish to help you but
Neptune will not permit any of the seafolk to help the same
person twice —except on one condition.”
“And what is that condition?” asked Michael eagerly.
“You must give him gold to adorn his wife.”
“Then I must remain poor,” cried Michael. “Where would
a poor fisherman like me find gold for Neptune’s wife?”
Your daughter, Fria, has fine golden hair,” said the Sea
Witch softly. “For gold such as that I could give her a warm fur


coat that would never wear out and I would fill your nets heavy
with fish every morning.”
‘'But my Fria’s beautiful hair! What would she do without
it?”
“It would grow again,” said the Sea Witch coaxingly. ”1
will give her a cap of fur to wear until it is long again. She would
find fur much warmer than hair and much more useful, for I
fear the next winter will be a bitter one.”
“I will speak with Fria about it,” said Michael in a low
troubled voice. He was unhappy to think of Fria's lovely hair
being cut off for Neptune’s wife. but. as the Sea Witch said, it
would grow again and if she would fill his nets every morning it
would certainly be worth it.
“Fria is a good daughter and I am sure she will not put her
beauty before her father’s need.” said the Sea Witch as she slid
off the rocky ledge. “If she is willing to make the bargain
she must row out to this rock at sunset to-night. You must stay
indoors for Neptune would be angry if anyone were to see. He is
fond of his wife and does not'like people to know how vain she is.”
Slowly Michael rowed home, his heart heavy within him.
Fria greeted him with her usual bright smile, saying, “Hurry,
father! Breakfast is just ready.”
Michael tried hard to eat his breakfast but he was too dis-
turbed in his mind to be hungry.
At last, Fria said, Father, you must not be disappointed.
VVe cannot expect such a haul of fish every day. Some folk never
get a haul like that in their whole lives.”
Michael pushed his plate from him saying, “Nay, Fria, that
is not what makes me sad.” Then he told her the whole story.
Fria s eyes opened wide with amazement. Never had she
heard such a story. “The Sea Witch!” she breathed. “Tell me,
father, had this Sea Witch a kind face?”


“Neither kind nor unkind as we know faces, my Fria. A
strange sea-face, it was, but gentle and very lovely,”
“She said she was our friend?”
“She declared she had held the winds back many a time to
let our boat pass safely home. She also promised to fill my nets
with such fish every morning.”
“Then,” declared Fria, “Neptune’s wife is welcome to my
hair. Even if she does not keep her promise about the fish ’twill
be no great loss. Hair grows very quickly and, though I want
nothing for myself, I would give a great deal more than my hair
to see smiles on my father’s face in place of those lines of worry.”
With that she stood up and kissed him.
“You are a good daughter, Fria,” said Michael, and there
were tears in his eyes as ho left the cabin to dry out his nets.
“THAT afternoon when the red sun, sinking low in the western
1 sky, tipped the white waves with fire, Fria took the boat and
rowed out to the rocks where Michael had seen the Sea Witch.
She waited, wondering if perhaps her father had imagined
the whole story. After all, he was old, and sometimes the old
grow fanciful. The fish were real enough, though. But why had
the Sea Witch singled them out for help? After all there were
other poor folk in the village.
Then a soft voice said, “So you have come, my pretty Fria,
to sell your golden hair for a warm fur cloak.” It was the same
lovely sea-woman with the black, black hair and the stormy
green eyes.
Fria replied, “It is not for myself, sea-woman, that I have
come, but to take the burden of poverty from my father’s heart
and the lines of pain from his dear face.”
“So long as you have come, the reason does not matter,”
said the Sea Witch. “But you must bend down and let your hair
trail in the water for I cannot come up to you.”




JbB* Jr * t .jftfftft
M -,.
J MH|
■ |
i § f fi
/# / i V Ilf f A t p - •i’.w’A .
/// y \ I / y\ ■ t | I *, fjfy \
/ I Vg %« m i v * / ■ \ »
ft ft It- \ Vt \ a /. yl i
ft " vlv * I I // vJDr
I « s /" ft fta > I
-I I , f». > . y' Jtt ' _ ”*
■ A ft 1 rst >, Si +***~ f ' *~ *_ B%[ > -» f v
rmU 9 /V i AHn f SS *V: /> - * J’ '' ‘-'mmmt ’' ' Bfafe.
Efc ft ft» I ft
Jiii*


Fria
of the boat so that the Sea Witch F fW ytjlPc^v^
might cut her hair, but no sooner ••/ \
had her long yellow plaits l<f T V ) \
touched the water than they f I K [ \t~ J: j
were clutched tightly in the Sea I | \ M I i
Witch’s strong hands and she \j \ ® 8L\( jr
was pulled out of the boat. Those I j \ i \ .£
white hands had a grip strong as : \ W /gMmjjil
steel, and, before Fria could even ’ _
struggle, she was drawn swiftly \
down below the surface. \
Down, down through the swirling green \ c .rJ. "IS
water they went, the Sea Witch never loosening *
her hold for a second. Past beds of sea blooms
they went, where pink and purple anemones
swayed in the current and the red crabs played
hide-and-seek among the long, waving green weed. f j
At last they came to the dark entrance of a /
cave which was guarded by two fierce sea-lions. j / ,
The sea-lions snarled angrily as they approached, \ \ C /
but, recognising the Witch, slunk quickly aside. 1 *//;//
Through an inky-black passage the poor Ij j\
fisher-girl was dragged, first to the left, then to V jjC /
the right. Finally she found herself inside a large j fr
sandy cave. It was not dim with the strange
————. SyLvt/\ TTauks . —~


half-light of the sea, but bright with a weird glow that seemed
to come from the cave itself.
Fria saw that the walls and roof were covered with millions
of little glow-worms, each giving forth a tiny beam of light. The
floor of the cave was strewn with treasure from a hundred wrecks,
bars of gold and silver and great heaps of precious stones —wink-
ing. red-eyed rubies, glimmering ropes of pearls and great
diamonds that sparkled and twinkled like stars on a frosty, winter
night.
As Fria looked with terror-stricken eyes she noticed a great
change coming over the Sea Witch. Her face, that had seemed
gentle and lovely, was becoming hard and cruel, a mirror of her
wicked heart. Her beautiful white hands changed to yellow claws
like those of some foul bird, while the black locks of hair became
black sea-snakes, hissing and coiling round her head.
The Sea Witch could change herself into any shape she
wished but only for an hour. Once that hour was over she had to
resume her own evil appearance.
Fria covered her face with her hands and wept.


OME here, my pretty golden bird!” sneered the witch, and
now her voice was harsh and ugly.
Seizing a great pair of shears made from the claws of an
enormous crab, she cut Fria s lovely hair close to her head. Pick-
ing up the fine golden fleece, she fondled it in her bony hands.
‘This will make a handsome golden chain for my neck and gold
bracelets for my arms,” she croaked. “Neptune’s wife shall not
be the only one in the sea to wear ornaments of gold. That was
a pretty tale I told your old father, was it not, my Fria?”
Fria cried, “Oh let me go home! You may keep my hair.
Only let me go home!”
“Not so fast? Not so fast!” cried the witch. “You must
first spin these fine hairs of yours into a ribbon for me. There is
a spinning wheel in the corner, ready waiting for you. I thought
I might have a use for it some day when I saved it from the wreck.
We sea-people have never learnt to spin so you must do it for me.
I have lots of gold, as you can see, but I cannot wear a bar of
gold as large as a brick round my pretty neck, can I, my dear?”
“May I go home when I have spun it?” wept Fria.
“When you have spun it, I will first give you the warm coat
of fur I promised you and the fur cap to cover your head. Then
you may go anywhere you please.”
“I don’t want any coat of fur,” cried Fria. “I want only to
go back to my dear father.”
“You may go anywhere you please,” repeated the witch,
and, as if she had said something amusing, she burst into cackle
after cackle of horrible laughter.
Fria was used to spinning, for she had spun the cloth for
her own clothes and her father’s ever since she had been a tiny
girl, but never had she tried so difficult a task as this. The hairs
were so fini and her hands trembled so much she made little
progress. Every now and then she was forced to stop because of
the tears that blinded her eyes.


The Sea Witch watched her for awhile then said, “Well, I
must cook my supper.” She went to a great cauldron at the back
of the cave and began to prepare a stew. Fria heard her say as
she began to fill the pot, “First the tentacles of an octopus, then
the daws of two lobsters, a bunch of sea-cabbage, the body of a
jelly-fish and the ink from a squid. Stir and stew! Stir and stew!
All for me, and none for you.”
The old hag recited this over and over as she stirred the
steaming pot. It sounded horrible to Fria but, presently, such an
appetising odour arose from the pot that her mouth began to
water in spite of herself.
But the smell of the stew was all she was to get for, when it
was cooked, the witch sat down and ate it all in great sucking
gulps. Then, after noisily picking her teeth with a sharp quill
from a porcupine fish, she fell asleep.
Poor Fria kept on spinning all that night and all the next
day until she could have cried from weariness.
When, at last, every bright hair had been spun and woven
into a ribbon the old witch tried the shining bands around her
skinny neck and yellow wrists. She seemed very pleased indeed
with herself.
Please, let me go home, now,” begged Fria
“First, I must give you the coat of fur I promised you,” said
the witch, with another of her evil cackles. “The Sea Witch
always keeps her promise.”
The terrified girl watched helplessly as she drew a small
flask from a shelf on the cave wall. Inside it was a clear liquid
that bubbled and hissed when the stopper was withdrawn.
Wheeling suddenly, she threw the contents over Fria. Half
stunned, the poor girl fell to the floor, sharp spasms of pain
passing through her body as she lay there.
“Now. my dear, you may go anywhere you like,” laughed
the horrible old creature. Fria tried to struggle to her feet but


XJ/I
n
found she no longer had any feet nor any hands —
only flippers. Her head and body were indeed
covered in a coat of fur. The witch had changed
her into a seal.
“Don’t you
like your new coat?” asked the
keep you very warm and, as I
never, never wear out.”
witch. “It will
promised, it will
With a strange inhuman cry, poor Fria fled
from that terrible cave, the witch’s evil laughter
ringing in her ears as she went.
\ i / HEN Fria found herself out in the open sea
W she swam up to the surface of the water and
looked about her to see where she was.
In the distance she could see the shore and
swam straight for the sandy beach. There was the
little* whprp <;he* had lived with her father.
little cabin where she had lived with her father.
She came in as close as she could but she dared not cross the sand
for she was now a creature of the water. There was the old man
sitting in front of the cottage, his face bowed in his hands. He
seemed so changed, so very old. His hair which had been grey
before was now snow-white. Her heart filled with
grief and she tried to call, “Father! Father!” but the
only sound that came from her throat was a hoarse
seal-bark. The old man did not even look up.
Fria was filled with horror and despair. Her
beloved father was probably thinking she had been
drowned and she could not even tell him that she
was there. Perhaps she was as far removed from
him as if she really were dead.
She swam slowly up and down the beach hop-
ing she might see Stephen but he was nowhere in
sight. She felt utterly lost and alone.


Every day, for five days, Fria returned to the little beach and
every day she saw her father sitting in sorrow outside their
cottage. On the sixth day, however, he was not there but she saw
Stephen enter the cottage carrying something in a basin. She
barked and barked, but though Stephen turned his head at the
sound, he did not come near her.
Then whole days dragged past without sound or sight of
anyone at the little cottage. The door and windows were closed
and no wisp of smoke rose from the chimney to tell of life within.
Was her father dead? Had he gone away? She could not tell and
there was no-one whom she could ask. Slowly and sorrowfully
she swam back into the sea that must now be her home.
C RIA felt hungry. Since that afternoon when she had rowed out
to sell her hair she had had no food. What was she to eat? She
nibbled some sea-kale that she found growing round the rocks but
that did not satisfy her gnawing hunger.
A friendly seal, watching her, said; “A little salad now and
then is very good, but why eat sea-kale when there are plenty of
fish in the sea?”
Fria said, “I do not know how to catch fish.
“You don’t know!” exclaimed the seal. “Didn’t your
mother teach you?”
When Fria had told her story the seal was very angry.
“She is always up to some mischief. There is no cruel or
wicked thing she would not do to satisfy her vanity. And she,
the ugliest hag in six oceans! I wish Neptune would banish her
to the North Pole. She gives us sea-folk a bad name.”
She swam up and down angrily, thrashing the water with her
flippers. Then she stopped awd said, “But I forgot that you are
hungry. Now that you are a seal, you had better learn seal ways.
Come with me and I will show you where the fish are.”
Fria swam with her till they came to the grounds where the
fish were feeding. “Now, watch me!” she said, as she snapped


up a fish. Fria watched, then did the same. It was
quite easy. She caught a second and then a third.
Now that her hunger was satisfied she felt better.
“I never imagined raw fish would taste so
good,” she thought. ‘‘lt’s just as well that old
horror gave me a seal’s appetite as well
as a seal’s coat. Things are bad enough
now but they would be more dreadful
still if I wanted bread and butter to eat.”
After that Fria spent a lot of time
swimming round with the other
seals who were a very happy like-
able lot. They showed her all the
places where fish went to hide at
dinner time and taught her the
names of all the strange creatures
who live down in the sea. She ate
fish every day but never more than
\\
s..
V ~
she really needed because she al-
ways remembered the poor fisher-
folk who depended on their catch
for their daily bread.
HEN, one day, she saw Stephen out fishing in his boat. She
swam up alongside the boat and called to him, but Stephen
could not understand. Fria swam round and round him trying to
think how she could make him realise who she was. But it was
no use. To Stephen she was just a seal and he watched with litthe
show of interest.
Then an idea occurred to her —she would help him to catch
fish. She dived down under the water and began to drive all the
fish she could find into Stephen’s net. When it was full she
climbed up on to a rock and watched him struggling to bring in
the heavily-laden nets.
Every day after that Fria waited till she saw Stephen in his
boat. Then she set to work rounding up the fish for him, feeling
that by doing this she was still in some way Fria, the fisher-girl.


Even though his heart was sad and lonely for Fria, Stephen
could not help being pleased at the change in his fortunes. In a
short time he was able to pay for his boat. If my luck keeps up
I will be able to build a little cottage next year,” he thought. ‘‘lf
only Fria were here we might be planning it together. I wonder
where Michael got that strange notion of his about a Sea Witch.
The poor old chap’s mind must have become crazed with grief.”
One day her friends, the seals, said to Fria: ‘Tomorrow we
begin our journey to the north. Are you coming with us?
‘‘Where do you go?” she asked.
‘‘Every year,” said the seals, “we go to a little island in the
far north where the summer sun never sinks below the sea. On
this island the seals choose their wives, the young ones often
having to fight the old ones for the wife they want. When all the
disputes have been settled, the mother seals rear their families.
The baby seals have to be taught to swim and to catch fish. We
will remain their till the babies can look after themselves and are
strong enough for the long journey south.”
Fria knew she would be lonely without these friendly playful
creatures who had been so kind to her, but she knew she must
stay to help Stephen. Very sadly, she said goodbye to her friends
and watched them as they swam off with their families for the
little island where there was no night.
Every day she filled Stephen’s nets full of struggling leaping
fish which tore at the nets in a mad effort to escape from the
restraining cords and get back into the free water. After a while
he began to realise that in some odd way his good fortune was
connected with the seal who swam about his boat. Sometimes he
called a greeting to her as, from a rock, she watched him pulling
in his catch. Fria barked her reply.
Q NEday as she swam close to the bottom of the sea after some
sand mullet, Fria saw a big milk-white pearl shimmering on
its shell among the green weed. Holding the prize carefully in


" . w


V


her mouth she swam with it to the beach and looked to see if
Stephen were about. Luckily, his boat was resting on the sand
where the rising tide lapped gently against its side. Raising
herself as high as she could out of the water, Fria dropped the
shell into the bottom of the boat, then swam out to her rock to
wait for Stephen’s coming.
When Stephen came down to dry out his boat there was the
milky treasure gleaming up at him from its shell. He took it up
gently in his hands and gazed on it in wonder and admiration.
Never before had he seen a pearl of such beauty and such size!
But how did it come to be in his boat? Surely it could not have
come up in the nets! It must be worth a fortune.
Then his eyes clouded with sorrow. "When my friends were
here, he thought, I had nothing to share with them but sorrow.
Now that I have joy to share I no longer have my friends."
The story of Stephen’s pearl spread like wildfire through the
village. Everyone crowded round him admiring the pearl and con-
gratulating him. It seemed as if everyone wished to be his friend,
even those who had hardly noticed him before. But these were
not the friends for whom he longed so much.
Stephen knew his pearl was worth a great deal of money,
enough perhaps for him to go away from the village and live in
the big town, but he could not bear to leave this rough coast
which Fria had loved and to which she might some day return.
He could not believe she was drowned. Perhaps she had been
washed out to sea and picked up by some passing ship. Perhaps
she was even now on her way back. She might return to-morrow
or this very day. So, clinging fast to hope, Stephen continued to
live as a simple fisherman.
Stephen did not seek new friends in the village, but Fria,
with watchful eyes, noticed that there was one person who now
took a great interest in Stephen. That was Anna, with the dark
eyes and the coal-black carls. Ever since she had seen him find
the pearl she always seemed to be walking along the beach when


Stephen was mending his nets or getting his boat ready for fishing.
She would stop and talk to Stephen and often Fria would hear
her gay laugh come ringing out over the water.
Fria knew that Anna was vain and selfish in spite of her
pretty looks and merry laugh. When Stephen was just a poor
fisherman Anna would not look in his direction, but now that he
was becoming rich she seemed very fond of his company.
“Will Stephen’s loneliness make him turn to Anna for happi-
ness?” wondered poor Fria. “Anna would not make Stephen a
loving wife. All she thinks of is jewellery and pretty clothes. But
I do? I am now only a poor seal, though I have a girl’s
heart.”
As Fria swam about in the sea, doubly lonely and unhappy
now, she kept thinking, “If only I could become Fria again! Is
there no escape for me at all?”
Then, one day, an idea occurred to her. “If the Sea Witch
was clever enough to change me into a seal perhaps there is some-
body else in the sea clever enough to change me back into a girl.
The Sea Witch can’t own all the brains in the ocean.” Whom
could she ask about it, though? She knew nobody now her seals
had gone north.
As she was thinking about it, an old sea-cow, who was
munching some seaweed, said to her, “You are very late, my dear.”
“Late for what?” Fria asked.
“Why, for the journey north of course. The other seals left
two weeks ago.”
“I am not going north,” said Fria. “I do not really belong to
the seal family. I was Fria, the fishergirl, but the Sea Witch
changed me into a seal.”
“Well, well!” said the Sea Cow. “I’ve heard she is very
clever. Still, I don’t see why you should sound so unhappy about
it. Don’t you like being a seal?”


“Oh, Sea Cow, I’d give anything to be a girl again!”
“How odd! Girls look such clumsy things to me with those
silly looking arms and legs. They’re very poor swimmers and I
hear they can’t catch fish at all.’’
“You don’t catch fish on the land,” explained Fria, “And
when you have legs you can walk instead of swimming.”
“Walking is such a slow and awkward method of getting
about. You can’t compare it with swimming if you want to see
the world. Still, I suppose you know what you want. If you’re
foolish enough to want to be a girl again—mind you, I’m sure
you’ll regret it —you had better talk to the White Dolphin. He
is very wise and may be able to help you.’’
“Oh, thank you, Sea Cow! Where can I find the White
Dolphin?”
“I can’t tell you just where to find him at present. He swam
past me only last week but we sea-folk don’t lock ourselves up
in little boxes as your people do, so he may be anywhere now.
You’d better go and look for him. He was swimming south when
I saw him.”
Fria thanked the sea-cow again, and, turning round quickly,
began to swim towards the south.
AY and night Fria swam, ever to the south, asking all the sea
creatures she met if they had seen the White Dolphin. Some
had seen him passing the week before, some had not seen him
at all.
Soon, she began to notice that when she came up on a rock
to rest, the sun was warmer. As her eyes turned to the land
where she longed to be, she found that the grim rocky coast had
given place to gentler country. Sloping down to the sea were
green hills, starred with yellow buttercups, where cattle grazed
peacefully in the sunshine. In the orchards, apple and pear trees


-
i time beauty. How she would have
f loved to climb those green hills or walk
under those boughs of blossom!
Sometimes grey churches raised
V their tall spires high into the clear air.
Fria had never seen buildings
like these and they filled her
-wjSk M wit * n wonder, but she knew
H she could not stay. She must
i m m in I ose I y
mass of fish. It semed strange to Fria /
that they took no notice of her, for usually / ■
when fish see a seal approaching they /y/
swim in all directions in case it is near lunch
time.
“Where are you going, salmon?” she called. — 0
They answered together with one mighty ~~ r.
voice, but still following their course and with- £*> —
out once looking at her.


Sytv/A 7#ARKS.
“We are on our way to the great rivers, for this is our time.
We shall swim up the rivers against the current. If there are
waterfalls we shall leap up them. Nothing can stop us. Cruel
men with nets will wait on the banks. Some of us shall be caught.
The rest will go on. We must go on for it is the time. When we
reach the end of our journey we shall find the quiet lakes and
pools where we were born. In these still waters in the shadows
of the green fir trees we shall lay our eggs. When it is again time,
we shall swim down the rivers, back to the great restless sea.”
Sometimes she
saw huge whales mov-
ing up to the cold
waters of the
north and a
high column of
spray told her
when these
great monsters
of the sea came
to the surface.
She knew that /
though their /
strength was / /
such that they y' a
could smash jj— -
boat into frag-
ments their -- '
food was the
tiniest creature
of the sea.
As she
swam Fria saw
great ships
with steel
sides, carrying
goods from one
end of the
world to the
other, smoky
little tugs,


puffing their way up the coast with coal, and little wooden craft
with white sails that danced for joy on the sunlit water.
She saw them all, but she could not stop, for she was on her
way, just as the salmon were. She had to find the White Dolphin,
for he alone could help her.
Fria was well to the south now and every day she was meet-
ing sea creatures she had never seen before. Many of the fish
were silver or grey like the fish in the cold northern waters, but
there were also newcomers in vivid blues, reds and yellows. Some
wore gaudy striped jackets that looked as if they were made from
pieces of rainbow. They darted about through the water like
gaily-coloured birds, but if they wondered what this lone seal was
doing so far south they did not wait to ask, for to every fish, the
seal is an enemy.
The sun was becoming very hot so Fria kept down under the
cool water as much as she could during the day and came up to
rest only in the evening.
One moonlight night, she heard music coming over the
water. Fria loved music and swam close to the shore to find
whence it came. The music came from a house very near the sea.
Inside the house there were many lights and Fria could hear the
laughing voices of young people as they danced to the sound of
violins. Sometimes a young couple would wander, hand in hand,
down to the water, talking in low voices as they leant on the sea
wall, enjoying the creamy coolness of the summer moon.
One young man had a voice so like Stephen’s that Fria
suddenly remembered where she was going and why she could
not stay.
Once a great storm came up. Black clouds hurried across
the sky, muttering and grumbling to themselves. Mighty bolts
of thunder made the air tremble and lightning sprang from the
sky in jagged streaks. Men in little boats hastily reefed their sails
and raced for home as the angry waves, whipped by the wind,
pounced on their tiny craft and tried to hurl them against the


rocks. Fria, who had always hated storms, dived deep down until
she came to calm water far below the hissing, boiling surface.
\ X/EEK after week she had been seeking the White Dolphin
VV and, at last, she seemed to be catching up with him. He had
been seen here yesterday, he had been seen there the day before.
Surely she must find him soon!
Then, one happy day, she saw a white fin break the surface
of the water. She had looked for that white fin for so long she
could hardly believe her eyes. Perhaps it was the white wing of
a gull that had dived for a fish. No, there it was again! She swam
quickly to where she had seen the fin.
“Oh, please, are you the White Dolphin?”
“Well, if you use your eyes, Miss Seal, you’ll see I’m pure
white and I’m certainly a dolphin. As far as I know, no other
dolphin has ever been white, so if I’m not the White Dolphin, I’d
like to know who is.”
“Please, don’t be cross with me!” cried Fria, nearly in tears,
for the White Dolphin’s tone was almost rude. “If you only knew
how many long weeks I’ve been looking for you!”
“My dear Miss Seal,” he said, in a much kinder tone now,
“Why didn’t you say so at first? I thought you were just one of
those stupid people who go round asking questions that they
could answer for themselves if they had enough brains to use their
eyes. But why have you been looking for me?”
“Sea Cow says that you are the wisest person in the sea and
that if anyone can help me it will be you.”
“I didn’t think Sea Cow had so much sense,” he answered,
his temper getting better every minute.
“You see,” continued Fria, “I am only a seal on the outside.
Inside I’m a girl, only the Sea Witch put me into a seal’s coat.”
“Did she, now? She’s a smart one, that Sea Witch! I suppose


'Vp. *'». -t * ''i f
V \<i, -s.
V^l
you want me to help you change back again?” 4
he asked. >3* \
w \
I would do anything.” said Fria \
“Oh, yes, please, if you can.”
v
fe-, \
If YOU can,” the White Dolphin cor-
rected. “I can only tell you what to do. You
must carry out the task yourself.”
“It’s not a bit of good doing ANYTHING,”
said White Dolphin. “You must do just what
I tell you and nothing else. Now listen!
On a shelf in the Witch’s cave is a phial
containing a sparkling, red fluid. If you swallow
this fluid at sunset in the place where you first
met the witch, you will regain your human
shape.”
‘‘But how am I to get it?” Fria asked with
fast-beating heart. “The cave is guarded by two
sea lions who are nearly as fierce as the witch
herself.”


' , '
-
— i
-
■
„ - '
- *' ’ *- ■’ *
V
• v
. *




,A‘. , .• o,\
• -s . S ; -••• '■ • ' n, v *' .//
• <12^
“We are coming to that. Crowing round the rocks north of
the Sea Witch’s cave are some pale yellow sea grapes. Some of
the grapes are plain yellow—don’t touch them! Look for grapes
that have tiny brown specks on them. Those are the ones
to pick. If you squeeze them in the eyes of any sea creature it
will lose its sight. Not permanently, of course, but until the next
high tide. I would not tell you this dangerous secret if you had
been staying in the sea. If you fail in your task and remain a seal
you must promise never to tell it to any creature of the sea. If it
became known there would be no end of trouble and Neptune
would blame me.’’
“I promise.” said Fria. “How can I ever thank you, White
Dolphin?”
“You can’t and needn’t,” said that gentleman. “Now be off
with you and remember what I’ve told you.”
Fria did not wait another minute but, with a quick flick of
her tail, struck out to begin her long journey home.
C HE swam close to the shore on her way home, her heart filled
*"with a hope that was almost certainty. “Soon,” she thought,
“I may move amongst human beings again and feel that I am one
of them.*”
When she passed the house by the sea whence she had heard
music, she said to herself, “Soon I may be dancing to music with
Stephen.”
Everywhere on the land she
passed, the promise of spring had
given place to the rich fulfil-
ment of late summer. The fruit
trees had shed their pearly blos-
soms and were now heavy with
luscious fruit. In fields where
larks had sung above the green


corn, the crops stood golden-ripe and ready for the harvest. When
she saw the men and girls working in the sun, she wanted to
greet them, and say. “Soon, I will be able to walk in the fields
too.”
When the familiar coast line told her she was nearing her
home she forgot all the weary miles she had travelled and the
dreadful ache in her flippers and told herself. “Only a little
longer! Only a little farther!”
A fisherman, watching her from his boat, said, “There’s a
good life for you! I wouldn’t mind being a seal myself.”
When, at long last, she arrived, all the seals had returned
and greeted her with friendly cries. They asked where she had
been and wanted her to look at their babies.
Fria could spend little time with the seals as she was most
anxious to find the rocks of which White Dolphin had spoken.
They were not hard to find and soon she saw the grapes hanging
in pale yellow bunches like drops of amber wine. She turned them
over carefully looking for the grapes with the brown specks. Ah,
there was one? Here was another—and a third! Soon she had
enough for her purpose.
The tide was at its lowest ebb, which was fortunate, for it
was just on noon and Fria knew the best time to take the witch
unawares was when she would be sleeping after her mid-day
meal.
She swam to that part of the sea where Sea Witch lived.
There were the sea-lions on guard as usual. She swam up and
down a few times pretending to be chasing fish. Then, when
they had become used to her presence and were no longer watch-
ing her closely, Fria swooped down and squeezed drops of wine
from the poisonous grapes right into the lions’ eyes. They yelped
with pain and began beating about the water with their flippers,
but it was too late Fria had slipped between them and was inside
the murky entrance to the cave.
Stealing quietly along the passage she came near enough to


the cave itself to hear the witch moving about. She heard her go
to the cauldron and take up her dinner. As usual it smelt very
good and Fria could hear the witch smacking her lips with relish.
Then there was quiet for a while and soon loud snores rattled
everything in the cave. The witch was asleep.
Fria slipped in like a shadow, almost afraid to breathe. There
was the precious bottle gleaming on the shelf, but as yet she dared
not touch it.
Silently she crept closer to the witch. But the terrible
creature was a light sleeper. The snores stopped, she turned
uneasily and suddenly her eyelids flickered.
Fria, be quick, be quick!
Not a moment too soon, Fria was alongside squeezing the
last of her grapes.
The witch opened her eyes wide.
“What, you here again!” she croaked and leapt towards Fria.
But the deadly speckled grapes acted instantly and the long skinny
claws missed Fria by a foot and clutched only darkness.
“Who told you? Who told you?” she roared in pain and
anger as she blundered blindly around the cave grabbing at every-
thing she bumped.
Suddenly those dreadful arms shot out again. There was a
triumphant shout from the witch. “Ha, I’ve got you this time, my
beauty!”
But it was not Fria she had caught in her blindness; it was
the great cauldron still half full of steaming hot stew.
Down it came, all over her, and she capered about the cave,
yelling and screaming at the top of her voice as she tried to rid
herself of all the odds and ends of hot sticky stew. There was
such a din that every fish for miles around rushed and hid
wherever it could find a dark spot.
Even now, Fria did not dare to stay and triumph over her


enemy. Darting swiftly to the shelf, she seized the precious bottle
and, choosing just the right moment sped out of the cave.
Down the dark passageway she hurried, first to the left and
then to the right, and had slipped past the still-dazed sea lions
before they knew she was there.
Out at last into the clear, green, peaceful sea, Fria noticed
that the tide had turned and was now rising. “It will not be full
till well after sundown,” she thought, “and by the time
the witch can see again I shall be well on my way to safety.”
Carefully hiding the bottle in a crevice on the reef she swam
back to the seals who had been a little hurt at her sudden
departure. All the afternoon she played with them and their
babies, jumping and skipping about in the water and on the rocks.
When the late afternoon sunlight lay along the water in
quivering bands of gold, she slipped away from them and made
her way to the reef. The precious bottle was still safe.
Impatiently she watched the cloudy west change from the pale
yellow of the wheatfield to the sullen crimson of poppies. When
at last the sun had set Fria opened the bottle and held it to her
mouth. Now! The next moment would bring the reward of her
long, long journey to the south in search of White Dolphin and
her dangerous trip into the witch’s cave.
As she swallowed the shining liquid it ran through her veins
like fire. For a moment everything went dark. Then she became
aware of feeling intensely cold.
Looking down she saw that her coat of fur had disappeared
—for ever. Once again she was a girl, with a girl’s body and feet
and hands. She put her hand up to her head. It was covered, not
with fur, but with real hair, and, though short and curly like a
boy’s now, it would soon be long again.
She slipped into the water and swam about to keep warm.
Swimming, however, was no longer the effortless movement it
had been during her seal days. When the twinkling lights inside


the houses told her that the beach would be deserted, she struck
out for the shore.
How lovely the dry sand felt under her feet as she ran lightly
across the beach and up to her father’s cottage! There was no
light there but as she put her hand on the knob of the door it
turned and the door opened to her.
Inside everything smelt musty and stale so Fria opened the
windows to let in some good fresh air.
Luckily some of her clothes were still in the cupboard and
Fria smoothed them fondly as she dressed herself. Old and shabby
as they were, it felt wonderful to be clad as a girl again.
Then she sat on the bed. her chin in her hands, wondering
what to do next.
She did not know where her beloved father was, nor had
there been any sign of Stephen on the beach all day.
While still wondering, weariness overcame her and she fell
asleep.
| N the morning the sound of her name being called woke her and
she opened her eyes to find the morning sunlight streaming
through the window.
There at the open door stood Stephen, staring at her in
unbelief.
“Oh, Stephen,” she cried, holding out her arms, “I’ve come
home!”
“I knew you’d come some day, Fria, my dear one,” he said,
running to her and clasping her in his arms.
“Stephen, where is my father? Don’t tell me he is dead! It
would break my heart.”
“He is not dead, Fria, but he grieved so much for you that
he became very ill and has gone to his sister in the town. He


could not bear the sight of the sea that
took you away from him.” j p
‘‘We must go to him, today,” said <; Ha
Fria. v ■
“But, Fria, you have "
not told me where you < \ ?
have been all these rSf&
months,” “ * <W \ ‘ *"
“It is such a long & , X
story, Stephen, that you \
must wait until you have < [
answered all my ques- « c 4%L\ 1
tions. Tell me about your- /AmOks -.
self and how you have
been getting on.” // Wty-h-w
_ , v **y ' 3'jebIHa■ \}
Stephen told her ' ZfPx I «t llirfto
about the pearl and the (|\
seal who swam about the I V V 4 * j
boat and brought him
“Now we can
build the cottage I have
always dreamed about \Wf > / WX-
and we can be married, t (/ j \w, ~
my Fria.” ij'- ! “If you are sure
* X/- V ou ont mind marry-
,n g a Wl^e catches
Q c and eats whole fish at
W . * <- one bite.”'
/ * «* *
, * - “Whatever do you
* mean, Fria?” asked poor
j Stephen, quite puzzled.
Tflf K|l ' “Stephen, dear, I
1 il I £ k. was swam
about your boat,” said
j r ' a> s^e *°id m
• X o • the w^°*e strange and
* ° 1 wonderful story.
Ti n %


. ■«**'- ■ * ■ *-** -W
. ' - v r- X
where Michael lay griev-
ing, Fortunately, he was
a sturdy old man and the
joy of having Fria restored
to him was the only medi-
cine needed for his recov-
ery.,
With tears stream-
ing from his happy old
eyes, Michael watched
Stephen being married to
the dear daughter whom
he had mourned as dead.
With the money
from Stephen’s pearl they
built a home, but not near
the sea, for Fria wanted
her dear ones to be as far
away as possible from the
cruel Sea Witch, for who
knows when one of them
might fall into her power
again.
The house, which is
on a sheltered hillside,
looks out on safe peace-
ful valleys and green
mountain slopes where
contented cattle graze.
Instead of the crash of
angry waves they hear the
gentle voices of rippling
IT was late afternoon when they
reached the cottage in the town
* «
SyuviA T/^kKs
streams and the soft murmer of the wind in the pine tops.
Fria is a wonderful cook too, and, for the friends she likes
best, she cooks a special dish. Do you know what it is? Well, it


is the fish stew which Fria saw the Sea Witch making. Of course,
she leaves out the squid ink, and instead of sea-kale puts in some
good wholesome vegetables from Michael’s garden. Everyone says
“It’s delicious, Fria! What do you put in it? Where did you learn
the recipe?’’ But Fria just smiles and does not tell.
There is yet another secret which Fria keeps from her friends
when they say, as they sometimes do, “Now that Stephen is rich
it is a wonder he does not buy Fria a warm fur coat for the cold
winter months.’’ But Fria, clinging tightly to Stephen’s arm,
trembles a little as she answers that fur coats do not suit her, and
she will never, never wear one as long as she lives.


Registered at the G.P.O. Sydney lor
Transmission by Post as a Book.
CLOCK PUBLISHING
COMPANY
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
M ARCH ANT & CO. PTY. LTD.
lor the
CLOCK PUBLISHING CO..
Box 39, P.O. Broadway. N.S.W.


I O
. sSb* o <n
D» !
y C:’ *
. t %, AS^hBI
**£tofs ■ slfL , 'u2* \ WiTtA /'H 7* 'SXVtif&v.- 'i£a»i*T>


■•%. « Jf '- —


CLOCK PUBLISHING
MPA N Y
