

p
■■■■■■■I 9 H-o 5+1 7
■ U | J I UillT G t£E
[Hr
...JliliM ..... jt I
~““ T " 1 "' A 111
(W ;■ j mL I II |
Am m 'll
J ■ / \pr «|
1
!^^V, nl «■ WVbKS m\
V '• .' sX /. I
ksKrIB £. . ™*j* “ \
J3L >> >3Bk •. :
*** ■
i *$ErMpN|to t ■ s 'Sbi \ jf I'A
|PI.. ’ •
.-. ‘ '; £ v *HH$ /
■ ; ■ J* ■ t * ?HBEKIXP J
?#.fJpP \ ; w ,. . .. ■. \
* ’


* \ if Urn L W SjjWI M§0
* mIM 'B ® 'B fc is % * *iBf \^SBp^~r > y ~i w v ni
If Jp ffr* V: 1 if ■ i $. : Bh £ji A
v yMgJaiJ* SFg%|a
mm * *** * «* &■ JhIt v ilBIgCar- j^g^r 4 iiiO « Jh jpgi
"jjjjr ■ III
' ’ ...♦ E^l^l
.... glp ~* ■%*& I
m *mm i
'*** v ; f:' &’;>-. •■ - •■; ■<■ .3|3mSH / «QKI
|gg| ii<pip
■FHBh f Be^r ■~m&7 , f* -- ' r-” r ‘ : 2f
I 1Ie5z TIB . Si sSST «** W»* MmmP*«w,.
< ■ Spiflk j^#ip^B" -- m #ly
jk- ■ JrV ifl jfcfa ■*' ♦»
flfi Hk BB..: -Mi' -m- ■«..,*-■
ggaMBMMHIL:-:■■■..... iNiPaw * w ,
~ r , r \ gllSt .-dftdl- "TfagJB * 'WBrnSh
hIHs I >w «Mft^>^ p
H MPif BV f M . V
y '*jm
jgf' 11; .«■ : A . |W - H$ W£/mkWS j|^&
a feggfifeS g£ wf / 4
:.« : V* i. fr ,. ..g|
:: - v ; : ' % : . ...J; \ |; v • -r$:^
w mB|y : *: j'
'■ k > I . Miw
SB! ' " a *0 1 g .... g
■ 4 1 |
-• ** m‘ ■ J " W . •;,;.% 1
';SPt ■'. Jc ♦ ’/ . '** ft* ‘'BM I ?
aF ■ aw M r . •■■^•jit^sBggr
: t ' r - MEf H t %. * y - 1
jHjjH ,;3 ?- » .«
I


THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
TO THOSE MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN
WHO, OUT OF THE GOODNESS OF THEIR HEARTS.
MADE POSSIBLE THE
WORK OF
THE BRITISH WAR RELIEF SOCIETY
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


**•*""“*** '* ***** < ,. / * ■/
m# *
ti ♦’ '* * ■ £ **%*
m ■;, I t,£ ' SjksMBi < , jfe.
•■m s' ’ f 'ffeEl I -MJ|- < it '■I , ,4 *• * *
• ' ' • '> :
&■ ■' ■ : " v .:.■■•■ -■■■ ■ ■ - .' -< --" ■ •" • ■ "■ ■■ '-■' '-‘J
THE QUEEN INSPECTS a fleet of tea-cars , gm?/? to the Y.M.C.A. by the
British War Relief Society , in the courtyard of Buckingham Palace.


FRIENDS
IN NEED
The story of
The British War Relief Society Incorporated
of the United States of America, 1939-1945.
Prepared by the Central Office of Information.
LONDON: HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE: 1947


Introduction . . . . .. . . . • • • P a S e 2
I. History of the British War Relief Society .. .. ~ 9
11. The Merchant Navy .. .. .. •. •• - '0
111. Canteens and other Mobile Services .. .. .. 15
IV. Help to Hospitals . . .. . . • • ..22
V. The Children 29
VI. The Man in the Street .. .. .. .. • • ~37
VII. Civil Defence .. .. .. .. .. ~41
VIII. Aid to the Allies 44
IX. Men and Women in the Services .. .. ~49
X. Pioneer Work .. .. .. • • • • • • -,54
XL Mutual Aid .. .. .. • • • • • • ~58
XII. The Blind, the Halt, the Lame „ 61
XIII. American Ambulance Great Britain .. .. .. 64
XIV. American Labour .. .. .. . • • • ~66
XV. East Grinstead .. .. .. .. .. • • >,68
XVI. Hail and Farewell ~25
CROWN COPYRIGHT RESERVED
To be purchased from His Majesty’s Stationery Office at York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 ;
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh, 2 ; 39-41 King Street, Manchester, 2 ; 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff ;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast; or through any bookseller. Price Is. 6d. net. S.O. Code No. 59-99.
Printed in Great Britain by Alabaster, Passmore & Sons, Ltd., London and Maidstone.


c 3BBBO
Foreword by the Rt. Hon. the Earl of Halifax, K.G.,
formerly British Ambassador to the United States of America.
. m
Garrowby,
York.
The tale of American help to Britain would be incomplete without some
permanent record of the work done by the British War Relief Society in
the United States during the late war.
Long before the United States were involved in the great struggle, from the
length and breadth of that land was flowing an invaluable contribution to
the effort of the British people. Mobile kitchens supplied hot meals to the
victims of the blitz war ; hospital equipment was provided ; clothes and
many of the essential necessities of life were found for those who had lost
everything ; and, in the pockets of the children’s clothes (a typical touch of
American warm-heartedness) would often be placed a little packet of sweets
which were hard to come by in Britain.
But the list of gifts would be a long one, and those who benefited by this
great expression of American sympathy know best what it meant in dark
days, and even when the days got brighter how much it did to supplement
many needs that must otherwise have gone unsatisfied.
I have often thought that the moral support which all this stood for was
worth at least as much as the material contribution. Perhaps more ; for
the gifts were an assurance that our people were not alone in their judgment
of what was at stake.
On all grounds this story deserves to be recorded. For it is the story of a
great assistance by one people to another, in circumstajices and on a scale
that were alike unique.
Halifax
June 1946,


INTRODUCTION
It has been thought fitting to place on record in book form the history of
the British War Relief Society of the United States of America, in order
that the British people may realize fully the vast extent of the work, and also
that members and workers in America may know of the many ways in which
their help was used.
It is a very moving and human story. Never in the history of the world
have the citizens of one country done so much to sustain those of another,
and yet not only is the British nation as a whole ignorant of the tremendous
achievements of the British War Relief Society, but the majority of the
actual recipients of help were unaware of its origin.
The Times in a leading article spoke of “a great tide of human kindness
that surged across the Atlantic to sustain and succour the people of Britain
in their need.” When this tide reached our shores it was broken up and
directed into our own familiar rivers and waterways. In official language,
the B.W.R.S. worked mainly through existing British ministries and
organizations. This co-operation certainly made for efficiency, and for the
best possible use of the amazingly varied help, but it also contributed largely
to our understandable ignorance of our great debt. To dispel this ignorance
would be in itself a justification for this book. No attempt has been made
to describe the various ways in which this wonderful work was achieved
from the American angle. This side of the picture would have been of
necessity quite inadequate, drawn at second hand, from remembered talks
with American workers during their flying visits to Great Britain, and
although of great interest, it is not needed. “By their fruits ye shall know
them.” It cannot be repeated too often that the Society was made up of
thousands of simple friendly people from all parts of the United States.
Apart from the money subscribed—again mainly in small sums from those
with modest incomes—-there were innumerable gifts in kind that represented
a tremendous total of well-directed energy, time, ingenuity, and general
sacrifice of every description.
The quiet courage with which the ordinary men and women of Great
Britain faced the outbreak of war, with all its shattering implications,
produced among their counterparts in America an understanding that was
transformed into admiration and a passionate desire to help as the Fall of
France was followed by the Battle of Britain. The tale that waits the telling
is of one of the many ways in which these ordinary American people—men,
women and children —translated this desire into practice. There is a danger
that the very magnitude of their achievement, with an accompanying maze
of catalogued statistics and figures, may hide the colour, warmth and life
which made this work of relief such a vivid and human thing. This book
will fail of its purpose if the human side of this manifestation of American
friendship is overpowered by its fantastic size and wide scope.
Definite labels have been attached to the name of the B.W.R.S. by the


ministries, organizations and individuals who appealed to the Society. It
made a reputation for itself in the first place as being a particularly friendly,
approachable organization, for which no task was too big to be attempted
or too small to be considered. When necessary, it worked at a speed that
was astonishing. “He gives twice who gives quickly” was the motto in
times of emergency. Imagination was linked with efficiency and considerable
pioneer work was undertaken with great success ; small sums of money were
used to launch promising ideas and many of these ideas eventually spread and
flourished all over the country. The closest touch was kept with sound
advisers and relief experts in both Britain and America, with the result that
the achievements of the B.W.R.S. were not only watched with interest and
affection but often copied with success.
It is hoped that this account of our stewardship will give to those generous
friends on the other side of the Atlantic some idea of how we used their help
and how much it meant to us. We thank them, not only for assistance sent
on such an unprecedented scale, but also for the sympathy and understanding
that accompanied it. Our thanks would be incomplete without mention
of their countrymen who represented them in Great Britain, who lived and
identified themselves with us, who adopted our cause from its earliest days,
and who worked without sparing themselves to bring relief to the tragic
victims of war. It can be said with perfect truth that the chilling finger of
officialdom was never allowed to touch the work. Gifts of this Society,
large and small, reached their ultimate destination vested in the same spirit
of human sympathy and interest with which they left the shores of the United
States, and were passed on by representatives who told us how proud they
were to be used as instruments in such an expression of goodwill.
In 1944 the Minister of Health wrote in a letter to the Chairman of the
London Committee :
“The British War Relief Society has become part of the life of Great Britain
at war. For you were not content to come to our help when we were first in need—
you have stayed with us and shared our difficulties and enterprises, and we owe to
your help much of what we have been able to achieve. Homes and nurseries for
children, hostels for old people, clubs for seamen, mobile services of one kind or
another, gifts of clothing and equipment—all these and more we owe to the ready
and practical friendship of your Society and its supporters on the other side of
the Atlantic.
“And so, while 1 write to express to your Society the deepest and most sincere
gratitude of the men, women and children of Great Britain for all that you have
done, may I add that, whatever we have to face in the future, we know from
experience that we have friends on whom we can rely. ’ ’
This is one of the innumerable tributes that were paid to the Society
during the years of war. They ranged from the spontaneous delight of little
children to the thanks of the King and Queen. Ulysses spoke with deep
affection of the companions who shared the dangers and adventures of his
journeys in words that may well be used when speaking of those friends
who made up the British War Relief Society :
“Souls that have toil’d and wrought and thought with me.”


COMMITTEES
of the
British War Relief Society of America
LONDON
Bertram de N
Cruger ( Chairman )
F. W. Allport
B. E. Astbury
Mrs. W. Dunderdale
John M. Gauntlett
Lady Astor, M.P.
Mrs. Rex Benson
Gilbert FI. Carr
The Hon. Mrs. Sydney Marsham
C. G. Osborne
D.B.E
D. G. Palmer
Mrs. Winston Churchill
The Hon. Mrs. J. Crawshay
H. E. Darling
George Tomlinson, m.p.
Mrs. Ronald Tree
The Hon. Lady Ward, c.b.e.
Joseph
Westwood, m.p.
NEW YORK
Sir Robert P. Appleby
F. Cecil Baker
Thomas A. Beck
Robt. Woods Bliss
Henry Bruere
E. Gerry Chadwick
Harold Benjamine Clark
Frederic R. Coudert
Clarence Dillon
Marshall Field
Leon Fraser
Frederick W. Gehle
A. B. Grant
Lester E. Grant
William Green
Humphrey A. Lee
Albert G. Milbank
Clark H. Minor
Phillip Murray
Ogden Reid
Gordon S. Rentschler
John D. Rockfeller, 3rd
Sir Samuel Salvage
Robert C. Stanley
Arthur Hays Sulzberger
Myron C. Taylor
Harold Vanderbilt
Stephen S. Vansant
Thomas J. Watson
Samuel A. Welldon
Sheldon Whitehouse
John Hay Whitney
Henry Rogers Winthrop
Sir William Wiseman
William Woodward


HISTORY OF THE BRITISH WAR RELIEF SOCIETY
The British War Relief Society was formed by amalgamating two American
organizations possessing similar objects—Allied Relief and British War
Relief. It was the largest voluntary relief organization in America and sent a
total of £12,000,000 in cash and kind to Great Britain.
United States State Department figures show that more than half the total
amount of war relief sent to this country by the 98 organizations engaged in
the work was given by the B.W.R.S.
Launched in New York in October 1939, over 900 committees were
eventually set up, covering every State in the U.S.A., with the two main
committees in New York and London. During the autumn of 1939 the
foundations of the Society were laid with the greatest care in Great Britain,
and contributed in no small measure to the smooth running of the work
during the years that followed. Close contacts were established with
ministries and Government departments. Generous arrangements were
made with the Cunard Line for freightage, with Thomas Cook & Son Ltd.
for the handling of shipments, and with the Treasury whereby relief goods
were allowed to enter the country without payment of Customs duty.
Many business houses in both countries lent premises, equipment, and the
help of their staffs.
At the request of the Foreign Office, the Personal Service League was
appointed to be the official receiving agent for all duty-free gifts shipped by
the British War Relief Society, and was generously offered the use of Dudley
House as a depot. It is impossible to estimate the value of the service
rendered by the Dudley House Committee during the years that followed,
and the warmest thanks are due to all the American and British workers
for their untiring co-operation.
More than a million and a half Americans supported the work of the
Society. They gave their money, their time, their skill and their energy,
and always with the reminder that they gave in no charitable sense but as a
spontaneous expression of sympathy and admiration. The closest contact
was kept between the two general committees, and personal visits by
committee members were exchanged during the years of war, enabling the
work of collection and distribution of relief to be observed at first hand. In
1941, young people in American colleges, schools and universities organized a
body called “Young America Wants To Help” and did much excellent work
for their own generation in Great Britain in conjunction with the B.W.R.S.
The first shipment of goods arrived in February 1940. From that time
on an ever-increasing stream of gifts flowed across the Atlantic. In
September of the same year the bombing of London began, and the Chairman
in London spoke to his opposite number in America on the transatlantic
telephone as the bombs fell within a few yards of his house. “It’s all hell
and haywire here,” was his report. The next day American papers bore
special front-page appeals and the stream of relief became a flood. A
committee to deal exclusively with air-raid relief was set up. The Charity


Organization Society, with its long and unrivalled record of expert social
service, was called in to advise and assist, and continued as a constant
co-operator for the remainder of the existence of the B.W.R.S. In 1944 the
British War Relief Society made a very generous donation to the general
fund of the C.O.S. as a mark of its appreciation.
The London headquarters of the Society in Berkeley Square was twice
damaged in air-raids : first in 1941, and then on an August morning in
1944, when a flying bomb dived on to the roof of an adjacent building. This
old house, bearing honourable scars of war, will long be remembered by
many an English man and woman as a place of hope, understanding and
succour. May it remain to bear witness to a heartening demonstration of
goodwill and good-neighbourliness on the part of the United States of
America.
In the chapters that follow, the relief work of five years has been classified
as far as possible with relation to various sections of the community. It
is difficult to give a comprehensive picture of the work of the Society. Such
a wide range of activities has been covered that its help has been felt, directly
or indirectly, in the lives of countless men, women and children upon whom
war has made its mark. And although much of this continuing help has
been achieved in co-operation with British organizations, and in this way
its American origin has been lost sight of, it is at the same time a fact that
the work of the British War Relief Society has become woven into the
pattern of the national life of Great Britain at war.
11. THE MERCHANT NAVY
“Preserve us from the dangers of the sea, and from the violence of the enemy
. . . that we may return in safety to enjoy the blessings of the land with the fruits
of our labours.”
This prayer, written over four hundred years ago, has lost none of its meaning
with the passing of the centuries. When war broke out in 1939 the policy of
sinking merchant shipping without warning operated from the outset, and
our merchant seamen took their place in the front line on the first day of war.
They remained there to the end, remorselessly attacked by submarine, by
aeroplane and by armed raider, as they brought to this country the essential
supplies of food, clothing and munitions of war, without which we could
neither live nor fight.
The three thousand miles of sea which separate this country from America
did not act as a barrier as far as help for seamen is concerned. Admiration
for the men who went down to the sea in ships in the face of dangers that were
indeed appalling, was shown in many practical ways and from the first onset
of war. Among the earliest donations shown in the records of the British
War Relief Society is one to King George’s Fund for Sailors—the co-
ordinating body for welfare work among seamen—and kits for merchant


seamen made up part of the first consignment of gifts to arrive by ship from
the British War Relief Society of America,
During the months of the so-called “phoney” war the Battle of the Seas
raged with terrible fury and with severe loss in men and ships. Survivors
from torpedoed merchantmen endured incredible hardships before they were
picked up or managed to reach land, and to mitigate such suffering where
possible a new anti-submarine device was brought into action in providing
which the British War Relief Society took a leading part. This new device
was the Rescue Ship. These ships were all fitted with special life-saving
apparatus —wide rope ladders, easy to find and use by exhausted men and up
which twenty men could climb in safety together. Huge baskets were
operated by cranes on the deck of the rescue ship which literally fished injured
men from the sea or from precarious rafts, and loud-speakers were so con-
structed that directions from the rescue ship could be heard for a radius of
three miles. Some of these ships had a limited sea-going range, but some
went out with the convoys, where, as one old rescue-ship captain put it,
they worked like a sheep-dog with a flock of sheep. The larger rescue ships
carried surgeons and were equipped with operating-theatres and hospital
bays—miracles of ingenuity in extremely restricted space.
Both the ships that accompanied the convoys and the launches that worked
within a limited distance from home had one thing in common : they all
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR speaking at the opening of London's Merchant
Navy Club, from which the “Shipmates Ashore" programme was broadcast weekly.


carried rescue kits of warm clothing, carefully thought out for the purpose,
which, with first-aid equipment and electric blankets, were provided by the
British War Relief Society. This invaluable help from America has been
briefly described in an official report of the British Sailors’ Society :
“In the autumn of 1940 the British Sailors’ Society received an urgent request
from both the Admiralty and the Ministry of War Transport to provide a store of
clothing and first-aid and medical equipment on all rescue ships accompanying
convoys and rescue tugs operating from ports both at home and overseas. It
was recommended that if torpedoed crews could be clothed immediately in dry
garments many lives could be saved and future illness and result of shock avoided.
The British War Relief Society has provided the entire cost of this service, 57 ships
have been equipped, several more are in process. In the war of 1914-1918, rescue
vessels as such were unknown, and survivors from torpedoed vessels had to run the
risk of being abandoned to their fate. ... In the present war, the psychological
effect of there being a vessel attached to the convoy for the sole purpose of picking
up survivors is immense, and great benefits have been derived. The electric
blankets which have been included in the medical equipment would alone have
justified the expenditure, for medical officers have testified to many lives having
been saved by them. ’ ’
The majority of rescued men lost all their personal possessions, and
thousands of bales of civilian clothes were sent to ports by the Society to
re-equip survivors, and the general fund of the Merchant Navy Comforts
Service was generously supported.
It was not only at sea that the men of the Merchant Navy suffered from the
violence of the enemy. When on shore they were bombed in company with
civilians, and because ports were important military targets, sailors’ clubs and
hostels suffered very considerable damage. Royal Seamen’s Rests in
Portsmouth and Devonport were destroyed ; the Dreadnought Hospital at
Greenwich was badly bombed ; only too often sailors reached port after
exhausting voyages to find the greatest difficulty in getting a bath, a rest, or
a good meal. Many of their homes, which naturally were in or near ports,
were also bombed. The speed at which the British War Relief Society
worked in times of emergency has already been commented on, but the
attack on certain South Coast ports, with its accompanying special distress
among seafaring men, provides a good example of this invaluable way
of working.
The Royal Sailors’ Rests at Devonport and Portsmouth were severely
bombed within a short space of time. Twenty-four hours after receiving a
special appeal, the British War Relief Society delivered 400 beds and
mattresses and 800 blankets. Four days after the raid on Portsmouth, the
town was visited by the King and Queen, who found a mobile canteen from
the British War Relief Society taking over temporary duty under the shadow
of the wrecked and gutted Sailors’ Rest. Later, the Society equipped a very
large canteen for 2,000 men, complete with reading and recreation rooms.
These were in the main emergency measures. Other more permanent
war relief was needed, and here again invaluable help was given by this
American organization. At a time when the enemy was extremely active in
the English Channel, crews of merchantmen were subject to such constant


' I lfP tj££sa &sWj£S'-J-S 1 '.
■ •» : ' ML ' : "$s^ r mB
k dmkm *W *' v • -^|
A V :#‘8PS6N&*; 31 w Jot ® ».
■ WWMSSk Jf-j •>* %*%V • ™* , ii. - _ ,-^_
v $5® - Site r ..IIS
Hp „ j \ * *: * ’ S ’ >>•* ■ ,, v
«B»
■J: . ,\
■ ~ ■'■ ? r ' -.**-• "f-jf^|B®t'
■■i. iiliSSililiSIB
“ANY LETTERS FOR ME?” An anxious moment at the Merchant Navy Club,
London , where the men of the convoys could come for much-needed rest and recreation.
attack that they had little chance to sleep or rest when at sea. They returned
to their billets or homes in the ports on short leave to find it equally difficult
to rest in these constantly bombed targets. A large country house was
acquired within a reasonable distance of Portsmouth and was equipped as a
Country House Hostel by the Society. A fleet of motor-buses took men
on leave straight from their ships, and they were thus enabled to enjoy their
leave, however short, in peaceful surroundings.
Ditcham Hall stands in a lovely park of 300 acres, and contains games
rooms, cinema, lounges, library, a chapel, and beds for 100 men. In the
park there are a golf course and prepared pitches for football, tennis, croquet,
cricket, and even archery. This country house is extremely popular and has
provided many overstrained and exhausted sailors with a very necessary and
happy break.
The Society in these many ways did all that was in their power to ameliorate
the lot of the serving seamen, and at the same time they were not forgetful of
their families. Many thousand garments for women and children were distri-
buted through various societies. Benevolent funds were generously supported,
and orphaned children of men who had died as a result of enemy action were
maintained at the Merchant Navy School.
This chapter would be incomplete without special reference to the Merchant
Navy Club, which was established in the heart of London. This Club was


the gift of the Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union of America, whose members
had given up some of their pay to make this tribute to the work of the
Merchant Navy, and had equipped the Club on the principle that, for the
men it would serve, the best was not too good. The Club was opened by the
American Ambassador, Mr. Winant. He said :
“The shore service to which seamen are entitled should not be limited to the
waterfront, but should be brought ‘up town,’ so that merchant seamen should
participate equally with the other members of the community in the recreational
activities of the nation. No seaman in the club could have any doubt that his
magnificent services in the war ranked among the highest in the hearts of the people.
This club is not a war-time institution : it is for the Navy as long as free men
should sail the seas.’’
Two clubs on similar lines were provided for the use of merchant seamen in
Glasgow and Cardiff, through the American labour organizations. In
America itself, 31 rest and recreation clubs were opened for men of the Royal
and Merchant Navies in ports on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.
The terrible experiences through which sailors have passed have been
brought home to all by means of the Press and the cinema. It is not
necessary, in modern war, to hear at first hand or have a vivid imagination to
realize what is meant by the term “taking to the boats.” Incredible stories
have been told of the experiences of crews torpedoed far from land. Men
spent weeks at sea in rowing-boats or fragile rafts : hungry, thirsty, burnt,
ill, wounded, with no stores or equipment and no protection from the fury
of the sea, the heat of the sun, exposure to bitter cold or the attacks of a
brutal and callous enemy. Those who survived returned again and again in
spite of their knowledge of the dangers, and in spite of the fact that many of
them had reached an age when they could have stayed in safety ashore.
Nothing more moving was shown in news-reels than the pictures of the
bombing of coastal tramp steamers. These tiny, unprotected ships were
attacked with the greatest fury. Bombed, machine-gunned, shelled, and an
easy target for torpedoes, they gradually became enveloped in the fog of war.
Then, like a miracle, the little ships would nose their way out of the fog
bearing fresh scars and, maybe, with dead or dying men on board, and
pass on their way as if such an escape was all in the day’s work.
‘ ‘ We asked of our seamen a special form of heroism and endurance, the cool and
constant courage of those who in every hour at sea by day or night were in peril of
sudden, stealthy attack by an unseen foe. The respite from that strain was rare
and brief.’’
Few permanent memorials of the amazing generosity of the British War
Relief Society exist, as it worked almost entirely through established channels
in this country, but one such memorial is to be found at Limpsfield in Surrey,
in the grounds of the convalescent home of the Seamen’s Union.
Twenty cottages have been built, to be used by seamen who will bear the
scars of their war-time experiences at sea as long as they live, and are
dedicated to men whose courage made it possible to link the armed strength
of America with our own.


111. CANTEENS AND OTHER MOBILE SERVICES
There is a story, founded on fact, of a British War Relief Society canteen
pursuing its decorous way along a winding English lane when round the
corner, hurrying with true national abandon, came an American soldier
on a high-powered motor-cycle. The ensuing crash left the motor-cyclist
insensible on the side of the road. When he recovered consciousness the
first thing he saw was the name of his home town, painted in large letters on
the side of the canteen. Such was his emotion that he fainted again, and
when he finally recovered he explained to the anxious driver that he had
imagined he had gone straight to heaven !
There must have been many Americans who were reminded of home
through reading canteen inscriptions, though it is to be hoped in not quite so
dramatic or painful a fashion. Canteens and other motor vehicles—well
over 1,000 of them —were given by towns, villages, societies, clubs, small
groups of well-wishers and individuals from all parts of the United States,
and in a great many cases were maintained by their generous donors. Some
were given in memory of well-known American men and women ; others
to commemorate stirring events of the war, or to keep alive the memory of
men who had already lost their lives fighting.
The canteen files in the London office are full of fascinating reading, and
provoke much idle curiosity. Who, one asks, were “Mystic and Noank,”
partners in the gift of canteens to serve night fighters ? Who were ‘ ‘ The
Boston Bruins”? Or those generous “Hands Across the Sea”? Where
did the “Fighters of the British Glove Tournament” hold their tourney?
What inspired the “Class of 1897 of Yale College” with such a special
affection for this country? And what had we done to earn the “Grateful
Appreciation of Britain’s Aid in the Flood of 1889”? How intriguing to
meet the “Daughters of St. George,” the awe-inspiring “Colonial Dames
of America,” or, above all, the “Knights of the Round Table of King
Arthur’s Court” !
The majority of these mobile vehicles were the familiar canteen or tea-car ;
but there were others with a distinct individuality which were built and
equipped to undertake special work. All were sent out complete to the last
detail, ready to fill war-time needs of soldier and civilian. Today, many
have lost their speed and sparkle, and others no longer serve the urgent needs
for which they were built, but what a popular pageant they would make !
What a welcome they would receive from the community they served so
faithfully and well ! Shut your eyes for a moment. Imagine a crowded
street “ somewhere in Great Britain, ’ ’ as the B.W.R.S. vehicles pass by.
In such a pageant pride of place would undoubtedly be given to the famous
Queen’s Messengers Convoys. There were 18 of these convoys, operating
from war-time regional districts in Great Britain, and forming complete food
units standing at the ready for instant despatch to any town in urgent need of
an emergency food service. Each convoy was made up of eight vehicles :
a water-tanker with a 300-gallon capacity, carried to minimize the risk of


■ ■ i ;
£ % ■ ' TM (W* 1 vrsstM$t*>s fit' P •*■ ■ - a-* - !
mmm “ *" .■„ n '"‘"iv"" j* .. <£■ ..
f, ■ .' : :M..; ;i ' v '- :; *• JgHlft '.qH ,J; ? »■:• •-
<1 •< v *
' «esJBP' fj
■■•" ■ . B-. -JK H r
||H|| ****>/ **. ,-”• mm ' 5 - >s 33?v*r
"vJK * 'm 4
I AmMsJ Sill \ur 4
. ill • 1
JJP jflPt « f'£ 5/ -:
SAFELY HOME FROM HAMBURG. The crew of
a Lancaster bomber, cold and weary after their long
flight, find a tea-car waiting for them on the airfield.
spreading epidemics through water pollution ; two food lorries, carrying
material for 6,000 emergency meals ; two kitchens supplied with solid fuel;
and three mobile canteens to distribute hot food and drinks in devastated
streets.
These Queen’s Messengers were on the road early in 1941. They were
driven and staffed by women who held themselves in readiness, day and
night, to move off from their action stations. When the city of Bath was
first attacked, in a devilish “ Baedeker” raid, the nearest Queen’s Messengers
Convoy left its depot fully stocked within 25 minutes of receiving the SOS.
It drove through the black-out at 30 miles an hour, no mean feat for a cross-
country journey, and for six days fed and comforted the people of that
shattered town. Fifty thousand meals were served without a hitch. The
convoys took part in hundreds of similar emergencies, and their work
became famous throughout the country. As the blue-and-cream convoys
entered a raided town, sometimes as the bombs were still falling, even the
exhausted citizens, begrimed, bewildered and homeless, “could scarce
forbear to cheer. ’ ’
Her Majesty the Queen took a great interest in this project from the start
and herself presented eight of the canteens. She inspected the first convoy
in the courtyard of Buckingham Palace and named them all in a charming
little speech :
ON THE JOB. One of the
arriving with hot food and
shattered Coventry on the
Queen's Messengers Convoys
drinks for the citizens of
morning after the great raid.
a -»
Wm jBHp iliß I i#| I 1 1
»’> *f £ ft**' Jb ►
If r i , W
* j»*JSR -fISSP ’ .•-•■♦
, , ■ '4 s
PAUSE FOR REFRESHMENT. A canteen finds its
way down narrow lanes to the hayfields, where it is
eagerly welcomed by hot and thirsty farm workers.
“These form part of a very much larger fleet, which has been provided by the
generosity of the British War Relief Society. lam glad that they should be called
Queen’s Messengers. The message I would entrust to the convoys will not be one
of courage, for courage is never lacking in the people of this country: it will
rather be one of true sympathy and loving-kindness. ’ ’
The convoys pass by, the names of Coventry, Plymouth, Bath, Bristol,
Exeter, Liverpool, Cardiff and a score of others painted on their sides—a
record of service giving every justification for pride.
In strange contrast to these up-to-date convoys is an old motor horse-box
which served as the first Mobile Citizens’ Advice Bureau and, like the Queen’s
Messengers, was held in readiness for grave emergencies. This vehicle
had been converted to serve as an office by day, a bedroom for the specially
trained staff by night, and a kitchen when needed. Tarpaulins served
as waiting-rooms for bewildered and anxious citizens who brought their
many problems to this old horse-box. Four more special units made
up this emergency section : a mobile bath, a laundry, latrines, and a mobile
pharmacy.
Only those who have experienced the horror and confusion that follow
concentrated air bombardment of a peaceful city can appreciate fully the
services rendered by these emergency vehicles. But they move on. Three
large, imposing vans take their place. First, a mobile library, carrying over


K7 ~»jP* SS3 : |Br^TjBy| y |, ■ £ a y 8 *^gr iSi i’-
1*^-“ .■ ■■jffjjl^jaS
\r§ M*» \ |P||I tc 1B|
38® -- v
jj A 8BK ' |P^
inHi rjp
NIGHT SERVICE. Night and day the Church Army
canteens served the troops. This was a searchlight
station on the East Coast, where the flying bombs came in.
2,000 books, which provide a wide selection of reading matter ; a first-class
cinema, which spent the war in Scotland giving shows to Allied troops
stationed there ; and last, a long six-wheeler van, from which came the
sound of singing and laughter. This van represented a triumph of ingenuity,
providing opportunities for both religious services and entertainment. The
adjustable altar could be screened olf, and the van contained a piano, a
radio, and a cinema projector. There were stepped seats for thirty and ample
standing room. Men watching in the crowd knew the van well and joined
in the songs as it passed.
The street fades away and a canteen is seen making its way down a
small country lane ; as it passes by, women and children hurry from their
cottages with baskets of fruit and vegetables gathered from their gardens.
This is a Canning Unit, one of six, which has brought the opportunity for
up-to-date preserving to the country village. The canteen draws up in the
shade of some trees at the end of the lane, and a quiet corner of England is
transformed for the day into a hive of activity. When it is too dark to see,
the canteen packs up and another village will welcome it the next day.
Back in our street once more in time to see four tiny vans hurry by, each
one given for a special purpose. The first lived through the London
‘ ‘ blitz, ’ ’ serving an East End settlement in a dozen ways ; a second worked
in the docks, for the Seamen’s Mission ; the third for an invalids’ kitchen ;
OF TEA. A canteen at
worked day and night
round ” of cargo shivs.
A WELL-EARNED CUP
the docks, feeding men who
to secure a quick ‘ ‘ turn
A WELCOME VISIT. Demolition workers, whose work
after a bad raid was both hard and dangerous, break
off for a few minutes when the canteen arrives.
and the last united scattered sections of the A.T.S. posted under the shadow ot
the great Roman Wall of Northumberland. With these little vans the last of
the special units pass. They were the aristocracy of the British War Relief
Society’s mobile services, and each one, from the Queen s Messengers to the
Ford vans, was fitted, staffed and maintained to serve a set purpose.
The main body of these, the honest-to-God hot-drink-and-snack canteens,
served the community, soldier and civilian, throughout the length and
breadth of Great Britain. There were over a thousand, and at first sight
there is little of pageantry about them. But the watching men and women
do not find them dull or uninteresting. For them, these canteens are alive
with memories of comrades with whom they shared the years ot war, and they
are welcomed as old and valued friends. Watch, and listen to the cheers
The Elome Guard canteens^—they reminded many men past Army age of
arduous training when the day’s work was over, of military duties lasting
through the night, and . of the chilly dawn—Home Guard units which
possessed a canteen were in luck ! A grey Irish morning, with pouring ram
and mist, and the landing of the first contingent of American troops they
cheered the canteen that waited for them at the quayside. Lonely camp sites,
with small detachments of men guarding a vital spot in charge of anti-
aircraft guns or working searchlights ; units from the women’s services
carrying on miles from civilization ; the canteens visiting these isolated


groups became first cousins to the village shop ; they were recognized by
their friends and given a special cheer.
Nights of the “blitz,” canteens that moved through torn-up streets lit
by the flames from burning buildings, bringing hot drinks to exhausted
fire-fighters, police, civil defence workers, rescue squads, ambulance drivers
and attendants. Those same canteens back at dawn bringing fresh supplies
of hot tea, coffee, sandwiches, feeding bombed-out families that faced
catastrophe. Canteens at the docks, to feed men working day and night to
achieve a speedy “turn round” of cargo ships. The haze of summer in the
harvest fields, with canteens and tricycles bringing meals to farmers and their
helpers. Endless pictures are brought to mind as the canteens go by.
There seems to be no man, woman or child in the street who has not some
personal memory : they wave, they shout to a familiar driver, they cheer
endlessly.
During the war luxuries became few and simple, but none the less they
were highly prized. Many a man and woman remembered moments when,
as far as they were concerned, empires might fall and civilization crumble
into dust; the only thing that really concerned them was the appearance of
the canteen and the longed-for cup of tea !
The last and largest group approaches—the canteens given by the British
War Relief Society to serve the Royal Air Force: Fighter, Bomber and
Coastal Commands. The first three of these tea-cars were handed over in
the late summer of 1940 and took part in the Battle of Britain. In those
epic days the heavy bombing of airfields so disorganized the cooking and
feeding services that canteens were called in to meet the need for hot drinks
and food to sustain the fighter pilots and ground staffs. At one airfield
the entire personnel was fed in this way for three days and nights. The
tea-car service came into its own more and more as crews and ground staffs
were distributed to widely-separated dispersal points. Eventually, at the
request of the airmen themselves, canteens were officially allowed to enter
the airfields and to serve hot tea and snacks to departing and returning
crews, and a Comforts Service was organized.
These canteens pass-haunted. Many brave men briefed for a raid had
taken their last hasty meal from a canteen drawn up under the wings of the
giant bombers, and often canteens met a returning plane to find that some
of the crew needed them no longer.
“Into the dark death cloud they passed, to set
Fame on their own dear land for fadeless wreath,
And dying died not. Valour lifts them yet
Into the splendour from the night beneath. ’ ’
In the later years of the war a small band of the canteens undertook a new
task. For the first time in history a mobile canteen went to the Ambassadors ’
Court of St. James’s Palace to provide refreshment for men and women,
many of whom had travelled for some distance to take part in a special
“Quiet Day” service arranged for people bereaved through the war.
British War Relief Society canteens undertook to be on duty on all such
occasions.


jiiiiij ii,
ill! I
■V>' A
. ■- "* * - - &■ '■£»:%„. - Mil I' IhI aJR f!A. K|i 4 «|
|A j ♦* tv ** Sm ®fi ®« SI' J. J
— ,
& || ' J m i| it ■■ m J ; PiMm v ' l|i||mMmBIMHB 4 ■jp|| J«p|
IN THE SHADOW OF ST. PAUL'S. Salvation Army canteens among the battered
buildings surrounding the Cathedral after a German raid on the City of London.


IV. HELP TO HOSPITALS
British hospitals were generously befriended by the British War Relief
Society in such widely differing ways and circumstances that for the sake of
clearness this chapter has been divided into three sections :
Equipment and Donations,
X-rays and Radon.
Special Hospitals.
Equipment and Donations
Medical aid was put into the forefront of the programme of the Society
from the beginning, and during the first year of war it investigated probable
needs and accumulated considerable medical stocks in Great Britain, and
so was in an excellent position to provide immediate help when air bombard-
ment made hospital needs acute. Distribution of gifts, both in cash and in
kind, were made chiefly by the British Hospitals Association, through
the Dudley House Committee, as well as by the New York and London
offices, to over 1,100 voluntary hospitals, run by private subscriptions to
help the poorest of the community. It should be pointed out that not only
did the hospitals learn to rely on well-chosen, steady assistance during the
whole period of the war, but also to count on the readiness of the Society to
make most painstaking efforts to meet special needs. Instances of this
willingness to take infinite trouble range from certain necessary and expensive
equipment obtained in America at the direct request of the Ministry of Health,
to comparatively small matters. One example of the latter was when
a famous hospital for children was in particular need of a small cystoscope
for examining very young children, and found that the instrument was
neither made nor obtainable in Great Britain. This hospital approached
the Society. The request became the subject of considerable correspondence
between the head offices in London and New York, and the final letter,
when the cystoscope was run to earth, is worth quoting :
“Re the need of a special cystoscope for the Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children. Mr. Cruger has just received notification from headquarters in New
York that after some burrowing round they have located one, used, but in first-class
condition. It is passed as thoroughly satisfactory by the Babies’ Home in New
York, and the New York office have therefore arranged for the earliest possible
shipment. ’ ’
Any attempt to compile a list of gifts in kind would be defeated by its
diversity and magnitude. Practically every hospital in Great Britain received
direct benefit. Three thousand bed sets (complete with necessary enamel
ware), 5.000 comfort bags, 100,000 yards of flannel, are round figures of
single consignments which indicate the scale of this assistance. Rubber
sheeting, linen, dressings, bandages, towels, overalls, layettes, valuable drugs,
vitamins, civilian clothing, rubber hot-water bottles, toys, sweets : these and
many other articles were distributed from port and warehouses to thirty of


i-
$ - ? i I ' f •' . ,a| I
~..4- I cT 1 I
09* ; , ;* jj , v •> ■
'■NP9 1 f
• Rpr v' i . -.Jjm
wm m fTI tmmMMm*. II. 1 # * 1 j# % J >^111111
| :#s Jk f
" te t * Billllil11^^
; ■ / iiafeMHi I
* -. /|s, iig ■ '-\m Jm »
■HUP X „ p- ■ 1g%'# _ *' v '\ 'Jk '
i| *: ’ V |||||| I f L * &A;
I If mBBI H I imJm t I iB * i
JiHiM SBHH : , ,« I mr ,:.:^v#
s< "'■■■ > ■' W f | mm : -| ■ || M JmIhH
the larger hospitals in different parts of the country, which, in turn acted as
distributing centres for other hospitals in the area.
Complete sets of surgical instruments of the highest quality were distributed
in the same way, and used as a pool from which temporary loans could be
made when called for. These sets, with many other surgical instruments,
operating-tables, lamps and sterilizers, were invaluable, as they met an acute
shortage which existed in this direction.
Considerable gifts of money were sent from America, many earmarked
for a particular hospital ; but out of the un-earmarked sums that were
passed on to the British Hospitals Association a central fund was built up to
meet the urgent needs of individual hospitals throughout the country, and
sent prompt donations to any particular hospital that had been badly
bombed, to provide immediate comforts for casualties and the staff.
All these gifts, both in cash and in kind, provided steady support for the
everyday work of hospitals. But there were occasions when SOS appeals
were received from bombed and partly destroyed hospitals. A bombed
hospital presents peculiarly difficult problems, as it can be taken for granted
that the surrounding neighbourhood will have suffered at the same time and
fresh casualties be brought to the hospital. Within its walls a few trained
persons are responsible for many helpless and gravely ill fellow-creatures ;
partial or total interference with the essential services of lighting, heating or
OPERATING UNDERGROUND. Raiders are overhead ; the hospital vibrates with
the crash oj bombs and the thunder of guns ; but down here the work of healing goes on.


water-supply creates immense problems, and yet, if humanly possible, the
work must go on. To the eternal credit of all concerned, it did.
One of the greatest boons to war-time hospitals was acetate sheeting, a
pliable material that could be cut to any size or shape and that admitted light
as readily as glass. It is an undisputed fact that nothing so good has been
produced in Great Britain, and by special request of the Foreign Office the
British War Relief Society shipped hundreds of rolls from the United States
and distributed them exclusively to hospitals because of their special need for
light, and because of the exceptional danger from flying glass in such
establishments. Famous hospitals such as St. George’s, St. Bartholomew’s
and the Westminster Hospital were among those which had their broken
windows restored by acetate, and this service was repeated at the time of the
V weapons.
Other special appeals were answered. The Dreadnought Hospital was
enabled to reconstruct an entire hospital in its remaining east wing alter a
disastrous raid in 1940 ; a resuscitation ward was equipped at Swansea ;
St. Thomas’s Maternity Ward, bombed out of London, was re-established at
Guildford ; hundreds of appeals from almoners for clothing for both
in-patients and out-patients were answered with the least possible delay.
One letter, representative of many, was sent to the Chairman of the London
Committee after one of these “good turns’’ :
“I want to send you a direct message of thanks which 1 hope you can convey to
all our friends in America, because the action of your Society was particularly
helpful to us when the last bombing of London took place.
“Shortly before that all our linen in the Hospital’s own stores had been destroyed
by enemy action, and on that night all the linen that was with our laundry con-
tractors was also destroyed. We were left, therefore, with very little to carry on
our great work, but a telephone call brought speedy help in the form of consign-
ments of linen of all kinds from your Society. With this linen we were able to deal
with large numbers of casualties and civilian patients without interruption of our
work.
“Will you please accept my sincerest thanks to your wonderful organization,
and let our gratitude be known in America.”
X-rays and Radon
Special interest in X-ray work was taken by the Society, and as early as
1940 six costly and elaborate installations were given to serve special purposes
in Emergency War Hospitals. The first was received on behalf of a maxillo-
facial hospital by Sir Harold Gillies, whose fame as a plastic surgeon is
world-wide. This machine was used in conjunction with a new method ol
dealing with jaw injuries, and patients so treated were able to move the jaw
painlessly and freely within twenty-four hours of the fracture being set.
Other specialized and powerful X-ray equipment was given to chest and
gastro-intestinal hospitals, and one to a neuro-surgical hospital. Several
mobile X-ray units were sent to various parts of the country.
When the air-raids on London began, the following warning was issued by
the British Medical Journal ;
‘’Doctors in London have been asked not to use radium for certain treatment,
but to use Radon. This position is desperate, as Radon is very short. But we


understand that the position will soon become a great deal better, because of the
generous provision of a Radon Centre by the British War Relief Society of
America.”
The British Medical Journal was right : a Radon Centre was not only
established by the Society, but maintained by a second grant three years later.
A short explanation of Radon is necessary in order that the enormous boon
of this Radon Centre may be properly appreciated.
It is common knowledge that radium is used for essential treatment of
certain types of cancer, and that it is invaluable when treating this terrible
disease, it is also universally known to be the most precious substance in
existence, as the world supply of radium is extremely small. But apart from
all this, radium is an exceedingly dangerous substance when not under
control, and can cause grave harm to human beings if its presence is not
realized. The danger of radium is vividly demonstrated when a patient who
is receiving treatment by means of radium needles is nursed in a public
ward. The needles contain only a minute particle of radium, but extra-
ordinary precautions are taken to prevent such a needle being lost and so
exposing other people to grave risk. A special nurse attends the case.
Every part of the bed itself and the bedding is labelled ; all utensils are
marked and kept apart. A large red cross on a stand is placed at the foot
of the bed to warn others not to come near. If one of the tiny needles is lost,
an unremitting search is carried on by every available person.
It is therefore easy to understand why, when air-raids began, radium
became a menace. One hospital arranged to place its stock in a special
tunnel 600 ft. below the Thames. But the result of all the precautions that
had to be taken was that the treatment of cancer patients suffered gravely.
The answer to the problem was Radon.
Radon is an emanation product of radium, and can be effectively used as a
substitute. This radium gas retains its destructive property for a few days
only, and if released by reason of air-raid damage, the menace of such released
Radon would be brief, and also would not diminish the small stocks of radium
in the country. The Radon Centre manufactured Radon seeds that were
largely used as a substitute for radium, and a very special debt of gratitude is
owed to the generosity of the British War Relief Society for this special and
scientific piece of war relief.
Special Hospitals
The Hadlield Spears Field Hospital lost all its vehicles and equipment in
the French collapse in 1940. It was reorganized as a 50-bed mobile hospital,
complete in every detail from its tents and its X-ray equipment to the finest
surgical instruments and newest Army cooker, by the Society. It afterwards
served with distinction in Syria and North Africa, doing excellent work under
desert conditions, and accompanied the Fighting French in the march
on Rome.
The Douglas Hospitals were two small convalescent homes maintained
by the Society for members of the barrage balloon squadrons in the South
Coast Command.


Certain R.A.F, Hospitals received most generous help from the Society,
and details of their very interesting work for airmen is described in detail
in the chapter devoted to the Armed Forces.
Six orthoptedic clinics for children were fully equipped in Ulster.
The Ilford Rheumatism Clinic received a large donation for rebuilding after
destruction by bombing.
Our American Friends’ Ward in Great Ormond Street Hospital was
dedicated “in gratitude to all in the U.S.A. who in the years of trial and
difficulty gave encouragement, sympathy, and help. ’ ’
The Churchill Hospital was known originally as the American Hospital,
and started its famous career in September 1940, when a group of United
States surgeons and nurses, under Dr. Philip Wilson, came to this country
as a medical unit, complete with stores and equipment, and financed by the
British War Relief Society. Apart from the hospital buildings, this unit was
maintained by the Society throughout and did extremely valuable work
at Park Prewett in Hampshire, before moving to Oxford in 1942. The
hospital was formally opened there by the Duchess of Kent, and it is unique
in that, as an entirely American-staffed-and-maintained hospital, it worked as
part of Great Britain’s Emergency Medical Service. Although it undertook
general hospital work, it specialized in orthopaedic and plastic surgery.
The Churchill Hospital passed through yet another phase when, in June
1942, it was taken over by the American Army. After this date, the British
War Relief Society carried on the tradition by continuing their support to
neuro-surgical work as maintained at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham.
Here was performed a most remarkable “trap-door” operation on a boy’s
skull whereby the child, who had been dumb following an air-raid injury,
once again learned to speak. The doctor was one of those honoured with an
allocation of penicillin when in its earliest experimental stage. He wrote :
“Easily the most exciting feature of the month has been the privilege of treating
two cases with penicillin. Both were saved by the new drug when in a desperate
state. I am staggered at the efficiency of this new agent. I have been given
500,000 units a month of this new agent, and am spending all my available time
attempting to find out how best to make use of this generous supply during the
coming months of the invasion.
“Once more, may 1 express my gratitude to the B.W.R.S. for giving me this
opportunity to carry on here in Birmingham,’’'
During the months when “London nightly withstood a siege that changed
the history of the world,” a remarkable diary was kept at one of the largest
and worst-bombed of its hospitals. It is a matter for regret that it cannot be
reproduced in full. It covers events in the hospital from September 1940 to
April 1941, and it is sufficient to quote the events of one night to show how
great was the need for help among the hospitals of Great Britain ;
‘‘The Alert sounded at 9,15 p.m. The raid commenced immediately afterwards
and continued uninterruptedly until 4 a.m. At 10 p.m. a number of incendiaries
fell in the garage yard. No cars were lost, but the carpenter’s shop was set alight
and burnt out. Incendiaries also fell all over the main building. Later, debris
between Blocks 7 and 8 caught fire and burnt for two hours before it was controlled.


DRIVERS AND STRETCHER-BEARERS. The HadfieldSpears Field Hospital lost its
equipment when France fell. Reorganized, it gave fine service to the Fighting French.
A succession of bombs fell in the river, shaking the hospital continuously, and at
1 a.m. blast blew in most of the windows at the south end, followed afterwards by an
explosion that shook the centre of the building. At 2.30 a.m. a land-mine fell in
Nightingale Square, wrecking the interiors of Blocks I and 2, and the blast from
this explosion also wrecked two basement wards, from which the patients were
evacuated immediately. One in addition caught fire, and the other was flooded
by water from tanks on the roof. The patients and 40 casualties admitted into the
Hospital from the raid were temporarily accommodated in Scutari, the basement
corridor, No. 4 classroom, and the canteen. The emergency lighting was brought
into immediate operation as the electricity supply failed altogether, with that of
gas and water. At 9.30 a.m. all patients not too ill to be moved were evacuated to
Sector Hospitals.”
The diary goes on to tell of a conference held at noon in the matron’s
office, when certain decisions were taken concerning carrying on the work,
all made “with the reservation that no emergency case should be refused.”
This diary tells plainly of the spirit of service that inspired such men and
women to carry on a seemingly unending, exhausting, self-forgetful struggle
in the face of terror and disaster, in order that no emergency case should be
refused. Admiration for this spirit impelled these distant friends in America
to send their varied and sustained help, which was so great an encouragement
to all those connected with hospitals in Great Britain.


■
llil
“A LITTLE CHILD that lightly draws its breath. What can it know of death '


V. THE CHILDREN
Under Five
September 1940 found the Ministry of Health in the unfortunate position
of the Old Woman who Lived in a Shoe. Gaps in the official evacuation
plan concerning children under five whose mothers could not, or would not,
leave badly bombed areas, brought about a distressing situation. So many
and so pathetic were the cases brought to light of war-damaged babies, that
appeals were made to the British War Relief Society for help. In answer, the
Society set up and maintained eight new residential nurseries, gave very
substantial help to enable others to expand their work, and supported bodies
especially interested in nurseries with timely grants.
Some of the babies had lost one or both parents as a result of enemy action;
others were pathetic victims of neglect owing to war conditions, or, saddest of
all, the children of women whose mental balance had been completely upset
by the terror of continual air-raids. Practically all were suffering in varying
degrees from continual shelter life, from lack of proper care, from unsuitable
food and from the many ills caused by the disorganization of a bombed town.
The matron of one of these nurseries said in an interview :
“We had one baby of 4| months arrive straight from a bombed hospital with its
hair and ears choked with dust and the charred fragments from a burning ward.
Others came just as they had been pulled out of bombed homes or from shelters,
suffering from bronchitis and pneumonia. Some were terribly wasted from
shell-shock, others frightened by the daylight, and indeed all unused to normal life
as every child should know it. One child, whose mother had been taken to hospital
badly injured, had been in the care of a grandmother dying of cancer. Owing to
the short hours of daylight, the more fortunate children spent sixteen out of
twenty-four hours regularly crowded together in public shelters and tube stations ;
others had remained underground for weeks on end.
“Here, with just patience, fresh air, quietness and proper feeding, they became
different children. When they first came, the sound of a siren sent them into fits.
They could neither eat nor drink, had not the will to move arms or legs, and could
not even cry. We named their condition ‘shelteritis’ because, apart from shock,
they are suffering terribly from living so long in shelters.
“After a short time the older ones laugh and say: ‘There’s that moo-cow
mooing again’!”
She pointed to a slight depression in the ground ;
“A bomb fell there some months ago. 1 wish Hitler could have seen our cured
little bomb victims kicking the earth back into the hole the next morning.”
It has been emphasized that children were one of the Society’s chief
concerns. This was abundantly true. Not only were these nurseries most
generously supported, but with what another matron described as “true
generosity and understanding hearts.” The closest touch was kept with
them throughout the war by representatives of the Society. These repre-
sentatives were constant and greatly loved visitors, and the children regarded


them as their own personal property. The first link in this delightful chain
was forged in September 1940, when the first party of small children was
seen off by train from London by the Secretary of the Society, for their new
home in Gloucestershire.
There were eight Anglo-American nurseries, providing room for 600
children. Each achieved its own individual atmosphere.
Syston Court, the first to be established, is a huge, rambling, haunted
house, abounding in secret passages, grey and hoary with age. But its
ghosts were kind to the children as they ran merrily about the old house,
learned their first lessons in the banqueting-hall, and slept peacefully in
rooms where kings and queens had slept hundreds of years before them.
Dauntsey Park, a typical Wiltshire country house, with its vast stables
housing an up-to-date laundry, was picked out by the Ministry of Health as
having reached a very high standard of efficiency and was requested to train
as many nursery nurses as possible. The children at Dauntsey came from
the East End of London during the height of the ‘ 1 blitz. ” It is an interesting
fact that they have taken appreciably longer to recover from their dreadful
experiences than children who came later, when shelter life had been made a
little less horrible. Those early days of shelter life left marks on young
children that have proved extremely difficult to eradicate.
The Montclair Nursery (Marsh Court) fulfils a special function. It is a
residential nursery for convalescents or for very delicate children. Here the
sick children are deliberately treated as far as possible as if they were in
normal health. The same policy and routine is observed as in the other
nurseries, but more fully trained nurses are on the staff in order that a most
careful watch can be kept on the children.
Marsh Court stands high on the downlands in the centre of Hampshire,
overlooking the River Test, famous for the best trout-fishing in the world.
Architecturally it is an arresting building, a product of the twentieth century
and designed by Sir Edward Lutyens, who used local materials throughout.
It is surrounded by a private golf course ; but today the children race along
the fairways and roll in noisy triumph down the grassy banks.
The Querns also requires special mention as having developed into a
residential nursery school for the five-to-seven age group. The children were
specially chosen from the seven residential nurseries of the Society as those
most likely to benefit from further special care. They attend local schools,
and their all-round development has proved the experiment a highly
successful one.
All this group of nurseries (with the exception of Marsh Court) was taken
over by the Ministry of Health in 1944 and incorporated into its normal
schemes. Marsh Court continued as a nursery for over-fives.
Three other nurseries may be mentioned.
The St. Christopher’s Nursery Training College at Tunbridge Wells had
been in existence for thirty years. The Society first assisted by means of a
grant covering the extra cost of children sent to the College by the Invalid
Children’s Aid Association. Next, The Dell, a large additional house, was
acquired and equipped, and finally the cost of the extremely successful work
for 200 bomb-shocked children under five has been borne entirely by the


Society. Not only were the children cared for, but ex-nannies were given
intensive training courses before going to Ministry of Health nurseries all
over the country.
The Princess Christian Nursery at Windsor owes its present lovely house
and grounds to the generosity of the Society. The Westminster Day Nursery
was enabled to move out of the dangers of London. The “Underground”
Nursery was supported in its early struggling days. A Royal hunting-box
was equipped and opened at Melton Mowbray, and a model nursery for
under-five bomb-shocked children was entirely equipped in the grounds of
the Chailey Heritage Schools and is known as the Princess Elizabeth Clinic.
Grand Street House, in Surrey, was opened in March 1942 as a recuperative
home for London mothers and children suffering from war strain. Forty
mothers and children were accommodated at a time, these guests paying £1
a week and ss. each for their children. The Society made generous gifts of
beds, bedding and other equipment.
So much for the nurseries themselves ; but other most valuable work
affecting war-time nurseries was achieved through central organizing bodies.
The Nursery School Association was enabled to build and equip a model
nursery school, the first of its kind, outside Guildford. In this prefabricated
day nursery centre, children of women engaged on essential war work in
nearby factories were cared for, and it served as a model for this special type
of nursery. The centre had accommodation for 50 children and was
supervised by a trained nursery school staff. It was built in a birchwood
copse with new large classrooms, a staff room, cloakrooms, lavatories, and
medical rooms for the weekly examination of the children by a doctor.
Large french-windows allowed the maximum of light and sunshine to enter,
and the equipment and furniture were chosen to complete the bright and
varied colour scheme. Windows opened on to a paved terrace providing a
dry playground. The midday meal for the children came from the adjacent
secondary school and was conveyed to the nursery centre on electrically
heated trolleys.
The building was constructed of materials which were easily available and
was erected with the minimum amount of labour. The centre was made
ready in a fortnight, but the actual work of assembly of the different parts
took only two days. This enterprising experiment proved of great help to
other local authorities, and gave a practical demonstration of one way of
dealing with acute lack of accommodation.
The National Society of Day Nurseries, whose work is to advise local
bodies and interested persons in all matters relating to under-fives, was given
grants to support additional trained experts who toured the country in an
advisory capacity.
The idea of the under-five nursery was little older than the war. Many
problems and difficulties presented themselves, and the sums of money
given to help these two Societies in their work of “nursery research” were
invaluable, and of the greatest assistance in establishing the high standard of
war-time nurseries which was attained in so short a space of time. Specific
day nurseries in Camberley and North Battersea received grants from
the 8.W.R.5., and also several in the Glasgow neighbourhood.


STATELY HOME. A party of ‘ ‘ under-fives, ’ ’ safe and happy at an Anglo-American
nursery in a country house far removed from the noise and terror of air-raids.
A special clinic was established in South-East London to care ior sick and
wasted babies and very young children, in particular those suffering from
bomb-shock and the evils of shelter life. During the latter part of the war
students were trained in this clinic, in order that the work might continue
for the debilitated babies of liberated Europe.
Outside the walls of the nursery and the clinic thousands of small children
received warm clothing, bedding, shoes and Wellingtons. American layettes
won for themselves a great reputation, the garments being so practical,
well-made and, at the same time, so attractive. This was the opinion of a
clergyman who wrote to the Committee from an East End shelter :
“You have made me the happiest man in London. When 1 opened your parcel
and found the twenty-five lovely layettes . . . !”
School Children
The Society showed concern for children of school age, apart from
individual assistance, by help given through other societies, such as the
Soldiers’, Sailors’ and Airmen’s Families Association, in three main ways :
1. Supplying special equipment to hostels for “difficult” children.
2. Maintaining war orphans in special homes.
3. Providing toys and Christmas parties.
When many thousands of children were evacuated, a certain number were


found to be ‘’difficult,” some because of the sudden uprooting from home,
others through faults of birth, training or adversity. Special hostels were
established for children who proved impossible to billet. But this un-
avoidable course of action made for great distress among those children who
had only recently developed behaviour problems and undesirable character-
istics owing to war conditions and upheavals. Schoolmates who had been
evacuated with them were fully aware of the circumstances of the out-of-
school life of the “difficult” children. This knowledge made life still more
unhappy. Eventually, child-guidance experts who dealt with problem-
children recommended the provision of special occupational material, and
the Society made grants to over 600 hostels for this purpose. The effect was
amazing. Jt is well worth while to quote the matron of one of these hostels ;
“1 was at my wits’ end with the children. Two hundred came to our town from
the same district of London, and the thirty put under my care were badly teased
by their old schoolmates. Children can be very cruel to each other, and my boys
suffered both from the teasing of other children and in many cases from a feeling of
sadness that they were not wanted in other people’s homes. 1 did what I could,
but apart from the provision for them of a house and its equipment, the children
were nobody’s business.
“One day a van delivered a load at the door which changed the situation. Out
of the blue, or more truthfully out of British War Relief Society funds, came
indoor games, modelling material, garden tools, cricket equipment, a punch-ball
and a wireless !
“1 do not pretend that the children were no longer difficult, but they were
no longer unhappy, and the feeling that someone was interested made a permanent
difference to many and was instrumental in assisting their return to normality.
It also changed the attitude of the other children, and within a week both I and the
various school teachers were in the ridiculous position of receiving applications
from normal children in normal billets to be transferred to this once despised
community.”
Special homes run under the supervision of the two well-known settle-
ments of Oxford House and Beauchamp Lodge, accommodating over 120
children over live whose homes were destroyed by bombing, were supported
almost entirely. One of these homes, Brampton Bryan Hall, run on the lines
of an English public school, was studied by educational authorities as an
experiment of considerable worth and interest.
A hostel for a group of bomb-shocked children, left with severe forms of
deafness and ear trouble, was established on the edge of Dartmoor. A grant
to this home provided electric apparatus for the treatment of these pathetic
children and special re-educational equipment.
The long waiting-list of children orphaned through enemy action led to
appeals for their maintenance, which brought considerable response from
the Society. Three well-known homes received regular monthly grants
over a period of years. They were the Homes for Little Boys, the Alexandra
Orphanage, and the London Orphan School.
All orphaned children accepted at these homes were cared for and educated
and equipped to earn their own living, and the progress of these special


“adoptees” of the British War Relief Society was followed with interest.
The Merchant Navy School was one of the first institutions in Great
Britain to be helped by the Society, when the traditional uniform worn by the
children was made by the Society’s working parties. It has been aptly
said that, in spite of rough water, help given in money and clothing has kept
the school afloat on an even keel.
One of the most dreadful air-raid incidents was the daylight bombing of a
South London school. Within a few hours a van from the Society's
headquarters delivered toys and sweets to the children who had survived, and
by means of an unexpected treat diverted their minds for a time from the
horror they had experienced.
Christmas was saved time and again in settlements, children's hostels,
patched-up dreary homes, and in children’s hospital wards by toys and
candies from America.
Hundreds of children’s parties all over the country had the Christmas-tree
bowed down with American parcels and were enlivened also by members ot
the Society in person. Thousands of multiplying pencils became famous
as the delight of the scholar and the despair of the schoolmaster. Months
before the Christmas season letters began to arrive at the Society’s London
office asking “to be remembered again. ’ ’ This particular ‘ 1 war relief’ ’ will
be remembered long after the war.
Adolescents
The lot of the adolescent in war-time was an unenviable one. High wages
tempted them into blind-alley employment ; many homes were disrupted,
fathers and mothers often occupied in war work. The closing down of clubs
in badly-bombed areas added to the difficulties and unhappiness of numbers
of boys and girls who were forced to spend their free time in the streets, in
the cinemas, or in crowded public shelters. Local authorities became seri-
ously alarmed, particularly at the increase in juvenile delinquency, and it was
decided to make a great effort to reopen Youth Clubs. Shelters were built
for their sole use, and to 212 such clubs, each possessing a special shelter,
the Society made special grants.
These grants were used in a variety of ways. Club canteens were provided.
Gymnastic apparatus and outdoor sports equipment, games, books, furniture,
bedding, workshop tools, boxing gloves, radiograms, kitchen utensils and
even camp equipment were purchased.
“America Day” parties were organized in many of these clubs, and
soldiers and sailors from the United States were the guests of honour on such
days, entertaining their young hosts with American films and with stories of
life in America, and being entertained in return.
There were many specially interesting clubs, such as a girls’ club which
used its grant to hire log-cabins in the New Forest, and a boys’ club whose
members became Civil Defence messengers and assisted most valiantly in
local incidents.
It is also worth while to point out that the provision of these grants spurred
club members to great efforts. They cleaned, repainted and refurnished


& ■•*.'• *.• ’ * *i •# •-■Lft*’ "BsE^SHb?"*
' ■^f/ S^ I :vi :<■ J?f ,.>•£ ,:-5i:-: ; 5
III j*1 V 4 -fjH|(W jflL
v if/Hi & ’■ „. 4
their own premises to make a cheerful setting for housing their prized
equipment. One club in London was bombed out three times, and the
boys worked like Trojans after each catastrophe to restore their club
to normal. Another was set on fire by incendiary bombs and the boys
refused to leave the hoses until the firemen were forced to cut off the supply
of water.
In these clubs boys and girls found the security, help, amusement and
stability so sadly lacking in their lives. The timely aid of the British War
Relief Society in re-establishing them at such a critical stage saved many a
boy and girl from temporary loneliness, temptation and lack of direction.
The same can be said of the ‘ ‘ American Bursaries. ’ ’ These bursaries were
much criticized in America, but were of the utmost value. The scheme was a
tremendous blessing to professional men whose practices had been ruined
by the war, enabling them to complete their children’s education.
War dealt particularly hardly with the adolescent boy and girl, and
only time will show the whole effect of their development under war con-
ditions, but through these American Bursaries and the work in youth clubs
the Society made a tremendous difference to many a child’s future and
unquestionably prevented many a spoilt and misdirected life.
AFTER THE DAY'S WORK. Young people visiting this South London Youth Club
found that the well-stocked refreshment bar was not the least of its many attractions.


iz ?
ii li .I' I #■
AMONG THE RUINS. Surrounded by the wreckage of their bombed homes ,
dwellers in London's East Endfind a mobile canteen ready to serve them with hot drinks.


VI. THE MAN IN THE STREET
Lord Halifax, on September sth, 1944, stated that an average of 700 houses
an hour were being damaged or destroyed to a varying degree by flying
bombs. In ten weeks the total mounted to 900,000.
Add to these the many thousands destroyed or rendered temporarily
useless during the “blitz” of 1940-1941 by sporadic raids on Great Britain,
and it is not surprising that the fear of being rendered homeless was very
widespread. Indeed, it is probable that this fear outstripped the fear
of bodily injury in the majority of those who endured air-raids. For many,
such a catastrophe meant the loss of their means of livelihood, their lifetime
savings, their only worldly possessions.
The prolonged bombardment of London was followed by savage attacks
on many other important towns of Great Britain. The whole world knows
of the martyrdom of Coventry ; her sufferings were repeated many times
over. The British War Relief Society stepped in with great promptness and
generosity. Fires were still smouldering, many dead still unburied, the
horrified, dazed, but undaunted citizens were carrying on to the best of their
ability amid scenes of unparalleled destruction, when the London Chairman
of the Society undertook a tour of these towns. He handed cheques totalling
many thousands of pounds to the mayors of eighteen towns for immediate
air-raid relief. Thousands of garments and tons of food were distributed
from British War Relief Society stores, and Queen’s Messengers food convoys
did magnificent work.
Underground shelters housed thousands of homeless persons. To these
shelters were sent portable heating and cooking stoves, tea-urns, vacuum-
flasks, mackintosh ground-sheets, hot-water bottles, first-aid equipment,
blankets by the tens of thousands and special sanitary screens. Close touch
was kept in London with the Regional Commissioner. Six special amplifiers
were successfully installed in the larger tube shelters, and provided enter-
tainment, concerts and light relief, doing much to keep up the morale of
the shelterers. Instructional posters were distributed to many shelters, setting
out in an interesting way information as to the care of health and sanitation
in shelter conditions.
A special grant for Christmas 1940 was responsible for underground
parties that will long be remembered, and that brought cheer and gaiety and a
very welcome break to children and adults alike in those dimly lit and
stark refuges.
The Society came to the rescue of many well-known settlements, and by
means of cash grants and most generous gifts of clothing and equipment
enabled them to carry on their work at a time of great difficulty. In poor,
crowded districts the Settlement stands out like a beacon. It is ready to be
the guide, counsellor and friend of all who live in its neighbourhood. It
offers occupation, recreation, ideas and companionship. Help given to the
settlements through American generosity spread like ripples from a stone
thrown into a pond, and reached the homeless over a wide area. The late
Duke of Kent paid a visit to a badly bombed settlement; he thanked the


British War Relief Society for its generous support, saying that it was due
to such help that a ruin had been made usable. He then went on to say :
“These generous American friends have always been quick to support a worth-
while undertaking, and this Settlement is no exception.”
Apart from grants to enable the general work of settlements to continue,
many small specific grants were made. One community centre was enabled
to make a coal allocation to the very poor among the bombed people of the
district ; another helped to make roof and window repairs ; a third re-
conditioned a damaged hall; a fourth replaced a ruined piano ; a fifth
bought books for their spoilt lending library ; and a sixth tools for a
carpentry class whose tools had been destroyed. The warmth and com-
panionship to be found within the walls of the settlements comforted many a
homeless “man and woman in the street.” In 1944 a special grant was
made to establish community centres in Hull and Coventry.
London men and boys whose families had been evacuated found an answer
to their problems in special hostels equipped by the Society at the request
of the Ministry of Health. The Ministry provided the building, with a
strongly reinforced dormitory shelter. The B.W.R.S. provided furniture,
sitting- and writing-room equipment, comfortable arm-chairs, kitchen and
laundry equipment, radio, billiards, darts and shove-ha’penny. The men
paid 255. a week for a home, food, friends and liberty of movement, and these
hostels proved so popular that they became entirely self-supporting.
Much of the work of war relief was carried on against a background of
human misery and tragedy. A very welcome exception to this was the
distribution of vegetable seeds. The scheme was launched at a Convention
held by the Associated Women of the American Farm Bureau, held in
Maryland in 1940. Nine tons were sent in 1941, 90 tons in 1942, 45 tons in
1943 and 45 tons in 1944. The seeds were sent in cartons containing 18
varieties, specially selected for the British soil and climate. Each carton
could keep a family of five in fresh vegetables for a year.
These seeds grew and flourished in many strange places. The ancient
moat of the Tower of London became an American vegetable garden, as
did the grounds of the house which King George and Queen Elizabeth
occupied when Duke and Duchess of York, and which was bombed during
the war. The Pets ’ Corner at the Eondon Zoo, the orangery in Kensington
Gardens, hundreds of plots in back gardens, on railway banks, in parks,
around Service huts, and even in bomb-craters produced new-style onion,
carrot, lettuce, bean, pea, turnip and parsnip. Special prizes were offered for
All America classes at agricultural and allotment shows up and down the
country. In many cases a regular correspondence was established between
ardent gardeners on both sides of the ocean, and lasting friendships were
made through the seed-packets.
A Harvest Home Show was held at the Isle of Dogs within a stone’s throw
of Brunswick Pier, where the original settlers of Virginia had embarked for
their great adventure. A Poplar policeman won the coveted award for the
best collection of vegetables with the fruit of his carton of seed grown in a
bomb-crater. At this show Mr. Robert Hudson, Minister of Agriculture,


mmm \
K ■ " . |j 1*1 if
■*l\ f I L \ I l-r'-i'
•> ‘ ; , _ V m I lilSBI I I T’ P * I 1 ■I
WMSfW'%\ S|' iiiiifei ! /J '%, 11 H Mr |p| ¥ * j|? I | 9 1 a 91
Ij figi-MJ J J *1 I
II If I I i'
,« v I'Tfi., 42t § I frl I m
Wm -■-„ I I In
|| , I I
| ■ i | W I I I
4 v w ripPi I I
,-■ »«, f s«ll H
::: '4y';.,,- ’v« * % - # jLx. # WQHgbJm^
» **• * >■ | kP- :
m&Srj
spoke for the gardeners of Britain. He expressed gratitude for a magnificent
gift from the people of the United States, and added ;
“These seeds are a reminder that the might of the United States is now linked
with this country until victory is achieved.”
The seeds were distributed among the 1,500,000 members of the National
Allotments Society. Thousands of these members found it too expensive
or too difficult to buy seeds, as there was a great shortage, and this invaluable
gift meant the difference between hunger and plenty in many British homes.
When the Channel Islands were occupied by Germany, 30,000 women,
children and old people without means escaped to this country. To these
unfortunate exiles the British War Relief Society sent a large financial grant,
in addition to enormous quantities of clothing and equipment. Gifts of
bedding and furniture enabled Channel Island families to set up homes in
Great Britain. The Society also gave special assistance towards a scheme
whereby parcels were sent to Channel Island deportees and to those in
concentration camps. In addition a monthly grant was made to the Channel
Island clothing depot.
An urgent desire to prove good neighbours provided the motive power for
the work of the British War Relief Society and was shown above all by the
amazing amount of individual assistance it furnished. All appeals were
AT THE HEIGHT OF THE RAID. An underground train stands in the station, its
day's work done, while Londoners seek safety and rest far below Piccadilly Circus.


DIGGING FOR VICTORY in the moat of the Tower of London. Tons of seeds
were shipped from America for distribution to allotment workers in Great Britain.
carefully considered by social experts who co-operated with the Committee,
and, once approved, were dealt with in a most expeditious and human way.
It is possible only to quote the few following instances, but it is not too much
to say that through this particular channel alone hundreds of war-shattered
families were given a fresh start at a moment when a helping hand made all
the difference.
‘ ‘ Mrs. has shown great courage and resourcefulness in keeping herself
and three children until her fried-fish-and-chip shop was first bombed. She had
the premises repaired, and got the business going again when the shop was once
more hit and completely wrecked. She procured another business, for which she
paid a deposit of £5, but as she had not the necessary balance to complete the
purchase, the Advisory Group recommend a grant of £25.”
'‘Mrs. -, injured in a raid, son in the Army, husband dead after removal
from a bombed hospital. Mrs. ———- has remaining child living in the country —
recommend a grant of £5 to enable her to move her few possessions to live with this
daughter. ’ ’
‘‘Mrs. cut her foot on glass when her house was blasted, but neglected'
the foot to care for her son, who developed pneumonia owing to exposure. As a'
result her leg was eventually amputated. An artificial limb has been supplied
‘to save the patient’s reason,’ and a grant of £5 to complete the purchase of the
limb is requested.”


"Mrs. , a widow, East Lewisham. Mrs. -’s husband and four of
her children were killed by enemy action. She was in hospital for four months
as a result of her injuries. Two elder boys in the Services, two younger still with
her, her home completely destroyed. Mrs. is devoted to her children, and
has borne all the terrible tragedies that have befallen her with great courage. She
now wishes to set up a new home, and the Advisory Group suggest that she should
be given the special donation sent by Dr. of California, and also a grant
of £10.”
"Mr. and Mrs. and their three little children, aged 10, 8, 2, were sitting
in their home when a land-mine exploded and destroyed the house. Katherine,
the baby, had one eye blown out, and the other so badly damaged that she is now
quite blind and has been admitted to a home for blind babies in the country.
The family are devoted to each other, and all particularly fond of the baby. They
are afraid that she will forget them, and the mother wishes to take the children to
see the baby every fortnight. The father is a checker on the railway, and their
income is too low to allow of these visits. A grant is requested.’ ’
The Society in this last case gave a sum of money to be held in trust in
order that the family might visit their blind baby until such time as she could
return to them.
The well-known American columnist Anne Ohare McCormick wrote :
"Whitechapel, Poplar and Putney have a very small stake in the British Empire.
They are not equipped for war. They can’t manoeuvre, retreat, or bring up
reinforcemenls. They can only stand where they are and take the most infernal
punishment ever meted out to a civilian population. Somehow they endure,
somehow they crawl out from the rubble and flames, and carry on. Invincible
fortifications built by man have crumbled, but man himself is the line that holds.”
VII. CIVIL DEFENCE
In answer to the widespread air attacks on Great Britain, a large number of
men and women were trained to form the Auxiliary Fire Service, which
worked beside the regular firemen of peace-time. These auxiliaries and
regulars were finally banded together to form the National Fire Service.
The devotion to duty and magnificent achievements of this Service are too
well known to need description. Admiration for their contribution to the
common cause inspired practical tributes from the New World. The first
contribution came in May 1941, when the British War Relief Society
donated £5,000 to the London Firemen’s Benevolent Fund. The cheque
was presented by the Chairman of the London Committee. He told the
men :
“Ever since the visit to London of a deputation of American firemen to see how


AFTER THE BLITZ. A canteen, having journeyed perilously through torn-up
streets lit by the flames of burning buddings, serves hot drinks to weary fire-fighters.
the fires started by incendiary bombs are dealt with, there has been a growing
interest and consequent admiration in the United States for the work of London’s
firemen. I hope that this cheque will alleviate the lot of those gallant firemen who
have been injured in carrying out their heroic work, and the dependants of those
who have been killed in carrying out their duty.”
This presentation was the first of a series of donations which totalled
many thousands of pounds. Large contributions were made by the
International Association of Firefighters of Toronto, Canada, and also by
the Firemen of New York.
The intermittent nature of air-raid warfare gave the firefighters considerable
spare time. An idea was mooted by an imaginative official interested in
evacuee nurseries, of using bombed and otherwise useless material to make
toys and nursery equipment. The firemen welcomed the idea, but un-
fortunately there was no money to buy necessary tools and paint. The
British War Relief Society, well known to be interested in nursery work, was
approached and was very sympathetic. A relatively small sum of money
was given to launch the scheme, which spread like wildfire. Many nurseries
were “adopted” by the firemen, and thousands of toys and pieces of nursery
furniture were turned out by fire-stations throughout the country. Brightly
painted wooden toys, rocking-horses, dolls’ houses, bricks, engines, and


- ' --’T” :: • ’ / ' ■' * •*•'■ ■ ■
5 V jffijfe .1,:'' •■-■: "; /> A
Hu w* W £jy Jy| /■ "
* ~ . ,, \ t 'Tl£li^if'
// \|p& a* ■ m
„ * tf
TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE. This little girl felt, no doubt, that members of
the National Fire Service had found a solution of one pressing war-time problem.
educational toys emerged from the firemen’s workshops : the women
members of the National Fire Service stuffed and dressed the dolls and added
the frills to many of the toys. The small evacuees, starved of toys by the
country-wide shortage, rejoiced to find their playrooms filled once again with
treasures.
In July 1941 a member of the United States Embassy sent a young English
artist, a Civil Defence worker, to the British War Relief Society’s office.
He asked for support for a scheme to encourage artists to do some of their
own work during time free from sterner duties. The aim of the scheme was
to help young artists to get established in spite of the war, so that when peace
came they need not make a completely new beginning. The Society
promised the small sum asked to give the scheme a start, and the first
exhibition of the Civil Defence Artists was opened in October 1941. So
successful was the original effort that in time exhibitions were held in Leeds,
Birmingham, Wolverhampton, Nottingham and Manchester, in addition to
those held in London. The works of more than 500 young artists, men and
women, were shown to the public.
Coopersale Hall, a large house on the outskirts of London, was equipped
by the British War Relief Society as a place of rest and recuperation for those
men in the Civil Defence services who were in great need of a week or two off
duty in quiet surroundings. The home was run by a settlement in Canning


Town, which served one of the poorest and worst bombed areas of London’s
East End.
Great quantities of American clothes were distributed to members of the
National Fire Service and their families when bad times came to them, and
many hundreds of grateful letters bear witness to the thankfulness with
which the clothes were received. One bombed-out child found a tag on
her new dress giving the address of the donor. She wrote the following
letter to America :
'"Thank you for my dress. 1 am 10 and 1 live in the country. I have never
seen the country before. It is lovely away from old man Nasty. Ele won’t come
here I hope. Ele spoilt our home, killed my pussy cat and broke my dolly. God
will punish him.”
VIII. AID TO THE ALLIES
In spite of its name, the British War Relief Society did not turn a deaf ear
to appeals on behalf of the Allies in exile. On the contrary, refugees from
the invaded countries found one of their staunchest friends in this Society.
Women and children, students, the sick and needy, soldiers, sailors, airmen,
were all assisted in various ways. The greater part of the help given to
refugees from Europe was distributed first through a committee known as
the “Refugees of England,” and then through the Allies Wing of the British
War Relief Society, which was set up in January 1942, and which incor-
porated the “Refugees of England.”
The invasion of the Low Countries and the subsequent fall of France
brought to Great Britain women and children who had seen war in its most
terrible form as they made their way to England along the choked and
bloody roads of escape. Some reached this country without money,
possessions, friends, or a hope in the world. Some had watched their
children die on the journey, or lost them in the mad scramble. After a few
short weeks in London, air-raids began and, although official evacuation
schemes were open to them, it meant splitting up the family. This many
women refused to consider and said they would rather die with the children
than be separated again ; their children were all they had.
The British War Relief Society was appealed to and a budge* for equipping
and maintaining three colonies was set before the London Committee. It
was accepted, and with general financial support Pauntley Court, Murrells
End and Nupend came into being. Belgian, French, Polish and Dutch
mothers and children were settled safely in the country. Many child exiles


I.', jjp§ f | *
* I ipr T ._w9mm Jf W
BL * IF m
E ;■’' .: ** “'v, - *%& . ..
,. *W flw / - . | w > iv£" #x
i / JE * IF 1|| '" *|||
'> &. I J$ w * v , H
. / «e %T 1 Cl ist' K v e ni
■A JBw V ssikk. fir - 'Wp f |Z". ,
" <4 JP ▼ ■*^ w \ W Jjg|^. . f 5 w&k ws Ik. Ik
*f m- W- J-£ k^s% %- i \ a?W
UNITED NATIONS. A colony of children, evacuees from British bombed areas and
refugees from occupied Europe, make their contribution to international understanding.
from the Channel Islands were supported in B.W.R.S. hostels by the Guernsey
Breeders War Relief Committee. Nupend became a pre- and post-natal
hostel and thereby filled an acute need for refugee mothers, as not only was
the new baby catered for, but the other young children in the family were
cared for at the same time until the mother and the new baby were well
enough to leave. Other colonies and nurseries were set up as time went on.
St. Norberts, Barn Park, Mirimar and Tyn-y-cae were filled with children of
Allied nationality. A nursery for Polish babies in Edinburgh, and two, with
the delightful names of Robin Hood and The Golden Parsonage, for Belgian
children, received help. All the colonies were run as far as possible as ‘ ‘homes
from home.” Christmas parties, birthday remembrances and family cele-
brations were encouraged. Older children came to the colonies for their
holidays and, for the very fortunate, “Father” sometimes appeared on leave.
Children of school age attended the village schools and worked on farms in
their holidays. They made many local friends. An interested observer wrote
of one of these colonies :
“In these hostels it was hoped to sow and foster the seeds of internationalism,
as it were at bedrock level, for children returning to their own country after having
lived and played, eaten and slept with children of other nations, must unconsciously
adopt a human attitude towards one another, contrary to the spirit of war. The
child is father to the man ; is it over-optimistic to hope that as generation gives


way to generation a careful nurturing of the seed planted in the years of distress and
chaos may produce a wider outlook and better practice?”
The Fighting French Cadet School received considerable support from
the British War Relief Society in its early struggling days, before it was taken
over by the French military authorities. This Cadet School was formed
originally by banding together 170 boys who made their way to England
after the fall of France, alone or in little groups, in all manner of astonishing
ways. Five crossed the English Channel in two patched-up canoes and
landed on a stretch of thickly-mined English foreshore. Every boy was
determined on one thing : to become a soldier and drive the hated Boche
from his beloved country. The boys had their wish. They passed out of
the Cadet School as commissioned officers in the French Army, and many
of them afterwards died on active service in Italy and France.
Apart from these definite establishments, a very considerable amount and
variety of work was undertaken for the benefit of Allied refugees in general
by the Allies Wing. Small groups of exiles outside regular schemes were
assisted. A regular contribution was made to the Spanish Section of the
Allies Wing, which cared for children rescued from the inferno of the last
stages of the Spanish Civil War. These boys and girls badly needed help
and direction in order that they might become self-supporting. Two small
groups of orphans were assisted in convents in Devon and Scotland.
Individual school and college courses were paid for, and furniture and
equipment lent to refugees. Dental equipment was loaned to set up a
French dentist, and many thousands of pounds’ worth of invaluable instru-
ments and equipment were transported and delivered to the Paderewski
Hospital in Edinburgh for the Paderewski Memorial Fund.
An original theatrical company, called the Federate Players, was given a
regular grant by the Society. These players gave regular performances in
shelters and underground refuges. The performances were given mainly in
French, to Belgian, Polish, French, Czechoslovak and Gibraltarian audiences.
The company included players of Allied nationality, and well-known short
plays and songs from many European countries were included in their
repertoire. The audiences were full of enthusiasm, and there were moving
scenes as the players went their rounds. Often the refugees met old friends in
the audiences ; there were speeches and even presentations. A Command per-
formance was given to the troops of General de Gaulle’s headquarters staff.
The Vestiaire of the Allies Wing needs special mention. It was housed
under the same roof as the Allies Wing offices, and fed by the clothing depot
of the Society. Requests from nurseries, colonies and hospitals, and all
posted requests, were passed directly from the office to the Vestiaire, and were
despatched with the minimum of delay ; individuals with emergency needs
received prompt attention. An unending stream of visitors, expected and
otherwise, came to the Vestiaire, and a student of human nature would have
found an interesting field for study. The workers became expert in a rough-
and-ready application of psychological methods, as the way of giving
became as important as the clothes themselves. Discharged men came to be
fitted out for civilian life ; they needed encouragement and patience. Men


and women who had found life in exile too much for them needed hope and
renewed self-respect with their new outfits. A friendly welcome and
consideration often became the first step towards rehabilitation. The
clothes themselves were of the utmost service. With few exceptions they
were admirable. Thousands came to the Vestiaire : Poles, Spaniards,
Frenchmen, Jugoslavs, Russians, Belgians, Dutchmen, Greeks, torpedoed
seamen, discharged Service men, repatriated civilians, students, hospital
patients, mischievous children, babies in arms. They found shelves reaching
to the ceiling filled with attractive, well-made and suitable American clothes
and shoes, and a friendly interest in themselves included. No wonder the
Vestiaire of the Allies Wing of the British War Relief Society became yet
another international centre.
A Belgian hostel for soldiers received considerable equipment. An
urgent request for a hostel for Polish flying non-commissioned officers and
men led to the renting and equipping of two houses for the purpose near
Victoria. Both Belgian and Polish hostels proved tremendous successes. A
special grant for sports equipment for Polish soldiers in Scotland was made.
These men guarded lonely and important stretches of coast in the north-
eastern corner of Great Britain and had nothing but the barest of military
equipment. The grant was utilized with great ingenuity, and footballs,
sports boots and shorts, gymnastic apparatus and equipment for national
games were distributed to units previously starved of any means of amuse-
ment. Letters were received from two Polish commanding officers :
‘ 1 Please convey my warmest thanks for the wonderful gift. I have put a message
in the orders for the day telling the soldiers that these gifts come from America.
So every man hears of his friends.”
“Thank you so very much for the sporty equipment, which we did get from
you. It facilitates to our men the sport practising, which keep them in good health,
and will give them more strength in the fighting for freedom of our country.”
In addition, 15 mobile canteens were sent to these Polish troops in
Scotland. Excellent use was made of them ; they served isolated units
living all round the coast in surprisingly primitive camps ; they accompanied
the Poles on their three- and four-day manoeuvres in the Scottish Highlands,
and were cared for as treasures that would be needed for the day when the
troops returned to Poland.
Canteens were also handed over from the British War Relief Society to
representatives of the Governments of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Free France,
Holland, Norway and Russia.
In May 1942, owing largely to the initiative of the Allies Wing, Mr.
Anthony Eden opened a unique club at 148, Piccadilly. Men and women of
17 Allied nations joined the club, which became firmly established as a
meeting-place for relaxation, refreshment and companionship on the model
of the best tradition of English club life. By 1944 the membership totalled
1,700. In this year the Society made a special grant to be used to establish
the club in permanent quarters at the end of the war.


J|i|H » v:f\:/'y'r-V:i K ;.,./
jaiLt " - y .> -|l '
• j|| pp^”* 1^
$« ’'$ r 'f ■&' ' $ J% % < i& ** JX ,. ; ' J \l \ I % J-ZZ^K
pP*' Ip*"- ~ .; . ? i v 1 v v *‘*Jj£
■ - 4 -■•••' : - > '■■ :■••’;’*
* • . *- /V«% 1: •'. • \ : * i*.., • _
’ ,’■;. <■■■"■'> .'.n- : ... ■^■.'••■.-. v '-■■ *0 Wfc———1>.
> * <■
%, ""■" 1 ■■• *■ .■’ •?*.•’* • *■'* !
■-, ■■'■.• * « n
; *-W’ ... ‘ ‘ -f v ' ■ -*«• , r r; '^S^
hf~*/ t iS.- V;, ,-..<«i'r' ,;i ■ ■ '■*•'■
, .-!• . O > j5S ! rf, , ;4™ , • . ' : .j. ■ , '-.■• < ■■,■—•" Tt_ ;1 ■ V **« "*
~.— % Jr* 4 "3«rtS5ft? '-V sfiSyF - ; »,i jfe ■
> "v ’ :* >>’4 ‘ V ;' **■ ; •■••,' 1^*;'‘> * ■
« ■ •« '■ ‘ ■ V'
"'" >" <"■ ’ •> >* r * 'wlltfe 1 * ’ Hi - v -' - '■ ' ' | 4 - ;
ll||*n. . ‘ ■ ■ •■.> ' I
«• ’’ • / V- ■ . -. •-’*#■ . jUl. ‘
T >W
; 'J;s ■ -,’■ '■ , : ’ : ■" ; 'v:'\'
SERVICE IN THE SNOW. The Y.M.C.A. earned a reputation among troops in
Britain for “always getting through with the tea-car, ’ ’ even to the most isolated areas.


IX. MEN AND WOMEN IN THE SERVICES
The British War Relief Society was held in affectionate regard by all the
Services, both for its contributions to the well-being and comfort of the
serving men and women themselves, and for its deep concern for the families
that were left behind.
In this war, more than ever before, men and women were called on to
serve their country in spite of family responsibilities and difficulties. As a
result, demands made on benevolent funds and welfare organizations
increased enormously. Nothing lowers the morale of a fighting individual
or unit so rapidly as anxiety for those at home. The British War Relief
Society quickly realized the heavy burden borne by such societies, and
assisted them materially. Very substantial cheques were sent to the
Benevolent Fund of the Commandos, the Airborne Forces Security Fund,
and the Benevolent Fund of the Royal Air Force. Supplies of clothing of all
kinds were sent in an unending stream to the Soldiers’, Sailors’ and Airmen’s
Families Association, the Soldiers’ and Sailors' Help Society, and the
Officers’ Families Fund.
General welfare work among the forces was supported in the main by-
grants to the general funds of the Church Army, the Salvation Army,
Toe H, and the Y.M.C.A. Hundreds of mobile vehicles, presented and in
many cases maintained by the British War Relief Society, visited large and
small camps, airfields, and isolated units, ministering to body and soul.
Troops embarking and disembarking were served, expatriated prisoners met.
and a canteen welcomed the first contingent of the American Army when it
landed on British soil.
Through the same four organizations, Service clubs, canteens and
recreation huts were supported, not only in Great Britain, but with the
Liberation Armies in Europe, and in Iraq, Aden, Cairo, India, and South-East
Asia Command. In addition, very generous specific grants were made to
establish Service clubs in Plymouth, Cairo and Gibraltar.
Other activities of the Society to help the armed Forces must be described
in tabloid form. Prisoners of war received many thousands of life-saving
parcels, each parcel containing clothes and tobacco as well as food. Tobacco
was also distributed to men on active service through the Overseas Tobacco
League. American Eagles were provided with equipment for a dormitory
club, and a famous cruiser sailed for action from a United States port with
more than 1,000 new books and magazines on board. The British War
Relief Society Book Committee shipped hundreds of thousands of books and
magazines to fighting forces in the Mediterranean area. The Officers'
Kit Replacement Service received help, thousands of officers of the Army,
Navy, Air Force and Merchant Navy making use of this very human
organization, which was supported by people who thought it a privilege
to pass on the equipment of lost or invalided relatives to those still in the
fight. Fur coats from America were supplied to men going to the Arctic ;
tropical kit to those ordered East ; isolated units in Australia and New
Zealand received large consignments of recreational supplies and comforts,


AIR-SEA RESCUE. These floats, moored in the English Channel and equipped
with comforts of all kinds, were the means of saving the lives of many airmen.
which were sent direct from America. One hundred and forty searchlight
crews and anti-aircraft batteries were supplied with comfortable chairs,
tables, simple comforts and recreational equipment.
When the flying bomb first appeared, special defensive measures were set up
hastily, and the Society came to the rescue, providing rudimentary comforts
and mobile baths and canteens for extremely important and hardworked
members of the Services. The Service Comforts Funds of Great Britain and
the Allies and the official seamen’s societies received over a million drinking-
cups, thousands of musical instruments, comfort kits, sponge-bags, razor-
blades, combs, slippers, housewives and buttons. Many yards of material
were made into curtains and bedspreads to brighten isolated Service posts.
In New York itself, the Society made itself responsible for the White Ensign
Club, which served officers and warrant officers of the Royal Navy, the Air
Force Club for airmen of all the Allied nations, and the Anzac Club.
It was as a token of profound gratitude felt all over America to the men of
the Allied Air Forces that the Memorial Wing for plastic surgery was built
and equipped at East Grinstead. Apart from this memorial, which has its
own chapter, the Society gave special help to the Royal Air Force in
connexion with the Air-Sea-Rescue Service, and in Air Force camps and
hospitals in the Eastern counties. A number of rescue floats, which were
instrumental in saving many lives, were furnished with dry clothes, food,


means of cooking, wireless, signalling apparatus, books, games, cigarettes,
and were then moored at different points in the English Channel, providing
airmen with means of rescue after a crash into the sea.
Throughout the war, special support was given to a group of R.A.F.
camps and hospitals, and the moving spirit of the work thus accomplished
by the Society tells the story in her own words :
“In the early days of the war I worked in an R.A.F. hospital. I found
that there were many small amusements that would make a vast difference
to the comfort and happiness of the boys there. So I appealed to the
British War Relief Society of America. As a result, radios were supplied
for all the wards, games of every description, both indoor and outdoor,
fishing-rods and tackle for the river.
“One day I found some men in bed in the Orthopaedic Ward whom I
knew had been up on crutches. ‘Why are you in bed, boys?’ I asked.
‘Some of the lads went on leave this morning with all the crutches, so we’ve
“had it.” ’ This I couldn’t bear. I telephoned to the British War Relief
Society, and the next day twelve pairs of crutches arrived by passenger train
and the boys were up for tea. These were the early, difficult days.
“From December 1940, quantities of hospital slippers, surgeons’ boots,
ether stockings, socks, sweaters, pyjamas and surgical dressings arrived,
earmarked for these R.A.F. hospitals. Hundreds of R.A.F. Afghans were
knitted by women and children all over America, and still, in 1944, these
afghans make the wards look cheerful. Summer again, with Sister wishing
to push the badly injured boys out into the garden. ‘lt would do them a
world of good, but we have no shade for them. ’ Multi-coloured umbrellas,
gifts of the British War Relief Society, were soon attached to beds and
wheel-chairs, and hastened the convalescence of many a man in the Royal
Air Force.
“It would need pages to tell all that was done by your Society for the men
in hospital. A giant magnet was procured, and was of untold value in
extracting foreign bodies from eyes, saving the eyesight of many. Electrically
heated food conveyors carried hot meals to wards spread over vast spaces,
self-propelled chairs made it possible for hundreds of boys, unable to walk,
to leave their wards for a change of scene after weeks in bed. Sitting-rooms,
recreation-rooms and a hospital library were attractively and comfortably
furnished.
“Outside the hospitals, the most important work done with British War
Relief Society grants was the furnishing of crew rest-rooms and briefing-
rooms. Morale, however high, can be shaken by heavy losses in crew
personnel. I well remember the day I visited a station and was told that a
number of bombers had been lost in a large-scale attack on Germany.
For nine hours crews of the R.A.F. had searched the North Sea for missing
men. Tired and weary, the boys returned to a bare room, with only tables,
forms and hard, straight chairs, where they awaited interrogation. Today,
after briefing and prior to interrogation, they can rest and relax on large
leather arm-chairs and sofas, given by those who, though thousands of miles
away, realized the value of comfort for men of the R.A.F. Thirty-seven
such rooms were furnished and many stations throughout Yorkshire and


FOOD FOR THE MIND. Fighting men find both recreation and quiet in a
Toe H Club. The first Talbot House Club was founded in 1915 in the Ypres Salient.
Lincolnshire, as well as every station in one Bomber Command Group, and
in the Pathfinder Force many have benefited by this great mark of generosity
from people in America. All ranks use the rooms, and never a week goes by
without some proof of gratitude and appreciation from the men to whom we
all owe so much. One of hundreds of letters came from the Commanding
Officer of a bomber station :
“ ‘We do so very much appreciate all that the British War Relief Society are
doing for us —comfort and relaxation are major factors in keeping fit, and for such
comfort we are deeply grateful. ’
“Last, a true story from a hospital. A certain eye specialist must have
decided that Americans can perform miracles. One Friday he came to me
and said : ‘1 want you to gel me some real leeches from America, not
synthetic ones, real live ones. It is imperative that I use them to treat the
eyes of a N.C.O. The type required for this treatment used to come from
Italy and Bavaria. Can you get me some?’ This made me think a bit,
but not for Jong. That night a cable went to New York. A leech farm
was located, the real article found, permits obtained from Washington, and a
bomber warned of special cargo ! On the Tuesday 1 received a cable :
‘LEECHES DESPATCHED BY EXPRESS STOP HANDLE NASTY
THINGS CAREFULLY'
Two days later a Customs officer announced their arrival, and within a


te |P "'w!s ' _ _ > *' M r $\ ,\ d.
I HHHT ?< x/ts 9^ **i Tuj'sr J» • ‘jbBP 1 ""
|£ }-BPl 1|P * WV 1 Jfc,
Hr- . >* f' wPC 1 . Ny^"
•■yMfel I; «- ,-. J »i % . ■aJTgg' ft '---Iiiflif
- ' * % ' J||jp ',
* wh iW % || %&* *<*&* <*$*$ m ,' I ipgr:
s Sm$m> I3® v 4 M SHIS M iSiS*' A%^ili v /mS f l||pL 1 W^f
lnffHHM|fe%i# khH II k$$ s9| dHr £*fe;
WBMp' BMp JF I | I
I 4 Jjr WS|i- JEMm/A f
i / i ir |L*r:l ite
A PROBLEM FOR THE SECRETARY. But this is not the first of such emer-
gencies, and everyone will soon he comfortably fixed up at this Y.W.C.A. Club.
week from the start the invaluable leeches were handed over to the eye
specialist. More than three-quarters survived the journey. The man’s
eyes were saved, and he will be eternally grateful to the resourcefulness of
the British War Relief Society.”
Women were conscripted for the first time in our history in 1941. They
proved amazingly adaptable and efficient, but nevertheless they were most
grateful for the provision of those small comforts that meant so much in
their rather stark and strenuous existence. British War Relief vans
visited the women’s camps and units, bringing such war rarities as shampoos,
cosmetics, books, gramophone records, needlework and writing materials,
cigarettes, sweets, and Service comfort kits—very nearly forgotten pleasures
to Service women in their corrugated-iron huts, warmed, if they were lucky,
by a grim central stove. No wonder the “American Van” got so warm a
welcome. Probably one of the most popular issues ever made by the British
War Relief Society was a consignment of hot-water bottles that went to the
women's Services. At any rate, this gift ranked in popularity with twelve
wedding-dresses from America, which were thoughtfully varied as to size
and style. They could be hired for a few shillings, to cover the cost of
cleaning, by members of the Forces, the A.R.P., the W.A.A.C. and the
N.F.S. Special huts were built and equipped in London, Yorkshire and
Surrey. Many other huts received varying equipment. The Land Army


was not left out. This service, which boasted that it contained no conscript
member, was allocated part of a large gift sent by American Industrial
Organizations. Three “Rest Break Houses’’ were set aside for Land Girls,
and a club in London where land girls from all over the country, on leave
or travelling from one job to another, could enjoy the amenities of a club of
their own. The women in the Services were wonderfully served by the
Y.W.C.A., and through this organization the British War Relief Society
contributed to their well-being by means of donations totalling many
thousands of pounds. After five years of constant support the President
of the Y.W.C.A., Mrs. Winston Churchill, sent the following letter to the
Chairman of the London Committee of the British War Relief Society :
Dear Mr. Cruger,
As President of the Y.W.C.A. War-time Fund I do want to express my very
real gratitude for the most generous support which has been given to the war
service of the Association by the British War Relief Society of the United States
of America.
The part played by women in this war is unprecedented in history—never before
have so many left their homes to serve their country. The Y.W.C.A. has tried
to follow them wherever they are sent, providing huts, mobile clubs, leave clubs
and hostels, and in many places it has been the generosity of the British War
Relief Society which has enabled the Association to do so.
Many a Service woman arriving at her first camp and finding there a Y.W.C.A.
hut to give her just that remembrance of home which she is wanting so much, has
read with gratitude the sign which records that “this Hut was provided through the
generosity of the British War Relief Society.’’ Very many industrial workers,
drafted to towns unknown to them, have realized with very great appreciation
that the Y.W.C.A. hostels which welcome them so warmly were made possible
through the generosity of America.
I know that thousands of British women to whom the Y.W.C.A. has meant so
much during this war would wish to join with me in expressing the deepest gratitude
to the donors in America who have helped the Association’s war service with such
magnificent generosity.
Yours sincerely,
Clementine S. Churchill.
X. PIONEER WORK
A remarkable record of pioneer relief work stands to the credit of the
British War Relief Society. Many appeals for assistance were made from
various quarters for help to launch interesting and novel schemes, and all
were thoroughly investigated and considered. It is worth noting that of


those projects eventually supported, several received the seal of official
support and all became established factors in the national war effort.
A few of these successful projects are described in detail. Once again
Great Britain had reason to be thankful for her good fortune in possessing
friends from the New World, who brought into relief work their well-known
genius for pioneering.
Matfield Court, a rest home for factory workers, is of special interest,
as it was the forerunner and inspiration of the many War-time Industrial
Rest Breaks established later through the generosity of the American Trade
Unions. It was started as a rest home for women factory workers, mostly
young girls, who were suffering from overwork and nervous strain caused
by continual air-raids. It was originally opened for Bermondsey workers,
under the direction of the Time and Talent Settlement. The British War
Relief Society gave equipment and a cash grant and, thanks to this initial
support and encouragement, hundreds of women who had lived in exception-
ally grim war-time surroundings, both at home and at work, were able to
take a holiday in a peaceful country house.
Coopersale Hall was another early rest and recuperation hostel, this time
for the benefit of exhausted Civil Defence workers. Again it was owing to
the initial support of the Society that it was able to come to life.
When, in 1941, the Ministry of Health decided to launch out in an
experimental scheme to house essential workers in London, Miss Horsbrugh,
the Ministry’s Parliamentary Secretary, made a personal appeal to the
British War Relief Society for help, and three of these very successful
experimental hostels were completely furnished for the Ministry.
Children and all that concerned their well-being were a special concern
of the Society, and so it is not surprising to find that it equipped and com-
pletely maintained, among many others, the first war-time residential
nursery for evacuees under five years of age. This nursery was set up at
Syston Court, in Gloucestershire, and early in 1941 the first train party of
toddlers from the East End was seen off by a member of the London Com-
mittee. Later, the nursery was honoured by a visit from Queen Mary, the
Princess Royal and the Duchess of Kent.
On April 26th, 1941, The Times described the opening of another type of
pioneer war-time nursery :
“The first prefabricated war emergency nursery to be erected in this country
was opened, on Saturday last, by Mr. Herbert Morrison, the Home Secretary.
Funds for the centre were provided through the generosity of the British War Relief
Society of America.
“Mr. Morrison congratulated Guildford and said it would be a notable chapter
in the educational history of the town. The welfare of young children was even
more important in time of war, particularly now that mothers were going out to
war work. Enthusiasts sometimes antagonized authorities by insisting on needless
expenditure, but there was nothing wasteful about this centre ; it was constructed
with economy and was pleasant and comfortable. Many more such nurseries and
schools should in future be constructed on this scale, and he congratulated the
Nursery Schools Association for putting forward this practical project. He was
very interested to see that the nursery furniture had been provided by the Civil


V‘“ n ||| ijj " I
pf I jff s
j *
“BRING YOUR OWN FRUIT." A Mobile Canning Centre ready to show the
women of a country village how to preserve the produce grown in their own gardens.
Defence workers in London. He would like to pay tribute to the generosity and
sympathy of the B.W.R.S. of America, and to the kindly humane interest of the
American people in these problems. Mr. Morrison presented the gold key with
which he had opened the centre to Mr. Bertram de N. Cruger, Chairman of the
8.W.R.5., to take back to his association as a memento of their work.”
The nursery furniture in which Mr. Morrison was interested was the direct
result of another amazingly successful industry originally set on its feet by
American funds. Details of this toy-making industry of the National Fire
Service have been given in the chapter dealing with Civil Defence, and many
of the war-time nurseries were similarly equipped with toys and furniture
from this country-wide source. The parallel scheme to assist Civil Defence
artists, described in detail elsewhere, was also launched by the Society,
which once again, by means of a small initial grant, gave life to an idea
that prospered and grew to an imposing size.
The inventive genius of Americans was shown plainly in their treatment of
mobile vehicles. From the British War Relief Society Great Britain obtained
the first mobile bath, the first mobile Citizens’ Advice Bureau, the first
mobile pharmacy, chapel, entertainment van and library. It was the British
War Relief Society that first took pity on the thirsty Home Guard and pre-
sented detachments with mobile canteens. The A.T.S. received their first
canteen from the Society. Converted ice-cream cars, known as “A Mug


in Time, ’ ’ first saw the light of day under the banner of the British War
Relief Society. Last, in 1943, a specially constructed canteen for work
overseas made its appearance, complete with bedding, wardrobe, stoves,
water-tanks, tea-urns—in fact everything needed to sustain workers and
enable them to provide relief in devastated areas.
Utility bags cannot be claimed as novelties, as everyone at some time or
other has possessed a utility bag of some sort filled with vital possessions, but
those sent to Great Britain were received with delight, as they were so
admirably fitted for their special purpose. Thousands upon thousands
arrived, planned for bombed-out men and women, for Service women, for
boys and girls, for hospital patients, for rescued seamen. Those for Service
women contained, among other articles, hot-water bottles, small pillows, bed-
jackets, torch batteries, cosmetics and comfortable bedroom slippers. Men
had soap, flannel, scissors, writing-paper, pencil, mending tackle, bandages,
cigarettes. The children’s utility bags were of figured linen of most
enchanting patterns, graded according to sex and age, and filled with a
wonderful mixture of useful and playtime material.
Space prohibits anything like a complete list of the war-time pioneer work
done by means of the Society, but it would be the greatest mistake if no
mention were made of the inspiration of a section of American women who
introduced into this country portable Canning Units.
Six of these units were presented to the British Federation of Business
and Professional Women by their opposite number in America, through the
British War Relief Society. The mobile units contained a canning machine,
sink, water, and collapsible table, and were fitted with all necessary utensils
and a supply of Calor gas. The vans visited villages, and made it possible
for the people to bring their home-grown produce to the van, and preserve
it on the spot, and in this way valuable additions were made to the nation’s
larder. Later, 300 hand-operated canning machines were also brought to
this country from Canada and America by the British War Relief Society.
Last, there follows a quotation from a London daily newspaper which
gives one example of how the ideas of a small American committee were
put into action, with the saving of much valuable property and many
invaluable lives :
“At the height of the bombing of dockyards, 10,000 pairs of asbestos gloves and
500 suits of asbestos clothing were brought from America to Great Britain. The
story is an interesting one. Some time ago, the London Committee of the
B.W.R.S. of the U.S.A. had the idea that asbestos clothing would be of great value
in preventing casualties among fire-fighters. They approached the Admiralty for
permission to acquire the desired quantity in the U.S., and the Admiralty welcomed
the proposal. The asbestos equipment has arrived. These gloves and suits are
destined for fire-fighters in dockyards, both naval and civilian. They could not
have come at a more urgent moment. ’ ’


XL MUTUAL AID
During the first year of the war a parcel was sent from America, and when
opened it was found to contain a complete outfit for a baby. No garment
was new, but all were carefully mended and freshly trimmed. The following
letter was enclosed :
“I am the wife of an American merchant seaman. I should like my baby
clothes to be given to the wife of a British merchant seaman, and wherever she
is I will be thinking of her and wish her good luck.”
Many such incidents came to the notice of the British War Relief Society
expressions of the goodness of heart of individuals, of small groups or of
large societies, and the outcome of a wish to help fellow-creatures with a
common link, either of circumstance, occupation or ancestry, or even a
purely fortuitous link of name. Many towns in the United States sent
help to a namesake town in this country. A small borough on the South
Coast received a fully equipped mobile kitchen from America. The Mayor
and Corporation summoned the people of the town to meet and receive their
gift on the promenade, and appeared before them in the full regalia of their
office. The Mayor said :
“Today is a great occasion. Today we forge another link with our own kin
across the sea. We gratefully accept this gift to our ancient borough through the
British War Relief Society. You boys and girls present on this historic day, if
spared after the war, will recall that during these dark days we were remembered
and helped by the children and citizens of our sister town over the sea. From this
old borough we send back a heartfelt ‘thank you’ across the ocean ; we feel greatly
honoured by your kindness and heartily reciprocate all the love and goodwill that
prompted this splendid gift. We send our good wishes to you all. ’ ’
That Mayor on the little promenade spoke for many small boroughs.
Many similar ceremonies took place all over the country. Prize Ayrshire
cattle, sold in America, produced vehicles for Ayrshire : the Girl Guides in a
Midland town received a tea-car from fellow Guides in Massachusetts :
a well-known film star sent a large sum of money to relieve war distress in
Bristol, the town of his birth ; and countless individuals remembered past
links with war-distressed towns and villages.
Craftsmen proved that fellow-feeling makes for kinship. Shoe operatives,
dry goods retailers and cabinet-makers sent relief to the shell- shocked and
evacuated children of their fellow-operatives. Fire-fighters in America and
Canada contributed magnificently to the men of .London’s Fire Service.
American hotel employees sent help to the bombed-out employees ot the
Savoy Hotel, London.
Music-lovers in the States helped British musicians. From the Berkshire
Musical Festival came a donation that was divided between the British
Musicians’ Benevolent Fund and a fund to replace the instruments of the


m ' * M i
"* * f% s >■ > $i§ % >-
P^C'' 5 By* 1 4 8 Ate I . ’ ’ *isOf °' i^C^B
# •* Mrl iX * lw l 4**
*' 4 ; ;^?!i: ?%' . ” "'■
London Philharmonic Orchestra, lost when the Queen’s Hall was completely
destroyed.
The Theatre Wing of the British War Relief Society gave a donation for
the restoration of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, which had been very
badly bombed, and the theatre attached to the Academy, completely
destroyed in 1940.
The founding of National Gallery Lunch-time Concerts by Dame Myra
Hess saved London from musical starvation during the first eighteen months
of the war, and gave employment to many first-class musicians who were
hard hit by the war. A donation from the Society enabled these concerts
to continue at a critical time. Dame Myra wrote :
“It would have been impossible to carry on through all these months without
additional help. At a moment when we were anxiously wondering just how much
further funds would take us—America came to our rescue.”
Two national efforts produced most impressive evidence of the strength of
the ties of a common ancestry. American Welsh and Scots throughout the
United States contributed their time, effort and money to the British War
Relief Society work. Many women spent hours a day working in different
centres, and their incentive to work was increased by knowing that the
RESPITE FROM WAR. Dame Myra Hess playing at one of her National Gallery
Lunch-time Concerts which helped to take the minds of Londoners off the war.


proceeds of their labours would reach the country of their forefathers.
A tremendous amount of clothing, blankets, footwear and equipment of all
kinds reached Wales and Scotland for the relief of the civilian population,
mainly through the channel of such societies as the Cymmrodorion Society
and the Gaelic Circle.
The Association of Highland Societies received the greater part of the help
sent to Scotland, and the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Rt. Hon.
Thomas Johnston, sent this letter to the President of that Society :
“1 was very much impressed to learn of the immense volume of American gifts
that have come to Scotland from the British War Relief Society of the United States.
I should be much obliged if you would convey to the British War Relief Society
and the Scottish Societies in America my appreciation and gratitude for the very
valuable help they have sent us in these difficult times.”
From the British side, touching examples of mutual help came from
children. Fifty youthful members of a dockside club collected five shillings
for the bombed-out children of Hawaii; shortly after the bombing of Pearl
Harbour some very poor children in Bermondsey sent a small sum of money
and a few toys to the British War Relief Society for the children of Pearl
Harbour.
Lan Hay, in his book “America Comes Across,” tells the following story
of a visit he paid to a British War Relief Society depot in America :
“Not long ago some very small and humble inhabitants of a bombed-out
English city received ‘from America’ a parcel containing toys—toys of an un-
imaginable splendour, the gift of happier children more happily placed. They
decided it would be only polite to send something in return. They had not much
to send, but what they had they sent. In due course their parcel arrived at the
Headquarters of the British War Relief Society in New York, addressed to their
youthful benefactors. It was found to contain a soiled and tattered Teddy-bear, a
rabbit whose woollen hide bore the marks of affectionate and none-too-clean
fingers, and a much-battered rag doll with a crudely painted cotton face—mute but
by no means inglorious survivors of God knows how many air-raids, now offered
upon the altar of friendship and gratitude by one set of small persons to another.
The ladies who opened that parcel are said to have been moved to tears. They are
not alone.”
That little story seems to sum up everything that War Relief stands for ;
human compassion and generosity on the one hand, human gratitude and
remembrance on the other. It also teaches us grown-ups a salutary lesson in
international relations.


XII. THE BLIND, THE HALT, THE LAME
In spite of its vast size and scope, the British War Relief Society never failed
to take a very keen and human interest in all who, by reason of special
disability, were not as well fitted to face the hardships of war conditions as
were the majority of their fellow-citizens. Appeals for the blind, the
crippled, the invalid and the aged received most careful and sympathetic
hearing, and many schemes for war relief among the physically handicapped
were not only supported, but followed up with the greatest interest. It was
one of the most endearing aspects of this huge relief organization, and was
made possible by reason of its youth, its freedom from red-tape, and above
all because of its urgent desire to give help where most needed.
Blinded Service men and women, firemen, merchant seamen and members
of Civil Defence were assisted by a very generous monthly grant over a
period of years. Not only did this help with the general work of training
the war-blinded, but it was of great assistance to the Society in the establishing
of a new St. Dunstan’s in Shropshire, after the bombing of the London
premises in Regent’s Park.
To help war-blinded civilians, not eligible for St. Dunstan’s, the Society
met the whole cost of acquiring and equipping and maintaining for a year a
Home of Recovery known as America Lodge, in Torquay. At the opening
of America Lodge the Hon. Secretary of the Society put into words the desire
to render help of a permanent value that lay behind all its work ;
“We hear many references to the brotherhood which binds lovers of freedom
everywhere, but we must back such words with action—action in rendering to one
another all the help in our power. It was in such a spirit that the British War
Relief Society chose to help the war-blinded civilians of this country—men,
women and even children who have been so cruelly blinded in their brave stand for
that blessed freedom. In that spirit, too, we admire the work of the National
Institute for the Blind, whose aim is to loosen the shackles of blindness and lead
these war-blinded civilians from darkness to the spiritual light of hope and
independence. It is said that Americans are fond of slogans. That may be so.
We can at least appreciate a good slogan when we hear it, and I know none better
than the slogan of the National Institute—‘Help the blind to help themselves.’
It expresses exactly the meaning of this Home of Recovery. I speak for a great
body of friendly people all over the United States of America when I express the
hope that here in the peace of America Lodge the wounded will be quietly helped to
adjust themselves to their changed circumstances, taught to enjoy through their
fingers the literature they formerly enjoyed through their eyes, trained for a pro-
fession or trade, and so prepared for a life happy with useful service. May God
bless this House.’’
But by no means all the blind have been trained to ‘ ‘ live blind, ’ ’ and there
were no more tragic victims of air warfare than those old blind men and
women whose homes were destroyed or damaged. Often their friends were
scattered and no longer at hand to help them, and they wandered in streets
suddenly changed out of all recognition, with piles of masonry blocking their
once familiar routes. Even if uninjured, their plight was pitiful. In May,


U
%
1941, through the Servers of the Blind League, a war-time home for the blind
was furnished and most comfortably equipped for sixty old, blind and
homeless people. The Society known as the Welfare of the Blind received
clothing and comforts. A library of “talking books” was sent direct to
St. Dunstan’s and the National Institute from America, and contacts
between the blind in the United Kingdom and blind benefactors in America
were made by means of braille messages transmitted by the British War
Relief Society.
Invalids and cripples, both old and young, were not passed over. By
means of help given at a time of crisis, invalid kitchens, providing special
diets for the very poor, were enabled to carry on their work, which was
described by Lord Horder as a great contribution to the health and happiness
of the districts they served. A mobile van presented by the Society provided
a special service for the bedridden, taking hot meals to their homes.
The Invalid Children’s Aid Association received support throughout the
war, and many young children, injured by enemy action and whose parents
could not afford the necessary treatment, were nursed and completely
restored to health in cots maintained by the Society.
In order to solve the problem of billeting the crippled evacuee, the British
War Relief Society co-operated with the After-Care Association in looking
after physically defective children. It furnished a home in Northampton in
LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS. This instructor, blinded in the First World War
is passing on what he has learned to a sightless soldier of the next generation:


which certain of these handicapped children were cared for and taught a
trade. At the famous Heritage Craft Schools at Chailey play-huts were
built, money grants were made, and very considerable consignments of jam,
sweets and clothing were allocated.
The Alexandra Musical Society did magnificent work among wounded
and sick ex-Service men in hospitals and convalescent homes. In 1943 alone
more than 52,000 badly disabled men were entertained and given small treats
of varying kinds that made all the difference to their lives. This Society was
supported most loyally by the British War Relief Society throughout the war.
Last, the old. Above the porch of a country almshouse is carved :
“Let me not be forsaken in my old age.”
It is a natural fear that may well become intensified in times of war. In
1941, help for old people who had lost their homes in air-raids formed one
of the main objectives of a special programme drawn up by the British War
Relief Society for air-raid relief, and donations were given to 200 old people’s
hostels. Work done by the Society of Friends among old people received
particularly generous financial support, and considerable stocks of clothing
were distributed for the same purpose through other societies. A lovely
house in Sussex was turned into a residential hotel for bombed-out men
and women of over seventy years of age, and the British War Relief Society
sent comforts to supplement essential equipment provided by the Ministry
of Health. In 1944, 2,000 old people were given a special Christmas gift.
In the files of the Society are to be found records of many nameless,
unremembered acts of kindness to the old and enfeebled. Coal was sent to
the very poor in a badly damaged district; vegetable seeds to old-age
pensioners ; books and periodicals ; boot-repairing tools and knitting wool;
wireless sets ; a cheque to help an old people’s chiropody clinic, and
another to provide home service for the old.
In connexion with the old, there is a story which bears out all that has been
said with regard to the confidence with which the British War Relief Society
became regarded, and the humanity with which it carried out its work. This
incident was reported in the Press in December 1942 :
“Thanks to two young sailors of the Royal Navy, 150 of Tottenham’s old folk
will get their usual Christmas party. The sailors, who are members of a club of
former pupils of a Tottenham school, walked into the New York Headquarters of
the British War Relief Society of America, and said they had heard that because so
many members of their club are in the Forces, a Christmas party which for more
than twenty years had been given to old folks would not take place this year.
A cable was sent to London, and the Chairman of the Society in Great Britain sent
a cheque to the party organizers, with a letter in which he expressed his admiration
for the thoughtfulness of the two sailors, and his Society’s best wishes for a
successful party.”
The British War Relief Society saw to it that this party was repeated in
succeeding years.


XIII. AMERICAN AMBULANCE GREAT BRITAIN
In June 1940 the American Society in London met to decide on the nature
of a celebration to be held on the coming anniversary of American
“Independence Day.’’ It was decided in place of the customary banquet
and ball to make a worth-while gesture to the people of Great Britain.
An appeal was made to American business men, who responded most
generously, and the American Ambulance Great Britain was born.
A magnificent fleet of 300 vehicles—motorized ambulances, surgical
units and mobile first-aid posts—was assembled. They became a familiar
sight all over the country, operating under the Ministry of Health from thirty
stations, maintaining a 24-hour 7-day service with the utmost efficiency.
Over million miles were covered, 288,377 journeys undertaken, 820,785
patients transported. After the initial funds were expended, the entire cost of
maintenance and operation for more than four years was borne by the
British War Relief Society.
The Minister of Health, writing in 1941, described the work of the
American Ambulance as a “great humanitarian service.”
“These vehicles” (he wrote) “have been in constant use for the transport of
patients under emergency hospital arrangements, conveyance of medical consultants
to urgent cases, meeting trains to take sick evacuated mothers and children to
hospital, transfer of hospital patients from coastal to inland hospitals ; conveyance
of cases to special surgical centres, removal of expectant mothers and aged infirm
persons to safer districts, and general transport duties on behalf of the blood-
transfusion service. ’ ’
Later on the American Ambulance undertook additional tasks. Ships
bringing home exchanged prisoners of war and hospital trains were met,
and patients conveyed from them to hospitals all over the country.
Emergency calls from the Royal Air Force were frequently answered.
The people manning these vehicles won, and well deserved, the highest
praise. Apart from strenuous day-to-day driving, the women drivers
cleaned their cars and were responsible for all the general upkeep. They
made a name for the whole organization as providing prompt and reliable
service whenever and wherever needed. Tributes to the spirit of untiring
readiness and enthusiasm of these women came from all parts of the country,
and on many occasions they went into action while severe raids were in
progress. Two of the drivers lost their lives on duty ; two others were
decorated by the King with the medal of Member of the Order of the British
Empire.
Innumerable human stories could be told about this invaluable work :
weekly reports were received at Headquarters from each of the 18 regional
stations. One story must suffice.
An order was received by an American ambulance driver to report at
once to a London hospital and carry a British merchant seaman—Alan
Moore, aged 19 —to be invested by the King with the George Medal for
heroism. Out of a torpedoed crew of 38 he was one of only 7 survivors.


fm v wr Jmmfcmrrm m m$JPWb*8C ~If f t f fTllgl
' \» *'•
■ ■ft £* ■ x ~~-—-~--~- .......^^*m~>*S
t>V ' ||n ,., „ ■'W'
The boy’s shipmates said that it was his leadership, courage and unconquer-
able spirit that helped them to cling grimly to life when all hope was gone.
As a result of exposure both his legs had been amputated, and he had lost
eight fingers. After the investiture, the ambulance took Moore for his first
fitting for artificial limbs ; these were given to him by the British War Relief
Society.
In June 1943 Her Majesty the Queen held an inspection of a large detach-
ment of the American Ambulance on its third anniversary. She was
accompanied by the American Ambassador and the Minister of Health.
Later this Minister, Mr. Ernest Brown, paid a fitting tribute to the work
of the organization :
“I should like to convey my warmest thanks and appreciation for the service
which the American Ambulance has given us with that efficiency and devotion
which has marked its work since its inception. I can only assure you once again
how valuable have been the operations in which they have been so fully engaged
from day to day in connexion with the war-time organization of our hospital and
medical services.
“When the medical history of the war comes to be written, the services of the
American Ambulance in Great Britain will make a notable chapter, and our
gratitude for it is, and will remain, both deep and lasting.”
OVER SIXTEEN MILLION MILES were covered by American Ambulance Great
Britain with this fleet which transported more than eight hundred thousand patients.


XIV. AMERICAN LABOUR
American Labour sent during the war, through the British War Relief
Society, very considerable support to their fellow-workers in Great Britain.
Money from the Congress of Industrial Organizations and the American
Federation of Labour, to which the members of the Railroad Brotherhood
also contributed, was devoted to the provision of “rest breaks,” and
war-time workers’ camps, clubs and hostels under a scheme administered
by a national advisory committee appointed by the Ministry of Labour and
National Service. The famous Merchant Navy Club in London was the
gift of the Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Association, the Congress of
Industrial Organizations established a Club for Indian Seamen in Avon-
mouth, the A.F, of L. a Merchant Navy Club in Glasgow. A third, in
Cardiff, was given jointly by the A.F, of L, and the C. of 1.0.
These most generous gifts of money were made up from many small
subscriptions ; some workers in America contributed a few cents weekly
over a long period, and the International Ladies’ Garment Workers gave up
half a day’s pay as their contribution.
War workers’ clubs were designed to benefit the large numbers of war
workers who had been moved from their homes to distant parts of the
country, in order to increase the production of munitions of war. Many
such transferred workers suffered acutely from loneliness, homesickness and
loss of morale due to their strange surroundings ; all these factors had an
adverse effect on their work and production. Billeting difficulties were often
insurmountable, owing to bombing or an abnormal increase in war-time
population in areas around the war-time factories. These difficulties, and
many of the other hardships of the transferred worker, were met by clubs in
which they might spend their leisure hours, and which were equipped through
the good offices and thoughtfulness of these American friends.
In these clubs workers met and made friends. Bathing, hairdressing,
laundry, ironing and sewing facilities were provided. Comfortable lounges,
emergency sleeping accommodation, canteens, and often a large hall
suitable for dancing and concerts were to be found. A variety of activities
was organized; dancing and “keep fit” classes, make-do-and-mend
instruction, dramatic and rambling clubs, toy-making, handicrafts, lectures
and debates. Libraries were organized in certain clubs and there were
rooms for quiet letter-writing and reading. Girls found in these clubs a
retreat where they could relax, enjoy informal pleasures with friends, and
find that opportunity of grooming both their clothes and their persons
which plays so important a part in the keeping up of morale. The clubs
gave to the transferred workers a home of their own. One girl put
it in a nutshell; “My home is in Surrey. 1 hated going to Birmingham to
work a capstan lathe, I didn’t like the factory, and I was frightened of the
machines. 1 knew nobody. By chance 1 heard of a War Workers’ Club.
Now, for about 3d. a week, 1 can dance, go to socials, join a dramatic club,
and meet friends every day. Munitions are hard on the hands. At the
Club I can get a manicure for 2d. We girls do appreciate that. I hope


clubs like these will carry on after the war, as 1 shall miss it even when I am
home again.”
Part of the gift from American industrial organizations was used to
provide the Land Army with a club of its own in London, where land
girls, either on leave or in transit, enjoyed the amenities of a club, which was
the greatest treat to these girls, many of whom lived and worked in extremely
primitive conditions. The monthly magazine of the Land Army published
the thanks of the members “for the goodwill and recognition of hard work
well done that these splendid gifts express. The Women’s Land Army
sends its warmest gratitude to the American friends who have thus
heartened us.”
Camping holidays provided many an industrial worker with a valuable and
invigorating break. Games, swimming, rambles, sports and cycle runs
proved most popular, and welfare officers reported that young workers
returned to their war effort in glowing health and with renewed vitality.
The official definition of a ‘Test break” is a ‘‘preventive measure to
avoid illness and breakdown for the industrial worker suffering from the
effects of accumulated fatigue ...” Such homes were either entirely or
partially equipped by American Labour gifts. They were in the nature of an
experiment carried out, with one exception, for women, and were described
as the only preventive medicine of a real character that was being practise^
LAND GIRLS ON HOLIDAY. War workers, after staying at one of these “rest
break ” homes, went back to the strain of long working hours refreshed and invigorated.


in Great Britain in 1942. They were designed to cut out breakdowns of
industrial war workers, by giving a spell of rest and relaxation in good time.
In short, they were for those who “had no time to be ill.” The experiment
was an overwhelming success ; factory welfare workers clamoured for more
and yet more of these rest breaks to which they could send men and women
who were breaking down under the strain of long working hours (up to
70 hours a week in certain emergency periods), transport difficulties, the
black-out, food rationing and lack of holidays. Key workers, with their
added responsibilities, were often in great need of such a rest break. These
special hostels were neither holiday nor convalescent homes. There were no
organized activities, a minimum of rules, four good meals a day, special
diets if needed, and those attending were placed in the charge of a carefully
chosen warden.
The rest breaks were set up in the healthiest parts of the country, or at the
seaside—Weston-super-Mare, Buxton, Abergele, Hexham, Stirling, Surrey.
Three were reserved for land girls, one for nurses. The good air, rest and
food restored normality and energy, and workers returned to their factories
no longer haunted with the fear of a breakdown, but able to concentrate
once more on the job in hand. Workers, welfare officers and labour
officials were all agreed on one point: that the rest breaks were a good thing
born in a very evil time, but that it would be a thousand pities if they came to
an end with the war ; and that this experiment, made possible by American
workers, had proved to many employers that it paid to take an interest in the
human part of their factories.
The Minister of Labour, Mr. Ernest Bevin, expressed the thanks of
thousands of beneficiaries at the opening of a rest break ;
“The workers of America have not been fair-weather friends. Their con-
tributions in 1943 alone had enabled 12,140 people to enjoy the rest break houses.
In every one of these houses a plaque is placed which indicates to the people of this
country that they have been made possible through the generosity of the workers
of America through their great organizations. These plaques will long survive the
war ; our gratitude is engraven on them, but far more deeply and permanently
is it engraven on our hearts. ’ ’
XV. EAST GRINSTEAD
The London Times, in a leading article of November 15th, 1944, said :
“In a characteristic corner of Sussex, now being measured and otherwise
prepared, will rise a permanent, practical memorial to the work of the British War
Relief Society of America, which has become woven into the war-time pattern
of Britain’s national life.
“The memorial, which is to take the form of a new wing to the Queen Victoria
Hospital at East Grinstead, is intended to continue in peace-time for those exposed


• ■ ■ I
THE NEW SURGICAL BLOCK at East Grinstead, where the work of healing
men burnt on active service will occupy the staff for many years to come.
to the mishaps of peace-time the manifold blessings bestowed by this centre of
plastic surgery upon war-scarred Service men as well as civilians maimed by
bombing attacks.”
An account of this centre has been written by an American, a young man
who left the peace of his own country in the early days of the war to volunteer
for the R.A.F. Terribly burnt on active service, he spent many months at
East Grinstead. Here is his story, written during his prolonged treatment:
“A stranger in the town of East Grinstead, Sussex, may well wonder what
manner of sorcery goes on here. He may have noticed on the street a face
which, although complete and well formed in its features, seemed not quite
as God had made it, but rather as if the hand of man were evident in its
fashioning. If his interest leads him to enquire of any townsman, he will be
told that it was, indeed, the hand of man that fashioned this face. He will be
told of the great work that is going on at a hospital on a hill near the edge of
this southern town. It is a work that has been substantially aided by the
British War Relief Society.
‘‘A fitting memorial to perpetuate the work of the Society will stand at the
Queen Victoria Hospital in East Grinstead. This permanent Surgical
Block was very carefully designed in consultation with the surgeons who
actually operate in it, and is at present the only building of its kind in England


entirely devoted to plastic surgery. The block contains some 67 rooms,
including 5 theatres, pathological and bacteriological laboratories, an
X-ray department, a museum, 10 single-bed wards, consulting- and waiting-
rooms. It is intended primarily for the lengthy repair of Service cases
following severe burns, a work which will occupy the staff for many years
to come.
“The need for such a unit was stressed by Mr. Archibald Mclndoe,
Surgeon-in-Charge, in a report made during the latter half of 1943 :
“ ‘One of our greatest handicaps at the Plastic Surgery and Jaw Injury Centre
is the emergency nature of our operating-rooms, and we have had plans drawn up
for the building of a new Surgical Unit which will house all the various activities
which surround this form of operative work. Such a Unit would enable us to do
more and better work, to cope more adequately with the increasing demands upon
our services, both from here and abroad. . . . This Unit is bound to be an
expensive one, but we feel that nothing is too good for the men who pass through
our wards.’
“This need was recognized by the British War Relief Society in September
of the same year with a gift of £30,000 for the erection of the proposed
block. With this gift the initial problem of finance was solved, and the
Hospital authorities proceeded with the task of getting the ‘go-ahead’
signal from the various ministries involved, and the problems of labour,
transport and materials were tackled. One cannot hope to list the details
of the gargantuan efforts involved in these respects : it is sufficient to say
that eventually all near-impossibilities were overcome. The project was
exempted from the building embargo, and the first sod was turned.
“A Times article of November 15th, 1944, told the nation of the work in
progress ;
“ ‘Exactly a year ago, to mark its fourth anniversary, the Society expressed a
desire to build and equip what will be an instructional centre as well as an up-to-date
operating clinic at East Grinstead. Mr. Bertram Cruger, its chief representative in
this country, had seen for himself what was literally the remaking—physical,
mental, and indeed spiritual—of British and Allied airmen disfigured by the flail
and flame of war, and as a result of his representations on the other side of the
Atlantic the sum originally earmarked for the purpose . . . has now grown
to £89,000.’
“The original appropriation had now been almost tripled to cover greatly
expanded plans and the complete equipping of the new building with the
finest surgical apparatus obtainable. To understand how fitting to the
spirit and purpose of the British War Relief Society is such a memorial, one
must know the history of the hospital of which it forms a part, and the work
which has been and will be accomplished there.
“The Queen Victoria Hospital Plastic Surgery and Jaw Injury Centre
was created under the Emergency Medical Scheme at the beginning of the
war, as a unit for the treatment of special injuries of this type —burns, jaw
fractures, missile and explosive injuries—which are so common under war
conditions.
“ Since its inception the Centre has been heavily engaged in facial and dental


g||| f wmh | - wfW^^^WS'
' '•’ H f/ w Ilf W , M . I I J*
■' «J / '*•% •? ■ ■ I I i
m . m *1 .' ;
Sfe •, # I
■i § jpip
■ I I HIV 5
'IIL Km! Si.. > ■
| * :
reconstructive work, and is now largely used by the Services, particularly
the R.A.F, Men representing practically all the Allied Nations have been
treated at this Centre. Its special facilities for the treatment of burns and jaw
injuries under a young and enthusiastic staff has made it so well known
throughout the country that today East Grinstead is synonymous with
plastic and dental repair work.
4 4 For post-graduate study in these fields a school was established there in
1940. Over 700 Allied dental surgeons, including 10 per cent of the entire
dental personnel of the British Army, Navy and Air Forces, have received
instruction in this school. Over 60 surgeons, practically all drawn from the
R.A.F. Medical Service, have received instruction in plastic work. Both
medical and nursing staffs of all the burn units in the R.A.F. have been
trained at East Grinstead, in addition to the burns orderlies who form
the backbone of this service. American surgeons and dental surgeons have
shown a strong interest in the Centre, and a number of them have undergone
courses there. Thus the school for plastic and dental instruction has become
the most important thing of its kind in England. This work is being extended
with the facilities of the new Surgical Block.
4 4 Despite the handicaps of supply and labour and the bombing activities
of the enemy, the Centre has continued to expand throughout the war. In
the beginning three main wards, a dental department and a kitchen block
THE PLASTIC SURGEON at work. “We do well to remember that the privilege
of dying for one's country is not equal to the privilege of living for it.”


were erected behind the original hospital to house, feed and care for the
patients of the new Centre. Accommodation within the parent hospital
building was depended upon for operating-theatres. X-ray facilities and
administration offices. After Dunkirk and during the Battle of Britain,
when R.A.F. fighters by day and Nazi bombers by night droned across the
sky above the hospital, the work of expansion was begun. Buildings were
constructed to provide recreational and dining rooms, to house the saline
baths, the dental lecture theatre, the photography, ophthalmy, physio-
therapy and industrial therapy departments, and the medical administration
offices. A small church for the use of the rapidly growing hospital
community was raised. It is typical of the Englishman’s serenity before the
onslaught of the Hun that, while bombs fell uncomfortably close, a rambling
garden for the use of patients was hewn out of the woodland behind the
wards. One such bomb fell a few yards from the main hospital, and
necessitated the evacuation of those patients sufficiently fit, while the still
unexploded bomb was being removed by a disposal squad.
“At the height of the flying-bomb attacks on Southern England the Cana-
dian Ward, containing 50 beds and housed in its own modern building, was
opened. One night, soon after its opening, the new ward received through
one window a cannon-shell intended by our pursuing fighter for a low-flying
‘doodle-bug.’ This incident was regarded by the men occupying beds in
the ward that night as an appropriate dedication ceremony for the new
building. True to this tradition, the American Surgical Block was raised at
a time when stratosphere rockets, aimed at London by a desperate but
inaccurate Hun, were exploding in the vicinity. With the addition of this
block the Centre, originally five huts with a borrowed emergency theatre,
became a community numbering some eleven buildings and possessing the
finest operating facilities.
‘‘ So the Plastic Surgery and Jaw Injury Centre grew. Born of the war, it
surmounted the difficulties of war to accommodate its war-wounded patients.
But the enduring story of this institution is not one of mortar and stone,
but of the human spirit; of the struggles of young men, grievously wounded
on the land, the sea and in the air, to prevail through months and years of
pain and disfigurement and emerge from hospital to continue the fight, or to
seek a life worth living ; of the struggle of their surgeons to make this
spiritual victory physically possible.
‘ ‘ Dunkirk casualties, among the first patients of the Centre ; Commandos ;
men of the Second Front armies ; Royal Naval casualties ; Battle of
Britain pilots ; crews of Bomber Command ; men of the Desert Air Force ;
repatriated prisoners of war ; men from bomb disposal squads ; D-Day
casualties, and casualties from operational training units ; blitz-wounded
from London and other parts of England —these are the men who passed
and are passing through the wards.
“They are among those who were ‘unconquered in defeat’ ; who returned
to penetrate Hitler’s ‘impenetrable wall’ at a dozen points from Norway
to Dieppe ; who finally smashed that wall in Normandy : who returned the
air blitz, multiplied a hundredfold, to Berlin and the Ruhr, where it


Ilptjj
KEEPING UP TO DATE. Members of the staff in the library. They work
in the only building of its kind in England entirely devoted to plastic surgery.
belonged ; who protected Britain’s life-line, the convoys, and swept the sea
clean of German craft; who, although ‘few,’ fought for and won the
sky over Britain ; and who, in the line of duty—and that phrase covers
those British civilians whose stalwartness under the German blitzes won
the admiration of the world—were grievously injured. Some came directly
to the Centre, while others were transferred from hospitals in Britain, Africa
and Italy. All were brought there because of the special nature of their
injuries, in which the Centre specializes. The majority of these cases has
always been badly burnt airmen, for this hazard is greater in their line of
duty than in any other Service. The range of their war experiences and the
different countries from which they came, as well as their future hopes and
plans, provide stimulating conversation.
“The prevailing atmosphere in the wards is one of optimism. Veteran
patients, near the end of their long series of operations, never tire of en-
couraging newcomers and helping them to get through a difficult period.
One such old-timer, returned for a last trimming-off operation, revealed his
history to a young airman as the two of them sat by the friendly stove at one
end of the ward on a winter evening. This man, a Czech pilot, was forced
to jump by parachute from his flaming Hurricane one day during the Battle
of Britain. He was deeply burnt on the face, hands and legs. He was
received into the Centre, and over a period of 28 months underwent 20
operations, including new eyelids, nose, upper lip and 7 hand grafts. The


lendons which control all but the knuckle joints were burnt away, and thus
his fingers were permanently immovable save at these joints. But through
skin grafts and other treatment his hands were so improved in usefulness
that he was passed for flying again in 1943, and flew a Spitfire in operations
against the enemy. Cases like this, which are not uncommon at the Centre,
are a great encouragement to those first starting treatment.
“The worst cases came in with hands incapable of lifting a glass of water
to their lips, and with faces that lacked eyelids, eyebrows, and parts of noses
and ears. At the end of their treatment these same men have leF the wards
with hands that made them entirely independent and with faces that were
complete and comfortable.
“To quote once more from The Times :
“ ‘But plastic surgery, however successful, is only part, perhaps the larger part,
of the battle for equipping some of the physically disfigured and mentally shocked
men at the hospital for a competitive place among their fellows in professional,
commercial and industrial life. This is where the special form of occupational
therapy practised by Mr. Archibald Mclndoe, surgeon in charge and consultant in
plastic surgery to the R.A.F., comes directly to the aid of the sufferers. For
instance, many of the badly burnt airmen, who comprise a large proportion of the
patients, are encouraged, often in the earliest stages of their recovery, to try their
hand, however disfigured, at fashioning small component parts of aircraft. Thus
their interest is immediately aroused in a field of endeavour closely allied to what
was life itself to them.
‘ ‘ ‘ The establishment and recognition of this unit, which is the only one in England
with a possible permanent future, will ensure that the stagnant years which followed
the last war will not be repeated.’
“ ‘We do well to remember,’ Mr, Archibald Mclndoe has reminded
these men, his patients, ‘that the privilege of dying for one’s country is not
equal to the privilege of living for it. ’ Through the work of the Plastic
Surgery and Jaw Injury Centre this greater privilege is realized for many
who have sacrificed most for its attainment. ’ ’
The Memorial Surgical Block was erected as part of a hospital which
had been intimately associated with war throughout every day of its exist-
ence. No more fitting memorial to the work of the British War Relief
Society could have been left behind in Great Britain. It was formally
opened by Her Majesty the Queen on July 25th, 1946.
XVI. HAIL AND FAREWELL
“To receive assistance from a friend when in need is to establish the true value of
friendship : to receive that assistance over and over again is to experience a rebirth
of faith, not only in friendship but in the ultimate brotherhood of man. ’ ’
The British War Relief Society closed down officially on December 31st,
1945, and Great Britain lost a friend who had stood by her for over six years


with undiminished vitality, despite increasing responsibilities and pre
occupations at home.
“We have been with you since the beginning” was indeed true, and up
to the end the Society not only continued to help old friends with their
problems and difficulties, but met new appeals as readily as ever. Tribute
was paid to the heroic exploits of the Airborne Division ; Lord Roberts
Memorial Workshops for the training of disabled ex-Service men were set up
in Bristol; block grants and help in kind were given to the victims of flying-
bombs and rockets ; a large quantity of acetate sheeting was distributed to
replace blasted windows ; Community Centres were established in the worst
hit of our towns ; British War Relief vans ran on the roads of liberated
Europe.
It only remains to express once more, most inadequately, our deep and
abiding gratitude for the innumerable gifts and proofs of friendship that
reached us, day after day, month after month, year after year. In particular
we remember the hundreds of British War Relief Society committees and
working parties established throughout the United States. The story of those
who freely gave their time to organizing, collecting, making, sewing, sorting
and packing will never be fully told, but it is in a large measure due to their
devotion that we received timely assistance, not once, but ‘‘over and over
again.”
The part played by these thousands of ordinary men, women and children
must never be forgotten ; they were the inspiration, the sustenance and the
soul of the British War Relief Society of the United States of America.
“Not as a ladder from earth to Heaven, not as a witness to any creed,
But simple service simply given to his own kind in their common need.”


10, Sobntng Hutti,
SStjiUhsli.
FROM THE PRIME MINISTER TO THE BRITISH
WAR RELIEF SOCIETY OF AMERICA.
On 15 November, 1939, the British War Relief
Society of America began its work and for over five
years they have never failed to bring comfort and
happiness to countless families and homes who have been
the victims of German bombs. The "Queen's Messengers",
the fleet of mobile canteens, the many homes and
nursery schools for bombed out children, gifts of
clothes at all times for those who have lost their own
and of toys and sweets for children at Christmas - these
are some of the ways in which the Society has carried on
its work of mercy and humanity. We shall not forget this
work and we all send our grateful thanks to the two
million voluntary workers and the hundreds of thousands
of other citizens of the United States whose efforts and
generosity have made it possible. Let us resolve that
the oond thus created in adversity shall grow stronger
when the days of peace return.


' 1
I
i”
I ME '■■******
{ i-
x| 11
mwMm


1 S jf i. | ** ** f
?.r\ . - « ? 1 \f\.,'' v V>' *>4 * * \
»gM ImJ
" • Fol..
4hfe» J ,i; r
' S *U_ : r : .
' y .. .. *^-3
jT 4 Vf ',/*' Jt ; ; •'
JSE <a *\/ jp
- :, A ,i??‘i • ‘
Ml / *
W f :u -*; ■'wf^sT A*'Jm :
l|gv / dm
rfFjr' ..- i £-* : 4
***' ££.J\ “ IV
i>
ip
;fS|
