

FRIENDLY COUNSEL
ADDRESSED TO THE
WORKING CLASSES,
MORE ESPECIALLY TO
NEWLY ARRIYED EMIGRANTS.
BY
GE ORGE WASHINGTON WALKER.
flTa^ntama :
H. AND C. BEST, PRINTERS, “ COURIER”-OEFICE, COLLINS STREET.
1854.




FRIENDLY COUNSEL
ADDRESSED TO THE
• WORKING CLASSES,
MORE ESPECIALLY TO
NEWLY ARRIVED EMIGKANTS,
BY
GEORGE WASHINGTON WALKER.
H. AND C. BEST, PRINTERS, “ COURIERI’-OEFICE, 1 ’-OEFICE, COLLIHS-STREET.
1854.




FRIENDLY COUNSEL,
&c.
Permit an old Colonist, one who is himself an
emigrant, and feels a lively interest in your welfare,
to address to you a few words of friendly counsel.
Many of you have recently left the land of your
birth, and are entering upon an untrodden path, in
which there is much that is strange to you. It is
like beginning the world anew. How important is
a right beginning! Strangers, in a strange land,
you may know none to whom you can look with
implicit confidence for counsel. It is the more
needful, then, that you be true to yourselves, and
study well your own interests. For the furtherance
of this object, and to assist you in arriving at right
conclusions, the following hints are submitted for
your consideration. Should they appear to you to
accord with the dictates of common sense, and with
your own convictions of what is right, and is even
incumbent on persons circumstanced as you are, and
thus strengthen your resolution to carry them out
in practice, the aim of the writer in thus addressing
you will be accomplished.
Some of the subjects referred to, though they
may seem of trifling import, yet have an intimate
bearing on your temporal interests, and therefore
may not be out of place in an address that is
designed to promote your present as well as your
everlasting well-being.
It may seem almost unnecessary to remind you
that, having to live by the fruit of your own exer


tions, it is highly important to economise your
means. It is rather for the purpose of suggesting
a mode by which you may do so with the greatest
advantage, that the subject is adverted to, and of
reminding you, that by placing your money in the
Savings’ Bank, it will not only be kept in safety,
but you will be less under the temptation to spend
it than if it were to remain in your own keeping.
Besides, every pound thus invested will bear interest
and increase, even without any addition to it on
your part. But you may reasonably hope that,
with care and industry, you will be enabled to add
to your store; and that at a future period, after
having gained experience in the Colony, you will be
better prepared for turning it to good account.
Remember, also, that as time is equivalent to
money, it is important not to lose a day that you
can help in entering upon regular employment. A
long voyage is unfavourable to the cultivation of
industrious habits ; the sooner these are resumed,
therefore, the better. When usefully employed,
you will not be likely to form unprofitable connec-
tions, which are often a snare to new-comers. You
will find it your interest to make few acquaintances,
particularly in the outset.
Beware of shipmates, or others, who would encou-
rage you to indulge in pleasure and dissipation. A
man’s character is estimated in great measure by the
company he keeps; and yours is of the utmost
importance to you. There are few places where
character, if deserving, is more highly appreciated
than in this Colony;—it generally commands a
premium.
Flee the public-house, as you would the road to
ruin ; and shun those persons, however warm their
professions of friendship, who would entice you to
drink ; look upon them as themselves deluded, if
not as plotting your ruin, by seeking to accomplish
their own selfish ends at your expence. Strong


drink is the principal means by which multitudes
in this land have their prospects blighted, and
ultimately become ruined in mind and body, as
well as in estate. The danger is no less real
when presented under the guise of a “ social glass,”
by a so-called friend, at the door or in the bar-room
of a public-house. Parley not with temptation.
However inviting the intoxicating cup may seem in
the commencement, “at the last it biteth like a ser-
pent and stingeth like an adder.” Prov. xxiii. 32.
“ Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and
whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.” Prov.
xx. 1. Many in these colonies have signed the
pledge to abstain from all intoxicating drinks, and
find themselves great gainers, not only in health and
circumstances, but in various other ways. If you
have not already done so, you cannot do better than
follow their example.
Labour at the present juncture is highly remune-
rative, and most persons are disposed to give fair,
and even liberal wages. Be not, however, extrava-
gant in your expectations, or unreasonable in your
demands, for this would only tend to militate against
your own interests. There are other considerations
also, besides the rate of wages, that in entering into
an engagement, should be taken into account; such
as the character of your employer, and the probable
permanence or otherwise of the situation, as well as
others more or less obvious. The respectability of
a master is in some degree reflected on his depen-
dants, so long as they conduct themselves with pro-
priety; and when a change of place becomes neces-
sary, to have served a respectable master, especially
if for a lengthened period, will always be found
valuable as an introduction to other and more advan-
tageous employment.
Guard against a roving and unsettled turn of
mind, which often terminates in confirmed fickleness
and instability of character in the persons who give


way to it. You will meet witli many such in these
colonies. As a general rule, you will find they
illustrate the truth of the old adage, “ the rolling
stone gathers no moss.”
Those of you who are mechanics, farming men, or
even day-labourers, have now a fair opportunity of
earning, not only a comfortable livelihood, hut of
laying something by for the permanent improvement
of your condition. A very few years of industry
and economy will secure to you the means of pur-
chasing a piece of ground and rearing a cottage and
garden of your own.
But the fair prospect before you may easily be
marred. Let none deceive themselves by supposing
that these colonies, in a general way, present any
short cut to independence, or royal road to wealth
any surer path, in fact, than that which Divine
Providence has every where marked out as the con-
dition of success; viz., a persevering course of honest
industry, combined with prudence and economy.
False notions on this head may induce conduct similar
to that of the dog in the fable, who let go a present
and substantial good to grasp at a shadow.
Among other temptations to abandon industrious
pursuits—although when persevered in these are all
hut certain of success—the Gold-fields will be repre-
sented to you, especially by the fickle and inconstant,
as the shortest road to independence. But ponder
well before you commit yourselves to such a step
consider the possible, nay probable, consequences,
before relinquishing a present and safe means of
livelihood for one that is precarious, remote, and
attended with many risks.
It is true that some do obtain gold, and a few in
considerable quantity. But for one who is thus
successful, how many hundreds have failed ? The
good fortune, as it is termed, of the few is trumpeted
forth by a thousand tongues, and far and near is
made the subject of comment, while we hear little of


the numbers who realise only their labour and
expences for their pains; for losses and failure
are not grateful topics, especially with those by
whom they are encountered. But those who are
wise will argue from the rule, and not from the
exception. It is computed that the average amount
of each gold-digger’s earnings is far below the wages
of an ordinary day-labourer. The chances, so to
speak, are therefore against you, looking at the
thing in a rational point of view ; and no other is
worthy of sensible men.
But could you be certain of obtaining gold, yet
are there many drawbacks that require to be taken
into account. Besides the cost of outfit and other
expences, which are considerable, there are the risks
of accidents and disease, as well as of personal out-
rage ; and in proportion to your reputed success,
whether real or not, will he your exposure to the
attacks of lawless violence. Many a poor wanderer
has met with an untimely end from one or other of
these causes, or has been entombed alive while
delving in the earth for the precious metal.
In the estimation of the thoughtful and right-
minded, there is yet another and more imminent risk,
that ought to have much weight with them; and it
is one to which the successful are more peculiarly
exposed.
Gold-digging is a lottery in which there are, it is
true, some prizes, but many more blanks. Hence
the occupation of the gold-digger is nearly allied to
that of the gambler; and, as in all games of hazard
where there is much at stake, its essential ten-
dency is to induce recklessness and general dete-
rioration of character. So frequently has this
been the result, that no small proportion of the
more successful adventurers have been rendered
not only worse citizens, but poorer men, than if
they had never visited the gold-fields. The
reckless and improvident habits they have there


acquired have soon stripped them of their gains.
They have meanwhile lost the relish, and in some
degree the capacity, for the healthful and, in the
end, more gainful pursuits of regular industry; and
as regards all that constitutes men good and useful
members of society, in every sense of the word, they
are losers. There is little douht that this is one of
the worst features of gold-digging.
To those, likewise, who have left families —wives
and daughters, for instance—in their eager pursuit
after gold, it has in numerous cases proved the cause
of irreparable injury. Gold, were it acquired, would
be but a poor compensation for the loss of domestic
happiness, attended as it has too often been with the
ruin of wives or daughters, the sad consequence of
temporary abandonment by their natural protectors.
Now no human prudence or foresight can secure
exemption from these evils, or others that might be
enumerated. How needful then, before embarking
in so hazardous an undertaking, to count the possible
cost of “ hastening to be rich,” through which, even
from ancient time, men have involved themselves in
“ temptation and a snare,” that have ultimately been
the means of “ drowning them in destruction and
perdition.” 1 Tim. vi. 9, 10.
And now for a few words of homely counsel to
such of you as are of the female sex, in reference to
matters that may be deemed insignificant, yet on
which much of your future usefulness and success
may depend.
Life is for the most part made up of little inci-
dents of daily and hourly occurrence, in which we
have to take part, and which tend more to the
formation of character and to stamp it with the
impress of usefulness or worthlessness—of good or
of evil—than actions of a more imposing kind, but
of rarer occurrence. Let none therefore despise
“ the day of small things.”


Domestic service will probably be the vocation of
most of you; and a faithful and efficient domestic is
both a useful and estimable member of society.
May all be careful when in service to earn this cha-
racter, and having once earned it, to maintain it.
It may soon be acquired by pains-taking and an
honest determination to do what is right, at all times
and under all circumstances, whether under the eye
of a master or mistress or not. Scorn mere eye-
service, as pitiful and degrading.
Whatever you take in hand, be it little or much,
aim to do it well. There is truth in the saying, that
<e a thing well done is twice done,” —that is, it saves
a second doing, which might otherwise be necessary.
And never take it amiss when shown how it might
have been better done. Rather be grateful to the
master or mistress who will be at the pains of
instructing you.
Another means of increasing the value of your
services, and of gaining the approval of your
employers—which all should be anxious to secure-
is to do things in the way that accords with their
wishes, rather than your own. This is no more than
a master or mistress has a right to expect, and what
you would probably require were you in their place.
Yet many an otherwise good servant fails to give
the satisfaction she might, from an anxiety, if not
determination, to do things in her own way, rather
than in that prescribed to her.
Have a special regard to cleanliness. Few things
contribute more to health and comfort, and, next to
honesty, perhaps nothing speaks more forcibly in a
young woman’s favour. The trite saying that
“ Cleanliness is next to Godliness,” is not without a
meaning. A neat and cleanly person, as well as a
well-ordered house, or even kitchen, bespeaks, in
some degree, a well-ordered mind. And here it
may be observed, that method, or, in other words, an
orderly, systematic way of going about your work,


will materially tend to the promotion of cleanliness.
It is no uncommon thing to see persons, for want of
method, make nearly as much litter and dirt while
professing to clean up, as they remove out of the
way, thus causing themselves interminable labour.
Again, in matters that require to be done daily or
weekly, have a fixed time for doing them, and be
regular and punctual in their performance. Have,
as far as practicable, a time for everything, and do
everything in its right time ; whilst adhering no less
rigidly to the good old maxim, “ A place for every-
thing, and everything in its place.”
It cannot he too strongly impressed upon your
minds that habits of order, punctuality, and clean-
liness, and, in short, every qualification that contri-
butes to make what we call a good servant , is not
merely valuable to a master or mistress. They are
of incomparably more advantage to their possessor.
These habits, once acquired, accompany a young
woman through life. They form a part of herself,
and invest her with a character of superiority; and
wherever she may be situated, or whatever may be
her occupation, they will materially add to her use-
fulness and worth : and should it become her lot to
change her condition, (and none are more likely, and
to change it for the better, too,) and she should have
to manage a family of her own, she will be still
better prepared to appreciate their value, as she will
prove in her own experience, how greatly they con-
tribute to the right and effective management of a
household.
And now, although last in the order of mention,
yet first in importance,—nay, far before every other
consideration, —may all be concerned to seek the
blessing of Almighty God in what they undertake.
The hints that have been offered for your guidance
in the preceding pages, comprise little more than
the suggestions of worldly prudence ; but as “ Wis-
dom dwells with prudence,” Prov. viii. 12, and


<f the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,” Job xxviii.
28, so an adherence to the course that has been
recommended to you will he found to harmonize
with the precepts and requirements of Religion.
And without religion, what is man ? and what is the
value of all for which he toils, even his most boasted
acquisitions ? Though he hoard up gold and “ make
it his hope, and say to the fine gold, thou art my
confidence,” Job xxxi. 24, surely with its owner it
will speedily pass away. “ Having brought nothing
into this world, it is certain he can carry nothing
out.” 1 Tim. vi. 7. And, “ what is a man profited
if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul ? Or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul ? ” Matt. xvi. 26. This is an awful con-
sideration, which, if it influence us aright, will
make the present life assume importance chiefly in
its relation to the future, —that endless state of being
in which “ every man shall be rewarded according
to his works,” Matt. xvi. 27; and how solemn the
thought that “ the eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good; ” Prov. xv.
3, —that He scrutinizes motives as well as actions.
“ Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the
Lord looketh on the heart.” 1 Sam. xvi. 7. “We
must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ,
that we may receive the things done in the body
according to that we have done, whether it be good
or bad.” 2 Cor. v. 10. Seeing, therefore, that none
can “ escape the righteous judgment of God,” Rom.
ii. 3, well might the Apostle add, “ knowing, there-
fore, the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.” 2
Cor. v. 2. Surely “itis a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.” Heb. x. 31.
“ The redemption of the soul is precious,” Ps. xlix.
8, —precious beyond what words can convey. It is
great work in which we ought all to be chiefly
concerned, so as to be prepared to stand with
acceptance before the judgment-seat of Christ. What


then is the counsel of Him who shall he our judge,
in reference to this all-important matter ? “ This is
the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He
hath sent.” John vi. 29. Again, “He that believeth
on me hath everlasting life.” John vi. 49. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins;
and if ye die in your sins, whither I go ye cannot
come.” John viii. 21 24. “I am the resurrection
and the life : he that believeth in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and
believeth in me shall never die.” John xi. 25-6.
Faith in Christ, therefore, —“ the faith of the
operation of God,” Col. ii. 12, a living, operative
faith, influencing the heart and life in such manner
as to change the one and reform the other, a be-
lieving with the heart unto righteousness, Rom.
x. 10—is the condition of admittance into “ the ever-
lasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.” 2 Pet. iv. 2.
How needful then the injunction of .an Apostle,
“ Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith,
prove your ownselves ; know ye not your ownselves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be repro-
bates.” 2 Cor. xiii. 5. “ For,” says the same inspired
writer, in another place, <£ if our gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this
world hath blinded the minds of them which believe
not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ,
who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
For God, who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
[or appearance] of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. i\. 4-6.
In accordance with prophecy, “ in due time, Christ
died for the ungodly.” Rom. iv. 6 ; and unto every
one of us is given grace, according to the measure of
the gift of Christ.” Eph. iv. 7. “He ascended up
on high, he led captivity captive, and received gifts
for men ; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord


God might dwell among them.” Ps. lxviii. 18.
Rom. iv. 8. “ The grace of God, that bringeth sal-
vation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glori-
ous appearing of the great God, and our Saviour
Jesus Christ—who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.”
Tit. ii. 11-14.
To listen to and obey the teachings of this unerring
Teacher—this “Wonderful Counsellor,” Is. ix. 6,
who by his grace first “ convinces us of sin,” and, as
we are willing and obedient, “ guides us into all
truth,” John xvi. 8, 13, and enables us “ to fulfil all
righteousness,”—is the essence, then, of Christianity,
—the sum and substance of the religion of Christ:
which thus resolves itself into a thing so simple and
intelligible, that the most unlettered and ignorant in
the wisdom of this world, the veriest babe in the
school of Christ, may readily comprehend it—so far,
at least, as is necessary to salvation.
It was probably the contemplation of this sublime
truth that drew from our holy Redeemer those me-
morable words, “ I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good
in Thy sight.” Matt. xi. 25-26. Yes, to believe in,
to love and follow the Saviour, “ not in word and in
tongue only, but in deed and in truth,” 1 John iii. 18,
is the religion of Christ. Without this, all that
bears the name of religion is mere profession, shadow
without substance, and hut “ as sounding brass, or as
the tinkling cymbal.” 1 Cor. xi. 1. If these things
be really so —and the Scriptures, as cited above, have
been allowed to speak for themselves —how important
that we should not merely read the plain directions


they contain, and assent to them with the understand-
ing, hut that we should reduce them to practice : as
said our blessed Redeemer, “ If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them.” John xiii. 17. Other-
wise, although nominally his followers, we may be
in no better position than were the Jews, with whom
he expostulated in the following language, “ Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me j and ye
will not come unto me that ye might have life.”
John v. 39, 40. e< No man cometh unto me except
the Father, which hath sent me, draw him.” John
vi. 44. It is by the operation of God’s grace on the
hearts of men that he draws them unto the Son;
hence, it is termed, “ the grace that brings salva-
tion.” Rom. iv. 8. For, “ there is none other name
[or power] under heaven given among men whereby
they must be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ.”
Acts iv. 12. And further, we are instructed, that
61 by grace we are saved, through faith, and that not
of ourselves, it is the gift of God,” Eph. ii. 8; and
that “ unto every one of us is given grace, according
to the measure of the gift of Christ.” Eph. iv. 7.
How diligently, then, should we cherish that inward
sense of right and wrong, those gentle whispers and
heartfelt convictions which the grace of God secretly
inspires. This grace addresses itself to the consci-
ence, it may be at times in a still, small voice, yet it
is a voice that is not only intelligible, but authorita-
tive : it is as “ a word behind us saying, ‘ This is the
way, walk ye in it,’ when we turn to the right hand,
and when we turn to the left,” in other words, when
we deviate from the path of rectitude.
What an unspeakable mercy, that God has not
left himself without a witness, no, not in the breasts
of even the rebellious children of men. How fre-
quently are these convinced of sin in their own
bosoms, by Him who is, emphatically “ the faithful and
true Witness,” Rev. iii. 14 ; and although by long


resistance to his strivings, and by turning a deaf ear
to his reproofs, it is possible to become hardened and
insensible thereto—for the Almighty hath declared
that “ His Spirit shall not always strive with man,”
—yet great is his forbearance and long-suffering to-
wards his erring creatures. Often for a long period
does his spirit “ reprove man, and set his sins in
order before him,” Ps. 1. 21, even while sinning with
a high hand, “ and drawing iniquity as with a cart-
rope,” Is. v. 18; and, whilst the day of merciful
visitation is thus lengthened, many times it is found
by the disobedient, to be indeed “ hard to kick
against the pricks,” Acts ix. 5; and if these repent
not, nor “ turn unto him from whom they have
deeply revolted,” Is. xxxi. 6, “ the word that he hath
spoken” thus often in their hearts, “ the same shall
judge them in the last day,” John xii. 48, and great
will be their condemnation.
But happy, thrice happy, are those who, while
{t Christ knocks at the door ” of their hearts, Rev.
iii. 20, close in with the gracious offers of his mercy,
and through unfeigned “ repentance towards God,
and faith towards the Lord Jesus Christ,” Acts xx.
21, evidenced by corresponding fruits, come to be
“ accepted in Him the Beloved.” Eph. i. 6.
The Holy Scriptures, those precious records of
divine truth, are chiefly to be valued in that they
point to “ Him of whom Moses in the law and the
prophets did write.” John i. 45. He himself bore
this testimony, “ they are they which testify of me.”
John v. 39. Christ declared himself to be “ the
way, the truth, and the life ; no man cometh unto
the Father but by me,” John xiv. 6; again, “My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they fol-
low me.” John x. 27.
We need not long be in doubt whether we have
come unto Christ; whether we “ have heard him,
and have been taught by him as the truth is in
Jesus,” Eph. iv. 21 ; whether, “ when our hearts were


overwhelmed," we have been “ led to the Rock that
is higher than we,” Ps. lxi. 2 ; whether “ we are still
without Christ, being strangers from the covenants
of promise, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
having no hope, and without God in the world,” Gl-
are “ now no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household
of God, being built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner-stone.” Eph. ii. 12-19-20. For,
“ whoso falleth on this stone shall be broken, Matt,
xxi. 44, said “ the Shepherd of Israel.” Gen.xlix 24.
The “ stony hearts ” of these have been taken away,
and “hearts of flesh,” Ezek. xi. 19, have been given
unto them ; and henceforth, from the depths of these
humbled and grateful hearts, ascend spiritual sacri-
fices, acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ,” 1 Pet.
ii. 5 ; even “ the sacrifices of a broken heart and
a contrite spirit.” Ps. li. 17. These have been
taught in the school of Christ, the deeply humili-
ating lesson of their own depravity; that they inherit
a fallen nature, prone to evil “ as the sparks tend
upwards.” Jer. xvii. 9. “ They know that in them-
selves, that is, in their fleshly and fallen nature,
dwelleth no good thing.” Rom. vii. 18. That even
when the “ evil heart of unbelief,” Heb. iii. 12.; “the
veil that is spread over all nations,” and which more
or less darkens all hearts, “ but, which is done away in
Christ,” Is. xxv. 7. 8. “ has been partially taken
away,” II Cor. iii. 14, 16.; and “they would fain
have done good, evil has too often been present with
them,” Rom. vii. 21.; until, in the depth of their
distress, in the very anguish of their souls, they have
been led to cry out, possibly in the words of the
Apostle, “ O, wretched man that I am ! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death ? Rom. vii. 24.
Or, with poor self-confident Peter, “ Lord save me,”
or I perish! Then it has probably been, that the
spirit or grace of Christ, known in their earlier expe


rience only as a Reprover, convincing them of sin,,
but whose prerogative it is to “ receive of the things
of Christ,” John xvi. 13-14, and to show them unto
the needy soul, has set before their spiritual view
“ Christ crucified.” 1 Cor. i. 23., 1 Cor. ii. 2. “The
ministry of reconciliation has been proclaimed unto
them;” 2 Cor. v. 18-19. “ Behold the Lamb of God,
that taketh away the sin of the world.” John i. 29.
“ They look on Him whom they have pierced,” Zech.
x. 12, and “whose spirit they have grieved,” Eph.
iv. 30; and “ believing in His name,” John i. 12,
the gracious language has been sounded in their
inmost souls by the Comforter, whom Christ promised
should be sent in his name; “ now are ye clean
through the word that I have spoken unto you;”
John xv. 3. Henceforward these are “ lively stones ”
in God’s spiritual house, 1 Pet. ii. 4-5 ; “ they are
of his husbandry, and his building.” 1 Cor. iii. 9.
“ They worship God in spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh.” Phil. iii. 3.
Whatever may be the measure of attainment in
Christian experience, or the precise spiritual process
by which the work of regeneration, so far as com-
pleted, may have been effected; for “ there are dif-
ferences of administrations, but the same Lord, and
there are diversities of operations, but it is the same
God that worketh all in all,” 1 Cor. vii. 5-6: and
therefore the work is susceptible of endless modi-
fication, as Infinite W isdom may see meet, according
to the diversified mental constitution and ever vary-
ing circumstances of man ; yet the heartfelt acknow-
ledgment of these redeemed souls will ever be one
and the same ; “not by works of righteousness that
we have done, but by liis mercy he saveth us, by the
washings of regeneration and the renewings of the
Holy Ghost.” Tit. iii. 5. Their own righteous-
nesses “ will be counted but as filthy rags,” Is.
lxiv. 6 ; and though “ careful to maintain good
works,” Tit. iii. 8-14, the most unequivocal evidence


of a living and genuine faith,” James ii. 17-22, their
sole ground of hope and of trust before God, will be
in the free and unmerited mercy of God in Christ
Jesus.
Many, however, are the secret conflicts and fiery
baptisms of these visited souls; as the Lord’s
refining hand is again and again turned upon them
for their further purification,—for the removal of
“ the dross and the tin,” Is. i. 25, and “ purifying the
silver,” Mai, iii. 3, before the great work of redemp-
tion be perfected. For “ Zion shall be redeemed
with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.”
Is. i. 27. When “ the Lord cometh to his temple
(the temple of the heart), he is like a refiner’s fire
and like fuller’s soap,” Mai. iii. 1-3; and until the
work of purification is completed, he is known as a
“ consuming fire ” Heb. xii. 29, against all that
opposes his righteous sway in the hearts of his
children. But, “ His people are made willing in
the day of his power,” Ps. cx. 3, and the work goes
forward. The first appearances of Divine grace,
although at first comparable to the “ grain of mus-
tard seed,” or “ the least of all seeds,” Matt. xiii.
31-32, progresses and becomes a great tree. “The
little leaven,” being allowed to operate, “the whole
lump becomes leavened.” Matt. xiii. 33. “ The
righteous hold on their way, and they that have
clean hands grow stronger and stronger, Job xvii.
9; and “ though many are the afflictions of the
righteous,” (arising too often from the plague of their
own hearts), yet, “ the Lord delivereth them out of
them all.” Ps. xxxiv. 19. They are “ made even
more than conquerors through Him who hath loved
them,” Rom. viii. 37, and are enabled, finally, to
“ bruise Satan under their feet.” Rom. xvii. 20.
Thus, “ the trial of their faith being much more
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be
tried with fire, will be found unto praise and honour
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ ; whom


having not seen they love, in whom, though now
they see him not, yet believing, they rejoice, with
joy unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end
of their faith, even the salvation of their souls.”
1 Pet. i. 7-9.
It is to be hoped that there are some amongst you
who are no strangers to these things, but who can
testify to the fact, that the Christian “ folio we th not
cunningly devised fables,” 2 Peter, i. 10, some who
have proved in their own experience “ that God is no
respecter of persons,” Acts x. 34-35, but that “he
chooseth the poor of this world, rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to
them that love him.” James ii. 5. The heart of
the writer would cordially salute such, in the love of
the Gospel, desiring that grace, mercy, and peace may
be multiplied unto them.
But to such as are unconcerned on the momentous
subject of their souls’ redemption, it may be asked; Is
not the salvation that is freely offered through Christ
worth a diligent enquiry and earnest search after ?
1 Peter i. 10-13, Luke xiii. 24. Is it of so little
moment that any of us should “put it from us and
count ourselves unworthy of eternal life ?” Acts
xiii. 46. “O, how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation ?” Heb. ii. 3. Trifle no longer.
“ This night thy soul may be required of thee.” Luke
xii. 20. Be aroused from your lethargy. “ Awake,
thou that sleepest, arise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light.” Eph. v. 14. “ That is
the true light which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world.” John i. 9. “He hath
shewed thee, O man! what is good, and what doth
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.”
Micah vi. 8. “ Give not sleep to thine eyes, ner
slumber to thine eyelids, until thou hast found
a place for the Lord, a habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob.” Ps. cxxxii. 4-5. The


habitation in which He delighteth to dwell, is the
sanctified and renewed hearts of the children of
men, Is. lvii. 15, lxvi. 1-2, Acts xvii. 23-2 8, John
xxiii. 17 -23, which are His temple, made up of living
stones : “ For, ye are the temple of the living God,”
as God hath said, “ I will dwell in them and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people; wherefore, come out from among them, and
be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and will be a father unto you, and
ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord
Almighty.” 2 Cor. vi. 16-18.
Slight not these “ exceeding great and precious
promises,” 2 Peter i. 4, which are made to the poor
and illiterate of this world equally with the rich and
more educated. James ii. 5, 1 Cor. i. 26-29, Luke
xvi. 22. “ Flee for refuge to lay hold of the hope set
before you in the Gospel,” Heb. vi. 18-19 ; you
will find it an anchor unto the soul. O, taste and see
for yourselves, that the Lord is good ! Ps. xxxiv. 8,
1 Peter ii. 3 ; and prove, by happy experience, that
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come.” 1 Tim. iv. 8.




