

Notified in G.O.’s dated
FRIENDLY FRUITS
and VEGETABLES
Prepared by the General Staff, L.H.Q. Australia, and issued under
the authority of the Commander Allied Land Forces S.W.P.A.
By Authority: Arbuckle Waddell Pty. Ltd., 20 McKillop St., Melbourne.




Fr iendly
FRUITS and
VEGETABLES
Prepared by the General Staff, L.H.Q. Australia, and issued under
the authority of the Commander Allied Land Forces S.W.P.A.
cAuthority
Arbuckle Waddell
Pty, Ltd.,
20 McKillop Street
Melbourne


CONTENTS
Page
I. GENERAL 5
11. WARNINGS 7
1. Poison Plants 7
2. Irritants 7
2. Water 8
4. Food Care, Cooking and Eating Utensils 8
111. FOOD PLANTS 10
5. Plants of Native Gardens 10
6. Starchy Foods 12
(a) Tubers ■ 12
(b) Sago Palm 19
(c) “Millionaire Salad” 23
id) Breadfruit 23
7. Green Vegetables 26
8. Fruit and Nuts 34
IV. SOURCES OF LIQUIDS 56
V. SOAP SUBSTITUTES 59
VI. FISH POISONS 62
VII. INJURIOUS OR POISONOUS PLANTS 64
VIII. OTHER SOURCES OF FOOD 70


Useful Plants of New Guinea and
Adjacent Islands
I. GENERAL
The purpose of this pamphlet is to provide the individual soldier with
sufficient information on jungle plants so that he will be able to “live on the
country” in the jungle without any impairment to his combat efficiency.
Every soldier must have confidence in his ability to live and fight in the
jungle for a considerable period even when “cut off” from his supply line
or base.
It is not expected that every soldier will know all the “tricks of the trade”
so that he will be able to identify and prepare all of the edible plants in the
same manner as experienced natives. The identification and preparation
of doubtful plants is not included in the scope of this pamphlet since this
would require too lengthy a study.
Most of the plants described in this pamphlet are native to Australia as
well as to the islands to the north. Actual experience in the jungle will be
necessary to facilitate the ready identification of these plants. Such instruc-
tion should be conducted in the rear training areas.
All troops should realise that natives have built up an immunity over a
long period of years so that they can eat certain foods that are unfit for
consumption by the white man, and drink untreated water from polluted


sources without suffering any ill effects. Running water is usually purer
than still water, but all drinking water must be boiled or chlorinated.
Certain plants, such as some members of the arum lily family, cycads (or
pineapple palms), and candle nuts, are often used by natives as emergency
foods, but only after special preparation. Even though these are classed as
edible, it is advisable to avoid such plants unless prepared by an experienced
person. Similarly some birds and animals can eat foods that are poisonous
to man.
In dense jungle, the height of the trees makes it difficult to collect fruit
and edible leaves, while the shade suppresses the growth of smaller plants
on the ground. The more open areas, on the margins of clearings, and along
tracks or beside streams, are the best places to search for food plants. In
lagoons, water-lily roots may be obtained.
In cooking leafy jungle foods, such as the leaves of taro or the shoots
of the edible hibiscus, the leaves are cooked in boiling water for twenty
minutes or longer until tender. Salt, if available, will improve the taste.
Tubers, such as yams, or dampers made from sago palm starch or water-lily
seeds, may be roasted or baked. Two common methods of cooking are given:
(a) Rake out the embers of a good fire. Place the material to be baked in
position and cover with ashes. Replace the live coals leaving the food to cook
for several hours.
(b) Build a fire in a small hole in the ground and thoroughly heat some
large stones. Rake out the fire. Place the food on the stones and cover it
with a layer of leaves and then with about four to six inches of earth. Allow
the food to bake for at least two hours or more, depending on size so that it
will be thoroughly cooked. The leaves prevent the soiling of the food.


II. WARNINGS
1.—POISON PLANTS
The following rules, if followed, will assist the soldier and prevent him
from suffering many hours of discomfort.
Avoid unknown fruits or tubers.
In case of doubt, cautiously apply a small piece of the plant to the inside
of the lower lip. Some plants and fruits, especially palm fruits and plants
similar to the taro, are Intensely irritating and, if eaten, may cause several
hours of extreme discomfort.
Avoid fruits similar in appearance to tomatoes, even though they may have
a pleasant odoyr and are attractive in appearance. In general, RED MEANS
DANGER IN THE JUNGLE, so that unknown red fruits and berries should
be avoided-.
Avoid all toadstools and mushrooms.
Never assume that because birds or animals eat certain foods that these
are safe for human consumption. Birds and animals can eat leaves, fruits and
tubers poisonous to man. Pigeons, for example, eat the fruit of the strychnine
tree without ill effects.
Do not suck water direct from water vines. The bark may irritate the lips.
2.—IRRITANTS
Avoid stinging trees and nettles which are common along tracks, in
clearings, and along jungle margins.
Do not carry mangoes, pawpaws or other fruit in the shirt next to the
skin. The juice is often irritating and will cause Inflammation of the skin.


3.—WATER
Avoid drinking water from streams unless it has been boiled or otherwise
sterilized. Running water is usually purer than still water. Small clear
streams that flow from uninhabited areas are the best source of drinking water.
Although natives may be able to indicate water supplies that are safe for
their drinking, many natives have built up an immunity so they may drink
polluted water without suffering any ill effects.
The best way to treat water is to use the sterilizing outfit as directed
on the inside of the tin. The directions may be summarised as follows:
Empty out any water that may be left in the water-bottle, then fill it to
the shoulder. Crush one white chlorinating tablet, add it to the water in
the bottle, and allow the contents to stand for half an hour. When this
time has elapsed, and NOT before, add one blue detasting tablet. The
water is then fit to drink.
Water vines and coconuts yield sterile drinking water which need not be
boiled or chlorinated.
4.—FOOD CARE, COOKING AND EATING UTENSILS
Keep your food, cooking and eating utensils clean. Even a small amount
of spoiled left-over food on a fork or mess kit can be the cause of
ptomaine or dysentery. Amoebic dysentery is a debilitating disease that
attacks the lining of the intestines and causes internal bleeding. The lazy
soldier “practice” of wiping mess gear with a handkerchief must be avoided
because of the fungi and germs in the jungle.
The following rules should be adhered to:—
Keep your hands, food, and utensils, clean.


Wash hands before eating. The use of soap or a soap substitute is essential.
If there is no water for washing, use your hands as seldom as possible when
eating. Keep your finger off the parts of the fruit or food you place in
your mouth.
Disinfect each drinking and eating utensil before using with a strong
chlorine or iodine solution or by boiling.
If you are forced to eat food prepared by natives, serve yourself the food
while it is boiling, on a plate that you yourself have washed and disinfected.
Clean and disinfect the top of every can and can opener (or blade of knife
used for can opener) before opening. If the contents of the can are more
than will be used at one meal, pour the desired amount from can into mess
kit. If it is necessary to save the remainder of the food, it should be left
in the original container and protected from flies and insects.
Keep flies and all other insects away from food and utensils.
Avoid native villages. These are the worst sources of disease because of
their lack of sanitation.
Cook all meat thoroughly.
Cook only enough food for one meal, as cooked food spoils quickly and
develops a fungoid growth. Do not keep cooked food for future meals.
Peel all fruits; the top of bananas should be removed before eating. The
contaminated top piece of the banana should be broken or cut off but never
bitten off.


III. FOOD PLANTS
5.—PLANTS OF NATIVE GARDENS
The following list of food plants that may be found in abandoned native
gardens is given as a guide. These foods will be easily identified as having
been under cultivation.
Fruits
Bananas (Including the plantain, a variety of banana, which is edible
when ripe and cooked), breadfruit, bukum buk (a tree with a large pear-
shaped fruit), citrus, coconuts, currant tomatoes (very small tomatoes in
clusters), custard apples, five corners (a sour yellow fruit like a small cucumber
with five angles), granadilla (a climbing vine with large smooth fruits), guava
(a yellow plum-sized fruit with many seeds), NEW GUINEA walnut (about the
size of an English walnut), pandanus, pineapple, and the ordinary tomato.
Vegetables
Cassava (manioc), cowpea (large field peas), cucumber, jack bean, maize
or corn, pumpkin, sword bean (a large flat bean), sweet potato, taro, winged
bean (about Sin. long with wings), pechay (a green leafy vegetable), sigandilla
(a five-angled long bean), and yams.
Sugar Cane (Fig. 1) (Pidgin, “Suga”; Motuan, “Tohu”)
Sugar Cane is widely cultivated. The varieties with a soft rind can be
chewed on the march and are nourishing. Chewing the juicy centre tends
to quench the thirst, but the juice only should be swallowed and not the pith.
There is a type of sugar cane known as “pit pit” or flowering sugar cane which
is often planted as a hedge. The flowers are plentiful and the unfolded flower
can be boiled as a vegetable. A syrup can be obtained by removing the hard
outer casing and cutting the cane into small portions. Boil well for several
hours.


Fig. 1. Sugar Cane — (Pidgin, “Suga”; Motua n, "Tohu”)


6.—STARCHY FOODS
(a) Tubers
Tubers are an important source of starchy food.
Yams (Fig. 2) (Pidgin, “Yam”; Motuan, “Taitu” “Maho”)
Yams are twisting plants. The plant is distinguished by its long runners
of ivy-like vines. These runners have a small dark green leaf that is easily
recognised by the veins of the leaf which radiate from the base instead of
branching off along the midrib. The leaves are oval, heart or arrow-shaped.
There are numerous kinds of yams. Some have small tubers on the climbing
stems as well as those found underground. All vary in quality. One kind
of yam has short hairy roots growing on it. The skin of one variety is of a
yellow brownish colour, while other varieties are purple. The food is creamy
or purple. Yams can easily be found by following the vine to the base of
the stem and by digging about twelve inches underground. They are usually
of a shape arid size resembling a man’s forearm. Larger yams are generally
found in sandy soil. A cluster of yams will usually feed a whole squad.
Those with an acrid taste should not be eaten unless the acridity is removed.
This can be accomplished by slicing and washing for several hours in a
running stream or through several changes of water. The fibrous types can
be grated and the fibre strained by a coarse mesh. Other fibreless types are
common, which may be boiled, steamed, roasted or baked. Yams that are
affected by disease or blight should not be eaten. The diseased plant can
be distinguished by brown lines running through it when the yam is broken
open.


Fig. 2 Yams — (Pidgin, “Yam”; Motuan, "Taitu” "Mah o”)


Taro (Pig. 3) (Pidgin, “Taro”; Motuan, “Taro”)
The taro plant is similar to an arum lily, with large dark green leaves
growing from thick light green stems. The plant is about four feet high.
Taro is found in native cultivations and grows wild in damp places. The
underground tubers can be cooked like potatoes, and the young leaves boiled
like spinach. The taro has the following characteristics:—
The leaf stalk is joined under the leaf towards the centre, and not at
the edge of the leaf blade.
There is not any creeping stem.
The common varieties of taro have a small blue or purple spot on the
leaf where the stalk joins the blade.
The tuber is a large bulb growing at the base of the leaves some inches
under the ground surface.
The skin of the taro is dark brown and the food is either white, creamy,
blue or purple. White taro makes the best food.
However, there is a variety of wild taro which has a much larger leaf
and a sharp taste. Wild taro is edible in an emergency, but a weak stomach
may reject the food. There are some wild plants of somewhat similar
appearance (such as the cunjevoi) which have an irritating juice.
To prepare taro remove the dirt from the skin. Then bake or boll. When
soft the food is ready for eating. Taro must be well cooked and never
eaten raw or half cooked.


Fig. 3. Taro — (Pidgin, “Taro”; Motuan, “Taro”)


Cassava (Pig. 4) (Pidgin, “Maniok” “Tapiok”; Motuan, “Maniok” “Tapiok”)
The Cassava does not grow wild but is cultivated. It may be found in
abandoned cultivations. The plant has long, slender, knobby stems about
six feet high with large spreading long-stalked dark green leaves divided into
three to seven narrow segments. The Cassava is a semi-shrubby perennial
with cylindrical tapering roots varying in size up to three feet long and two
inches in diameter. The roots contain a milky juice. There are two distinct
varieties the bitter and the sweet. The stems of the sweet variety have
red veins while those of the bitter Cassava are white. The sap of the bitter
Cassava contains hydrocyanic acid (prussic acid). However, it must be
carefully prepared as a food, as all varieties contain some prussic acid, and
particularly the bitter Cassava. The underground tubers must be fresh and
not stored longer than two days. The poison may be rendered innocuous by
cutting open the roots; slicing, and then leaving these chips in the sun until
thoroughly dried. The poison may also be removed by long boiling. The best
method of preparing Cassava is by grating it, then placing the grated material
in a cloth and thoroughly washing and squeezing out all the liquid which
dilutes and removes the prussic acid. This grated material is Tapioca and
should be boiled about 20 minutes before using. There are several methods
of cooking after the above-mentioned precautions have been taken. Remove
the dirt from the skin and bake. Or cut into slices and boll or fry the same
as potatoes. A good flour can be obtained by grinding dried out slices of the
Cassava root.
Palm Lily (Cordyline) (Fig. 5) (Pidgin, “Tanket”; Motuan, “Batu”)
These plants have enlarged starchy roots of varying quality. Old or slow
growing plants may be very fibrous, but the well developed young specimens
yield a good root vegetable. Grating and straining removes the fibre. These
may be prepared in the same manner as Taro or Yams.


Pig. 4. Cassava— (Pidgin, “Maniok” “Tapiok”; Motuan, “Maniok” “Tapiok”)


Fig. 5. Palm Lily — (Cordyline) Pidgin, “Tank et”; Motuan, “Balu")


Wild Ginger (Fig. 6) (Pidgin, “Goragora”; Motuan, “Kurumoni”)
There are several wild ginger plants. These may be pulled out of the
ground and the young shoots eaten raw or cooked. They have a distinctive
ginger taste. One of these wild plants, found in NEW GUINEA, is closely
related to the commercial ginger.
Water-Lily Roots (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, “Muguro”)
The fleshy roots of water-lilies (water lilies as distinct from the water
hyacinth, which is a floating plant) are obtainable in lagoons, etc. These
roots are edible raw or preferably roasted. The seeds of the large water-lilies
may be obtained after the flower has gone to seed. The seed may be eaten
either raw or roasted. If roasted, the seeds are pounded into a dough and
then roasted on coals for half an hour. The leaf stems may be skinned and
eaten raw like celery. The leaves may be burned and the ashes used to
season food.
(b) Sago Palm
(Pig. 7) (Pidgin, “Sak Sak”; Motuan, “Rabia”)
This thorny palm has an erect trunk twelve to fifteen feet high and is
found generally in valleys, along rivers, and in fresh water swamps. The
palm does not grow in altitudes over 3,000 feet elevation. The leaves are
large and sometimes thirty feet long. The palm tree attains a height of forty
feet and has a trunk at least eighteen inches in diameter. The Sago Palm
is easy to identify by the size of the trunk and the fact that the Sago Palm
grows only in swamp places or on the edge of such country where there is
a great deal of moisture.


Fig. 6. Wild Ginger — (Pidgin, “Goragora”; Motuan, “Kurumont”)


Fig. 7. Sago Palm — (Pidgin, "Sak Sale”; Motuan, “Bahia”)


The plant produces numerous sprouts around Its base. The terminal
buds, which are the undeveloped leaves at the top of the trunk, are edible.
The Sago, which is a starchy food, comes from the pithy trunk of the
palm. This pith contains large quantities of sta'rch and is a most important
commercial source. The palm is useless when mature, which is when it
produces a flowering spike at its top. To test whether a palm is suitable for
the production of sago it is advisable to cut out a small portion of the pithy
trunk with an axe. Chew a small portion of the pith and expectorate the
resulting juice into the palm of the hand. Allow the juice to remain for a
minute then slowly pour off. If a starchy sediment remains on the hand
the palm is ready to be used, but not if the sediment flows away with the
saliva.
A method of obtaining this Sago starch is to fell the palm near its base.
The trunk is then divided into convenient sections. The rind, which is about
one quarter of an inch thick, is removed, leaving the pithy brownish yellow
Inner portion exposed. This pith is crushed under water. It disintegrates
into a pulpy mass which is kneaded with water through a strainer coarse
enough to allow the sediment to pass through with the water into a container.
If no strainer is available the pith may be crushed under water which will
separate the fibre and allow the starch to settle to the bottom of the container
as a dirty white powder. After several washings, the starch can be dried.
When a sufficient quantity of sago is obtained, the sago is placed in a porous
container by wrapping the sago in large leaves or bark, then hanging up the
bundle which drains off the water. If brackish water is used the sago will have
a grey colour.
Crudely prepared sago does not keep well. In native inhabltated country
prepared sago ready to be cooked may often be found in large bark or leaf
covered bundles, weighing about 20 lbs., hanging from trees near a sago swamp


or native village. Prepared sago is a floury starchy mass that is light brown
In colour.
Sago is cooked by pouring boiling water on the sago and stirring it briskly
over a fire. The scum which appears on the surface is removed as soon as
it collects. The remainder is boiled until the sago has the consistency of
glue. In this form it is not very palatable unless sugar is added. Sago may
be wrapped in leaves and the bundles baked in the coals of a fire. Fresh
pith can be toasted and eaten, but has a rather bitter taste. Another method
is to make a dough by adding water to the sago. Salt to taste and fry the
dough.
(c) “Millionaire Salad”
An excellent vegetable is obtained from the apical bud of many palms,
especially the coconut palm (Pig. 8), fan palms, fish tail palm, and sago
palm (Kg. 7). The removal of the bud kills the palm tree. The fully
developed leaves are cut away until a soft “cabbage” is left. It may be
roasted or boiled until tender. Slender palms have a small “cabbage” often
not worth considering.
(d) Breadfruit
(Fig. 9) (Pidgin, "Kapiak”; Motuan, “Unu”)
This is a starchy fruit. The Breadfruit tree grows to a height of from
forty to sixty feet. It has large, glossy, deeply-cut leaves and bears a round,
dark green fruit, which is about the size of a melon. The breadfruit is five
to seven inches long and about four inches in diameter. It is rough on the
surface, which is dark green in colour, and has a solid white pulp containing
seeds. The better varieties are seedless, but the wild variety found in the
forests contain numerous seeds.
The common method of cooking is to bake the whole fruit in the coals of
a fire. The interior is then scooped out and has a taste comparable to that
of boiled potatoes and sweet milk. To preserve the fruit, cut into pieces and


Pig. 8. Coconut — (Pidgin. '‘Coconut” "Kulau”; Motuan. “Niu” “Niu Karu”)


Pig. 9. Breadfruit — (Pidgin, “Kapiak”; Motuan, "Unu”)


allow these to dry in the sun. Flour can be obtained by grinding the dried
pieces. The seeds or kernels are edible and, when roasted, have the flavour
of chestnuts.
7.—GREEN VEGETABLES (Pidgin, “Kumu”)
A large' variety of leafy shoots can be cooked like cabbage or spinach.
These are cooked in boiling water for twenty to thirty minutes or until tender.
In the absence of salt, sea water may be used for cooking to improve the
flavour. A tasty balanced meal may be prepared by mixing green vegetables
with rice or tomatoes. The best of these leafy vegetables are the young
taro leaves, sweet potato shoots, pumpkin leaves, pigweed, wandering jew,
albeka (the edible hibiscus with reddish green young leaves, considered the best
leaf vegetable in NEW GUINEA), fig leaf tips, Amaranthus virldis and other
amaranths (common weeds of cultivation).
Native Spinach (Pidgin, “Aibeka”; Motuan, Unknown)
A shrub with slender stems which vary in colour from green to reddish
green. The shrub grows to a height of about eight feet. It has small dark
reddish green leaves, similar to mint in shape. 801 l the young leaves in salty
water for twenty minutes or until tender.
Beans (Fig. 10) (Pidgin, “Bin”; Motuan, Unknown)
The native bean vine is a thin-stemmed creeper. The stem is green and
has a small dark green leaf. The green bean which grows from the stem
is long and narrow. The plant sometimes grows to a height of between five
to eight feet.


Pig. 10. Beans — (Pidgin, "Bln"; Motuan, Unknown)


The bean Is sliced into small pieces, then boiled in salty water for twenty
minutes or until tender. The taste of the beans is improved if cooked with
a piece of fat meat.
Cucumber (Pidgin, “Kukumba”; Motuan, Unknown)
The cucumber is the same as the apple cucumber of Australia, except that
it is yellowish-brown. The cucumber grows from a vine with long greenish-
white runners which bear green leaves divided into segments. This may be
eaten raw or fried in a maize-meal batter.
Com (Pidgin, “Corn”; Motuan, Unknown)
Com or maize kernels grow on cobs on long thin stalks which attain a
height of about eight feet. The leaves are long, thin and light green in
colour. These leaves change their colour as the corn ages, from very light
green to brown. Each ear is covered with light green ribbed leaves and has
at its tip a light brown feathery tassel. The ears of corn grow from the side
of the stalk. When the leaves are removed, the white or creamy kernel can
be seen around the cob. Young corn is the best for consumption, and the
age is Judged from the colour of the leaves enveloping the cob. Corn is an
excellent food and is often found in native cultivated areas. Remove the
leaves and boil the ears of corn in salty water for twenty minutes or until
tender. Without removing the leaves, the ears of corn may be baked in the
fire. Maize meal or corn meal is made from corn in the ripe stage after the
milky fluid is dried out from the grain. The ear is then scraped on a grate
which can be made by punching holes in a piece of tin with a nail. The
maize-meal is mixed with a cup of water to each cup of meal. Add salt and
boil slowly until it has the consistency of porridge. The maize-meal may be
used as a batter for fish and meat. In addition, maize-meal, when mixed
with a small amount of water or egg, can be fried in deep fat.


Elatostemma (Fig. 11) (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
In the mountain streams Elatostemma is often plentiful and found
growing in water among the rocks. It can be identified by Its heavy fleshy
stems and lopsided leaves. However, it should not be confused with the
jungle begonias, which do not grow in water but have a similar leaf. Jungle
begonias are not edible.
Ferns (Pig. 12) (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
The young fronds of ferns in the soft curled stage are often good green
vegetables and can also be eaten raw. Hairs can be singed off in the fire.
Watercress (Fig. 13) (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
Watercress grows in many NEW GUINEA water-courses. It Is an excellent
green vegetable when eaten raw. However, care should be exercised before
eating raw watercress, because of the possible contamination of the water from
disease organisms. The same danger also exists when eating succulent grass
shoots growing in swamps and along streams.
NEW GUINEA Cabbage (Pig. 14) (Pidgin, “Kamangoro”; Motuan,
“Übo” “Uri”)
NEW GUINEA cabbage is the name given throughout the territory to a
tree with small branches coming out in groups of young shoots of leaves at
regular intervals around the trunk. On these shoots of leaves are edible
nuts about the size and shape of a pigeon’s egg. In the common variety, the
nuts are purple or plum coloured and smooth on the outside. In another
variety, these are pink and ribbed. All contain an edible kernel. The young
leaves are considered one of the best greens. The young tips are better than
the older leaves which have a strong flavour and are more fibrous. These


Pig. 11. Elatostemma — (Pidgin. Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)


Pig. 12. Ferns — (Pidgin. Unknown; Motuan. Unknown)


Pig. 13. Watercress — (Pidgin, Unknown: Motuan, Unknown)


Fig. 14. NEW GUINEA Cabbage (Pidgin. “Kamangoro”; Motuan, “Ubo” “Uri”)


trees are usually of a pole-like growth. It Is unknown whether this Is a
natural growth or due to the lower branches having been stripped by natives
to obtain the leaves.
Pit (Pig. 15) (Pidgin, "Pitpit” "Pit”; Motuan, “Bogo” “Mimla”)
The plant resembles thin, weedly sugar cane, and Is found on the banks
of creeks and rivers. It has reddish-green stems, growing to a height of six
to ten feet. The green leaves turn yellow and dry up In the older plants.
These leaves are three to four feet long and about four to five inches wide.
Dry yellow leaves cover the reddish-green stems. Pit may be prepared by
baking the tender young shoots in hot coals. After baking the leaves are
removed and the resulting food may be described as “native asparagus.”
The leaves should be removed if the shoots are to be boiled in water until
tender.
Bamboo Shoots (Fig. 16) (Pidgin, “Mambu”; Motuan, “Baubau”
“Tuhu Tuhu-na”)
The edible bamboo grows In small clumps. The leaves are a brilliant
green, except when the bamboo Is ageing, when the leaves become yellow.
The short tender shoots at the base may be prepared in the same manner
as Pit.
8.—FRUIT AND NUTS
Considering the great amount of vegetation In the NEW GUINEA Jungles,
the number of palatable fruits and nuts is small. There are several varieties
of the sour cherry or Malta Malta which has an acid watery sap. It is not
within the scope of this pamphlet to describe completely all edible fruits
and nuts, so that this information may be obtained from friendly natives.
These should not be tasted or eaten indiscriminately because many are
poisonous.


Fig. 15. Pit — (Pidgin, “Pitpit” "Pit”; Motuan, "Bo go" "Mimia”)


Pig. 16. Bamboo Shoots — (Pidgin, “Mambu"; Motuan, “Baubau" "Tuhu Tuhu-na”)


Bananas (Fig. 17) (Pidgin, “Banana”: Motuan, “Blku”)
The banana grows in large bunches which hang from the top of the plant.
When the fresh fruit is ripe the skin of the banana is usually light yellow.
The flesh under the skin is soft but of firm consistency. The most palatable
is the small banana with a light yellow coloured skin. If the flesh of the
banana is hard, the banana should be cooked instead of eaten raw. Many
varieties of bananas are indigestible unless cooked. Bananas may be baked
in their skins in hot coals or boiled in water until tender.
Paw Paw (Fig. 18) (Pidgin, “Pawpaw”; Motuan, “Nita”)
The paw paw is a fruit of a small tree that grows to an average height
of about 12 feet. The tree has broad green leaves. The trunk is narrow
and soft and is marked in many sections by horizontal seams. The fruit
grows in a cluster from the trunk just below the branches which are at the
top of the tree. The fruit itself is about the size and shape of a small football
and changes from green to yellow when ripe. The ripe fruit is best when
eaten raw. The green fruit can be cut into slices and boiled until tender,
and has a taste similar to marrow. In addition, the paw paw seeds contain
pepsin, which acts as a purgative.
Dawa (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
The dawa grows on a large tree and has a fruit similar to an under-
sized green orange. This may be eaten raw after the green outer covering and
inner white section are removed. The fruit on the dawa is like jelly and has
a large nut inside.
Malay Apple (Pidgin, “Laulau”; Motuan, Unknown)
The Malay apple grows on a tree with a dark glossy leaf about five Inches
long by two inches wide. The tree bears a pink flower and a fruit about the


Pig. 17. Bananas —(Pidgin. “Banana”: Motuan, “Biku”)


Pig. 18 Paw Paw —(Pidgin, "Pawpaw"; Motnan, Nita"


size of an apple, which grows from the branches. Laulau is white when
unripe and red when ripe, with the appearance similar to a flattened quince.
The fruit is eaten like an apple after the red peeling is removed. When the
tree starts to bear fruit, there is a carpet of red needles which fall on to the
ground.
CAUTION: Although red is a danger sign in the jungle, the Malay apple
can be identified by the carpet of red needles.
Ton (Pidgin, “Ton”; Motuan, Unknown)
A large tree which produces clusters of fruit-like small plums, which
change colour from green to russet to black as the fruit ripens. The flesh
is the edible portion of the fruit.
Pineapples (Pidgin, “Painap”; Motuan, Unknown)
The pineapple grows from the centre of a small plant which has long
stiff green leaves. The edge of the leaves are spiked. The pineapple when
ripe has a bright golden colour usually tinged with red around the base of
the small, round, brown projections which make up the outer surface of the
fruit.
Mangosteen (Pig. 19) (Pidgin, “Bio-Bio”; Motuan, Unknown)
There are many varieties of inferior mangosteen in the jungle. All are
extremely acid with a soft or watery pulp. They are round in appearance
and similar to the large plum, and vary from green to purple in colour. They
are crowned at the top with a dark rayed or lobed disc.
Mango (Pig. 20) (Pidgin, “Mango”; Motuan, “Valval'’)
The common tree has a dense spreading and glossy foliage and averages
from thirty to forty feet in height. The leaves have pointed tips and are dark
green in colour. The fruit is oval shaped about four to five Inches long and


Fig. 19. Mangosteen — (Pidgin, “Bio-Bio”; Motuan, Unknown)


Pig. 20. Mango — (Pidgin. “Mango”; Motuan. "Valval")


two to three inches in diameter. When ripe the fruit is yellow. It is juicy
and has a slightly tart taste.
Wild Mango (Pidgin, “Mango belong bush”; Motuan, “Uda Vaivai”)
The wild mango is Inferior to the cultivated varieties. It is edible but
stringy, and possesses a strong turpentine taste.
Citrus Fruits (Pidgin, “Muli”; Motuan, "Slporo”)
Wild citrus trees bear fruit of poor quality and of an unpleasant taste.
These fruits are similar to domestic varieties of limes, lemons and oranges.
They may be easily identified by their odour.
Fig Trees (Pig. 21) (Pidgin, “Ficus”; Motuan, “Magi”)
Pig trees are abundant in all jungles below 5,000 feet elevation. The fruit
can be eaten, but it is often of poor quality. In some varieties the fruits are
low down on the trunk and even on surface “roots” running along the ground.
Fandanus (Fig. 22) (Pidgin, “Marita” “Karoka”; Motuan, “Geregere”)
The Pandanus is one of the trees most frequently found along the coasts
of NEW GUINEA and other islands of the Pacific. It usually grows in very
moist soil and can be found in altitudes up to 10,000 feet near the mountain
streams and creeks. The Pandanus has long narrow leaves, saw-like on the
edge and midrib. The leaves are plaited by the natives into baskets and
other domestic articles. The trunk is covered with small spikes very painful
to the touch. The fruit grows in large red oval-shaped heads, which break
up into small pieces when ripe. The surface is rough and covered by several
small round projections. Upon breaking open the pieces they will be found
to contain a series of small, grey, narrow, oval containers closely packed


Fig. 21. Fig Trees — (Pidgin, "Ficus”; Motuan, "Magi”)


Pig. 22. Pandanus —(Pidgin, "Marita” “Karoka”: Motuan, "Gere gere”)


together. These small containers surround the seed which contains an oily
juice. The juice, which may be sucked from the seed when ripe, has a rich
“fruity” or “winey” smell. The seeds are nutritious and vary In quality, but
are rather difficult to extract. Sometimes a machette or stone is necessary
to extract these seeds. It is best to dry the small grey containers in the sun
before cracking open to obtain the seed.
Mountain Fandanus (Pidgin, “Marita” “Aran”; Motuan, “Vani”)
In the mountain jungles, a different type of Pandanus (Fig. 23) is found,
which has a narrow cone that is much prized by the natives. This may be
either boiled or roasted. If roasted it should be soaked in water for two
hours before roasting.
Coconut (Pig. 8) (Pidgin, “Coconut” “Kulau”; Motuan, "Niu” “Nlu Karu”)
The coconut palm is a tall, slender palm found along the coastal area
and inland up to an altitude of about 1,000 ft. elevation. The coconuts grow in
clusters at the top of the palm and fall when ripe. The coconut is green
in its early stages and ripens to a medium brown. The flesh of the coconut
may be eaten raw in all stages of maturity. The best food Is found in the
ripe brown nut. The edible portion of the nut is the white flesh. The pithy
substance, often found in the centre of the ripe nuts, is a pleasant food which
may be eaten raw, but does not possess a very high food value. The liquid
in the centre of the young nut is a pleasant thirst-quenching drink. The
flesh of the coconut is best eaten raw, but it can be grated and boiled with
sago.
Galip (Fig. 24) (Pidgin, “Galip”; Motuan, "Okari”)
Galip (or Narli Nut, also known as Nl, Sailor and Nungi Nut) is the
principal nut of the SOLOMONS and NEW GUINEA. A large tree having a
dense foliage with its branches only at the top. These trees attain a height


Pig. 23. Mountain Pandanus— (Pidgin. “Marita” “Aran”; Motuan. “Vani”)


Fig. 24. Galip — (Pidgin, "Galip”; Motuan, "Okari")


of forty to fifty feet with a light grey trunk about 2 feet in diameter. The
Galip usually grows near the coast. The nuts mature about March, April and
May. The kernel is covered with a purple black husk, when ripe, closely
resembling a prune in appearance. Fallen nuts are devoid of this husk. The
nut Itself is about two inches long, nearly flat, with a slight round curve on
one side and rising to an angle on the other. The kernel is very oily and
has a fattening effect on the natives in the areas where this nut forms one
of the chief foods. The trees are large and bear heavy crops. The branches
are often bent down from the weight of the nut.
Okari Nut (Fig. 25) (Pidgin, “Tallsa” “Tails”; Motuan, "Okari’)
The Okari nut is one of the largest and most palatable and nutritious of
all the wild nuts in the PAPUAN jungle. They are encased in a thick fibrous
coating of a dull dark red with a smooth outside when fresh. The outermost
covering quickly decays and is generally absent from the fallen nuts which
leave the rough fibres exposed. The oily kernel has the flavour of a large
almond of good quality.
JAVA Almond (Fig. 26) (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
The JAVA Almond grows wild on the edge of the jungle near the sea.
The fruit when ripe varies from dark red to black. It is flat angled and
rounded on the edges. Although it is of the same type as the Okari nut it
is much smaller and inferior in flavour. The tree Is often planted around
townships, government stations, etc., because of the wide spreading shade
and its ability to grow in the sandy soils near the sea.
The Alla (Pig. 27) (Pidgin, “Alla”; Motuan, “Siaea”)
The Aila tree (known as Baravu in the SOLOMONS) is a large tree often
found in the rain-forests near the sea. It bears a large somewhat flattened


Fig. 25. Okari Nut —(Pidgin, "Tall sa” “Tails”; Motuan. “Okari”)


Fig. 26. JAVA Almond — (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)


Fig. 27. The Aila — (Pidgin. "Aila”; Motuan. “Siaea”)


pod about three Inches In diameter. The Aila nut is very similar to the Galip
nut, but less common. The kernel may be eaten after roasting.
Wild Passion Fruit (Pig. 28) (Pidgin, “Passiflora”; Motuan, “Asemu”)
Wild passion fruit is common in clearings. The species with the fruit
surrounded by a spidery calyx can be eaten raw. The calyx is a whorl of leaves
forming the outer case of the fruit.
Wild Raspberries (Fig. 29) (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)
Wild raspberries similar to the domestic variety are abundant along many
tracks and clearings. These are palatable but insipid in taste.


Fig. 28. Wild Passion Fruit — (Pidgin, “Passifl ora”; Motuan,"Asemu")


Fig. 29. Wild Raspberries— (Pidgin, Unknown; Motuan, Unknown)


IV. SOURCES OF LIQUIDS
Water Vines (Fig. 30)
Good drinking water may be obtained from many of the woody vines in
the jungle. Complete sections of water vines cut Into two or three foot
lengths will give small quantities of water in a short time. Vine sections
must be cut at both ends to ensure the flow of water. Some types of vines
are useless, but the type of vine with large pores contains the most water.
The best procedure is to cut vines of differing varieties, especially those that
are pliable. When one is found to drip, divide it into pieces about two feet
long, and stand it upright in a vessel to drain. The water may be blown out
or sucked if the bark is not irritating. Such water is sterile and does not
need chlorinating. The best types of vines are the grape vines and some of
the lawyer vines. Tree roots with open grain may yield some water if vines
cannot be found.
Coconuts (Fig. 8)
The milk from coconuts is another source of liquid and makes a refreshing
drink, especially the milk from immature nuts.
Nipa Palm Nut (Fig. 31)
The trunkless Nipa palm, which grows in salt water as a mangrove, has
clusters of small nuts which contain a small amount of palatable liquid. This
is the only palm that grows in tidal water.


Fig. 30. Water Tines


Fig. 31. Nipa Palm Nut


v. SOAP SUBSTITUTES
Certain plants produce a lather when pounded and rubbed with water.
These make an efficient soap substitute. The two most important and easily
identified species are the Red Ash and the Matchbox Bean.
The Red Ash (Fig. 32)
The Red Ash is a tree which grows to a height of about one hundred
and twenty feet. The leaves and bark from the young saplings are usually
more convenient for Identification and collection. The best means of identi-
fication is by the leaves, which are glossy green with a white or silver under
surface. A handful of leaves or bark chips rubbed vigorously with water will
provide a lather. A soapy solution may be also obtained by boiling the
leaves or bark in water.
The Matchbox Bean (Fig. 33)
The Matchbox Bean is a stout woody vine of the jungle bearing a flat
woody pod, two to four feet in length. Each pod contains from ten to thirty
seeds nearly two inches in diameter. Seeds often fall out and take part of
the pod with them, which results in a vacant space or “window” in the pod.
A soapy solution will be obtained when the bark or small twigs are pounded
and rubbed together in water.


Fig. 32. The Red Ash


Fig. 33. The Matchbox Bean


VI. FISH POISONS
Fish poisons should be used only in cases of emergency because these
destroy young fish as well as those of useful size. Pish obtained in this manner
are edible and are not in the slightest degree injurious to human beings.
There are numerous species of fish-poisoning plants and, in general, those
which give a good lather when rubbed in the water are most effective. The
leaves, bark, or both, are pounded between stones and thrown into pools of
slowly moving streams. Some stupified fish generally come to the surface
after about an hour and a half. The larger fish may be only stunned and
not come to the surface, but these can be easily caught. The following fish
poisons are the most frequently used:—
Red Ash (Fig. 32)
The glossy green leaves with a white or silver under-surface lather readily
in water. Both leaves and bark of the Red Ash may be used.
Matchbox Bean (Pig. 33)
A woody vine of the jungle with a flat woody pod up to four feet in length.
Both bark chips and twigs which have been crushed may be used.
Barringtonia (Fig. 34)
A tree with a fibrous, woody, pear-shaped fruit with prominent angles.
The bark is beaten into shreds. Large Barringtonia fruits often found floating
or cast up along the shore are grated. Natives often use both fruits and bark.
“NEW GUINEA Dynamite” (Derris)
Woody climbers with clusters of small pea-shaped flowers and with seeds
in papery pod. The roots are pounded and when thrown into water a milky
fluid exudes. There are several species of Derris. One variety may be found
climbing among the mangroves. It can be used in salt water as well as
fresh. Although potent as a fish poison, the edible qualities of the fish are
not affected.


Fig. 34. Barringtonia


VII. INJURIOUS OR POISONOUS PLANTS
Ant Plants (Pig. 35)
Ant plants are often found on the branches of mangroves and other
coastal plants, and even in some trees in the mountain jungles. These consist
of a tuber about the size of a football with a small tuft of leaves on top. The
tuber is riddled with cavities inhabited by ants, which will attack vigorously
when the plant is disturbed.
Thorny and Prickly Plants
Thorny and prickly plants should be avoided. The lawyer vine, or rattan
(Fig. 36) is one of the most troublesome.
Irritating Hairs
Certain vines in the jungle have velvety pods covered with the minute
hairs which cause intense itching if brushed against. If these hairs cannot
be picked out, shaving is the next best treatment.
Stinging Trees (Pig. 37)
The Gympie tree is the most common. There are several types of these
stinging trees and nettles. All types have large velvety heart-shaped leaves
covered with stinging hairs. When these come in contact with the skin, a
violent stinging sensation develops, and if a large area is affected the pain is
intolerable and in extreme cases even death may result. The pain lasts for
a long time and recurs when the affected part is washed, even weeks after-
wards. The irritation is due to the penetration of flinty hairs and the
injection of formic acid. The best antidote is the application of an alkaline
agent such as carbonate of soda or ammonia. If these are not available,
moistened wood ashes may be used as a substitute. Emergency treatment


Fi g. 35 Ant Plante


Fig. 36. Thorny and Prickly Plants


Fig. 37. Stinging Tree (Gympi e)


which will give some relief is to rub the affected parts with the inner bark of
the stinging tree itself or the lather made from the bark or leaves of the Red
Ash. Stinging trees grow to a large size but the small specimens with leaves
near the ground are the most dangerous. When cutting these trees, care must
be exercised to avoid inhaling any flying hairs which will cause an intense
irritation of the membranes of the nose and throat. To prevent this, a
handkerchief should be tied over the nose and mouth.
Stinging Nettle
Stinging Nettle causes a similar irritation but is not as dangerous as the
stinging trees. Generally these occur in clearings and along tracks. Treat-
ment is the same as the antidote for the stinging tree.
Irritant Saps
The juice of the milky mangrove (the only mangrove which has this white
sap) causes severe pain and sometimes blindness if it gets into the eyes. It
may produce blistering on the skin. One tablespoon, if swallowed, is a fatal
dose. The juice of pawpaws and of mangoes may cause inflammation when
left in contact with the skin. These fruits should never be carried in the
shirt next to the skin. Severe irritation is caused by the sap and also of
the crushed tissues of fruits of certain palms, especially the fish tail palm
and the sugar palm. The fruits of unknown palms must be handled with
caution, particularly when crushed or decayed, because many have irritating
crystals. Many plants of the taro family produce similar irritation, due to
minute crystals of calcium oxalate. Plants of this type should not be chewed
or their tubers used for food unless properly prepared. The common cunjevoi,
or green lily, is one of these plants.


Poisonous Fruits and Berries
Certain animals and birds can eat plants poisonous to human beings.
Food which shows signs of having been eaten by animals or birds cannot be
taken as a positive indication that it is fit for human consumption. As
already stated, birds can eat the berries of the strychnine tree which are fatal
to man. Tomatoes grow wild in certain jungle clearings, but any other
tomato-like fruit is apt to be poisonous and must be avoided. Yams with
an acrid taste should not be eaten unless properly prepared. Any yam that
stings the inside of the lips or tip of the tongue when a small piece is applied
should not be eaten unless properly prepared and cooked, but without experience
such preparation should not be attempted. The bitter cassava contains prussic
acid and is poisonous unless the tuber is shredded and properly washed and
dried before cooking. The preparation of all such doubtful foods should
be attempted only by an expert. Although mushrooms and many toadstools
are good food, it is much safer to avoid all mushrooms and toadstools because
some are poisonous and many are indigestible.


VIII. OTHER SOURCES OF FOOD
While the scope of this pamphlet is to describe the useful plants, there
are many other sources of food. Space does not permit more than the listing
of such food.
Game
Wild game is an important source of food supply and should be utilized
when the tactical situation permits.
Coastal Food
All sea food is high in food value and will assist in maintaining life for
an indefinite period. The more important and readily accessible are as follows:
Fish (Pidgin, “Pis”)
Most fish are edible and can be obtained by fishing, spearing, shooting,
blasting or poisoning.
Oysters and Clams (Pidgin, “Kina ’)
These are usually found in shallow water and generally more plentiful
at the mouths of creeks. They may be eaten either raw or cooked in various
ways.
Turtles
Turtles are an excellent source of food. Turtles may be caught on the
beach when they leave the water to lay their eggs in the sand above the high
water mark. The turtle leaves a clearly defined double trail from the edge
of the water to the nest where she lays the eggs. By walking along the
beach after each tide this track may be easily found and the nest located.
The inexperienced should shoot the turtle rather than attempt to capture it.


The turtle has an excellent steak which can be prepared in the same manner
as beef or mutton. Some turtles have a poisonous bag under the neck which
should not be eaten. Turtle nests are found generally in the sand about
ten to twenty feet above the high water mark. The eggs may be cooked in
the usual manner, but the white part remains watery.
Crabs (Pidgin, “Kuka”)
Sea crabs are edible and should be prepared by removing the legs. 801 l
the remainder of the crab in sea water for ten to twenty minutes, depending
on the size. While none of the crab is poisonous, only the white meat should
be eaten.
CAUTION: All land crabs are poisonous.
Prawns (Pidgin, “Kindam”)
Prawns are normally found under the stones of mountain creeks. Sea
prawns are found at low tide in shallow water and are more plentiful at the
mouths of creeks. The prawns should be boiled for about fifteen minutes and
the outer covering removed before eating. Sea-slugs and periwinkles also
have some food value and are prepared in the same manner as prawns.


