

Reprinted from “ Pharmaceutical Notes and News ”
Friends
OF
Armenia
Published by :
ELLIOTT BROTHERS LIMITED
Sydney and Brisbane




FRIENDS OF ARMENIA.
The Persecution
of Armenians did not cease with the armistice.
The Turks seem to have neglected to inform their outlying'
forces that the terms of the armistice demanded the prompt
cessation of all hostile attacks, and the surrender of guns,
etc., to the nearest Allied military, commander. Fighting has
An Armenian Refugee Camp.
continued in many parts of Arabia and of Asia Minor, and
many Armenians have lost their lives since the beginning of
the year.
The Allies Have Demanded
that fighting shall cease forthwith, and that com-
plete surrender shall be enforced by the Turkish Government
upon all within their contol; but, unfortunately, Turkey has
never had a great deal of control over the petty chiefs in the


outlying parts of her Empire in Asia Minor, and possibly
punitive expeditions' may have to be sent against disobedient
chieftains before order is restored and Armenians and others
are secure in the possession of life and property.
The Heal Reason
for the conduct of the Turks is their bitter
hatred of Christian settlers in their Empire. They have been
tolerated in the more civilized parts, but in the outlying dis-
tricts it has been considered a virtue and a sure passport
to Paradise to convert or to slay a Christian. The women
were given their choice of renouncing the Christian Faith and
entering a Turkish Harem, or suffering violation, torture and
death. Is it to be wondered that vast numbers of Armenian
women drowned themselves rather than submit to the terms
of their enemies? Babies were carried about on the spears
of the soldiers. Girls were crucified to trees, and even the
walls of houses. Boys were taken away into slavery, and
treated with the most terrible cruelty if they would not
renounce their faith. They did not yield without a struggle.
A number of girls escaped by shaving their heads and dress-
ing as Turkish boys or soldiers. It was from them that the
worst news was brought. Some of these girls had even been
in the Turkish Army, and had had wonderful escapes from
death. They braved the hardships of their lot for two pur-
•poses. One was to carry the news to the Allies of the real
state of things in the districts from whence they came, and
the other was to stir up the feelings of the Allies, so that out
of pity for the terrible plight of the persecuted Armenians,
relief would be sent, and pressure would be brought to bear
upon the Turks to compel them to suppress the persecutions
and restore order in the districts where Turks were still
plundering and slaying.
The Church of Armenia
was founded in Apostolic times. She was one of
the first nations to make Christianity the national religion.
Her churches date back to the year A.D. 34, and at one time
Armenia so grew in power and splendour, as to be regarded
as one of the most advanced people of their day.
Their Religious Persecution
first came from Persia in A.D. 451, when Yesgerd
11. was on the Persian throne, and issued a decree “that all
peoples and tongues living under the protection of the Persian
Emperor should abandon their heresies, and worship the
sun.”
Prior to this the Armenians had been conquered by the
Babylonish power, and had sought assistance from Persia.
Minermish, the Grand Vizier of the Persian Court, wrote a
long letter to the Armenians, charging them to change their
religion, and the Armenian reply is still preserved.
“No one can move us from our belief, neither angels, nor


men, nor fire, nor the sword. Here below we will choose
no other God, and in Heaven above no other Lord but Jesus
Christ.” They fought hard in those days for their religious
liberty, and won it against enormous odds. Their brave
leader, Prince Vartan, fell, mortally wounded in the battle,
and with his dying breath he exhorted his followers never
to yield to their persecutors.
After their victory they built him a magnificent tomb at
Eurmis, in Persian Armenia, but the Persian authorities
would not allow it to be kept from falling into decay, though
the remains still stand.
The Armenian Quarter of the City of Adana, in Asia Minor,
After the Massacre of the Inhabitants.
The Church Held the People
together, and united them again and again. In
1375 the Turks and the Huns began their work of persecution,
and have systematically slaughtered the Armenians for a
period of five hundred years. The wonder is that any of them
were left at the beginning of the present war. But in spite
of all they had suffered there were still over two million
inhabitants of Armenia, while all over the world you may
meet them, as dispersed as the Jews, and far more perse-
cuted. The Armenian Church sent missionaries to India
sixty-three years before the British took possession of the
country.


The Home Life
in Armenia was an ideal one. The men did all
the work outside the house, and the women devoted their
time to making- the home comfortable and beautiful. They
were the educators of their children, and taught them Bibli-
cal stories with their national traditions. They spun the
cloth used by them for the making of their husband’s and
children’s clothing. One educated Armenian in America has
recently written of some of the scenes of his home life. He
recalls how his mother used to get the children together of
an evening, and read to them the story of Job and of his
sufferings and his deliverance.
A High Tribute
has been paid to the Armenians by the Turks.
In consequence of their sturdy independence and their love
of country, their home life, their fidelity to their pledged
word, the Turks called them “The Anglo-Saxons of the East.”
There is something in the Armenian life and character
that should irresistibly appeal to the British in all parts of
the world. The Mothers of Israel were celebrated in their
day, and the Isrealitish, mother is still a pattern of all that
a mother should be. But the Mothers of England have made
that nation what it is to-day. It has been the mothers’ in-
fluence that has moulded the characters of the best and
bravest of our nation. In Armenia the same type of mother
is to be found, bringing up her children to be good, her
daughters to be diligent and modest and virtuous, her boys
to be pure and strong and brave and valiant for their
country.
We Are Asked to Help
a noble race.. They are a people akin to our-
selves in many respects, only saving that we have never had
to endure what these people have endured for their country
and for their faith and for their homes in their native land.
What will Australia do for these people? We have helped
the French and the Servians and the Belgians, but here is a
people whose bitter cry comes to our ears. A people worthy
of our respect and our assistance. Surely we cannot turn a
deaf ear to their cry.
We could write a big book on the woes of Armenia, and we
could advance many reasons why we should help to restore
this Ancient Christian Nation to its former place among the
peoples of the earth. When Germany started the war in
August, 1914, she sought to open a passage from the Bos-
phorus to the Persian Gulf, right through Armenia, and if
she had willed she could have stopped the crimes in the
country with little effort on her part. Instead of this she
taught the Turks to deport the Armenians from their homes
and to torture them. In .1915 an entire village was deported by
Turkish and German officers.


Armbnians in U.S.A. :
are numerous, and are respected. One of this
people, Nishan Der-Hagopain, has graphically depicted the
devastation of his country for American readers. He was
born and educated in Armenia. He, received, his military
education in his native land, and saw much fighting in her
service. He returned in 1915, and took part in many actions
in which the Armenians defended their land and possessions
Mush, an important Armenian Town on the Euphrates.
The Scene of a Terrible Massacre of Armenians.
from the Turks. Thus, he writes: “This is not war. It is
destruction of civilized humanity. To-day, in Turkey, the
Armenians are absolutely destroyed. Their wealth, their pro-
perty, their lives, are taken.
“My race is face to face with destruction, and its helpless-
ness cries mightily to humanity for immediate and effectual
aid. The situation is unprecedented in history. If it is per


mitted to continue unchecked, it will cast an eternal cloud
over the twentieth century.”
Who Will Help?
Ho riot say this is of no cdncern of yours. The
need of these people is so desperate that they can hardly
Tiridates of Armenia.
The First Christian King of the World. In 302 this King
made Christianity the State Religion.
appeal to you for help. Think of what we have escaped in
Sunny New South Wales, where never a cannon has been
fired in anger, and where our fields have never been stained


by blood of warfare. We, in thankfulness for all the good
that has been our lot, should not, nay, cannot, turn a deaf
ear to the cry for help from Armenia.
The Patriarch of the Armenian Church at Jerusalem.
The. Story op Armenian Persecution
is a long and a terrible tale. This nation has
been tried in the fire of affliction, and has borne its sufferings


bravely. Nearly three fourths of the survivors of centuries
of oppression have fallen victims to German cunning ahd
Turkish cruelty. A remnant is left. Their strength may be
weak and their numbers few, but their courage is unabated.
We cannot help admiring a people who might have purchased
safety at the expense of their principles, and who yet have
been true to the traditions of their ancestors and the faith
of their forefathers. We should esteem it a privilege, as well
as a duty, to assist in re-establishing this noble race in their
own land. * n
« jf ■* ,
To Protect the Weak
has ever been sthe pround boast of the British
nation. If ever a nation deserved and needed the help of a
strong hand in her dire need that nation is Armenia.
The Opportunity
is given to Sydney people to assist in restoring
this oppressed and suffering nation. Who has the heart to
refuse to do something in this worthy cause? The need is
urgent. Bet our response be worthy of the cause for which
we plead, and the people who dwell in “The Brightest Gem
in the Crown of the British Empire.”
Contributions should be sent to the undersigned,
by whom they will be gratefully acknowledged.
R. W. RICHARDS
(Lord Mayor), President.
The Ho* l°F° Earp } Joint Hon ' Tr6asnrers '
Mr. W. a Layton | Joint Hott ' Salaries.


Commanded by Her Royal Highness
Princess Victoria to proceed to France
Professor RANDAL WOODHOUSE writes of the
wonderful benefit derived from CLEMENTS TONIC
(,
Professor Randal Woodhouse, is one
of the most widely-known authorities on voice-
production, singing and teaching in Australia.
In London, during the war, he was commanded
by H.R.H. Princess Victoria to proceed to
Prance, where he sang at 178 concerts in hos-
pitals and camps.
He has occupied the important position of
Senior Professor of Singing and Examiner at
the Royal Irish Academy of Music, Dublin, Pro-
fessor of the London College of Music, London,
and Professor of Dominican Convents, Zion Hill,
Black Rock, and Eccles Street, Dublin.
Professor Woodhouse was four times elected
chairman of the Vocal Science Conferences, held
by the Incorporated Society of Musicians, Glas-
gow and Manchester.
During the celebrations attendant on the in-
auguration of the Commonwealth, Professor
Woodhouse, at the direction of Sir John See,
controlled the musical festivities at that historic
period.
Professor Woodhouse, writing on the question
of health, states that during his period at the
front, also in London hospitals, he saw many
harrowing sights, and, returning to Australia on
a troopship with 600 wounded Australian
soldiers, his nerves completely gave away.
After a brief period here he took CLEMENTS
TONIC on the advice of a benefited friend, and
it proved the turning point to health, and he is
healthier than he has been for years. Conclud-
ing he says:— ,
“I think that a carefully-studied diet, assisted
by CLEMENTS TONIC, would soon make quite
a lot of ailing people have quite a different out-
look of life.”
Always keep this medicine in the house. It does
good because it is good. All Chemists and
. Stores sell it in Australia and New Zealand.


Your relief from
Insomnia, Anaemia
Indigestion, Brain-fag,
Debility or Nerve
Breakdown
' - '
Clemants Tonic
Get it to-day, and get well
All Chemists and Stores sell it Everywhere
Printed by Shipping- Newspapers Ltd., 16 Bond St., Sydney.
