

FRIVOLOUS PEEPS
AT
INDIA
ETHEL KEELLY




FRIVOLOUS PEEPS
AT
INDIA








FRIVOLOUS PEEPS
AT INDIA
BY
ETHEL KELLY
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
PROPY. LTD.,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE
AND BRISBANE.


DEDICATION
ON leaving for India all my friends desired me to
write them from each place I visited ; this is an
impossibility if one is to have the joy, not the work, of
living in a brief winter tour. The thought then occurred
to me to make a collection of a series of letters written
to different people, but open to all to read who care
to buy the book. I have endeavoured to see new
things in old places, and to record the familiar aspects
of each town for the benefit of those who I know will
neither see India with their own eyes, nor read any of
the exhaustive studies already published on this fascin-
ating country. This little book does not pretend, to
enlighten or improve the mind thirsting for archaeological
or geographical knowledge, but to give a truthful photo-
graph of social India as I saw it. To do this, names must
appear, but I trust I am not like the early amateur
photographers who “ did justice without mercy.” The
names set down are only inserted as milestones of
kindness, and I trust I may be forgiven by the owners
for the personal tone they infuse.
ETHEL KELLY
Commissioner’s House,
LUCKNOW.
February sth, 1911 .


CONTENTS
Letter Page
I. COLOMBO 1 i
11. BOMBAY 21
111. AHMEDABAD AND JLYPORL 35
IV. LUCKNOW (Army Cup Week) ... ... 63
V. FATLPUR SIKRI 79
VI. AGRA 87
VII. DELHI 11 I
VIII. ALLAHABAD (United Provinces Exhibition)... 137
IX. DARJEELING 147
X. CALCUTTA 155
XI. BENARES 171
XII. LAHORE • ... 187
XIII. RAWAL PINDI 197
XIV. UMBALLA 209
XV. LUCKNOW 218.




ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
Two Views of Colombo ... ... ... ... ... 13
Victoria Terminal, Bombay ... ... ... ... ... 19
Entrance to Mahim Woods, Bombay ... ... ... 27
Rani Sepree’s Tomb ... ... ... ... ... 33
15th Century Mosque, Ahmedabad ... ... ... 33
Hathi Singh Temple, Ahmedabad ... ... ... ... 37
Sidi Said's Mosque, Ahmedabad ... ... ... ... 39
A Street, Jeypore ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Amber —Palace and Fort ... ... ... ... ... 45
Astronomical Observatory, Jeypore ... ... ... ... 47
Entrance to Palace, Amber ... ... ... ... ... 51
Courtyard of the Palace, Amber ... ... ... ... 53
Doorway in the Palace, Amber ... ... ... ... 55
Interior of a Room in the Palace, Amber ... ... ... 57
The Residency ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Lucknow ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Chuttar Munzil Club, Lucknow ... ... ... ... 69
The Imambarah, Lucknow ... ... ... ... ... 69
Tomb of Salim Chisti, Fatepur Sikri ... ... ... ... 77
Praying-place in the Palace, Agra ... ... ... ... 85
Bedroom of the Lady of the Taj, Agra ... ... ... 89
Interior of the Pearl Mosque, Agra ... ... ... ... 91
Outside Pillars of Akbar’s Red Sandstone Room, Agra ... 95
The Jama Masjid, Agra ... ... ... ... ... 97
Resting-place of the Koh-i-nur, Sikandra Bagh ... ... 101
Hall of Public Audience, Fort Agra ... ... ... 103
Itimad-ud-daulah’s Tomb, Agra ... ... ... ... 103


Page
The Taj Mahal, Agra... ... ... ... ••• 105
The Royal Baths, Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 110
The Delhi Gate to the Fort, Delhi ... ... ... 110
Where the celebrated Peacock Throne stood ... ... 114
Fountain discovered and restored by Lord Curzon, Fort Delhi 1 14
Kutub Minar and Iron Pillar, Delhi ... ... ... ... 123
The Tomb of Altamsh, Delhi ... ... ... 127
Ruins of Tughlakabad ... ... ... ... ... 131
Section of the Kutub Minar... ... ... ... ... 131
Native Spinner—Allahabad Exhibition ... ... 136
Woman Grinding Corn ... ... ... ... 136
On the Road to Darjeeling ... ... ... 146
Mongolian-looking Hindoos at Darjeeling ... 150
On the Road to Darjeeling ... ... ... 150
Benares on the Ganges—showing the burning-ghats ... 170
The devout “contemplating” under fibre umbrellas, Benares 175
The Author being carried to the Maharajah’s boat ... ... 183
A Native Bed ... ... ... ... 196
The Street Barber—Rawal Pindi ... ... ... ... 196
Hindoos at Umballa ... ... ... ... ... ... 208
The Dhobi Wala 208
The Turkish Gate to the Bazaar ... ... ... ... 217
The Bailey Guard Gate, Lucknow ... ... ... ... 217
My Last Glimpse of Native Lucknow ... ... ... 229


COLOMBO.
THE GRAND ORIENTAL HOTEL,
COLOMBO , CEYLON.
Daddy dear, —
The sun shone hotly as the “Malwa” rounded the
course necessary to enter the open space between the
break-water wall, constructed to protect the Harbor from
the monsoonal storms. Even now, November 9th, the
sea dashed high against it, sending sheets of surf well
over. The natives in dug out catamarans, their brown
bodies only covered by a loin cloth, chattered like mon-
keys, and the moment the ship came up to her anchorage,
dozens of quaintly dressed Tamils came aboard, selling
native lace, an industry taught their women by the French
Nuns. Others had post-cards, or the net scarves of Port
Said, with a pattern welted in of silver; but all with
their heads quaintly dressed or ornamented.
Many wear long hair dressed up at the neck like a
woman’s; the crown of the head is surmounted by a
band of tortoise-shell that encircles the back, but has an
open space across the brow. These men wore a strip of
cloth wrapped about their legs reaching to the ground,
and a cotton jacket; Hindoos with turbans of red, blue,
yellow, or white frequently had the sarong draped. The
Parsees wore quaint, stiff gabardines, like the Hebrew
Priests, but all chattered as noisily as the crows, who


boldy lit upon the ship’s rigging, and even darted on
the deck if any article of food presented itself.
We transhipped to a launch and soon landed, and in
a second or two arrived at this Hotel, which is directly
opposite the landing quay, which was lined with jinrick-
shaws. The delightful little rubber-tyred carriages, with
a native coolie between the shafts, who silently and swiftly
runs you about for a fee of a shilling an hour. Native
clerks at the desk allot your rooms, electric fans buzz
everywhere over a babel of tongues, for a French and
German boat are also in port, and people are having
tiffin in a palm garden, which we pass on our way to
the lift.
Just beneath my window I can see the red-tiled roof
apparently of a Catholic mission, as a white cross sur-
mounts it, that suggests Texan and Mexican buildings.
These buildings nestle against the luxuriant foliage of
the hotel garden trees. A winding road about the quay
is covered with carts like gipsy vans, but with high tops
of woven fibre, drawn by tiny little bullocks. The sea
beyond is blue, the breeze fresh, the eternal electric fan
where I’d hoped for the old fashioned punkah, and my
temperature is 99.8, but the charm of this place prevails,
and I join my companions to saunter in the bazaars that
join the hotel.
I am fortunately free from that germ which impels
women to buy all that seems attractive, and within one’s
purse’s possibility. So I pass seed pearls, and native
stones, ivory elephants with bejewelled trappings, Japa-
nese kimonos—cheaper here than in Tokio —and tawdry
Indian embroideries, but hie me to that greatest comfort
to the indisposed in a foreign land, the English chemist.


Colombo.




As I was feeling better after tiffin, we wandered forth
in ’rickshaws. Being my first experience of them I was
entranced with the motion; all about the motley streets
we went, with their seething population, who seemed to
be there only to heighten the color of the scene. Little,
naked babies and older children, with sarongs of gay
cloth wrapped round their legs, ran beside us begging,
and to me were hard to refuse. The traveller, hardened
to them, sternly bids them “go.” Older ones, with
astonishing cupidity, tossed into our laps pinkish, wax-
like blossoms of four petals, which they had deftly turned
back to show a skein-like mass of stamens curled in a
knob, but tipped with red points. These they called
Buddha flowers, and the name appeals to one prepared
to adore and accept at its own value this wonderful East.
Colombo seems peppered with tiny beautiful lakes, and
each has some form of native life. One that I paused
beside to have the inevitable snapshot taken of myself,
displayed men standing in the water up to the waist
washing their hair, women scrubbing their bodies vigor-
ously, and the dhobi or washerman beating their
clothes, sent him to cleanse, against a rock near the shore.
Bullocks and a horse swam about in unpleasant proximity.
Farther on we came to the celebrated Banyan tree, an
excessively large and aged one, but the scent of the
cinnamon is not about this part of the town; indeed,
I have not found it anywhere in Ceylon, which is one
illusion gone. At five we again mounted behind our
bare footed and perspiring natives, and trotted along
the glorious sea front drive to the “Galleface,” an ideally
situated hotel. As we approached, private gharris, not
unlike the Paris and Montreal fiacre, filled with native


ladies and children passed us, all alert and richly dressed.
When in native attire they were quite lovely, but too
often they were hideous in European shoddy finery, of
a vintage only suitable to wine.
Smart barouches, with two liveried servants, that is,
the livery of splendid turban and native dress, rolled by,
perhaps conveying the man who haggled in the bazaar
over embroideries or necklaces an hour before. For they
are rich these merchants, and there are many with five
hundred guinea pairs to draw them. The sea thundered
in on an exquisitely clean beach on our right. On our
left was a wide plateau and bridle path, where equestrians
trotted past, or even practised polo, and finally our des-
tination. marked by a clump of giant palms bent m mighty
curves from the all impelling breeze that sweeps over
the palace-like proportions of the hotel.
We descended for tea on the verandah, but before
came, the wonder of the East, the street jugglers voice
was heard below, and we gathered on the verandah ra
ina to see the time-honored trick of making the mang
tree -row A series of conjuring tricks with bird, egg,
arid brass cups, for which we tossed
The importunate fellow was not satis e
more for his cobra trick, which we declined to hagg
about, and returned along the esplanade, obeyed with
an emotion of sound an to o
r rr»rs:s * -


a garden, lighted like those of Honolulu, with multi-
colored electric light bulbs in the trees. Later, in a
gharri, we drove under the radiance of a pale girl moon
to the Galleface Hotel, whose situation, if possible, was
enhanced by the softness of the night. Ships’ passengers
were dancing. 1 o many these dances are the requiem
to shipboard flirtations, for Colombo marks the parting
of the ways. W e tried to drive home by the Cinnamon
Gardens, but our baulking beasty behaved so badly we
were forced to let the driver get us home as the horse
preferred, through the native village, which is eerie at
night and the antithesis of cinnamon on the breeze.
Black night was over all; the lights flickered out in
the garden of our Hotel, and we went to bed wondrously
silent and satisfied with the strangeness of the day.




Victoria Terminal, Bombay.




BOMBAY.
TAJ MAHAL HOTEL.
BOMBA Y.
Dear Charlie,
Ihree sun-kissed days with always India’s coast line
before one’s eyes, a calm sea underneath, and a fever of
joyous anticipation in one’s heart, then Bombay. Lying
out in the Harbor one first woke up to something unusual
at the sight of many bandy legged, black porters, with
the draped cotton loin cloth surmounted by khaki shirts,
marked “P. & 0.,” who came swarming on board, seizing
all available luggage and bustling it off to the lighters.
Then came Parsee agents, in their white duck trousers,
and black knee-length coats, buttoned to the chin heads
surmounted by black, high, shiny caps sloping abruptly
at the back, their faces most hebraic in caste. Mine from
King, King & Co., found me, and after filling in a cus-
toms form I was freed from further responsibility of
my luggage. Sensation three: when my bearer presented
himself, having travelled one thousand miles down from
up country, to meet me, and salaaming, quietly presented
a letter, which told me he was my bearer, and was called
“Cobind.” He wears trousers, then a white shirt hanging
outside, the tail unblushingly flapping beneath his coat.
Evidently the latter garment was made for some previous
master. On his head is a turban, and on his face the


most terrifying black beard, parted on the chin, and only
capable of description by that past master on the sub-
ject of face fungi —Mr. F. Richardson. We pile in a
gharri and bowl over the wide, beautiful streets, to
this Hotel. I am entranced with the luxury of the palms,
the foliage generally, and the similarity in character of
the thoroughfares to parts of Back Bay, Boston, though
every Yankee in the Union cries me down; and at night
I feel this likeness, driving past the cheap shops, where
ices and cool drinks are served facing the beach. It
is Boston robbed of her hygienic boots and spectacles.
The Hotel is delightful, sanely planned to make life
for the insect strenuous. The whole interior suggests
Turkish baths, with its concrete floors inlaid with white
stone, patterned with broken china. Delightful bay win-
dows, the sashes on central pivots filled with a green,
translucent glass that afford shade and give an abundance
of air. A big porcelain bath between my room and my
maid’s adds the completing touch of comfort.
At four I wandered over to the Yacht Club to tea with
Col. Whitall, having lunched at an early hour on board.
It was empty, so one could stare to one’s eyes content,
without being marked and disapproved as a passer-
through. The club lies directly on the bay, a retaining
wall alone between its broad path where tea is served,
and the native sail boats in the water. A lawn spreads
between the path and the Club House, and great trees
and hedges luxuriate on the entrance side. I dined here
with the Chief Justice, Sir Basil Scott, a veritable modern
Chesterfield, and his uncle, Mr. Lang, next evening. On


the Apollo Bunder, preparations are in progress for a
pavilion for the reception of the Viceroy designate. Lord
Hardinge, who arrives this week.
A Sabbath calm reigned over all, and I returned to
the hotel charmed, allured, at peace. I leaned across
my window ledge; in a street far below the itinerant
worker was weaving bamboo blinds, and closer my eyes
rested on the palms and fountains in front of the hotel.
Directly under my room a great, wire-netted, sun parlor
projects, over which sturdy blue convolvuli clamber, and
raise great clumps of blossom till one could swear ’twas
only painted scenery.
Monday morning dawned cool and clear, and after
chota hazri, or early tea, at seven, we left in a gharri for
the Arab stables. One enters these through a tall,
plastered arch, in an enormously high wall, and finds
oneself m a maze of loose boxes, made of tall bamboo
poles, roofed with the same. As we wandered in we
saw a row of Arabs lounging in a line, smoking the
beloved hubble-bubble pipe or hookah. Several
Europeans were inspecting ponies, but we passed on to a
very large fibre tent where I was introduced
to All Ben Talib, the old Arab dealer, and
biggest importer of Arab horses in India. Being
seated, an almost naked Hindoo passed us blue and
white Arabian coffee cups, and poured a delicious
beverage from a tin can fitted with a brass top, handle,
and spout. Our host then offered us large Arabian
cigarettes, smoking his own from a holder, whose mouth-
piece was of amber, shaped like a plum, and which he
laid lightly against his lips. His dress was very fine,
almost pure white woollen socks on his feet, surmounted


by red morocco slippers of European shape; his long,
white loose tunic, fastened on one side like a Chinaman’s,
and reaching the ground, was belted in with a wide band
of silver cloth. Over this a long, black coat, well cut
and of fine surface cloth covered his white garment.
His keen eyes and well chiselled lips set in moustache
and beard of grey, were framed in the Arab’s head
drapery of gold and red, crowned with three rings of
crepe hair, the thickness of one’s wrist, squeezed in about
every five inches with red and silver threads for the
space of an inch. Two white garbed attendants with
the Arab head dress interpreted for him, and occasionally
vaulted on the horses being displayed to us, and rode
them bare back up and down the path. Behind us, in
the shed with Arab mares, huge prize sheep lay about
lazily; whilst the more active goats picked their way
nimbly all over the place. Baby kids nestled together
in almost every stall where the sais lived. In one a
cook was squatting by his primitive fire-place, beating
out dough cakes of muffin-like proportion to the thin-
ness of wafers, and the size of a dinner plate before
cooking them. In a huge concrete basin, many almost
naked grooms were bathing a horse with buckets of
water and a spray —wringing out tail and mane, drying
and finally massaging the neck, chest, and shoulders with
the care usually bestowed on a prize beauty. The
crows flew in boldly pecking at the sheep, the sun
filtered through the fibre roof and shone in golden bars
on the cool enclosure, and with polite salutations and
farewells, we came away.
It was a pleasant sight to see His Excellency, the
Governor, arrive with his bride at Victoria Terminal the


same afternoon. A body guard of native soldiers, in
glorious scarlet tunics to the knees, and flaming turbans,
with pennants flying from their lances, followed the car-
riage as it wound through a heartily cheering crowd,
Lady Clarke smiled sweetly and graciously from beneath
a huge, red umbrella, held over her head by a native
soldier, standing behind with superb poise.
Like Sir Edwin Arnold, I have had the pleasure of
experiencing Parsee hospitality. After tea in Madame
I atas’ charming bungalow, on my second day in Bom-
bay, I was taken to the wonderful place for the disposal
of their dead on Malabar Hill, called the Towers of
Silence, wherein all Parsees who die are placed on
exposed gratings, divested of garments; in an hour the
cruel vultures, who hover greedily above this spot, have
left only the skeleton of a once beloved body. The
bones are left for days to dry, and are then put in a
well m the centre of the tower to crumble, and finally
passing out into four drains, go through charcoal and
gravel for purification, before being swept to the sea.
Having ascended the 80 steps through the garden to
the 1 owers, we pause in a garden reserved on the right
hand side for the meditation and prayers of the relatives
of the dead. In a Persian-looking, long, low building,
the garments of those who bear the body to the Towers
are removed, and ablutions performed, whilst an adja-
cent mosque is used for prayer. When I was in the
garden the funeral cortege of a poor man was borne
along. The body, on a stretcher enveloped in a white
shroud, was carried on the shoulders of about ten men,
all clad in white; behind, two black-bearded, white-robed
Parsee priests walked, casually muttering prayers, and


three friends of the poor man followed. The huge
birds flapped their wings, forming a sable border to the
top of the white wall of the tower; solemnity pervaded
the whole place. Each sect must adhere to its convic-
tions, but ....
To the Mahim Woods, a cocoanut plantation of vast
extent, some fourteen miles from Bombay, is a drive that
transports one to a realisation of fairy country. Cocoa-
nut palms alone are the vegetation in this vast area, and
for upwards of 40 feet they rear their splendid, feathery
heads, commingling above in a canopy of green that
almost completely shuts out the sky. A narrow road
spreads in a network of directions in this wonderful
village. Far back, behind the road-side plastered
walls, lie native houses —some large and prosperous
looking, others grey and gloomy. An air of mystery
pervades the place by day, and motoring through at
night one is seized with feelings awesome and unreal,
especially when a single light placed on the verandah
floor, or inside an open door silhouettes the building in
the deepening gloom. Native bazaar life abounds:
huddled close to the roadside one hears the musical
tinkle of the tinsmiths (usually two together) squatting
on their hunkers, the utensil held between their knees
and hammering in unison. The bottles of syrup, red
and yellow, in cheap, European glass bottles are an
anachronism in these shops of past ages, where Indian
sweetmeats are sold, and cheap German goods lie along-
side native articles, proclaiming more potently than
learned investigation has proved, the impossibility of


Entrance to Mahim Woods, Bombay.




welding East to West as one body, one thought. It is
night, and we fly home, too thoughtful for idle conversa-
tion.
My letter of introduction to His Excellency met with
prompt response in the form of an invitation to dinner
that night. Government House lies above the sea, in
a lovely tropical garden on Malabar Hill, and is an open,
airy structure, unpretentious, and most suitable to the
climate. Three finely-carved screens fit in arches in
the centre of the building, dividing it into rooms, but it
is otherwise European in atmosphere. A delightful
orchestra of twenty musicians discoursed an intelligent
programme until eleven, when, my taxi-cab having been
taken by another guest, I was forced to remain, until one
of the staff kindly got his car around and motored me
to the hotel. Air, cool and soft as a caress falls over
Bombay at midnight (this week the moon is full).
Native life is hushed, it is the hour for spirit com-
munion with the beauties of Nature—but, one goes to
bed.
An attempt next day to reach the water tank failed
in its specific intention, but through getting “bushed,”
as one says in Australia, we found a picture my memory
will always sense with acute delight. Day trailed
away after a passionate, red-gold kiss to the fringe of
palms on the horizon; her face paling like a good
woman’s, sweetly with advancing age. A tenderness in
the sky brought out a warmth of red brown in the earth
and scrub, deepened the filigree of papul tree and lent a
giant hardness to the palm trunks. A purple haze
clothed the distant hills; a cold moon, round and watch-
ful, rose in the East, producing a shiver of conscious


affinity. One throbbed in unison with the pulse this
great land holds. India, beloved Mistress of Emotions!
I salute you for the hour.
The Princess Mary Gymkhana is a place the newly-
arrived European regards with pleasure. Here Parsee,
Mahommedan, and Hindoo ladies emerge from seclusion,
and respond to the call of the West. It lies on the city
front, swept by sea breezes, a Club House, and long
stretch of croquet and tennis lawns. Three days a
week it is strict zenana, but on the other days gentlemen
are admitted as guests. Lady Jehangir, a handsome
Parsee, vivacious as a French woman, and knowing her
Europe as perfectly as India, kindly gave me an oppor-
tunity to see this interesting Club on a day when native
gentlemen were admitted. Amongst the lovely Parsee
ladies, in their gaudy silk sarais and magnificent jewels,
sat fat native princes and titled Parsees. 'The day
faded, the chill of sunset alone made real the lovely
sense of color on graceful forms, moving with the incom-
parable tread of the Oriental to a European band dis-
coursing comic opera music.
That night I dined at the Orient Club, and listened
to curious sentiments. I am an Imperialist and a
subtle indefinable sense told me my views of Imperial
matters and theirs were on a different plan. A fat,
black prince, who stuttered and talked in disjointed
phrases, was present. I met him again next day at
a charming luncheon party given to welcome back to
India the Chief Justice of Calcutta, Sir Lawrence
Jenkins and his wife.
Lady Jenkins, a woman of incomparable courage and
vivacity, is collecting rare stamps for her little son;


leaning across the table she importuned the “Dear, darl-
ing Marajah” to hunt up his grandmother’s love-letters,
and give her the stamps off them, but his Highness, with
a sense of humour, stutteringly replied: “My gr-r-and-
m-m-mother Mas a v-very di-d-d-screet wo-man, she
burned all her 1-1-love letters.”
1 or some curious reason a taxi-cab never returns for
you m Bombay. You sit in the calm belief that it
will the first time; on the second occasion you sit doubt-
ingly; there is no third time; if you want it, you keep
it waiting. This was my second trial, it did not come,
and I was sent back in the Maharajah’s carriage. Con-
versation did not flow. I’m a Confederate when I live
in America.
I waved adieu to Bombay with regret. I saw the
Viceroy arrive, through the courtesy of that prince of
kindliness, Mr. A alter Lang, Secretarv of the Yacht
Club, from the Club Chamber’s balcony, and later to the
band of the Warwickshire Regiment, drank tea and
renewed memories with old naval acquaintances, I should
like to say friends, on the Yacht Club lawn. It was a
fitting finish to a happy week.




Rani Sepree Tomb.
15th Century Mosque, Ahmedabad,
C




AHMEDABAD AND JEYPORE.
JEYPORE.
My ever dear Roslyn, —
How I wish you had been with me this week-end,
when squeezed with my maid into a small compartment
of a vestibule train, with a real bathroom attached, a
32 calibre revolver under my pillow, and the fear of the
black railway thief in my heart, I started for Ahmeda-
bad. We arrived without accident; though I nearly
had a pot at the faithful Hannah, when I felt her cover-
ing me with an extra rug in the night. I stealthily
drew my Smith & Wesson’s product from beneath the
pillow, when my attendant turned to pick something up;
the hazy light showed a breadth of figure no half-
starved night thief can hope to attain this side of
Paradise, so the Labour Party won’t hang me just yet.
My first punkah, a lovely carved beam, with a valance
of dirty holland, greeted me from the railway station
room I elected to stay in. There was a divinely large
white porcelain bath, and the hardest water in the
world in my dressing-room, but the day was bright and
cool and young, and I, too, sensed something of its
freshness. My breakfast, an enormous meal which I
blush to acknowledge, being despatched, I loitered for a
promised Commissioner, but I subsequently learned he
was away.


The whip of the sun started me oft' through crowds
of dirtv natives, and inches of germ-laden dust to do
my first Temples and Mosques —and 1 did them, guide-
book in hand, the mystery of past ages a passion in my
heart, and my imagination prepared for an orgy of
delight. I placed my feet trustingly in eighteen inch
long canvas shoes to protect the holy places from my
polluting (?) tread, and started out to get them all in
my head. Well. 1 didn’t. 1 only got a cold; but I
saw them, admired, when it was stone work with any
purity of design, as many of them are. I felt I could
inhabit some with pleasure on a hot afternoon, with the
sun percolating through the stone windows, pierced in
geometrical conventional designs, if a nice, soft Indian
rug lay on the floor, and some of their big, brass pots
were well placed with tall ferns and palms in them, in
various places, and a nice young man were murmuring
intelligent phrases in my praise; nothing stimulates the
truly shy like approbation. If you wish to know what
I saw, turn up Ahmedabad in Murray’s Guide-Book,
and then look at the pictures this letter contains. I
bought them for you to look at.
In the afternoon I went to the Hathi Singh Temple —it
has a surrounding building the photo, does not reveal,
a marble verandah, open on the temple side, but walled
on the outer with dozens of images of Hindoo gods
reposing behind gilded bars, for all the world like dogs
at a bench show. One is inexpressibly shocked at the
cheap, modern clock loudly ticking near the principal
shrine, and the barbaric crystal chandeliers and awful,
flower-bedaubed glass lamps one sees in rooms of mag-
nificent simplicity. The bazaar, too, is disappointing,


Ilathi singh Temple, Ahmedtibad.




Sidi Said’s Mosque, Ahmedabad.




but monkeys and camels cheered my childish heart;
whilst the impartiality of the flies, who lit first on the
sore eyes of the camels, then rested on the native sweet-
meats, provided a new emotion and a world of explana-
tion as to the health of the Indian.
In a railway station up the line, my lust for purchas-
ing carved furniture was pandered to by the sight of
two beautiful tables, of Louis XIV. design, of a superb
redwood, which I learned was carved in the town. As
the place is a pin point on the map, and better known to
the Cook tourist as a place for dinner than to the seeker
after antiquities, it won’t go down to fame.
The morning showed us a distinct change in the native
—clean and gay blankets of orange, rose and blue, a
human aurora. Ajmere, Sunrise City, Salaam! A
man who never travels, but knows everything of every
country, having India in the head and no emotion in the
heart, had bidden me at a dinner before I left Australia
to see Ahmedabad —no matter what else I missed. Result,
a wearying day of dirt and antiquity, disappointment in
the product of bazaars, and a sense of relief at leaving.
True, the crenellated stone work is lovely, but familiarity
with the windows so often illustrated makes one conceive
them of larger size than they are. But had 1 not gone to
Ahmedabad, 1 would never have felt the morning kiss
of Ajmere. Hills, having the appearing of volcanic
structure, festoon about this eye-enchanting place. The
palace-like villas on the river, with their broad, stone
flights of ghaut steps, running into the water below the
stone garden railings, were alive at this hour with bathers
and dhobies banging out the clothes. An Irishman,


seeing washing done in this fashion for the first time,
exclaimed, “Bedad, that’s the first time I iver saw a
man break stones wid a shirt.”
High above on the summit of a mountain are white
buildings of fortress appearance that excite the imagina-
tion ; and everywhere one glances, restored grandeur
gives back reality to one’s previously formed mental
pictures. The railway station presented gay and less
squalid types of native travellers, enveloped in warm
blankets of gay colors, frequently with flowered quilted
coats, all jangling with many ounces of metal, ankle and
arm bangles, and moving with superb grace. The
touch of cold dispels the languor of the South 3,000 feet
up, but the sun is warm as the embrace of acknowledged
love. To live to-day is to realise the greatness of God
in creating humans last.
At noon we got to Jeypore and drove in a conveyance
guaranteed, I should think, to extract teeth painlessly
if used long enough. Bump, rattle, and shake;
bump, shake, and rattle; shake, rattle, and bump
for a mile and a half, then you arrive at
the hotel, and get a bare, clean bedroom and a
large bathroom. Being refreshed, you, if wise, will
eschew the handsome guide and stick to your bearer,
your Murray’s red-book, and your peace of mind. I was
not wise, and before we had seen the gardens and the
buildings surrounding it, I learned of my mistake in
taking an educated Hindoo, whose pride of petty know-
ledge and English drove me to a fine frenzy, so that when
the city gates were reached, I was prepared to hate
everything, but I did not. I don’t want to deceive any-
one about Jeypore; people who have been there have


A Street, Jeypore.




Amber— Palace and Fort.




Astronomical Observatory, Jeypore.




cruelly misled me with tales of pink marble. Gaze on
the glorious photos., oh. patient Roslyn! and learn the
horrible truth—it’s all plaster, kalsomined once of rosy
hue, now frequently daubed with dirt, pitch-like in
color, and what appears to be carved design on the
arches and window frames is but painted on in indigo or
white paint. The streets are wide and magnificently
smooth, the natives happy and well cared for, never
taxed, nursed when ill at the Maharajah’s expense, and
given opportunities for European education. The
Maharajah’s stables contain 300 horses, his palace has
been exhaustively described, and did not tickle my fancy;
but the Astronomical Observatory—Ah! that was a
giant child’s toy-shop surely. The picture can’t con-
vey the mammoth instruments, the tidiness of it all, and
the come-to-stay and keep-clean air of the enormous
courtyard, in which these quaint and ancient instruments
are guarded. Everything seemed to begin by being
twenty feet wide, or deep, or long. It was a panto-
mime scene in real life, and this ancient child mentally
applauded the fantasy.
The road to Amber. What visions the words conjure
up. The dust was stirred by hundreds of women’s feet
jingling with anklets, and all gay and festive in attire,
for we journeyed on some Hindoo saint’s day, and our
foot travelling companions were making a pilgrimage.
The carriage bowled along evenly, and from it we saw
the palace on our right, where the Emperor often went
in hot weather to enjoy the breeze from the lake below.
Shaded by the hills beyond it is a poetic view, although
the lovelv lake is almost dry. Just beyond we changed
to elephant’s back. His tread, at first irritatingly slow,
I)


as we wound around hill paths, not unlike the Blue
Mountain roads of New South Wales, became a joy
when a bend in the road brought Amber before us. The
lake on the left, at the far end as we approach, has a
garden enclosed by a retaining wall, and in it are high
walls at right angles, broad enough to serve as the paths
they are designed to be. Below in an enclosure are the
gardens, now filled with shrubs and trees, so tall that
they form a canopy to the paths. Just above on the
hillside, as our elephant slowly zig-zags round beneath
the palace gates, are the erstwhile elephant stables —
great, low-walled enclosures. Below them a plateau is
built out on to the lake, with a steep flight of steps all
along its side, where princes and nobles of long ago
went to embark when they “ate the air at evening on
the lake,” as the native term puts it, or where the
myriad attendants of the court bathed daily. This
sight on the ghaut becomes so familiar to a traveller in
India that its unusual charm when first seen becomes
difficult to describe after a few weeks sojourn in the
country.
Through a giant gateway, spiked and barred, we
entered an enormous courtyard. It is all as perfect as
the forts and palace court yards that are inhabited to-day,
yet it is one hundred and eighty-three years since it was
deserted. Y ears ago, the legend runs, a daily human
sacrifice was made at the entrance (see picture) that we
approached; now a goat is slain, and the temple we
ascend to, bears testimony to our nostrils of this
unsavoury fact. But it is quickly left behind, and we
come to the reality of stone carving, inlaid archways,
silver barred doors, and ladies’ apartments of rare beauty,


Entrance to Palace, Amber.




Courtyard of the Palace, Amber.




Doorway in the Palace, Amber.




Interior of a Room, Amber Palace.




where walls are covered with painted designs of stiff
flowers or divided into sections bearing painted blue
vases —a pattern I’ve noticed in all Indian palace apart-
ments. The elevation is enormous, as one looks out
of latticed panes of colored glass, or through beautiful
pierced marble screens to the lake below, and yet, above
and beyond, circling half round Amber is the fort 400
feet higher. Inside all these battlemented walls, and
nestling below the Hall of Victory is a garden, an
Eastern poem in freshness and a picture to gladden eyes
tired of stone and glittering looking-glass work that
spangles the walls and ceilings of the various rooms. I
do not want to go away from this quiet spot, but my
querulous guide urges me to see “back premises.” A
sense of fright pervades me as I look where he directs
on all the maze of passages and buildings that con-
tained the labourers for the Emperor’s pleasure, kitchens
and artisans’ quarters. What a joy for the school boy
or girl to explore. But it saddens me, I know not why,
as also does the laugh of the low class Hindoo women,
huddled in the stabling quarters of the court yard as we
come out. The begging of the children’s “Salaam, mem
sahib,” accompanied by a circular rubbing of their
stomachs, and a quick action of the fingers drawn toge-
ther, and placed in staccato action on their mouths is
revolting. Cripples come and exhibit sores and
deformities, in hope of eliciting alms. Singing voices
of returning pilgrims, swirling the dust of the road with
their bare feet, heavy metal anklets jangling beneath the
women’s skirts, sometimes voluminous, sometimes scant
cotton cloth wound about their legs almost men fashion.
Arms rattling with colored glass and silver bangles, noses


all pierced on one side, sometimes on both, and bearing-
small, ornate buttons or huge rings, as well as ears
ladened with heavy gew-gaws. Dirt, grace of move-
ment, merry laughter—the sign-posts to sunny India.
Ihe elephant slowly retraced his steps. In the
softened light the palace cried out to me to return, to
explore the Rajah s apartments with the moonlight
filtering through the carved marble screens on to the
mosaic arches and inlaid panels of alabaster, to sit and
dream in the bathing room, all creamy marble, when
the crows and chattering natives’ voices were hushed. I
felt impelled to return that night (my only one) in
Jeypore. “Order the elephant,” I cried to the guide,
Ini nine o clock. We’ll come back to-night.” “Rut.
Ladyship,” he protested, “no one ever come to Amber at
night. Exactly what I wish, but we will come at
night, I said, firmly. “No, Ladyship, it too dark, you
cannot take the view at night.” Dreamily I answer, “I
shall come at nine o’clock.” Already I see in my mind
the exquisitely placed palace and garden, bathed in
sib ei light, and guarded like some precious person
asleep by the stern soldier fort on the hill above. The
guide takes up my dreamy tone; his voice is hushed, “But,
Ladyship, you cannot come at night to Amber. Tigers,
they come at night to drink in the Lake.” He paused,
a nd added man awesome whisper, “Ladvship, they eat
you.”


The Residency.
Lucknow.




LUCKNOW.
LUCKNOW.
Bertie dear, —
If you’d ever been in Texas you would know what I
mean by saying Witzler’s Hotel is Mexican. It is a two-
storied flat roof building, with balconies to both stories,
and is a series of detached buildings enclosing a garden.
A high white plaster arch is in the outside gate, sur-
mounted by a life-sized Diana, whom some native artist, to
relieve her white monotony, has endowed with the pinkest
legs I’ve ever seen. Result, on seeing it for the first
time, one either blushes or screams with laughter —pro-
priety being entirely a matter of temperament. It was
so delightful to be met by Captain and Mrs. Hore-
Ruthven. After the greetings they brought me to this
hotel in General Mahon’s car, as he is away, and as his
guests they have the use of it. That is one heavenly
point of Indian hospitality; you have the use of every-
thing that is your neighbours —his ox, his ass, even the
stranger within his gates.
The hotel is far from being luxurious, for in one’s
bath-room is a common tin tub, and a tin dipper with
which to pour cold water over oneself. The Bisti,
as the water carrier is called, brings one hot water, com-
ing into one’s bath-room through a door from a back
passage. One never sees him coming or going unless


one wishes to. He is a curious-looking creature, with a
goat skin tanned and stretched back into the original
shape, then slung legs up by a strap over his shoulder,
the neck used as spoutj bp- hll water jugs. The
sweeper, with a haiidleless broom of coarse canes, comes
along in the morning and stirs up the dust from the
corners of your room on to all your clothes, and leaves
your bearer to tidy the room after him. This is all the
service the hotel supplies outside the Kitmagars in the
dining-room, and in small places one is often better
served by being attended at meals by one’s own bearer.
There are two polo grounds in Lucknow, but the one
the matches were on this week is a lovely spot at Dil-
kusha, surrounded by shade trees. The raised platform
for seats being under an avenue, and at the end of the
stand, tents are up for tea. Not the white linen things
we know, but gaily coloured affairs with fringed valances,
underfoot bright cotton carpets, and everyone comes to
tea who has paid admission. Behind the spectators’
seats a band plays each afternoon, by courtesy of one
ol the resident regiments. The charm of Indian hospi-
tality to itself is so noticeable after residence in a labour-
go\ erned country, where all phases of social life are
grudged to the Army, and the pastimes of officers and
gentlemen looked upon with no favour at all by the
untutored politician. Hunting is the best possible
training for a cavalry officer, and polo second, as all
Lnglish officers know. Result, in India the training for
war is made a pleasure that keeps her men fit and ready
for action. Mrs. Hore-Ruthven’s brother, who is
A.l>.C. to the L.G., is playing in these matches, so we
went to polo with a personal interest.


I must tell you of an experience I had at a dinner that
Captain Pollok gave the first night of this race week. A
delightful entertainment before a fancy dress ball, at a
place adjoining the polo grounds, called the Mahommed
Bagh Club. Bagh is the Indian word for garden. In
this case it’s rather a misnomer, for the compound does
not abound in flowers, but has tennis courts about it.
The majority of the guests were in fancy dress. Some
of the women looked divine. One girl, who rejoices in
the petit nom of “Naughty Mary,“ was absolutely ador-
able as a Romney girl, poudre, with a huge, blue satin
hat, a white muslin fichu-befrilled frock, with mitts and
patches, and such a pair of eyes! No wonder they dub
her “Naughty.”
A most alluring lady, born in the country, I’m told,
was an ideal Sonia in the Marsovian dress. She is also
a most perfect dancer. Then for distinction, a French
Marquise of about 1776. This lady, with great charm
of manner, made one realise the delight of fancy dress
more than all the others.
I was plain mem sahib, and feeling rather shy, I sat
between a mere boy, who was also feeling timid, and a
fat person of great geniality, who says he was at Eton
with you. They call him the “Honorable Perks” here,
or “Champagne Charlie,” as he is selling wine, and has
enormous luncheon and tea parties in a gorgeous tent
each day at the races, to advertise his brand. One sees
everybody at them. One day I sat next Sir John
Hewitt, Lieutenant-Governor of the United Provinces. At
the next table sat the Maharajah of Jodpore, where the
breeches come from, a lame, slender native, with dis-
tinctly Jewish cast of countenance. The youth and
E


fashion, the racing men and local officials, are all bidden
to these parties, and we eat, drink, and are merry, and
though we don't die on the morrow, we fear we may.
and sometimes wish we hadn t eaten so plenteously.
Across the table at Captain Pollok’s dinner. I was con-
scious of being the subject of conversation. I did not
mind, it s natural m hen you are new to a place to excite
enquiries and the consciousness that one’s hair is well
done, one’s frock quite right, gives a peace to the pos-
sessor that passeth understanding, to the male mind at
lea-t. After dinner, the man opposite was presented,
and asked tor a dance. I gave him choice of twelve
or thirteen; the former being a two-step which he could
not do, he suggested we should sit it out, and dance
the thirteenth. I agreed. lam new, and have not been
introduced to many men. and the least attractive man is
beaer at a dance than the ghastly sensation of being
part of the mural decorations. He murmured things
about the charm of my voice: said it thrilled him. I
expect it was the port; it often leaves men incapable of
analysing their emotions.
e danced in a rather dark room. Such a mistake,
the ballroom should be gloriously bright. The “Kala
Tuggas,” as the Hindoo calls those places so fraught with
romance, which we refer to as “sitting out places.” should
be what the Hindoo calls them, “Black holes”; only for
holes read comfy chairs in obscure places. At this dance
there was a uniform gloom in all places, except the sup-
per room, where I found myself later with a cheery
pam of Major Crawley and his wife, who was the cap-
tivating Marquise, and a piquant lady in black, satin
Pierrette dress, who is the Commissioner’s wife, the


A.D.C. to the C. in C. at Calcutta, who says he’ll do
what he can to make my stay there pleasant. Then
Major Crawley’s sweet-faced sister-in-law, like myself
new to India, my partner for twelve and thirteen, and
the “Honorable Perks,” who ordered his own champagne
lavishly, though the majority preferred black beer, which
is really a splendid supper beverage, and was introduced
to Simla some years ago by a certain German Consul,
and has made his fame all over India. It’s a thing that
makes early gallops possible with a clear head, after a
very late night.
Supper ended with the eleventh dance, and I joined
my partner for twelve and thirteen as we left the table,
and went, at his suggestion, to the Billiard Room, which
is even gloomier than any of the others. "They made
no attempt to decorate the Club, which, after our superb
effects at Home, seems curious in a land abounding in
cheap service and luxury of palms. We sat on a hard,
unromantic sofa, and I assure you there wasn’t a con-
dition of allurement anywhere, and my partner was well
over forty. We used to think the boys in the American
Fleet quick off the mark. I remember Lady Poore tell-
ing me after their memorable week in Sydney in 1908,
that they began where most men leave off. Well! this
Major man began where the American Meet left off.
He poured out feverish remarks about my being the
one woman on the earth he’d ever wanted to kiss at
first sight. I was “irresistible, adorable.” I regarded
him curiouslv. How a man with gaps between his
teeth caused by those not lost but gone before, and only
half his hair, could flatter himself so, was beyond my
comprehension. “I felt when I first looked at you at


dinner that I’d like to lay my lips on yours and leave
them there for an eternity,” he said. This was too
revolting. “Good heavens! where is Captain Sandy?”
I gasped; just why I don’t know, but I felt he at least
was safe. “Don’t be angry,” the elderly Lothario
pleaded. Angry! I was furious. “You will kindly take
me to get my cloak, and then you will call my carriage,
you utterly detestable person!” I remarked, and stalked
out. He spluttered apologies till 1 was off.
Next day he greeted me at “Champagne Charlie’s”
luncheon as though nothing had happened. Naturally,
I returned the salutation, but avoided him. I told the
“Sandys,” who thought it rather sudden; I told a dear,
pretty lady, with two sweet daughters from Simla. “My
dear,” she said, “I don’t wonder at his wanting to kiss
you; all men try to kiss people out here. They even
want to kiss me; but, if you gave him no encourage-
ment? there was a note of inquiry in her voice, which
I promptly set right. “Really, it was rather tiresome.”
NY ell! the whole of India may be a man’s mouth, but
I m sure I don’t want to kiss it.
India, with its kissing men, would be a grand thing
for some of our yearners at home. A season for them
here would, I’m sure, take a lot of the pinched looks out
of their laces; but I don’t think there’s a love-hungry
look in my eyes; do you? The attractive photo of the
1 huttar Munzil Club will show you where I went to
another dance. This building was a Native Prince’s
palace early in the last century, and his wives were kept
in a house on the opposite bank of the river, a subter-
ranean passage leading to it. I asked one of the mem-
bers oi this Club if they still kept all the comforts of


Chuttar Munzil Club.
The Imambarah, Lucknow.




home there, but he assured me the passage had long since
been blocked up. The ballroom floor in this splendid
Indian palace is hung on chains, and one never tires
dancing on this beautiful vibrating surface. There are
handsome carved wooden screens of fine proportion in
the entrance hall, and an air of prosperity about the
Club that is pleasing at first glance and all subsequent
ones. The ladies’ cloak room arrangements leave much
to be desired, as the native ayah is absolutely useless to
make one look tidy if one gets disarranged in the dance,
and she is usually huddled on the floor in her voluminous,
not too white, cotton draperies, and leaves you to scramble
for your cloaks and scarves at your impatient leisure.
I motored home from this dance with a man who’d
taken me to supper, where he diverted me by ordering
six poached eggs and eating all of them. I told him
I was going to Agra. He seemed to think I should wait
over a week and go with him to see it properly. “But
why should I wait for you?” “Because I want you to,”
he began. The reason seemed insufficient and verging
on the sentimental. 1 talked about the beauty of the
night for the remainder of the drive.
At the races General Mahon kindly offered us his
box. Even at these tiny courses one has private en-
closures in front of the grand-stand, which is so much
nicer than our Australian way. The General’s is next
the viceregal box, but no ceremony is observed by those
in authority here. The Lieut. Governor walks about
the course unhampered by an A.D.C., goes to the betting
ring, marks the prices, and places his bets himself, and
is beloved by all the racing fraternity.


I am so interested in all the Anglo-Indian types —
one, a woman of forty or over, beautifully and conspicu-
ously gowned, with her adoring subaltern in attendance
She’s out from home to escape the English winter. The
officers’ wives sit chatting in little groups, of more obvious
reasons for her presence here. The tongue of my sex is
not always as generous in quality as in quantity. It’s
a dear little meeting; the smallest I’ve ever been at,
and taken so seriously. Gentlemen jockeys give a touch
of personal interest. Horses owned by many of our
new friends, make it exciting, and at Mr. E. T. Mar-
shall’s, the well-known Calcutta racing man, suggestion
I back “Coal,” General Mahon’s horse, and win. It is
Coal’s fifth race, and fifth victory.
The drive back from the races takes one past Dil-
kusha House, which stands a lovely ruin in an extensive
compound, as one hears the gardens called all over India.
It was in this picturesque spot General Havelock died
with the knowledge that the whole garrison had been
safely rescued from the Residency, twelve days after the
place was taken by Sir Colin Campbell in 1857.
As we drove home from the races the streets were being
swept and watered. In one block I counted 43 native
men brushing the dust away. Four bistis scattering water
from their goat skins by hand; and four low-class
women, almost as scantily clad as the Bombay fishwife,
but without the seaside woman’s superb figure, gathering
up cattle dung to make into fuel. This was placed in
baskets on their heads and borne along with splendid
poise and utter indifference. One sees everything trans-
ported on the heads of coolies and porters, from luggage
to furniture. A tale is told of an old woman at Simla


who carried a grand piano up the hills on her head;
but she expired on arrival there. One does not wonder.
The dress of the native about Lucknow is quite subdued
in color, and, except for a splendid Tuluclidar or two on
the racecourse, one who flaunted about in peach brocade
thousers and coat, with a square of sandal-scented
emerald brocade over his shoulders, we’ve seen nothing
to gasp at here.
Returning from the races with a large bundle of
paper notes of less than a pound in value, one feels quite
cheerful, and rich, when one talks of winning hundreds :
but it’s rupees, and so woefully little next day when in
front of the hotel in a wicker chair, I sat to invest in
jewellery from the native vendor. This form of shop-
ping obtains all over India. The merchant arrives
with huge, cotton enveloped bundles, or cheap English
tin trunks, and squatting on the floor displays wares he
has the temerity to demand Bond Street prices for. The
native juggler was doing tricks at my elbow, producing
eleven live birds out of an egg-shaped box, and petition-
ing to do the mango trick in front of my bedroom for
R’s 5. He prefers doing it privately, as he makes more
money; but I have seen it in Ceylon, so, instead, took
a lean Maliommedan fortune teller across the compound
to reveal my fate. He produced chits to prove people
have paid him R’s 30 for a fortune. I demurred at
such extortion, so he suggested a pound. I jeered at his
high price; said I was a poor woman. It was then his
turn to jeer. He did it in these words of flattery: My
Queen, if you are not rich now the luck mark is on your
beautiful forehead that you will have millions of rupees.
We finally settled on R’s 5, and he told with most re-


markable accuracy of the past. If his prognostications
of the future are as correct, we have not much to worry
over ahead. So I got at least a calm spirit and a morn-
ing’s amusement for my money.
Lucknow to you, I know, spells only siege; but that
which remains is so poetic a monument, it is hard to
realise the horror it has been the stage of in the past.
I did it thoroughly with the “Sandys” one morning,
guided about by an Irish veteran, to whom it all seems
as fresh as any event of the past five years; but this.
I lancv, comes from constant reiteration of the facts to
visitors. The inscriptions on some of the tombstones
of young mothers, mere girls in years, with their little
babies beside them, struck me as one of the most pathetic
things in this monument to British patience and endur-
ance. As one wandered down to the Gumti banks and
had the position of the enemy explained, it made the
bravery of Capt. Butler, who left the Residency, crept
through the enemy s line, swam the river and informed
the force on the right bank of the mutineers abandon-
ment of defence along the canal of Ghazi-ud-din Haidar
Khan, a feat of magnificent courage,
1 vent back to lunch at Hagstaft House, where the
Sandys are staying, and Mr. “Billy” Miles, of the Royal
Dragoons, and his sister, who is just out for the winter.
I'he General’s bungalow is so delightful after the stupid
German Hotel. It was nice to see good old silver on
the table, and a tasteful arrangement of old brass and
blue china in the dining room, and his servants are ex-
cellent. The Indian servant is far from that perfect
creature, who anticipates your every want with silent


grace of movement. He seldom has any manners, and
addresses you casually.
Every day at the races I’ve lunched with Mr. Thel-
lusson’s party, and one morning he motored me to the
great Imambarah. It’s an enormous room filled with
mirrors, and chandeliers holding common glass lamps,
and contains a tawdry affair covered with beaten silver,
which looks like the lead lining from a tea chest. This
is a King’s Throne. The great hall of the Imambarah
is 162 feet long, 53 feet wide, and 49 feet high. We
went through the Turkish Gate to the bazaar, where I
bought a table cloth of chicken work on muslin at four
times its value. Mr. Thellusson’s opulent presence and
our arrival in the motor, I’m sure, were responsible for
the price.
I chaperoned the two pretty Bingham girls to the
races in the afternoon, after which they took me to tea
at “Naughty Mary’s”; it conjured up my lost youth
when Kipling’s charming women were my pet delight.
I wished then to grow into a Mrs. Hawkesbee. I’m sure
“Naughty Mary” will.
I dined with General Mahon, to whom I longed to
talk; he looks so interesting; but the party was small,
and not for five seconds did the conversation diverge
from that noble animal, the horse. After dinner three
of the men thought it unsafe for me to be travelling
alone, and offered to do a personally conducted tour ;
but I shall leave here early to-morrow morning unaccom-
panied and unafraid.




Tomb of Salim Chisti —Fatepur Sikri.




FATEPUR SIKRI.
THE CECIL HOTEL.
AGRA.
My dear John,
On a cool, sunny morning 1 left this Hotel in a motor
with General and Mrs. Hickman, the latter’s pretty
daughter Miss Marjory Bingham, and Col. Taylor, to
see Fatepur Sikri. The city, built in every detail by
Akbar, but deserted by him for Agra, owing to the diffi-
culty of obtaining good water, has always been inhabited,
and to-day has a scattered population, our guide assured
us, of 70,000 natives.
All along the perfectly smooth road we were shaded
by an avenue of trees, which is being supplemented by
young ones growing inside circular walls of clay, topped
by a fringe of twigs. I was amused to hear this is done
to preserve them from the onslaught of the hedgehogs.
Col. Taylor is putting in three months in India from
no love of travel or sight-seeing. General Hickman,
however, was as interested as I to see and understand it
all, and was a delightful sight-seeing companion; and
as we walked over the wondrous city with an intelligent
guide, I felt I was viewing comfortably and thoroughly,
all that I had come to see.
Akbar’s three wives’ houses are absolutely different.
His Hindoo wife had the least attractive one; but


Miriam, his Jeypore wife, who the guide insisted was a
Portuguese C hristian, had what was called “sonahra
makan.” or golden house, on account of the profuse gild-
ng both inside and out. 1 his and her 1 urkish bath are
Quite jDeriect. Ihe 1 urkish Queen’s house, now a single
room fifteen feet square, is a marvel of carving. Built
•I led sandstone, there is not one inch left uncarved
anywhere. The ceiling and the pillars of the verandah
that surround it are most beautifully cut. A dado four
feet deep inside depicts scenes of forest and animal life,
and above this, stone lattice screens form shelves.
The tomb of Salim Chisti is a white marble lace-like
building. A solid ebony door, ornamented with brass,
enhances the snowy whiteness of its pierced marble walls,
and the canopy over the tomb inside is inlaid solidly with
Mother-of-pearl. Ihe cenotaph is engraved with the
date of its completion and the Saint’s death, 1580.
Hanging to one of the marble screens that form the
walls are countless pieces of tape and bits of colored
string, tied on by the childless women, both Hindoo and
Mohammedan, who come to pray for the Saint’s inter-
cession to alter their condition.
I he Mosque is a splendid building, and copied from
the one at Mecca. Rising majestically to a height of
seventy feet, it breathes a benediction over the tombs
and palaces. A tiny tomb at the back is pointed out
as the grave of the Saint’s son, who was sacrificed to
appease the gods, and to spare Akbar’s son Jehangir’s
file when he was born. Wandering here, there, and
everywhere, we came constantly upon buildings, each
more lovely than the last. The plain, small building
known as the Girls’ School has a huge stone-paved Court


in front of it, blocked like a pachisi board, with the Em-
peror’s stone seat in the centre, on which he sat to direct
the moves of live slave girls who acted as pieces in the
royal game. Beyond this is the Panch Mahal, erected
as a pleasure house for the court ladies. Fifty-six
columns support the ceiling of the first storey; in the
stone-carved designs with which they are covered no
two are exactly alike. This building rises to a height
of five stories, each smaller than the one below, till
nothing but a small kiosk remains on top.
Akbar’s khwabgah, or house of dreams, on
the second storey of which he slept, bears
paintings all over the walls. I liese have
been varnished to preserve them, a precaution
which has spoiled any charm they may have originally
possessed. Two shafts below, support a platform, and
are beautifully carved, as is almost every room in this
wondrous place. The diwan-i-khas has a curious carved
pillar in the centre of the floor, running half way up the
height of the room; here it diverges into four bridges
across to the corners, where they join a balcony which
runs around the interior. From the outside this single
chamber has the appearance of a two-storey building.
And it is said secret affairs of State were here discussed
by the Emperor, who sat in the centre with one of his
four ministers in each corner of the balcony.
Near by is the Ankh Michauli, a delightful building
of mazelike construction, where one is told the playful
Emperor chased the ladies of the court in the game of
hide and seek. It consists of three large rooms sur-
rounded by narrow passages, the light percolating dimly
through pierced stone screen windows.
F


In front of this building is the astrologer’s house,
built m the twelfth century style of Hindoo architecture.
Huge monsters emit curiously carved struts from their
mouths to the dome, which once was painted. At the
Elephant Gate, back of all these buildings, we paused
to enjoy a view of great beauty. Over the twenty feet
high archway are the two mutilated elephants attributed
to Auraugzeb. To the left are the polo grounds, and
further off still rises the Dur Minaret, a circular stone
tower studded with stone elephants’ tusks, and rising to
a height of seventy feet. Here Akbar came to shoot
antelope, and the tower was built as a monument to his
favorite elephant. A curious fear pervades the average
native child’s mind in India of the elephant, and screams
and tears are the usual accompaniment to incessant chat-
ter when an elephant approaches.
I he waterworks are a wondrous construction on the
left °f the road as one retraces one’s steps from the
Elephant Gate. An enormous well, surrounded by rooms
and staircases, continues into a system of reservoirs, from
which a series of Persian wheels raise the water, and dis-
perse it throughout the palace.
In the Palace of Birbal, built by the Rajah of that
name tor his daughter, we paused to refresh ourselves.
Col. laylor at last showed a little interest in the pro-
ceedings, and helped Miss Bingham cut bread and butter
with an interest I had not thought him capable of show-
ing about anything, especially after his total indifference
to all the wonders he had so recently seen. In this cool
two-storied building of red sandstone, consisting of four
rooms fifteen feet square, we roamed about whilst the
kettle boiled. Victor Hugo is reported to have said of


this, “If it were not the most minute of palaces, it was
the most gigantic of jewel cases.” The ceilings of the
lower rooms are supported by a frieze elaborately carved,
as are the recesses, walls, arches, and doorways. Ihe
upper rooms are covered with cupolas, which are sup-
ported by walls of octagonal construction, and finely
carved corbel brackets, stretching across the angles of the
rooms.
Outside the carving is as beautiful; it has two entrance
porches on the ground floor, and two above with bal-
conies enclosed by stone screens. After tea we explored
a great courtyard enclosed on three sides with stables
for one hundred and two horses and many camels. In
some of the mangers we saw the stone rings used for the
horses’ halters.
As we walked away we paused to see the Gate of Vic-
tory, which rises 172 feet high, above a magnificent
flight of steps. The view of the country is superb when
looked at through this archway, on which is engraved
inside, “Jesus, on whom be peace, said: ‘The world is a
bridge, pass over it, but build no house on it. The world
endures but an hour, spend it in devotion.’ ” With this
advice in our minds we left Fatepur Sikri.
Outside the city wall is a school, wherein the marvel-
lous application of the Hindoo is shown. Here children
diligently set themselves to the task of learning to write
through the medium of a slab of rough slate, a stick
chewed at one end until it resembled a brush, and com-
mon clay dissolved into thin mud for a writing fluid.
What Australian child would pursue studies under these
conditions?




Praying-place in the Palace of the Fort— Agra.




AGRA.
CECIL HOTEL,
AGRA.
Madge dearest,
Across the years of separation our thoughts have con-
stantly embraced, and now, can I make you sense I
wonder, some of the joys my mind has found here?
I left Lucknow 6.30 a.m. Sunday for Gwalior. Judge
Russell, of Bombay, had given me a letter to His High-
ness the Maharajah, which I had forwarded, announcing
my arrival, but I defy any English woman whose know-
ledge of Hindoostani is bounded by “Jao,” “Argy,”
“cha,” and “poggle” to get on a train ostensibly bound
for one place, to keep on that train, and arrive at her
objective point. You change carriages at the command
of your native bearer in a mild submissive spirit, for the
time table is planned to drive you silly. So, though my
ticket said “to Agra via Jhansi and Gwalior,” I arrived
here by the East Indian Railway, although my ticket
read I.M'.R.
'Three times during the day did I sign papers to the
effect that I was an English lady with a maid travelling
without tickets over that line, and I expected an action
for damages on my arrival at Gwalior; but after a day
of misery and misunderstanding, when I found myself
at Agra at 6 p.m., I wisely got off the train, figuratively


kissed the Maharajah’s elephant good-bye for ever, and
prepared to be happy. After a good night’s rest I got a
guide at three rupees a day and drove to the Fort and
I alace. I longed to have you with me. I began in under-
ground rooms used as hot weather apartments for the
court ladies. They are cool and shady, and look over the
river, and lead down to where furnaces are built, that
heated the water in huge cauldrons which was subse-
quently piped to the various baths in the Palace above.
Oh.' they lived in cleanliness in India in the seventeenth
century, and they sometimes died that way. For down
m these shady catacombs is shown a beam, where “death
In hanging and drowning,” was accomplished by sus-
pending the offender by a silk cord to the beam, and
leaving him dangling till the cord snapped, and he
dropped into a deep well below, and was carried out to
e river. Above this gruesome place are the slave women’s
] artments, and the reception and sleeping apartment of
the Lady of the Taj. Oh, Madge! life was just one
perfumed sweetmeat for a favorite in those days: so
simple, so satisfying.
I he Queen’s baths had ceilings of glittering talc over-
laid with a fine pattern of ivy leaves and vines in white
P Ster ’ Ihe marble walls are painted in brilliant colors
and gold m geometrical borders. The deep marble de-
pression m the floor wherein they plunged was fed by
water that flowed through an aperture in the wall in
a cascade over a series of niches holding colored lights,
into a lower basin-like passage of intricate inlaid design
o colored marble leading into the bath.
A curious phenomenon is the piece of sunstone over a
‘ oor leading into a passage that is quite dark, except


Bedroom of the Lady of the Taj, in the Fort-Agra.




Interior of the Pearl Mosque— Agra Fort.




for the curious light-giving quality of a slab of this
stone set in the wall on the way to a white marble room
with curious latrinal appointments; the only one of its
kind, I’m told, in all India. Where the sunstone is
found, of what it consists, the guide could not tell us.
but even on a sunny morning it emits in the shade, a
bright, phosphorescent glow.
All about the inner rooms are pierced marble fences.
The sleeping room, with its receptacles in the walls,
wherein one tries to thrust one’s arm down to the elbow,
as one is told the Queen’s jewels were kept there. Look
at the pictures; can’t you fancy the joy of life on a
soft cushion, with sandalwood scented, silk curtains hang-
ing from the bronze rings that are still in the marble
ceiling, and gazing out upon the glorious view of the
river like a great serpent winding in and out of the corn-
fields. The splash of the rose-water fountain in the room
back of this, which is like a verandah open on one side
to a tiny courtyard paved in black and white marble,
like a chess board ; whilst down below the massive walls
dipped into a moat, which effectually guarded its dun-
geons when the drawbridge was up, and the great gates
barred. It was like a fairy tale and a dream of a thou-
sand days of dear delights.
This delightful palace is tawdry Eastern, if you like,
but exquisite to a degree is the Pearl Mosque, com-
menced in 1648, and taking seven years to build. In
front is a tank thirty-seven feet long, where lovely ladies
used to sit under fountains of colored water, in marble
niches around the sides, to amuse the Emperor. I he
Diwan-i-am, or Hall of public audience, 1 also send a
picture of. But I must tell you of a large plateau of


grass, surrounded by stone balconies with archives at
one end, where an extended platform was projected for
the Emperor to sit on to fish, for the plateau was once
a pond. I here is a bazaar where the merchants used
to display their wares to the court ladies, who could only
peer through stone and marble latticed screens at the
temptations below; and a grape garden 280 feet square,
which once was a mass of pergolas, but is now planted,
with flowers growing close to the ground in a carpet,
pattern.
On the East side of this is a lovely gilded and painted
marble hall, called the Khas Mahal, and in one corner
of the grape garden are three beautifully frescoed rooms
that were the apartments of Shah Jehan. The room near-
est the river is very handsome, and in it Shah Jehan
died gazing at the laj and longing for the lovelv lady
it contained. Ihe one real love he knew in an existence
of many little affections.
I send you a picture of a red sandstone room most
chastely carved. It was built by Akbar, and is pure
Hindoo. Ihe stone ceiling is wonderful with stone cross
beams, carved with great dragons.
As I came away I passed an enormous monolithic cis-
tern of granite. It is nearly five feet high and eight feet
in diameter, and was used as a tub by Jehangir. I then
drove to a merchant’s shop, and for two hours looked at
silk, worked with gold, and marvellous curtains of gauze
and silver. Bed-spreads of silk and precious metals
vere offering at £IOO, and I handled emeralds at extor-
tionate prices, and barbaric ornaments nearly a foot
square, a blaze of rubies and diamonds. Pearls in such


Outside Pillars of Akbar’s Red Sandstone Room, Fort Agra.




The Jama Masjid —Agra.
G




profusion one gathered them up in enormous tassels, and
left them behind.
Agra is not all architecture; one Otto Weylant is a
distinct feature of the place, and to his wonderful car-
pet factory I went with my friends, General and Mrs.
Hickman, and spent a delightful morning.
Stopping in front of an ordinary looking house one
was compelled to gasp with pleasure at the vista seen
through a back door of a chrysanthemum garden. On
entering this, a large fibre-covered shed like the Arab
stables at Bombay confronted one, and a sound of chant-
ing—this, as we walked to the opening grew louder,
until it became an organ swelling volume of sound as the
marvellous picture of the interior revealed itself to our
delighted eyes.
Running across the long, narrow building were a dozen
or more frames holding the threads which form the
foundation of the carpets. On a long bench in front
of each sat as many as eight, ten, or twelve little boys,
and between each loom on the floor, cross-legged, with
a huge book before him, sat a man.
The book contains the pattern of the carpet in rhyme,
and the man reads off a line in a droning voice, which
is echoed in turn by the small workers, whose fingers, with
incredulous swiftness knot in and press down the threads
of their section. One tiny creature, perhaps four years
old, was engaged in the few cream threads which formed
the'outer edge of the carpet he was working on, which in
any case was always the same number of threads,
but he’d chant in Hindoostani “eight white threads,”
then literally fall off the bench, scramble to the other
side to put in eight stitches there, and run back after


each number was called out. A fine carpet has 350
stitches to the inch, and not more than an inch and a
half can be accomplished in a day.
0n Fnda y at 110011 a mo st wondrous sight is the Tamid
Masjid, where nine thousand Mohammedans stand to
pray. Five miles from Agra, at Sikandra Bagh, a fine
gateway opens on the lovely garden enclosing the tomb
ot the Emperor Akbar, a pyramidal building seventy-
-1 °ur feet high, built in four stories, three of which are
red sandstone, and the fourth enclosing the cenotaph
(see picture) of marble. The real resting place is in the
>asement, reached by an inclined plane. A cloister runs
a >out the lower storey, the vaulted ceiling of which is
frescoed in blue and gold. A chapter of the Koran is
written under the fresco on a scroll a foot broad.
Each square of the lattice marble windows on the
fourth storey is carved in a different pattern. Back of
tie monolith cenotaph, which like the majority, is en-
graved with the ninety-nine names of God, is a handsome
marble pillar, four feet high. On this once rested an
engraved emerald saucer, which held the Koh-i-nur.
Nowhere in India have 1 seen a fine staircase. Here.
aS 111 all other buildings, common, steep, and narrow
e steps are found, a curious thing, considering the
beauty of construction of most mosques.
1 he earliest inlay work on marble in India is found
m the exquisite tomb of the grandfather of the ladv of
ie l aj, Itimad-ud-daulah. The tomb stands in a most
.. m C garden 011 tlle opposite side of the river to the
T J ’ tWO hundred aild fifty yards north of the
bast Indian Railway Bridge. At each corner of this
lairy-like creation of cob-webbed marble, stand octagonal


Resting Place of the Koh-i-nur— Sikandra Bagh.




Hall of Public Audience, Fort Agra.
Itimad-ud-daulah’s Tomb.




The Taj Mahal— Agra.




towers forty feet high. On the cenotaphs of Itimad-
ud-daulah and his wife, which are exactly over the actual
tombs below, and made of yellow marble, quantities of
jessamine cover the top, which the attendant gathered
in handfuls for us in return for our offering, and we came
away inhaling the perfume of the blossom, and watch-
ing the day dying in soft, rosy tints, as gently as a
flower.
In India little tin boxes with the owner’s name painted
on them and the words “Not at home” are hung on every
front gate. Into these one shoots one’s card and thanks
God for the simplicity of the visiting convention. Capt.
Pollok had kindly given me a letter of introduction to
the Commissioner’s wife at Agra, and when I presented
it I found her out, but an hour later Mrs. Edward’s
bearer presented a chit from her, asking me to tea on
the morrow, and telling me her husband had put me up
at the Club. Alas! my train leaves at five. Indian hos-
pitality is so frankly kind, so spontaneous, one is in a
perpetual state of feeling grateful.
The Taj one must not see first at high noon. Mv
guide told me that, and created such a feeling of obstin-
ate determination on my part to see why it was withheld
till evening, that I can never get the marvellous charm
it exerts on the mind of all who behold it first in the
softening light of sunset. There is no doubt it is won-
derful in formation and majestic in proportion. Each
time I saw it I was impressed, but never once did I feel
that aching sense, appreciation of great beauty forces
upon one: true there was no moon. I had dreamed of


seeing it in tile pixies light, a silvery poem; but always
s ‘ y " aS a bakm « hot ’ sm-reflecting tomb, hard, unrespon-
i he garden restored, or rather demolished to English
uniformity, no longer has any Oriental character. Amber
"" ' lts untouche d. almost untended garden, delighted
my soul. It was a garden of the East, and as such ful-
i< nn dreams, making me sense the throb of love
and life that existed several hundred years ago.
Whereas the crown lady’s tomb, which took nearly
twenty-two years to build, and cost nearly two million
pounds, does not move me as it should. I climbed to
one of the four turrets of the white minarets, picked out
w-ith black marble, and gazed at the tomb from an de-
lation of one hundred and thirty-seven feet. The tomb
i sdt measures one hundred and eighty-six feet on each
I'l l- 3 * perils ps the most beautifully proportioned
1 " lg ° lts kind in the world. The pierced marble
screens about the cenotaph are exquisite.
“ tla SUgar balls ,rere R'ven us by the attendant in
1 urn for baksheesh as we gazed on the delicate tracing
R “, ga 6 an ‘ lapis lazuli übout the tomb. Austin of
■ deaux probably took part in their decorations, as
cen r 11 , ,1e he was 111 Akbar ’ s service, finally over the
cenotaph hangs a fine Cairene lamp, the gift of Lord
omVdlr tbe s lob e-trotting American, when asked his
in tombs o’’ 0 ’’ J ’ 1 eCh ° * he repl - V ’ “ It,s a neat thill S




The Royal Baths, Fort Delhi.
The Delhi Gate to the Fort.


DLLHI.
CECIL HOTEL,
DELHI.
My ever dear Mother,
Murray’s Guide Book gives one 109 things of interest
to look at in Delhi, and says that the sights cannot be
comfortably seen in less than four or five days. It then
proceeds with an itinerary for those who can only spare
three days. The brain that can see, assimilate, and retain
memory of twenty individual things a day, is one that
will be of inestimable pleasure to its possessor. I, alas!
have a weaker variety of head, so decided to leave the
Guide Book at home, select what appealed to me. and
with a native guide and a friend who spoke Hindoostani,
go when the spirit moved me to see a few things thor-
oughly. I was successful in my selection of a guide;
he did not produce a book of chits, extolling his excel-
lence in that capacity, which is the tiresome procedure
of almost every kind of tradesman in India. If one
buys a pot of ink. a pair of shoes, any impersonal item,
one is besought to write of its superiority, the honesty of
the dealer, and any flowery detail one may see fit to add.
Servants produce most marvellous “ chits” or
recommendations from late masters, which may be
genuine, or, again, may have been purchased from a
Baboo in the bazaar. The professional letter writer is


one who does a thriving trade in all parts of India. An
example of this kind having come under my notice I
append it here. It was an application for employment
addressed to the Officer commanding Decli Irregular
Forces, and ran as follows: —
“Honored Master! Having heard of your almighty
mercy and loving kindness to us worms. I tell you of
my circumstances. By grace of God and your Lordship
I have seven children, all babes and sucklings. Besides
this abominable litter I have many male and female re-
lations. What have I done that I, should be blessed with
such cursed trials? As your Lordship is my Father and
Mother, I would request that you will take this worm
and wife and suckles and relations—both male and
female —and provide for us from your bounty at a re-
muneration of R’s 20 a month. I cannot read or write,
and have only the suckle qualifications, and male rela-
tions and feminine, but by the Grace of God and your
Lordship, I look forward to years of prosperity and
happiness. All the chavin of Decli sing of your praises,
your justice and mercy, therefore, call us all that we
may fatten on your love and gentleness. Call quickly.
Your faithful worm and beast. Meema tal—Despicable
brute and unwilling father of babies.”
I arrived at Delhi late at night and awoke next morn-
ing to the eternal sunshine of December, and hastened to
the Mughal Fort and Palace, built between 1638-48. by
the Fmperor Shah-Jahan.
For the history of Delhi I find no space in this little
hook, nor of its stirring share in the Mutiny. One long
day I gave to the Ridge and all that has to do with the


Where the celebrated Peacock Throne stood.
Fountain discovered and restored by Lord Curzon, Fort Delhi.




siege. It was a day of sadness, of introspective emotion,
that has no right to grow into narrative beneath my
frivolous pen.
The name of Curzon is sounded the moment one enters
the Fort by the Delhi Gate, where between the outer gate
—which is inferior in every way to the Lahore Gate—and
the inner one, stand two huge, black stone elephants,
which were restored and presented in place of the original
mutilated ones, by the late Viceroy. Pieces of the
originals are to be seen in the Fort Museum—a tiny
place containing such things as Moguls’ silver chairs, a
blood-stained coat of General Nicholson’s, odd and sun-
dry weapons, and villainous pictures of Delhi Kings and
other grandees. To a casual spectator the Delhi Fort
has not the pleasure-giving qualities of the one at Agra,
nor is it as well kept up. Large spaces of ground, either
covered with coarse, long grass, or earth and loose stones,
have to be traversed between many of the buildings, and
though many barbarous European contrivances to turn
stately rooms into partitioned compartments for officers’
quarters existed up till a few years ago, I am glad to
say they are now being removed.
In one room recently used as the Officers’ Mess, adjoin-
ing the Diwan-i-am, the floor having been taken up and
the rough plaster removed by Lord Curzon’s orders, a
lovely, creamy, marble basin to a fountain, carved in
the form of a gigantic lotus, was revealed. It is at
least ten feet in diameter.
The hall of public audience, 100 feet long by 60 feet
wide, with its splendid columns and engrailed arches
is very fine. It is not difficult to conjure up the beauti-
ful scene it must have presented in the days of Shah


Jehan, when it was covered with brilliant Chunam, which
is a design painted on the marble in gorgeous colors and
much gold, and populated by the superbly dressed natives,
who came to present petitions to the Emperor seated in
a recess on the famous peacock throne.
I he pietra dura work, so extolled by the guide books,
is disappointing if one has gone to India imbued with
the idea of their civilisation so ancient and profound
when Europeans were savages. 1648 exhibited in Europe
far finer inlay-work and carvings than one sees of that
date in any part of Delhi. And then the Diwan-i-Khas,
or private audience hall, disappointed me, with its
tracery of precious stone inlay, so deftly picked away
by cute Americans’ penknives. It is well their country-
woman s dollars have gone to so wisely repair their
thoughtless damage. Why anyone wants to destroy a
beautiful, graceful design, in an utterlv lovely building,
by taking away a fragment of lapis lazuli, agate, or dis-
colored turquoise, passes my understanding.
Until guarded by watchmen, however, this was an
almost daily occurrence since tourist Americans have
been travelling over India.
I could not see that the private audience chamber,
even though splendidly proportioned and built of white
marble, and at one time bearing a ceiling of silver, could
ever have merited the Persian inscription ‘over the two
outer arches, which translates into “If Paradise can be
on the face of the earth, it is this. Oh. it is this: Oh,
it is this; Oh, it is this.” Unless perhaps when bril-
liant with lights and British uniforms, scintillating with
flashing jewels and lovely ladies’ eyes, one thinks of the
ball on January 6th, 1903, in honor of the Coronation


of his late Majesty King Edward VII. Numerous
rooms open off one another near this, but they have no
artistic value, and the three bath apartments floored with
intricate inlay of pietra dura have barbarously been white-
washed everywhere. The excuse being that the walls
of the King’s bath supported paintings of an immoral
character.
An old Scotch veteran took us through a massive
bronze door into the forty by thirty-five feet courtyard of
the Pearl Mosque. This Mosque has three arches over
a stage like elevation at the end, and the walls are decor-
ated in low relief. The prayer places under the arches
on the platform, which are shaped in outlines of pietra
dura work, were recently restored “By order of Lord
Curzon” at a cost of something like R’s 90 each. The
high walls that surround this Moti Masjid threw cooling
shadows. Our ancient guide mumbled his guide book
lesson, and left us to dream, for here it was peaceful to
a degree, until a party of native sightseers from the hills,
with the most horrible, old, garrulous guide imaginable,
came chattering in and dispelled the charm of the
moment of meditation.
So we went on to look at two pavilions called the
“Question and Answer.” A marble canal leads from one
to the other, where sweet-scented water used to flow,
starting in “Question,” over a cascade wherein colored
lights were placed as in the ladies’ baths at Agra. Be-
tween these pavilions is a huge covered tank, used by
the Emperor as a swimming bath. It was all in process
of being restored when I was there —a disconcerting ele-
ment to one who goes to a historic spot to dream of its
ancient grandeur.


After bartering for ivory elephants and pearls all
one morning, the latter four times Bond Street prices,
I came out of the shop to find myself facing the Jama
Masjid, a Mohammedan Mosque.
An enormous flight of steps, at least half a street
block in length, led up to the gateways. These steps
were infested with beggars, whining “Baksheesh, mem
sahib, Baksheesh,” and displaying their rags, and fre-
quently hideous deformities. In India the unsightly
cripple makes his ailment a means of livelihood, which
is distressing beyond words to the ordinary mind.
When we reached the massive doors overlaid with brass
arabesques half an inch thick, my Hindoo bearer was
turned back with scant courtesy. At a recent Moham-
medan festival, he tells me, a dead pig was thrown in
amongst the devout at prayer. This caused a riot that
resulted in bloodshed and disorder, and an ordinance
against the admission to this Mosque of any of the
accursed race of pig throwers.
We entered the quadrangle 325 feet square and sub-
mitted to the tying on of colossal cotton shoes before
proceeding. The usual tank is in the centre, where all
who come to pray first bathe, cleanse their teeth, arrange
their hair, and replace their turbans. It is a mark of
great disrespect for a Hindoo or Mohammedan to appear
with his head uncovered. There are four towers at each
corner; into one I climbed; half way up I met some
burly visiting pathans coming down, and the problem
of two bodies occupying one space was demonstrated
most unpleasantly. However, the top once gained, a
superb view of Delhi was my reward. The heat of the
noon sun was overpowering, and drove me back to inspect


the mosque, which occupies one end of the quadrangle.
It is 200 feet long and 90 feet deep, and surmounted by
three domes. As we turned to come out we were be-
sought to look at sacred relics of the prophet. “Koran,
Lady, come see Koran from which the Prophet read.”
We went, but those in charge refused to uncover this
holy of holies till Baksheesh had been paid. We pre-
sented eight annas, but evidently our appearance in their
eyes warranted more. “Ladyship pay more to see these
most holy things,” the guide whined; but “Ladyship”
was tired of importunate Mohammedans, and took her
eight annas out of the astonished guide’s hand and
walked off, leaving the attendants in the barred enclosure
with the Koran, to say the least, surprised.
As we climbed into our phaeton gharri, our attention
was arrested by some dancing girls, and men beating
curious drums like huge hour glasses.
One of these nautch girls was quite beautiful enough
to have inspired any of the Eastern love songs heard in
English drawing-rooms. She was quite the dirtiest of
the lot. Bangles jangled on her ankles above feet which
were crusted with the earth she lovingly dug her heels
into. Her wondrously adjusted sari covered an untidy
head, and all her tawdry draperies were woefully soiled.
Her face was lovely and her teeth perfect. The eyes,
well blacked with the soot from lamp smoke, were lumin-
ous.
This eye-blacking process is indulged in by men,
women, and infants. The baboos in Messrs. ThoS. Cook
& Son’s at Bombay—dressed in proper European shirts,
collars, ties, and coats, surmounting the native drapery
in lieu of trousers, which displays with Scotch impar


tiality the leg from above the sock to well over the knee —
are blacked about the eyes like a Gaiety-chorus girl. The
tiny infants of a few months that I saw on the road from
Amber, were so blurred about the eyelids I fancied them
suffering from some awful ailment. On inquiring of
the guide what the black on the children’s eyes was
caused by, he looked at me pityingly and remarked,
loftily, “To make beauty, of course!” From Koran to
dancing girl the eight annas went, and the nautch began.
The men droning a tune and intermittently hitting the
drums, whilst the three women, who might well be grand-
mother, mother and daughter, lilted the melancholy music
and postured in the dust, bending, swirling, gesticulating,
and always droning the story the dance was supposed
to illustrate. We threw baksheesh and drove off to that
kaleidoscopic bazaar, the Chandni Chauk.
Nowhere else in India have 1 seen such a collection
of shops on so broad a thoroughfare. The streets of
Jevpore are very wide, but have a deserted air. Down
the centre of the Chandni Chauk the pedlars’ booths are
gav with Indian garments, bangles, and fruit. Sweet-
meats and chipatties or native bread food are sold on
huge brass travs, supported on little tables ingeniously
made of twisted straw. These little straw stands one
sees at every Railway Station at which one stops. The
vendor of native food or “nice, decent fruit; nice, decent
fruit,” as one often hears the moral orange and banana
called, walks along with a tray heavily ladened on his
head, his straw stand under his arm, and later squats on
the ground, his wares before him on his impromptu table.
d'he shops on either side contain merchandise of greater
value, and dismounting we climbed a narrow staircase


and found ourselves on a flat roof. At once I sensed a
delightful air ot mystery in this abode of the famous
Delhi gold embroiderer. We walked across the roof
to a room where, lying about on the floor, native workers
eyed me curiously. This shop opens on to a balcony
that overlooks the street. When we were there it sup-
ported half a dozen men busy about a coffee-making ma-
chine, for it was their hour of tiffin. Cupboards around
the walls, glass encased, contained most lovely native
garments at fabulous prices. I had come to purchase
Indian clothes for my three little pledges of affection in
far-away Australia, and found myself parting foolishly
with money for tiny green satin, sapphire velvet, and
red coats, that I’d refused for carved ivories earlier in
the day; but whenever was sentiment light on the pocket?
It was in this shop Lady Curzon’s wondrous Durbar
peacock dress was worked, and though the gold and
silver is massively applied, the designs strike me as stiff
and inartistic, in all this vaunted Delhi metal embroid-
ery.
Driving home through the garden, at St. James’
Church I got out and went in to see the memorial tablets
and say a little prayer. There is something so tear-com-
pelling about the simplicity of the inscriptions on the
walls and in front of the altar, of the dear, brave men
whose blood has soaked the Indian soil that England
might he supreme. As a mother, I prayed that if neces-
sary my son may follow in the footsteps of these calm
heroes, whose lives have so gallantly been offered up on
the altar of patriotism.
Let me warn you, dear Mummy and all who intend to
do Indrapat, that if you mean to go for data notebook


in hand, to mark and to report on the length and breadth
of this ruined Delhi, you must start early and stay all
day, with tiffin basket much in evidence.
For the dreamer like myself, to whom India is but
a series of lovely pictures, let him choose the late after-
noon, clad in thinnest clothes, with a heavy coat and
fur rug for the return drive after sundown. All these
so-called deserted cities are inhabited by a population
that would be called a thriving village in barren Aus-
tralia. As we crossed the bridge, having just left our
gharri, a nice little boy, perhaps twelve years old. offered
his services as guide. We took him and his several com-
panions as far as the gate, where fortunately the latter
left us to explore- the ruined city, with only the faint
echo of their voices at a pleasant distance from our ears.
We poked about in erstwhile palace and mosque. In
the latter I climbed steep steps after my little guide,
who had an adorable appreciation of views—and silence.
He spoke only Hindoostani, and discreetly little of that.
I never enjoyed any sight seeing in Indian ruins so much
as that evening of rose and gold in dead Indrapat. Till
the man who accompanied me grew restless, I sat in a
cloistered tower of the mosque dreaming of Humavan,
who died in 1550, of the Court that then held sway.
No doubt the Emperor wore the ridiculous fitting
trousers and coats of the high-class native of to-day,
that always so offend my sense of niceness. Dreaming
myself into an indolent woman of that time I know no.
other cut, so I am blissfully unconscious of the excel-
lence of English Sahibs’ clothes, and their comforting
influence. On the way back, by a series of hideous scum-
covered pools, in which natives bathe, we got out to see


Kutub Minar and Iron Pillar, Delhi.




the spot on the rampart wall where Brigadier General
John Nicholson, who led the assault of Delhi, fell in
the hour of victory on September 23rd. My mind will
conjure up that picture at twilight on every anniversary,
as it is the eve of little Beatrice’s birthday, and will
serve to remind me always of a pathetic event of the
great Mutiny of 1857.
There are twelve or more ancient Delhis, and to-day
undoubtedly the most interesting is eleven miles from
the modern city. All along the road, one passes ruins
of mosque and court, that would command exhaustive
investigation were one not impatiently waiting to see
the great mosque of Kuwat-ud-Islam and the Kutub
Minar. The picture of the latter fails to convey the
impressiveness of this wondrous piece of stone work. It
is 238 feet high, and rises slightly out of plumb in the
first storey, to an erect elevation of five stories, marked
by corbelled balconies, and decorated with dadoes of
inscription. The base diameter is over forty-seven feet
and the top nine feet. 'The lowest great hand of text
inscription is extremely beautiful; the three first storeys
are of red sandstone, the two upper faced with white
marble. A gallery of ninety-five feet above the ground
gives a fine view, but it is from the summit, after climb-
ing 379 steps, one gets an adequate reward for one’s
effort. A story is told there by the guide to this effect.
The Begum of Altamsh, being a devout woman, desired
to gaze daily upon the sacred Jumna; to do this mam-
slaves were required to carry her to the River. Altamsh
then conceived the idea of heightening the Kutub, so that
his Begum might gaze daily upon her beloved Jumna.


without leaving the City, and accordingly raised it to its
present elevation.
The tomb of Altamsh, who perished in 1235 A.D., is
built of red sandstone. It is primarily interesting as
being the oldest tomb known to exist in India. The
interior, which is like a large room, is almost completely
covered with beautiful carving, and finely cut inscrip-
tions of passages from the Koran. At present it is open
to the sky.
I he iron pillar here is one of the most interesting
curiosities in India, rising 23 feet 8 inches above the
ground, and recording its history by a deeply cut San-
scrit inscription on its west face. The third century
A.D. has been assigned as its date by the translator.
From the hot sun that beat mercilessly upon us, as we
stood gazing at this solid shaft 16 inches in diameter,
we sought shelter in the cloisters running around from
both sides of the gate.
These cloisters are supported by Jain pillars, which,
though originally carved beautifully with replicas of
human and animal figures, have, in almost every
instance, been mutilated by the Mohammedans, who allow
no image of man or beast to be made.
The Arabic inscription over the Eastern gate says that
27 idolatrous temples were demolished to provide this
material. The whole history of Indian palaces and
mosques teems with deeds of loot; is it, therefore, ant-
wonder the native appropriates anything not nailed
down, since the right of might is the law of Kings. As
a tourist in hotels, as a guest in bungalows for three
months, I never lost one article by theft. During no


The Tomb of Altamsh—Delhi.




similar period in European travel have I ever known a
tourist escape despoiling.
Five miles along a road of beauty and variety of
views, we motored to Tughlakabad. For some distance
before we arrived the crest of the fort was seen. The
city is enclosed by a wall or erstwhile rampart of nearly
four miles in circuit, built of such massive stones that it
is supposed they were quarried on the spot, the largest
weighing about six tons. The city had thirteen gates,
through walls 45 feet high, with parapets and inner
walls taking the whole to an elevation of 62 feet. Ruins
of palace and mosque abound, domed, separate rooms,
and dark passages leading to outer walls. It is a
dream place to explore. There are no beauties to delight
the eye, but a thousand things to excite the imagination,
for it is the ruin of a stern giant, massive and grand.
The ruined walls of Jama Masjid are inhabited by a
small Guyar colony. It is impressively desolate, having
been cursed by the Nizam-ud-din Aulia in the words,
f‘May it be inhabited by Guyars, or may it remain deso-
late.” The tomb of Tuglak Shah forcibly suggests Egypt,
with its flat and sloping walls. It is in the midst of an
artificial lake, surrounded by a pentagonal outwork.
The outside of the tomb is decorated by bands of white
marble, set in red sandstone, and is surmounted by a
marble dome. Three lofty archways form entrances
on three of its four sides, and inside are three cenotaphs,
said to be those of Tuglak Shah, his Queen, and their
son, Khuni Sultan, “the bloody King.” The warning
of “plenty snakes here,” made exploring a mixed joy.
So with the story ringing in my ears of Feroz Shah, the
humane, who succeeded bloody Khuni, and purchased
I


acquittances from all those whom his predecessor had
wronged, and put them in a chest at the head of his
tomb, that he might present them when called to judg-
ment, I retraced my steps, inhaling the perfume of the
tiny jessamine flowers, the attendant took from a Begum’s
tomb, in return for our offering. The motor speedily
bore us to a more inspiriting scene —a collection of
lovely tombs, enhanced by splendid trees and plateaus
of grass are those by the fine mosque of red sandstone
of Jamud Khana, and the rest house built by Emperor
Aurangzeb. Here also is the simple grave of that
poetess, Jahanara Begum, sister of the Emperor, who
desired only the covering of soft, green grass open to
the face of the sky as her tomb. Beside this are the
tombs of Muhammud Shah, 1719-1748, and Prince
Jahangir, Akbar’s son. These have elaborately carved
marble doors in the screen-like archways of beautifully
pierced marble that enclose the tombs, and near by is the
tomb of Amir Khussan, a famous poet. Seated all
about this tomb were students copying out his writing,
their quaint Eastern raiment making a splendid splash of
color, in the dim light of the grave chamber surrounded
by two galleries. The walls of the tomb are inscribed
with an epitaph to this now silent “sweet-tongued par-
rot.” and a pathway through small shrines takes us upon
the wondrous sight of a huge tank of deep, translucent,
green water, on two sides of which are covered balconies
about 8 feet wide. A platform at one end descends in
a flight of ghaut steps to the pool, and on the fourth side
is a high, stone wall, with bronze domes glistening in
the sun, and backed by luxuriant, large-leafed trees.


Ruins of Tughlakabad.
Section of the Kutub Minar.




Various men were bathing as we entered an aperture
opening to the stone platform, and a superbly propor-
tioned young man asked if we cared to see him do a
high dive. We assented readily, and at his suggestion
entered the balcony and walked to the junction of the
two covered cloisters from whence we watched him, brown,
lithe, and beautiful, run lightly along the top of the
Avail, spring upon a bronze dome, poise for a moment
like a bird, then dart into the cool, green, placid pool,
emerging shortly and running breathlessly to where we
stood, salaaming for his pay. We gave it most willingly,
and watched a second plunge before visiting the Avhite
marble Tomb of the Saint —he of the traditional quarrel
with the Emperor Tughlak Shah.
This tomb is 18 feet square, and surrounded by a
Avide platform. Around the grave is a low marble
rail, and over it is a canopy, inlaid solidly with mother-
of-pearl. In the Avails are the pierced, marble screens
seen in such perfection in so many parts of India.
The story of the quarrel between this Saint (who died
in 1324, at the age of 92) and the King, has been
told thus: —“The Emperor requisitioned the work-
men on the tank for labour on his fortress at Tugh-
lakabad, and that when the .Saint arranged to carry on
his Avork at night, the Emperor forbade the sale of oil to
him; thereupon the Avater of the tank miraculously
served as oil, and Avas duly cursed by the incensed King,
in return for which the Saint cursed Tughlakabad.”
Be the cause what it may have been, there can be no
reasonable doubt that Nizam-ud-din Avas concerned with
Ala-ud-din in the plot against the Emperor, and the say-


ing with which he comforted his disciples when told
that the King was returning to punish him, and, indeed,
"as only a few miles distant, was “Dilli harrog dur ast”
—Delhi is still far off.




Native Spinner Allahabad Exhibition.
Woman grinding Corn.


ALLAHABAD.
VISITORS’ CAMP.
ALLAHABAD.
Veronica dearest, —
I have been in this country over a month, but have had
no hour for you till now. I arrived here at broiling
noon, jogging in a thing built for the very slim, but often
crowded with fat natives—a closed conveyance, that
always takes away my last shred of good temper, and
which landed me at the visitors’ camp, which is a long
way from the station. The camp is a curious collection
of newly-blocked streets, alphabetically named, and
covered with tents. Hannah got down at the Camp
Inspector’s tent, to enquire where we were to go. I
waited. She returned, “Mr. Lawson will see you,
Madam.” I got out with alacrity, prepared for war.
I sensed that they’d never heard of me despite my
letters and telegrams to the Superintendent or Manager,
or whoever Mr. Murray was, is, or ought to he.
A soft voice, bidding me come in, stemmed my fast
approaching wrath, and there at the table, piled with
correspondence, the telephone ringing incessantly, sat
the saddest-faced man I’ve ever seen. He listened
courteously, and conducted us to a tent, advising me to
have my maid sleep with me.


So ’ if you please, we were housed under canvas with
narrow camp beds, a tiny table with a looking glass that
libelled you to look in, and a single chair.
One lone electric bulb was suspended from a string
about the tent pole, like the head of the serpent on the
tree m Eden, that fateful tree of good and evil. Behind
is a tiny tent for bath and dressing-room. The wash-
hand stand, an iron tripod affair. The canvas roof so
°w you crick your neck whilst you bathe. But, oh!
my darling girl! the moment of delight is when you sit
m your bath. Whilst you dally with your toe end. the
mosquitoes lovingly bite their monograms on your back.
When you splash the water there, they light on your
knees, which the proportion of your bath makes neces-
sary to tuck under your chin. Then you rise up. for-
getting the roof, only to get a spank from the sandy
canvas, for sand is everywhere, since your tent is on a
glorified ant-heap.
er tiffin in a barn-like building, I got a tonga, the
rudest form of wooden cart, and sitting behind a
y r U u riVCr ’ bumped into Government House to see
Airs. Hore-Ruthven, who is laid up there with a sore
throat Heavens! the relief to get somewhere dark
. 11 C °° ' 1 Stayed all afternoon, and Lady Hewitt came
m an d gave us tea at five.
On my return here, I took a rickshaw round the United
P ovmces Exhibition. It's just a stone’s throw from
tine “f pi, 3 POl ° ground beside It’s the usual
Sh t T bUi ' ding ’ and at sundown « lit up
with .. if TT r ° WS ° f electric lights and fireworks,
evening. * " atlVe S ° loves blastin S the peaceful


Inside, suburban India was riotously gay about the
restaurant, drinking tea or milk punch, a liquor like
sweetened sherry and quinine, supposed to avert the
evening chill. There was an undercurrent murmur of
voices in the hushed, nervous tones heard at a large
cliurch wedding, and a band played, but no one looked
cheery and gay, no one laughed, no one lounged. They
sat decorously, satisfied to be doing something unusual —
the dear, calm British nation! I returned to my tent,
dined in splendid solitude, and went to bed bored with
everything.
Next dav I did the fort, which has been held by the
British since 1798, and was founded by Abkar 1575 A.D.
It interested me chiefly because, from one point outside
its ramparts you see the union of the Ganges and the
Jumna. In the one are natives bathing as a sacred rite,
whilst the crocodile sports below in the other waiting for
human tit-bits. Cheerful country!
The temple in the underground part of the fort is
abominable. Hindoo gods are carved in the stone walls
and smudged with vermilion, orange-coloured flowers
piled in front of each, and a sense of dampness and
slime pervading it all.
The chief work is a stone or block of iron, that looks
like a buffalo hump. This is supposed to be an undecay-
ing banyan tree. The native guide, seeing my appar-
ent disappointment in these holy surroundings, and.
wishing to excite my interest, told me a holy man once
struck the tree with his sword, and that milk flowed
from one side, whilst blood ran from the other. “A
useful man to have about in siege times,” I remarked.


I here is a King’s apartment in this fort, fast crumb-
ling to decay. The “Tommy” entrusted to escort
me said he had no idea such a place was there, so
evidently many people do not pry beyond the Asoka
pillar, which rises 49 feet 5 inches above the ground.
Edicts of Circa, 240 8.C., are inscribed on it, and also
a record of Samundra Guptas’ victories in the second
century, and one by Jahangir to commemorate his acces-
sion to the throne. How much more enduring than
our modern newspaper accounts.
1 left the courtyard with its ancient pillar and went
to the racecourse; it is the dearest little garden, with
such a tiny stand facing the length of the course, which
is also very small. On a railed platform, comfy wicker
chairs, and tables for tea were set out under the shade
of tlie trees amongst the inevitable tubs of palms.
1 he officers of a regiment were at home, which means
free tea to the assembled populace. I arrived with the
grim determination to say good-bye and dash off to
Benares; but fate made me powerless. Fate that always
steps m with a new emotion just when life threatens to
become vegetable. 1 sent my tonga off, and General
Mahon took me to the Club in Captain Barrett’s car.
Or did I go with Captain Barrett, the A.D.C., in
General Mahon’s car? I shall never solve the mystery
of that car’s owner.
Anyway, I went to the Allahabad Club, and into the
pretty ballroom, whose floor is sunk a foot below the
level of the space outside the doric pillars that enclose
the dancing surface. I sat in a deep rosy chintz-
nnered lounge, under softly shaded lamps, sipped a milk
punch, and allowed myself to be persuaded to remain


over at least one night for the dance at the Club, which
in turn brought Captain Plant as a partner, who is in
charge of the Maharajah of Benares’ son, and I’m to be
put up at the guest house when I go there, which now
will not be till after New Year.
I wish I could tell you adequately about the polo next
day. Kishingar’s gorgeous turbaned team, with 70 ponies
to choose from, made the galloping furious. Whirl-
winds of dust everywhere below, feminine flutter in the
stand and vice-regal enclosure, and Oh! delicious gossip!
Veronica, the world is just the same on these burning
plains of India as in a Canadian village. The petty in
spirit dominating where it can, the mighty in birth
snubbing the upstart when necessary.
To-day the Burra mem sahib has been pleased to get
angry with her guests for beginning breakfast without
her, and has been nicely reproved by the daughter of a
peer. I’m so glad I stayed. One sometimes tries to
feel there are finer, bigger, better people than one knows
oneself to be, and it’s so depressing to be self-effacing.
To-day I feel just a little nicer and more amiable than
some of these dear ladies.
I took two men to lunch in my barn —they w r ere such
cheery dears, and in the afternoon I met some people
whom I feel will materially add to my pleasures in India.
I dined tout seul with one of the polo players; such an
interesting man! and did the art exhibits with him later
on. But inferior lacquer after Japanese fine product,
and crude silver and embroideries left me unmoved, and
I thought the native women’s exhibit pathetic. Long
have I heard of fine Indian muslin and of the embroidery


thereon. My dear, stick to your French convent
embroidery and English mull for fine texture.
More polo next morning, then a tete a tete lunch with
a boy who says he is 30. He looks 22. I feel like
his maiden aunt, is it a safe sensation? More races
afterwards, and then a dash to the Club in the cold, for
it grows curiously chilly here at sundown, in the car of
two owners. We stopped at General Kerrs to get a
viap, and decided to let the chauffeur drive, as three
in the back seat are productive of warmth. I wound
my feather boa around each man, when crash! bang!
Entering the Club grounds by the “out” gate, we collided
with a four-in-hand. With splendid presence of mind
we three sat dumb, whilst the chauffeur, smashing over a
bicycle the bicycle that stands at every Club door in
India, with the palm of the community —we dashed out
the In gate to the dark road beyond.
I then untangled the boa. We returned by the
ladies’ entrance, and whilst the General and I had milk
punch, his A.D.C. mingled his commiseration with the
owner of the broken bicycle. “Did you get the number
of the car?” he inquired. The man had not. “Well,
surely you saw the colour?” Another negative. “Who
was sitting in it?” This was really a brave question,
hut f ate is smiling on me. The owner of the “bike”
did not know.
Each night, at 8 p.m., there is an old custom here in
the houses of the native princes. A piper stands on
the top of the palace gates and pipes to let the faithful
subjects know their King is doing his best to increase
his family. The managers of the Exhibition being
unconscious of this custom, I presume, but wishing the


native as well as the European to have the music of
his country, elected to place a piper on the entrance gate.
I dined at the Exhibition my last night in Allahabad,
and as I left for the train, the native piper’s weird
strains came plaintively on the breeze, as he tramped
about on the arch over the manager’s office.
lam finishing this letter in Calcutta. Next day we
had lunch served so quaintly on the train. Our section
was like a small room. There was a door on each side
next to a partition, which shut off our bath-room. In
front of the three windows on either side of the car
adjoining the doors, were the long leather seats whereon
one sleeps at night. As one takes great rolls of bedding,
pillows, and a steamer trunk, and hat box into the car-
riage one is quite comfortable, as there is plenty of
light, and two electric fans.
At one station where we paused the usual ten or
twelve minutes, two bare-footed attendants came into our
car dressed in white trousers, with long green serge frock-
like coats, fastened to the chin with brass buttons.
Broad belts of three cords of twisted red and gold cloth
were around their waists, and high, white glazed hats
fitting tightly to their heads, and slanting to a somewhat
larger crown, surrounded at the top with a twist of the
red and gold cord, which was drawn down to the edge
of the head in the centre in front with a brass brooch,
the trade mark of the railway caterer.
They bore trays of spoons, forks, napkins, etc., and
whilst we were at the station, soup and fish were quickly
served beside us where we sat. As we pulled out of
the station, huge piles of dishes tied up in white cotton
cloths were put in our carriage, and one attendant


travelled with us to the next station, serving three meat
courses. One with fresh salad, which I forbade Hannah
to eat, followed by stewed guavas and a Welsh rabbit,
all perfectly hot.
With no unnecessary noise, our bearded Mohammedan
Khidmutgar gathered the plates together, tied up the
corners of the cotton cloth, and having collected two
shillings for each person’s lunch, salaamed, and stepped
off the train when it stopped, with his dishes and empty
soda water bottles.




On the Line to Darjeeling.


DARJEELING.
CALCUTTA,
DEC. 15th, iq 10.
Olive dear, —
Here in this East you have so delightfully expressed,
I am constantly thinking of you, but life is so beautiful
these days I have little time to write. Just doing the
things one wants to, out of the choice of what can be
done, and sometimes doing the thing one longs to do as
I am going to tell you of in this letter, and in visiting
those places one has dreamed about.
Canadian-born, the snows have always called to me.
I don t want them intimately. I have no desire to
battle with their force. But always are they alluring
when their coldness does not reach me. So I started off
alone with my bearer one afternoon about 5.30 from
Calcutta, with a great joy in my heart, and, as the com-
fortable vestibule carriage on the train bore me past the
luxuriant green-robed gardens of suburban Calcutta,
with their ponds and palms, and their creaking bamboo,
I felt no desire to read my books or magazines. Life
without was a panorama of splendour that my aching
eyes clung to, till night veiled it all in silent mystery.
We reached Damudkia about nine o’clock. The noisy,
bustling coolies pushed and jostled in human waves, and
led us down an inclined mud bank to the flat-bottomed


steam ferry —a fine big boat, with dressing-room and
bath-room, with porcelain tubs and plenty of mirrors.
Xo need to wear one’s hat crooked when travelling in
India. On the upper deck in the caressing night air I
dined. A soft moon, in a vapourous mist shone fitfully
on the river, which scintillated under the steamer’s
beacon as we plodded slowly up the thirteen miles to the
Sara Ghaut landing on the other side, where the train
was waiting, and I was soon asleep on my way to Silli-
guri. When 1 awoke the next morning earlv, there on
the right, far beyond, were the rose-tinted snow peaks of
the Kinchin janga Range. It was my first glimpse of
snow in India, and a charming emotion. After break-
fast at Silliguri, I got into the most delightful railway
carriage 1 have ever seen running on a two-feet gauge.
1 he cars were a series of open boxes not unlike a motor
or a tram, with three seats facing three others, a roof,
but no sides, and so low one had scarcelv to raise one’s
foot to enter.
Enveloped in a sealskin coat, and my feet tucked up in
a fur rug, I was prepared for the cold. Yet a little
girl sat between me and her father, and did crochet work
with bare hands all the way up.
Winding along most lovely roads, we started off slowly.
AN e went little over eight miles an hour, but ascended a
thousand feet in each. About seven miles from Silli-
guri we began the climb, twisting and turning on to a
fresh view of surpassing loveliness everv few minutes.
(rreat trees towered above, and the undergrowth of tree
ferns and shrubs in the ravines was most graceful and
lovely. About 17 miles along one does an extraordinary
loop, of which I send a picture, and the road grows


Mongolian-looking Hindoos at Darjeeling.
On the Road to Darjeeling.




narrower and narrower. One has no sense of being on
a railway; it’s the exact sensation of motoring, helter-
skelter along a road.
The native changes materially as we ascend, and
becomes a distinctly flat-nosed, almond-eyed Mongolian
in type. Though his forehead is plastered with Hindoo
caste marks, his hair is worn in a pigtail, and surmounted
with a Tibetan hat. The women, too, wear different
garments to their sisters in the plains. Greasy cotton
bands bind their brows, sewn with crude turquoise. Great
metal ear-rings, a blur of blue turquoise or copper ore,
Ido not know which. Huge necklaces, barbaric and
clumsy, but intensely attractive, hang on their chests,
and their hands are covered with silver rings set with
turquoise and pink tourmalines.
As we mounted to colder regions, bare feet and sandals
gave way to thick-soled, felt Chinese boots, and as trees
and ferns faded from the landscape below, the hills
blossomed with the stunted tea shrub, set in mathemati-
cal rows, and made picturesque by the cinnamon-brown
and claret-coloured draperies of the native girl
gardeners.
It was a sunny day of exquisite clearness that Fate
granted me to make this trip, and having reached a cold
elevation of 7,000 feet, we began to descend to Darjee-
ling, which is 6,000 feet, and tl>e view of the highest
mountains in the world gradually revealed themselves. I
was thankful the train was almost empty, and the other
travellers as speechless as myself—indiscriminate words
would have killed my joy of Kinchinjanga, forty-five


miles away in reality, but seemingly close enough to
embrace. They are 28,156 feet high. Think of it—
five and a half miles up in the air
Arriving at lunch time, I was intensely disappointed
in the type of cottages built in this splendid spot. I’d
hoped for Swiss chalets, or Indian bungalows. Not a
bit of it! Horrid pretentious English or American
suburban villas are everywhere in this king of mountain
places.
I got a rickshaw, not at all the Japanese' or Cingalese
variety, but with a centre shaft and cross beam. At the
end of the shaft, five-foot length, the coolies stood on
each side, and two pushed behind, and with many
grunts and groans we mounted to Woodlands Hotel.
Here the itinerant vendor has many pieces of Tibetan
brass and copper ware and crude embroideries, spread
for sale on the verandah. I spent an hour haggling for
brass, watching constantly the ever-changing shadows on
my beloved hills, for I was rushing this into one day, as
fortune had given me a clear view. After lunch I took
my rickshaw and had the runners fill in the time till
my t ra i n left, pulling me about. How you would have
revelled in it, and at sunset as the train (this time a
closed-in affair, like a third-class English carriage, with
hot water foot-warmers), bore me away, the cold peaks
over the trees as we descended seemed to stand like
steel-coated sentinels to guard the land. I dined at
Silliguri railway station before going to sleep on the
other bumpy train, which almost jolted me on to the
floor twice. I hen the joy of crossing the Ganges,
breakfasting on the boat, and regaining my comfortable
Calcutta train, and reading in the morning paper of the


lOtli Hussars victory at Allahabad yesterday. I don’t
know why I was cheered by that fact, but it certainly
started the day pleasantly, and when at noon I got into
steamy, hot Calcutta, I rushed away to my hotel to
change for the races, absolutely happy and well rewarded
for my journey of 500 miles to get a sight of the snow.




CALCUTTA.
GRAND HOTEL,
CALCUTTA.
My dear Patsy, —
No one who has not approached Calcutta by day-
light from the Central Provinces can have any idea of the
entrancing beauty its outskirts present to eyes used to
Australian country. The myriad little lakes, like a dis-
jointed canal on either side of the railway, fringed with
the most luxuriant growths of bamboo, palm, and flower-
ing shrubs, present a view hard to equal in fertile loveli-
ness.
Behind these ponds are compounds, and one gets every
little while a glimpse of charming bungalows. Often a
huge pond in the garden has a stone coping, and a
landing with a few steps into the water. Sometimes a
stone path leads into the middle of the miniature lake,
and a square platform provides space for evening rests
and meditation, taking the air when the sun has gone
down is a popular pastime in the land of days of pas-
sionate heat. We arrived on Sunday at Howrah, and
the drive to the hotel entailed crossing the bridge over
the Hugli, a river of commerce, pleasure, and mystery.
On through the solid old shipping quarter, one might
fancy himself in London, till one gets to old Court House
Street, and passes Government House, and comes on


those great lungs of this gracious city, the Maidan.
Acres and acres of level grass, with tree-embowered
plateaus, for t ennis, for cricket, or morning gallops.
1 hey trail away to the polo ground and racecourse. One
need hardly put one’s horses feet on the road for several
miles. Ihe mail that awaited me included a card from
which nodded a red-capped folly head, and I read that
“I he Unceremonials” were “at home” the following
night at 12 Russell Street, and to me an alluring word
Dancing” was in the corner.
I accepted with alacrity, for had I not heard of the
Golightly Club, where thirty-five or thirty-six delightful
men make happy all those who are fortunate enough to be
entertained within the cheery hospitable house known as
“Golightly.” “Champagne Charlie” is here, and next
day I motored with him to the Zoo, a most attractive and
beautifully laid out garden. My escort was particularly
attracted by a black, silky-haired monkey, whom he tried
to tease into action by poking his cane between the bars
of the monkey’s cage, which was also protected by wire-
netting about three feet up from the floor. The beast
receded to the back wall of the cage, and kept glowering
but motionless.
I was wearing a charming and most expensive hat
vuth garniture of huge velvet poppies and upstanding,
pale gray grasses. Whether it was the cane or my red
flowers that created the frenzy in the monkey, I shall
never know. All I can say is, 1 suddenly felt myself
being scalped, for Mr. Monkey had made one bound
forward, and with terrific strength, wrenched the grass
from off my hat, which was so firmly pinned to my hair,
that a large quantity was forcibly pulled out by the


roots. My crowning sorrow was that though I knew my
hat to be ruined, my cheery escort affirmed he could not
see that it looked other than “all right,” that vague term
men so often apply to our costumes when we long for
analytical praise.
I was bidden to dine at “Golightly” by the Hon. Mr.
Grahame, one of the two resident members, and found
my way upstairs behind the bearer, who deposited me at
the drawing-room unannounced; this, of course, because
he spoke no English.
It is a thing that takes one used to hearing his name
pronounced on entering a room, a little time to get used
to —the finding of one’s host or hostess, to whom one is
perhaps a stranger and unknown quantity behind a
letter of introduction. We dined delightfully —Col.
Bythal, Col. Apostolides, a Greco-Indian, and Miss
Grahame —on the wide, cool balcony. My cheery host,
when we descended to the ballroom, proceeded to find
me enough partners to completely fill my dancing pro-
gramme before the first note of music. How many of
us take that amount of trouble for visiting strangers?
Result, an evening of unalloyed pleasure that was but
the index to the three weeks that followed.
Invitations came fast on top of my letters of introduc-
tion which I presented next day, when I also left cards
first on the people who had been written to about me —
a custom that obtains all over India. I felt that if I was
to see Dargeeling, I must go at once. So, after seeing
my first polo in Calcutta on Wednesday, and motoring
home past Eden Park, where hundreds of smart equip-
ages were drawn up in the pale, evening light, to listen to
a band that plays remarkably well, I waved my hand to


Calcutta till Saturday, when I returned for the race.
nd was ooked after most kindly by my acquaintances
dating only from Monday night. ' ' q
I sat in three different boxes, had tea on the lawn with
me® StiU another ' who “ok
uck dimoa o t ay -i ght CIUb ’ 3 ddi « h,ful h <>-e
eked into a quiet side street, back of Chowringhe the
principal thoroughfare. g ’ ttle
Here are large rooms with comfy chairs and a
library where either one can read or obtain books for
home perusal, and as we walked through, we came to a
arge ball-room, then half-carpeted and furnished with
race n frocks a T y V « Ms in
, ia , ;™ b * a ro ' v ° f
hats could h 3lf> the forms o f dancers in
nats, could be seen moving to the strain* «f n •
band. This was * * ° f mvisible
A . Mas m > first experience of afternoon
ancmg, which I found a custom in manv places during
winter m India. * 1 Qunn .g
late/tbouflO 0 my hotd r f ° r dimer ’ 3nd later ’ ™rv ™ch
of the P n- ” Ct ’ W3S taken ,0 3 Performance
of the Follies. Dinner in India is always late and the
icatres do not attempt to run in opposition to it.
I his particular building is rather on the French prin-
ciple in construction, the first balcony being a series of
uncurtained H T open and
most interesting ° I °wold T &
thC Perf ° rmanCe ’ Which 1 couMnot^t
ftf"td PaSt tWdVe ’ Wh “ “ —d to be


During the next two days I danced again at
Golightly. This time after a big dinner there, in the
ball-room and club dining-room, which were quickly
cleared once the meal was over.
The next day we had the opening polo match, and T
went to Tollygunge for the first time.
This most attractively-situated golf course, where also
one gets day pigeon shooting and mild croquet, is about
five miles from town. Under spreading trees, amongst
delightful people, tea on the lawn becomes an enchant-
ment hard to tear one’s self away from. On the night
of my first visit the new Viceroy was holding his premier
drawing-room. True, it was to be half-mourning,
which would rob it of some of its brilliancy, but one
hoped for the best and returned to town for that most
essential half-hour’s rest before dinner, that if taken keeps
women able to fulfil all the social round, and retain the
English woman’s accredited appearance of fitness.
At nine-thirty p.m. we arrived at the gates of Govern-
ment House to find the traffic controlled by English-
speaking soldiers —such a relief —and my taxi- throttled
down to evil-smelling snorts as we got into line. In
the cloak room the usual scrimmage obtained, and I was
amused to see how real the three-guinea cotton bouquets,
that appeared so artificial in the milliner’s shops, looked
at night, with their fresh ferns and trails of asparagus
greenery.
These bouquets are imperative, as in this climate natural
flowers would fade long before the evening was over.
There are so few ladies of private entree privilege that
we all squashed gaily on. A murmur that “Her Excel-
lency has fever and will not appear” was breathed about.


A few fervent remarks of “Thank goodness only one
curtsey” were heard from those who take the drawing-
room much as a child regards a trip to the dentist, an
evil essential for future well-being. We found our-
selves pushed upstairs to where a series of palm pens
were arranged to separate us in twenties on the way to
the throne room. At each pen splendid natives from
the scarlet-coated guard of honor, in striped turban,
shining knee boots, and white gloves of mammoth pro-
portion, held the red ropes that kept us in little impatient
lots.
livening dress and an optional bouquet alone are
required for presentation to the King’s representative in
India; but some ladies had adorned themselves in court
trains, feathers and straggling tulle. An old darling
preceded me in this attire, and was distui'bed to find no
one to spread out her finery at the throne room door. I
had a bouquet and the tail of my frock, and only two
hands, but at least I did not crowd upon her. Indignant
and very red, she advanced as her name was shrieked
for the first time, on she went, looking neither to right
nor to left, straight past His Excellency, past all the
lorgnette-framed eyes of those who preceded her, on to
the exit without bow or bend; and yet we had heard her
complaints of how differently it was all done at home.
Another amusing lady, who apparently had not heard
of Her Excellency’s indisposition, having made her first
bob, and seeing no one beside the Viceroy, moved three
steps backward in front of the private entree ladies, and,
fixing on the Bishop’s wife as the most likely, solemnly
curtsied to her before passing on.


Upstairs again to the ballroom, thronged with brilliant
uniforms and the most unique form of half-mouring I
have ever seen. Glittering silver sequin robes, white and
gold dresses, black and gold, and one bright green satin
veiled in gray chiffon ; with red bouquets and pink bou-
quets. The heroic attempt at the mauves, white and
blacks, and gray frocks to adhere to the Court regulation
of half-mourning were almost lost sight of. When the
presentations were over, Miss Sanford, Tadv Hardinge’s
cousin, accompanied the Viceroy, who was followed by
his staff, and walked in procession through the rooms, and
by eleven the drawing-room of 1910 was over, and both
the lights and guests going out.
Along the road to Tollygunge—what pictures that
sentence conjures in my brain. Soft green trees melting
into sky, native mud houses with thatched roofs, and
windows formed of osier twigs crossed in the open spaces.
1 iny temples on the sickly stream, but teeming with
native individuality. Smooth roads and the sense of
joyous anticipation of pleasure that must pervade any-
one who has had the least experience of Calcutta hospi-
tality, that wonderful open-handed big-heartedness that
gives you of its best with a hearty welcome.
It was Boxing Day, 1910, and there was a Horse Show
on the Tollygunge course, which, in itself, is a perfect
picture. A forest of bamboo at the far end makes a
delightful arbor, where late in the afternoon we
assembled for tea. At first it was cool, shady, and most
alluring. Ihe stretch of green sward everywhere that
forms the golf links, the clusters of trees, beautifully
symmetrical and luxuriant in foliage, and the Club
K


House itself, all make a perfect composition. On Box-
mg Day, it was gay with bunting, festooned from tall
bamboo poles, which do duty as Venetian masts. In
front of the tent His Excellency the Viceroy sat to view
the jumping contest, which was over two cane hedges,
a fixed clay jump with loose blocks, and a water jump!
Tents off amongst trees on the opposite side of the Vice-
Regal enclosure formed Secretary’s Offices, for the tent
is used for many things in this adaptable clime. Huge
pavilions of canvas farther off covered the luncheon
tables.
Next day all was cleared away, and the landscape
beautiful and unmarred. This, of course, is only pos-
sible in a dense population of low-wage workers.
Everywhere on seats placed casually outside the Exhi-
bition rings, three in number, sat pretty ladies and their
escorts. Women, business-like in habits, walked about
with male competitors, all joyous, hopeful of winning,
but absolutely glad to be doing it whether a prize winner
or otherwise.
V e sat to watch the various events —Ladies’ Hacks,
Arabs, Chargers, Tandems, and Pairs in the types of
vehicle driven here, the Turn-Turn, a deep-seated,
covered sulky, smart in outline, with a disc of iron pro-
jecting behind on which the native syce sits, his legs locked
under the body of the carriage, and holding on by his
hands to a strap at the back of the hood. Sometimes he
stands erect on his tiny iron platform, but always he is a
picturesque adjunct to the turnout.
We lunched merrily at the table of the Commander-
in-Chief s staff after the polo ponies had been judged,
and returned to see the Viceroy arrive for the jumping


and parade of prize winners. The sun sank, melting
the sky with the glorious haze so peculiar to India. The
prizes were distributed, and we sauntered after tea in the
bamboo grove to our motor, and left lovely Tollygunge
in the embrace of a dying day.
On the west bank of the Hugli lies one of the
loveliest of park-like gardens, stretching along the banks
for 100 acres. Avenues of almond trees, with little
ponds nestling by their sides, fringed with bamboo; lanes
of palms and baby forests of mahogany everywhere
enchant the eye. Huge, kraal-shaped houses, with fibre
roofs, over which flowering vines clamber, are filled with
graceful ferns of all descriptions and exotic plants. It
is an afternoon of fragrant memories to me.
Ihe huge banyan tree that covers a circumference of
1,000 feet, and has 250 aerial roots, is filled with possi-
bilities for the monkey-like young, to swing from branch
to branch, or nestle with a book and apple in some
secluded corner of its generous shade.
Long sloping green lawns, ideal for polo grounds, with
landscape garden views, that delight one under the
lengthening shadows cast by the setting sun. I was
loath to return to the motor, but even in departing, the
view on the Hugli charms one in its mystery of life
and coloring. Were it not for the factory chimneys on
the opposite bank, one might easily, with wide open eyes
believe oneself living countless ages ago. The life on
the sampan and the other river boats, with the native in
his costume unchanged in style for at least 500 years,
transports one’s imagination easily to existences long
since dead.


Racing in Calcutta is accomplished with the maximum
of pleasure and the minimum of fatigue. The paddock
is close behind the splendid grand-stand, and the betting
ring on one side of it, and the members’ tea enclosure
directly behind. Ihe clerks of the course have a charm-
ing \ ine-embowered summer-house, where I was taken to
tea with some friends, who were Sir Allen Arthur’s
guests. Everyone is so tremendously gracious and
hospitable, one never feels an intruder.
ith greatest excitement I awaited the Viceroy’s
arrival on Cup Day. Out over the polo ground one sees
spires m the trees fringing the distant Maidan against a
cloudless sky. The centre of the course thronged with
gaily-dressed natives in turbans of all colors. In the
stand smart ladies and men in topees, which, to me, rob
them of a distinctive appearance in smart gatherings.
Since women appear in sunstroke enticing head covering,
and don’t succumb, one wonders if the topee worn all
day, but always exchanged for a hat at sundown, which
is carried in motor or carriage, is an absolute necessity
in winter.
In the middle of the members’ stand a half circle of
steps ascend to the Vice-Regal enclosure, which is oppo-
site the winning post, and in front of it is an opening on
to the course.
Excited murmurs of “Here he comes,” turned our eyes
to the left, where we saw approaching in cantering twos,
the bodyguard in scarlet uniform, bearing their flutter-
ing pennants, with jangle of sword and curb chains,
and the sun glinting on their spurs. Thev advanced
with their brown faces immobile, their decorum perfect


()pposite the judges’ stand they lined up as one man,
lances like a row of pickets, and the outriders advanced,
followed by His Excellency’s carriage with postilions
and escort. He descended with his party, for there were
two carriages, and he and Lady Hardinge were received
by Sir Allen Arthur, General B. Mahon, and Mr. Apos-
tolides, and escorted to their enclosure.
Ihe Viceroy’s Cup, a large silver gilt one, reposed
on its plinth on a table on the lawn directly in front of
them for all to pause and inspect. After the race, His
Excellency graciously carried it up to Mr. Apcar, the
owmer of the winning horse, Mayfowl, as Mr. Apcar,
who had risen from a sick bed to he present, ivas
unequal to the task of leaving his box to receive the
trophy. After the next race the Viceregal Party
departed, and later winners and losers on the day, waited
at the gate in a chaos of vehicles till their own appeared
and whisked them in clouds of dust elsewhere.
I he marvellous activity in winter of the Anglo-Indian
is exemplified by his capacity to dance or theatre late at
night alter a strenuous day, and rise for morning gallops
or a paper chase at six.
By seven the racecourse is thronged with men, women,
and flappers, gaily cantering or wildly galloping
around. It is patent to the most unobservant that the
most is made of every recreation in India, and one who
has lived in a land of “benefits forgot,” as I have, cannot
but leel a thrill of pleasure in being amongst those so
keen on outdoor sport, and so lively at indoor diversions.
For except the younger generation of polo players, who
take themselves so seriously that they live on an ascetic
Monk’s Lenten diet, and eschew dances for an early bed,


the community of Calcutta so splendidly capable as box
wa las, are magnificently joyous, be it dancing, flying
or riding. '
Although Government House was observing strict
Court etiquette as regards large entertainments, “Belvi-
dere,” the residence of the State Governor, Sir Samuel
Baker, was the scene of two delightful balls during my
stay m Calcutta. The long ballroom with perfect floor,
is surrounded by a wide space furnished for sitting out
and is also encircled by a charming balcony, where non-
dancers can see the brilliant assembly without congesting
the space below.
1 he large drawing-rooms were hospitably thrown open,
and below the ball-room a palm-embowered supper-room,
beautifully decorated and lighted with red, tempted one
to ignore partners above, whilst one toyed with supper.
. y mraiory of one of these dances is clouded by a friend-
ship shattered by this very innocent cause. Some day
w leu write my confessions it will make a prettv little
bit of fiction.
On the last day of the year I went to Tollygunge
steeplechase course for the last of' my Calcutta racing.
Starting early, I drove in a friend’s Victoria, arriving in
•me for lunch, which was served on tables under',he
rees back of the tiny grand-stand. Natives, waving
tall bamboo poles, with colored flags everywhere,
niongs tie luncheon tables, excited a query from me
s to what they were for, and I learned with amusement,
a. my attention was drawn to the network of string tied
ac oss below the trees, that our food was being preserved
simtcl tT ’ "' ho W6re bngin « t 0 flv do '™ and
snatch it from our plates.


W hen I began this little account of nobody’s travels, I
meant it to be peeps of geography, but who that has
travelled in India can leave it at that alone? Names
must crop in, because names are what one lives with,
and by, in India. Therefore, the tragedy of Gerard
must go down. It was one of the saddest races I’ve
ever seen. Three p.m., and all aglow with the wine in
the Indian sun, for, oh! the day was warm. There was
a look of Virginian marsh about the course. The red,
green, blue, and purple of the natives sais garments
blotching the only color on the course; for the ladies
were singularly unsmart this day, and the men as ever
on an Indian racecourse marred from an air of distinction
by the topee. Ihe field consisted of Circassian Best.
Baron Athol, Kaffirpan, and Foy, Mystic Circle, Idle'
Gerard, Maisonette, and Countenance, all thirsting for
the fray.
Did we idle women sense the disaster? If we had,
would it have mattered? 1 his thought, to me, is the one
that makes racing a crime, we are so indifferent of
result. The crowd politely murmured, “They are off.”
The ones in front saw, the ones next tried to, those in
the back waited for excited spectators to proclaim places.
I was of the latter. The programme described the race
as distance, about three miles.” I was surreptitiously
powdering my nose, when a gasp proclaimed some
disaster. 1 peered through several rude backs, and saw
opposite the grand-stand that Kaffirpan was leading.
Gerard has broken down,” was being muttered, but
Gerard ran a gallant race. Around the last bend they
came. 1 here was no crack of whip, no feeling of
urging a finish, only a sickening sense of horses hoofs, an


expectant silence and a finish, with Ivaifirpan first, and
Gerard a close second. In fifteen minutes he was dead.
Dear, brave old beast! He ran a furlong with a broken
pastern, the heart that heroes are made of beat beneath
his hairy hide.
It was a magnificent effort, and at night it was as
though it had never been. Many murmured sympathe-
tic regrets to Mr. Billy” Miles, the young owner who
alone, perhaps, knows the misery I felt in seeing this
pathetic finish to my last glimpse of sporting Calcutta.




Benares on the Ganges —showing the burning-ghauls.


BENARLS.
NANDESAR HOUSE,
BENARES.
My dear George,—
I arrived in Benares on January 3rd, in glorious sun-
shine.
1 he C hristmas rains that seem so universal in India
had not fallen, and all was dusty and shimmering in the
golden, morning light.
C aptain Plant had come to meet me in the Maharajah’s
carriage, with two men on the box, two behind in the
red and gold livery of their master. We bowled along
the streets of Benares, which at that point exhibit no
individual charm, to Nandesar House, which the Maha-
rajah generously keeps up for his European visitors.
I he compound is being made over into an Italian garden,
and tents are going up for the German Crown Prince’s
camp, as he is shortly to visit Benares. On the house,
as one enters, a plate with this inscription is noticed
“This house was the residence of Mr. Davis, Magistrate
of Benares, and defended by him single-handed with a
spear on January 14th, 1799, against two hundred armed
rebels, led by Nawab Wagir Ali.”
My rooms are upstairs. To get to them we passed
a wondrous electric light affair, of a glass peacock, with
trailing tail, and higher an imitation well, surmounted


by lattice, covered with metal grape leaves. The bunches
of fruit being electric globes surmounted with glass
grapes of purple, yellow, and green. The walls of the
stairway are covered with portraits of native princes.
I have a dining-room, three sitting rooms, my bedroom
and bath, the latter appointed as well as that of an up-to-
date American Hotel, save that no water runs in the
taps and shower marked hot; it would not he India if it
did.
I he rooms were upholstered by a Calcutta firm for the
visit' of the Prince and Princess of Wales. The decora-
tor has done it villainously—devils could do no more to
make it ugly. French they doubtlessly call it, and much
money it must have cost.
I he things that aroused my enthusiasm, however, were
some pictures by a native artist, scenes in Indian life,
which were really lovely—like picture pages from an old
missal, and a white marble, large stone chair, or sofa,
with hack and sides of pierced marble like the Taj screens
about the tomb. This is on the back balcony, which
is wide and airy, and looks on a garden not unlike that
approaching the great Agra testimony of the immortality
of love.
After an excellent tiffin, which 1 ate in solemn gran-
deur alone, 1 was taken in a motor to Sarnath, where a
museum has been built to preserve the figures, has reliefs,
and pillars, excavated from the ruins, which, to the
casual observer to-day, are but incoherent walls. How-
ever, it is fraught with interest from having been the old
Penares, where Buddha lived and taught.
Heaving the pretty avenue and Ghazipur Road at the
third mile stone, and turning to the left, one comes upon


two towers, one on a hill and the other, said to he the
best preserved of the Bengal Topes; but when carefully
explored m 1835 it was found to contain no relics.
1 he building consists of a stone basement, 93 feet in
diameter, solidly built, the stones being clamped together
iron to the height of 43 feet. Above that it is in
brickwork, rising to a height of 110 feet above the sur-
rounding ruins, and 128 feet above the plain. Exter-
nally, the lower part is relieved by eight projecting faces.
In each is a small niche, intended apparently to contain
a seated figure of Buddha. Below them, encircling the
monument, is a band of sculptured ornaments. The
central part consists of geometric patterns of great intri-
cacy, but combined with singular skill. Above and
below a design of foliage is carved equally well. We
leant against it as we stood watching the sunset. My
companion had only come because I had, which, to me,
was irksome, as I felt an additional duty in his already
busy day.
1 wanted to sit and dream of the past history of this
ancient spot, for it is certain it was a flourishing and
important place six centuries before the Christian era.
Mv mind pictured the procession of stirring events, the
arrival of Sakya Muni, who came here from Holy Gya to
establish his religion. I wished to mentally conjure
up the fervent monk in his Eastern draperies, walking
about this Tope. I’ve bought a beautiful native water
color, which I like to think expresses his face.
I hen I might have dreamed of the glorious Raja
Jaichana, “whose army was as countless as the sand,” but
was defeated and killed by the General of Shahab-ud-din
Ghori in 12th century, when the Emperor Alla-ud-din


destroyed 1,000 temples and built mosques in their stead,
n consequence of the iconoclastic spirit of her conquerors,
Benares to-day has little that dates before the age of
- • >ar, yet it is the Holy City, and one million Hindoo
worshippers of Shiva, the Destroyer, visit it every year.
1 he magnanimous spirit of the present Maharajah is
S AT 7 n " V lllS ° f a lar g e prayer-ground to the
- fohammedans, a tolerance not found amongst Christian
sects.
Every pilgrim visiting Benares makes the circuit of
anch Kosi around the sacred territory of Benares, a
distance of 45 miles in length, and occupying six days to
I had an interesting view of many of the devout next
morning. Rising early, I embarked on the Ganges in
a covered row-boat, manned by six villainous looking
kish i-walas, or sailors, with short oars, which they
rarely dipped m the water. A guidesman in the prow,
uddled with openly contemptuous glance on his face at
our curiosity at the sights before us, and such sights!
A human rainbow. Other curious tourists in parties,
omously Cooks,” sat in herds on the roof of motor
launches, whilst launches enclosed with slat shutters of
ie purdah carriage variety, emitted sounds of the phono-
e,rapi an gramophone, set with Hindoo records. Truly
this may be said to be a union of West and East.
everywhere men, women, and children were bathing
™ e g lat steps. As we slowly floated along under our
white a ™“g, I saw huge piles of faggots with
if °i " llte projecting points low down near the water.
alnn ’* W de " ote the body of a woma ”. for the feet
e are e t out. Soon the wood was smouldering, and


The devout “contemplating” under fibre umbrellas— Benares.




later, when we returned, only a charred spot marked
what had been once the embodiment of joy, of hate, of
love, of life. Often when too poor to send their dead
much wood, the remains of the bodies are pushed by
re\ erent relatives into the river, and as the women are
always buried in their anklets and bracelets, the interiors
of caught crocodiles frequently display these indigestible
morsels.
More than anywhere else are seen on these Benares
ghats, the huge umbrellas, made of palm woven fibre on
bamboo frames, shading the native as he sits to pray or
contemplate the Ganges.
Ihe recently-bathed were everywhere indulging in
wrestling or calisthenic exercises, holding on to a bar
or the top edge of a wall, raising and lowering them-
selves in quick successive movements, that brought all
the muscles of the back, arms, and legs into play. I
thought of our dirty unemployed, whose only voluntary
exercise is jaw action in eating or speaking. Why the
skin of the native is not rough and chapped is a marvel.
They are never entirely nude when bathing, as the loin-
cloth is always retained, and in coming from the water
the low class use no towels, but when partially dried by
the air, the garment to be worn on the legs, a length of
about four yards of cotton, is enveloped about the body,
and the wet loin cloth allowed to drop.
I he cotton is then used as a towel, and deftly crossed
between the legs until it makes a pair of respectable
trousers. The shirt is put on, and the toilet completed.
It is amusing to see a very black Hindoo, his face
smeared with some greasy form of soap, which makes
it as w hite as a cloAvn’s, sitting on his hunkers, for all
L


tne world like a great monkey. That he means to clean
himself is obvious enough, but his indifference co
tne remains of burnt bodies, and the more unspeakable
tilth everywhere about him in the water, robs his ablution
of that chastity which is usually associated with the
Englishman’s bath.
Ihe small, brass bowl that every native possesses is
used to hold water to cleanse the mouth, vigorous rubbing
ol the teeth with the forefinger, gargling and sluicing
goes on with frequent expectoration, regardless of the
proximity of the neighbours engaged in washing their
fates and bodies. I hat it is the Ganges, the holiest of
water, seems to their minds, to free it from all personal
pollution.
There is no strikingly individual building on the ghats.
All are huddled together, merging into a grim pile of
stone, mellow and neutral. A rare gilded dome is some- •
times seen, glinting amongst the grey, or the green of a
tree, but for color one depends on the dress of the native
and the indigo blue paint of the boats. Colored post-
( ards of tlle g liats make them a rainbow' of blue, pink, and
gold. It exists only in the artist’s dream.
Ihe Benares Maharajah’s Palace for death pointed
out. All the rich Hindoos come, if possible, to die on
the left bank of the Ganges, as from it souls are instantly
transported to heaven. Some years ago the mother of
the present Maharajah, having been doomed by the
court astrologer to die in three weeks’ time, v'as sent
Horn the Palace on the right bank with the Maharajah’s
first, and elderly wife and mother of his heir, and his
second and only other, an emancipated lady of then less
than thirty years. The Hindoo custom is that these


female relatives should attend the dying till her last
hour ; but when four months passed, and there seemed
no likelihood of the astrologer’s prophecy coming true,
the young wife calmly packed and announced her inten-
tion of returning to the summer palace.
I hat the hen-pecked husband is not a creation of
Western civilization is proved by the fact that the Maha-
rajah fled to the jungle, and remained there a fortnight
when the news of his disobedient wife’s intended return
was brought to him.
W e got out of our boat at one ghat, and went up the
steps past the bathing and contemplating Hindoos, past
the fakir, lean and begging, the juggler with his cobra
and mango, into a narrow lane not four feet wide, I’m
sure, sloppy and slippery with mud, strewn with fresh
flowers dropped by the devout on their way to one of the
thousand shrines in this network of temples.
Runners ahead made way for the Maharajah’s guest,
so we were not importuned for alms from the hundreds
ol ragged, miserable beggars that infest this part; for
we were approaching the temple of Annapurma, a god-
dess who is supposed to have had express orders from
Bisheshwar to feed the inhabitants of Benares. Close
to this Bahoos were writing certificates at the Temple of
Sakhi Vinayak, the witnessing deity for the pilgrims who
have completed the Panch Kosi circuit. We passed also
the temple of Shaukareshwar, Shukar being Venus. Here
bits of cotton and threads tied to the grille work doors
proclaimed the number of women who had been to pray
for handsome sons. Behind the Mir Ghaut we found the
Nepalese Temple, which municipal authorities prohibit
women from regarding because of its obscene carvings.


I So we wended a narrow stone staircase in a tiny build-
ing, to see the Golden Temple, which is crammed in so
Jg it y amongst other buildings one could never see the
oo y ooking up from the adjoining lanes. This roof
tas plates of copper covered by gold. The expense of
mg was borne b J' Maharajah Ranjit Singh, of La-
mre, whose daughter curiously enough travelled back to
f “ re "’ lth me from Amritzar . where we had both visited
ie Golden Temple on a day sacred to Hindoos. She
tore a native woman's dress with sarai over the head
claret-colored silk, and on her gloveless hands rings
f European setting. On her feet she wore English tan
toes and stockings, and a beautiful long sable coat over
-r native dress. She was accompanied by a European
impamon, w 10 talked to her in German, but they spoke
nglish to a native who saw them off. The Princess
anjit Singh struck me as a singularly interesting and
agnetic personality. I have not seen'the fakir on his
o nai points; or the devout treading the hot coals
,^ re feet but 1 visited ‘he Cow Temple and saw
silly sacred one, garlanded with flowers amidst a
rong of worshippers, all reeking of pungent crushed
wers, the orange marigolds being particularly unplea-
After that I climbed to another second storey to see
- famous nine bells, which hang from a carved stone
-me work between the Temples of Mahadeo and
Mah War '- , f \ fineS ‘ ° f theSe bells "’as presented bv
Maharajah of Nepal. In these crowded narrow pas-
es more than anywhere else I've been do I sense the
d that other travellers have written of. India here-
ore has not conveyed the idea of a great ancient civi


are m!r Fnl!r i' ld r bmld i ings are magnificent, but then so
, . gISI at hedrals, vet no one enthuses about
* carvings of the reign of Edward I. Here in
orTvU: Ch l ! mildi,,g iS fraUght Wi ‘ h » form
tour' One h n' ™ po ® lb le to assimilate it in a casual
• ne should speak Hindoostani and loiter with a
“ Sah ‘ b fOT h ° UrS ‘° graSp all there &to be
'Ve forced our way through to the bazaar, where I
“ 2"" W f the “‘Called famous Benares
enouah "a “ “ 0 ™ ga ™- a " d curiously
enough 1 purchased m Bombay Jeypore metal cheaper
than one gets it where it is made. P
We went upstairs to a silk merchant; again I quar-
“ the Allahabad exhibition. Where are the
vaunted brocades of gold and silver and lovely silks sup-
posed to be here? Surelv all thp
-it fPo TTw*f a “ Benares Product is not
with the M a n T Fair? 1 PUrChaSed « au2e “arves
tth the gold and stiver gilt borders that some people
fineVv ' nt 1116 EaStem WOTk at its best is tawdry
hnery in my estimation of the beautiful.
The Durga or Monkey Temple in the native town we
raw in tle afternoon on our way to visit His Highness
It is not exciting; the plaster is stained red with ochre'
and it is picturesquely situated by a fine tank. Three
■mes a day a large drum is beaten by the priests. Twelve
curiously carved pillars on a platform raised four feet
above the ground support the central portion. In the
porch are two bells, and through the brass-plated doors
may be seen the image of the goddess, and over it all
dozens of live monkeys.


We rolled along to the banks of the Ganges, where
we left the motor for quaint sedan-like open chairs,
carried by two coolies, and were borne to the River’s
edge, where we were rowed to the water entrance of the
Maharajah’s Palace.
Here one ascends a broad flight of steps, turns to the
right, and climbs more steps, turns to the left, again
to the left, and arrives at the Palace entrance, where
eight solemn guards stand in livery with presented battle-
axes. Here we were met by the Maharajah’s son and
escorted up another flight of steps to a large audience
chamber, hung with the present ruler’s portrait, and
ozens of his ancestors by native artists. The room has
two fine marble mantel-pieces, and illimitable windows,
chairs, and tables spaced in geometrical precision, and
presumably a fine Indian carpet on the floor. At present
hke the furniture, it is shrouded in a white cotton
cover; glass-prismed chandeliers, and French clock-work
toys complete the furniture of this apartment.
I lie Maharajah, an alert little man, looking younger
than his son. who is large and very fat, entered unan-
nounced. We were presented, and to amuse us he first
took us to see the lovely view from the audience chamber
>a coin , then below to an open courtyard enclosed by
rooms, where from the safe confines of one of the sur-
rounding apartments were brought his wonderful jewels,
qneralds the size of walnuts—certainly not flawless.
Rubies like large flat prunes in size. Pearls, more pearls,
and still more strings of the lovely, creamy gems, for
sc om, m the Indian jewels, are they the pure white
color Europeans demand; but here one sees size, lustre,
and skin in good condition.


The Author being carried to the Maharajah of Benares’ boat
on the Ganges.




We also saw the emerald, engraved and slightly curved
like a saucer over three inches in diameter that once held
the Koh-i-nor, when it was India’s tomb guarding gem.
Then, as he had an engagement to drive with the Maha-
rajah of Kashmir, our host sent for the native, silver
ribbon, garlands, with medallions of Delhi needlework!
and hanging one on each, he sprinkled Indian scent on
our handkerchiefs and departed, leaving his son to show
us the interesting armoury that led off from this court-
yard. In it is a fine collection of muskets, the barrels
wondrously chased or of Damascene inlay. The
sword and dagger blades exquisitely beautiful—some with
an open space in the centre of the blades—had tiny pearls
running up and down in infinitesimally fine grooves.
The hilts either of lovely carved jade, inset with gems,
carved ivory, or bejewelled gold and silver. Spears and
chain armour, and relics of more barbaric times were
ranged around the walls.
From here we were taken through an open space, where
large buildings adjoin, in which are the Law Courts.
Through a gate whereon the native piper plays, to the
open road, where in a cage a large tiger is confined. He
growled and roared for our amusement when teased by
an attendant; he was finally rewarded for his share of
the entertainment with a huge bit of raw meat. We re-
traced our steps to the courtyard, where we bade the
gentle son of the Maharajah good-bye and continued our
way to the ghat and thence by boat back to the left bank.
Cantonment life here is much the same as in other
small places. At the Club racquets and tennis obtain


daily, and people drop in at dust for gossip and salted
P P° tatoes > w hich they eat in the fingers like almonds
or as the Americans do pop corn.
osp v hea A my a PreSenCe here P esterda y is provoking curi-
nn- fi t d t™ 5 ; er ' S Wife with whom 1 had tea on
Z, \ * e " ViSitCd by the enti ro English com-
umty , inquire who I am. "Tel! them,” I said, laugh-
n } ' . tllat 1 m the morganatic wife of the exalted for-
eign visitor,” and I am amused to think some of those
who saw me there may point me out as such when next
i-> see me, if my unimportant features linger in their
TrTdd- A T remly i( has heen a ptopitioos season
weddings, for the outward and visible sign of this
mward and spiritual grace is everywhere evident in the
ouses Winch for the event have always external mural
come o’ * !, CC °f " g ‘° * he Si2e ° f the inhabitants’ in-
re,’f eS ° f the well -'o-do wondrous has
re .ef are executed of Rajahs, animals, and the British
sold,er invariably with his musket over the wrong shoul-
de and frequently a marvellous kilted Scotchman, all
onlv sev / “r 837 Co ' or ' °" the house
denoted th ° , S . P ° tS ’ sometimes a sin g!e row of dots.
and fe, 7 W “. The draWi "« S are al "' a « crude
lifeless— he it beast or man. Nowhere does’ one se»
of thT I ', ?° f eXpreSSion J a P an «* artists even
Of the lowest rank impart to their figures.
whfch X ‘T° min , g ’ Under tower ing clouds, I left Benares,
Z-n r’ Z my T Pl " led OTt ’ hathed in the firs,
ram i saw m India.


LAHORE.
PUNJA B EXPRESS.
Dear old Ruth, —
1 he Railway Station at Lahore was gay with decora-
tions of greenery and flowers the night we got there,
m anticipation of the arrival a few days later of the
German Crown Prince, and for the first time in India I
sensed, something in the air suggestive of winter as I
drove to my Hotel. Here my sitting room was an attrac-
tive one, opening off a verandah and into a bedroom that
reminded me of bedrooms in Scotch castles, so small
was it in ground plan, so intensely high, with windows
placed up at quite unwashable distances. Laid on its
side the room would have been a spacious apartment,
but I felt in a prison when I awoke next morning,
and registered a vow not to present my letters of intro-
duction to the Lieut. Governor’s wife, Lady Dane or to
Mrs. Butler, the wife of the Deputy Commissioner, but
to see the city as a sight and hurry on to Rawal Pindi.
A huge bunch of roses from a local acquaintance put
me on better terms with Lahore. Had we left it at that
we would probably have been friends to-day; but he
came around to do guide, and, like the average Anglo-
Indian, knew less about the points of interest in his town
than a visiting stranger, who at least has guide book in-
formation in his head when he arrives.


We drove past “Kims” gun, of which I took pictures
hat were subsequently spoiled by a fool of a photo-
grapher in Umballa; then on the fort, where, had 1 gone
tolifnff 77 a ” lnteUigent “ Tomm y” would have been
told off to show me round, and I would have had pleasant
impressions. As it is, I remember the for, principally
on, the fact that the subaltern who showed us about
pomting out the various fine and curious weapons in
Whirl yCa ,! d ° l,r attention t 0 gaps in the wall from
W a recent Commander in Chief had looted weapons.
round si 7d r 7“’ h ° WeVer ’ Was the rhinoceros hide
omid shield of Gura Govind; his battle axe, with blade
of fine Damascus steel; and some helmets inscribed Akal
• ipalii taken by the English from the Sikhs; also long
gaunt,eted swords used for fencing; cuirasses with bras!
“ l°V hm ; Which belon g rf ‘0 the officers command-
mg he French regiments, and the rings of steel used as
missiles in war by the Akalis and others. The crests of
the e soldiers, called Jikars, are also shown
I here are cannons with barrels turning like those in
Death7s 1 5 "°T “ PerSian “ Victor >' ”
coats of i a r, d a number of camel guns and many
oats of mail. Through the door one saw the sun glint-
ing on the Palace portion of the fort, which when ex-
v,r,h a "' “ ed memories of Agfa from its formation.
• ■ d the plaster and mirror work within which is to be
restored for the Viceroy’s visit this year
An 7 K T WC dTOVe lo ° kin « for ‘he tomb of
of Cod ' , * he gUMe b °° k “‘he 99 names
of God carved on the white marble cenotaph are so
xquisitely formed as to surpass anything of the kind in
1 Can ° n lament ‘hot I had a self-appointed


guide, in place of paying a professional one to show me
the points of interest, but we did see the most interesting
bazaar street outside of Benares.
It is so narrow that two conveyances can only pass
at certain points. The houses on either side, high and
ornamental in their woodwork, reminded one of the
street scenes in Tunis. The shops were the ever glorious
rainbow of color, and mysteries of smell, that every
Indian bazaar presents. I purchased odd and sundry
pieces of old bokhara ware and a hubble bubble pipe, the
Mohammedan variety, with long curling tube. The Hindoo
kind varies by having a long stiff tube, which supports
the fire and tobacco jar at one end, and has the other
inserted in the water vessel. Near the vessel another stiff
tube, with mouthpiece at the top, is inserted at a slanting
angle in the pipe that holds the fuel cup.
M lien it came to paying for these articles my R’s 100
note was refused, despite the fact that it states “The
Bank of Upper India promises to pay on demand R’s
100.’ A street broker led us to a local banker’s. With
the shutters down the native bank presented a single room
entireh open on the street side, with a long desk running
along the back, and one intersecting it in front, divided
the front of the Bank into two small offices. Here, after
endorsing the note and paying a discount, it was changed
to notes of R’s 10 and silver. A further commission to
our street broker, and I was able to pay for my pur-
chases and drive away.
I he direction we now took was one my friend knew
thoroughly, the gardens surrounding Montgomery Hall,
a splendid tree-embowered drive, containing tennis courts
and cricket pitch and the inevitable Zoo.


In the HaH itself which is a finely proportioned build-
strain of Ti rt 16 best dancing floors “ India > the
Strams of a band were swelling, and coffee and cakes
one end. At he other end, though it was not six o'clock
Jancmg was being vigorously pursued, and most people
d come prepared to do it, although I saw one couple
the man in tennis shoes and I,ls partner in riding hfbit
and boots ; but “it’s a poor heart that never rejoices ”
tectiof N ‘Tn ° f HiS Majesty ’ As - vlum of p ™-
ection, Nur-ud-dm Muhammad, the Emperor Jahangir,
627, is one of the loveliest spots in Lahore. As one
velv-t g “ enVel ° ped in furs - with an English,
glad e ‘ emal *° pee ’ one fel ‘
brileweTV 1 " “ d over the
no . * ent ’ passin S rui »ed tombs, for which we did
not dismount. We arrivpH a t „ £ ,
hi ff h i r . dat a hne archway fifty feet
Nn T SlO Dilkusha Garden of the Empress
r i mn ’ that 1S t0 ~ da y most beautifully kept up The
“r? " Hke the >o-st P terrace
;, V Wlth four minarets at the corners and a small
pavilion over the tomb in the centre.
marMe ’ with work of
ca ted onV“t “ " mm * of God beautifully
carved on the East and West sides. The passage to
is tomb chamber is paved with marble brought all
ando,her and
wotk screens.
minarets, one in each corner. These are f„„ ! T v
and lpavp tivQ m ~ . lour stories high,
lease the .11 conditioned breathless. If silence gives


consent, it would be a good place for lovers to bring
the maiden or widow-of their choice and propose
1- lien from them is superh. Alas! my picture taken
in one was spoiled with the rest of fifteen films by that
op e at Umballa; also a delightful group of father
mother, and tiny babe that 1 took at the entrance to this’
lovely mosque.
To pass Amritzar without seeing the Golden Temple
ac impossible, so 1 went back to spend a morning there
before starting for Rawal Pindi. January 7th is a Hin-
coo estival day, and Amritzar was gay with strings fes-
tooned across the streets, bearing three-cornered pieces of
to ored tissue paper. My tiresome friend from Lahore
accompanied me, and again destroyed, as far as he was
able, my enjoyment of the day.
The temple was a bustling scene of noise and gaily,
dressed crowds, which filled me with delight. Never
had 1 beheld till that moment Indians in gala attire;
cotton was exchanged for silk, accompanied by multiple
ornaments, and flowers galore.
I found in place of covering my shoes with the cotton
ones usually provided, I was required to take mine off
before putting on the temple slippers. With two native
]»o ice guarding me front and back, we started across
the courtyard down a flight of steps upon a view that
impelled a cry of delight. The pool that lies about
the temple is so much larger, the temple so much smaller,
t tan 1 imagined it, and as we descended to the ledge that
surrounds the tank and runs out like a pier to the temple
were j° stled and pushed by hundreds of men, women
cnddren and sacred bulls. The latter with silver-mounted
horns, garlands of flowers about their necks, as well as


tight-fitting necklaces of large china and glass beads,
and looking as silly as they probably felt themselves
to be. All this stimulated me to a frenzy of delight.
A pungent odor of jessamine was over everything.
This was the East, and for the moment I felt part of it.
It was only a moment, however, till my carping friend,
who hates the native with an unaccountable loathing,
began to urge me to give up the joy of entering the
temple. “I’m sure your husband would never allow you
to go on in this crowd.” he reiterated, until I reminded
him that neither the Church, the Law, nor I had given
him the prerogative to usurp the dictatorial attitude of
one whom the law calls mine, so on I went.
No picture I have ever seen of the Amritzar Golden
Temple has conveyed the beauty of that scene. We were
the only Luropeans there. Except for the occasional
Baboos’ half European dress, our world might never have
existed. It was the East, purged of all Western influence
save those collars, ties, coats and flaunting waistcoats of
the Baboos.
Glittering m the sun, the Temple that Ranjit Singh
seized m 1802 and roofed with copper gilt, from whence
it takes its name of Golden Temple, lured me on. Ex-
cept for the lower parts of its walls, which are of white
marble, the entire building is covered with gilded copper,
engraved with verses from the Granth Sahib in Pun-
jabi characters.
The four doors, covered with finely wrought silver,
v ere open, the interior packed with a swerving mass
Of rose, blue, violet, green yellow, and white enveloped
humans. In a shepherd’s plaid black and white tweed
1 felt a distinct anachronism. The altar inside, with its


gilded dome, was covered with offerings tossed there by
this surging crowd, through which we squeezed to a stair-
case to the roof. Once up I so much wanted to take a
picture, hut for some reason, though it may be photo-
graphed from any point outside, none are allowed to be
taken upon its sacred precinct; so we descended for a
final glimpse of its interior walls, richly gilded and
painted with flowers.
We then retraced our steps along the marble pier to
the west side, where we entered gilt-domed Akal Bungah,
which was built in the time of Arjan the sth Guru. A
low stairway led us to a room with open balcony in
front. This room held a gilt ark in front of the project-
ing window or balcony, on the floor of which was spread
a common cotton cloth. After several rupees had
changed from my pocket to the priest’s, he sullenly with-
drew the cloth, revealing a large sword, falchion shaped
and about four feet long. It is the reputed sword of Guru
Govind, whose shield of rhinoceros hide we saw at La-
hore, but nothing else could we induce the holy attendant
to display.
We returned to the gateway, its doors covered with
massive silver plates that look like lead. In the Treasury
at this place there are thirty-one pillars of silver nine
feet high and 44 inches in diameter and four larger ones,
but no bribe would induce the attendants, who were most
sullen, to open the chests and display the gilt maces and
canopy set with precious stones which are used when the
granth is carried in procession.
It is just possible all these treasures were being used
in a procession when we arrived, a fact that did not
penetrate my friend’s vaunted knowledge of Hindoostani.
M


I first politely asked, then implored to be shown these
things I’d come so far to see, finally produced a sovereign
and demanded. It only resulted in a flow of language I
could not understand, nor my interpreter explain, so I
left rather angry and disappointed.
freed from the boring presence of my self-appointed
guide, whose hatred of the native is so great he pocketed
the tip I left for the kitmagar at the railway station
lunch room, I now look back upon that feast of color
and perfumed humanity as one of the loveliest sights to
be found in India.




A Native Bed.
The Street Barber— Rawal Pindi.


RAWAL PINDI.
FLASHMAN’S H O TEL .
RAWAL PINDI.
My dearest Dot, —
Leaving Lahore at night, we arrived in blinding
sheets of rain at Rawal Pindi next morning almost before
dawn, and could only get to the hotel by tonga, and
such a Hotel! Having registered at the office, I was
escorted an entire block outside in the rain, across the
street and into another compound, where an entire bunga-
low was allotted to me and my maid. A small verandah
level with the ground opened into a sitting room;
“chicks,” as the lined bamboo blinds are called, hung
on each section of the verandah, and over each door to
ensure privacy. 1 here are two bedrooms and two bath-
rooms; for if it is primitive in India, at least one has
the comfort of isolation at the toilet.
The army officer and wife who had vacated my pre-
mises left me the gloom of holes in the plaster, caused
by the nails their family gods had Lung on. But a
cheerful fire in the various hearths dispelled the damp-
ness ; and, later, when a marli, or native gardener, drip-
ping and wretched came by, bearing a huge basket tray
on his head of sweet-scented jonquils, violets, and tawny
wallflowers, for a rupee the room was made to bloom,
for flowers are cheap in India.


Exercise one must, so, despite the rain, late in the
afternoon we ventured out to walk. Murree Hills, beauti-
ful always, are now a very salome of loveliness, in the
seven veils of mist the dampness draped them in.
A Military camp was set in a line with the hills.
Horses shivering under dripping blankets, and reflected
in the pools of water everywhere. Miserable native sais
huddled over fires, smouldering sulkily, of damp wood ;
and this is only peace warfare. One paused to wonder at
the greed of politicians who, in perpetual comfort, dare
to cut down the cost of the “panoply of war” to squan-
der it in ignoble ways.
I here is no individuality in the English cantonment;
streets at right angles, the eternal Mall, the bungalow
with English chintz and silver photo frames, they are
almost all alike.
I did find an original note, however, in this very place,
but it was a man's quarters. About his front door were
all the things one looks for in a stable. Even a cart in
ghostly winding sheet nestled under the verandah eaves.
Judge then of the joy when the door opened to find one-
self in intense ruby gloom. The mantel board concealed
by a dull toned piece of satin, with the French knots
solid work, called Bokhara embroidery. An ingle nook
wainscotted and covered with the most lovely Persian
dark red carpet, exquisite in texture. French posters
flirting on the walls with etchings, old engravings, modern
water colors, and the inevitable naughty lady. Men are
divided into two classes —the ones who put lovely women
on their walls and the ones who keep them between the
covers of rare editions on book shelves ; but all men keep
pictures somewhere of the ladies of their dreams.


I iger skins were on the floor, racing cups everywhere.
By the window a lovely old French writing desk, that
was not hired in the bazaar, where most of the bungalow
furniture comes from to grace the erstwhile home of
the English mem sahib; and goes back there, then on
to mingle in the emotion of the next family.
Every bungalow in winter has a wide or narrow fender
seat; this one has no exception in this respect; I sat on
it back to the blaze and poured out tea for my host.
He is an extraordinary person, a Captain in the army, a
barrister by profession, a rider of races, a shooter of
animals, and a linguist of exceptional merit. Know-
ledgable to the last degree of art, music, and literature;
a connoisseur in old china and silver and all the dear'
delightful things an early George called “objects of
bigotry and virtue.” Then when you’ve said all this
of him, one always adds, “and lie’s a famous cook” ; such
a man will never starve, except for recognition of his
higher qualities.
The Mohurran festival is on, for it is January, the
holiest of months, in which in older times it was unholy
to wage war, but camels, cows, sheep, goats, and lambs
are sacrificed.
All the morning the streets near the bazaar, which
is so new, it is like a church fete affair put up for a
week only, have been gay with curious temples, like
dolls’ houses, made of flimsy paste and light wood and
decorated in a most tawdry manner with tinsels, gilt and
colored paper. They are carried in a procession on
this tenth day of January. These Tabuts or Tagiyas,
which are supposed to simulate the tomb of Ali at Kar


bala, will be thrown into the sea or other water, or, in
the absence of water, buried.
Ihe rains hold off; it is a day of shivering cold
weather, however, and one goes to the race meeting
enveloped in furs.
I have seen races in Lucknow, in Allahabad, and Cal-
cutta, but for real joy of racing commend me to Pindi.
Grown men run about like little boys, playing at the
game. A tiny grandstand holds the local beauty and
fashion. Paris need not look to her laurels on that
account, however, hour or five bookies shout the small-
est odds I have ever heard called. Sometimes they re-
J used to bet at all, which made us angry : but they know
the course, they know the horses, and they know the dear,
reckless gentlemen riders; and after all a father’s heart
often beats ’neath a bookie’s waistcoat.
My little friend, whose hospitality I enjoyed yesterday,
and his conversation more than anyone’s in India, was
running about in jockey kit as serious as the Mohamme-
dans, whose chant, “Ya Hasan! Ya Hasain! Ya Ali!”
could be heard circling in the far distance.
The 10th Hussars drag drove up with a dash inside
the course. On the flat beyond bang went a gun; it was
the hearer of an officer using his master’s best “Purdy”
to shoot a crow for his own dinner.
Whilst back of the stand two horses were being led
out in the paddock, where three riders shivered and won-
dered at the result—three riders and two horses, for,
alas • the spirit of religion was abroad, and the third
man’s sais had wandered away across the flat with his
pony regardless of time, his master’s wrath, or the race.


Enthralled by the tom-tom’s beat, the pipe’s lone call,
the flaunting banner and tawdry toy, borne aloft on the
gaily-dressed native shoulders, the sais and pony wan-
dered on, and the race proceeded without them. We
ascended the stand and saw our two friends gallop round
in mud over the fetlocks. It was not a speedy race,
there were no cheers as the winner came down the
straight, and the owner of the absent horse was cursing.
In the steeplechase, distance three miles, Capt. Lane
gave a beautiful performance leading on “Leading Lady.”
He fell at the second jump. The field he’d left behind
dosed up on him, and as the second horse took off for
the jump he fell at, he rose with his horse, mounted, and
got at once into the leading stride, and won by so many
lengths at top weight, the owner must have been furious.
A professional or more knowing jockey would probably
have given the horse a sore mouth for the good of future
betting. After this Col. Cayley and the officers of the
West Yorkshire Regiment entertained the entire course
to tea in a comfy marquee tent sheltered from the wind,
carpeted with a gay durri, and decorated with palms.
To the strains of the band we left the view of Murree
Hills, then soft and tender as they faced the grandstand
under the fitful rays of a setting sun, that for the hour
dispelled the shadows left by fog and rain of the day
before.
Rain, more rain, and soughing wind next day. Polo
was an impossibility; the ground was a shallow lake.
The all conquering 10th Hussars, fresh from triumphs of
Allahabad and Calcutta, vainly chafed to get on their
ponies again, but relentless nature drowned their hopes
in rain.


1 liere is a park in Rawal Pindi that is prodigal in
delight!ul curves and stretches to drive about in; and if
it is commonplace in its neutral coloring on a wet after-
noon, the story I heard as 1 drove through it opened up
again the India of love and passion one dreams of. be-
fore one sees it, in its closeness to mother earth, that
eaith in her dirty dusty mood the low class Hindoo
effects. Not mother earth of this damp afternoon, the
green leaves glistening from the recent rain, and kissed
mto lines of golden light from a traitor sun that at each
tv ernn g of these past few wet days has glinted a promise
of a fine to-morrow. The India this story is of is the
inscrutable Past, and as I heard it I trv to write it.
'‘On the last day of September, or, to lie accurate, on
the first day oi October, I was sleeping in the compound
near Colonel Vaughan, on one of those native, wooden
frame beds, with canvas strips woven across as its only
form of mattress, for it was still very hot.
I was roused about 2 p.m. by a sais in a perturbed state,
who begged me to come at once, as a man had been mur-
dered near the stables. 1 got up as I was and walked
m the fitful light of a lantern, for there was no moon,
and it was very dark to where the object pointed out as-
the dead man, lay.
1 touched him with my foot, and he moved. “What
the devil do you mean by waking me up and dragging
me here,” 1 said ; “this man is not dead.” “But 1 am
byhig, Sahib,” the object on the ground said. I had the
lantern placed where 1 could see him, and found to my
horror it was Clems’ sais. He was stabbed through the
abdomen and bleeding profusely. I sent at once for the
ambulance tonga to take him to the hospital, and while-


we waited for it he told me he’d swear it was my sais
who had done it stabbed him with Clems’ sword whilst
he lay asleep. The wounded man sat up without a moan,
as brave as they make them, for he must have been in
horrible pain, and when the tonga came I told the men
to lift him in, but he refused, and insisted on getting up
and walking to it, only leaning on their arms. He never
moaned once ;it was superb endurance. They drove him
to the hospital, poor devil, where he died four hours
after.
Where are the police?” I asked my sais when the
wounded man had gone. “I don’t know, sahib. No
police been here to-night.” “Well send for them and
tell them it is Abdul who has done this. There’s a train
out at 5 o clock ; he 11 probably try to get away on that,
and have the Bazaar searched,” and 1 picked my way
back with a careful look out for snakes. I had just got
into a comfortable doze when the melancholy sais and
another native woke me up and said another man had
been murdered in the Bazaar.
“What the devil has it to do with me?” I said. “Whv
am 1 to be dragged out because some bally native sees fit
to go on a slaughtering party? Where is he, anyway? If
it is any distance, I’m going to dress first,” and I did.
When we got to the second man, his head was almost
severed from his body, and he was surrounded by native
friends. ‘Will the sahib kindly examine the body and
see that he is dead?” they asked. “See that he is dead.
\ou old poggle ! How can a man be otherwise with his
head hanging by a bit of skin?” But his wound, see.
salnb; for evidence we ask you to examine him.” And
though I revolted at the idea, they Avere so insistent on


my giving evidence, I examined the poor beggar, who
was not only decapitated, but stabbed in about six places
m the abdomen, hacked about, and cut in a frightful
manner. As I walked home through the park about
6 a.m., I came upon my wretched sais, sitting handcuffed
between two police. “Salaam sahib,” he greeted me with
his manacled hands to his brow; “Salaam, sahib,” the
cheery beggar continued, till 1 told him to drop it. I
asked him if he had murdered Clems’ sais and the man
in the Bazaar. \ es, sahib, both of them,” he promptly
answered, and seemed neither horrorstruck nor remorse-
ful.
“A\hy did he do it?” I asked my raconteur. “Women,”
he replied, tersely, the old hideous excuse for misplaced
passion. It appears a lovely little widow, with some
property and beloved by Clems’ sais, lived with her elder
married sister and her husband in the Bazaar. Abdul
wished to marry her, but the married sister, feeling he
was not worthy, refused her sanction to Abdul and smiled
on Clems’ sais’ suit.
Abdul determined to rid the earth of all that stood
between him and his houri, so calmly stabbed first his
rival, then went to the house of his beloved to slay her
sister; the brother-in-law heard him, however, and in
attempting to eject him was stabbed, hacked, and finally
slashed across the throat.
1 railing his bloody weapon, Abdul, exalted with blood
letting, calmly went to a native tobacco shop, purchased
some cigarettes, which he lit, and was smoking with
calm enjoyment when the police came upon him.
“And the lovely widow?” 1 asked.


“Oh, she went away up country and married another
man, I believe, and Abdul has appealed against the
sentence of death, and I have to testify at his second
trial on Monday.”






Hindoos at Umballa.
The Dhobi Wala.


UMBALLA.
UMB ALLA.
Dearest Bertha,
My first glimpse of cantonment life came in January
at Umballa, where I arrived one cold night after a long
journey. My cheery host met me at the station, and
drove me in a Turn Turn, as the buggy of the country
is called, along a misty Mall to the corner of British
Cavalry Road, where his bungalow was situated.
Soft-shaded lamps and firelight glinted on to the veran-
dah. 1 got an impression of doric columns, palms, rosy
English chintz, and hundreds of photos, as my lovely
hostess, a vision in a geranium red tea gown, came to
greet me.
It was all so cosy, so fresh, so clean after a series of
up country hotels and trains, I felt I’d arrived at Heaven
without the preliminary of dying. I had a dress rehear-
sal of that, however, before I left.
I had been told that Umballa was the jumping off
spot of all India, nothing to do but ride out to polo and
come back and talk about it. But who, remembering the
long glorious rides, with eyes towards the hills of Simla,
can say there is nothing to do; or see unmoved, on going
through the native mud hut village, the rainbow of
humans, and little naked brown babies, that if they did
not smell of every kind of unclean thing, and peat smoke
into the bargain, would be so adorable to cuddle.
N


All through India I had this desire, but having given
way to it once, never dared to repeat the offence to my
nose. They walk when no bigger than a six months’
old European, although they are probably well over a
year in age; seldom dressed beyond the red brahmin
string round the waist, which sometimes supports a metal
medallion, meant to hang in front, but seldom there.
1 he girls from the earliest hours have their baby noses
burdened with rings, and I have seen habies of both
sexes with several wooden pegs in the top of the cartilage
of each ear, to keep open the holes pierced for future
ornament.
1 hen the heads of many little Mohammedans as yet
unturbaned, with close clipped or shaved off locks, save
for the v isp left on the crown, by which they expect
to be drawn up to Heaven.
Amicable women friends are squatting on the ground,
and accommodating each other by a vigorous hunt for the
source of annoyance that infests their heads. Nothing
seems to be withheld ; every detail of life is openly per-
formed. They are as simple and direct as the animals
m the fields we cantered through out to the grand trunk
road, so pregnant in one’s memory with Kipling’s tale
of little “Kim.”
A e pass the jail where chained prisoners are at work
splitting wood ; past a dairy farm in such proximity to
stable filth that we shudder at the fumes, and all along
the road trudge mothers with tiny babes sitting astride
their hips. I only saw in all my thousands of miles of
Indian travel, two babies borne in the arms as we carry
them. From the earliest hour they are set astride the


mother s hip, and, later, on a man’s shoulder when they
have sense enough to hold on to his head.
Driving out one afternoon to the Club, where half
Umballa assembles every day at five, my hostess mur-
mured to the bearer that she would like him to get some
roses for the house. “Yes, Ma’am,” he replied ; “later,
when the mem sahibs all at the Club, I get you some.”
The delightful way the servants steal from each others
gardens is most naive.
As a rule one goes to Paget Park, where a nursery of
no mean order exists. One buys a book of pink tickets
for a rupee and goes eight times for as many as one can
cut and carry away. The head gardener, if there, limits
one to a dozen roses, but he is seldom there.
In this tiny park is a pretty little temple, beside a
small lake covered with Lotus blossom. The lake has
the appearance of considerable depth. A story illustrat-
ing how little the East understands the West was told
me of a young Englishman newly arrived in Umballa.
He was walking through Paget Park late one after-
noon, when his attention was arrested by violent cries
of distress, or for help, emanating from the temple, to
which he rushed. Speaking no Hindoostani, he could
not make out exactly what had happened, but from the
frenzied gesticulation of the natives assembled there
had no doubt that someone was to be rescued from the
lake.
Pulling off his boots and coat, he dived into the sup-
posed deep water and stuck, head and shoulders deep,
in soft mud. Impotent to call for help in his predica-
ment, he was watched a short time by the natives he
had tried to succour, who, having no understanding of


his heroic action, finally walked off, leaving him unas-
sisted, with murmurings of wonderment at “These mad
English.” He was taken from the lake some hours after
quite dead. The natives had only been indulging in a
little cheery conversation.
Two afternoons a week one can dance in the Umballa
Club to a military band on an excellent floor, and the
pastime presents a grotesque picture to one unused to
dancers in rubber-soled tennis shoes, polo kit, and ladies
in habits. A fair sprinkling of all of these are found
amongst those who take the floor. On other afternoons
silent tea parties assemble in the dim corners of the ball-
room and converse in the hushed tones that are always
used in criticising the other guests.
One dines out frequently, and returns hospitality as
often. This does not entail great expense, as food is
cheap, and an excellent dinner can be provided for one
rupee a head in a town where quails are 1/4 a dozen,
and 1/6 buys a pair of chickens. How the Indian cook
can send up the dinners he does —good, bad, or indif-
ferent, having prepared them over a clay stove, with
perhaps at most a half dozen holes in it filled with char-
coal ; nowhere to bake or to roast, as an English cook
understands the process, and only the most primitive
culinary implements to work with —is a mystery of the
East I never solved.
There are five available polo grounds on the Maidan,
and had it not rained with a dispiriting frequency we
might have witnessed more than one practice game, which,
alas! was all I saw, for on the first fine day after my
arrival we had arranged to go to golf, and were on the
way in the Turn Turn when the shaft broke, and. slam


ming on the horse, frightened him into a bolt. Half a
mile down the road a tree growing out of a ditch exer-
' ised such a latal fascination for the beast that he went
straight at it. The tree tore off the hood of the buggy,
broke the other shaft, liberating the horse, and deposited
m\ hostess on the road and me twenty feet away in the
ditch.
Despite the rain, the earth of Umballa was of the
natuie of the hard, hard world of reality and woe, especi-
ally when 1 unpremeditatingly tried to shove my face
into it.
Bruised and bleeding, I was driven home and put to
bed, whilst my stunned hostess with positive heroism
wrote a note summoning the K.D.G. Surgeon, who pre-
scribed rest in a darkened room for at least a week, as I
was suffering with slight concussion.
Next day a nose of terrific proportion, a chin gashed
open for several inches, and as disreputable a black eye
as it is possible to have, quite closed up and utterly dis-
figuring, made it easy for me to obey the doctor’s orders;
and until the day before I left, I stuck to the seclusion
of the bungalow.
On iriy first Sunday in Umballa I went to the Cathe-
dral, and watched with pleasure the choir of Tommies,
and revelled after the service, in the march off of several
regiments and hands, and felt life in a military canton-
ment was a cheerv thing.
But when one lies ill, depressed by rain without and
the pain within, the incessant trumpeting, that is so em-
phatic a feature of military station life, gets on one’s
nerves to such an extent one wishes the martial blast
had never been heard.


The day before I left Umballa, I painted the black
eye out of sight, and went forth in the afternoon to
General Pilcher’s garden party.
This cheery entertainment filled me with delight, as
I saw on my arrival amongst the dozen or more con-
jurors provided to entertain us, one who had come to do
the snake and mongoose act. I was doomed to be dis-
appointed, for just as the conjuror placed his nasty big
snake free on the grass and released the mongoose, a for-
eign lady visitor began to try and hypnotise the snake.
The reptile did not respond, and the mongoose was just
working up a show of opposition when the infuriated
lady seized the snake firmly below the head, and refused
to allow the trick to proceed.
I turned away to be cheered by a Hindoo fortune-
teller, but as he spoke no English, I got a very garbled
idea of my future, which, however, held the emphatic
assertion that I would not cross water for six months;
that is less than six weeks ago. I’ve been through the
Arabian Sea, down the Indian Ocean, and approach the
Pacific as I write, so my faith in the soothsayer of Um-
balla fades.
At this garden party a band discoursed all the latest
comic opera music, which to me was quite wonderful,
as at least six months elapse after a London success
ere the music reaches Australia —the so-called Paradise of
light opera.
In a sand paddock the General most kindly had his
three new English thoroughbreds, for he dearly loves
a horse, brought out for my inspection. As the playful
gee-gees laid down and rolled in the muddy sand. I fear


the sais did not enjoy that part of the entertainment as
much as the spectators.
In the evening, after a delightful dinner, we went to
one of the fortnightly Club dances, which, as it was
taboo, I thoroughly enjoyed.
A terrific electrical storm raged all night, and was
Brocken-like in effect as we drove home at 2 a.m. Next
morning the rain again descended, but it was essential
for me to have money, so I sallied forth to the Bank,
and on my return I was rewarded by the sight of a
native wedding procession.
I en elephants, with jangling bells, burdened with rela-
tives of the espousing parties and dozens of retainers in
white, were making a terrific racket; then many gaily-
dressed natives, and finally the youthful bridegroom being
led on a pony, sitting up in splendid raiment, aged. I
should think, at most about six years.
At night I drove down the Mall regretfully to the
Station, leaving the toy-like town behind, with its rec-
tangular streets and pretty bungalows. I felt it had
possibilities my untimely accident had prevented me for-
ever from proving. Since then I have met some of the
kind people who entertained me there, and though I shall
probably never return, I shall look forward always with
great happiness to meeting once more my friends of a
pleasant hour.




The Turkish Gate to the Bazaar.
The Bailey Guard Gate, Lucknow.




LUCKNOW.
COMMISSIONER’S HOUSE,
LUCKNOW.
Dear, dear Mrs. Ashbridge,—
How much, how often, I have thought of you in Luck-
now. Its been a week of such cheery pleasure. I arrived
here the day before my birthday, after a night journey
from Umballa.
I was so excited at the thought of seeing all these nice
people again, I could not sleep. Every time the train
stopped 1 looked out at the shadows of people in great
throngs huddled in clusters all about the station, for
" na tive wants to travel he packs up and goes
to the station, where he waits sometimes a day and a night
for the train.
1 ime, it is said, was made for slaves. Certainly in
India the native acts as though he possessed an eternity
of it. The irritating thing is he frequently behaves in
his business relations with one, as though we possessed
a lifetime of loose hours, only to be tied together by a
tape of death ; that is their only boundary line, and it
never throws the least shadow of hurry into their lives.
Iron cups, flaming with light from the burning oil
they contain, were held aloft on a yard-high iron rod
by men whose jaws are invariably tied up as though the
owners were suffering with mumps, and with huge quilted
wraps swathed about their shoulders, whilst thin, bare
legs go uncovered below.


It is a nation absolutely lacking in a sense of pro-
portion • therein lies its charm. Away from it, the irri-
tating noises, the wrangling voices fade from memory,
and one forgets the terrible throat-clearing that begins at
dawn and greets one’s ears at every station till break-
fast, giving the impression that physical India is one
huge cough of Augean stable quality.
But from the rainy Punjab to sunny Central Provinces
was a delightful change. I felt ten years younger. Joy,
even in anticipation, is the greatest rejuvenator.
I went first to the Hotel I’d stayed at two months ago,
and was given nice rooms, as 1 only wanted them for
the week end. Every inch of space had been engaged
weeks ahead for the Civil Service Cup week, to which
I’d been asked to stay with the cheeriest, dearest people
imaginable.
After getting nicely unpacked, I was met with the
annoying information that the Maharajah of Jodpore,
who had engaged these rooms for next week, had elected
to arrive that afternoon, and I would kindly go into some
horrid little rooms in another wing.
It is useless to protest in India, but lots of people do.
I heard one Mem-sahib from Simla, who was treated in
a similar manner, peevishly complain of the lack of defer-
ence due to a lady of her position, the absence of consider-
ation shown to one of her husband’s rank, etc. It had no
effect on the proprietor, since she was not prepared to
pay more than the incoming black potentate for the rooms
she desired.
Since my rooms were not pleasant, I rushed into the
sunshine, seeing all the familiar street scenes—the side-
walk barber, the fruit vendors, the metal workers, all


the dear, bright blotches of color in their dingy frames of
dirt—a dirt one does not sense acutely. The hideous
fakir even gave a touch of dreamlike unreality, and a
comprehensive, sweeping view of the Husainabad Imam-
barah and tank, though only built by Muhammed All
Shah between 1837-1842, gave me a satisfactory sense of
the East as a land of magnificence.
I drove about dropping cards in the little tin boxes,
and wrote my name in the various books of those in
command. After lunching with the Railston family, who
have two nice sons out here—the one known as “Admiral”
is one of the best polo players in the Rifle Brigade team
—we went to the horse show, which had been going on
all day.
The most attractive feature was Miss Biddy Barrett,
about five years old, her lovely little face, crowned with
golden curls and framed in a topee, sitting astride her
pony m Jodpore breeches, a tweed coat, turnover collar
on her tiny shirt, and tie fastened across with a miniature
gold safety pin. She took second prize. Had I been
judging, she d have had first. A more adorable thing
in baby equestriennes I’ve never seen.
In the evening I chaperoned Miss Clova Railston, who
had made a charming picture on her brother’s horses all
the afternoon, to the dance at Mahommed Bagh Club,
and danced up to Sunday with no compunction. It was
delightful renewing my acquaintances in Lucknow, for I
had my first dance and polo here last November.
On Sunday afternoon I went to tea at Lady Violet
Crawley’s bungalow. People were playing tennis, and
I met such an attractive woman—a Mrs. Jack Fagan—
who rides superbly, plays polo and pig-sticks astride,


and off a horse looks like an apple blossom —so sweet,
so gentle and expressive is she of the best in the elements.
Monday I came here. My hostess has the capacity to
pretend she hardly knows how many people are her guests,
but sees that each and every one has all his pet comforts,
and everyone is allowed to feel as unrestrained as in a
hotel. My host, Mr. Saunders, the Commissioner, is one
of the wittiest men I’ve met in India, and delightful
Capt. Winter, whom I met in Pindi, is also here; a
deputy commissioner, called Joplin, so interesting and
quiet; two brothers called Faunthorpe, who shoot tigers
as nonchalantly as one claps a mosquito to death; Mr.
Archie 'Pod, of the Rifle Brigade, who is here for the
polo, and odd sundry other men —ten in all, and only
four women!
The bungalow has only a few big rooms, and the
women are all put up in the house, but the men have
delightful tents in the compound. This is reallv com-
fortable when it is not too cold, as one’s native servant
sees that one gets all one’s usual comforts.
All day we sat at polo, and after a cheery dinner,
some of the party went to a little entertainment for the
Crown Prince at Government House, at which the guest
of honor seemed bored.
Tuesday I got up very early, enveloped myself in furs,
and went in the motor with Mr. Marshall, a racing box
wallah, and Capt. Winter, to the racecourse to see morn-
ing gallops. 'This is a delightful pastime. The grass
was wet with dew, the sky pink with the blush of coming
sunlight, the cheep of birds flitting here, there, every-
where. The caw caw of the irrepressible crow, which
exists in millions in this land of sorrow and laughter;


be assured, however, the laughter comes last. I'm not
trying to be cryptic; one could not amongst all this
splendid, cheery, open-hearted existence.
Mrs. Barrett and Miss “Billy" Miles were knocking
polo balls about, other women riding around, and every-
one interested and happy. Owners getting weights and
gurmg out chances of winning, and the sun slowly ris-
ing. «hen he got over the horizon we adjourned to
the she ter of a shed at the back of the course, where
'Offee brown bread and butter, and toast, and salt is
served at little tables, and the riders dismount and con-
gregate little parties. At a quarter to nine we returned
to the house to bathe and dress for breakfast
° Ur hOSt announ “ d > as we were busy with the numer-
Servkn T ’h'™' l)reakfast al "’ays contains, that a
■-rule a , ’ biCyding from Calcutta ‘o Bel-
Tittle Fm, rV nVited t 0 lUl ’ Ch tha ‘ day ' As he s Pe a ks
French’ to W 'T , aske<l *° *°" ° ne Side and talk
, ~ lm ' "bich he knows better than English
on the other side, to speak Ruf^
' h the C °unt speaks better than either
■Some of the party objected to him because he was
reported to wear golf trousers and stocking a
sweater covered on the chest with medals and ' i!
satin pill-box hat worked in gold. Pmk
I confess the idea amused me anrl t i
to be on the front verandah to see Mm a ”t H “““
up on his bicycle with »reat dash 1 a H<s Came
ing^theblames^f^all'the^otabh had^met^aiid


never let the book out of his sight or reach for a second.
We always had two tables at lunch and dinner, and most
of those of the house party who were lunching in, pre-
ferred to sit at the other table.
We progressed merrily. The Count’s deportment was
original, to say the least, and his twisted sentences in
English, which he insisted on speaking, were mirth pro-
voking. When he saw my hostess and me drinking
claret, he blandly asked, “Is that wine?” He had asked
for beer. On being told that it was, he announced, “No
good womens drinks wine in my country.” A murmur
from the other table reached my ears of “Kick the
bounder out.” It was a low growl, and came, I think,
from nice Archie 'bod.
The little Count, however, did not seem to sense any-
thing unusual in his remark. His little bullet head,
with hair cut very close, nodded like a little perky bird.
His eyes smiled, and he toasted everybody in turn, and
the health and prosperity of the house, and having heard
that a huge fete was to be given that night by the
Talukdars, as the rich natives are called, said he
intended to be present, and regretted that he had sent his
handsome velvet suit, “smoker suit,” worked in gold, on
to Delhi.
Apart from his gaudy attire he had no luggage or
clothes other than he wore. A beautifully simple way
to travel. He preceded our carriages to the races, and
when we arrived he was strutting up and down lashing
his trouser leg with his whip; a dog from savage Europe
every inch. A troubled air pervaded the dinner party
that night at Commissioner’s house. Chits came from
Government House, chits Avere hastily written and sent


back, more chits came, and dinner was punctuated with
telephone calls, till our suspense was relieved by the
announcement that the Crown Prince of Germany was
lost. He had started with his chauffeur to motor about
3 p.m., when all Government House party were at the
races, and at 8.30 had not returned. The unpleasant
task of breaking this disappointing news to the Talukdars
devolved upon my host. The Lieutenant-Governor and
party, however, announced their intention of being
present.
As we approached the Palace wherein the Talukdars
proposed to receive their exalted guest the place was
like a fairy scene. The arches and windows of all
buildings were outlined with tiny lights, an endless
labor, since neither electricity or gas is laid on in Luck-
now. We drove up with a fine flourish, and descended
on the red carpet on which anxious and wondering
Talukdars stood to receive. I did not envy Mr.
Saunders’ mission, and we sensed some of his regret.
It had all been so generously, so splendidly planned. A
wide balcony was carpeted and arranged with chairs
around the Vice-Regal enclosure, that all guests might see
the splendid fireworks, the native fete always has as its
most prominent feature. Inside the Palace a dais was
arranged, and an archway on either side led to a room
where a sumptuous champagne supper was spread.
People who had not heard of the Prince’s disaster
came crushing in, anxiously looking for His Highness.
Failing to locate him, they looked for the Lieutenant-
Governor, and being unrewarded in the search for
notabilities, sought with equal anxiety the supper, which
partially consoled them, His Excellency, the Lieutenant-
O


Governor, arrived in due time, when the rumour of the
Crown Prince’s breakdown at Fatepur, and his tele-
graphed regrets at being unable to arrive in time for the
fete, was whispered all over the room, and the fireworks
display proceeded.
At its conclusion, 1 went in for a sandwich, and while
Mr. Joplin was attending to my wants, the Servian Count
appeared, dressed exactly as at lunch, but, in addition, a
huge red ribbon hung round his neck, supporting a
medal, the badge of “ The Welcome Club, Allahabad.”
The moment he caught sight of me he came up, bowed,
and kissed my hand, and seizing a huge bunch of roses
from a silver bowl on the supper table, bowed pro-
foundly, and presented them.
Then, with equal rapidity he filled himself a glass of
champagne, and saying loudly, “I drink to the beautiful
Australian Queen,” he drained the bumper. During
this feat we escaped. The reception-room was brilliant
with English uniformed officers and natives in fancy
raiment. The interior decorations reminded me of an
old-fashioned French Hotel, and whilst 1 was gazing
about, a charming General and his A.D.C. told me our
house party had gone, and they were deputed to take me
to supper at the Chuttar Munzil Club, and then home.
Captain Winter from the house party was with us, and
as we left, the sadly-disappointed hosts hung the native
garlands fashioned of gold and silver tape, interspersed
with silver discs heavily gold embroidered about our
necks The cool night air was delightfully refreshing as
we rushed through it to the Club, which we found, had
more than one eye closed, and the cooks asleep. When
I met Captain Winter ill Rawal Pindi I was given a


catalogued list of his many attainments, the last being
that he was a splendid cook, and in this as in all other
items, 1 had heard he excelled his recommendation a
thousand fold.
Rushing to the kitchen, he took off his coat, aroused
the servants, and in an incredibly short time came to the
table, and calmly helped us eat the delicious omelette he
had made, and an excellent dish of cod roes a la diable —
eggs and a tin of roe being all the kitchen could supply
at that hour.
It was piercing cold when we went out. The General
insisted on my taking his coat, his A.D.C. insisted on
covering his chief with his, and then the General insisted
on the A.D.C. sitting on the floor at our feet out of the
draught, whilst our cordon bleu shivered between us.
The next evening I went to the ball given to the Crown
Prince at this Club. It was changed incredibly. All
day my dear hostess had worked directing the decorations.
The ballroom, which is quite Hindoo in character, was
beautiful with gold elephant trappings across the stage
in front of the band. The whole of the terrace on the
river side was tented in and arranged as a drawing-room,
heated with tiny oil stoves, which made the Kala Juggas
comfy places for the inevitable rose-leaf conversations of
those who sit out.
Soon after my arrival, a wondrous figure wended its
way through the dense crowd. I could not place it at
first, then it dawned on Captain Winter, who was beside
me, who it was, and we laughed convulsively. In a
ready-made waiter’s evening dress, tan boots, bare hands,
a crush hat under his arms, and the “Welcome Club, of
Allahabad” medal on its wide red ribbon dangling over
his heart, was the Servian Count.


“Would Madam honor him with a dance,” he won-
dered in Russian to Captain Winter, who saved me with
ready wit from such an infliction. He then said to me
in English, “1 had wished to take the dance with you,
hut the music it to my blood makes the boil, and I get so
excite I know not what I do; perhaps it is as good Madam
has not for me the dance to give.”
Rater, lie met the Commissioner, who is sure the gal-
lant bicyclist came uninvited. “See my dotes,” lie
exclaimed, with pleasure, “I gets him from the tailor,
hut to-morrow I not keep him, just for this hall. It is
a very fine fete. Many lovely ladies, but that Australian,
she is the best,” so you see I had one poor little conquest.
The Crown Prince sent for me a little after his
arrival, and we danced. He then suggested that we
might find a Kala Jugga, hut all seemed occupied. “It
is so very crowded. If we could only find a single chair,”
he plaintively complained. I told him it would he nicer
to find two chairs, as I had abandoned my intention to
write a book called “Knees I have sat on.” We sat out
a dance. We danced the next, sat out the fourth, and
then he went home, leaving me to placate my angry neg-
lected partners, who had to stand aside for Royalty.
'They were such very nice partners, too. I ate supper
in a chastened mood. I’d been accused of trying to
amuse His Highness. 'Told if I’d been dull he would
have quickly released me, hut who in the wide world
would risk being dull even to escape a Prince for one’s
most particular pet partner? and he does dance divinely.
When the music stops, he doesn’t let go of your right
hand and leave you to extricate yourself as Englishmen
do, from his encircling arm. He quickly withdraws his


My last glimpse of Native Lucknow.




arm from your waist, holds your hand for the fraction
of a second till you have got over the sway from the
rhythm of the dance, bows abruptly and releases your
hand. It’s quite the nicest bit of deportment I’ve met in
any ballroom.
The next day, Thursday, was Cup Day, and the grand-
stand at the races was crowded. H.R.H. the Crown
Prince was present, but left during the afternoon for
Calcutta, and in the evening we drove out to the Bth
Hussars’ circus to see Billy Waite, of Australia, do his
famous buckjumping exhibition. Dozens of “Tommies”
gallantly tried to sit the beasty, hut one and all met with
ignominious defeat.
Friday, the regular item of all Indian weeks, the
fancy dress ball, came off in the Chuttar Munzil Club.
Mrs. Alex. Watson bearing off the prize in her beautiful
Marsovian dress. In India there is less self consciousness
than anywhere else about making oneself beautiful, or
ridiculous, by ancient or fantastic garb, and it materially
helps the gaiety of a race week.
Saturday was the last day of the races. I went to
lunch at Flagstaff House, and motored out with the
General, but a spirit of sadness pervaded that scene, and
the attendance was materially decreased by the departure
of many visitors. The 16th Cavalry and Staff and
Departments were “At Home.” We sipped their tea
in a weary fashion to the strains of the Highland Light
Infantry Band, the sun set, and the Civil Service week
was over.
Sunday morning 1 bargained on the verandah with a
dealer in native pictures. He began asking Rs. 300,
and finally took Rs. 65 for one, but on the ones at


Rs. 15, lie would not come down one pie. Shopping is
really most wearying on this system. Mrs. Saunders
went hunting, and came home with a badly-sprained arm,
as her horse fell with her. She was so plucky; she is
really an exceptional woman. You’d find her most
interesting.
1 drove one of the departing men to the station, and
dropped another silken tie. Oh ! those charming friends
of an hour. Why is life such a kaleidoscope?
Monday, as an aftermath, f went to the Military
Dairy Farm, where 1 watched the point to point races
from the roof. It was such fun. Over the four-mile
course they scampered all the dear people one knew, with
Captain Barrett weighing them in, in impromptu scales
before each event. Dear frivolous Lucknow! So serious
in your pleasure-taking pastimes, how 1 love you.
The house party has dissolved. I alone am left, and
so happy to have these hours for better understanding of
my clever charming host and hostess.
The eve of my departure has come. After an after-
noon of tennis, General Mahon motored me to the
Residency. The day was over, the Tower locked,
but he is Burra Sahib, and it was quickly opened for
him, and we climbed up silently and looked at the beau-
tiful view—the river winding like a silver scarf, the
wealth of trees about the velvety lawns, the suffused glow
of sundown on the crumbling stone ; it was a tone poem in
silence, and, above all, the British Flag afloat.
The Keystone Printing Co., Royal Lane. Melbourne








