

PeTH f t-Vr \
FROM NEW ZEALAND
TO LIVERPOOL
H. B. MORTON.
REPRINTED FROM THE “WARRINGTON GUARDIAN
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
WARRINGTON :
PRINTED AT THE GUARDIAN OFFICE.
1879.








FROM NEW ZEALAND
TO LIVERPOOL
H. B. MORTON.
REPRINTED FROM THE “ WARRINGTON GUARDIAN
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION,
WARRINGTON:
PRINTED AT THE GUARDIAN OFFICE.
iByg.




The following notes were not written for publica-
tion. Passing impressions are therefore noted as
they occurred to me at the time, often, perhaps,
in terms which are not well chosen. At the sug-
gestion of Mr. Brewtnall, of the “ Warrington
Guardian,” they were placed at the disposal of that
journal. They are reprinted in the present form in
the hope that they may not be devoid of interest
to my friends and acquaintances.
H. B. M.




Jnrm ifdaitir to gifepol
On Board the s. s. Australia,
Saturday , sth April , 1879.
The lat. to-day at noon was 19 36 South; long., 172
32 West.
Fire practice is just over. The signal for ‘‘fire on
board ” is the violent ringing of the large bell on the
hurricane deck. What an animated scene follows!
The stewards rush on deck; not a moment is lost. If
anyone shows a disposition to finish his work, however
important, he is instantly ordered on deck by the head
steward. Some, on their way, shoulder “ extincteurs,”
French inventions for extinguishing fires. The Chinese
portion of the crew seem more intensely in earnest
than the Europeans; they man a hand pump, form a
line along which buckets are passed from man to man,
connect two long hoses with a steam fire engine, and
with the rest are prepared with all the ship’s appli-
ances in readiness for putting out a fire in exactly 1
minute and 30 seconds from the time the alarm was
sounded. ’Tis not pleasant to think of the possibility
of a fire at sea; but seeing there is such a possibility it
makes one more comfortable to know that such admira-
ble preparations are made to meet it. The passengers
were informed at lunch time that a “ fire practice ” was
to take place this afternoon, otherwise much panic
would have been caused. The preparations all looked
so terribly real, and the men for the most part looked


so anxious, that few could have guessed the alarm had
no real foundation.
We are in the tropics now; and fine, breezy, balmy,
and luxurious weather we are having. ’Tis true it is
warm, some say hot, and others ’ot; but what matters
when one has only to pass the time idly by ? As usual
on board ship we live to eat, and for the time, if the
truth must be said, it is not objectionable so to do.
Truly, we read, talk, walk, and play whist; quoits, too,
find their votaries; but if you could watch the expres-
sion on the faces of nineteen passengers out of twenty at
various times during the day, I think you would agree
with me that it is brightest, most peaceful, and con-
tented at the signal for —well, any meal—but dinner
especially. I had almost forgotten sleep amongst our
devices for passing time. Not that it merits forgetful-
ness, however it may beget it. But sleep has not been
always practicable since we left Auckland. All ships
have a habit of rolling, and a very bad habit landsmen
and women find it. At the worst it upsets one’s inner
man, and who needs a description of the horrors of mat
de mer ? At least it causes one to shift in one’s bed
most uncomfortably. If you lie on your back you are
thrown on your side and most likely the wrong side. If
you change your position and lie on your side, you are
sure to be rolled on your back. So that for most peo-
ple sound refreshing sleep is out of the question the
first few nights at sea.
We left Auckland bound for San Francisco at 7. 30
on the evening of Tuesday, the Ist April, and had
windy weather and a rather nasty cross sea for the first
two days and three nights. We have been at sea, by
the way, five days, and still it is only Saturday to-day
—at least the Captain of the ship (Captain Cargill)
tells us so. The fact is we had two Thursdays the
third of April. To-day is Sunday in New Zealand. I
don’t know what day is, or will be, Sunday in Eng-
land. This idea of two days of the same date and kind


in one week is overpowering, and the weather in truth
is a little inclined to be the same, so I shall wait for
enlightenment until we reach a cooler latitude.
We are to have a theatrical performance this even-
ing by the stewards. Of course I shall give a
critique on it. This afternoon an American young lady,
Miss S , has been playing and singing. She is a fine
girl and truly American, but as the “ dress for dinner”
bell has just sounded I must lay aside my note book.
Sunday morning , 6th April,
What a comfort the bath rooms are such weather as
this ! The pity is that there are not more of them.
One cannot decently revel long in the comparatively
cool water, with the knowledge that fellow passengers
in a row are waiting outside almost counting the
minutes you have been in, and calculating how soon
you will be out. The atmosphere this morning is very
warm. A soft mild breeze from the north keeps the
air in motion, however, and prevents the present high
temperature from being oppressive.
Last night was one to be remembered. The moon
was at its full. The atmosphere soft and genial, the
sea calm, but with motion enough to reflect the moon’s
bright beams on innumerable riplets. One had only to go
into the bows and watch the ship “ cutting the liquid
road” to picture the sea goddess’s chariot drawn by
horses whiter than the purest snow, leaving its track
where the wheels had cleft the wavy sea. To aid the
imagination, flying fish were continually darting across
our track, and the black glittering water was thrown
into relief by the snowy white foam on either side of
our bows. If the truth must be told these poetical
surroundings were not lost on some of the passengers.
To say so is but to tell that they are mortal men and
women, but to say that sentiment is not yet extin-
guished by the hurry scurry high pressure existence of
every day life.


The concert and theatrical entertainment by the
stewards passed off fairly well. Such entertainments
are exempt from sharp criticism; a kind intention
prompts them, and we judge them accordingly. The
spirit .of music was abroad amongst the passengers
until midnight. A knot of gentlemen, lying full length
on Singapore chairs placed on the hurricane deck, sang
songs as different in tune as in sentiment, soft words of
love, choruses in which the words, “te tooral ri too,”
&c., occur more often than any others, patriotism, pure
and unadulterated, informing our enemies that “we
don’t want to fight, but by Jingo if we do, &c.; ” these
and others were sung with much gusto during the
evening.
Sunday evening.
Service was held this morning. The saloon was well
filled, our cabin passengers, about eighty all told, nearly
all mustered, and a few second cabin passengers came
down. The ship’s officers in their uniform gave a
sprightly appearance to the gathering. The heat in the
saloon this evening is very oppressive. Punkahs are
much needed on these steamers, and I am surprised that
the company have not provided them. The temperature
on deck is simply delicious. We are running in the
teeth of a gentle breeze; and so are able, so long as one
keeps out of the sun, to enjoy life on deck amazingly.
I have hitherto looked upon sea travelling as a neces-
sary evil; but this trip convinces me that no kind of
relaxation is more enjoyable than ship life, provided it
is surrounded with the comforts that are necessary to
make it so. This afternoon we sighted three islands of
the Navigator’s Group, and later on passed very close
to the largest one called Tutuiha; in fact, we passed
through a narrow channel between it and a much smaller
island on its eastern end. The sight of these pretty
islands was a great relief to us. Captain Cargill oblig-
ingly had dinner delayed for half an hour to enable us
to have a good look at them, and the view was not dis-


appointing. The sun was just sinking behind the
larger island, and its setting rays threw the cocoa-nut
palms and other trees into bold relief against the clear
blue sky. Patches of crimson sky, set off by inky black
clouds, bounded the western horizon, whilst on the east
the moon, now at its full, was rising like a huge ball of
molten copper, fringed and partly obscured by light,
fleecy, summer clouds. One expects to be fascinated
with the first sight of the blue set gems of these south-
ern seas, and this, my first view, has quite fulfilled my
anticipations. A boat put off from the smaller island,
probably loaded with bananas and oranges for us ; but as
night was approaching the Captain thought it prudent
not to wait, and so our would-be benefactors had to
return without fulfilling their mission.
Tuesday morning, Bth April,
What a scene of frolic, fun and jollity the deck of our
ship presents ! In this glorious tropical weather every-
one abandons himself to enjoyment. Peals of laughter
ring through the ship, ladies play all sorts of games
which they would consider outre anywhere but on ship
board, intimacies spring up on all sides. One can sit
or lie anywhere without fear of catching cold. Hurrah
for the tropics! Hurrah for such a fine comfortable
ship as the “Australia !”
Our company presents some points of interest. The
well-known spiritualist “ Dr. Slade ” is of the number.
He is the gentleman whose seances attracted some atten-
tion in London a few years ago. The English team of
gentlemen cricketers is also on board. They are under
the captaincy of Lord Harris, who is accompanied by
Lady Harris. There are also several other ladies of
the party. Mr. Hornby is one of the English team, which
also includes Mr. Penn, son of the eminent Greenwich
engineer. The team is composed of a fine lot of young
men, good types of the athletic young Englishman.
They are gentlemanly, and unassuming, and are cer-


tainly a welcome addition to the party. Whilst I
write, Lady Harris is singing a pretty song at the piano.
The proportion of gentlemen passengers to ladies is
about five to one. Sitting as lam beneath the wind-
sail, I hear the voice of Mr. Dorling, a gentleman
connected with the London sporting press. He is
acting as auctioneer on the hurricane deck, selling the
chances in the sweepstakes on the day’s running.
He is now selling a favourite number (of miles) and
has reached 275. The cost ol the ticket to the owner
was 2s. The probable amount of the pool will be
about £g or £lO.
Last night our whist quartette extemporized a table
on the main deck, and we had a very enjoyable game
until eleven o’clock. It rained very heavily at intervals
during the evening; but this did not interrupt our
game, as we were on the lee side of the ship, sheltered
by the projecting hurricane deck.
The talk to-day is all of theatricals; one company is
already formed to do “ Little Toddlekins,” and another
one will probably be formed for a second piece before
the day is over. We are also to have a “nigger”
entertainment in a few days.
My jottings are swelling into a journal, which I had
no definite idea of keeping, but example is catching,
and nearly everyone on board keeps a diary. The con-
sumption of paper and ink is considerable. A very credi-
table picture gallery might be made of the photographs
which the passengers have with them, embracing every
variety of scenery and view throughout the colonies. I,
alas! have not brought one of my photographs with
me.
Saturday morning, 12th April.
The weather, ever the principal topic of interest on
board ship, has changed. In the place of comparative
calm, although it has never been very calm, a strong
breeze, with a rather heavy head sea, set in yesterday
morning and has continued ever since. Night time


under such circumstances is very wretched, as the con-
tinual rolling of the ship prevents refreshing sleep.
Meals, too, are much less enjoyable than in fine
weather, and it is very provoking to see your favourite
beverage dyeing the table cloth, or, it may be, stream-
ing down the apparel of your neighbour, instead of
fulfilling its proper use.
It is a fine sight to stand on the hurricane deck and
watch the vessel shipping small seas. They can be
watched from the bridge without much risk of a
wetting.
Dr. Slade has been ill ever since we left New Zea-
land, and is now suffering from an attack of paralysis.
Whilst writing the other morning I did not dream
that I should be the winner of the pool—but so it was.
There was no competition for my numbers, so they
were knocked down to the owner. They were 252, 302,
and 287 miles. Everybody thought that about 275
would win ; but when the day’s running was posted, it
proved to be 287, so I won the pool.
The cricketers’ party are lively agreeable people.
They have cricket matches nearly every afternoon.
The ball is secured by a long string. The other day
there was intense excitement over a match between two
of the ladies. Lady Harris offered to give her opponent
a dozen runs; but much to her own astonishment and
the amusement of everyone else, she was herself
bowled out for one run. Like a good-natured lady
as she is, I believe she was rather glad to see her
friend win. They also play a good board ship game
every afternoon called “ ring,” which causes much
merriment.
Yesterday afternoon four of us had our first rehearsal
of a farce called “ The Bilious Attack.” It is a piece
for two ladies and two gentlemen; but I fear that the
present rough weather will prevent frequent rehearsals,
and possibly make its production impracticable.
We crossed the Equator on Tuesday night, eight


days out from Auckland. The temperature is now
becoming slightly cooler, although in reality it has not
been very high at any time. The Captain assures me it
has not exceeded 83deg. in the cabin ; but the atmo-
sphere has been very moist ever since we left New
Zealand, and so the heat has at times been oppressive,
especially at night. Amongst our passengers are a
sprinkling of retired publicans and Yankee bagmen, the
former accompanied by their wives. They are great
connoisseurs of meat and drink, and their conversation
has principal reference to that portion of the human
form which was said to be the god of certain contem-
poraries of St. Paul. They make a rush for favourite
dishes at every meal, but this does not greatly matter,
as our table steward is a capital forager, and generally
manages to replace anything required from some other
table. The Yankee bagmen are quaint and amusing.
They look upon the world as a small concern and think
nothing of a trip around it to push the sale of salt
cellars or kerosine lamps. Various handbills have
mysteriously got into circulation over the ship, advocat-
ing different railway routes and hotels in the United
States. Ursa Major first made its appearance on
Monday night, and we have since been favoured with
the Southern and Northern principal constellations
shining together.
Monday afternoon , i\th April.
The temperature is now becoming cool and pleasant.
Last night I was able to bear a sheet over me for the
first time for many nights, although my bed is just
under the window, which we always keep wide open.
Tropical weather is very pleasant for a change, but one
soon tires of it, and longs for a return to a more tem-
perate climate. This is especially the case when rough
weather necessitates all the ports being closed. For-
tunately I secured a berth in one of the cabins on
deck, called “ deck state rooms,” where the windows
can always remain open, except in very severe weather.


Dr. Slade continues very ill, he has been helped up-
stairs the-last two or three days, but becomes delirious
at times. I believe he has had a good season in Aus-
tralia. Are his supporters chiefly of the curious or the
faithful ? It is a subject of interest to an observant per-
son that so many men, discarding the religion of their
fathers, and disdaining religious faith as inconsistent
with the exercise of reason, can yet be found to take
refuge in belief in Spiritualism. Why are mediums
so generally found amongst the most scheming, the
least enlightened, the most unspiritual of men ? In
writing to one of my friends to-day, I thus mention our
passengers: “As many of them are agreeable people, I
have made some nice acquaintances. Some again are
not so nice—they speak of ’ot weather; and eat peas
with their knives—good specimens indeed of the con-
ventional type of successful colonists.”
Thursday morning , zyth April ,
The island of Woahoo or Oahu, one of the Sandwich
group, was sighted early on Tuesday morning, and at
ten o’clock the pilot came aboard. I was disappointed
in my first impression of the island. It is plainly of
volcanic origin and apparently of comparatively recent
formation. It rises picturesquely and somewhat ab-
ruptly, and the hills are fringed with a border of low
level land. It is on one of these flats that the town
of Honolulu is built. The outlines of the island are
bold and well defined. What principally causes a feel-
ing of disappointment is the comparative bareness of
the hills, especially on the leeward side. There is a
scarcity of the graceful cocoanut palms which were so
conspicuous at Tutuiha. The soil of the island is
of a bright chocolate colour, and the sun shining
upon this gives the hills a very dried-up appearance,
although furnishing tints which were doubtless highly
appreciated by the several amateur artists on board.
What perhaps causes most disappointment in travel-


ling is the similarity of places and things all the world
over. A really fresh sensation is a delightful novelty,
much appreciated by a traveller. Such a sensation it
was my lot to experience when we steamed inside the
coral reef which forms the harbour of Honolulu. The
water is delightfully blue, rivalling in colour the famous
terrace pools at Rotomahana, the centre of the boiling
spring district in New Zealand. As soon as our speed
was slowed, about thirty of the native boys swam
alongside the vessel. The natural warm tint of
their bodies showed in very pretty contrast with
the blue water. They appeared to be of a rich,
bright, copper colour, and as they reclined gracefully on
the bright sunlit wavelets the sight was one not easily
to be forgotten. To say they swim well does not do
them justice. They swim like frogs, but they have the
indolent, graceful way of reposing in water which I
thought was peculiar to fish. They stand in the water,
lie on either side or on their backs or stomachs, with
just the least perceptible motion of their limbs, and with
perfect grace. As they came alongside they cried
loudly for shillings, and the passengers responded
freely. For about half an hour coins splashed into the
water most liberally in all directions, and few, if any of
them, escaped these wonderful diving boys. As they
brought them to the surface they held them up in their
hands, and then quickly transferred them to their
mouths, ready to dive for more. \
The town of Honolulu is laid out at right angles.
The streets are narrow, and most of the buildings low
and shabby looking. There are, however, several very
fine mercantile stores in the principal streets. The in-
habitants comprise an extraordinary medley of races.
The cabs, or rather wagonettes, which are clean and
light, and remarkably well constructed, are all owned
and driven by natives of the island. The business of
the place is carried on by English, American and Ger-
man traders. The English, I think, predominate. One


quarter of the town is almost entirely occupied by
Chinese, and, as usual in such places, there is a dark
mysterious appearance about the establishments of these
“ celestial” traders. There are many Chinese women
here, and, as might be supposed, a good sprinkling of
“celestial” babies. Then there is a cross between
Chinese and Hawaiians, the Hawaiians pure and
simple, half castes between them and Europeans,
Europeans of all nationalities, Americans, Australians,
and many tourists from all parts of the world. Just
outside the town are the residences of many of the
wealthier inhabitants, pretty verandahed cottages nes-
tled in the midst of beautiful flowering shrubs and luxu-
riant palm growths which only a tropical climate could
reproduce. These leave a pleasant impression on the
memory, and one feels momentarily tempted to envy
the occupants of such lovely retreats. The market is
small and illprovided. There is a lethargic air about
the place, as one might expect in a tropical town on the
lee side of a mountainous island, shut out from the com-
paratively bracing wind which prevails on the windward
side. There are a number of very fine mules about the
town. One cannot but wonder that these patient,
hardy animals are not used in New Zealand, where so
much of the country is rough and mountainous. There
are many other novelties to arrest the attention. Mexi-
can saddles ridden by the Hawaiians wearing huge spurs
to correspond. Native women, picturesquely dressed and
modest looking, riding in the fashion of the other sex.
The Parliament building, King’s Palace, State Prison,
and Hotel, are all far in advance of the place. We
lunched at the last named, and got a fairly good cold
lunch for which we paid a dollar (4s. 2d.).
I must not omit the wharf. This is a creditable
structure, and for real convenience to shipping is supe-
rior to the Auckland Wharf. The “ Australia” was
hauled alongside at eleven o’clock in the morning, and
by midnight had taken on board over 500 tons of sugar.


After a stroll through the town with Mr. G , and
calling on a few of the principal merchants, we lunched
at the hotel, and then started on horseback to see the
sight of the island, the Pali. This is about seven miles
from the town ; the road rises the whole way, and lies
in the middle of a narrow valley. A small and rapid
stream which flows from the head of the valley has been
utilized for irrigation. We passed several small Taro
plantations in the midst of little artificial swamps. We
also passed a large ice manufactory. It was an amus-
ing and animating sight to see the numerous parties
from the “ Australia ” on foot, on horseback, and in
wagonettes, going at great varieties of speed towards
the Pali. The road, which is for the most part a rough
one, ends as a driving road at a little roadside accom-
modation hut. Here we dismounted, and following the
track, reached a point overlooking a deep precipice.
The view is very fine. The track on which we stand
is a mere ledge cut out of the solid rock. There is an
extensive valley far beneath us, opening to the sea, and
surrounded on its other sides by lofty hills, which ter-
minate in fantastic peaks of bare rock. The whole dis-
trict appears to lie in the crater of a huge extinct
volcano, the seaward side of which has fallen away.
The foreground consists of rugged and precipitous cliffs
of volcanic rock, the highest peak of which, called
Konahuanui, is 3,105 feet high. The valley beneath
presents a view of great beauty; the prevailing tint is a
rich, bright green, relieved in places by patches of bare
volcanic soil. From this height it is not easy to detect
anything essentially tropical in the appearance of the
landscape. It looks like a fertile grazing district,
especially as cattle in small lots of twos and threes scat-
tered over the valley may be discerned with the naked
eye.
With the aid of a good glass a different impression is
obtained. We detected two sugar mills, several sugar
plantations, and numerous pretty looking white houses


in the midst of farms and plantations, that appear to be
well and neatly kept. In the distance the soft pale
blue sea is here and there lashed into snowy surf against
the coral reefs which partially surround the island. We
lingered long over this fascinating scene, and rejoiced
that the mail arrangements of the colonies allowed of a
day’s roaming amidst such charming spots.
Friday morning, 18 th April.
At last the weather has changed. This morning the
sea is calm and there is scarcely any wind. We are
out of the tropics, and a soft, cool, northerly breeze is
all that remains of the strong head winds of the last
fortnight or more. We can even go into the ship’s
bows without much risk of a wetting. lam pleased to
get into cool, refreshing weather again,—hot weather is
pleasant, when dry, but the humid, heavy atmosphere
that we have experienced is far from agreeable or health-
ful. Then the constant rolling of the ship is most
wearisome, day and night it is the same—everything
unstable around you.
I forgot to mention that whilst at Honolulu, we had
a fine view of the electric light displayed by one of the
men-o’-war in harbour. Her Majesty’s ships “Opal”
and “Triumph,” the latter the flagship of Rear-
Admiral De Horsey, were both lying at the man-o’-war
anchorage. I also saw several native girls dance one
of their old national dances ; the movements of their
bodies were very extraordinary, but the dances certainly
much inferior to the Maori “ Haka,” although excel-
ling it in lascivious gesticulation.
Sunday evening, 20 th April.
Service as usual this morning, with an additional
prayer in the Litany for the “ President of the United
States of America. ” It is rather singular to hear of
the extreme sensitiveness of some of the Americans on
board. On Friday evening there was a very good negro


minstrel entertainment given by some of the passengers
and crew. A gentleman named Rae (the late Com-
missioner of Railways for New South Wales) called out
in a sportive way, “ Raise the rag.,” meaning the flag
which served as a stage curtain. Now it so happened
that this flag was no other than the American ensign.
Next morning mysterious rumours were afloat that deep
offence had been offered to certain American citizens on
board. One person, said to be an ex-oflicer in the
American Navy, remarked that if Englishmen did not
respect the American flag, they must be made to do so.
The additions to our number from Honolulu are
no improvement, except in two or three instances.
About thirty passengers joined the ship there. Most of
them have a jaded, sallow appearance, and speak with a
nasal twang. We are now having cool, pleasant, calm,
weather, but the late gales have left a heavy swell,
which causes our ship to roll badly. Very bad weather
has prevailed in the Pacific Ocean lately. Whilst at
Honolulu we learned that the “ City of Sydney,” on her
trip from Auckland, had encountered a hurricane, which
carried away a portion of her upper, or hurricane
deck, and also that the “Alaska ” from San Francisco
to Yokohama had found it necessary to put into
Honolulu for repairs, having received severe damage to
one of her paddle boxes. She left on the Saturday
before our arrival at Honolulu.
Tuesday morning, 2 2nd April.
I had to close my notes rather hurriedly on Sunday
evening. A dozen or more passengers came round a
lady who was sitting near me, and commenced draw-
ing pigs with their eyes shut. The fun was catching.
Strange to say that although I haven’t an idea how to
draw a pig with my eyes open I drew the best pig of
the evening with them shut. This morning is clear
and sharp. A fresh breeze is blowing, but as we are
able to carry plenty of sail there is hardly any motion


of the ship. A petition from the ladies, asking the Cap-
tain for a dance in the saloon this evening, has just
been presented to him. There is so much labour
involved in clearing the saloon, that I am doubtful if
he will see his way to allow it. The latter part of our
voyage is most pleasant, and I for one am not overjoyed
that we are so near the end of it. One now knows
everybody on board, and there are a great many very
pleasant people. I am unfortunately debarred from
one great source of pleasure on board ship, viz., plea-
sant conversation at meal times. The sole topic of the
people who sit at our table is what to eat, and how
much worse our table is provided than the Captain’s
and others’, although in nearly every instance each
table is served the same, dish for dish.
To-day at noon we were only 348 miles from the
Golden Gate, the name given to the entrance of San
Francisco Harbour, so with ordinary steaming weather
we shall reach our destination in time for dinner on
shore to-morrow. It is now blowing very strongly, and
if the wind were ahead our passage to-day would be a
most unpleasant one.
The theatrical entertainment last night was a decided
success. Lord Harris is an excellent comedian, has an
unusual memory, and went through his parts very
cleverly. He is about the best amateur comedian I
have ever seen. “The Bilious Attack” is said to
have gone off very well. The farce of “ Little Toddle-
kins ” certainly did. There was an evenness of act-
ing rarely seen, even on the stage of a theatre. We
were favoured with very fine weather on both occa-
sions.
The Captain received the ladies’ petition very kindly,
and would have willingly granted its request had a
reasonable number of dancing people been on board.
He asked one of the passengers to go round the ship
and see how many ladies would actually dance. He
could only find about eight, and therefore was obliged


in fairness to the stewards, on whom much labour
would have devolved, to advise the Captain not to think
any more about it.
Wednesday night, 23 rd April.
We are now safely anchored in San Francisco Har-
bour. The day has been rough and cold, very unplea-
sant, and I am extremely glad to be at rest once again.
So rough has it been that many of the passengers have
again succumbed to mal de mer. I cannot say much of
my first impressions of the American coast, as it was
enveloped in fog and could not be seen until we were
within a very short distance of it. The environs of
San Francisco appear to consist of barren sandhills.
Cliff House and Seal Rock are prominent objects. The
former is well named, I never saw a hotel built in so
exposed a situation as this appears to be, seen from the
sea. The city of San Francisco appears to be built
upon the sides of several hills, and the appearance of
long rows of lighted streets is most picturesque, as
seen from our anchorage. The entrance to the har-
bour (named “ Golden Gate ”) is bold and well defined.
We reached our anchorage about seven o’clock.
Nearly all the passengers are spending the night
aboard. A steam tug which put off for the mails
brought a number of American “ touts,” and the scene
on board which followed their arrival was novel and
amusing. The only description of “touts” so far are
hotel, railway route, and passenger agency “ runners.”
No expense seems to be spared in advertising. They
circulate without stint large elaborate maps, well
executed photographs, and admirably printed gilt-
edged cards.
I have made one of a party to go to the
Palace Hotel in the morning. Indeed, nearly all the
“Australia’s” passengers are going there, so we shall
not want for familiar faces. Our runs per diem have
not, I understand, been up to the average. Still, we
are here one day ahead of contract time. These are


our positions and distances since leaving Auckland at
7 p.m. on the ist April;—
Latitude Longitude Distance
Noon of South. West. run.
April 2 34*4° •••• 177*22 .... 186 miles
3 3 1 *8 .... 17958 .... 242
3 27*29 .... 177*42 .... 258
4 23*23 .... 175 21 .... 277
5 I 9'3® •••• 1723* •••• 277
6 15*27 .... 170*19 .... 279
♦ 7 ii’io .... 16913 .... 265
8 6*28 .... 168*16 .... 287
9 2*5 .... 16657 •••• 275
North.
10 2*15 .... 165*39 .... 271
11 6-15 .... 164*20 .... 253
12 9*30 .... 162*17 .... 230
13 13 3° ...... -161*10 .... 249
14 * 1738 159’54 •••• 259
15 reached Honolulu at 10 a.m 248
Auckland to Honolulu 3856 miles
Left Honolulu at midnight.
16 22*26 .... 156*16 .... 118
i? 2459 152-38 252
18 27*9 .... 149*12 .... 226
19 29*36 1443 S 285
20 31*36 .... 139-42 .... 280
21 3339 •••• 13432 .... 289
22 35-28 .... 129*6 .... 289
23 37‘ 6 •••• 12352 .... 273
Reached San Francisco at 6*3000 23rd April, 1879 77
Total distance from Auckland to San Francisco 5945 miles
Saturday morning, 26 th April.
San Francisco is a dreadfully noisy place. I
am writing in my bedroom before breakfast, on the
third story of the Palace Hotel, and the clatter of
passing vehicles is bewildering. The Palace Hotel is a
vast building. It contains nearly 800 bedrooms, at
least so I have read, but I see my room is No. 904.
This bedroom is 21 feet by 24 feet, besides which there
are bathroom, lavatory, &c., connected with it. In
all I have nine gas jets to enlighten me, there are three
large and one small mirrors, couch, easy and bedroom
* Computed by dead reckoning, owing to cloudy sky obscuring the sun,


chairs, writing table, &c. In short, the appointments
of the hotel are on a wonderful scale. The entrance,
courtyard and dining saloons are lighted by the electric
light. There are the industries of a town under the
building. The kitchen is, of course, very complete,
then there is a large bakery, and an extensive steam
laundry, the latter worked chiefly by Chinese labour.
The manner of turning out linen at this laundry is per-
fect, and I have never seen it approached elsewhere.
In this great underground department there are also
many steam engines, apparatus for making gas, and
working the electric light, also hydraulic engines for
working the elevators, which take visitors to the vari-
ous floors of the hotel, and store rooms as large as
small warehouses. In short, everything is novel and
interesting to one who has been accustomed to the
quiet of a small town.
San Francisco is a large city. Many of its buildings
are fine and substantial. Most of the private houses and
some of the business places are built of wood. The streets
are not so well formed as one would expect. They are
all laid with tram rails, generally in four sets, and street
cars run along the principal thoroughfares almost con-
stantly from morning until night. Some of these cars,
up the hilliest streets, are worked by endless wires
which are unseen, being placed under the road. The
effect is very extraordinary of seeing a couple of car
loads of passengers running along at a rapid speed with-
out any visible propelling power. There is a very
high pressure tone apparent everywhere, and I should
not care to live here. The Oakland Ferry boats are
huge things, about 300 feet long and about 75 feet beam.
They have excellent accommodation for passengers.
Huge piles of life preservers serve to remind the visitor
that the element of risk enters into even so short a
journey as that between the city and suburbs. The
trains run through the principal streets at Oakland. To
warn people of their approach they sound a large bell


which is rung by hand, and a very alarming sight and
sound are presented at night by the approach of a huge
engine with lights, cow catcher, and bell. Accidents
are said to be of rare occurrence, however.
I have met several very familiar faces here, and have
been somewhat surprised to hear my name called out
in a place so far from home.
Every attention is shown to travellers by the people
connected with transit arrangements, and one has to
leave nothing to chance. Every movement over this
vast country can be calculated to a few minutes. I
would fain describe the drive through the park to Seal
Rock, and Cliff House, but breakfast time has arrived.
Sunday night, 2 Jth April.
There are really 855 bedrooms in this hotel, and
the number of visitors ranges from 400 to 800. At pre-
sent there are 600 persons living here. The accom-
modation is all that could be wished, save in the
matter of attendance at meals. Complaints are
general that orders are executed very slowly. The
waiters and servants are all negroes and negresses, who
appear to be even more independent than white men.
The cartes of the various meals are quite a curiosity. So
many of the dishes are new to Englishmen. There are
four regular meals per diem. Visitors have an
unlimited table. The charge is four dollars per day,
which includes everything but liquors. Of course no
allowance is made for visitors’ absence whilst their
names are retained on the books of the hotel. The
restaurant dinner is a study in itself, and would
take some minutes even to read over. The scale
of prices for nearly everything of every day use is
high in San Francisco, and although the wages of
working men are said to be good, I should doubt
whether they are so well off here as in New Zealand.
Sunday is a curious day in this city. At breakfast
table I read the morning’s paper, from which


I saw that various amusements were to take
place in the evening, amongst others the play of
“Our Boys,” at the Baldwin Theatre. After break-
fast I went with some of the “ Australia’s” passengers
to Trinity Episcopal Church. The streets were all
alive as on a week day, and it was singular to watch
the stream of people, some wending their way to places
of worship, of which there are many in the city, and
some making purchases or carrying on the every day
business of life. Many, perhaps most, of the shops are
open, the street cars run, and groups of dissipated-look-
ing men with cigars in their mouths are congregated
around the little offices which are everywhere notice-
able under the large buildings ; the occupiers of which
do not require the whole of their frontages. Amuse-
ments of a much more questionable character than
the play of “ Our Boys ” are also “ run ” on Sundays,
to use the common expression of the place. Last night
I visited the Chinese quarter of the town. One can-
not feel surprised that there is such a widespread anti-
pathy to the incursion of this industrious but otherwise
objectionable people. The service at Trinity Church
was good, the music was very fine. I understand it is
customary to employ paid vocalists at the principal
churches. The sermon from Work out your own
salvation,” &c., was eloquent and practical.
Yesterday and to-day I have dined and spent the
afternoon with an old New Zealand friend. He is
living at Piedmont, about a dozen miles from here —a
very pretty spot —whence he has taken me for some
lovely drives. He has two of the fastest trotting
horses I have ever seen, and the country over which
we have driven is as beautiful as any I expect to see in
Europe.
To-morrow afternoon I start with a party for Yo
Semite Valley. My stay here has been longer than
I intended, but I thought a few days’ rest advisable
after 23 days’ knocking about at sea.


Yo Semite Valley, Friday evening, 2nd May.
I left San Francisco on Monday evening, and have
had some hard travelling since. From the Oaklands
Ferry to Lathrop, thence to Merced by rail takes about
six hours, and is, I think, about 150 miles. From
Merced we started at five o’clock on Tuesday morning
by coach and four. The morning was sharp and sunny.
W , my compagnon de voyage, for the time had
an inside seat and I one on the box. This was not
pleasant, as the other outside passenger was very fat
and not unselfish. He was an Eastern American,
presumably a man of trade. His stock of ideas was in
inverse proportion to the size of his body. He was not
a satisfactory fellow traveller. The coachman was
humorous. Where is there one who is not? The
country was flat and poor after the first few miles, and
almost destitute of stock of any kind. Here and there
we passed a sheep “ ranch,” and once or twice we met
a flock of sheep as they were being mustered by the
“herdsmen.” The country is, however, almost
destitute of water from this time to the commencement
of the rainy season; so the grass withers and the sheep
have to be removed to the mountains. There was
much on the road to interest a stranger, large flocks of
sand hill cranes especially attracted my attention, we
also saw large squirrels and many other things that
were quite new to me, in a wild state. We changed
horses at a pretty homely-looking “ ranch,” very like a
small English farm house, and reached a small village
called, I think, Hornitos, about 10.30. Here we had
dinner, a plain substantial meal in American fashion
price 1 dol., certainly half the price would have been
enough for it. This is an old mining township, and
it is said that the revolver is not an unpopular arbiter
in deciding quarrels in the vicinity.
From this settlement to Mariposa the road lies
through forest country with occasional “ranches,”
anglice “ homesteads, ** here and there to break the


surrounding solitude. An American forest differs
much from a forest in New Zealand. Here, there is a
total absence of undergrowth, and so the mass of bright
and varied vegetation one sees and admires so much in
New Zealand is quite wanting. The country over
which we drove the remainder of the day, however, was
by no means uninteresting. The trees, dotted at short
distances apart over thinly grassed land, gave it a very
park-like appearance, whilst the varied and beautiful
wild flowers everywhere growing around us were to me
a new and most delightful addition to the features of a
country. I saw a long thin snake wriggling along the
road, and the air was vocal with the notes of the many
native birds. I cannot forget the pretty doves we
passed, nor the quail, turkey-buzzards, and blackbirds.
Many parts of the country were extremely pretty,
and with a bright sky and clear atmosphere would
have shown to even greater advantage. So far as
I have seen, however, the atmosphere is not so clear,
nor the sky so bright here as in Australia and
New Zealand. One feature about the forest interested
me as being so different from a New Zealand “bush,” I
mean the number of trees in all stages of growth, from
the merest seedlings upwards, showing that here the
forest is always recovering from the loss of trees which
are decayed or have been felled, whereas in New Zea-
land native trees do not appear to grow when
the forest is opened. I am also much impressed
with the expense of travelling, or indeed of living, in
this part of America. In country hotels, however
primitive, every meal costs a dollar, a bath 50
cents, and the luxury of clean boots, 25 cents, or over
a shilling of English money. I am of opinion that
there is less actual drunkenness here than amongst
Englishmen, as I saw only one drunken man in San
Francisco, and I have not seen one since.
We reached our stopping place for the night,
Mariposa, or “ Butterfly,” early in the afternoon


of Tuesday, the 29th April. This is an old
mining township, and a few Chinamen still toil
away in quest of gold. Like all deserted goldfields it
has a gloomy, second-hand sort of appearance. Strange
scenes have been enacted here. It is a saying that a
man has been shot or hanged for every stone in the
street, and a large tree immediately behind the hotel
where we stayed was the favourite place for lynching
those who offended against the rough and ready laws of
the early settlement. There is a large quartz-crushing
mill just outside the township, but it has been unused
for ten years, and is very dilapidated.
We started at six o’clock on Wednesday morning
for a place called Clark’s Station. I forgot to men-
tion that the entire distance from Merced to Yo
Semite is only a hundred miles, and yet three days
are consumed in doing the journey. The road to-day
was in a very bad state. It lies through a forest,
and is as a rule very steep. The longest hill is
five miles long, and the road at its summit attains
an altitude of 5,200 feet above the sea level. The
drive then becomes very picturesque, the monotony
of the forest is relieved by many clearings, and pretty
glimpses are occasionally obtained of distant snow-
clad hills. We reached Clark’s Station early in the
afternoon, and after a good lunch a party of eight ladies
and gentlemen started with a guide for the well-known
Mariposa grove of “ big trees.” Big trees they cer-
tainly are, beside which men on horseback look
very diminutive. Our party tried to encircle one of
them, the “ Grizzly Giantbut our nine horses
in close procession were a long way from accom-
plishing what we tried to do. We rode through
a fine forest and saw hundreds of immense trees.
The effect was to a certain extent marred by
the garrulity of our guide, who persisted in tell-
ing us the names of all the principal trees. It is
some to a degree to have one’s ideas of the grandeur of


a primeval forest disturbed by being told that this tree
is “ Mary Jane,” that one “A. Johnson,” these “The
Graces,” those the “ Siamese Twins,” and so forth. I
saw the tree whose -bark was taken to England,
and is now I think set up in the Crystal Palace. They
range from 60 to 105 feet in girth, and upwards of 300
feet in height. We were fortunate enough to see a
glorious sunset over a range of distant mountains. We
stood on a point of rock, not unlike “ Govett’s ” leap in
New South Wales, which overlooked a deep valley
covered with forest trees. The view in the foreground
was grand and impressive, the setting sun in the back-
ground was a sight not easily to be forgotten. On our
return in the evening we met a party of our fellow
passengers (some of the English cricketers), who gave
us glowing accounts of the beauties and wonders
they had seen in Yo Semite Valley. Their con-
versation was interesting enough to keep me up
until 11 o’clock, and by four o’clock the next morning,
Ist May, I was awoke, as our coach was to start in an
hour, and we could get nothing to eat before reaching
our journey’s end. The road to the Yo Semite Valley
from Clark’s Station lies through a very mountainous
country, and is both rough and steep. It is a wild and
picturesque journey, and many were the views of gorge
and hill we saw. One view I admired especially,
“ Yaas,” said the driver, a comical American; “ I
know a man who’d give 500 dollars for that view; ”
then after a few seconds adding, “ but he’s blind as a
bat.” The road at its highest point is said to exceed
6,000 feet above sea level. We saw a few deer skip
daintily through the forest before us, but regretted
seeing neither bear nor snake. The view of Yo Semite
Valley from Inspiration Point is exceedingly grand
and beautiful; but I must defer any account of this
wonderful locality as the hour is late and we start at
half-past six in the morning for fresh wonders.


Big Tree Station, or Clarke's ,
Saturday night , 3 rd May.
We passed a little snow on the road to Yo Semite,
notwithstanding the heat of the sun, and I have ascer-
tained that the highest point of the road is over 6,000
feet. The valley of Yo Semite is a deep and narrow
mountaing orge, having smaller canyons or ravines
leading out of it on either side. The approach to
it is between two vast granite mounts, which form a
natural portal to this remarkable valley. The one on
the left, called “ El Capitan,” is about 7,300 feet above
sea level, and that on the right, a three-peaked moun-
tain called “ The Three Graces,” is about 7,400 feet.
The Yo Semite Valley is a little over 4,000 feet above
sea level, so that these vast granite columns are about
3,400 feet higher than the ground on which you stand.
The coup d’oeil on entering the valley is grand in the
extreme. Almost perpendicular granite mountains
ranging from 7,000 to 10,000 feet above the sea meet
the eye at every turn.
The following table of altitudes at Yo Semite
Valley with the Indian name, signification, American
name, and height above valley, is circulated in the valley
for the information of visitors : —“Waterfalls: Pohono,
Spirit of the Evil Wind; Bridal Veil, 940 feet. Yo Se-
mite, Large Grizzly Bear; 2,634 feet. First Fall, 1,600
feet; Second Fall, 534 feet; Third Fall, 500 feet. Pi
wa ack, Cataract of Diamonds; Vernal, 350 feet.
Yo-wi-ye, Meandering; Nevada, 700 feet. Too-lool-
we-ack, Rushing water ; South Fork, 500 feet. To-
coy-ae, Shade to Indian Baby Basket; Royal Arch Fall,
2,000 feet. Loya ; Sentinel Fall, 3,270 feet, Lung-
-00-too-koo-ya, Long and Slender; Virgin Tears, 3,300
feet. Mountains : Tis-sa-ack, Goddess of the Valley ;
South Dome, 5,000 feet. Cloud’s Rest, 6,150 feet. To-
coy-se, Shade to Indian Baby Basket; North Dome,
3,725 feet. Glacier Point, 3,200 feet. Hunto, The
Watching Eye; Round Tower 2,400 feet. Mah-ta,


Martyr Mountain; Cap of Liberty, 3,100 feet. Mt.
Starr King, 5,100 feet. To-tock-a-nu-la, Great Chief of
the Valley; The Captain, 3,300 feet. Wah-wah-le-na ;
Three Graces, 3,400 feet. Pom-pom-pa-sas, Falling
Rocks ; Three Brothers, 3,900 feet. Poo-see-nah-Chuck-
ka, Large Acorn Cache ; Cathedral Spires, 2,600 feet.
Sentinel Dome, 4,125 feet. Loya ; The Sentinel, 3,100
feet. The Yo Semite Valley is 4,060 feet above the
sea. Its general course is north-easterly and south-
westerly. The main Merced River runs through it. In
many places the walls of the Valley are nearly vertical.
The mountains surrounding it will average about 4,000
feet in height.”
.As will be seen from this table, the waterfalls run-
ning down the steep, almost perpendicular sides of
these mountains are amongst the highest in the world.
The imagination fails, however, to realize the enormous
height from which the various waterfalls around the
valley descend. Everything is on so vast a scale.
The scene on entering is somewhat calculated to remind
anyone who has been to Milford Sound, the most beauti-
ful of the New Zealand fiords, of that grand inlet —or,
I should rather say, to suggest a comparison. In the
latter the mountains appear higher, as they are seen
from sea level. The vegetation, too, is much more
luxuriant and beautiful, and one or two glaciers add to
the charms of the scene. It has not, however, been
possible hitherto to scale any of the mountains, and the
eye wearies in time of looking up at them from the deck
of a steamer. At Yo Semite, however, “ trails, ”or
mountain paths, have been cut in every direction. This
has been done by private enterprise, the undertakers
having the right of levying tolls varying from 75
cents to 1 dol. on all persons using the trails. Horses
are abundant, and as the season had hardly com-
menced competition was keen. We secured good
horses and mules at 2 dols. per diem. Each party
takes a guide. The ascent to Glacier Point is


3,200 feet from the foot of the trail, and a more
magnificent trip I could not wish to make. The trail
is of just sufficient width for one horse to walk in safety,
and at certain points in the journey we turned sharp
corners that overlooked sheer precipices over 1,500 feet
deep. I must confess that these points caused an in-
voluntary thrill—the sensation was new and delightful.
I was mounted on a black mule, very pleasant to ride,
and a surefooted patient beast. Our party included two
ladies from New Zealand who were induced to join us
by a spirit of adventure which travel in that country is
so well calculated to arouse. They endured the fatigue
of the journey most bravely. We made the ascent in
about three hours, and the view from the summit baffles
any attempt at description. A clear, almost cloudless
blue sky; a fresh sharp, mountain air ; snow drifts all
around us, the deep and awful valley of Yo Semite right
under us—for we stand on a ledge of granite overlook-
ing, one might almost say overhanging, the side of the
mountain. This spot is protected by an iron rail, lean-
ing over which we looked down a precipice over 3,000
feet deep. The scenery on all sides is grand in the
extreme. All the principal waterfalls are seen at a
glance. They no longer awe us by their height, or the
noise of their falling waters. At this distance only the
gentlest murmer is borne towards us. They appear
like silvery bands reaching down the mountains’ sides,
swayed to and fro, the play of each passing breeze. We
see, too, as far as the eye can reach, the snowy peaks
of the distant Sierra Nevadas looking at this height
like great waves on an angry sea. Nearer than all,
beneath and around us are those wonderful rents in
the mountains which have given such a fascination
to the district. The recollection of this memorable
scene recalls a thrill of pleasure. Alas, that lam un-
able to convey any just idea of its beauty and grandeur.
Another beautiful trip was to Snow’s Hotel, at the
foot of the Nevada Falls. The ride lies first along the


valley and then for several miles along a narrow moun-
tain track which winds up the side of one of the deep
canyons running out of the valley. The scenery resem-
bles that which we saw goingto Glacier Point, although
somewhat less grand. The Nevada Falls discharge the
whole of the Merced River over a rock 700 feet high.
The river then rushes down its steep and rocky bed,
forming a succession of foaming cataracts for about a
mile, and then, descending over another rock 350 feet
high, forms the beautiful “ Vernal Falls.” We clam-
bered on to a ledge of granite which forms part of the
rock over which the river descends, and standing
within twenty feet of the rushing water obtained a
glorious view. The Indian name “ Paiwack” signifies" a
cataract of diamonds,” and nothing could so adequately
describe the appearance of this lovely waterfall. Look-
ing over the edge of the natural balcony on which we
rested, we saw the river falling into the abyss beneath
us, a mass of snowy foam encircled by a brilliant rain-
bow. Standing in the midst of such wonders what
more natural than to exclaim, “ How wonderful are
Thy works, Oh Lord! in wisdom hast Thou made
them all.”
My stay at Yo Semite would have been longer but
for the circumstance of my companion disliking the
continual exercise in the saddle. He returned hurriedly,
and I decided to return with two of my fellow pas-
sengers from the “ Australia. ” It is too early in the
season to ascend some of the highest peaks; indeed, we
were stopped by the snow or would have proceeded
from Glacier Point to “ Sentinel Dome, ” over 8,000
feet high. My intention was to have also gone to the
summit of “ Cloud’s Rest, ” a mountain over 10,000
feet high, but the trail was blocked by deep snow.
Tuesday , 6th May.
On the Overland train crossing the Sierra Nevadas.
The journey back to Lathrop was devoid of special


interest, as we merely retraced our steps. I must not
forget to mention the delicious mountain trout we got
at the Yo Semite Hotel. They are caught by the
“ Digger Indians” and sold at 25 cents per lb. These
Indians are a miserable-looking set of people and call
for no remark. They are not to be compared with
Maories in physique or general appearance. I saw
several kinds of fruit growing wild in the valley,
amongst others the gooseberry, strawberry, plum, and
currant.
Walker House , Salt Lake City ,
Wednesday, yth May.
I must say a word or two about the last two days’
railway travelling. We started from Lathrop at noon
on Monday by the train which left San Francisco at 8
a.m. The remainder of Monday’s ride was through
pretty cultivated country, farms, orchards and vine-
yards. At this season of the year nothing could exceed
the greenness and fertility of the landscape. lam told,
however, that the scene will be much altered in about six
weeks’ time, and that by the end of the summer the
whole country will be parched up. This district is known
as the Sacramento Valley. We passed through Sacra-
mento, the capital of the State of California; the Capitol
is a magnificent building, and the city appears to be
well and ornamentally laid out. During the night we
reached the “ Summit,” about 7,200 feet high, the
highest point of the Nevadas, crossed by the railway.
The moon was at its full, and the glimpses we obtained
of mountain scenery were very fine. Most of the best
views are, however, obscured by snow sheds.
The luxury of “American silver palace drawing room
and sleeping cars ” is superior to anything I expected,
and the bed made up by the coloured porter for my
weary limbs would, under ordinary circumstances,
have induced sleep. As it was, the frequent stoppages
invariably awoke me, and I arose on Tuesday morn-
ing feeling very “ seedy.” Early in the morning we


commenced crossing the desert, and it would be
somewhat difficult to imagine a more utterly dreary
waste. It is a vast valley of sandy soil, on which
nothing grows but the parched and dreary “ sage
brush.” The valley is bounded by lofty mountains,
the summits of which are more or less snow-capped.
These mountains are rich in minerals. Silver, lead,
gold, sulphur, are all found in abundance. So this
dreary God-forsaken route is dotted with hamlets
studded here and there along the line. Wretched and
utterly comfortless for the most part they look, the
huts unpainted, the children unkempt and neglected,
dust flying in clouds. What a spot for human habita-
tion ! To add to the look of utter dreariness and
gloom there are generally a few squalid, ugly Indians
hanging about these places. They have the com-
mand of a few American expressions which en-
able them to beg of passing passengers. The appear-
ance of some of these Indian squaws, or old
women, is so pitiably degraded, so languid,
and indifferent, so deplorably wrinkled and ugly, that
it is hard to believe they are members of the great
human family at all. All honour to the men and to
the nationality which had the boundless energy and
undaunted perseverance to carry a railway through
such a country, and amongst such a people. A verit-
able oasis in this dreary desert is the township of Hum-
boldt, where we found a most comfortable hotel and
where we had a delicious breakfast. Here water has
been brought from the mountain, and, asthough a magi-
cian’s wand had been laid over the country, all is rich
fertility —a fountain plays in front of the hotel, fresh
pasture grows around, fruits and vegetables flourish—
but only for a few hundred feet—then we enter the
same drear desert —it is the same all day of Tuesday—
it was the same all last night, and no change was
apparent when we arose this morning—soon afterwards,
however, an improvement was perceptible, and at 8.10


we reached Ogden. Here we breakfasted and changed
trains for Salt Lake, or Mormon, City.
The road from Ogden to this city is through a plain
lying between the Wahsatch Range and the shores of
Salt Lake. The former rises to a height of 10,000 feet
and is snow-capped. The latter is a dull and rather
dreary-looking waste of waters. It is so salt that four
barrels of its waters are said to produce one of salt —
fish cannot live in it—nor is it advisable to dive beneath
its surface. These plains were originally covered with
sage brush, and were in all respects as dreary and bar-
ren as those we passed yesterday. Now they are con-
verted into pretty homesteads where large quantities of
grain and cattle are raised. When Brigham Young passed
through the canyon or ravine entering into this plain 30
or 40 years ago, the appearance of the country must
have been enough to quench his most lively enthusiasm.
How his band of followers lived at the outset I do not
know. How the transformation of to-day has been
brought about is obvious enough. Brigham Young’s
crest consisted of a lion and a beehive, indicative of
courage and industry; hard work and unfailing courage
have diverted the waters from their courses, and instead
of allowing them to flow in deep and narrow channels to
the great lake, have caused them to flow in numerous
fertilizing streams over the plain —irrigation is the
magician which has wrought such changes.
A drive of three hours made us acquainted with the
principal points of interest. The city is well arranged.
The streets are laid out at right angles with running
streams and rows of trees along their sides. In this
respect and the perfect flatness of the town it reminded
me of the town of Christchurch in New Zealand.
We drove to Fort Douglas, the station of the United
States troops, situated on a hill 700 feet above the city,
from which we obtained a charming view. Salt Lake
City looked as fresh and green and neatly arranged as a
well-kept nursery garden.


We visited the “ California brewery, ” where we had
some very good lager beer. The theatre is a fine
building, but there is no performance to-night. Of
course the great sight is the famous Mormon taber-
nacle, a large building 250 feet long, 150 feet broad, and
70 feet high. It contains an organ built by “ the
Church of Christ’s latter day saints ” 50 feet high, said
to be the second largest in the United States. The
attendant informed us that there is sitting accommoda-
tion for 12,000 persons, that the building had held
15,000, and that the average attendance is 5,00 u, each
of which statements I am inclined to think exag-
gerated.
What interested and astonished me most were the
acoustic properties of the tabernacle. Standing at the
extreme end of the gallery I conversed with ease in an
ordinary tone of voice with the attendant who was stand-
ing by the side of the organ at the opposite end of the
church. He whispered to me, and I heard what he said
without difficulty; then he dropped a pin on the ground,
and I distinctly heard it fall.
There is not so much in Salt Lake City to attract
attention as one expects to find. The people are just
like other Americans. In the country the women seem
to adopt a rather Quakerish style of dress, and to wear
queer-looking old-fashioned “poke ” bonnets ; but in the
city even this distinction is not observable. There
are a great many outsiders or “ Gentiles ” in the place
now —Episcopalians, Methodists, Presbyterians and
Roman Catholics each have their place of worship. One
of the newspapers, “The Salt Lake Tribune, ” is anti-
Mormon, and is unsparing in its ridicule of the sect.
Very much of the business of the place is done by the
Gentiles. Still the largest building in the city is “ Zion’s
Mercantile Co-operative Institution, ” where the sign
over the door is a human eye, very wide open, under the
motto “ Holiness to the Lord. ” There are the usual
number of “ selling off’’ shops and retail establishments


of every description. Our hotel, the “ Walker House,”
is very comfortable, and we were driven out in as nice
a landau and as good a pair of trotters as one would
find anywhere.
I am inclined to think the Mormon system has
received its death blow. Railways and telegraphs
are not favourable to the continuance of a system
which wars with the convictions of society at large.
The United States Government seem determined to
stop polygamy. I do not think they are interfering
with the old saints, but they are certainly trying to
punish those who now break the law in this respect.
There was great excitement here yesterday on this
very subject. The Government had taken proceedings
for bigamy against one of the saints, whose defence,
I understand, was that the Mormon form of marriage,
although sufficient for their society, is not a legal form
of marriage according to the laws of the conntry. It
appears that the marriage rites are performed in a
secret chamber called the “ Endowment House and
one of the leading elders who was subpoenaed to prove
the second marriage refused to give any information
as to what took place in this building. He was there-
upon committed to prison for .24 hours for contempt
of court. This latter proceeding caused intense ex-
citement amongst the Mormon community. The elder
was liberated yesterday, and an enormous procession,
said to number fifteen thousand people, assembled with
banners, on which all sorts of indignant protests were
inscribed, to escort the elder from the jail to his own
house. Notwithstanding the excitement which un-
doubtedly prevailed, it is noteworthy that no riotous
or unseemly proceedings occurred throughout the day.
I am told that the Mormon form of worship is very
like that of the Baptist, save that they have no paid or
regular preachers. They recognize the Protestant
Bible, with the addition of a special revelation to their
founder. Only a minority of the entire number of
D


“ Saints ” are polygamists, and of these few have more
than three wives. The Church is supported by tithes.
We saw the mount, on one side of the canyon at the
entrance to the plain, where Brigham Young ascended
to consult the Lord before deciding to remain, and
another point opposite where the Angel Gabriel is said
to have appeared to him. To the Mormons Lake Utah
is the Sea of Galilee from which the river Jordan runs
to the “ Dead Sea ” or Salt Lake.
On the train , 6 p.m., Sth May.
The ride back to Ogden this morning impressed me
differently with the appearance of Salt Lake. It was
a lovely, bright morning. A cloudless sky overspread
the lake, to which it imparted its own soft azure tint.
A fresh mountain breeze was blowing. The sharp
outlines of the snowy mountains were setoff by the blue
sky. The valley looked fresh and verdant, and the air
was enlivened by the song of many birds. As the train
sped through cultivated farms, where busy Mormon
settlers were tilling the soil, I mentally blessed the
people whose industry and courage had converted
the wilderness into a garden. The journey to-day
has been through canyons or ravines, wild and
picturesque, with an occasional glimpse of clearings, or
“ ranches.” We are steadily ascending the Western
Slope of the Rocky Mountains, and are this evening
about 7,000 feet above sea level. To-morrow we reach
Sherman, the highest point of the line, 8,242 feet high.
Friday, gfh May, 1 p.m.
Still toiling away among the mountains. We have
passed some wild spots. Last evening at dusk we
went very slowly along a ledge of rock, where from the
windows of our cars we looked down a precipice 1,600
feet deep. Still there are few places that suggest
unusual danger. The trains as far as Omaha are run
slowly, about 20 miles an hour, and carefully as far as


one can judge. The line is very fairly made, and
altogether the mode of travelling is better than I
expected. We have just passed Sherman. There are
a few patches of snow around us, but the distant moun-
tains are densely covered. We have passed through
many miles of snow shed this morning, which, it is
needless to add, is a very uninteresting part of our
journey. The country is still rocky and barren looking,
although at Laramie City, which we passed an hour
or two ago, there is a population of 4,000, and there
are some large cattle stations along the route in this
neighbourhood.
We passed some antelope and elk this morning, but
I was not fortunate enough to see them. So far this jour-
ney has rather surprised me with regard to the amount
of barren land in the United States. Doubtless we shall
see better country as we journey east. At present we
have travelled nearly 1,400 miles principally through
barren, wild looking country. It must not be over-
looked, however, that these mountains are all more or
less rich in minerals and precious stones. Coal is being
largely worked in various places, and I was told on
good authority of one seam known to be 100 miles long
and 34 feet thick.
At Ogden the Central Pacific line terminates and is
joined by the Union Pacific which runs to Omaha.
Pullman cars, too, take the place of the “Silver Palace ”
cars which are run as far as Ogden. The charge for
travelling in either of these is about three dollars
and a half per day in addition to regular first-class
fares. The Union line is rather easier and more com-
fortable than the Central, and I found less difficulty
in sleeping last night.
At this point I am reminded of one characteristic of
American life which has struck me forcibly. Perhaps
the observation applies with more force to hotel life
than to any other. Many of the women and most of the
men a stranger meets look as though they suffered from


dyspepsia ; and no wonder if they do. It seems to be
the custom of the country to eat of a great many dishes
at each meal, to eat much and to eat hurriedly —apropos
of which I forgot to record an incident that happened
at the Palace Hotel. One of our passengers came
down to breakfast late one morning, and in reply
to a waiter said he wasn’t hungry, and would
leave him to select a nice little breakfast. This
was the result: —Iced water —iced milk —fruits—coffee
—corn cakes and butter—bread—mutton cutlets—pig’s
feet and broiled bacon —fried oysters —fried fish—fried
potatoes—and potato chips. All these things are
brought in tiny dishes, and when they were arranged
around my friend’s plate the effect was very comical,
and caused us a good laugh. At nearly every place I
have visited iced water is placed before one without ask-
ing. I have rarely seen intoxicating drinks of any kind
on the dinner table. Americans seem to drink iced
water or milk at every meal; then tea or coffee. Yes-
terday I heard a man order at the same time a cup of
iced tea and one of hot tea. The tea used here pro-
duces a pale yellowish infusion. The Congou kind
ordinarily used by English people is called “ English
Breakfast Tea, ” and does not seem to be held in favour.
I am told that Americans drink much at bars, instead
of drinking at meal-times as Englishmen do, but I have
not observed an unusual amount of drinking at any of
the various bars I have passed through. The hard
nasal twang of the Americans whom I have thus far
encountered is to me most distasteful, and I shall be
glad to be once more amongst English speaking people.
Of course my experience has been over the worst part of
the country, I mean the most newly settled districts,
and I feel sure that further East there are plenty of cul-
tivated Americans who speak the mother tongue more
as it is ordinarily spoken by educated English people.
One most agreeable trait I must not omit, the readiness
with which Americans impart information, and their


seeming unreserve to visitors. I have met two or three
amusing American women. At Mariposa we were dis-
cussing the high price of eggs compared with their value
East. The lady was a New Yorker. “I guess,” she
said, “ the hens about here are like the mines—played
out.”
Thursday, 15 th May, 1879.
At Copley, near Oneida, Illinois.
The remainder of Friday last was spent amongst the
mountains, but a great change in the appearance of
the country was apparent when we arose on Saturday
morning. We were in the State of Nebraska, amidst
rich, level, alluvial, grassy country. The Great Pacific
Railway Companies own immense tracts of country
here, as well as in the sterile districts we have been
passing through. The United States Government has
made liberal grants to facilitate railway extension.
The land for twenty miles back on each side of the
line is divided into sections of a mile square, which are
owned alternately by the Government and the Railway
Company. This leads to competition for purchasers
on the part of the rival owners, which I understand
has caused litigation and ill-will. The ordinary price
of land in these new, unsettled districts is 1 dol. 50
cents per acre. The Government terms are cash,
while the Railway Companies give from 7 to 12 years’
credit at 7 per cent, interest. Immense herds of
cattle graze on this fertile, open country. I heard of a
New Zealand colonist (who was a fellow passenger in
the “ Australia”) trying to arrange for the purchase of
a block of 5,000 or 6,000 acres. Such a purchase
would be almost removed from the region of specula-
tion. It must increase rapidly in value, considering
the quality of the soil and the fact that a railway runs
through the heart of the State, also that the high price
of land further east is causing the tide of emigration to
set towards this State. The towns and villages en
route now present a more inviting appearance. Paint


is evidently not at such a high premium as it is further
west. The exorbitant meal tariff continues. The
dusty, tired traveller swallows a hasty breakfast, din-
ner, or supper, for which he has to pay a dollar. I
have seen a weary lady-traveller take a glass of water
and a piece of bread for her morning meal. ’Tis all the
same if you enter the breakfast room, —a dollar to pay.
Some travellers avoid this excessive tariff by providing
themselves with a small hamper of provisions, and
eating and drinking when and how they please.
A great change in climate is now noticeable. The
mountain air, dry and pleasant, is exchanged for a hot,
exhausting temperature. No cool breeze renders the
night refreshing. Continued travelling in close, dusty
carriages becomes irksome to a degree. My two New
Zealand fellow travellers and I exercise our ingenuity
to lessen the monotony; but do as you will, it must be
confessed that this mode of travel, day after day,
becomes very tiresome.
At last the day passes. We reach the city of Omaha,
966 feet above sea level, at four o’clock in the after-
noon. Here I take leave of my friends, and prepare to
kill the next twenty-four hours in one of the most
uninteresting of cities. It is on the banks of the
Missouri River. What a river! It is a wide stream
of rich, brown, or black mud, hurrying through the
continent on its way to join the Mississippi. Twenty-
four hours in a strange town where there is really
nothing to be done or to be seen do not furnish much
material for a journal. The Hotel “ Withnall House ”
is fairly comfortable, but my bedroom is aloft and
there is no elevator, and American hotel comforts are
spoiling me for ascending flights of stairs. Omaha is
1,913 miles from San Francisco, and has a population
of over 24,000. It forms one of the many monu-
ments to the value of the railway policy of this
great country, to which it owes all its importance;
for this is one of the great depots, whence traffic is


directed, where material is constructed, and repairs are
done.
I went to a Presbyterian Church on Sunday morning.
The choir consisted of a quartette, two ladies and two
gentlemen. The ladies had fine voices, and during
various intervals in the service sang solos with good
effect, accompanied by a harmonium. The Rev.
preached a sermon. He was introduced by the regular
minister exactly as a lecturer would be on an English
platform. His sermon was like many others, an effort
to make up for a want of power or ideas by a redundancy
of words.
I started from Omaha on Sunday afternoon. The
bridge across the Missouri is three-fifths of a mile long,
and is constructed on cylindrical iron piles. The
reflection that suggests itself in crossing is a hope that
if it ever be my lot to be drowned I may meet my doom
in nice, clear, blue water, and never in such a muddy
uninviting river as the Missouri.
At Council Bluffs, the name given to the Eastern
side of Omaha, I present my luggage “ checks ” and
ask to have my baggage “ re-checked ” to Chicago.
There is no hurrying nor anxiety, and my luggage has
without doubt found its way there long ere now, and
when I again present the little brass checks which I
keep in my pocket I can either take it to my hotel, or
further re-check it to any part of the United States,
where it will be safely stored until I claim it. All this
is done by the Railway Companies without any charge.
Memo : Why do not English and Colonial people adopt
so admirable a system ?
From Omaha eastward to Chicago each express train
takes a “ palace dining and restaurant car,” in which
an admirably well cooked meal is served from carte for
75 cents. Iced tea, water, or milk included, with hot
tea, cocoa, or chocolate to follow. If this is not enough
there is a well-assorted wine list. To my delight I have
again reached a region of cheap beer. Here I obtain a


pint bottle of sound, bright, “ Milwaukee lager ale ” for
15 cents. Hitherto I have had to pay 50 cents for a pint
bottle of the delectable liquid brewed by Messrs. Ten-
nant of Glasgow ; therefore my consumption of beer has
been small.
The rate of speed on the Chicago, Burlington, and
Quincy Railway is 25 miles an hour, stoppages in-
cluded; and the road is a somewhat rough one. Sun-
day night was not therefore passed very pleasantly. The
only berth available for me was an upper one, immedi-
ately over a young lady who was travelling with her
parents. I kept the ventilators open all night, prefer-
ring dust to stifling. The atmosphere was too hot to
allow of bed covering being used, and as often as I
awoke during the night I distinctly felt the dust falling
on my body. In the morning I might have written my
name in the dust which had accumulated on the mat-
trass.
We reached Oneida at 8 o’clock on Monday morning,
the 12th May. This is a small town in the midst of an
extensive farming district, where I proposed spending a
few days with some friends, and where I have remained
since. The country in all directions is well farmed.
Very large quantities of grain are raised. The prices
ruling are so low as to be worth recording. Maize is
selling at 26 cents per bushel of 521 b.; oats at 20 cents
per bushel of 321b5.; rye at 35 cents per bushel of
601b5.; wheat at 75 cents per bushel of 6olbs. Yet
land is not to be bought for less than about 40 dols. an
acre, and it is inexplicable to a New Zealand resident
how it can pay to grow grain at such prices. Dairy
produce offers no greater remuneration to the farmer.
Eggs realize but 7 cents per dozen. Fresh butter 10
to 15 cents per pound. Fat hogs 3 cents per pound.
I am much pleased with the appearance of the coun-
try. I have driven around in various directions, and
have everywhere found pretty undulating districts,
cropped with Indian corn, wheat, rye, oats, or potatoes,


or laid down in pasture. The trees, all deciduous, have
just put forth their spring foliage. Wild fruits are all
in blossom. The violet, the larkspur, and many other
wild flowers are likewise in full bloom. Beautiful birds
and butterflies flit across one’s path in all directions.
The country, although hardly so well watered as New
Zealand, is yet infinitely better off in this respect than
are most parts of Australia. Surely nothing can exceed
the rustic beauty of this pleasant spot. Here is one’s
ideal of Arcadian felicity.
We must examine a little more closely before fixing
upon an ideal.
The great civil war has left many a deep scar on the
social and domestic side of this charming locality. For
a long time prices of all kinds rose extravagantly high.
Men’s hopes rose too. They did not foresee the reac-
tion which must assuredly come, but invested in land
beyond their means. This is but one of the reasons
why so many of the homesteads are mortgaged. Another
obvious reason is the present excessively low price of
all kinds of produce. Most of the holdings are too
small for stock raising, and so the owners are com-
pelled to grow grain.
This State of Illinois has always been one of the
loyallest of the United States. It contributed of its
young men when the Federal cause was at its time of
greatest need. How many never returned can only
be surmised by the stranger; but even he can see that
the loss of so much of the best blood and muscle has
paralysed many and many a family.
Lest my deductions should seem overdrawn, I quote
from a volume of poems entitled “ Poems of the Farm
and Fireside,” by Eugene J. Hall, published in
Chicago: —
Old Farmer Brown.
From the harvest field old Farmer Brown came home with a look of care,
He threw his hat on the floor, and sat down on his old splint-bottomed
chair,
He wiped the sweat from his wrinkled brow, and pulled out his old jack
knife.


4 6 From New Zealand to Liverpool.
He whittled away to himself awhile, and called to his little wife.
****•»
“ Hannah, I’m sick a livin’ here an’ a working from spring to fall,
A raisin’ ’taters and corn to sell that don’t bring nothin’ at all.
Here we have worked together, for forty years, like a pair o’ slaves,
An’ that old mortgage ain’t lifted yet that I owe to Gideon Graves.
That judgment note o’ Deacon Dunn’s will soon be failin’ due,
An’ where the money’s a cornin’ from why I can’t tell, nor you.
I’ve worked in the woods in the wintertime, I’ve ploughed an’ sowed
in the spring,
I’ve hoed an’ dug through summer an’ fall, and I haven’t made a thing.
Sometimes Hay awake all night, and worry an’ fuss an’ fret,
An’ never a single wink o’ sleep, nor a bit o’ rest I get.
I think of our grown-up children an’ the life they’ve just begun;
They’ve got to hoe the same hard row as you an’ I have done,
I think o’ the politicians, an’ the way they rob and steal,
And the more I think o’ farming, the poorer it makes me feel.”
Withal, I think the conditions of the smallest far-
mers preferable to that of ordinary mechanics and
clerks in cities. Here the poorest can always depend
upon a supply of poultry, eggs, and bacon; so that in
the event of illness, he and his family are preserved
from the prospect of sheer starvation which often meets
the other class under similar conditions.
Tuesday morning , on the train,
20th May , 1879, near London, Canada.
I left my friend’s hospitable house with regret yester-
day morning. Miss W. is a very pleasant specimen of
an American girl. Five feet nine inches in height, fair
and well proportioned, well informed and clever, an
uncompromising advocate of America and American
institutions, well educated, and with a taste for ento-
mology which interested me and recalled many a plea-
sant memory of my boyhood.
The route lay through a beautifully cultivated part
of the State of Illinois, until we reached Chicago about
half-past three in the afternoon. Chicago is a large
city of over half a million inhabitants, built on the
shore of Lake Michigan. My stay was limited to an


hour and a half, but I saw enough to give me some
notion of the greatness of its trade. It has many
magnificent buildings. Immense street cars run in all
directions. Lake Michigan looks like an inland sea, its
opposite shore being invisible from the Chicago side.
Steam boats and sailing vessels lie safely moored in
the various docks which border the city. The State of
Illinois may well be proud of its great inland emporium
of grain and produce.
From Illinois to this point I have little to record, as
our travelling has been done by night. At Detroit,
which was passed through at 3*35 this morning, we
entered Southern Canada. We have been passing
since daylight through a farming district. It is bush
country, and the soil appears to be far inferior to that
of Nebraska, lowa and Illinois.
A dining car is attached to this train, and the com-
fort of a leisurely, well served, almost luxurious meal
can be appreciated by a railway traveller.
I have omitted to notice one peculiar feature of a
journey across the continent, viz., the number of haw-
kers who are allowed to travel in the trains—“candies,”
fruits, mineral specimens, vegetable ivory ornaments,
bouquets of flowers, and books are their wares, and most
persevering salesmen are these itinerants. Sometimes
their importunities become a nuisance.
The short distance we have travelled from American
soil has made a difference in the appearance of the pas-
sengers who join the train at wayside stations. They
are Canadians, not Americans; and in manners, dress,
speech and appearance are more like English, than
American, people.
At Niagara Falls , Wednesday , 2,lst May.
It is now nearly five o’clock, and as I leave for New
York at 7*lo this evening after a hard day’s sightseeing
I should like to devote a half hour to record my impres-
sions of Niagara, the spot on earth, of all others, my


boyish imagination pictured as most wonderful, the one
spot which as a boy I determined some day to see.
I reached here at mid-day yesterday, and have
devoted every hour of daylight since (save the small
hours of this morning) to the investigation of Niagara
Falls, Do you ask for my impressions ? The sight is
exactly what my imagination pictured it. One feeling
of disappointment I cannot overcome. I will tell what
it is by and bye.
How to record even the slightest idea of the wonders
of this place Ido not know. It is so different from any-
thing I have ever seen before. The adjectives “won-
derful,” “ grand,” “beautiful,” “awful,” involuntarily
escape one’s lips whilst viewing these falls; but what
idea do they convey ? The weight of the volume of
water discharged by the Niagara river every hour has
been computed by eminent scientists at a hundred
million tons; and considering that science has demon-
strated the materials of which the sun is composed, has
gauged its distance from our earth, and predicts with
mathematical certainty the recurrence of celestial
phenomena, it is probably not far wrong in its estimate
of a fact which it can see and handle. But what idea
is suggested by a mere bewildering list of figures ?
They do not picture the reality, any more than the
expression “ a pound of paint ” would tell of the lights
and shades, and the power of expression, embodied in
the work of a master painter.
Any view of Niagara Falls is enchanting, perhaps
none more so than to sit on Terrapin Rock on Goat
Island. Here you are on the very edge of the
great Horseshoe Fall, on a projecting rock within three
feet of the precipice, the waters rushing down on both
sides of you. It is difficult to convey even an out-
line of the impression this sublime sight makes upon
the mind. To be on the edge of a vast river just as
it reaches the verge of a precipice 160 feet high, —to see
it all around, a seething mass of waters, rushing faster


and faster as it nears the fall, —to see it flowing majes-
tically over the brink, covering the perpendicular rocks
as with a beautiful, endless veil of green,—to watch its
passage as it gains in speed every moment of its descent,
—to see it reach the mighty whirlpool below, trans-
formed into a mass of boiling, roaring foam, —to watch
the vast clouds of spray that fill the air, often illumined
by beauteous rainbows, —to hear the ceaseless music of
the angry waters,—to feel that all this has been going
on for unknown centuries, and that it will go on after
generations yet unborn shall be forgotten.
“ For men may come, and men may go,
But this goes on for ever.”
To think of all this, one becomes lost in thought;
admiration and awe alternately rule the mind.
The best general view of both Falls is from the Cana-
dian side. The hotel where I stayed (Prospect House)
is only the width of the road from the river bank,
nearly opposite the American Falls and quite near the
Canadian ; it commands a very fine view of both.
The river Niagara runs comparatively peacefully for
about a mile after leaving the Falls, then it reaches a
narrow rent or gorge in the rocks, through which it
rushes —an angry, billowy, foaming torrent called “ the
whirlpool.” To see this there is an elevator worked
by the river itself. Descending by this means the pre-
cipitous rocks and sitting on one of the blocks of stone
with which the banks of the river are strewn, with the
mass of water a hundred feet deep, whirling past, one
gains perhaps as good an idea of the vastness of the
power and force of Niagara as it is possible to obtain.
One of the things to be done is to go behind one of
the smaller sheets of water. I attempted this on the
American side. At first I was told it was impractic-
able, owing to the mass of ice which still remained at
the foot of the Fall; but the guide afterwards agreed to
take me. Divesting myself of every article of my own


clothing, and putting on flannel and oil-skin garments
provided for the purpose, and with a spiked staff to help
me across the ice, I started. It was hard work, how-
ever, and the result did not justify the effort. Being
unaccustomed to move about over ice my steps were
very uncertain. As we advanced, every puff of wind
threw such blinding clouds of thick spray into my face
as to cause a drowning sensation, and to render breath-
ing difficult. After a number of toilsome steps we
reached a place which the guide afterwards told me
was behind the Fall. Very likely it was. I tried to
look up, but the water threatened to blind and choke
me. To speak in the midst of such a crash of waters
was out of the question. In short, lam not anxious to
go behind Niagara again.
The gas spring on the Canadian side is a great natu-
ral curiosity. It is a bubbling spring of water, from
which inflammable gas is continually emitted. A piece
©flighted paper thrown on its surface causes a slight
explosion, followed by a clear flame. The price charged
to see this is half a dollar.
This brings me to the one point about which I felt
disappointed at Niagara. The place is overrun with
showmen and touts. You sit down to admire, it may
be to worship, in silence, and you are disgusted by a
hard nasal, unmistakable voice just behind you asking,
almost ordering, you to have your portrait taken with
the Falls in the background. You decline, he persists ;
and you suggest with some warmth the absurdity and
presumption of a picture in which so great a work of
nature is made to play second to a man’s puny figure. He
tells you “ The Prince of Wales had his likeness taken
so, and so did the Marquis of Lome and his lady,” as
though he thought such illustrious examples were
irresistible to an Englishman. Every spot of special
interest is owned by private persons, who levy entrance
fees from visitors. These fees are not unreasonable in
themselves, as the owners provide bridges, platforms,


staircases, elevators, &c., in return. The objectionable
part is that all these places are overrun with photo-
graphers, restaurants, and booths for the sale of Indian
curiosities, the latter oftentimes collections of rubbish
as innocent of Indian workmanship as they are of
ornament or utility. Thus the sweet feeling of solitude,
of communion with nature is wholly dispelled, and one
is apt to look upon the Falls in the light of a driving
power for so much machinery. This is especially the
case on the American side, where small streams have
been diverted to form mill races to work paper and flour
mills and various other industries.
As though to complete the work of desecration, Nia-
gara river has to-day been the scene of the exploits of a
couple of foolhardy adventurers, one of whom performed
appalling feats of rope walking on one of the wire ropes
which stretch obliquely from the middle of the upper
suspension bridge to both the Canadian and American
shores, partly stretching across the river and partly
across the sharp and rocky boulders which here line its
banks. To watch this man coolly talking with his
companions who were keeping pace with him on the
bridge whilst he was being swayed to and fro by
the wind, knowing that if he missed his footing
there was nothing to break his fall into the river,
or worse still against the rocks nearly 200 feet below
him, was certainly a novel but assuredly not an agree-
able sensation.
The performance of the other man was no less than
a “ leap ” or more correctly speaking a drop from the
bridge into the river, a distance of exactly igo feet. The
feat was performed in the following manner. A tem-
porary derrick was projected from the side of the bridge.
At the end of the derrick was fitted a small revolving
iron drum, round which a coil of thin metal rope was
wound, the length of this rope being somewhat greater
than the height of the bridge* The rope’s end was
then fastened around the man’s body just under the


armpits. All preparations being finished he hung on
to the derrick by his hands for a minute or more, then
at a given signal from his comrades he released his
hold and descended, feet foremost, into the angry river,
almost as quickly as the eye could follow him. It was
a sickening sight to see a man drop from such a height
into such a river, and I felt that I was voluntarily
witnessing a case of self-destruction. The man
descended with great force, as evidenced by the foam-
ing, swollen water which closed over him when he
sank beneath the surface. Boats were in readiness to
pick him up, but for a few moments there was no sign
of him, nor did I expect to see him again alive. Soon,
however, he reappeared, raising himself above the
water by means of the rope, which alone prevented
him being carried away by the current. He was
almost immediately picked up by one of the boats, and
in half an hour afterwards was going round, hat in
hand, soliciting contributions.
New York City , Friday , May 2 yd.
I left Niagara with regret at seven o’clock on Wed-
nesday night. The scenery next morning was pretty.
We passed along the banks of the Susquehanna and
afterwards of the Delaware River. Most of the country
is mountainous and stony, but in places we passed
some beautifully cultivated districts. One pretty valley
in particular, traversed by the Erie Canal, on which an
immense traffic appears to be done, attracted my atten-
tion, as we looked down upon it from the rocky cutting
along which the railway is constructed. There was a
sharp frost during the night, which was a welcome
change from the oppressive nights we experienced
earlier in the journey.
We reached Jersey City about noon yesterday. A
huge ferry boat was waiting to take us across the har-
bour to New York; half a dozen large coaches and
wagons, as well as a crowd of passengers, did not any-
thing like fill this ferry.


New York is a “taking” city. It has a light,
cheerful appearance. The atmosphere is clear and the
sky blue. Many of the largest and best buildings are
of white marble. Houses and warehouses range from
five to nine floors in height. The Fifth Avenue
Hotel, where I am staying, is a palatial building of
white marble, with marble floors and staircases. There
is a large traffic in all the principal streets, and above
the ordinary stream of street life, human and equine,
there is, half way up to the tops of the houses, a line
of “ elevated street railways,” running all day and until
midnight at the rate of fifteen miles or more an hour.
This to a stranger is a singular, bewildering feature of
the place. When Londoners wanted to relieve their
streets of the ever-growing traffic, they devised the plan
of underground railways. New Yorkers, always ready
to progress and to improve upon the old, have carried
out a system of overhead railways. From a traveller’s
point of view the overhead railway is a great improve-
ment upon the underground; but what the owners of
property say to having the windows of their third stories
placed on a level with a stream of traffic, with the
fumes of a locomotive engine wafted into their bed-
rooms, is quite another matter.
Central Park is a beautiful retreat, with a fine
“ Mall,” pretty carriage drives, a fine course for eques-
trians, and various streams and ornamental waters on
which prettily painted gondola-like boats ply for hire.
I went into Trinity Church one afternoon. It is the
Cathedral Church of the Episcopalians, and is a very
beautiful building. Gas lights were burning in the
chancel, on each side of which appeared to be a pile of
choice and many coloured flowers. I observed a man
watering and carefully tending them, and found they
were all living plants, charmingly arranged and of
course in full blossom. In the baptismal font was a
mammoth bouquet, most artistically arranged, which
entirely filled the basin. Behind the Communion


Table is a large and beautifully carved stone reredos
known as “ the Astor Memorial,” It contains a great
number of figure groups, and is illustrative of the origin
and progress of the Christian religion. Before this are
two huge candles, one on each side of the crucifix, and
over it a set of very fine stained glass windows, also
illustrative of early Christian times.
My general impression of New York is that it is a
beautiful city, with many palatial dwellings, and
churches and hotels, and something more than the
average of crime and vice even of large cities.
The newspapers, including the most respectable, seem
to aim at a sensational style in their accounts of even the
most trivial incidents. The headings to their columns,
especially their police reports, are often absurd and
grandiloquent to a degree. In this way the
general tendency of the Americans to exaggeration is
pandered to and stimulated.
On hoard the S.S. City of Berlin,
Sunday evening, 25 th May .
We started from New York yesterday morning at
half-past seven. This is a large iron steamer of 2,956
tons register. The cabin is not so pleasant and airy as
that of the “ Australia,” nor are the appointments
generally on perhaps as good a scale. The table, how-
ever, is somewhat better, and I think the rooms are
better ventilated. The ship is half as large again as
the “Australia.” The cabins are fitted throughout
with electric bells. There are about 170 saloon pas-
sengers, and a greater medley could hardly be found—
Irish priests, Germans, Frenchmen, Americans, Eng-
lishmen. There seem to be a good many fairly plea-
sant people, but at present I have not had an oppor-
tunity of becoming well acquainted with any of them.
The captain is a fine, old, weather-beaten Scotchman.
This morning he read the Church prayers in the
matter-of-fact, sailorly way usual with sea captains.


The weather, so far, has been all that could be wished,
and scarcely any motion is perceptible. This is said to
be one of the largest passenger ships afloat, larger than
any of the other steamers on the Atlantic. She is 520
feet long, whereas the “ Australia ”is about 400. The
beam of this ship is 45 feet.
Friday morning, 30 th May.
Thus far the reputation of the “ stormy Atlantic ” has
not been borne out by my experience. The weather has
been very fine, and there has been scarcely any percepti-
ble motion of the ship. For the first time in my life I
have been able to get sound sleep on board a steamer.
The immense size and weight of this ship make her ride
wonderfully easily. The cuisine is good, and by this
time I have made the acquaintance of several very
agreeable people. Still, there are a great number of
undesirable passengers. By far the greater number
seem to be of that class. The nasal drawl and the
intolerably bad English of most of the Americans are
irksome to a degree. A nice cut of chicken is “ ele-
gant. ” “ What did you say ?” is “ How, now?” “I
suppose ” or “ I know ” is “ I guess, ” and so with a
hundred other words and expressions. The worst of it
is that the people who use these extraordinary expres-
sions maintain that they speak pure English, and that
English people speak a corrupted language. Of course
this is not the case with well-educated people, but it
seems as though the latter class form a small minority
of the American travelling public.
Amongst the passengers are “Colonel” and Mrs. ——
The Colonel was, until recently, American Consul at
one of the New Zealand towns, whence he withdrew
suddenly and unexpectedly, without paying any adieux*
Friday evenings
The weather this evening is not so pleasant* The
atmosphere is moist and rather oppressive, the wind


has shifted and is now almost ahead. The general
impression appears to be that we shall reach Liverpool
about noon on Monday next. There is a lack of any
concerted amusement on board, and every effort to
induce any of the numerous passengers to play, or sing,
or do anything else for the general benefit has signally
failed. In this respect our trip is a great contrast to
that per “ Australia.”
An American gentleman, a Colonel C., told me to-day
of a pretty mode he had adopted lately to present his
parting compliments to his friends. Having occasion to
leave New York hurriedly in the midst of the season, he
sketched in pen and ink a little picture of a man stand-
ing on the sea shore, writing the word “ adieu ” on the
sand, with the end of his umbrella, a few vessels, clouds,
&c., in the background. He took his sketch to the
Graphic Printing Company, who reproduced 200 exact
copies in a few hours. He had then only to write the
name of the friend to whom he wished to send a copy,
on the sand, and each one was possessed of a little pen
and ink-like souvenir, which could not be detected from
the original.
Monday , 2nd June , Liverpool.
Again in England, after many years’ absence. We
had a pleasant voyage, considering all things, certainly
the weather could hardly have been more pleasant. On
Saturday evening we had an entertainment, music and
reading, the latter by professional actors, with a collec-
tion in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan’s Home.
On Sunday morning land was sighted, the coast of
Ireland, and at 6 p.m. the mails were sent ashore at
Queenstown with the passengers who wished to land in
Ireland. The Irish coast is interesting, being hilly and
rocky. The great number of lights and landmarks
strike a stranger in contrast to the comparatively small
protection to mariners on the New Zealand or Aus-
tralian coast.
Liverpool is a busy city. It is Whit Monday to-


day, and everybody is holiday making. What a lot of
ruddy-faced girls! The day, too, is perfection, and I
begin to think the English climate is maligned. I
shall see by and bye. I have wished “farewell” to
many a pleasent acquaintance on board the “ City of
Berlin.” Nine days at sea brings people into close
intimacy. Shall we meet again ? In some instances
perhaps we shall—in out-of-the-way corners of the
world, where we least expect to see a familiar face.
PRINTED AT THE GUARDIAN OFFICE, WARRINGTON.


