

WHITE CROSS LEAGUE
7, Dean's Yard, Westminster, S.W
FROM
SOLDIER’S SISTER
WELL DONE! You have come forward and
joined the ranks of the greatest Army ever
seen since the world began. You have taken
your place amongst the heroes of all time. You are
part of the splendid body of men sworn to fight for
the grandest Country, for an Empire on which the sun
never sets. You have left home, comfort and all that
is dear to you, to go out and face hardships, discom-
fort, pain, illness and even death, and you have done
all this because you know your help is needed to
protect the weak against tyranny and injustice.
We women of the Empire, your mothers, sisters,
wives and sweethearts are proud of you. You have
done as we all knew you would; shown the true man-
hood which is in you; shown that the British race is
still as ready as of old to champion a just cause.
And now because of all this, because you are to us
so dear, because in you we have given our very life
to the nation, we would ask you just one more thing,
yet another self-sacrifice.
Out at the front, all along that great line of battle,
at home in the camps scattered over the United King-


dom, as well as in the Dominions beyond the seas,
there is another battle raging, besides the earthly one.
Wherever you are, wherever you will be sent and
duty calls, two great enemies will face and try to
conquer you: Drink and Immorality. They are in-
finitely harder to fight and far more subtle than any
foe of flesh and blood. ♦ But because of our great
faith in you and because we know that you can con-
quer—and you will, we ask you to cope with these
even against tremendous odds.
For the first, it would seem best to refuse all taste
of it, even if offered in friendship's name. Every
nerve and muscle must be trained to the utmost so
that you may face what is before you with clear mind
and healthy body.
For the other, the young, pure girls thrown in your
path we feel quite sure your chivalry will protect; but
for those hardened by years of sin and vice it is a
different matter. They will use every art to ensnare
you, and the fight against their wiles may be hard
and stubborn, but remember the eyes of the whole
world are on you now. It is you who can keep the
honour of our noble army unstained, and as you
resist these temptations you will help to make the
name of the British soldier what it has always been,
what we pray it always may be —‘A true-hearted
gentleman.'
You may feel that in asking this we are asking
more than mortal man can stand, that having given
up so much for us, we have no right to lay restric-
tions on your ‘off duty' time, and try and limit what


you may feel legitimate recreations; that these women
are beyond the pale, and you have a right to use
them as you will. Surely not.
A very clever, well-known doctor in one of our large
towns was working in a Hospital for Women. Many
of those who came under his care were of the lowest
type—outcasts, in fact. Tlie nurses, his fellow sur-
geons and doctors, noticed that the more degraded in
mind and body any woman seemed, the more careful
he was in every way to show her respect and courtesy.
One day a friend remarked this to him and asked why
he made such a point of doing it. 'The nice, good
women have the respect and care of all decent men, ,,
he said, “but these have never known what chivalry
means. ” Will you not then do as he did? Show
even these degraded ones what a real gentleman is,
and save them from themselves, and by resisting their
blandishments help them to regain part of their lost
self-respect.
We know that you have the courage in you, that
you can do it if you will. And remember all the
time, night and day, the great wall of our prayers,
our hopes, our thoughts, is round you. We would
have you go forth as the women of old sent their
knights to war. We, as they did, will buckle on your
armour, not only the earthly, but the spiritual
weapons; but do not let it be said that we failed in
our part and fastened it with a weak, uncertain hand.
We will be true to you and fight the loneliness and
despair which must come during our long months of
watching, and in the future, when this deadly war is


over, and peace reigns once more, you will come back
to us who are waiting for you with aching, longing
hearts, with your shield unsullied, and your honour
undimmed. You will have lived up to the highest
that is in you. All the nations of the world will say
you were a noble friend, a generous foe.
It may be that in this campaign now being waged
you will not be singled out for special honour, but, if
you have kept the flag of purity and truth, manhood
and bravery flying, then in the despatches of our
Great Captain in the world beyond, there will be
written against your name, “For Valour,” God’s V.C.
The “White Cross” Obligations.
I.—To treat all girls and women with respect and
endeavour to protect them from wrong and
degradation.
2. —To endeavour to put down all indecent
language and coarse jests.
3. —To maintain the law of purity as equally
binding on men and women.
4. —To endeavour to spread these principles
among my companions, and to try and help
my younger brothers.
s.—To use every possible means to fulfil the
command, “Keep THYSELF pure/’
For information or advice apply to the Secretary,
Australasian White Cross League, Box 1280, G.P.0.,
Sydney.
Reprinted for the Australasian White Cross League, 56 Elizabeth St., Sydney
by William Brooks & Co. Ltd., 17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
